AN EMBASSAGE FROM HEAVEN.

Wherein Our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus gives to understand, his just
indignation against al such, as being Catholic minded, dare yield their
presence to the rites and public prayer, of the malignant Church.

By Raphe Buckland Priest.

Po^^^t in nobis D^^^ ^^^^en ^^^^ciliationis pro Christo, i^^^ue Legatiorie
(...), tanquam Deo exhorta^te per nos, (...) Christo ^^^ciliamin^ Deo.

2. Cor. 5. verse. (...) God has pl^^ed (...) conciliation, we be thereof (...);
God as it were exhorting by (...) for Chris^^ sake, be (...).

Published with License.

AN EPISTLE TO AL Schismatikes.
TO you, oh you miserable, who straying from the paths of peace, run as
confidently forwards in dark and slippery wales, as if ye traced the steps
of truth and righteousness, neither wandered one jot from the high way to
salvation.

The Preface to the Reader.
WHo has ears to hear, let him hear, a courteous and a friendly admonition
(gentle reader) of that most mighty, and most humble Prince, who sends this
Embassage to prepare the hearts of hi^ disloyal subjects, to more perfect
observance of his laws: which many inconsiderately, (because they fear to
hear them) do violate; and fear to hear truly expounded, least they should
understand them, and understanding them a-right, should powerfully be moved to
obey them, with loss of their reputation, life, and goods. Which
inconveniences (for so they esteem them) least they might incur: they stop
their ears and will not listen to the voice of the wise enchaunter, telling
them, that the Kingdom of heaven, is without comparison of more value, then al
the^ worldly pelf: and that the troubles of these times, are not to be waighed
in regard of the future glory, which shall be reuelled in them, even in this
life, through the testimony of a good conscience, but chiefly in the next, and
everlasting life, by the perfect enjoying of almighty God, and seeing him there
face to face as be is: to which beautifying vision, by serving God with a pure
heart (for such only shall see him) thou art earnestly entreated by this book
(Godly reader) what ever thou art that have a soul to save, rich, or poor,
learned, or unlearned, lukewarm Schismatike, or cold Catholic, for this
work concerns you both, though with indifferency: in the perusing whereof
the more attention and heed thou do bestow, the better thou will accept ^f
the authors pious, and charitable endeavors; and reap unto thy self great
fruit to salvation, which whiles it is ripining in thee; show thy self I pray
thee, no less grateful to the religious author hereof, by praying for ^is
soul, then to his yet suruiuing friend, at whose earnest suite, this so
necessary and profitable a message is delivered unto thee, not without
approbation and counsel; after a careful view and examination of the same.
Fare-wel.

AN EMBASSAGE FROM HEAVEN.
HEarken ye erring souls, 1. The dangerous estate of Schismatikes.
who will not enter the Arc, ordained for the safety of my Elect? yet hope to
escape the universal floode of my wrath; who refuse to leave Sodom? yet fear
not fire and brimstone; who forsake not the Tabernacles of Chore? yet dread not
to be swallowed of the earth; neglect to fly from Babylon, yet expect nothing
less then to be oppressed with the ruins thereof. Oh ye lost sheep, who
having received my mark, enter another sold; yet will needs be termed of my
flock, run with the Thief, and will be holden innocent; partake in iniquity,
yet will be accounted righteous; Ye broken branches ignorant of your own decay;
Ye that rent my unseamed coat, not acknowledging a fault; tear my body
without sense of sin; break the unity of my Church without scruple of
Schism. Come forth before me and justify your selves if ye can, call together
your wits, search the depth of your hearts, ponder the reasons of your frailty,
and the circumstances of your defense, in equity I will argue your offense, and
contending by just judgment. I stand against you to your face: my Majesty shall
not prejudice, to allege what you can, I will neither oppress you with
authority, nor overrule without reason, but your own guiltiness shall appale
you, and the clearenes of your crime, shall make you dumb. Laying a-side the
person of a Judge, I the Creator of al, refer the cause to the censure of al
my creatures. To al both Angels and Men, I appeal to Catholics and Heretics;
to Christians and not Christians, to your own consciences if ye have any.

2. Schismatikes no true servants of God.
I have tried you and found you faithless, I have given occasion of manifesting
your fidelity, and found you a disloyal generation; I have provided for you a
plentiful harvest of glorious and eternal merits, I proffer the purchase of the
Kingdom of heaven; but I perceive you set at naught my wisdom and bounty,
contemning the treasures of my Kingdom, as not worthy the vile price of
temporal detriment. I have proved you at the touchstone, and discerned you to
be b^se: I have weighed you, and found you to light. Oh seed of Samaria, and
not of Judah, I hate your dissimulation, I detest your cowardice, and abhor
your blindness; my soul loatheth your halting hearts. Great is my indignation
against you, and digest your frowardness I cannot.

If any man withold your right, 3. Ingratitude of Schismatikes and their
injurious dealing toward God.
an action is ready, he is served with process and exclaimed against, for
unconscionable dealing. How long shall I demand the interest which I have in
your souls, and you give no ear to my claim. You disdain to be contemned at
your servants hands, you brook not disobedience in your children; In case the
fields and orchyeardes yield not their fruits, ye storm and rage: But where is
your own duty? the honor of your Maker, the love of your Redeemer, the awe of
your God? where are the fruits which my care have deserved? Long have I
travailed in manuring your barraine souls: I have sent my laborers, who
employ their diligence, I have by many occasions solicited your hearts, and
with sweet inspirations, I have at al times endeavored to mollisie your
obstinate minds. What is that I should do to you and have not done it? yet
reap I naught but contempt, nor find you other then stiff and intractable,
unprofitable, and void of al towardness; Whatsoever you have is of my
benevolence: your very life and being is of my bounty: neither depends your
continual preservation upon any other assurance, then the protection of my
right hand. If all this be too little, I am ready to do more, and greater
matters I will in your behoof perform, then your selves would either have
expected, or desired: and the good that I purpose toward you, in case you make
your selves worthy thereof, cannot by mortal heart be conceived. For which then
of al my benefits do you thus injury my patience? wherein has my gracious
goodness deserved the contumely and reproach, vvhere-with your iniquity does
daily vex me? Wicked and perverse people, yield you this thanks to my
kindness, this recompense to my deserts? Why do ye thus forsake me and deny
me, despise and disobey me, oppugn and assault me?

Ye forsake me, and deny me, 4. Schismatiks deny, despise, and impugn God.
and say with a bold countenance, wherein have we forsaken and denied thee?
Have ye not renounced my service, cast off my livery, departed from my family,
passed from my camp and colors, to the adversaries tents, and yielded to the
profession of a Protestant? Ye despise and disobey me, yet blush not to say,
wherein (oh Lord) do we despise or disobey thee? Have I not commanded you to
love me above al, and to confess my name, my belief and Church, and to
contend even unto death for my truth sake? Where is your loialty? Have not I
ordained Sacraments for your special comfort, a Sacrifice celestial for memory
of my exceeding munificence, and as an homage of Christian subjection? have I
not in my Church determinate ceremonies and obseruances, for the greater
dignity of my service, and absoluter unity of my family? Al which sithence you
frequent not, where is your love of me? or the regard of my honor? you oppugn
me also and assault me, and dissemblingly say, wherein do we oppugn and
assault thee. Oh Savior? your example discomforteth others, which would else
do well, dissolueth the courage, decreaseth the number of my part, weakeneth
the cause of faith, and fortifieth the enemy.

5. Schismatikes wilfully deceive them selves.
You flatter your selves notwithstanding al these injuries, soothing your
consciences with a vain pretense, that you love and honor me still, and with a
false gloz^ that you would not for a thousand worlds forsake my service, nor
deny my sacred name. How iniquity will lie unto it self, and bear the port of
innocence? you list not found the depth of your own hearts, for fear of
touching the quick, and espying the default, which you would not see, because
seeing you would not amend, and not amending must needs feel the continual
fretting of a disquieted conscience, and think your souls to hang over the
Dragons mouth. But I will search the ground of your hollow hearts; reveal your
deep dissimulation, unmask your vain pretenses, and lance your festered
soars to the very bottom.

Do ye not as Peter deny your selves, 6. By Peter's denial is proved that
Sch^smatik deny Christ.
to be of my company? do ye not apparently renounce, yea and sometime abjure
the fellowship of my followers? Do ye not pretend to have nothing to do with
their conversation, dreading to be pr^sumed, as one of their number? what is
this but to disclaim from my Religion, to depart from the corpse of my
universal Church, and to separate your selves from the Congregation, which
among all the people of this land, is al only left for my inheritance, and among
whom only I am se^ued and honored? To deny the communion of my flock, is to
deny me to be the true Sheep-heard, to renounce the fellowship of the household
of faith, is to renounce me for your Lord, and to disauow my service. In not
partaking with my children, you cast me off as none of your Father, and in
disioyning your selves from the rest of my members, you give sufficient
argument, that I am not your head. Thus you renounce me for your God, denying
utterly my holy name and Majesty. If you be not urged to deny my Godhead, no
more was Peter: If you be not willed to revolt in heart from your Redeemer, no
more was he: If you be not expressly commanded, to appostate from your faith and
conscience, no more was he: If you deny with month ^o one article of belief,
no more did he. In sound belief of heart he passed you far (or if comparison
should pass between^ you) I suppose you will vaunt no prerogative. His zeal
had in other respects been often proved, as yours daily upon small trial,
deserves reproof. Your wickedness may almost justify his weakness, at
leastwise the enormity of your crime may extenuate the guilt of his frailty.
Though he denied me his Master, by denying himself to be a Disciple, yet waded
he not so far, as by any other external sign, to bear show of an enemy.
Though he wickedly spoke, and rashly perjured as ouer-carelesse what he
replied, to a Girls question; Yet before the Magistrate at public trial of
his faith, he showed more constancy, accomplishing by loss of life, the period
of this penance, then which neither could he offer up, nor I require any
greater satisfaction. After thrice offending, he conceived hearty and profound
contrition, neither ever relapsed into like sacrilege, but presently bewailed
with bitter tears, the grieuousnesse of his sin; and lamented the longest
day of his life. The crowing of the Cock was a peale to his penance, a
memorial infallible to showers of remorse, and what one day had committed of
sin, a^ days following omitted not to sobbe. How different are your deserts
from his? how contrary a course do ye take? multiplying your sins without al
modesty, if not without measure; not privately and suddenly speaking a word of
Apostasy, but publicly in the face of the world, committing acts of Heresy,
vvithful deliberation, with a heart resolved to hazard shipwreck, and give
adventure upon the shelfes of sin. Not contented with eschewing the exercise
of the Catholic faith, and participation with the faithful, in profession of
conscience; ye make no scruple to frequent the rites of a false belief, and
partake with my utter enemies, in the sacrilegious impiety of their
profession. Yet whereas in him you acknowledge a damnable, and mortal denial of
me, the Lord of Hosts; your own more apparent and odious, you will not
understand. But you reply (a crafty generation, as you are, crafty to deceive
your selves, and as ingenious in iniquity, as slow to piety) you will return
upon me the reproof of an unjust complaint: saying, 7. Schismatikes are not of
the Catholic Church.
that you be Catholics, and remain firmly united to the Church my Spouse.

Da^e ye then say that Catholic Resantes, are not my proper stock? Or can ye
maintain, that your selves are of their band, members of their Church and
Fraternity? or vvil ye avouch that any company can be mine, which imbraceth
not wholly their faith? For upon one of these three, of force ye must rely, if
ye vvil justify your selves, to be Children of my Church, or fortify your
error with hope of salvation.

Recusants to stand upon an assu^ed ground, none can justly deny, 8. The
assured ground where upon Recusants stand.
or with reason call their salvation in question; who cleave steadfastly to
their forefathers faith, departing neither on the right hand, nor on the left
hand, from the rule of religion, but agonizing even unto death in that
Confession, vvhere-unto their first christined Ancestors were converted, and
wherein al their Godly Predecessors, both virtuously lived and happily died.
Ye your selves, though slack imitaters of their piety, cannot but admire it,
and praise in them that perfect resolution and heroycal courage, which bold
affection though ye feel not, though in fits of remorse, y^ some time wish it.
The very view, and regard whereof, might make you blush before men, and shall
confound you at the supreme judgment.

9. Recusants highly to be commended for their zeal
These are they which nourish the sparks of that fire, which I came down to
kindle on earth: these only maintain in this Realm my heavenly lamp, that it
be not extinguished, support my law that it be not ruinated, glorify my name
that it be not utterly defaced. These remain like stars in the dark night,
like green bays in the midst of hoary winter, like lively fresh fountains in
the sandy desert. These are they who live unspotted, a-midst a perverse
generation, whose virtue staieth my fury, and withholdeth my sword from the
rest of the people. They walk in light, and know what they do, ye confess
them to do best, and their vowed enemies acknowledge them to be in state of
salvation.

With these you may wish to confort in conscience, 10. Schismatikes have no
part with Recusants, neither are of the same Church.
to partake in profession of faith: ye may in bare terms avouch as much, but
shall never with reason be able to make it good. To become joynt-heires with
them in the heavenly inheritance, ye may foolishly hope upon rash presumption,
but shall never attain it for want of merit. Will ye with them reign, with whom
ye do not sustain? Will ye divide in the laborers hire, nor partaking in his
travail? Will ye reap of their joys, with whom ye sow not in tears? Think
ye to feast with them, in the eternal Holy Day of the resurrection, with whom
ye fast not the lent? Or bear a part in their Musical Alleluia, which hold no
voice in their tragical vah? in the Psalms not in the Threnes? Shall deniers be
joined with Confessors? disclaimers with Disciples, fugitives with followers,
faithful Soldiers with false cowards. As Soon shall shameless Apostataes be
enthronized with my holy Apostles, as perverted Runnegates with my steadfast
Recusants; you deny your selves to be of their congregation before men; and
shall I acknowledge you for one of them before my Angels? At the time of
battle you will be none of them, and shall ye be found vncassered at the time
of pay? Nay, nay, they which bear not my badge shall not be cladde with my
liueri^s; they which be not of my retinew, shall not be fed of my dispense.
What then? you are and will be of my suite and service, as the best Catholics
are.

11. Schismatikes are not Catholics.
And are you indeed? ask the Recusant, and he rejects you: ask the
Persecutor, and he imbraceth you not: ask the Saints and Angels, and they
abhor you? I never yet took you for servants of mine, since you cast away my
cognizance, neither did I think that you durst be so bold, as to ascribe your
selves to my family, who are retainers to another train, and set your feet
under my foes table. Are ye to be deemed of the true Church, making your resort
to the malignant? may they be numbered in the society of the faithful, who are
associate with Infidels? How are ye of my flock, who assemble in another fold,
and approach not to mine; feed of other pastures and forsake mine; hear the
voice of other sheepe-heardes, and disobey mine? Have no confidence in vain
lying words; say not in your hearts we be Catholics: ye are none, you have
gone forth from among them, you have separated and divided your selves, for
fear of the world, refusing to be partakers of their punishments and
calamities, and to bear the yoke under which they groan. Call not your selves
children of my Church, vaunt not to sit in the lap of my beautiful Spouse. Ye
are become like black a-moores Brats, and like Aegiptian Elues.

Out of my sight, 12. Schismatikes shall receive judgeme^t with Heretics.
whom to behold is my grief, the view of your ugly deformity I cannot abide.
As I did to Chore and his company, so did I to al those which negligently
stayed among his Tabernacles; as I did to Samaria who had quite cast off my
belief and law, and to her Idols, so d^d I to Hi^rusalem and her Idols,
although sh^e pretended no revolt from my service. And as in the day of
vengeance, I will plague Heretics and Infidels, who manifestly rebelled against
me, and impugned my faith, so will I with the same Scorpions, scourge al those
who for fear of friendship (or what respect soever) adhere to their faction,
and yield to their fury, al copartners in iniquity shall together have their
portion, in the lake burning with brimstone, I am a jealous God, which will not
bear any competitor in interest of my inheritance, any riual in the love of
man's soul, nor endure that the reverence due to my divine service, be
exhibited to any ungodly sect, and the personal observance, which my espoused
Queen challenges, be performed to an Adulterous Synagogue.

13. Indiffere^cy in religion in effect Apostasy.
No man can serve two Masters, without displeasing the one, no man can war
under two adversary Princes, without being a Traitor to the one. Mine you are
by generation, by regeneration more mine then before, by dependence of
conservation, ye are more mine then your own, yet will you both in heart have
recourse to me, and in act to Beelzebub. You say you love my Temple, but you
enter into Bethel and Galgala: Amos c. 5. verse. 5.
like the Schismatical Israelites; you commend my Sac^i ice, but frequent the
Calves of Hier^boam. Ye pr^tend to the Hill of Syon, but ye ascend to adore in
the profane Hill of Garazim as Samaritans, becoming thereby companions of
Devils, and wounding the consciences of the weak, together with the true God,
4. Reg. 17.
ye adore the false. As those libertines among the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 8. and
10.
relying upon your inward belief, ye freely eat of Idolatrous Sacrifices,
Apoc. 3.
as those of Laodicea, ye are neither hot nor cold, and therefore loathsome
to my stomach. Ye resemble those which swear by God and by Melchom, Aba. 1.
v. 5.
whom therefore I threatened with vengeance, with wicked Achab ye worship God
and Baal, nay your exterior open worship, is whole to Baal, and not to me; you
remain with me in feigned falsehood, and not in all your heart: nay rather you
remain with them, and on their side; if not in all your heart, yet in outward
profession; if not wilfully yet willingly; if not dispitefully, yet
disobediently. Love not me in word, but in work; not with lips, but in heart;
not in pretense, but in truth and sincerity. The perverse, for fashion sake
demanded what they should do to accomplish my will, Luke 18.
and when it was told them, neglected to fulfill it.

If you be children of my Church, do the works of children; if you be my
servants, do the works of servants. Have access to my Priests, frequent my
Sacraments, cleanse your souls by humble confession and penance, have in due
reverence my rights and ceremonies, honor my service with your presence,
prostrate your selves before my holy Altar, lifting up pure hearts and hands.
Adore with zealous endeavor, at the hour of my dreadful Sacrifice; when
propitiation for the living and dead, when memory of your Redeemer is
celebrated. This seek through fire and water, through swords and snares. Let
neither distance of miles, nor friuoulous danger of places, nor surmised peril
of your own persons impeach Godly endeavors, what should I say more, declare
by your devotion, that you hunger and thirst salvation, and that you set by
nothing so much, as by the exercises of your religion, and the presence of me
your Savior. Above al fly the Synagogues of Satan; fly al profane prayers,
al heretical co^uenticles, al ungodly rites, al participation with any thing,
that belongs to the table and cup of Devils. This do, and then call me
Father of heaven, and the Church Mother of earth, I will bless you in life, and
she shall present you to meat your death.

Here you strain courtesy, here flesh and blood reclaimeth, the spirit taking
the foil, and the old man triumphing; 14. Schismatikes justly repelled from
the Sacraments.
some of you discharge themselves of their crimes, by mystewards over rigorous
austerity; and by complaint of injury in being secluded from my sacred
mysteries? understand ye what ye ask, oh ye hypocrites? in this one thing only
happy, that your suite is suspended, and prudently rejected by those which
know, that they are ordained for dispensers, not for spenders and vvasters of
my celestial provision, and that the childrens food, is not to be given to
dogs, nor pearls to be cast before swine, why demand ye that which would
augment your damnation, which though most divine, yet would no more sanctify
you then it did Judas, nor more prevail you, then the Arc did profit the
Philistian. The sweetest conserues in undisposed stomachs, turn to gal and
choler; the most nourishing meats, breed most annoy in infected bodies, and
nothing is wholesome, where wants digestion. What flower or herb the Spider
feeds on, turns to venom, be it never so pleasant; and what Serpents
devour, turns to poison, be it never so wholesome.

How dare you proffer to approach to my Altar, where so great a Majesty is
resident, without sufficient examination and proof of your worthiness? how
can ye be proved, unless ye be purged? how purged, but by penance? how
admitted, to penance and pardon, either not acknowledging your guilt, or not in
purpose of amendment?

Well then, 15. Schismatiks are to be presumed for Heretics and why.
among my Catholics since you are not, where shall I find you? where are your
raunges; being that you cleave to Sectaries in acts of their Schismatical
profession, I pronounce you Protestants, whose proceedings in departure from
the faith, though in private opinion (or possibly in talk) ye reprove, yet by
presence at their houses of Idolatry you in appearance honor, by obeying you
allow, by example you further, by deeds you confirm, by dissembling you
establish. You go thither as one of them, you sit there as one of them, you
behave your self reverently as one of them. The Caluinist takes you for
Proselites, and as either converted or conformed; not altogether abhorring
their pretended religion, not over resolute in the old faith, and finally as
persons, not far from their Kingdom. The poor Catholic scandalized at your
impiety, frames no other conceit, then that either you are quite perverted to
heresy, or at leastwise that your faith is in the wane; that your Sun is
set, your devotion done, the light of your soul extinguished, that you are
lost sheep, distemblers, Schismatikes, and at the brinke of bottomless
heresy. And have not think you the one and the other, just reason of their
censure. You give your hand, though you vvith-hold your heart; you wear the
Devils coat, though you call him not Lord; you honor him, though you hate him;
though you abhon^ him, yet you obey him.

16. Those which go to the co^ue^ticles of Heretical rites, are justly and
properly called Schismatikes.
Abominable is Schism, and ^o^rible is the name of a Schismatike, but why
should this be a word of offense, to whom the subject thereof, and the
sacrilege of so great a sin, is neither shame nor remorse. Men are men, not
privy to the secre^s of hearts: the understanding censureth, as by the senses is
delivered. The Church therefore judges, by that which she sees, not by that
which she sees not. The deed (as reason will) does prejudice the contrary
word, and upon the fact rises sentence of faith?

When my Church in her first prime, was nipped with sharp persecution, so
that diverse blossoms sell from her branches, those which through passionate
fear condescended to Idolatry, were by the Brethren condemned as fallen from
their faith, rejected as Apostataes, and denounced excommunicated, neither
received again without public satisfaction, and many years penance.

He that should keep the Saturday holy, and pray with Jews in their
congregation, were to be supposed a Jew: Every man would exclaim against the
fact, without caring for the cause. He that enters any of Mahomets meschits,
prays in his Temples, or kisseth the books of his law, is of every Christian
man defied for a Runnegate, and of the Turks priuileged for a Boserman; no man
inquiring whether love of their Mahometry, or dread of extremity, whether
carnal sensuality and liberty of their law, or worldly prosperity, did move
him: fixing their eyes upon his outward action, men let the intention repose it
self in the prosound abisme of the heart, what then should hinder, why you also
associating Heretics in their actions, yea principal and proper actions of
their profession, should not be blazoned for a sherents to Infidelity, bearing
the blot of depa^ters from my Church Catholic, and consequently of
Schismatical persons.

17. Protestants cannot be of the Catholic Church, neither in their faith can
be salvation.
I know, I know, what it is that lies at your heart, a mischief so corrupting
your appetite, that it destreth not good, and your taste that it discerns not
evil; a privy poison, but so pestiterous, so benumming (not the senses, but the
soul) that if it be not exhausted, an incureable letargy, a mortal and
everlasting sleep ensues, ye are not persuaded forsooth, that the Protestants
religion is so abominable; they are to precise, which either make them
Heretics, or think that Heretics must needs miscarry. What? we be al
Christians, believe in one Savior, expect one heaven, and enjoy one
redemption. Have not al men souls to save: little diffe^ences make no great
square, in the foundation we agree. At leastwise, whatsoever their lives be
wicked, and doctrine false, their prayers and Churches must needs be of God,
because they be good, and needs be good, because they honor God.

Ah ingenious impiety, how thou turnest and tossest to wind from thy accuser?
nay rather, ah foolish stubborn blindness, which will not see that, which is
as clear as noone day, which takes for one (or as not much different) those
things which are as wide distant as the two poles of heaven. To take your
selves for a particular Church, is impossible for a heedlesse multitude, who
have neither Temple, Altar, Priest, nor Sacrifice, neither distict members, nor
any band of union. As Well you may think of going at the latter day, neither to
heaven nor to hell, as to think in this life of a Neutrality? Blind you are,
if you perceive not your selves to be separated from my Church; but if you
imagine that those whom you cleave unto, may be my congregation, and that in
their prayers, holiness; or in their faith, salvation may be found; then are
ye both blind and impious.

Pro. 17.
Take heed what you say, to justify the wicked is as detestable, as to
condemn the just. Will you divide my Church, whose especial mark and property
is unity? or will you give me two Bodies mistical, two Spouses unspotted, two
chaste Turtles, two Cities on hills, two Kingdoms, two Families, two Pillars
of truth; Am I an adulterer, or am I deuorsed from my love. To say that
Protestants may by their profession be saved, is either to make an other God
beside me, or to make me none; to make an other summum bonum, or to make me
evil, to league me with Lucifer, or to make Iehonah Satan, to conclude me as
author of dissension, or patron of impiety, a double dissembler, or a flat
Heretic.

If I can have two Churches so different in rites, so contrary in doctrine, so
naturally and necessarily tending the one to the utter extirpation of the
other, then give me two heavens for them, and contrary glories for their
opposite deserts. Divide my Godhead with furious Manes, and defend one God
good, and an other evil; or say that I am mutable good, and badde by
enter-change of places, and enter-course of times. If there be two Churches,
provide them of two Christ's; if there be two Moons, find them two Suns: An
other Sun to lighten this other Moon; an other Christ to illuminate this
other Church; an other Redeemer to wash her in his blood; an other Holy Ghost
to Sanctify her: for I dyed but for one, my divine Spirit sanctifies but one.

If on the other side, 18. The perfect opposition and contrariety of Catholics
and Pro^t^stants.
you join Caluinists with Catholics in one Church, then set together the
Woolfe with the Lamb; couple the Lion with the Heart; the Gos-hawke with the
Partridge, and they shall well agree. No, no, heaven and hell have as much
affinity, as have these ^wo religions, and shall as soon shake hands, the one
being sure, the other surmised; the one infallible, the other impossible; the
one founded by my self from the beginning, and upon a Rock; the other newly
reared by man's imaginations, cherished for policy, having no other ground then
flitting and foundring sand, the one entitled by prescription, the other
settled in possession, the one erected by divine providence, the other seized by
intrusion, (and to be brief) the one mine, the other Belzebubs, the one
divine, the other Deuilish. Where are my indifferent mates, that can bear two
faces in one hood, carry fire in one hand, and water in the other, that can
breathe both hot and cold, that can hold with the Hare and run with the
Hound: Weather-cocks which turn with the wind: Camelions transforming their
hew, according to the present object which they see. Let them unfold the whole
sardle of their fancies, and bring me forth the golden mean, which they so
much commend.

Combine me fire and water in one bundle; make me understand (oh ye Neuters)
how these two faiths can be recon^iled together, or constitute one faithful
company, being so opposite, that of necessity the one must be plain blasphemy,
or the other Idolatry: For as much as my dreadful Eucharist is irresragably
believed by the one, to be my true body; not in figure, but in verity; not in
conceit, but in re; not in shadow, but in substance; not in faith only, but by
my personal presence, and consequently is adored with due veneration, whereas
by Hugonots and other Heretics it is injuriously reviled, vpbraided as an
Idol, torn, spit at, and trodden under foot (beastly Monsters as they are.) Of
other maine differences, consider with your selves the particularities; in
number of Sacraments, in use of Images, in invocation of Saints, in
forgiveness of Sins, in heavenly Glory, in Infernal pains, in Justification
of the living, in praying for the Dead, in Faith, Hope, and Charity, in
Fastings and Prayers, in Sin and Merit, in Predestination and Free Will, in
Scriptures, in Traditions, and almost in the whole sum of Faith. Shall Arius,
Nestorius, and Eutiches with other old Heretics be justly credited, by
universal consent of al ages, and by your own verdicts to roar in the
bottomless pit for one or two points (for further they went not) and stagger
ye what to think of them, who have tossed over every stone, reuersed the
whole frame of faith, and turned al vpside-downe? Or is not rather their
departure, and division from my Church, a sufficient vvarrant of their
judgment, though but in one point only, they varied from the faith.

19. How abominable the Scriptures, prayers, and Churches of Heretics a^^.
Caluinisme then being doctrine so diabolical; what are the fruits thereof? what
are al things which depend upon it, or are annexed thereunto? Have this for
certain, whatsoever concurreth with my says, concurreth with me; and
whatsoever has affinity with heresy, conspireth with Satan, who is the
father of lying, and fosterer of falsehood. You mistake much, if you take their
Scriptures to be my word: Fie, none of mine, they are the word of the Devil,
false adulterated, poisoned, perverted, full of corruptions, which belie me in
every leaf, and make my spirit to speak things, which I never thought,
oppugning my faith and church, for whose maintenance and comfort they were
inspired, I disclaim from them as from a counterfaite copy, and reuounce them
as no deed of mine.

You err if you think their prayers to be prayers, whatsoever they say,
Hierom. in c. 4. Osee.
whatsoever they sing, it is in my ears the howling of Wolves, the bellowing
of Bulls, the screetching of Owls, the mutual answering of night Ravens in
the deserts. Oh how illusion bewitcheth you: if yo^ deem Ministers to succeed
in the authority of my chair, and participate in my keys, they are of heresy
heresies, pensioners, officers of Antichrist, his Heralds, his Prolocutors, his
Scribes, his Preachers, his forerunners, his Apostles, and the Angels of his
Kingdom. Less danger to the body is to suck Adders eggs, then to the soul
ministration of their profane bread; and better it were to swil the dregs of
a fatal boule, then to sippe the cup of their communion. Their rites and
ceremonies, though few and fantastical, yet not a little noisome and
infectious. They are not holy, but profane; not religious, but sacriligious;
yea, even those which they retain of the ancient custom, as Fastes and
Holydaies, which sithence they have translated to vnder-propping of their
superficial and ruinous edifice, and to disguising of their false ware and
fradulent trash, do please me even as much as a man delights to be wounded
with his own blade, and dispighted with his own inventions. Yea their
Churches and Temples (be not carried away with the accustomed phrase) are no
more holy, no more my house, no more the place of my Sanctification.

They were, they were mine; but then mine, when none of theirs; for becoming
theirs, they ceased to be mine. Why call you that mine which is conquered,
possessed, and polluted by my enemies? My adversary, yea your adversary, and
the adversary of al mankind, boasts in the seat which was holy, and has
placed his chair of pestilence, where the sacred Altar my earthly Thronestood.
In stead of Quyres of Angels, Chrysostom.
which carst frequented about it, descending and ascending (though mortal eyes
were unworthy of the sight) as the dignity of my presence required, legions of
infernal spirits there now dance, (though for auerting your minds, they
bewray not themselves) triumphing not only as in their most proper residence
and Palace, but more, as in a subdued fort, victoriously obtained against me.
Woe to the betraiers, that of faint courage, first gave over my hold, and
rendered my signiory; and woe to al those which shall thither now go, to yeeled
their homage and allegiance. The honor which there is exhibited, keeps
course of speech by pretense of my name, but in verity touches not me, but is
appropriate to Lucifer, who always affecting to paragonize the highest, his
hatred is so strong; his envy so cankred, his insolency so haughty, that he
reckons as nothing al other honors, which Heathens and Pagans unto him
exhibit, except he may draw to himself, whatsoever is wont to be mine, and
magnify himself with the bravery of my plume.

Genes. 12. and 31. 1. Reg. 10.
Bethel was my house, where Jacob and the Patriarchs both adored and
Sacrificed, but after King Hieroboam had cut off Israel from Jerusalem, 3.
Reg. 12. and 13.
and had there erected a Religion, Priests, and Sacrifices, of his own
invention? was Bethel any more my house? Deutr. 11. and 17.
Garazim I ordained for a hill of benediction; but when the Samaritans usurped
it for a place of their adoration, Ioh. 4.
was it any longer a hill of benediction? Genes. 12.
Sichem where I appeared to Abraham, was a place sanctified and adorned by him,
in memory thereof with an Altar, but when the Schismatical people had made it
the 3. Reg. 12 John. 4. Where Sichar is affirmed by S. Hierom to be al one with
Sichem.
Metrapolitane See of their separation, was Sichem from thence-forth sacred? Or
are the Turkish mesquits houses of divine prayer, because they were in times
past Christian Churches? No more then Judas was the Temple of the holy Ghost,
after the tempter had invaded his heart, when the place is so profane, because
of the service therein exercised, what can the service it self be but mere
abomination?

Oh think not it can be to my worship which is so wicked. Remember, 20. The
Protestants public prayer, how unlawful and detestable
that Altar is raised up against Altar, Priests set up against Priests,
Sacraments against Sacraments, Service against Service, Faith against Faith,
between which there is not, (neither possible can be) any unity concord or
conformity; Or to speak more properly, and not by the common peoples terms,
who ignorantly confound the names of things call to mind, that against my
venerable Altar, there is erected a plain communion Table, in defiance of the
precious and veritable Host (my own quickening and sanctifying Body) is
exalted, the Idol of their contemptible Supper, a base and unprofitable piece
of bread, in liew of my anointed Priests, are obtruded the Ministers of
darkness, for a reverent, worthy, sound, and undoubted faith, is crept in
bastard, counterfaite, uncertain, and fained miscreance.

If Mass and Mattins, were fully and wholly used in their assemblies, and that
public prayer had nothing of their own corruption, yet were it abominable in
my sight, proceeding from their Ministry, who have run away from my Church,
and stolen away with them her ornaments; and to cover the rags where with
they are rigde; jet up and down, cladde in her robes. Can the veil of a
Virgin, make a strumpet honest, or stolen attire beautify heresy? Is this any
other, then with Jews to bow the knee, and spit in my face, to crown with
thorns, and then salute as King.

If the service (I say) were perfectly Catholic, yet will I give no license and
leave to Sacrifice in Egypt, but will be served among a chaste generation, and
rather in the desert, then among the Egyptians. How then shall I brook a form
of prayer, a shadow of divine service, wholly tending to maintenance of heresy,
not only abrogating, disanulling, suppressing, my ancient and approved rites,
but directly substituted in defiance of me and my mysteries, and of the faith
Catholic, which is put into English, to insinuate that my Church erreth in not
using the vulgar; blotteth out invocation of Saints, as open Idolatry; and
prayer for the dead, as plain superstition; cancelleth Consecration, as vanity
and falsehood; abhors Elevation, as detestable impiety; prays expressly for
propagation of their Sect, and in imprecation, joyneth Peter's Successor (the
Rock of says) with the Mahumetan Potentate, and his confederates.

See here the service, which they who mock me, call mine, and they who delude
themselves, name the old service translated: where are the memories and
r^^^^^ntations of my Saints? (lessons of ins^^^^on to the ignorant, and
examples of ^^ety to the simple) are they not dispitefully broken and brent as
Idols? where is my standert, the eternal monument of my triumph, at the sight
whereof the suries quake, and whose sight is to every good Christian as a
sentence, heard or read out of my passion? where are my Tapers, which warn
people, to see that their life be light, and their souls free from darkness?
where are the Vestments and Vessels of sanctification, does not the face of al
things in their Temples, import a perfect and absolute alteration in faith:
do not the very walls and pillars cry out, that Catholics should not come
there? Ah ye poor Schismatical souls, how long vvil ye err and run forward
without remorse, if reason stay you not, regard the examples of constancy,
which stand before your eyes; and how faithful believers behave themselves.

21. Schismatikes vainly build upon pernicious examples.
You can say that Priests did in many Parishes follow the new course, and many
of them yet living, continue in the same. And why rather lean ye not unto the
example of the Bishops, whom no less learning and sanctity then their
Superiors function, more commend unto you; who universally died in long and
lingering imprisonment, no one yielding to unconscionable conformity, but rather
choosing to loose both livings and liberty and to see their adversaries
possess their chaires. Oh but great Presidents move you, and many wise
fellows have assaied this Ice before you. Ye pry upon the corruptest souls,
as Kites when they seek a carcass; and like the Raven, which Noe let fly,
ye rather will stay your selves upon a carrion, then return to the Arc. Why
rather return ye not with the Dove, although ye should have found green
boughs, whereon to recline? you propose to your weary and tired spirit, to
your fainting hearts, the examples of certain which seem to you wise, but are
in very deed sooles; seem learned, are ignorant; seem religious, are mere
worldlings.

As Well you might build, that theft, extortion, murder, or adultery, were no
wickedness, because they sometimes fall into these sins, whom a false show of
wisdom or virtue had before commended. Every man that sins, does not
straight think it lawful, will you direct your life by his rule, who perhaps
condemns his own, yet if any will stiffly defend their Schism, to clear
themselves from sin, is this sufficient security, to follow such men's
fantasies? where have these Pastors the k^^ of knowledge; whence fetched these
Doctors them profound learning? where waded they, through the depthes of
divinity? No man in his weighty cause trusts the warrant of a puny student,
contrary to the opinion of Counsailors, no man crediteth his life to a ^aw
practisioner, against the advice of the expe^tensed Physician. And will ye
hazard your souls upon a presumptuous sm^ttere^s conj^cture, neglecting what
they teach, whose only labor is to guide to heaven; whose life and study is
the daily meditation of my law.

22. Examples fit to be ^egarded by Schismatikes for their instruction.
Why ^ather six^ ye not before your ^ies, so many both of the spiritualty and
l^ity, who have in your own memory, but yesterday, yea daily, sustained bloody
and ignominious death, rather then run your race and incur damnation? Walk
to the prisons, see if they be not full of my Confessors? there have you
examples justly to be embraced, not one but many, not many but multitudes.

If things present please you not, cast your regard upon ages past, consider
what the faithful in all antiquity has been wont to do in like case, as yours
is now. Weigh what Tobias would have done in these times, Tob. 1.
who when al Israel frequented the Calves of Hieroboam, though he were of their
Tribes, yet would never bear them company, but contrary to the Kings
ordinance, and the peoples practice, went yearly to adore at Jerusalem, what
those religious hearts would have performed, who being Israelites for sooke
their native Country, because of the Schism, 1. Paral. 15.
and went to dwell in Judah under a right believing Prince.

What constancy the seven Brethren would have showed, Mac. 7.
who were sacrificed by unspeakable torments, for refusing to eat swines
flesh, at King Antiochus commandment, because it was an act abhorring from the
profession of their law.

Match. 6.
How would Eleazarus have behaved himself, who gladly suffered death, rather
then to give scandal by seeming conformable to the same wicked decrees,
refusing most constantly so to dissemble, as publicly to eat meats, not
forbidden indeed by Mo^ses, yet proffered unto him, and pretended to the
beholders as swines flesh, thereby outwardly condescending to the Infidels
proceedings.

How resolute would Machabeus have been, how courageous his Sons? What a
firery and zealous answer gave the Father to the Kings Commissioners,
exacting his obedience to the late edicts, concerning alteration in religion.
If al men obey the Kings commandments, yet I and my Sons will never do it.
If to these Presidents ye plead that Moses was greater then I, my servant
then my self, that more perfection and zeal was to be required of Jews, then
of Christians, that my old Testament, was more holy and more precisely to be
stood upon then my new, bethink your selves of my Apostles and Disciples,
whose heirs and imitatours as ye pretend to be in faith, so ye ought to be in
profession.

Would Peter think you have brooked Luther, founder and grandfather of so
many falsehoods, who for one article of misbeleefe, bid Simon Magus auaunt as
full of bitter gal, and the child of perdition? Would Paul have spared Ministers
the seducers of many souls, who stoutly called Elymas the Devils Son, Act.
13.
and enemy of righteousness, for diswading one man from the faith, and by his
word stroke him with blindness? Would my divine Evangelist S. John have
endured John Calvin that Arch-heretike, the corrupter of whole Provinces, who
at the sight of petty Cerinthus, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Eusebius. hist Eccl. lib.
3. cap. 22.
subuerter not of the thousands person, in comparison of the other, cried out
to the people, that they should fly from his company, least the place where
they were, together should for Cerinthus sake fall upon their head. Perhaps
these pillars of my church, would to save their goods or lives, have reverently
heard the common prayers of Simon, Elymas, and Corinthus, honored their
abominations, and received communion bread at their hands. What apprehended
ye of al my ancient Martirs? thousands of whom each day throughout the year,
has registered in the book of life, and crowned with an immortal Garland,
because they would not partake with Idolaters, in any act of their ungodliness.

23. Participation in works of Heresy worse then in acts of Idolatry.
If now you be so simple, as to think that Heresy is not worse then Idolatry;
that to forsake me, is not worse then never to have followed me; to deny me,
then not to confess me; to abjure me, then not to know me; to blaspheme, then
not to honor me; that Infidels for their ignorance, shall be beaten with many
stripes, and Heresy for her perverseness; malice and apostasy shall be beaten,
with few; that to cast two or three grains of Francumcense upon a Heathen
Altar; or to lay a bunch of Grapes before Bacchus, Syndas Nicephorus.
to crown Ceres with cares of corn; to move a little the bonnet before
Jupiter be greater sacrilege, then the courtesy of cappe and knee, and
reuerential presence, at their thrice Idolatrous communion; or then the service
to maintenance thereof erected; every jot of whose ritual customs, and public
prayers was invented, commanded, practiced, and is still continued, only in
detestation, defiance, extirpation, and denial of my faith Catholic.

Then, oh then how are ye deceived? 24. Heresy worse then Infidelity and
Idolatry.
seeing every falsehood, the more it has of truth, is the more apt to beguile;
the m^re apt to beguile, the more pernicious to the destruction of souls, and
more abominable. False Prophets which cry the Lord, the Lord, when I the Lord
have not spoken unto them, are worse ten-fold then the Prophets of Baal, sooner
shall the Publican be justified, then the hypocritical Pharasie, viler and more
hateful before me and men is the Adultresse, which by Matronlike demeanure
would seem a Saint, then the open Strumpet which carries lightness on her
back, and vanity in her face. A plain fable is laughed at, but not hated,
because it is not made to deceive, neither is apt to deceit if the author
would, but a lie forged, and obtruded for truth is intolerable; Yet if so be
that wilfulness has amazed reason, that whereas you are resolved to die,
rather then yield to Idolatry (for so now and then you would make your selves
believe) yet you would yield to heresy, rather then sustain any damage.

Reflect then once at my request, upon my good Christians, whom (Idolatry being
overcome) I exercised by Arianisme; somewhat always, being necessary to try
my elect. Restect (I say) your understanding upon their excellent zeal:
(except perhaps ye refuse with soar eyes, to behold the Sun, for fear of
greater annoy) mark well how they fortified their faith against the Arrian
Heretics.

Socrat. l. 2. c. 12.22.23.24. Theod. l. 4. cap. 14. Niceph. l. 9. cap. 24.
Regard how in Greece, they withstood the Proclamations of Valens the Emperor,
choosing rather to be scorched, brent, slain, at their assemblies without the
Church walls, then they would be present at public prayer of their heretical
Superintendent, though their service which he said were nothing altered from
their own; Victor Vtic. de persecutione Vandalorum.
set before your eyes the horrible calamities, and intolerable vexations,
which Catholics in Africa endured, under their Vandal Princes, for refusing
to partake with them in their Arrian rites, and for privately frequenting
Mass, when it was forbidden.

Finally, muster before your selves the Martirs and Confessors of al ages, from
the beginning of the world, to this present time, from Abel to the last which
you have seen (or might have seen) with your own eyes. Let the very names of
Martyr and Confessor exhort you: the first whereof admonishes you, Martyr
signifies witness.
that I require your testimony: refuse not therefore to bear witness of my
truth; the other that I challenge your suite and service at my Court, your duty
and attendance at my feasts, your vassalage and allegiance confess therefore
and deny me not.

Oh ye stubborn bows, which will rather break then come to the just bent,
which the true measure of Christianity requires? Oh perverse generation, how
much ye want of the perfection of ancient believers? Nay, how much want ye of
the true zeal, which a number of good souls declare, on whom yet I have
bestowed less gifts, either of nature or of worldly prosperity? In case you
say to your selves, that you see not the actions of ancient times, yet the
example and constancy of these, does every day in every place hitte you on the
eyes, and might wound your hearts, if they were flesh, and not of flint: nay,
if they were not too fleshy, and void of al spirit. How just cause have I then
to exclaim against you (oh disloyal wreatches) how long will ye reject my
authority, and kick against my Commandments? 25. By what commandments of God
going to the Heretics prayers is forbidden.
who am I that charge you? am not I the Omnipotent? who am I that call you? am I
not your Creator? You put your hand in your bosom, and draw forth an empty
excuse from your hollow hearts, you can remember no law of mine, that you brake
by going to heretical service, nor can find any precept to the contrary. I
perceive that you are deeplier seen in the statutes of men, then in mine
ordinances, in the common law, then in the Canons, more mind the managing of
secular affairs, then of your souls, and better know how many years purchase
a piece of land is worth, or how much a load of corn comes to at such a
rate, then what p^^^e heaven is to be valued at, or what sum of felicity
merits added to merits, will at length a mount unto, which is that great and
maine commandment, not the principal point only, but the abridgement of the
whole law?

Is it not, that man love me with all his heart, with al his strength, with all
his soul? you answer, this serves your turn, and that you love me as much as
I require: But descend to the particulars, and you shall be taken with the lie.

Did I no where will, that besides believing in heart, you should also profess
your belief before men. Or vvil you violently make me to mean before Jews and
Heathen, but not before Heretics; in time of religion flourishing, but not in
time of persecution, to the obtaining of credit or commodity, but not to
detriment? Did I not add, that he which denies me before men, shall be denied
of me, in the presence of Angels. He which shall be ashamed of my religion, I
will put him to open confusion, and which shall save his life temporally, by
yielding to the persecutour, shall loose it eternally being condemned at a more
dreadful tribunal, when universal Sizes are held over all the world.

Isay 42.
Have I not said, that I am a jealous God, and will not give my honor to
another? Deuter. 7.
Did I not severely forbid my people, to encermedle in Heathenisse rites? did
I not for peril thereof interdict them al society, Exodus 23.
and conversation with Infidels? did I not denounce by my Apostles pen, that as
in heart men are to believe, that they may be justified, Romans 10.
so with mouth they are to confess their says, that they may be saved? If by
mouth, how much more by deeds, and the whole course of their life? Or will I
(think you) contrary my own decrees, approve him which confesses me in
words, and denies me in profession?

And what if I had not in such express wise prescribed your duty? 26.
Schismatikes violate the law of nature, by going to the Protestants Churches.
does not the light of reason, the law of nature, the office of a Christian
man, suggest, teach, command, that ye cleave firmly to your faith, and that
for no cause possible to be imagined, ye commit any thing, in word ordeed, or
omit any thing by negligence or sloth, which may import a departure from your
religion, or be so interpreted and accepted; or that may seem in any one point
a conformity; to a strange and false faith, a yielding or agreement to
irreligious proceedings? If he which breaks one commandment be guilty of al,
as a violater of charity; shall not he likewise, which fails or falls in
one point of faith, be fully guilty of Infidelity? To bear truly the title of
a faithful soul, it is not enough to believe a-right in one or two articles,
but my whole law, that is, the entire word of faith, must steadfastly be
embraced. If then I shall say; go ye cursed, for not doing good, for omitting
only hospitality, and works of mercy, shall wickedness go scot-free, shall
partaking with Heretics in their abh minations, pass as innocent? Shall
departure from my Church, my Faith, and Sacraments, deserve to hear: Come ye
blessed? Is there nothing for me to examine, but whether you be murderers,
thieves, or adulterers? do I much respect that you should not offend your
neighbor, and contemn my own injuries.

27. Heresy and pe^^ecutio^ purposely permitted of God for trial of men's hearts.
I foretold, while I conuersed on earth, that heresies of necessity must be for
the trial, and manifestation of men's hearts, that it might be apparent, who
would of a proud and contemptuous spirit embrace heresy, who would of faint
heart and pusi lanimity obey it, who contrariwise would meekely trace his
reverent Fathers steps, and prefer the authority of the universal Church,
before his own imaginations, and not to be shaken as a reed, with any
tempests of blustering persecution. Luke 12.
I forewarned that I came not to send peace but separation, between Parents
and Children, Subject and Prince, Master and Servant, between Wife and
Husband, Brethren, Kinsfolk, and Friends, that persecutions should be raised
on al sides, and that he which loves parents or children, or what else more
then me, and will not take up his Cross and follow me, Math. 10.
is not my Disciple, nor worthy to have part in my Kingdom.

Are you Christians, 25. Disse^bling in religion is abominable.
and think your selves excused from the precept, which I gave to the
Synagogue, that if any man would draw you to a strange faith, he should not be
obeyed, for that by such I make proof of my servants, I discover the secrets
of the heart; and sift the branne from the fine flower, try the wheat from
chafe.

Are you Christians, and know not that to follow a false faith, is to serve a
false God, and to begin new and strange doctrine of faith, is to erect a new
and strange Idol. If you doubt thereof, I assure you it is so. And now is your
time of trial: now are you called upon, solicited, yea commanded to follow new
doctrine, to serve Caluins Idol, now are you cast into the furnace, now shall
you prove your selves, either gold or dross, and the calamities of this
present time, I have purposely sent that the secrets of al hearts shall be
revealed.

Revealed you are to your own shame and to my grief. What shall I do to your
stony hearts, to whom my serious commandment, of professing sincerely your
says by your conversation, is but as a puff of wind against a mountain?
Shall I charge your consciences with Moses ceremonies, and cause you as I did
the Jews, to bear the remembrance of this commandment upon your bodies,
seeing it is so shine from your hearts. Shall I forbid you to wear
linsey-woolsey in your raiment, to join in the plough the Ass with the Ox,
and to sow with two kind of seeds. Though these obseruances were appendant to
the old law, doubt ye not but the signification of them, takes place in the
new. He which walks simply and plainly, Pro. 10.
walks confidently; Dissimulation and double-dealing, I in every thing hate;
but in factes of religion, I utterly abhor.

Admit that neither reason nor rule of conscience suggested unto you, 29.
Schismatikes contemn the authority of the Church.
nor that I expressly exacted of you such firm confession of faith, yet ought
not the authority of my Church, to weigh so light in your conceits, as neither
to hearken unto my Priests, who to reduce you from Heretical conuenticles, set
naught by their lives, and have by their blood confirmed the thing to be
unlawful, refusing to accept pardon of life, upon so damnable a condition; nor
to my Vicat in earth, who sollicitous for souls, spares neither care nor
cost for your salvation, nor to the declaration of my General Council at Trent,
which resolved (when this case came first in question) that not without
grievous sacrilege, you could yield your presence, at the Heretics Churches,
or Ecclesiastical assemblies; or by any other manner of sign, give external
consent to their detestable rites. A thing indeed, which by men of
understanding could never have been doubted off, if worldly fear had not
blinded peoples hearts, and made them hard to believe, that which pleased not
their humor. What can they therefore account themselves, who will not hearken
to my Spouses voice, nor obey her admonition; but to be worse then Heathens
and Infidels. Math. 17. 2. Reg.
Let them know, that not to obey her, is as sac^legious as Idolatry, and all that contemn her are accursed. Tob. 13.


30. Heretics how precis^ly to be shunned.
Besides that principal precept, of loving your God above al; and that other
absolute statute of constant profession of my faith Catholic, which suffers
no exception. If you will but a little look about you, ye shall find that I
have yet left you another commandment, as a continual help against man's
frailty, a sovereign preservation against al infection of pestilent doctrine.
It is more available against the spiritual enemy, then any armor of proof,
or a ten-fold shield: and might in these darkesome days be a torch unto your
steps. Will you bear to h^are it? will you endeavor to follow it, that my
present admonition, may not turn to your greater damnation? you will, if you
may hear it from my own mouth, it shall be joyfully received, as coming from
heaven, your words are reasonable.

Well then, whose spirit but mine inspired, and established as a perpetual
observation, to the worlds end, that Heretics should be utterly avoided, as
men subverted and already damned by their own judgeme^t; Tit. 3. Romans 16.
as sowers of schism and authors of division, by teaching contrary faith, to
that which was first received; 2. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 3.
as whose speech creeps like a canker; as lovers of pleasures, rather then of
God, making a show of piety, but denying in effect the virtue thereof; Math. 7.
2. Pet. 2.
as Wolves in sheep attire; as authors of blasphemous Sects, bold, self
conceipted, walking after the flesh; 2. Pet. 3. 1. Ioh. 2.
as those who following their own fancies and desires, have issued out from
among the faithful, and fallen from the truth, 2. Tim. 2.
Iudae 4.
turning the grace of God to uncleanness, and are therefore already appointed
to judgment; as false Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.
deceitful laborers, Ministers of Satan, whose end shall be according to their
works, and (to conclude al iniquity, imaginable under one title) as
Antichrist, ^. Ioh. 2.
I will not therefore, that ye eat or drink, or have familiarity with them,
Ioh. ep. 2.
I will not that ye friendly salute them, for in so doing you partake in their
wicked works, and bolster them in their proccedinges, and by just consequent
must be partners of their damnation.

How long shall the light of reason and conscience sleep? how often must ye be
admonish^d, that right believers must not participate with Infidels; that I can
have no society with Belial: nor my cup with the cup of Devils. If light and
darkness can love? If I join in any respect with Lucifer, if ever any mercy,
love, or amity, any league or consent, be between him and me, then let
Catholics adhere to Heretics. If no such thing can possibly be, but that
eternal enmity be sworn between us, why then should children of Jerusalem,
come to the solemnities of Babylon? they which look to be heirs of heaven,
make pact with hell? expecters of life everlasting, merchandise for their
temporal with accursed death? He that runs with the thief, fornicateth with
the adulterer, murthereth with the Tyrant, is in no case to be excused, no not
although they do it for fear, more then for affection to the sin.

Shall they then which profess heresy, with Heretics be found clear? Of
like I had no reason to forbid you their company, 31. Schismatikes are
infected with heresy and not with pure Schism only.
for you are provident and discreet, firmly grounded in the Catholic faith,
strong Rocks, whom no waves nor tempests can move, vveake vvreatches, and
so much the weaker, by how much you presume more of your selves, and rely more
upon your own endeavors, then upon my grace: how feeble ye are, your actions
give better testimony, then your imaginations.

Are ye they, which can live in the fire, and not be scorched in the flame, and
not be smothered; wade up to the lip in the surges of the Sea, and not be
overwhelmed; handle pitch and not be defiled, eat and drink, converse,
contract, (not only bargains, but marriages) disport, discourse, play, pray,
live and die with Heretics; and yet sound at my terrible examen, neither
attached with their infection, nor touched with contagion? I forewarned my
ancient and first people, that if they used the conversation of Infidels,
among whom they dwelt, Ios. 23.
they should find them stumbling blocks of scandal, by giving occasion of
ruin, and pricks to their eyes, in putting out the inward light of faith,
what by example, what by custom and persuasion. Experience proves this true
in them, and the event argues it more true in yourselues.

Are not most of you infected, some with one heresy, some with another? I have
to charge you withal, besides going to Church, how soever you think your
selves, to be somewhat virtuous, and Godly; Rarer then a white Crow is he to
be found among you, who either cancelleth not fasting-daies by his own
authority, or dispenses not with meats prohibited, as often as he list, or
doubts not of some article of faith, if not of al? One improueth Confession,
another Purgatory, this man invocation of Saints or use of Images, that man
prayers for the Dead, or the office in Latin. There are that suppose Antichrist
shall not be one singular person, but includes a company or a succession. Many
doubt nothing of this, yet acknowledge no union of the Church, under one head
visible; or detract from the authority of Councels, and decrees Ecclesiastical:
Most of you fear least the gates of hell have prevailed against my Rock; least
the spirit which I gave her, have not fulfilled my promise, neither taught her
al truth, but that she may diversely err.

The stench of the damnable memory, and the fume of their brimstone, ascends
from the bottomless lake, who of Schismatikes have at last become flat
Heretics, yea Persecutours, yea and of an il beginning, made a worse ending?
3^. By what means Schismatikes grow to be Heretics.
whence all this? not because the longer ye live, the skilfuller ye wax in
Divinity, the carefuller of your souls, more desirous of heaven, or are oftener
visited with inspirations celestial, but because ye wax weary of expecting my
pleasure, in that I come not at your appointment, but let my secret and eternal
providence have the determinate course, ye think I have either forgotten my
Church, or cast her off; supposing quite contrary to Christian doctrine, that
adversity is an absolute sign of my indignation, and of a reprobate religion.
Waxing more and more in love with the world, ye have less sense and feeling
of remorse? by never talking with Priests, nor conferring of matters touching
the spirit; by being laden with secret sins, which either you will not
acknowledge, or mind not to forsake, or cannot be endured to reform by
restitution and satisfaction; it comes to pass, partly through the nature of
such negligence, partly through my just permission, for your ingratitude toward
me, that you begin to loath the religion, which checketh your humor, and
assures not heaven to sin and iniquity.

Amidst these your sensual, carnal, and worldly affections, heresy buszeth
about your ears, plausibly inuiting you to her cup of pleasure. Thus lying
open to the enemy, and destitute of my grace and protection, you are made a
pray to the roaring Lion; while with conuersing among Heretics, ye become like
them in life. Becoming like them in conditions, you quickly delight in their
suitable doctrine. Poison, poison, lurketh in their company, as in domestical
Adders, and in the familiarity as in Cocatrice eyes. What though at the first
ye be not Conquered? He which loves peril, shall perish therein: what though
their arguments be but weak and foolish? Drops of rain in continuance pearce
the hardest stone, a small worm in time decaieth the root of the fairest Vine,
and contemptible Yui^ being let alone, ouer-creep^th and over mastereth in time
the tal^st tree. Flee therefore society of Heretics (as much as you may) even
in temporal business, because of your peril, and because my counsel is so to
do. F^ee it absolute in fact of religion, not for peril only, but for sin,
not because of my advise only, but for my commandment sake. Flee Babylon, flee
Chore, flee Sodom, flee from the adversary camp in time, as ye will at the day
of my victory, at the day of your death, at the great day of judgment, not be
taken for enemies.

33. The obstinacy of Schismatikes and ingratitude toward God.
Perceive ye not, for all that I can say or do, the horror of your offense, (oh
ye my traitors and rebels) how long shall I cry out to a people, which have
stopped their ears, and allege reason to them, which say they will not
understand? how long shall I preach repentance to them, which repel knowledge,
and catch hold upon every simple shift, as upon a staff to sustain their
halting and trembling consciences. The ear discerns words, and the eyes
colors, the mouth tastes: This rude wilful people has reason, and yet
discerueth not iniquity. They repel al outward admonitions, for fea^e they
should be convicted; secret inspiration of contrition, they reject as
melancholy; remorse of conscience, they hate as a heart sore.

Shall I for this hold my peace, and leave to lay open their faults? If it be
little that I have yet alleged against you, hear more if it be not too
little, but enough to condemn you, and too too much for you to find any
evasion, yet will I add more, to see if any thing can move you; yea though
nothing w^l move you, ye^ wall I add it to j^stifie your condemnation, and my
complaint, woe, woe, to you who will not know the time of your visitation.

Behold, I have stood at the door, desirous to be let into you^ hearts, and
you have not opened unto me, when therefore ye shall desire to enter into my
Kingdom, and rest I will answer you, that which the foolish Virgins heard,
wi^h sorrow enough: Ye come to late, the gate is shut, and it shall never more
be opened. I have sought rest in your souls, to make there my mansion, and I
find as at my nativity, Luke 1.
that there is no place in the Inn; I must seek some-where else. I come to
your bounds and territories, to cast out your Devils, and heal your
infirmities: Math. 8.
you like second Gerasens, because of temporal loss of your Swine, request me
to depart your confines.

I will depart, and when in necessity you call me back, I will not return. I
inuit my self to your dinner, as I did to Zacheus, to work in your house
salvation; ye contrary to him refuse my courtesy, and will no s^luation to your
house. I will seek more worthy Hosts, and I will sh^ke off the dust of my feet
against you. I call you as Lazarus four days dead, (four years dead, if not
forty) out of your stinking graves; I cry come forth, come forth, and ye will
not arise. Possibly you imagine, that as I in raising Lazarus, brake the common
course of nature, to show my glory, so I will in you swerve from the statute of
your creation, and violating your free vvil, make you Catholics by force so to
save you, well lie still in your putrefaction, whom my voice could not raise to
salvation, my Angels shall raise them to judgment. I have so ^ong stood and
cried: Ye which travail and are laden come unto me, and I will refresh you. I
have openly proclaimed that whosoever thirsts, should come unto me, and I
will give him drink of the water of life. Which importunate endeavors of mine,
and vehement prouocations since they nothing avail, seeing ye contemn my love,
and set not by the riches of my mercy. I am forced to an our cry against you: O
al ye which pass by the way, behold and see if there be any grief like unto
mine? See if any man were ever so handled by his enemies, as I their God by my
creatures. See if ever so great kindness has been recompensed with so
monstrous ingratitude: if Superiou^s were ever so dispighted by their Subjects,
Lords by their Vassals. See if at any time beggarly necessity despised so
bountiful munificence; or apparent peril of ruin and utter destruction, were
so securely neglected. See if any memory can record so high a Majesty, to have
loved so affectionally as base a bondmaide, and to have been so ignominiously
repulsed in his suite.

What fettered caitiues were ever called to such glorious liberty, and would
not come out of their dungeons? What languishing in such loathsome malladies
were proffered health, and loved better their noisome calamity? Consider and
see how the Courtly cares, the Royal cheer, which I have prepared for my
feast, Luke 14.
has been frustrate and disgraced by unworthy companions: one excuses
himself by cares, an other by covetousness, an other by caruality, one has
business, an other is bargaining, the third has married and cannot come. Nay
ye shall not come? but the time shall come when like dogs, ye shall hunger and
run about searching, and shall not find for your famine. Ye shall crave and
wish, cry and call for the crummes, which shall fall from my childrens table, and
from the trenchers of my household, but shall not obtain them, ye shall roar
after one draught of wate to allay your thirst, neither shall it be reached: yet
when you have done your worst, by not coming when ye were called; my banquet
shall not be blemished. I will oppose to your souls of better talent, you
frustrate my feast, but it shall not be frustrate, I will fill it with better
guestes; you disgrace it, but I vvil grace it with more honorable rooms; ye
shall be eternally barred from the table of the Lamb, Heretics shall enter
before you into my Kingdom, Heretics shall be converted, to supply your place;
and Infidels will I fetch from East and West India, to sit in my glory, and ye
shall be thrown into utter darkness. They shall possess the Thrones ordained
for you; they shall enjoy the Crown, which hong over your heads, in
expectation of your de^erts. Faith shall be given to them, to them shall the
grace be translated which ye ref^se, and they shall fulfill the righteousness
belonging to their b leefe.

34. Schismati^^s b^ their evil example impugn the Catholic ^aith.
But oh that only ye lost your own Crowns, and that ye were not occasion of
perdition to thousands more. Oh that though ye honor me not your selves, yet
that ye would not work me that contumely and reproach, which I may not bear at
your hands. Every where am I blasphemed through your example, my religion
growing in contempt, because ye set so little by it, who are thought to believe
it. The edifice which I so care^ully founded, ye like mouldring stones decay by
your faltring and relenting, that which my Saints have built by their blood (or
rather I by mine own) ye ruinate by the world and flesh, as fast as zeal
labors to kindle holly flame, so fast does your coldness extinguish it.
Mark how desolate my house is, and how many have forsaken my Church, one
through another example. It is your dissimulation that betraieth my cause,
without which persecution could little prevail. For introduction and
confirmation to your error, ye set the examples of others before your eyes, as
pillars of your actions, others shall make you the ground of their ungodliness.

The contagion runs among you from one to an other: as Chored sheep and
blasted fruit, ye daily are destroyed and destroy by mutual infection, you say
you hurt not me or my cause, but the joy of the adversary, and the dole of the
Catholics conuinceth it. If you could now see the triumph, which you adorn
for the Devil, and the sorrow of the Angels and Saints, as you shall one day
know it, you would confess no less, then I now charge you vvithal, in the
mean space that which you see in the Children of light, and in the Children of
darkness, how the one is grieved, the other encouraged, and how each side
labors, the one to win you, the other to hold you fast, is sufficient to
inform you and condemn you, because Moses and Aaron did once by their
example not sanctify me, I would never let them enter the land of promise, and
shall you enter into my rest, who dishonor me before people every day? He which
is the ruin of one poor soul, were better be drowned with a millstone, and
think ye it a slight matter to destroy, ye know not your selves how many?
The children of Israel repining against the difficulties which they found, when
I led them through the laborious desert, (as I now conduct my Church in
England, through the uncouth dreadful and paineful ways of affliction and
tribulation) I caused them every one to die in the wilderness, except only
Joshua and Caleb, because they two as much as in them lay, encouraged forward the
rest. Shall then your murmuring and rebelling against the crosses, laid upon my
flock escape my judgments? Wherein chiefly lay the sin of Ophin and Phines,
for which I plagued both their father, their children, and al their posterity?
was it not the alienating and discouraging of people from my sacrifice by
prejudicial behavior? will any King going to warre-fare endure him, which shall
by faint words or cowardly examples, detract the journey and dissolve the
Soldiers hearts from battle? I suppose not: for one such person hurts more
then seven enemies, if he would; should he not build with one hand, and pull
down with the other? How then can ye be excused from being both impediments
and impugners, of my religion? seeing as in skirmish, so in contention about
religion, the apprehension of man and his frailty is such, that if one shrink
ten faint, and if ten yield a hundred fly; and diverse not standing to their
tackling, the overthrow of al follows, and slaughter of the rest.

Oh ye fugitives from my pauilions and camp, ye call me King, 35. Schismatikes
grievously abuse God.
but where is your subjection, you call me Captain, but where is your courage?
you call me Lord, but where is yours service? ye call me father, but where is
your fillial love? ye call me Savior, but where is your care of salvation? ye
call me Redeemer, but where is your thankfulness? ye call me Creator, but
where is your obedience and love? ye call me Omnipotent, yet ye fear not my
power; ye call me just, yet fear not my rod; ye call me w^se, yet think not
that I pearce your dissimulation; ye call me merciful, yet accept not my pardon,
which I here offer you yet again, if ye will presen^ly repent. Ye call me good,
yet use it not, but abuse my goodness: ye call me righteous, yet do me wrong:
ye call me God, yet have more respect of man. Ye say ye are not wicked, but what
greater impiety, then to associate your selves to my adversaries, to betray my
cause, to deny my religion, and forsake the participation of my Sacraments. To
have more care of your substance, then of your souls, to poise the world and
me in balance, and prefer it before me; not to deal with my Priests, not to
assemble at my prayers, to live like Heathens, acknowledging the service which
ye haunt to be folly and sacrilege, yet otherwise wanting al exercise of
Religion? Cursed is he that does my work negligently and fraudulently, and
cursed is he which does it not al.

Why do I thus reprehend a sort of innocents, 36. Excuses of Schismatikes
refelled.
who wish well to me and my faith, and with all their hearts, desire the return
of their forefathers days, helping my distressed members to their uttermost
power. It is not they which have denied my faith, and abolished my laws; or
which persecute with such extremity. What they do, is against their will upon
mere compulsion, not so much for regard of their own particular, as of
children and family, neither from the heart, but for fashion sake and obedience,
and only for a time. They purpose not to die otherwise, then graffed into my
body Mystical, and true members of my Church, and in the mean space redeem
the time of their sin, with works of mercy.

Can iniquity thus teach your mouths an vntrought? Pyned consciences, how
greedily they pray upon the food of falsehood. The bread of lying rellisheth
well in your taste, but the grauel thereof shall grate your mouths, and fret your
mawes: Against your own souls ye plead.

37. Schismatikes are not excused by pretense of helping the Catholic.
Others indeed made the breach in Peter's Net, but why have ye with them fallen
headlong forth? others ouer-sowed the cockle, but why are ye choked
therewith? others raised the smoke, but how happens it that your eyes are
blinded? others pursue and assault my Catholics, but why have ye through your
departure weakened them, and made them a pray, to whom if ye had manfully
stood, neither they should have been so oppressed, nor you live in such
slavery of conscience, nor I have been so dishonored in this Realm, and
almost quite exiled. What tell ye me of your simple assistance, which is the
least that ye ought to do, but far from the most that ye might. Is your
continuance in Schism to further the conversion of England? What? Shall my
Church be reared in iniquity, and Syon founded upon damned souls? Can not I
maintain my power without your sins? or (though I use you as I find you)
will I evil that good may redounde thereof? I seek not your goods, but your
good; not your substance, but your sanctification; you and not yours. Build not
your sins upon my back, for I will cast you headlong; I need not your
dissimulation, you are not necessary to me at al. If I feed you without other
men's aid, so can I feed others without you. Perhaps I am beholding unto you,
that ye are not such flat Heretics as some are, I had as liefe ye were. Oh we
are luke warm; I would ye were cold: oh we do not wholly follow Baal. If Baal
be God follow him wholly; if I be God, follow him not at al, but me: halt no
longer between both. And what is it that ye dream off, your good works? 38.
Schismatike merit not glory not remi^sio by the^ good works.
and frame imaginations of I know not what manner to redeem your sins.

Pretend ye to be Christians, to be of understanding, to know well what ye do,
and are ignorant that al works done in state of ^inne, and out of grace, how
much soever they tend to piety, or intend my honor, are abundantly rewarded,
if in cons^deration thereof I temporally bless you, with health, wealth, or
other pro^perity: seeing they neither satisfy my justice, no^ merit remission
of offenses. Having dismembered the vn^^^ of my Church, by your departure, and
violated the sacred bond of her peace and charity, whatsoever ye do, though ye
gave al to the poor, and your bodies to the fire for my sake, ye are nothing,
ye do nothing, ye shall reap nothing. I spit at your works, if you think
that done out of grace, they serve to salvation.

Nothing saves but by lively virtue, and force of my Passion, with which none
can have affinity, who have by sin made themselves dead, detestable are such
in my sight, until by profound and perfect repentance, they be reconciled to my
favor. No works are holy, where the soul is not sanctified, no branch can
bear fruit, except it bide in the stock, cleanse your vessels, then put in
your wine, and your floor before you heap corn. Ere up a fresh your ground
and cast not away your seed upon thorns. My Church is a Vine, whereof I am
the root; become branches of this Vine, and then may ye bear fruit to
salvation, keep perfectly my Commandments, 1. Ioh. 3.
and then have confidence.

Out of my sight with polluted and blind Sacrifices: away with the works
which smell of the contaminated caske. Abominable are the offerings of the
wicked; Pro. 15.
neither will I be gresed with the oil of sinners, such as the die is, such is
the color: such as the pipe is, such is the liquor. Ye holy? your very
justice and righteousest actions are as rags of office; the choicest of you
is but as chafe, the smoothest a Thistel, the b^st is a Bryer, and the hol^est
among you an Hypocrite. Ye rich in merits? ye are vvretched, poor, miserable,
when your heap (such as it is) shall come to the Mil, ye shall find that your
grains were hollow and worme-eaten, fuller of filth then pure flower. Well
void, to the void, and full to the full, they which have, shall have more and
abound, and from you shall be taken that little which ye have. I will suffer you
to have your course: ye are cold, but ye shall wax colder: ye are run far
from me, but ye shall run further, I will puff away your alms as ashes,
your gifts I will reject as from dissembling friends. I ween ye measure me by
your selves, and think to bribe me before the day of judgment, your
expectation shall be deceived, and your sins argued before all the world. What
shall I do with a multitude of your prayers, the lip-labor of defiled
mouths, and flattery of faithless hearts? Let not the confidence of them
ouerwhelme you, Eccles. 15.
my praise is not fitting in the mouths of sinners, and execrable is his
prayer, Pro. 28.
which will not hear my law. Salute not me, Lord, Lord, except ye fulfill my
will. If blasphemous tongues can magnify me a-right, then shall your mouths
perhaps praise me worthily; whose deeds blaspheme me, I hear not sinners.

What magnify you your fastes external, Ioh. 9.
39. Schismatikes precise in smaller matters neglect the greatest.
neglecting the solemn and great fast internal, from sin and wickedness? Your
fastes are infected with self will, (in following your own desires and not
mine) with worldly fear, with hatred of correction, and reprehension with
froward auersion from the truth, with deadly sin, what of your feasts,
holy days, and other ancient obseruances, wherein you choose what ye list,
and what ye list ye contemn? ye fast the Eues and keep Holy Days, possibly
more then ordinary, in discerning of meats, many of you are more precise then
you need. But to communicate through fear with Heretics in their sacrilege;
to abstain altogether from my Sacraments through fear, to deny me before men,
is no matter of scruple. Oh Pharasees which very precisely tith-mint and rue,
condemning whosoever swarueth one jot from his duty, or does not more then he
is bound in these smaller matters, and breaking freely the maine precepts and
principal points of my commandment: Hypocrites. These greater things ought by
any means strictly to be observed; and then are the other not to be omitted.
First observe the substantial part, then have care of secondary respects:
First, hold fast surely the possession and profession of your faith: then
neglect not the ceremonies thereto belonging. Why strain ye a Gnat, and
swallow a Camel, fear a Mote and dread not a Beam, stop at a Straw, and
stagger not at a Stream? To whom, but to such as you did. I cry by my Prophet,
Ierem. 14.
that when they fast and pray, I will not hear them, and when they lift up
their hands, I will turn away my face.

40. The objection of obedience refelled.
Let not the bare name of obedience blindfold you. I forbid you not to give
unto Caesar, that which is Caesar's, but deny me not mine. No, not though Caesar
would arrogate to himself, that which appertains to me. Yield to Caesar
goods, life, al temporal servitude, as far as behooves to the Countries
commodity and regiment. Render to me a pure heart, and sincere observance
without al exception, this I challenge as my right. Honor the Prince for my
sake, but honor me for my self. So I say, Honor me, Fear me, Love me,
Reverence me, Obey me, Serve me, which of you will endure, that his Son shall
disobey him, and for his excuse, that he did it by your servants commandment?
ye must not obey my servant against me the Master, neither my Magistrate
against me the Sovereign Lord of al.

Be ye your own judges in this case, whether ye ought most to obey man or me:
Go ye to heretical conuenticles for obedience to the law? More tolerable shall
it be at my great day to them, which yield of frailty and fear, not
aggravating their offense, by acknowledging prerogative over souls, besides
that alone which I have appropriated to my Church and ke^es; neither joining
their exterior schism with inward schism and heresy. If obedience be a
precious thing perform it to me, to whom al subjection is due, and to whom al
powers bow, I command obedience to superior preeminence, but not in derogation
of my own prerogative, neither am I contrary to my self. Neither must the law
of the supreme Court, give place to a meaner seat, neither my celestial
Throne, to a terrene Tribunal. What obedience is that, wherein is the greatest
disobedience possible? what dutiful subjection, where in is most notorious and
perfidious rebellion? If the name of obedience be holy, whatsoever it
pretends, and that against the sillables thereof, no reason can be heard,
then obey the body commanding against the spirit, the world against heaven, the
Devil against me.

41. The excuse of fear rejected.
What now, if ye be not so mad as to allege that you sin against my law, by
way of obedience, to the laws of the Realm; but that what you do of any
goodness, ye do for love of me, and that which ye omit, ye omit for fear of
the world. Nay, what if all the good ye do, be done for fear of my wrath, or
for vainglory, and not for my love? and that which ye do not, ye omit for
love of the world, preferring the same before my fear? for how can ye fear
the world, but that ye love too much the world, and fear least it should not
love you? Why stand ye in awe of her frown, but because ye would allure her
fawn? you would not dread her bended brows, if her smile pleased you not too
well, and tickled not your hearts with delight. If you loathed the world, and
could brook either the absence of her company, or the eye of her displeasure,
ye would not fear what she could do unto you, which to speak the most, is
but to use you frowardly, or to banish you her sight. This if she did, am not
I presently ready with arms displaied, to receive you into my bosom, into my
Palace, into my eternal and incomparable Tabernacles? If ye loved me, ye would
not so love the world, ye would not so fear her: Seeing ye violate my
commandment, because of her countermande, how is it not manifest, that wherein
you obey me, ye obey me for fear of my revenging rod, which also ye would
soon tread under foot, if the world should thither in like sort extend her
prohibition.

Oh faithless cowardes, and not faithful champions: oh Hares and not Men: oh
patterns of pusillanimity, what avails it you for excuse, fear indeed (as
you say) drive you from your duty? I evidently denounced that ye should not
fear them, which kill the body, and cannot destroy the soul; but me, who can
cast both body and soul into everlasting flames. Have I no way deserved, that
you should suffer for me; Number the pricks of my sharp pearsing thorns,
number the bloody and renting stripes, received oueral my body, from the rage
where of no part from the crown, to the plate was free, if ye cannot number
these being innumerable, consider my five deepest wounds, consider my
despightful death, and what I suffered for the redemption of al mankind, for
yours in particular amongst the rest. Or I pray you, if you suffer any thing
for my sake, is my future glory an unworthy recompense. Am I a slow play master,
or a poor Lord, not able to make you amends, or are ye richer then I, and can
expect no just retribution? If now while ye are my enemies, I have provided
you, and furnished you with many necessary things, and suffer you to enjoy the
fruits of my excellent vvorke-manship, the Earth and Sky; have I reserved
nothing in store, to gratify my friends.

Give credit to my words, I tell you that blessed and a thousand times happy
are they, which suffer persecution and crosses for my name sake, and for their
conscience, for great is their reward in heaven. If perfect wisdom were to be
talked to imperfect hearts, I would tell you how to endure for religion, is a
thing which in so ample wise satisfies, for humane negligences and former
offenses, combineth so singular a Garland for the sufferers; so exquisitely
conformeth to the type of my Passion, and makes men so like to me their
Savior, that Saints in all ages have with tears of hearty affection desired it;
with joy embraced it, drawing near and fervently sought it, when it was far
off: why fear ye and tremble (oh ye of little faith) why despair ye, and cast
your selves away, O ye of no faith? The shippe-man calls to me from the
bottom of the Sea, in expectation to be swallowed, and I hear him. The
trauailer passing through the midst of thieves craves my a^^e, and I conduct
him safe. Daniel was secure in the Lions den. Jonas in the Whales belly, the
three children in the furnace, because I assisted them. I forsook not my
Disciples and ship, though sometime I seem to sleep, and to forget them. If
your eyes were worthy to be opened, you should see as my servant Elizeus did,
millions of Angels in readiness for preservation of my Church and company.
Fear not therefore, that from which both I can deliver you if I will, and will
as I see it best.

Deny ye my omnipotency and ability to deliver you; or if I call you to suffer
somewhat for me, who are ye that dare detract and say, ye will not, if ye be so
bold, can ye alive or dead escape my hands, but that I will make you suffer
even in this life, much more for your sins, and that without al consolation,
thanks, or recompense?

That which ye fear shall come furiously upon you, and oppress you like an
armed Giant. Though ye fear to serve me, yet will not I be afraid to repay
your dastardy, with a dreadful hire. The slouthful person fears to be stoned
with a piece of turfe, pretends for his lazines: Eccles. 22.
A Lion is without the door: in the midst of the street I shall be devoured.
What ailest thou Prophet of sloth, if thou take courage I am with thee. Pro.
29.
Fear me and my law, he which fears man, shall soon perish; but he which
trusts in me shall be assured. What fear thou persecution as a Lion: Fear
sin and fly from it, for it is a Serpent, and a two edged sword. You hear
not, you are not persuaded: Go your ways ye unkind wreatches; ye shall not
suffer for me, for ye are not worthy.

42. Excuse of necessity overthrown.
Necessity you say has no law; but deserves pardon. Oh how you vex me with
wilful blindness. What necessity is there, why ye should deny your faith by
going to the malignant congregation? Necessity forces you to save your souls,
for if ye do not, in vain ye have received them, nay cursed is the hour
wherein ye were borne, who have frustrated the end of your creation, which
was that glorifying me in this life, ye might be glorified by me in the life to
come, and caused my blood to be shed for you in vain, and shall be damned for
euer-more, without al redemption.

But no necessity compels you to save your life, much less your goods.
What if ye become poor, yea most poor? What if ye die? is not the cause mine?
Is it not your faith that ye suffer for? I repeat it again. No necessity
constrains you to save your life, much less your goods; neither care of
your selves; neither care of your family.

Can not I provide for you and yours, 43. Care of family is no excuse of
schism.
without your sin? Ask the Birds, Fishes, and Beasts, who feeds them,
whereas they neither sow nor reap. Say not with the murmurers: Can God
provide us food in the desert, fear their example, I gave them sustainance,
and when they were not content with such as I sent, I condescended to them
their hearts desire, but while the meat was in their mouths, my wrath fell
upon them. The expectation of the careful shall perish, and the less ye trust
in me, Romans 11.
the less regard I will have of you. Seeing you discard me from your accounts, I
discharge my self of your care. Will thou needs provide for thy family? thou
do well? does natural love instigate thee to seek their maintenance? So do
I also, yea I tell thee, if thou feel not this instinct, thou art worse then
an Infidel. But how behooves it thee to provide? by hook and by crook, by
sin, Schism, Infidelity, Perjury, Theft, Murder? must al things be lawful
to thee for maintenance of thy family, according to thy calling? Or must thou
provide for them only by industry, labor, or any other honest and just means;
and touching the rest, commit them to me? My commandments do not one impugn
the other, neither have I willed any man to offend.

Eccles. 15.
When I commanded to love me above al, did I except wife and children? did I not
peremptorily avouch, that he is unworthy of me, whosoever prefers them in
any thing before me? Cursed shall the child be, which shall be respected above me
and my commandments; be he innocent, yet shall he sustain the recoile of his
fathers iniquity. And he which takes hold upon the natural love engraffed by
me in your hearts, why do ye not infer with your selves, that if he who
provides not for his family temporal necessaries, is worse then an Infidel, he
which neglects provision for their souls, is a very Devil: Unless ye think
that the body is more precious then the soul. But I assure you that al is lost
if the soul be lost; ye show well therefore, that you love your children for
your own sakes and delight, and not for me or my will, thus turning the law of
nature, against me the author of nature. Go forwards ye who are so
sollicitous for your household and posterity, proceed in your cares; when ye
have al done, both hazarded and lost your souls, and daily offended me for
their sakes; who is it that fostered and preserved them? you or I? who filled
their Mothers breasts with milk? who gave to you that affection of love, which
makes you to assist them?

Tell me whosoever thou be, which trustest more in thine own solicitude, or
(to speak plainly) more distrustest me, then that thou dare commit them to
my hands, can thou feed thy self without my providence? I, who but I?
cherish the young Ravens, cloth the Lillies and Flowers, open my hands and
fill all the earth with blessings, I number not the stars only, but the very
hairs of your head, why then dare ye not rely upon my refuge.

44. The true cause why Schismatikes going to Church are ripped.
I have laid before you the excuses, which the best of you with vnsacred lips,
and uncircumcised heart do forge. Wicked and unsearchable is man's mind, but I
who am the searcher of hearts, will find out every corner. The reed on which
you lean, shall run through your hands and break. Are these your causes and
pretexts? Pretexts they are, but not causes. He easily finds occasion, which
will needs break friendship. If you will not utter the very cause, but are
ashamed thereof; then hear it at least, and confess a truth. Charity is waxen
cold in your hearts, the world or the flesh have ouer-whelmed you, ye want
says; of the Catholic belief, you have no certainty, as infallible; but
opinion only, that is probable.

Your souls are ouer-growne with sins and sensualites, as a barren field
with bushes and brambles; your corrupt affection tieth you more strongly to the
world, then if you were chained by one foot to a stake, you can not soar
aloft, not lift up your hearts to congitation of celestial and spiritual
things. If sometimes ye cast up as it were one eye to heaven, ye cannot but
fix the other on earth; if ye proffer up one foot, the other is fast clogde;
ye cannot move, if ye offer to use the triple wings of grace, reason, and
free will: the massy poise of flesh and blood abaseth you presently, before ye
can make winge. Ye vvil suffer nothing, ye will loose nothing, ye will bear no
pain, sustain no detriment, incur no disgrace, endure no calamity, ye will
diminish no diet, impeach no sleep, abate no part of your port, impair no
credit, abridge no liberty, cast off no superfluity.

Ye little think, Eccles. 1.
that to serve me is perfect liberty, to loose for me is great gains: it
comes not to your mind, that a secure conscience is a continual banquet, and
that the fruit of a religious heart, is joy and peace. What shall I do to such a
nice, delicate, and unmortified generation? If the times were good, could ye
easily go to heaven: not so soon as ye suppose. Ye vvil never take up my
Cross and follow me, who when I lay it upon you, and help you to bear it,
thrust it from you with violence, and hurl it away with a mischief. Let your
sainting hearts meditate defense of their constancy: but they shall not be
innocent. Build pretense while you will, but ye shall not be guarded from the
tempest of my wrath. Wash your selves with soap, as long as ye list, ye shall
never be clean: Why being invited to my heavenly banquet, desire ye to be
holden excused? Why say ye that ye cannot come: what need these complements?
Speak plainly, say as the truth is; say, we will not come.

Oh fie, such words to our Lord God? such a flat denial to our maker? 45.
Against such as or defer their conversion.
Nay, Spare us a while O Father of heaven, we will but set things in order, and
weight a convenient time, at least once before we die, we will approach to thy
sanctified Table. Crave you then days and deliberation? Is it for my behoof
or your commodity, I inuit you? Need I your salvation, more then of so many
other souls, Jews, Infidels, and others, which I hourly suffer to perish,
and inuit them not to life? whom if I invited, I should find multitudes of
them, answerable to my inspirations, and if I had given them some few of those
opportunities and motives, which I afforded to you, they would long since have
done penance in sackcloth and ashes, and been converted perfectly from their
wicked ways. Or if besides my Quyres of Angels and Saints, I yet would be
glorified of more, can I not create more children to Abraham? or when ye have
done your best, have ye not been unanswerable to your talents as unprofitable
servants? Did I choose you first, or did you choose me? I chose you and loved
you, before ye were in nature, before ye were any thing, and now ye be
something ye forsake me. And yet though ye have forsaken me, I have not so
forsaken you, but that I inuit you once more to return. Turn unto me, and I
will turn unto you. Nay, behold I turn unto you, turn therefore unto me, I
humble my self to seek first the atonement; I inuit you gratis to my
supereminent glory. Ask any man if he will entreat you, or hire you to partake
of his blessings: yet behold I inuit you.

Come, come, my children, come poor souls, take your fill for thanks, not
Wine and Milk or Honny, but of supernal, immortal, and Angelical food, which
who so eats, lives for ever, and who so eats not, can have no life in him.
Come, and ye shall not only be wel-come, but I will give you present grace, as
pledge of future glory, I will give you remission of sin, I will make you one
with me, I will endew you with some especial favor. For I am not he that enter
any where and am well entertained, but I there bountifully leave my remembrance.
If ever I deserved well at your hands, if ever ye expect any further pleasure,
if ye love me, if ye honor me, if ye fear me; come, delay I may not bear. My
fatlings and foul are killed, al things are in readiness, and I will not
stay. If ye will not come for my sake, come for your own.

Come while you are in health: Forsake the world before it forsake you, This is
merit and thanks. Come while your senses serve, while your wits are your
own, while as reasonable you may use reason, before ye be drowsy and
speachlesse as beasts, or rauing as damned spirits.

Come quickly, least ye be taken in a trappe, at an hour unlooked for, and
never come; or at least when you would, no means occur; whereby ye cannot
come. Bring forth the vvriting, wherein I have indented with you, not to call
you til ye be ready; if you have any deed or lease of life or years, show me
my seal, and then build upon my assurance. If you have no such, show me at
least some parrol vvarrant; if ye hold only at vvil; why dally you, why delay
you? Why prevent ye not my sudden summons, having no Charter of estate?

Oh miserable souls, whose chiefest hope is, that which of al other things
is next to damnation, the most horrible? that is to be converted a^ the end of
your life; then which, what is more perilous or uncertain?

46. Against those which say the Prince shall answer.
There are among you, which are not yet so forward, as to purpose to turn to me
at their last hour; but can finely shift themselves from the severity of my
judgment, although they acknowledge their actions to be il. They can shun
the blame thereof upon the Prince and the lawmakers, who are the causes of
their sin. Your souls indeed I vvil require at their hands, but what is
that to you, who per^sh in your iniquities. What may the punishment of the
accessory avail the principal felon? of just actions, the motive is not
reproueable, not the cause il, if your act be not damnable, what is their
offense. Are ye Infants? or will ye plead simplicity? or are ye men who because
their free will cannot be forced further, then they list themselves, are at
their own peril to look to their doings. The thief alleges his necessity,
the fornicatour the violence of his passion you the terror of the laws? As Well
you might al think your selves excused, by casting the fault upon the Devil,
who tempreth you.

Lo here the weakness of your fortifications? Either you go for obedience,
or compelled for fear, or for love of your family: either you lay the fault
upon others, or you defer your conversion. Scar-bugs and visards to terrify
children, not to amaze men; excuses to mock fools, not to satisfy him which
requires reason.

Are these the bulwarks that must sustain the day of my wrath? 47. Excuse of
Schismatikes how vain and weak.
are these your trenches for time of battle? If Spiders webs can withold
the Eagles flight; if a thin boorde can recoile the roaring Canon, then shall
these allegations serve for a good plea. Soldiers trust not in gilded armor,
nor the mariner in painted ships. Dare ye venture your souls on such
friuoulous illusions? you may deceive others, you may deceive your selves, but
me ye cannot deceive; no not though you think to ouer-reach me, and persuade
me to be content: I see not as man sees, for man ouerseeth, but nothing
escapes my knowledge, yet if as man I see; what man is so blind that sees
not your dissimulation and offense? I will weigh al your actions even to a
grain, and keep tale of al your sins even to one; I will rippe up your
hearts, discover the center of your cogitations, and lay open your barren
roots, your adulterate love I reject; your fained obedience I renounce; your
pretended deserts I cast out off my memorial.

Pro. 11.
There is a way which seems to a man not to be unrighteous, and the end
thereof leads to death: Such is the course which you ensue. There is a
generation which seems pure to it self, and is not cleansed from her filth:
Pro. 30.
such a generation are ye. But (as I told you before) the reason hereof is,
because vanity bewitcheth you, obscuring that which is best, and perverting
your understanding. Eccles. 8.
Because judgment is not out of hand pronounced against you, therefore ye
securely wallow in sin: ye love your selves and not me. Self-love I say you
have, for indeece ye love not rightly your selves, if ye did, ye would love me
more then your selves. Tob. 12.
He that loves sin, is the Enemy of his own soul.

What shall I say to you? 48. Against those which appeal^ to God^ mercy.
though al excuses fail you, yet will you not fail to excuse, when nothing
serves your turn, then appeal you to my mercy, Appeal to my mercy when ye
hartyly repent, not while ye purpose to continue in sin; while ye live, not
when ye be dead; while ye be yet at liberty, not when ye be apprehended, and
cast into prison for my debt, I am merciful. Now come to me, and I will take
you to mercy. Will ye not come? Then in calling me merciful ye mock me. Exodus
^.
To say the Lord is righteous, and we are wicked, shall no more avail you, then
it did Pharao, except ye forsake your iniquity. Shall a Man for-giue his Wife,
if she persist still in her adulterous mind, or his Son if he continue his
contempt? if such may be found yet will not I be so fond. Oh desperate
boldness: Because my word extolleth my mercy, and examples of my clemency are
maruailous, in confidence thereof to wax male part and bold, and to tell me
before hand, that presuming there-vpon, you will neither care what you do to
me, nor what I say to you.

Shall then the Arbiter of the heavens be unjust, and the Judge of Judges be
corrupted? Shall I so a^use my self, as to absolve whom the final verdict shall
find guilty? Then were my iniquity greater then yours. If ye hope to find
mercy, without conversion to the fountain of mercy, and auersion from your
wickedness, Pro. 10.
ye gape to feed upon wind, and follow birds flying in the air, your hope
is as thistle-downe, which every breath scatters. In this consists my
abundant mercy, that I have not all this while taken you away in the midst of
your sin, but patiently a long time put up al abuses, and expected you to
repentance; that I have lovingly given you diverse motives of remorse, that I
have by secret means removed from you diverse occasions of further sin, that
I have not suffered the enemy, to execute his malice against you, in such sort
as he would have done, and as ye deserved; that yet also I am pressed to receive
you once more, even now inuit you again to salvation.

As for the rest, you have heard (I am sure) and by authority authentical, that
I am a hard Lord, reaping where I sowed not; a severe creditour, that will exact
of ungrateful debtours the uttermost farthing; a precise Judge, which will
examine and call to account every idle word. A straight Prince, Math. 25
which will damn to utter darkness an unprofitable servant, a terrible God,
which for negligences and omissions of smaller matters, then exercise of
religion and profession of faith will denounce: Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire. Have I not flatly proclaimed that the way to heaven is straight, the gate
narrow, and sew shall enter; that scant the just shall be saved. If it shall go
so hard with good Catholics, what shall become of you? if the flourishing and
fruitful tree shall scant escape fire, what shall the dry and withered stock?
This if ye will not now understand to salvation, the tempter shall beat it into
your heads, at your final hour to desperation.

49. Schismatikes rely upon humane wisdom.
My words I wast, not able to persuade this wise and circumspect company, who
cast beyond the Moon, and think with their far reach to surpass my
providence, who deem it a feate of the greatest folly that may be, to venture
goods for grace, their livings for my love; to hazard terrene honor, for hope
of Celestial glory, and a little temporal prosperity, for eternal felicity.
This is the sum of your reckoning. First and principally, before the care of
God and conscience, I will quietly enjoy my wealth, and live in estimation among
al men to my power: Shall I be in danger of want, or seek a strangers table,
who am now able to entertain others? Shall my enemies have advantage over me,
and tread me under feet? Shall varlets and ribauldes possess themselves of my
substance, which I have so painefully gotten together, and so carefully kept?
Shall I live in prison, and be used I know not how, who now may go where I
list, and sport at my pleasure?

Understand what is true policy (oh ye babes) learn perfect prudence (oh ye
fools) that which you say is vanity; and the practice thereof is mere
maddenesse. Pro. 1. and. 9.
The beginning of wisdom (if your wisdoms will consider it) is my fear,
Eccles. 12.
and the accomplishment of wisdom is the awe of me. This is the beginning and
the end, this is al in all. 1. Cor. 3.
The wisdom of the flesh is foolishness before me, Pro. 12.
and the ways of the wicked shall finally deceive them, ye say ye are not
blind; your own words condemn ye, Ioh. 9.
and of them I take witness, that ye err not of simplicity and ignorance.
Beguile not your selves, I am not to be jested with al. Measure your
foresight, Pro. 23.
trust not overmuch to your devises, which I will bring to confusion, Pro. 3.
but have confidence in me with all your heart. Be no longer wise in wickedness,
and simple in goodness: Seek first the Kingdom of he^uen, and the
righteousness thereof, and al things else shall be supplied by me. Romans 8.
The wisdom of the flesh is death, but wisdom of the spirit is life eternal.
If ye abhor to be a triumph to your enemies; Let not the Devil the chiefest
foe of al, brave me by the spoils of your souls.

Now you are captive, now may your back friends scorn you, now do they
tread upon you, when they have made you yield unto them, and for fear of
them, to do that which is both a shameful shift, and which they know vexes
you to the heart: For he is never overcome which makes resistance, but he
whose courage failing, recanteth as recreant. Neither is your estimation to be
stood upon, as a matter of worth, for honesty may be well thought cracked, where
Christian duty to God has taken her flight. It cannot be expected, that he will
be loyal to man, who has violated fidelity to his maker. If you force not of
this credit, but intend authority, gape after dignity, love superiority, and
delight to command, are not your hearts guilty of abominable ambition, and
testify against you, that ye love the honor of men, more then the honor of
your Lord God? Let your glory be to know me; for to follow me is perfect
worship. Eccles. 23.
I am the glory of my people, and they are my countenance.

Liberty you love; why then remain ye the slaves of sin? ye are content to
be the Devils bond men and thral, rather then ye will be my servants; and to
endure his heavy fetters, rather then sustain my sweet yoke. Use the liberty
which I have given you, captiuate not your spirits and free will, to the earthly
inclination of sensuality. And why should you prefer gold and silver before
me, whereas I redeemed not you with corruptible mettel, but with the last
drop of my blood? The earth is mine, Luke 15.
ye are mine husbandmen and laborers; al goods are mine, and ye are my
Stewardes; is it much for you to render to me my own, if I demand it? you are
rich enough, if ye have a good conscience; Eccles. 3.
and most pestilent poverty is in a wicked breast, wherein is no goodness.
Better is piety then precious stones, Pro. 30.
it is the word of life; and a Bay Tree always flourishing. Romans 15. Eccles.
27.
Better is a little with piety, then great treasures. Many seeking riches,
turn away their sight from seeing truth, and easily make shipwreck of their
souls; seek not so eagerly, that which is an impediment to the entry of my
Kingdom.

50. The great folly of Schismatikes.
But for as much as you think your selves so wise, consider yet a little, and
you shall see much more of your foolishness, which every child may plainly
discry, and convict you of folly; what profits it you, that my Church has
power to forgive sins, seeing you have no access unto it? that she prays
for her children, both live and dead, seeing ye be none of hers?

What avails it you, that my Passion is a medicine to salvation, seeing ye
apply it not unto you? that my holy Body sanctifies and prepares to glory,
seeing ye never receive it? What booteth it you, that the just shall shine like
the Sun, seeing ye for your schism, shall be as ugly as fiendes? that to the
righteous is prepared a Kingdom of glory; seeing ye be wicked, and deserve
torment in Hell? That there is a Heaven, seeing ye shall not enter into it. Angels
and Saints, seeing ye shall never enjoy their company?

Finally, in vain it is to you that there is a God, into whose rest ye shall
never enter, and whose face ye shall never see, ye have mouths, and praise me
not aright; ears, but never hear the Canonical prayers, and voice of my
Spouse, eyes ye have, and never behold me your Savior, though most lovingly I
offered my pretense among men, that they may daily remember my Passion.

50. God will pervert the wisdom of Schismatikes.
All this notwithstanding you think your selves wise, and that my Catholics are
improuident persons. Contend with them no longer, but contend with me. See if I
turn not your devises against your selves, and make the wicked fruits of your
vain conceits, to light upon your own heads. Contend with me in wisdom,
and see whether you can more easily lay a foundation of felicity, or I subvert
it; you gather together, or I scatter; you purpose, or I prevent; you
determine, or I frustrate. Your trust is in the security, which is promised and
permitted unto you, for your unconscionable conformity; as though they could
assure you of prosperity.

Cursed is the man, which trusts in man: Whence ye least fear danger, I send
out mischief against you as a Sergeant, and my wrath as a Pursuiuant, no
strength shall be able to defend you, nor any place to hide you. I would have
delivered you from them, but who shall rescue wretched sinners out of my hands.
I despise such, as to please men displease me, and their bones I will crush a
sunder. As I hate the ringleaders and masters of falsehood, so abhor I their
disciples and confederates: You fear them, but it is I which will plague you;
you dread to step in the hoare frost, but snow shall ouerwhelme you; ye fear
drops, but storms shall ouer-take you; ye fear a crack as it were of thunder,
but I will strike you with my horrible boltes in deed. As with the holy I am
holy, so with the overthwart I will be ouer-thwart, of all the evil which you
have sown, ye shall reap seauen-fold; for to the sword I have ordained those,
Eccles. 16.
who pass from righteousness to the Tents of iniquity, Iud. 5.
Anathema to the land of Meror, for not aiding my Israelites in their extremity
of battle, and Anathema to those, whose joining with my adversaries, and
yielding to them, has made my host a pray, yet want I not means to maintain
my Church, and without you it shall triumph.

Unprofitable trees, how long shall I expect fruit in vain? years and years
are passed, and always I find you barren. The Axe therefore shall be set to
your roots, and ye shall serve for fire, if ye were Roses as ye be cankers, yet
being so entangled among thorns and briers, ye should go together to the
surnace, ye shall see my Catholics in my Kingdom, and your selves be kept
without doors as dogs; which of my Saints will stand between you and my fury,
whose communion you have renounced, with whose impugners ye are associate.

What help can ye hope for of the Angels, whom ye have contristated by
auersion from their King? Your Guardian Angels ye have chased away, by entering
Schismatical Temples. They are ashamed to have labored so long in vain about
you, neither will follow you into the Kingdom of darkness. At that day
therefore, ye shall see my children glistering in glory, and shall say. Behold
these are they, whose course of life we esteemed ridiculous, and zeal to be
mere madness, whom we thought to be miserable, and eschewed their company as
full of calamity, now with how great diversity has God divided their felicity
from our wreatchednesse? If I defer til then you care not. Nay, the Judge is
at the gate, and his rod sleeps not; Though ye be flexible by favor, yet
will I be just, though ye dissemble with me, I will not dissemble with you, nor
fail of my threatening word. Ye shall know that I look not down on earth for
nothing, nor in vain behold the actions of the Sons of men. Ye doubt whether
there by providence, but when I repay you in weight and measure, and subvert al
your wise imaginations, then ye shall feel it.

Go to the Synagogues of Satan, sit with the malignant in their Church, and
wot well that you shall be judged for so doing. Pass this life as merrily as you
can, but hope not for the life to come. Be not content with your own evil, but
pervert and hinder others also, (which is the proper office of the Devil)
rather then further them to salvation as Angels. Ye shall one day find, that
double sins are needless, for of one you shall be condemned. Fear of
disgrace spurreth you to perdition, forgetting that I gave Toby favor in the
sight of King Salmanasar, above al others, because above al others he honored
me most, and least seared the Kings displeasure, in matter of conscience.

David and Joseph might also serve you of example, that credit is not always
lost by serving of me, but seeing ye so fear to loose men's favor, ye shall
loose it, they shall malign you, abuse you, hate you worse then Recusants. From
your wealth and fatness proceeds often your iniquity, I will make you leaner,
multiplying your miseries, and the third heir shall never enjoy those things,
for enjoying whereof ye forsake me. I will put a ring in your nostrels, and a
curb in your mouths, your own conceits shall perish, and my will shall
prevail. You are jealous of your honors, and think you that I will not stand
upon mine. Because you despise me, I therefore defy you; and as spittle I cast
you out of my mouth. You are none of mine, and I will be none of yours; I will
blot you out, and cross you as notes out of use are wiped out of tables. And
when I behold your necessities, I will clappe my hands over you. You have cast
me away as a burdensome and unprofitable God. But I will shake you off, as a
man would cast filth from his coat. Ye have set a time to your selves, beyond
which ye will not expect, and now tired with expectation, ye are quite
desperate. Me, who made the globles of heaven, will ye limit? to me who am
eternity, will ye prescribe an hour or a year? For this mark what I tell you;
ye that say, We shall never see good days, Number. 14,
but shall die in the wilderness, and therefore now let us follow the time.
Good times shall come, and ye shall never see them, but die in the wilderness,
and (which is worse) in your sin; your fortune shall be like to the incredulous
captain, who saw the wonderful plenty and alteration, 4. Reg. 7.
which he believed should come to pass, but never enjoyed the benefit thereof,
and ye likewise which say. Good time shall shortly come, we will not be to
forward before we see them, but will then be converted. Good time shall come
when I appoint: the prefixed number of my Martirs being accomplished, when al
hearts have been sufficiently laid open, when I have tried out, and retried
al dissemblers, such as I find you to be: Yet shall not the fruit hereof, nor
the joy be such, as you promise to your souls, some of you shall die before,
others at that time, when they would most gladly live a while, others shall
even then have their hearts hardened in some other sin, as now in Schism.

52. An inuitation to return from sin.
Repent therefore, repent and turn to the Sheepe-heard of your souls: O ye my
sheep; turn unto your Lord God O ye children, why set ye your souls to sale
for vanity, and sell your selves to the Devil for a vile price? Why suffer ye
creatures to draw you from your Creator? Adhere no more to gold, silver, and
possessions, vvhere-with I often cloy my slaves, and smile at your
childishness. Let not drossy mucke, nor dirty farms separate you any longer
from my church. Wed not your selves so straightly to the world, which passes
in a moment, and all that is therein, no otherwise then a cloud before the
Sun.

The riches that ye have, others had before, and some must have after you. Ask
your Mannours and Lands, how many owners they have had, and they vvil reckon
up unto you a long Catalogue; none of whom could ever yet by wit, strength, or
power, either retain them still himself, or assure them to his posterity, ye
shall find them bought, sold, changed, reexchanged, given, inherited,
purchased, let out, morgaged, forfeited, usurped, conquered, lost, recovered,
by right, by wrong, by might, by law, with a thousand other alterations. If the
sundry lives, and demeanure of such several possessors, and what these goods
did cause unto them, were recorded. Ye should see substance and possessions to
be nothing else, but the pray of extortioners, the object of rauenours, the
eie-sore of great personages, the ready pray of a Tyrant, the nourse of
unthriftiness, the wrack of youth, the carke of age, the source of al vice,
the shipwreck of al souls: A but then, which oppresses all that undertake it,
a gate out of which envy cannot be shut forth, a thorny bush which choked al
goodness and grace. Regard them not therefore, but have pity on your souls,
spare your selves and sin no more. Eccles. 30.


Return, O my prodigal children, and I will receive you. How many h^relings
have their fill in my house, while ye in a foreign land devour husks with
swine. Return, and I will cladde you with a new stole, and cast your sins
into the bottom of the Sea. Let every one of you hasten to save himself, as
being in a dangerous tempest, to him which does perish, all the world
perishes. Why die you and live not? Why spend you your talents, and not in
purchasing heaven? Circumcise your hearts, that ye may understand, pull your
tails out of your ears, and stop not reason with sensuality: ye are not
beasts but men, use the dignity of souls, of reason, of conscience, of
free will. Follow me in simplicity of heart, and prove me if I show not my self
a good God unto you and whether I will forsake you, or yet suffer you to be
tempted above your power, or any further then is necessary for your good, you
shall see that nothing is better then to fear me, and nothing sweeter then my
law; yea, Eccles. 23. Eccles. 1.
I will provide for you by such means, as you would least expect. So shall ye be
sure to taste happiness at last, and to be blessed at your end. Eccles. 2.
Eccles. 24.
No man ever trusted in me and was deluded. Be not ashamed to defend truth and
profess it. For this confusion will bring you to glory. Eccles. 4.
Be not a-fraide to strive even unto death for righteousness, I am your reward
incomprehensible. Eccles. 17.
Pass to the part of the holy flock and live with them, which live and praise
my name. Eccles. 21.
The Synagogue of sinners is as a heap of stubble, and their end is a flame.
What reward is it to be Catholics, when times are Catholic, Eccles. 18.
now in the time of impiety and infidelity, show a good conversation. Withdraw
your selves from those, whom malice and sin has blinded, depart from their
pollution, touch not their filthiness, away from it, away from it; come not
near it on pain of your souls. Look back to the rocks from which ye have
fallen; for blessing is upon Syon, and curse upon Hebal; my spirit over
Jerusalem, and my sword over Babylon: Become ye fellow Citizens of the Saints;
enrole your selves in my family; be reconciled to me, and I will be reconciled
unto you. My Messengers and Legates, I have sent into al quarters to preach my
peace unto you, and offer you pardon. Consider and see; this is all that I your
Lord God require at your hands, that ye leave dissimulation, that ye love me,
and fear me above al, walking before me in a perfect and upright heart. Do
this and live for ever, ye shall be my children and I will be your Father.

Shall this Embassage be of no regard?
Sent from a God, and from a man besides
Who for thy sake in love he has not spard.
His head, his arms, his legs, his sacred sides,
But al have been embrued in dearest blood,
To save thy soul, and work thy greatest good.
Bond-slaue thou wast, to hell and to damnation,
No worldly means from thence could set thee fre.
No price on earth, to ransom thy salvation,
But what alone must be performd by me.
I spared not, what treasure heaven did hold.
To gain for heaven, what to hell was sold.
I took man's flesh, descending for thy sake.
I past to hell, to free thy soul from thence.
What to requite me dare thou undertake?
At what Tribunal plead in my defense?
The world does te^pt, thou yeldest, devils threte^.
Betwixt them both, thy Savior is forgotten.
Thou love the world, and therefore loath to lose it.
Thou fear the power of hellish damned crew.
Thy soul is mine, and thou durst not dispose, it.
Little remembering what thou have to rue.
Will thou refuse me, now the time is thine?
And then presume, when that the day is mine?
Thy time is now thou fightest for^ crown
I first began the conflict and the fight.
I wan the field, and put the Devils down.
I showed less way, how thou might gain thy right,
Mercy is (...), whilst the life does last.
Justice do^^ follow, when this date is past.
Let love (...) flame thee, first for thy creation,
Thou a^ not able to content me truly.
Then what thou owe for thy wrought salvation,
Is not in^^ce to make requital duly.
Yield love for love, let not thy love be plast
Where love turns hate, when that this lif is past,
What love, what terror, all the world may yield,
Al are but shadows, glaunsing on a wall,
Or like the wind, stowping the corn in field,
They have short ti^e, of no regard at al.
The love of heaven the dreadful judgeme^t da^
These, these, are they, whose end^s c^not decay.
Choose now of whether thou will have thy share.
Of that, which ends in a moments blast.
Or of those treasures, which I do prepare,
For my (...) which shall ever last.
The world is go^^ ^hy Savior shall rem^ine.
Stand la^^ to hi^ and heaven is thy gain

