Eccle. 38. Altissimus creauit de terra medicinam, and vir prudens non
abhorrebit illam.

BVLLEINS Bulwark of Defense against all Sickness, Soarenesse, and Wounds
that do daily assault mankind: Which Bulwark is kept with Hilarious the
Gardener, and Health the Physician, with the Chirurgian, to help the Wounded
Soldiers. Gathered and practiced from the most worthy learned, both old and
new: to the great comfort of Mankind: by William Bullein, Doctor of Physic.
1562.

IMPRINTED At London by Thomas Marshe, dwellinge in Fleetestreate near unto
Saint Dunstanes Churh. 1579.

Cicero. 1. Offic. Eos quoru^ vita perspecta est in rebus honestis, and been de
Rep. sentientes obseruare and colere solemus.



TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Lord Henry Carry Baron of Hunsdon, and Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter: William Bulleyn wishes all health, and perfect
felicity in Christ.
Mankind, which is called of the Philosopher, Microcosmos, Orbiculus, or a
little World, having in it self, either Misery, Felicity, or a Mean: although
it be of the most beautiful Form, and fairest Shape, excelling all other
living Creatures upon Earth: And also is rightly endued with goodly gifts of
Nature, in whose Brain is fixed the Jewel called Reason, the Mother of Art,
and Science, by whom be wrought, and Invented marvelous things, whereby our
eternal GOD is perceived in us his Creatures, more abundantly, than in the
high Lyghtes mooueable, and fixed in the Fyrmament of Heaven: whose natural
influences be known unto Mankind. Even so be the virtues of every Creature
here in Earth: as Beast, Foul, Fyshe, Serpent, Trees, Plants, Fruictes,
Flower, Herb, Grass, Gum, Stone, and Metal. There is nothing so secret
hidden, within the Mynerals of the Earth, or lurking so low under the Floudes
of the Sea: but by means, and policy, they are brought to use. Their Names,
Qualities, and Natures are known unto the witty Head of Mankind: to this
end, to help Mankind in the time of his bodily infirmity. These has GOD
ordained by his dyuine providence, that every Creature sensible, and
insensible, should serve his best Creature, Mankind. Luke. 1.
To this end, that he should serve GOD in righteousness, and holiness, all the
days of his life, for these his Gifts. And the Philosopher says, in libro de
Coelo, and Mundo: Deus, and Natura nihil frustra agunt: GOD, and Nature does
nothing in vain, but are ever working, and doing: he the pryncipall cause, and
they his effect. Yet for all these syngular Uertues, gieuen to Man: through the
continuance of time, Calamities of this World, Wounds in the Body, corruption
of the Air, abundance of Humors. etc. the same Mankind does decay, dye,
and return unto the Dust, and become as though he had never bin: although he
be never so honorable, yea or poor, death does make equality between them.
Every man's course is appointed, they cannot prolong their time:
notwythstanding, Job. 14.
GOD has ordained sundry Means, by his Mynisters, to help Mankind in the
time of Sycknesse, to ease their pains, and heal their Wounds. And I being a
Child of the Common wealth, am bound unto my Mother, that is, the Land in
which I am borne: to pleasure it, with any good gift, that it has pleased GOD
to bestow upon me: not fo this end, to instruct the learned, but to help the
ignorant, that they may resort to this little Bulwarcke, which I do Dedicate
unto your honorable Lordship. Where they shall not only be defended in the
same, from sickness, and Wounds: but also being wounded, through cruel
Assaulters of this Bulwark, or Sick, here eftsoons they shall have at hand,
all manner of Cordials, and wholesome Salues. Whereby they shall be the abler, to
keep this Hold against all bodyly evils: which I do call Soarenesse, and
Sickness: for whose sakes, I have builded this little Fort calling it my
Bulwark. Not being able to build any bigger work of defense against
Sickness, or evil Diet: as that Man of worthy memory, Sir Thomas Eliot Knight
did, when he builded his Castle of Health, a Book very profitable. Would GOD,
that all Men of Worship in their calling, were likewise disposed to their
Country, as he was, and many more, whose names I do commend unto the Reader,
within this little Bulwark. And although there will be many peradventure,
both malicious, spightfull, and cankred of Mind, that both with slander and
disdain, will lay their Battry, against this Fort: I shall be able ever to
repulse them, through your Lordshippes good aid. For I have builded it very
low, wanting neither the strength of Ordinance, prouysion of Uictualles, nor
the Pollycie of most worthy Captains, and good Souldeours: as Hippocrates,
Galen, Dioscorides. etc. Now finally, I shall most humbly desire your good
Lordshyp, to take this simple Book, as an Argument of my good Zeal and Love,
that I bare unto you, for your goodness toward me. For if I were otherwise
able, to gratify your Honor, according to my bounden Duty: I would not leave
it undone, as knows GOD, who ever give your Lordship continuance of Honor,
and prosperous Health.

From London. In March. 1562. Your Lordshippes ever to command: William
Bulleyn.

TO THE Friendly Reader, William Bulleyn sends Salutacion.
FOr as mutch good Reader, as four years last past, I promised (in a Book of
mine, called the Government of health, which I dedicated to a Knight of great
worship in the North, called Sir Thomas, the Baron of Hilton) to set forth an
other Book of healthful Medicines: Even so, by the space of one year next
after the same, I trauayled to perform my Promise made, and so finished my
Copy: which Copy did perish in Shipwreck, and so my Labor was lost. And not
only my Labor, but also my Life, by sundry malicious and deuilishe Inventions,
by, and through one William Hilton: in nature, Brother to the foresaid Baron of
Hilton, but in Conditions, nothing like at all: for he wanted his gentleness,
and good nature. Now, after that God had delivered me from the great peril of
this Man, that is to say: conspiring of my giltles death, and hurtlesse life,
toward him and his: Eftsoons this man attempted an other new displeasure
against me for debt: coloring his Malice by a pretense of law. By which
Action, finally I was imprisoned, me thought a long time (for there are but
few Ghestes, that have pleasure in such Innes.) And being thus in Prison, me
thought I had not only convenient time, but also a quiet Conscience, to
travel, in renewing my late Book, or lost Copy, which in deed, I am not able
to finyshe, being prevented with so many Troubles, and Lets of my said Enemy,
whose doings at large, I commit to silence, least I should seem to write, a
Story or Tragedy, or else a description of his folly, in the place of Physic:
no less also can I, but declare some cause of my let, and why my Book came
not forth ere this time. accordingly as I promised. But blame me not, good
Reader, although I put him in my Book, which would have put me from this
Life. And this Book, which I have done, Gentle Reader, take it in good part, I
pray you, for that is my desire.

First, I have made you a Book of Simples, as Herbs, Fruictes. etc. For I had
no small pleasure in the natures of them, being moved of the Heathen men, so
to do: whose names do, and ever shall remain, among such as read of Simples.
Galen commends unto us, ye love and cunning ye Orpheus, Museus, Hesiodus,
Homerus, and Rufus Ephesius had in Herbs. Who can forget Lysimachus, a worthy
noble Capitayn to Alexander? who, when he was wounded very deep, found an herb
which healed him, and called ye same herb, by his own name: Artemisia a noble
Queen, called Mugwort, after her own name. Helena found first ye virtue of
Enulacampana. Gentian was named by Gentias king of Illyria: with many mo noble
Men and Women, which delited in the Flowers, and Fruictes of the ground whose
names for ye most part you shall find in the Simples. I cannot forget Attalus,
the king of the less Asia, and Euax a king of Arabie, who wroate good Books
to Nero the Emperor: with many good Worckes of Compoundes. Among all,
Dioscorides a noble Knight of Egypt, which served Antonius, and Cleopatra,
like a worthy Soldier in the Field: and excelled all other in the Noble
knowledge of Herbs. etc. Let us not forget, the passing Wisdom of Solomon,
who had knowledge most excellent in natural Philosophy, as well as Moral: and
taught the Queen of Saba all the virtues of herbs. How worthy were Archelaus
King of Cappadocia, and Agamemnon Prince of the Argiues, which were noble
Kings, yet were they Heathen, saving Solomon. Whose chief delights, were not
in Bacchus Bankets, or Venus Games: but spent their time pleasauntly, in the
sweet Fields among Fruictes, Flowers, and Spices of delight. Would GOD in
such Uertues, the Chrystians were their Equalles. When you have read the
Simples following, then approaches the Chirurgian Plaster, and Salve prepared
ready, to make whole the wounded Man helped by Hippocrates, Galen, and Auicen
to finishe his cunning cure. Then comes the Apothecarie Nicholaus, with rich
Cordials, Pills, Electuaries, and Purgations of each kind, with his master
the Physician, who does dispense every Medicine in Time, Place, Quantity, and
good order, to his Pacient with good Diet, travel, sleep: and finally, ye
perturbacions of the Mind. At which place good Reader, I should have declared
of other Judgments, as Pulse, Uryne, and the proper Cures of every Fever,
afflicting the Body: which hereafter, by Gods grace, I shall bring to pass, if
time will suffer me to live. And until such time, most gentle Reader, take
this in good part, from the hands of him, who thincketh it well bestowed upon
thee, if courteously thou do receive the same again. Thus fare thou heartily
well. Thine ever to his small power.

William Bulleyn.

THE AUTHORS, Captains, and Soldiers of this Bulwark*
Moses. David. Solomon. Esdras. JESUS Christus. Lucas Euangel. Paulus Apost.
Hippocrates. Galenus. Lysimachus rex Maced. Auicen. Dioscorides. Auerrhois.
Rasis. Ruellius. Isaac. Theophrastus. Fulgentius. Mesue. Paulus AEgineta.
Arnoldus de noua Comen. Pandect. Leonardus Euchsius. Conradus Gesnerus. Petrus
Andraeas Matthiolus. Leonellus Fauentinus. Iulianus Moristica. Nicolaus Prep.
Nicolaus Myreps. Ioh. Placatomus. Ioh. Tagaultius. Iacobus Hollerius. Marianus.
Plato de Legibus. Xenophon. Pompeius Mela. A. Gellius. Strabo. C. Plinius
Secundus Persius. Textor* offic. Ovid. Virgil.
XLIII. in number.

Thomas Newton to the Freendly Reader.
DUe proof does show, so does Experience teach
That handcraftsmen (when Su^ne is gone to glade)
If slender light their weary Eyes empeach,
Or hindre them, in that their toyling trade,
(For that their sight is dim with darkness made)
Of custom use to covet open Air,
And bring their work into more lightsome layre.
The Mind of Man in Bodies Prison kept
Is pressed down, and fetired lies full fast*
All rest, all case, all Joy is from it swept,
Unless it be reuiu'de with souereygne taste
Of sacred Lore, or worthy Woork^s forepast:
By which one mean, it bayles it self from Gyeues,
And (mauger Spite) with comfort great suruiues.
This work thus pend by Bulleins busy brain,
With travail, toil, expense, and mickle charge
(Which proves and shows how glad he was and fayn^
To help each sort, and set his Mind at large:
As one (saunce f^are) by help of Palias (Targe)
He franckly here unto the learned Crew
Beequeathes and gives with friendly eye to view.
It was at first but roughly hewn out
Himself that time in Prison fast detayned,
No marvel the^, though scapes and faults did sprout,
Sith he the while from liberty was wayned:
Yet his goodwill, his skill, and love unfeigned
He kept not back, but offered it to all,
In hope thereby to pleasure great and small.
If God on high had lent him longer days
He would the same have repecus'd again
And brought in frame, as mountain Bear astates
With licking Tongue, her whelps in shope to train:
But gone he is, with Christ above to raygne:
He plainly spoke, he plainly wrate also,
His Lyte, and Speech did both together go.
His pleasant Pen, his merry Mind, and Wit
Did most men please, yea all of judgment found:
Tried truth he told, and nail on head he hit:
Examples stoare in all his Books are found.
Whose sap and fruict does to each sex redound.
Blind Empiricke, ne Doggeleach could he brook,
No cosening Mate, no popish Clawback^s look.
In lieu of pains thus taken for thy sake,
Afoorde him thanks, and good report withal:
Of Ashes his so may thou some awake,
As pressed as he, t'assist thee in thy thral.
Few faults (I trust) and they but very small
Are left beehinde: God grant to thee, and me
(Good Reader) grace our faults, and sins to flee.
1579. Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

Ad adyta virtuti aditus.
THE BOOK OF SIMPLES.
Marcellus. FIrst of al, my friend Hilarious, because I have no small grief in
my breast, Azarabaccha or w^^de Nardus.
I shall desire you, to show me the nature of an herb called Asaron, which I
trust will help me by the way of vomit.


Hilarious. PLinius remembering this herb lib. xj. cap. xiij. and lib. 21. cap.
6. among al other flowers or herbs (says he) it is utterly refused,
Azarabaccha is br^ader in Italy, then here in England.
and not worthy to be preferred among pleasant Garlands, or sweet Nos^gaies,
because of the baseness, and bitterness of his nature. In form says he, it
is not unlike unto Iuie leaves: notwithstanding it is rounder, softer, and
brother: it is mutch like unto Vngula, called Foales foot. Dioscorides with
whom none has ever been comparable hetherunto, for the excellent invention,
and knowledge of herbs, lib. 1. cap. ix. says that the leaves be of the
foresaid form. And is so hot, that it does vehemently bite the tongue, but in
virtue it provoke urine, helps the dropsy, and painful ache of the huckle
bone called Sciatica. Six dragmes of the roots of Asaron, sodden in sweet
water, the same water drunken will draw forth the terms in women. Asaron
provoke terms* and helps Sciatica.
Galen lib. 6. simpli* medi. speaking of the roots of Asaron says, they be
like to Acorus, but yt is marvelous it should so be: for Acorus will not
provoke strong vomites, as Asaron will. Therefore Dioscorides has said the
truth, and Mesue says, that Asaron has the virtue of Elleborus, to purge both
up and down, Choler* and fleume, which Acorus cannot do so: it is hot, and
dry in the third degree. In Latin it is called Vulgago, it provoke urine,
cleanses the matrix, Asaron does help the Liver and stomach.
helps the liver from all grie^e, Raynes, Stomach, Belly, and Spleen. etc. in
the laud thereof, having these virtues as I have said from Dioscorides, and
Mesue, Marcus Aemilius affirms the same, saying: Asaron in Greek, Vulgago in
Latin, heat, and dry in the iij. degree, provoke Urine, and purges terms
menstruoli and takes away the pains of the Liver.
Est Asaron Graece, vulgago dicta Latin,
Haec calidae and siccae virtutis dicitur esse,
Tertius est illi gradus, vt dicunt in vtroque.
Prouocat vrinam, potataque menstrua purgat,
Hocque modo iecoris medicatur sumpta dolori:
Here have three notable learned men, declared the virtue of Asaron.
Furthermore, if the juice of six leaves, be strayned with a pint of Whale,
specially of Goats milk, and drunk in the morning: This Drink in Summer,
will cast forth yellowe Choler, and unnatural Fleume. For in Summer vomets
ought to be taken, to cleanse the upper parts, as the lower members be purged,
by electuaries in Winter. Furthermore, 20. Leaves do seen in iniust on, but
other ways three, sower, or five do suffice,
xxx. green leaves steeped in new Wine all the night, and strained in the
morning, drink this against all the abundance of humors in the Breast, or
precordial parts, in this manner. Power this wine into a close pot, with a
piece of fat Porke, and sees the same: then let the Pacient eat of the Porke,
and then drink the Wine, or else the Wine may be drunk after the Porke, simply
diluted or steeped all the night with the leaves, and never to be sodden with
ye Porke. This will help the Iaundice, Asaron good against Dropsy. Fe^ers.
and frenzy.
and if it be drunk of any body, which has a Tercian being first digested:
and specially not on the sick day, it will clean deliver from the said
Tercian: in the beginninges of Hydropsies, Timpani^s, Quotidians, green
Sickness, Quartaynes, Worms, and swellinge in the Stomach, there is no better
reamedy, than to drink this, as in the manner aforesaid: For a weak frantike
Brain, coming of an extreme cold, when Melancholy is placed in the ma^sion
of reason, through which, the principal Senses be obscured and darkened: shave
the Moulde of the head, and wash the same with Wine, wherein Calamintes,
Rosemary, Lignum Aloes, and Asaron have bin sodden, and then anoint the head
with the oils of Maces, Mintes, and Asaron warm, purging the head with
Pills of Hierae simplex, and abstayning from such meats, as wyllingender
Melancholy, or make exhalation, or Smoke up into the Brain. The juice of
Asaron tempered with Nill, The Arabians call that Nill which we name Visc^m or
Missiltowe Lib, primo Paradox. Cap. xxvj.
called Missiltow, and strayned with a little Rosewater, will cleanse the dark
sight of the Eyes, and make them clear. And thus I end of herb Asaron,
which has virtue against Choler: would God it had the like effect, to cleanse
Disdain, rankor, and malice, so that grace, that most precious herb, might
be replanted again in each man's breast, which the Devil has supplanted
through pride.


Marcellus. What is Asplenon, called Scolopendrion, or Citrache, and
Hemionitis, leaued like Dragons, and Phyllitis, called Hearts tongue, good for?


Hilarious. Asplenon good for the Spleen.
TO this herb Asplenon, no herb may be compared, for his singular virtue, to
help the sickness, or grief of the Spleen, the place of Melancholy. It is
called Scolopendrion, of a speckled Worm with many feet. This herb is a
small Fern, growing among stones, neither having stalk, flower, or seed: the
leaves be yellowe by neath, and green above. There is an other herb of the
same virtue, Hemionitis leaued like Dragons.
for the spleen called Hemionitis, whose leaves be mutch like Dragons, with
many small roots: these said heroes dye not, and be hoate in the first, and
dry in the second degree. Goodly Sirupes are made of them for the Spleen:
Diosco. lib. 3. Capi. 134.
they be very good in decoction for ye same: if one do drink of this herb
sodden in Uineger, by the space of.40. days, it has virtue to consume ye
spleen: this herb has virtue to help the Iaundice, stone, stra^gury, Galen.
lib. 5. S^^. medica. Capi. xij.
hicket, or wind, and Capper barks, Tamarice roots, Scolopendrion, and
Scilla sodden by art together, will help the Spleen. There is an herb called
Phyllitis, or Hearts tongue, growing in dark places, which is partly of the
nature of the said herbs, which has singular virtue, both for man and beast,
to be drunk against poison, and bloody flixes, or flowing of terms immoderat
in Women. But many now a days, have such passions of the Spleen Cancred with
melancholy, The spleneticke love.
corrupted with disdain, and with golden words, louinge only from the
Spleen, and not from the Heart, that they give each other the curtesy of the
tongue, without the consent of the heart: and thus I conclude of heartlesse
Tongue, and Hearts tongue, the one of comfort, the other of decay. Lingua
fallax non amat veritatem, Proverb. 27. d*
and os lubricum operatur ruinas.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Wormewodde? that bitter herb called
Absynthium?


Hilarious. Absinthium is a common herb: it is of diverse kinds, as Ponticum,
Wormwood.
and Romanum. etc. it is hoate in the first and dry in the second, and it is
very bitter, and being dried, keeps clothes from worms and mothes, and the
Sirupes thereof eaten before wine, preserves Men from dronke^nesse: if it be
sodden in Uyneger* it will help the sores that breeds in the Ears: beeinge
laid warm upon it: it is to be drunk against swellinge of the Stomach.
And Ophthalmia which is a Syckenesse of the Eyes, is greatly helped with
Wormewodde* Sore ears.
if it be stamped and made luke warm with Rosewater, For the Eyes
and put into a clean Walnut shell: the Syrup heals the blouddy Flux
bound to the Belly: Blouddy flux
it does help a cold Stomach, if it be drunk.x. days, Cold Stomachs.
every morninge two spoonefull of the Syrup: it is also good against the
Dropsy. And thus says Auicen, Fygges, Cockle. Wormwood, and Niter stamped
together, Dropsies.
and made in a Plaster, is good against the disease of the Spleen, Auicen.
lib. 2.
and also kills Worms in the Belly, used in the foresaid manner: Simp. 2,
one dragme of the Powder may be drunk at once in Wine: For ye spleen.
it has many goodly virtues, as the Wine thereof being drunk, against
Dropsyes, coldness of the Stomach, Wind, Swellings: Wormwood has many
virtues.
if a handefull be sodden in.viij. pound of clean Water or Wine, in a
vessel of Silver, Glass, or Stone, putting in sweet Calamus, Cynamon, the
flowers of Cassia, Squinance, Spikenarde, and Dates of each..iiij. beaten all
together and sodden, as is aforesaid: or else these things put in a vessel of
new Wine with a linen bag, and so kept close.ij. months, and afterward
drunk of them that have either the yellow Iaundice, pains in the Raynes,
lothesomnesse of the Stomach, stopping of terms, swelling after meat,
continuance of Uomites, cold passions of the heart. etc. this virtue has
Wormwood Wine says Dioscorides, libro qum. Cap. 40. Furthermore gather a. l
i. of Wormwood leaves, and stamp them in a Mortar of stone, and then put unto
the same. l i.iiij. of the best white Sugar, and so beat them together until
they be come to one substance, keep this in a close Pot or Glass. And this is
the virtue thereof, says that well learned Man Matthiolus, A goodly medicen
for Hydropsie.
it helps the Dropsy, if the Pacient eat every day of this half an
ounce.iij. hours before meat, and with this I have known many helped, says
he, and as for the virtue of the syrup of Wormewoode, it shall come in his
place accordingly.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Anisseede?


Hilarious. IT is much like unto Fenell seed, and is called Romayne Fenell,
Galen de sim. Opens the Raynes.
it is warm and sweet, and hoate in the second, and dry in the third degree:
the new Seeds be best, it engenders vital Seed, if opens the stoppyng of
the Raynes and Matrix, being drunk with Ptisanes or clean temperate Wine:
this herb or seed is comfortable in sweet compounded medicines or in powder
for shortness of breath, and soreness of the lunges: and also is good to be
sodden in Ptisanes, made of Barley, to be drunk in the Fever Quotidiane bred of
Phlegm: it ingendreth Milk in the breasts drunk with sweet Wine or Milk: it
provoke vryne, makes sweet breath, and is good against the Collike or wind
of ye great Guts, being drunk with good white Wine and Sugar, and also
stops the whites which runs oftentimes from the bodies of Women: the
powder thereof, Tamarix.
with the pouders of Fenell, Gallingale, Spicknarde, Tamarix, Nutmegges, and
Graynes of Paradise, called Cardamomum, tempered with Wheat flower, A good
remedy for the ru^ninge of the Raynes.
water and red Wine, and so baked in manchets or cakes, is most wholesome to be
eaten of them which have the running of the Raines, wasting of Nature, moist
Dropsyes, or of them in whom the humor of phlegm does greatly abound, through
humidity, wind, or cold, and this was proved to help a Lady which was sick
of a Timpany, and was sir Thomas the Baron Hiltons wife, within the Byshopprike
of Duresme, which used this Bread during one half year, and also once a
month was purged with wholesome Electuaries accordingly, and blood letting: and
thus I conclude of Amsseede the best whereof comes from Egypt.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of a Mouse ear, which is like the ear of
Mouse, and full of hair, in form mutch like the ear of a Mouse?


Hilarious. AN herb commonly known, cold and moist in the first degree as
Galen says, a decoction of this herb sodden in water with sugar, Falling
sickness.
is good against the Falling sickness, being oftentimes drunk and a leaf
thereof put into the Nose, it will provoke sternutation or neesing, Neesing,
which wonderfully does cleanse the veins: and sodden in white Wine, Ptisane
or Borage water, with Sugar candy, this is good against pains in the Throat,
Mouse ear helps the Throat.
called Angina, and Dioscorides writes but little of this herb. And Galen
says, in the.vij. lib. of Simples, that it is dry in the second degree: and it
grows in May upon Hills, Meddowes, and Waysides, says Matthiolus upon
Dioscorides. Furthermore if it be stamped with Madder, and the great Plantein
roots, and an herb called Sheperdes purse, and so sodden in red Wine and
strayned out, and so put into a little drink warm, this is also good against
the blouddy Flux, or a broken Uayne within the Body of one, Against the
blouddy flixe.
which has fallen into some deep place, and this was proved by a young man
dwelling in Newcastel, which fell into a deep Coal pit, whose outward wounds
were healed by an ancient Practicioner called Michell a Frenchman, who also is
cunninge to help his own country disease, Michell the Chyrurgian of Newcastle
that now is to commonly known here in England (the more to be lamented) but
yet daily increased, whereof I entende to speak of in the place of the Pox.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Garlyke?


Hilarious. GArlyke is very hot and dry in the fourth degree, Garlike.
it troubles the Stomach of Cholorike men, it is hurtful to the Eyes, and
Head, it increases dryness, Provoke vryne.

Biting of a Snake.

Hemeroydes.


but it will provoke Uryne, and is good to be laid upon the biting of a Snake,
or Adder, it is good for the Emeroydes, applied to the sore place being first
stampte: if it be sodden, the stink thereof is taken from it, Coughes.
but the virtue remains to be eaten against coughes and pain in the Lunges,
it cutteth, and consumes corrupt Fleume, and brings sleep, it is not good
for hot Men, and Women with Children, Corrupt Fleume.
or Nurses giving Milk to Children: but Galen calls it the common Peoples
Treacle. If Sanguyne Men eat mutch of it, it will make the^ to have read
Faces, but is a special remedy against Poison, Against poison.
and a hoate Plaster applied to the biting of a mad Dog, made of Garlyke,
helps it: if it be drunk it kills Worms in the Belly. For Tothach
And Garlyke stamped with Mastike, and put into the mouth, does aswage the
Dolor of the Teeth. Garlyke dried or burnt into Powder, To increase hair.
and tempered with Honey and Bears Grease, is good to anoint a baulde head to
recover hair: and all this and more reports Dioscorides, which excelled in
herbs. Plinius reports, if it be stamped and made in a Gargarisme, it
heals the Angina, it helps the Throat, with Oil of Quinces and so warm
applied to the Belly it is good against the Collicke, and the blouddy Flux.
New Ale, and Garlyke, kills Worms to be drunk: A medicine for the fistulo.
it is good to be eaten against the Falling evil. And Garlike heals
Fistulaes tempered with Pitche, Brimstone and Rosen, made hoate in a Tente.
These with such like virtues do Plinius, Aetius, Galen. etc. report: but it
is a gross kind of Medycine, very unpleasant for fair Ladies, and tender
Lylly Rose colloured Damselles, which often times prefer sweet breathes
before gentle Words: but both would do very well.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Honey, the Fruictes of Bees labor, and their
Summers travel?


Hilarious. AVERHOIS says, Auerhois. 5 Simeon Sethi.
Honey is hoate and dry in the second degree, and does cleanse very mutch, and is
a medicinable meat, most chiefly for old Men, and Women, Ill for chollerike
persons.
for it does warm them and conuerteth in them to good blood. It is not good
for Chollericke persons, because of the heat and dryness: they do greatly
err that say Honey is hoate, and moist, but if it be claryfied from his Wax,
and dross, and kept in a close vessel, there is nothing liquid upon the earth
that remains longer. And this precious Jewel Honey has bin ever more praised,
for it will conserve and keep any fruit, Honey is an heavenly dew.
herb or root, or any other thing that is put into it, an exceeding long
time. Plinius writes of a Monster which was long kept in Honey in Claudius
days. Merueylous is the work of God, Honey being an heavenly dew that falls
upon flowers and leaves as Auicen says, Auicen. Can. 2. cap. 504.
and is neither Juice of leaves nor fruicts, but only the heavenly dew,
whereunto the Bees in Summer in due time do resort and gather the said Honey,
Bees be an example unto us, both for love and workinge in the commonwealth.
and lay it up in store, in their curious houses builded, whereas they dwell
together in most goodly order. O Bees, Bees, how mutch happier are you than
many wretched men, which dwell never together in unity and peace, but in
continual discord, and vnqui^tnes, as Virgill says: En quo discordia ciues
perduxit miseros? Virgill.
Behold whither discord has brought wretched Cityzens. But now to speak of
the most excellent virtues of Honey, New Honey.
it is good in the meats of them that be Fleumatike. Honey newly taken out of
the Combs is partly laxatiue, and clarified Honey does bind, and dry up
Fleume, Clarified Honey does bind
and keep the bodies of Fleumatike and old persons from corruption. The best
Honey is gathered in the Spryng time, the second in Summer, but that which is
gathered in Winter is ill, and hurtful. One part of Honey, and some part of
water sodden together until the Froth be all scommed of, An healthful drink
for Summer.
and when it is cold, kept in a close stone Pot, this drink (says Galen) is
wholesome for Summer, it cleanses the Lunges, and preserves the body in health.
Oximel simplex, and Compos^tum, be made with Honey, Pandect. cap. 347.
and so be many mo things, which be of great virtue. Also the aucthour of the
Pandect, says yt Honey poured into a new wound yt eftsoons it cleanses and
makes it whole. Honey mingled with a little Salt, and poured warm into the
ear, kills Worms that breed there: The same also kills Lyce, if
Childrens heads be anointed therewith. Rub young Chyldrens Gummes with clean
Honey every day and it will easily cause their Teeth to grow. Honey mingled with
Oil of Roses, and so drunk incontinently, will cause one to vomit when he
has eaten any venomous thing, as rotten Moushromes, called Fungi. etc. Also
Gargarismes and Suppositories be made of Honey, the one does cleanse the
Throat, and the other does relaxe the Belly. Serpigo. Cost.

To cure Serpigo.


There is an infection in the skin, through the corruption of the Liver,
which is called Serpigo, oftentimes in the Paulme of the hand, chiefly in the
right hand, specially in Chollerike persons* which is helped with Honey mingled
with Cost, and anointed warm every day twice. To cleanse the Face.
Also the distilled Water of Honey has virtue to make clean the skin of them
whose Faces be unclean: but most chiefly if it be stilled with strong
Uineger, Milk, and the Urine of a Boy, and so with a Sponge wash the Face to
bedward, and let it dry in of it self. The goodly Ointment called Vnguentum
Aegiptiacum, which cleanses all corrupt humors, and wounds being rotten
within, the chief thing in this Ointment is Honey: it is marvelous that they
which use to eat Honey daily, and daily anoint their Stomachs with Oil of
Wormwood, should either die suddenly, or live paynefully, or be evil colloured
in their Faces. The people of Wales do use to drink Mede, Welchmens drink.
and Metheglyne, and under Heaven there is no fayrer people of complexion, nor
cleaner of nature, To increase Hair.
Anoynte the head being new shaven with Bears grease and Honey mingled
together, and it preserves the hair from falling. Honey of Roses is a goodly
Medicine, outwardly in wounds, and inwardly cleanses fleume, mundifieth the
Stomach, and opens the mouth of the veins, and also is good to put in the
Eyes to cleanse them.


Marcellus. I Did never here any thing so greatly commended as thou have
commended Honey: if it be true that thou have spoken, there be but few things
may be compared to it, for the excellent virtue of it.


Hilarious. BE not in doubt of the truth thereof, for the best Aucthours have
taught me, Exodus.
and daily experience moves me, thus mutch to report of Honey: I ought to
think no shame thereof. In asmutch as the God of Heaven, and Earth, maker of
all Creatures, did give his people of Israel no greater blessing than a land
which did flow with Milk, and Honey. And often times amongst ye Blessings of
GOD, sweet Honey. is rehearsed. The Prophet David in the Psalms, does often
name Honey, Psalms.
and the Honey Comb, making a comparison beetweene it and the word of God.
In some of the holy Sacrifices, Honey was brought in for an Offering, before the
Lord GOD into his holy Temple, Iudic. 14.
the strong Nazareth of GOD Judge of Israel. That mighty Prince Sampson, loved
well Honey, as appears after he had slain the Lion, he did eat the Honey
which he found in his Carcass, so did his Father, and his Mother eat of the
same Honey. It was as a divine Omen of the Wisdom and learning that afterward
came unto Plato, when in his Cradel, Bees brought Honey unto his Mouth. Who was
greater among men then S. Ihon Baptist? What was his most food? it was wild
Honey. How many pleasant verses has Virgill written upon Bees and Honey?
Plini. lib. 11. Cap. 9.
who ever did excel Plinius secundus, in the nature of Creatures, and as it
plainly appearteh in his.xj. book, he declares of a worthy man called
Aristomachus, who so wonderfully loved Bees: and in the same book, says he,
Xenophon, in his book of Household.
the Bees have many Kings with small Coronets on their heads: about whom the
great agmen or swarm does cluster and flees into the fields, and comes
home in order, bringing their treasure with them: the elder Bees do build
within the Hyues, The propertye of a good huswyfe.
having therein a Mystresse or Queen to set them to work, which never goes
from home, but places every thing in order: the younger do bring their Stuff
to the Hyue: none of them be idle, every one of them has a house to dwell
in.vj. cornered in fashion: they will suffer no filthiness to be amongst them,
nor strangers to dwell within their City or commonwealth. They also punish
them with stynginge, that hurt their Princes, Bees maintain no strangers, for
they be not profitable.
and they have fore knowledge of weather when it is fair and foul. Also they
have senses of smelling, for if any of them be lost in the field, they follow
their fellows by the sweet air, they be scant perfect of hearing* but yet as
appears they hear, when they muster at the soundes of Basens: their greatest
delight is in Time, and Balm, and therefore about Athens is the best Honey in
the World, as Plini says, and in the Islande called Calydna, Plin lib. xj
Cap. xij.
and also in Meleta: would God, says he, that we had the Honey in the same
nature that it falls from the heavens. Yea rather would to God that Idle
people would take Bees for an example to labor, and Subjects to obey* etc.
What shall I speak more of the properties of Bees, and of their good natures,
providence and cunning? nothing else Marcellus, but these simple Uerses
following. A Noble Prince there is, whose wealth and work excel,
More than all other earthly wightes, that in the world do dwell.
The king of Bees and his Army.
Saturnus black and cold, has taught him for to fly,
The hory Frostes and Snowes so white* and darkness of the Sky
Sagittarius, and Pysces, Lord Jupiter called by name,
Does cunning give unto this Prince, how he his house should fra^e.
The red and flaming bloody Mars, the Lord of war and strife,
Does teach this king his host to train, with sharp darts al their life.
O happy Sol with golden beams, whose glory does excel,
Thou art the candell of this World, and darkness do expel.
Thou make glad this little King, in fieldd when he does ride,
No Horse he has, but wings to fly, thou only art his guide,
When he does sound his warlike tune, in Hyue where he does dwell,
His Soldiers muster all on heaps, the Stars they do excel
In number infinite most fair, clear Air does them infuse,
Dame Flora sweet does them rejoice, but Boreas them misuse.
With grisly storms and Hayle so hard, he breaks their tender bones,
No helmets have, nor shieldes they bear, to keep them from hard stones.
When Storms be past and Venus come, the banisher of cold showers,
With pretty Horns, and tender wings, they play among the flowers.
The Bean flowers make them glad, the Lilly makes them gay,
Their chief delight is Time, and Balm, most glad they are of May.
For Mercury does gieue them mirth, when Twynnes he does embrace,
From rising Sun to Titans fall, labor is all their grace.
In flowred Fields and Motley meades, where white does grow in green,
The heavenly dewes, that nightly fall, is gathered up of Been.
Jove does rain from virgiliae this precious heavenly gift,
Whom Bees do know, and bear to Hyue, with Wings forth flying swyfte.
And then they make this goodly meat, Manna fallen from Heaven.
The signa.xij. with Bees do work, so do the Planets seven.



Marcellus. Now have you well declared what Honey is: is there also any virtue
in the Combs, or Wax?


Hilarious. GALEN says, in the.vj. book of Simples, Wax is good for
Plasters, not only in drying, but also in that per accidens, it moisteth, and
is used for outward Medicines, but not for inward and Dioscorides reports
that Wax does mollify and warm ye body, Dioscorides libr. secundo* Cap.
lxxvij.
and.x. graynes wayght dronken with the syrup of Pla^tein is good for the
blouddy flux: it also dries the Milk in Women's breasts: and to conclude,
there be but few Emplaysters yt can be without the help of Wax. It has also
bin abused in Churches, Chaples, and Temples, offered by the ignorant, before
the blind.


Marcellus. I do know Sage by name, because it does grow in my Garden and is
used in my Kitchen, but Christ does know, the virtue thereof is hidden from
me.


Hilarious. This noble herb is called Elclisphacon, Saluia, or Sage, Sage.
and as it should appear by Theophrastus there be two kinds of Sage, the one
of the Garden, which is rough, Lib. vj. Cap. ij. de Plan. Libr. iij. Dioscorides
long and broad leaued, which says Matthiolus, I suppose to be the Female
herb: the other Sage which is shorter, and narrower, with two small ears in
the beginning of ye leaves, which the said Theophrastus calls Sphacelo, Lib.
6. Simp.
whom Matthiolus clepeth the Male herb, and of this grows great plenty in
Italy in the tops of Mountains, in the noble Countries both of Apulia, and
Calabria: so does there almost in every Garden in England. This herb is hot
and dry, says Aetius, so says Galen, and some notable Practicioners do say,
that perfume of Sage does stop the immoderate Flux menstruall. Agrippa did
call this the hory herb, because it was so good to Women, not only in
expulsing evil matter from the Matrix, but also in retayning the vital seed
of Generation, whereby Conceptione is made perfect. The Juice of Sage helps
Conception.
If a Woman drink the Juice thereof with a little Salt, and Sugar sodden
together, four days before, and after the use with her husband, giving the
man the like quantity, before the time of procreation, without doubt Conception
follows. is said, sometime there was so great a pestilence in a City of
Egypt, that through the Poison thereof few were left a live: but when the
Plague was ceased, the young Women were compelled to drink the Wine, or Juice
of Sage, through whose virtue they were conceived with Children, having the
help of Man: that in the end, the City was replenished again, and filled
with People of their own Generation. Sage, says Orpheus..iiij. mingled with
clean clarified Honey, and eaten of an empty Stomach, To stop blood running
at ye mouth.
does incontinently stop the blood that comes from the Breast, Stomach, or
Lunges, breakinge out of the Mouth with cruent Uomites. There is a Sycknesse
within the Body, called Tabes, which is a great corruption of humors,
through foul Matter, and Blood myngled together, whose beginnynge comes
from the Head through a continual Rheum, and does Apostumate, and wound the
Lunges: through whose putrefaction by little, and little, all the Members of
the body consume, through dryness, leanness, and a continual coughe, with
pains in the Breast, An excellent Pill against Apostumatio^ of ye Lunges,
Rheum, or consumption, which helped Bullem the Aucthour of this Book.
and shortness of the Wind: the remedy there of sometime has bin with Sage
in this manner. Take Spicknard, Ginger, of each..ij. seed of Sage..viij. dried,
beaten fine in Powder, with the foresaid Spyces, and..xij. of long Peper in
like manner, and..j. of old Aster, and the Juice of Sage, and so make your Pill
in a clean Mortar, and take every Morning fasting..j. of this, and as much at
night drinkinge after it pure clean Sage water: and this is the best Pill that
ever I did know, and helped me in a great sickness in Suffolk, where
sometime I dwelled. This herb also provoke vryne, cleanses phlegm,
expulseth wind, dries up the Dropsy, helps the Paulsie, strengthens the
Sinews, To kill Canker and quench Robin good-fellowes Fever.
and purges blood: If it be sodden in running water, Roch Alum, and Woodbinde
leaves, it kills the Canker in the Mouth, and also quenches the great heat
and burninge, stynke, filthe, and matter that oftentimes comes through
corruption of nature, or meretrix manner, and does chance into the Secret
places of Men or Women, which is helped this way, puttinge in a little of the
Powder of Aristolochia rotunda: forasmutch as it dries, it is put into Pigs,
which be most moist of nature to dry up their humidity or moisture wythall,
which else be evil for Flegmatike persons. Auicen. 3. trac. cap, 1.
The incomparable virtue of this herb is excellent, that the great learned
Fathers of Salem, did write these words to the late famous Prince King Henry
the eight, in the laud thereof saying. Curmoritur homo, cui saluia crescit in
horto? Inquiringe why mortal Men should dye, which have Sage in their Gardens?
But because no herb has power to make Men immortal, they say furthermore,
Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis. And thus I do conclude of this
virtuous herb Sage. Whose Wine being daily drunk, is good against the
fallinge sycknesse. And the common Sage Ale, ryghtly brewed with Sage,
Squinance, Spicknarde, Calamus, Fenell seeds, and Betony, is very wholesome for
the Flegmaticke, Dropsy, wind Collike, and rawnesse of the stomach with
indigestion.


Marcellus. What be the virtues of Onyons in their kinds?


Hilarious. THey do make thyn the Blood, and bring sleep, they be not good
for Choleric men. Onions provoke sleep. Long Onyons.
The long Onyon is more vehemente then the round, and the Red more then the
White, the Gray more then the Green, and the raw more then the sodden, or
preserved in Salt, although they cause sleep very paynefull and troublous,
Green sickness.

To cleanse ye Stomach.


and be hot in the third degree, but they warm and cleanse the Stomach,
bring good Color to the Face, and then they must be good for the neewe
Green Sycknesse, and do very well provoke Uryne, and being roasted, and
warm applied to the Paynefull hard Emeroydes, eftesoones do open them (if
vinegar warm be put to them) and being clean pilled or taken from the over
rind and Skin, and cut of both the ends, Onions do heal the Emeroydes.
and cast into water, remaining in it one hour, and slicesed: these do take
away the vehement sharpness, that else would hurt the Eyes, and Head, For
biting of a Dog.
and being applied with Honey, Rue, and Salt, all incorporated together to the
wound bitten of a Dog, do heal it soon. Leekes purge the blood in March,
and pain the head, and be not greatly praised, for their Juice is evil,
Leekes.
says Dioscorides. The head being anointed with the Juice of them, keeps
hair from fallinge, Hair from fallinge.
there is much variety of this Onion among Writers, says Plinius, but this
shall suffice, for us Englishmen. There be great plenty of good Onions that be
brought from Flaunders, Where plenty of Onions do grow.
called saynct Homars Onions. So there be very many growing in Holland in
Lyncolneshyre, and in the Town of Duresme in the North country.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Fenell?


Hilarious. IT has power to warm in the third degree, and dry in the first,
and makes sweet the Breath: Foeniculum. Sweet breathes.

For the Eyesight.


the Seed eaten oftentimes upon an empty Stomach, does help the Eyesyght.
The Roots clean washed be very wholesome in Potage, and good in Ptisants. The
green or red tufts, growinge upon the Stalks, sodden in Wine, Potage, or
Ale, To break (...) Stone.

Increases Milk.

To wash Feet.


help the Bladder, Raynes, and break the stone, increases Milk in Women's
Breasts, and Seed of Generation. It is good to use Endyue, or such like with
it, because it is very hoate, and it is very good to wash ones Feet to
bedwarde. It is good in Barbars Bathes, and washinge Water, with Balm, and
Bays. The syrup is very good and wholesome, An excellent medicine of Fenel,
for the Raynes and Bladder.
it helps a Flegmatike Stomach. And Fenell, Parsely, and Watercresses, of
each like quantity stamped together, pouring white Wine to them, and the crummes
of Barley bread, standinge all one night in a stone Mortar, the next day being
strayned, Clarifyed, and drunk, this will cleanse the Raynes from Gravel,
Stone, and Choler, For fat folks.
and cause one to make much Water that has the Strangury. Two kinds of Fenell.
It is good for fat Men to open the vessels, as Uaynes, and Guts. There be
two kinds of Fenell, one Marathrum, which is best: the other Hippomarathrum
which is Wild, the Seed has greater virtue then the root.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Purslan?


Hilarious* Cold in the third, and moist in the second degree. Purslan is an
herb of a singular virtue to cool, or quench Choler.
If it be stamped with steeped Barley, it makes a good plaster to cool the
Head, Eyes, and Liver, in Agues, and hoate infla^mations. To eat of it,
stops fluxes, and quenches burning Choler, extinguisheth venereous lust,
and greatly helps ye Raynes, and Bladder, and will kill round Worms in the
Belly: and comfort the matrixe, against hoate choler, and terms abounding.
And the juice is good to drink in hot Fevers: it may be preserved with Salt,
and then it is very good with roasted meats. Plini says, it is supposed to
make the sight blunt and weak: An example of Purslan.
Further he says that in Spain, a great noble man, whom he did know, did hang
this Purslane root on a Thread, commonly about his neck, which was troubled of
a Vuula, and was healed therewith.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Dragons?


Hilarious. THe juice of Dragons, says Dioscorides, dropped into ye eyes, does
cleanse them, Of Dragons which help against the Pestilence.
and causes mutch brightness unto the eyes of them, which have dark sights.
The Water of this herb, has virtue against the pestilence, if it be drunk
blood warm with Uenice Triacle, or Mithridatum. The savor of this herb is
hurtefull to women newly conceived with Child. Plini says, that who so
bears this herb upon them, no venomous Serpent will do them any harm. This
herb is hoate and dry, and being sodden in Wine, it heals a kibed heel,
called Pernio. And this herb being bruised, and applied with Plantein, heals
a new wound.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Filipendula?


Hilarious. Filipendula has round roots hanging upon small fine thredes in the
earth.
IT is called Filipendula, because it has small round roots, hanging upon it
with thredes in the ground, it is an herb hoate and dry, in the third degree:
if it be sodden in white wine, and dronk, it dries up windy places in the
guts, and cleanses the raines of the back and bladder. And the powder drunk
in Wine, is good against the falling evil, and helps the yellow Iaundice:
the leaves and stalks sodden in Wine and drunk, cleanse the secondes.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Violettes?


Hilarious. SIMEON SETHI reports, that they do help against hoate
inflammations of the Guts, Uiolets be great coolers and to cold for the
heart.
head, and stomach, if the cause be of burninge Choler: either the Water,
Sirup, or Conserve of the said Uiolets, being eaten or drunk, after the
digestion of any hoate passion: but undoubtedly it offends the heart, because
of ye great coldness. The sauoure of the Flowers be pleasant. The Oil that is
made of this herb, has virtue to reconcile quiet sleep to them, which have
grievous hoate pain in the head, Good for Coughes and shortwinde.
Uiolet water, and clean Sallet Oil, of each one ounce together drunk,
cleanses rotten matter in the Stomach, and Coughes, or pain in the Lunges.


Marcellus What is the virtue of white Lillies, and water Lillies called
Nimphea.


Hilarious. DIoscorides says, that the Oil of Lillies does mollifye the
Sinews, and the mouth of the matrix: ye Juice of Lillies, Uineger, and Honey,
sodden in a Brazen vessel, does make an ointment, to heal both new and old
wounds: if the Roots be roasted, and stamped with Roses, they make an healing
plaster against burning of fire: the same root Roasted, has virtue to break a
pestilence sore, applied hot unto the sore place, and is dry in the first
degree. The oil of Water Lillies, is moist, sovereign against all hot
diseases to anoint the ardent and hot places, and does reconcile quiet sleep,
if the forehed be anointed therewith it is wholesome for mad men. The seed and
root sodden in wine, stops the immoderate flux menstruall, and the bloody
Flixe, as Dioscorides and Galen say Libro viij Simplicium Medicamento^um.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Chickweede?


Hilarious. ALmost every ignorant woman does know this herb, but there be of
diverse kinds of it, Anagallis o^ morsus Gallinae, called Chickweede.
they be very good to keep wounds from apostumations, stamped, and applied
unto them, and draw corruption out of wounds: and sodden with Uineger, do
draw fleume out of the head if Chickweede be often warm, put into the
mouth, and spit out again, in the same manner it helps the teeth, and sodden
in wine, and so drunk, it will cleanse the raynes of the back.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Sorel, which in the North is called Sower
Dockes.


Hilarious. Every one does right well know it, and al they that make greensauce,
but the description, I leave to Dioscorides, Rumex, ^apathus, or acedu is
Sorel, an Sor^ll de bois.
and Leonardus Fuchsius, not only in this herb, but in all other, and to tell
the virtue I will: it is cold and dry, in the second degree, it also stops:
it is like Endive in property, because it overcomes Choler, and is much
commended. It helps the yellow Iaundice, if it be drunk with small wine or
ale, and also quenches burning fevers: to eat of the leaves every Morninge
in a Pestilence time, is most wholesome, if they be eaten fasting. This herb
does Dioscorides, Galen and Auicen greatly commend, besides the great learned
men of this time.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Planten or VVaybrede?


Hilarious. THe greatter Planten is the better, it has seven great veins, it
is cold and dry: Plantago called arnoglosia.
the seeds drunk with red wine, or the roots sodden therein, stop the
bloody flux, likewise the roots and leaves being sodden with fair water, or
with Burrage water and Sugar, and given to him yt has an Ague, either Tertian
or quarten, two hours before his fit, helps him. Prove this, for thus have
I helped many, it is very comfortable for children that have great fluxes
and Agues, and is a friend unto the Liver. This herb is greatly praised of the
learned writers. Water Planten roots, leaves and buddes be wholesome to be dronk
against the falling sickness.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Camomill?


Hilarious. THis herb is very hot, it is drunk against cold winds, and
matter being in the guts, the Egiptians did suppose it would help all cold
Agues, and did consecrate the same as Galen says: also if it be tempered and
strayned into white wine, and drunk of women having the child dead within
their bodies, it will cause present deliverance: it does mightily cleanse the
bladder, and is excellent to be sodden in water to to wash the feet, the Oil
is precious, as is declared hereafter.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Hoppes?


Hilarious. THere be Hoppes which do cool, that be called Lupuli: those that we
have be hoate and dry, Lupulus Salictarius, be ^oppes
bitter, sower, hot, says old Herballes, and Fuchsius says, they cleanse
Fleume, and Choler, and the Water between the skin and Flesh. The syrup will
cleanse gross raw Fleume from the guts, and is good against obstructions. If
the Juice be dropped in the Ear, it takes away the stink of Rotten Sores,
the roots will help the Liver, and Spleen, being sodden and drunk, the Beer
is very good for Flegmatike men.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Horehounde?


Hilarious. IT is an herb hoate and dry, if it be sodden with fair water,
Sugar or Honey, and strayned, this drink does cleanse the stomach from stinking
fleume. It is an excelent herb for women to cleanse their Monthly terms.
Stinkinge fleume.
The water of this, is good to help them which have a moist Reume falling from
the head upon the Lunges, being often drunk, To help a moist reume.
but it is hurtful to the bladder and raynes, the syrup thereof does cleanse the
kings evil. And also put into the ears it does greatly comfort the hearing,
if ye ears be troubled with deafnes: stamped with honny and applied to the
eyes, it cleanses the sight. Kings evil.
To help the sight.



Marcellus What is the virtue of Ueruen. Ueruen.



Hilarious. IT is called the Holy herb, it dries and byndeth: if it be sodden
with Uineger, it helps a disease called. S. Anthonies fire, Wild fire
oftentimes washing the payned place. The leaves of Ueruen, and Roses, To keep
wo^^des from corruption.
and fresh Swynes grease stamped together, will cease pain and grief in
every wound, and will keep wounds from corruptinge. It is good for peopel that
have the Tercian, and Quarten Agues, thus says Dioscorides. Against Agues.
Moreover he says the weight of a, of this herb with three halfpeny wayghtes of
Olibanu^, put into.ix. of old wine tempered together, and drunk forty days
in this quantity fasting, it will help the disease called the kings evil, To
help the Kings evil.
or pain in the throat.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Rice? Rice.



Hilarious. There be many opinions concerning Rice, Auice^, in ij. can. Cap*
78.
but I shall stay my self with the Judgments of Auicen. Rice says he, is
hot and dry, and has virtue to stop the Belly, it does nourish much, ^it
be sodden with Milk, qut it ought to be stepped in water an whole night
before. If Blaunched Almons be stamped with Rose water, and strayned into
them, and sodden with Cowes milk, it is very much nourishinge: the Flower or
Meal of Arza or Rise, stops the bloudye flyxe, in drink or Clister.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Pease and Beans* Beans*



Hilarious. Beans be more grosser and fuller of wynd, then Pease be, and make
evil matter, except they be well sodden and buttered, and so eaten with the
whitest Onions that may be gotten, because they be hard of digestion: how be it
they do make fat, and partly cleanse, To make fat.
yet they are not compared with tender white Peason, well sodden and buttered,
or else made in pottage with garden Mintes, and gross Pepper which have virtue
to cleanse the raynes of the Back and bladder, There is a place in Suffolk
called Orfort, where Pease grow on the stones, never sown. Lintelles be of the
same virtue. Barley being clean hulled, and sodden with milk, clean water
and Sugar, makes a very wholesome and comfortable potage, for whole Choleric
persons, or young people, and this is much used in the North parts of England
and is called Big Keale, and of clean Barley and pure water, Ptisant.
is made that excellent water. called Ptisant.


Marcellus. Beats.
What is the virtue of Beetes.


Hilarious. White beetes
THere be of two kinds, and both be praise worthy. Simeon Sethi writes, that
they be hot and dry in the third degree, the white be the best, Purging the
head.
they have virtue to cleanse, as Niter has but are of evil juice: ye juice of
this herb with Honny, applied into the Nose, do purge the head, so does the
leaf, it is an holsom herb in pottage, if it be well sodden, or else noisome to
the stomach, if it be parboyled and eaten with Uineger, it is good against the
stopping of the liver, Stoppinge of the Liver.
not withstandinge the juice of this herb does stop the belly being symplie
taken. It is called Beat of Beta, or Ueta the Greek. B. because of the form
or shape.


Marcellus. Betony.
What is the virtue of Betony?


Hilarious. THey be of diverse kinds Leonardus Fuchsius, does call the sweet
Giloflowers by the names of Betonye, but he seems to talk of that which is
commonly known of the people, To kill worms,
called the land Betony, which has virtue to kill worms within the belly, and
helps the Quarten, cleanses the Matrix, For Bruses.
and has virtue to heal the Body within if it be bruised: it is of so great
effect, if it be sodden with Wormwood in white wine, as to purge Fleume, it is
hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.


Marcellus. Sauery.
What is the virtue of Sauerie?


Hilarious. IT is hoate and dry in the third degree, if the green Herb be
sodden in water or white wine, Liver soft. Cold coughs. Dead children.
and drunk, these be his virtues: to make the Liver so it, to cleanse Dropsies,
cold Coughes, to cleanse women's diseases, and to separate the dead child from
the mother, as Dioscorides and Galen say: also Germander is not much unlike in
virtue to this herb.


Marcellus. Mustarde.
What is the virtue of Mustard or Sinapium.


Hilarious. PLINIVS does greatly allow it, saying, that there is nothing does
pierce more swifter into the brain then it does. Honye Vinegar, To Gargarize
the head.
and Mustarde tempered together, is an excellent Gargarisme to purge the head,
teeth, and throat. Mustarde is good against all the diseases of the stomach, or
Lunges, wind, fleume and rawnesse of the guts, and conduces food into the
body, Fallinge sickness. Palsy.
provoke urine, helps the Palsy, wastes the qua^ten, dries. up moist
reumes, applied playsterwise unto the head. Honye and Mustarde helps the
coughe, and is good for them that have the Falling sycknesse: And tents of
Vinegar and Mustard put into the nose help the Palsye. Notwithstanding the
common use of Mustarde, Evil for the eyes.
is a cruel enemy unto ye eyes: many more virtues have I read of Mustarde, but
the occasion of time has unhappily prevented, not only my large description
in this, but also in many other Simples.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Senetion or Groundesyll? Senetion.



Hilarious. IT is of a mixed temperature, it cools and partly cleanses. If it
be stamped and sodden in water, and drunk with your Pottage, Hot Collar in ye
stomach* To help the eyes.
it will purge hot Choler: this done with Saffron and cold water, stamped and
put into the eyes, it will dry the runninge drops of them: and prepared ^laster
wise, it helps many grievous wounds. Dioscorides says, that the heads of
Senetion with the flowers, and a little wine and Manna, Dioscorides lib iiij.
cap. xcij.

For wounds


tempered together, heals the wounds, that be in the synewes. The flower of
this herb, has white hair, and when the wind blows it away, then it
appears like a Balde headded Man, therefore it is called Senecio.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cucummers* Cucummers?



Hilarious. THey be (truly) in the second degree very moist, and cold the
Seeds be very good to be given in hot sicknesses. The powder of the same
Seeds drunk in clean Wine, are good against diverse hoate passions of the
Heart, To provoke vryne,

Uomit.

Good blood.


This Fruit will cause one to make water well. The root dried, and the powder
thereof drunk in water and Honye, provoke vomit. If they be moderatly eaten,
they bring good blood. Tempered with Honye, Epinictides*
and the Eyes there with anointed they help a disease called Epinictidas,
which troubles men with strange syghtes in the Night: the best of this fruit
is yt which bears ye best seed ye savor of them is holsom. Melons, citruls,
Pompeions, Raw herbs*
and this kind of Pepins, or great Apples, be much used in England, and are
more common the^ profitable, because they use to eat the^ raw, Englishmen being
born in a te^perat region, enclyning to cold, may not without hurt eat raw
herbs, roots, and fruits so plentiful, as many men which be borne far in the
South parts of the world, which be most hoate of stomach: therefore eat
these fruits boiled, orels baked with Honey, Peper, and Fenell seeds, or such
like: there be an other hot kind of bitter Cucummers, which do purge called
Colocynthis. The Apple being steeped in Ptisant water, duringe Twelve hours,
and so strayned, and drunk in the Morninge half a pint, does purge
Melancholy, and Choler adust and vitriall fleume, but it is a very gross
purgation, but ye Trochiskes of Coloquintida are better to purge with.
Coloquitide*
But.i of the Powder of Coloquintida sodden with Mirthe and Ote water, and
Honye to a thicknes, makes a goodly Pil to purge Fleume and choler, it is
good in Clisters, Dioscorides. lib. iiij. capit. Clxx.
for the same purpose, sodden with vinegar, this kept in the mouth, kills
worms in the teeth. The Oil of this is good to anoint the pains of the Huckel
bone called Sciattica, It also kills worms in the Ears: this is most
bitter to the mouth and stomach, it kills worms in the Belly, Matthiolus
super dioscoride^.
both in Emplasters and drink. The Arabians call this herb Chandel, but in
Laten it is called Cucurbita Syluestris.


Marcellus. Cabage.
What is the virtue of Cabage or Brassica?


Hilarious. CAbage is of two properties, of byndinge the Bellye, and making
laxatiue, Ius Brassicae soluit, cuius substantia stringit.

To bind laxatiue

To cleanse Leprosy.

Aristote.iij. probl. Auicen.ii. ca^Rasisiij. Al.


the juice of Cabages, lightlye boiled in fresh Beef brothe is laxatiue, but
the substance of this herb is hard of digestion, but if it be sodden twyse,
the broth of it will bind the Belly, if it be tempered with Allume: This herb
has virtue to cleanse a new Red Leprosye, laid upon the sore place, in the
manner of a Plaster, but to conclude of this herb, ye broth of it has virtue
to keep a man from drunkenness, as Aristotle, Rasis, and Auicen do report,
eaten before meat or drink. And this is good to make Pottage withal, and is
a profitable herb in a common wealth, which the Fleminges sell dear, but we
have it growing in our own Gardens, Dioscor. li. 4.
if we would prefer our own commodity, before ydlenes, and not suffer weeds
to grow where herbs should be planted. If Fenegrike and this be sodden
plaster wise, it helps the Gout, The leaves sodden with Honye, heal ulcers
and Cankers, and kill worms in the Bellye, there be sundry kinds of wortes,
both Garden, Feelde and Sea, mutche like to each other in virtue. There be
great plenty growing between Albrought and Horthforde in Suffolk upon ye Sea
shore.


Marcellus. Rue called Herb grace.
What is the virtue of Rue, or herb of Grace?


Hilarious. I Tell thee this herb* is very hot and bitter, and does burn,
because of his hotenes in the third degree. If a little of this Rue be stamped,
and sodden in wine, and drunk, it is an excellent medicine against Poison and
Pestilence. Roses, Uineger and Riue stamped together, Poison Pain in the head.
and put into a Forhead cloth or Bigge^ and applied to the Temples of the
head, or Forehead, do cease grievous pain in the head. And in like manner it
helps the bytinge of Serpents, and of Dogs, stamped with vinegar, many nice
people cannot abide it, cryinge fie it stinks. The sede of this herb beaten in
powder and put in fresh clarifyed Butter, Against biting of Dogs and serpe^ts.
and Pitche melted together, is good for them to drink that are bruised The
seed of this Rue being dried and beaten into powder, with ye pouders of sweet
Calamus and long Pepper sodden in white Wine, drunk warm helps the wind in
the small Guts. Buleins experience many times.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Lettice Lettice.



Hilarious. IT does mightily increase Milk in women's breasts, To increase Milk
and therefore it is called Lettice, as Martial says, first shall be given to
the virtue and power, to increase milk in women's breasts every hour. Comfort
against hoate cholic^ in the stomach.
Lettice is an herb cold and moist and very comfortable for a hot stomach,
brings sleep, mollifyeth the bellye, the dryer it be eaten the better it is.
I mean, if it be not much washed in water, adding clean Salet Oil, Sugar
and vinegar to it, it abateth carnal lust: and much use of it dulleth the
sight. Ill forsight. To abate the Lust.

An increase of seed.

Broke bones Coughe.

Dioscor. lib* ij* Cap. cxxxliij.


The seed is precious against hot diseases, drunk with Ptisantes. There is
an herb called Rocket gentle, that partly smells like a Fox, which is very
hot, an encreaser of seed, this herb must always be eaten with Lettice. The
root thereof sodden in water will draw forth broken bones, and will help the
cough in young children, the seed does vehemently expel vryne, drunk in
white wine, and kills woormes: and tempered with an Ox gaul, does cleanse
black spots in the face or skin after strypes.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Mintes? Mintes



Hilarious. MIntes be of two kinds, garden and wild Mintes, Stoppinge of vomits.

Repletion.

To kill worms.

Bytinge of a Dog.

To help the Collike.


they be hot unto the third degree, and dry in the second degree Garden
Mintes be best: the powder of this with the juice of Pomgranets, stops
vomits, helps sighing, cleanses hot choler. Three branches of this sodden
with wine does help repleation, being drunk fasting. This juice tempered
with good Triakle, and eaten of children in morninges, will kill worms, and
stamped with salt, and applied to the bytyng of a Dog, will heal it. It is
wholesome sodden with wyndy meats and Peason etc. and sodden in posset ale with
Fenel, it increases vital seed. It is not best for Chollerike complexions but
good for Fleumatike and indifferent for Melancholic, and it will stop blood,
stamped and applied to the place: the juice of Mintes be best to mingle in a
medicine against poyso^: To make sweet brea^h.
ye powder of Mints are good in pottage to help digestio^, and to make sweet
breath.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Dandelion, or Lions teeth* Dandelion.



Hilarious. IT is temperate, cold, and dry: The head. Sowthistell ^o loa^e
the^ belly.
with Roses and Uineger te^pered together, it helps the head in hot
diseases, the sowthistle called Sonchos has ye same virtue and so has Cicory:
if they be sodden, the loose the belly and quenches heat which burns in the
stomach, Yellow choler

Burning Agues.


and defends the head from hot smoking vapoures, and purges yellow choler,
and rebateth venerous and fleshly heat, and is good to be sodden and dronk in
hot burning Agues: though this herb be commonly known and counted of many as
a vile wede, yet it is reported of Dioscorides to be an excellent herb, and is
called Lions teeth.


Marcellus. Hysop.
What is the virtue of Hysope?


Hilarious. AN herb commonly known, growing in gardens, and hot in the third
degrre: it has virtue to make humors thin and warm: Dioscor lib. 3.
sodden with Figs, Rewe, and Honey, in clean water, and drunk, greatly
helps the sickness in the lungs old Coughes, Sickness in the Lunges. Old
coughes, Rotten humors.

To help the Spleen.


rotten humors, drippinges upon the lunges, sodden with Eris, and Graynes of
Paradise called Cardamomu^, it mightily purges and brings good color.
Figs, Salt Nitrum, and Hysope stamped together, and applied to the Spleen,
help it much, and take awoy the water that runs between the skin and the
Flesh: sodden with Oximel it cleanses flewme. How be it, Galen writes but
little of this herb in his eight book of Simples, Fleume.
but says that it is dry and hot in the third degree. But this herb was
used in the old Testament, in the old time of the bloody Sacrifice. And the
holy prophet in his. li. Psalm, says unto almighty God? Sprinkle me oh Lord
with Hysope etc. God grant us all to have such blessed plants of that Hysope in
our gardens, which have virtue to heal all sicknesses of the Soul, defiled
with sin.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Wine?


Hilarious. HIPPOCRATES says, of a customable thing comes lesser hurt than
of things not used, Hip in ij. lib. Apha^i.
whereof I gather that they which drink wine moderatly with measure, it does
profyt them much, and makes good digestion, but those people that use to drink
wine seldom times, be distempered. Digestion.
White wine if it be clear, is wholesome to be drunk before meat, White wine.
Auerhois in.6. colig. Rasis in li. 26. con. ca. 1.
for it preserves the body and perseth quickly to the bladder, but if it be
drunk upon a full stomach, it will rather make opilation, or stopping of the
Meseraikes, because it does swiftly drive food down, before nature has of
himself digested it: and the nature of white wine is of less warmness.
Claret wine warmeth the Body.

Galen lib. de tue. sani ca. 9. Wine is an ennemy to children.

Red wine corrupts blood


The second wine is pure Claret, of a clear Iacint or yellowe color: this
wine does greatly norish and warm the body, and it is an wholesome wine with
meat, and is good for Flegmatike folk, but very unwholesome for young children:
for Galen says Vinum pueris inimicum, because it heateth above nature, and
hurts the head. Nor for them which have hoate livers, or pains in the head,
occasioned of hot vapors, or smokes* for it is like unto fire, and flax. The
third is black or deep, Red wine which is thick a stopper of the belly, a
corrupter of the blood, a breeder of the stone, hurtefull to old men, Auicen
in 3. prim. 2. doc. cap 8.

To know good wine.


and profitable to few Men, except they have the bloudye flux. And for the
Election of wine Auicen says, that Wine is best, which is between new and
old, clear, declyning somewhat to Read or Amber, of good odor, neither
sharp nor sweet, but equal between both, for it has virtue not only to make
humors temperate, warm and moist, but also to expel evil matter, which
corrupts the stomach and blood: In Summer it ought to be delayed with pure
clean water, To know good Wine.
as Aristotle says in his Problemes: and note this, that in dry years, wynes
be best and most wholesome: but in watery years, the Grapes be corrupted, which
wine does bring to the body many evil diseases, as Dropsies, Timpanies,
Fluxes, When Wine is best.

Galen. in Regacu.


Reumes, winds and such like, as Galen says: And thus to conclude of wine,
almighty God did ordain it for the great comfort of mankind, to be taken
moderately, but to be drunk with excess* it is unwholesome and is Poison most
venomous: it relaxeth the sinews, brings Palsy, Wine moderatlye comfort.
Falling sickness, in old persons, hot Fevers, Fransies, Fighting, Lechery,
and a consuming of the Liver to the Chollerike: and generally there is no
credence to be given to drunkardes, although they be mighty men. It makes men
like unto monsters with countenance like to burning coals. A glass for all
excessive. wine bibbers to look in.
It dishonoreth noble men, and beggereth poor men, and nearehande kills as
many as be slain in cruel battayles the more it is to be lamented. Plato in
secundo de legibus. Plato in 2 legibus.
commanded that none under.xxij. years old should drink wine. And this wise
man does show a reason saying: Non oportet ignem igni adiscere. One fire ought
not to be put to an other or coupled together for they will devour each other,
because there is no mean between them, but extreme in one degree. Prouer. xxxj.
And the words of king Lamuel be these against drunken Princes or Judges:
Noli regibus o Lamuel, noli regibus dare vinu^, quia nullum secretum vbi regnat
ebrietas, ne forte bibat and obliuiscantur iu^^ciorum, and mute^t causam
filiorum pauperis. etc. Oh Lamuel it is not fit for Kings, it is not for
kings to drink wine. For there is no secret* where dronkenes reigns, least
they being drunk forget the law, and pervert or change the Judgment of poor
men's Children. Lethi ^ Flud whose water did cause men to forget them selves
when they dru^k of it
Give wine to such as be condemned to death, and Wine to such as Mourne^,
that they may Drink it and forgette their miserye and aduersitye. I conclude
that wine is wholesome for cold complections and crude stomachs, euel for
cholerike, immoderatly taken* a prince to princes, and a confounder of Judges,
and finally the flood of Lethe to the afflicted, to make them forget their
miseries,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the common water of Ryuers. Waters.
springes and fountaynes. etc


Hilarious. WAter is one of the four Elements, Gal. 3. de vic. acu. lib. ij.
fe^. 2.
more lighter then Earth, heavier then fire and air. But this Water which is
here among us in Rivers, Pondes, Springes, Fluds, and Seas, is no pure water,
for it is mingled with sundry Airs, Corruptions, Grossenes and softenes. What
kind of water is best.
Notwithstanding in all once Meats and Drynkes Water is used, and amongeste
all living Creatures cannot be forborne neither of Man, Beast, Fish,
Foul, nor Herb. etc. for all have need of water. And Auicen says, the Clay
water is pure, for the clay cleanses the water: ye water is better, Auice^ lib.
ij* fen inde dispositionibus.
then ye water yt runs over grauel or stones, so that it be pure Clay, and
void of corruption. Also waters running toward the East be pure, coming out of
hard stony Rocks, and a pint of that water is lighter then a pint of the
standing water of Wels or Pooles: the lighter the water, the better it is. Also
water that is put in wine. etc. ought first to be sodden, or it be occupied,
and so the fire does cleanse it from corruption. Standing waters, and Waters
running near unto Cittyes and Towns, or Marrish grounds, wooddes, and
fennes, be ever full of corruption, because there is so much fylthe in them of
Carrions, and rotten dunge. etc. The hyer the water does fall* the better it
is: Ise and snow waters be very gross, and be hurtful to the bodies of men
and Beasts. To drink cold water is evil, for it will stop the body, Salt
water heals scabs
and engender Melancholye. Salt water cleanses a man from scabs, Itch, and
moist humors, it kills Lice, and wastes blood between the skin and the
flesh, but it is most hurtful to the stomach: but the vapoure and smoke of it
is good for them that have the dropsye. If one that is bitten with a mad
Dog, be suddenly cast into a swifte runninge River, and so plunged up and
down, three or four times, hanging by the wast in a strong Lynnen cloth, it
will help him by the reason of the great sudden fear, in that Melancholye
passion says Dioscorides. And Auicen says, water wherein steel is quenched,
is good to be given to him that is bitten with a mad Dog. Also he says,
whosoever is bitten of a mad Dog, and is vehemently afraid when he sees his
face in a vessel of water and knows him self, it is a sig^e that he shall not
die. Also bathes for the clensyng of the corrupt bodies of men be made of
clean water: The goodlye virtues of common water.
without water Men are more defiled than beasts, for it is a nutriment of
every living creature, sensyble, and insensible. There is a River runninge at
Rome called Tiber, whose water is of such virtue, that it will remain in a
vessel of stone by the space of an hundred years uncorrupted as says Petrus,
Andraeus* Matthiolus upon Dioscorides. There were some time near unto that
aunciente and old City called Agrigentum, sacred wells, which were of such
virtue, that the water brought forth such precious Oil, that the bodies
which were anointed therewith, were cleansed of sundry and diverse diseases.

Of Nilus that noble flood.
Let us not be forgetful of that noble River Tagus in Spain, in whom swimmeth
diverse kinds of fyshes, under whose streams lies plentye of golden sands:
what shall we say unto the Capital river of all this World called Nilus, which
runs over all Ethiopia and Egipte, in which Egipte there is no Rain, but
only the swellinge and ouerflowinge of that fludde, which being fallen down
within his banks, eftsoons great plentye of spices, Herbs, Plants, and
fruits do grow, in so much that the people of ye Land do live without any
great travel, pain, or Labor, the cause of the abundance, and swellinge of
this famous river sayethe Galen, is when the Snowes be melted, through the
great heat of the Sun in the Mountains of Ethiopia? The cause why Nilus
does flow.
The Ocean the most Mighty Sea of all the World, the Mother of Fyshes,
strange Monsters, Stones of diverse natures, seperater of lands, enuironer of
Islands, ye water thereof through a long continual boiling over the fire, is
converted into salt. Also in the North parts of Scotland nere and upon the
said Ocian Sea, sticks, branches, and bordes of broken ships falling into
the same Sea, The cause of Barnacles.
upon these things be engendered fowls or birds, which we commonly call
Brants or Barnacles, a kind of small Geese, which we do see commonly in this
Realm, al of one color and bigness, their Eggs were never seen amongst us,
they have none other generation than I have said: although to the incredulous
and ignorant it seems untrue, whose fantasyes I force not of, but of the
truth. There be also waters in the North parts of the Ocian Sea, which do
freese for evermore, The cause of Crystal.
whose Ise is nothing else but Crystal, for Crystal is of no other
generation. There be waters of an other nature here in England called Aquae
callidae, or the hot Bathes, at a place so named called Bathe, whose water
does never freese through extreme coldenes, but is ever warm, which has
virtue to help the sore, The effects of the Bathes at the town of Bathe.
scabbed and mangie, if I may so term them: many have come thither lame and
have gone away without corruption of the Flesh* contraction of synewes,
lamenes of Lims or weakness of nature, and this is a blessing of God among us,
to have so precious a Jewel. There is a well near hand of the like effect at
Buckestone, whose water has done many and sundry good cures, Guiacum is of
greatter virtue then bath or Buck^stons wels against the nosegay of Naples.
both to the sore, and lame: yet these waters are reported to be so gentle,
that they will not usurp or steal from Guiacum, his virtue and good service,
which it daily does to his Neapolita^, French or English friends, you know what
I mean. What shall I say more of water or deep wells, which be warm in
winter, by the reason that heat is in the bowels of the Earth, and cold in
Summer, because heat is above the earth: There is a noble well called Alissus in
Arcadia, and who so drinks of this water shall be delivered of the venom, or
bytinge of mad Dogs. There be diverse wells at Nante wyche. etc. whereof is
made great plenty of good white Salt, very rich and profitable to our common
wealth. I will not forgette the Well of Silo and the Sacred flood of Iordane,
which was the first water of Baptism where as Jesus Christ our Savior was
Baptized himself, whose beginning is from the heads of Ior. and Dan. or from a
Fountain called Pancade so named of Caesarea: in this river is plenty of good
Fishes, it is a sweet noble Flood where Christ Jesus our savior, did show
Miracles. But Asphaltites says Pliny will suffer nothing to syncke into it,
Bull nor Cammell. etc. in this Flood is plenty of Sytumen, The dead se^.
where was Sodom and Gomor, sometime the dead Sea. And thus I make an end of
water and the Earth. Rain water is bynding and stopping of nature, water is a
very good servant, but it is a cruel master.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Beer and Ale?


Hilarious. ALe does engender gross humors in the body, but if it be made of
good Barley malte, and of wholesome water, and very well sodden, and stand.v. or
vi. days, until it be clear, it is wholesome, Although Beer and Ale be
compounds yet I have here placed them after water, whereof they receive their
greattest substance.
especially for hot Cholorike persons, having burning Fevers. But if Ale be
very sweet and not well sodden in the brewing, it brings inflation of wind
and fleum into the Belly, If it be very sower, it nippeth and freateth the
guts, and is evil for the eyes: to them that be very Fleumatike, Ale is very
gross, but to temperate bodies, it increases blood, it is partlye laxatiue
and provoke urine. Clean brued Beer, if it be not very strong, brewed
with good Hoppes does cleanse the Body from corruption, and is very wholesome for
the Liver, it is an usual or common drink in most places of England, which in
deed is hurt and made worse with many rotten Hoppes, or Hoppes dried like
dust, which comes from beyond sea: but although there come many good Hoppes
from thence, yet it is known that the goodly fyeldes, and fruitful grounds
of England do bring forth to man's use, as good Hoppes as grows in any place
of the world, as by proof I know in many places of the Country of Suffolk,
where they brew their Beer with the Hoppes that grow upon their own
grounds, as in a place called Brisiarde, near to an old famous castle called
Framingham and in many other places of the country. A late house of Nuns
Thus to conclude of Ale and Beer, they have no such virtue, nor goodness,
Surfets of Ale and Beer Au^ce^ ij. tert^a capi. viij. Auerho in co^. Rasis
in.iiij. Almen. cap. v.
as wine has: and the surfets which be taken of them, through dronkennes, be
worser then the surfetes of win^. Know this, that to drink Ale or Beer, of
any empty stomach moderatly, hurts not but does good But if one be fasting
hungry, or empty, and drink much Wine, it will hurt the Sinews, and bring
the Crampe, sharp Agues, and Palseis, as Auicen, Auerhois, and Rasis, says.
The rinsepichers had a good medecin prepared for them: for the Mayor of
London, upon a polityke consideration, Anno. 1560. made an order against
mighty Beer and Ale, as well for the health of the commons of London, as for
their profit. Whereat the Ale knights, were not little offended, and do
continue still as true Soldiers to ye strong Beer and Ale, which is their
Captain, notwithstanding my lord Majors decree, as it plainly appears in
their flushing, red, coppred noses. For strong Ale has such virtue and
worthiness, that he cannot be so persecuted, afflicted, yea and banished, but
his disciples most constantly will follow him, to the end of their lives.
Therefore they shall have Bacchus blessing for their labors. But yet the end of
Drunkards and Gluttons is miserable: therefore my Marcellus, hear that most
prudent and wisest Prince king Solomon, saying. Noli esse in conuiuijs
potatorum, nec in comessationibus eorum qui carnes ad vescendum co^ferunt: quia
vacantes potibus, and dantes symbola, consumentur and vestietur pannis
dormitatio. etc. Keep no company with Wine bibbers, and ryotous eaters of
Flesh. For such as be drunkardes and ryoters, shall come to poverty. And he
that is given to much sleep, with ragged clothes. etc Lo, these be the
rewards of such companions and unthrifts.


Marcellus. I Thank you for your good counsel, good Hilarious, you have
spoken indifferently: and you have alleged good writers, but specially
Solomon, whose words be well placed, against ryotours and drunkardes, with
their rewards, as poverty, shame, and rags. etc. for abusyng the good
creatures, and blessings of God: but to use them in good order, they be our
servants, and we may take them for our need. I pray you say some thing of
Bread, which is the chyefe food to all living men in this Land.


Hilarious. THE best bread is made of clean Wheat, The mean baked bread* the
best.
which grows in claye ground, lightly Leuened, meanly Salted, and the Bread
to be baken in the oven, not extremely hot, least it be burned, nor also less
than meanly hot, least the Bread be heavy and raw: the lighter the bread
is, and the more fuller of the holes, the holsomer it is, thus Auerhois, and
Rasis say. Aue in v. col. Rasis in.xxx. in almu^ Cap. 3 What bread is best.
And also Bread must neither be eaten new baked, nor very stale, or old, for
the one causes dryness, thurst, and smokyng in the hedde, troublyng the
brains and eyes, through the heat thereof. The other dries the body, and
brings melancholy humors, hurting memory. The best bread is that, Bread of a
day old,
that is of a day old: and the loaves or Manchettes, may neither be great nor
little, but mean, for the fire in small loaves, dries up the moistenes or
virtue of the bread, and in great loaves, it leueth rawnes and grosenes, Read
Galen, Galen ii. al^ment. capi. 2 Sodden bread not wholesome.
in the properties of bread: sodden bread, which is called Simnelles. or
Crackenelles, is very unwholesome, and hurts many one. Rye bread is wyndie, and
hurtful to many, therefore it must be well salted, and baken with Anisedes.
And commonly crusts of Bread, be dry and burned: they do engender choler aduste
and melancholy humors. Therefore in great men's houses, the Bread is chipped
so nigh, and so largely pared, that mutch of it is abused, and shamefully made
into sosse for Dogs, which would feed a great number of poor people: but
many men be more affectionate to Dogs, Barley bread.
than to men. Barley Bread does cleanse, and make the body lean.

Yet thus mutch more of Bread. If a Manchette stand al night in Borage water,
and in the morning be given to a man, that is new fallen mad, it will help
him, vsyng it xiiii. days: being also letten blood in Cephalica, a vein in
the forehead. Also a Cake or Manchette, made in this manner, and daily
eaten:.viii. half in the morning, and as much at Night, helps Gonorrhea
passio, or running of the raines. A pound of fine flower, and the fine dried
pouders of Walnuttes, Chestnuttes, Hasil nuttes, Filberdes, Master R^ger
Stra^ges Medicine, brought from Uenice, written by a learned Italian Doctor.
Nutmegges, Almonds, and Pistacia, of these, vii. kinds of Nuttes..iii,
tempered with this meal, and red Wine, and so your bread made thereof. There
is also a kind of Bisquit made with Anisedes, wholesome for the lunges, or
reumatike persons. Calamus, long Peper, Ginger, Spicknard, and Galanga, be
good to put into their bread which have the Dropsy, or Tympanie.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Pears.


Hilarious, THere be of diverse kinds of Pears, heavier then Aples, not good
until they be very ripe, The operation of Pears.
unless they be tenderly roasted, or baken, and eaten after meals. There is a
kind of Pears, growing in the City of Norwich, called the Black Freres Pear,
very delicious and pleasant, and no less profitable unto a hoate stomach, as
I heard it reported, by a right worshipful Physician of the same City, called
Doctor Manfield, who said, he thought that those Pears, without all
comparison, were the best that grew in any place of England. Dioscorides
says Lib. i. Capi. cxxxii. That all Pears do stop and bind, Black
Freres Pears. of Norwiche.
so do the leaves, and therefore says he, plasters be wholesome made of the^,
to stop vomites and laxies. There may Lie be made of Pear tree branches,
or barks, which is wholesome to sees wild Pears in, that be called
stranglyng, or choke Pears. For so sodde^, it does take away venom or hurt:
the same Ashes does help Men, being drunken in white Wine, Ashes made of wild
peare-tree, the virtue thereof.
that be almost strangled with Mouseums, or such like. Pears have many names,
as Pear Robert, Pear John, Busshops blessyngs, with other pretty names. The
red Warden is of great virtue, conserved, roasted, or baken, to quench choler.


Marcellus. Aples.
What is the virtue of Aples?


Hilarious. APles be very cold and wyndye, hard to digest, engenderers of ill
blood, hurtful to the flegmatike persons, good to cholerike stomachs, if they
be through ripe, The operation of Aples. Diosco^ides Lib. i. Cap. 131 For a
chole^ike stomach. Costarde. green Cote. Pipins.
but best if they be roasted, or baken and eaten with gross Peper to Bedwarde.
They be of many kinds, as Costardes, the green Cotes, the Pippe^, the queen
Aple, and so forth: the distilled water of Aples, Champhire, Vinegar and Milk,
is a good medicine to anoint the Faces of children, that have the small Pockes,
when the said Pockes be ripe, to keep them from pittes or erres, provided,
that they have given them in their Milk Saffron, or Mithridatum, to expel the
venom, and keep them from the air, A medicine for the small Pockes.
during the said sickness. The pappe of an Aple with Rose Water applied to the
Eyes, does quench the burning, and takes away the rednes of them. Aples be
good in Winter, and provoke urine: eat them with a little Salt. Tartes of
Aples with Anisedes, make sweet breath: there is a wyndy drink made of them
called Cider: Uergis is not greatly to be^ lauded, albeit, custom does permit
it.


Marcellus. Peaches.
What is the virtue of Peches,


Hilarious. The operacion of Peaches
THE leaves be hot, for if they be stamped in plaster wise, and applied unto
the belly, they kyl worms: the fruict is cold, and very good for the stomach:
Hot stomach.
they be good to be eaten of them, that have stinking breathes of hot causes,
Against stynking breathes
eaten of any empty stomach, as it is the counsel of Galen. who says, if
they be eaten after meat, they do corrupt, both them selves, and the Meats
lately eaten, and they be been ders of the belly: Quinces wholesome.
but Quinces be most comfortable after meat, and they do enclose the
s^^mack, and let vapors from ascending into the brain, and stop vomites.
Folks that be swollen in their bodies, and use to eat quinces with the gross
powder of Galanga, Spiknard, Calamus, Swellings.
and Ginger, shall receive comfort: they may be eaten before meat, of the said
sick pacyents, as well as after, but mutch use of them, is not so profitable,
as delectable to the eaters of them.


Marcellus. What is the virtues of Quinces? Any more than thus. Quinces.



Hilarious* IF thy stomach be very hot, or moist, or thy belly laxatiue, The
operacion of quinces.
then Quinces be good to be eaten before meat, being roasted, or eaten cold:
and in this case, the tarter be the better: Po^garnettes.
and Pomgarnettes be of the same virtue, as Isaac says: but eaten after
meat, they do enclose the stomach, and moist the belly, Isaac in perti*
die.
they ought not to be used in common meats: the custom of them hurts the
sinews, but in the way of medecin they be excellent: and the cores being
taken out, and preserved in Honye, or kept in their musslege, they may long
continu^, Quinces raw hurt.
to the use of rostyng, or bakyng, for they be perilous to the stomach eaten
raw, but preserved, they do mightily prevail against drunkenes: Against
drunkenesse.
they be cold in the first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cheries? Cheries.



Hilarious. THE tarte Cheryes undoubtedly, be more wholsomer then ye sweet, The
operacyon of Cheries.
and eaten before meat, they do mollifye the Belly, Against hot Choler.

Galen de alimen. Ra lib. xxiii. Capi Diosc. in libr. i. capi. cxxix


prepare digestion, and they be most excellent against hot burning choler,
they be good also after meat, and be of many kinds, as black, red, and pale:
the red Cherye partly tarte is best, Galen and Rasis, greatly commend this
fruicte. This fruicte is cold and moist in the first degree. And the gum of a
Cherye tree, sodden in Wine and drunk, has all these properties, says
Dioscorides, it helps old coughes, gives good color to the face, sharpeth
the sight, makes perfect digestion, and makes clean the raynes from gravel.
Pliny says, Libr, xv. Capi xxv. it was a strange thing to see Cheries at
Rome, until such time as Lucullus the Noble Roman vanquished Mithridates,
the king of Pontus. And from thence came Cheries at that time to Rome, which
was about the incarnacion of our Lord Christ.lxxiii. years. And then within
few years after, all Italy was full, and the^ most part of France: and so
they came in to this our great Britan chiefly in Ke^t, whereas great plenty
does grow yearly.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Grapes, Rasines, Prunes, Barberies, Orenges,
and Medlers?


Hilarious. Grapes.
HIppocrates says, that the white Grapes, be better than the black, and
wholsomer when they are two or three days gathered from the Uine, than
presently pulled from it: and if they be sweet, they be partlye nutratyue,
and warm the Body, and this agrees Galen, Galen de alimen. ii. Rasis in
iiii. alimen. xx.
and Rasis, who seems to commend sweet Grapes, above Dates, saying: although
they be not so warm, yet they do not stop the body, or make oppilation as
Dates do. They be wholesome to be eaten before meat, even as Nuttes be good
after Fysh: toward the South, and South East parts of the world, there be many
growyng in diverse Regions, whereof the Wines be made, the farther from us, the
hotter the Wine: there be very good Grapes growyng here in England, in many
places, as partly I have seen. Raisons.
Raysons of the Son be very wholesome, and comfort digestion, but the stones
and rindes, would be refused: and then they be good for the spleen and liver,
To comfort digestion Spleen and Liver.

Sweet prunes be laxatiue, but tarte be byndyng Oxiacantha, called the
Barbary Mespila called the Medler.


so be Aligantes. Rasis does mutch commend them, but undoubtedly the small
Raysons be hurtful to the spleen. Prunes, and Damaseins have virtue to relaxe
the belly, if they be sweet and ripe: they do nourysh very little, but
quench, choler. Grapes Raisons, Prunes Plu^mes, and Slowes, if they be sower,
be all binders of the belly. And so is the Barbery, called Oxiacantha, and
Orenges, except the said Orenges be condited with Sugar, and then they be good
coolers against hoate choler, whose rindes be hoate, and dry of nature. The
fruict called the Medler, is used for a medicine, and not for meat, it
provoke urine, and of nature is stipticke.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Capers and Olyues?


Hilarious. Capers and Olives.
FResh Capers be hoate and dry in the second degree, and eaten before meats,
do greatly comfort digestion: and be the best things for the Spleen, Good
for the Spleen.
or to cleanse mela^choly, so is the oil of Capers to anoint the Spleen, or
left side, that can be taken. Preserved Olives in Salt, eaten at the beginning
of meats, do greatly fortefy the stomach, and relaxe the belly, cleanse the
liver, and are hoate and dry in the second degree. The decoction of Caper
barks helps the Spleen, being drunk.


Marcellus. Aloes.
What is the virtue of Aloes?


Hilarious. THere be two kinds of Aloes, one is named Succotrina, which is
like a liver, Two kinds of Aloes.
clear, bryttle, bitter, colored between red and yellow: this is best for
medicines, a little of this te^pered with Rose water, To help watery eyes.
and being put into the eyes, helps the dropping, and watery eyes. Also it is
put into many excellent medicines laxatiue, as Saffro^, Mirrhe, Aloes, mingled
together in the form of pills, is the most excellent medicine against ye
Pestilence, Against the Pestilence. cal^ed pillule Ru^^i
as it is written in this book following. Honey and Aloes mingled together, do
take away the marks of stripes, and also do mundyfye sores, and ulcers, it
does cleanse the abundance of choler and fleume from the stomach, it is not
good to be taken in Winter. For Auicen does forbid it, Marks of stripes of
the skin.
but in the Spring time, or Harvest: the powder thereof, the wayghte of a
French croune, mingeled with the water of Honye, or Mede, and so drunk in the
morning, does cleanse both Choler and fleume. To cleanse choler and fleum*
There is an other gross Aloes, which is good for horses tempered with Ale,
and ministered, and as well to other great Beasts, as horses, the wayght of
half an Unce, and thus mutch have I said of Aloes: but if Aloes be clean
washed, it is the holsommer, mutch unwashed Aloes will cause Emeroides. A cause
of the Emroides.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Dictamnum,


Hilarious. IT is of a singular virtue, leaued like unto Peneryal, but greater,
and somewhat rough, and tastes like Ginger when it is bitte^ on: this herb is
incomparable for his singular goodness, in spedy deliverance of dead children
from their Mothers, being drunk in Syrup. There be two kinds of them the one
called Dictamnum, and the other Pseudo dictamnum, one of the garden, the other
of the field, and have many roots: Dictamnum is a good sode^* salve for a
soldier in the fyelde*
the Leaves be only occupied, and not the stalks, being sodden in wine, it
draws corruption out of deep wounds: if any man be wounded with Iron, as
Dager, Spear, nail, pyece of harneis, hayleshot, or mayle, drop in ye Juice
of this herb into the said wound, and eftsoon it will draw forth the Iron
therein fyxed, so that the pacyent drink of the same herb in wine.
Dioscorides. lib iij. cap. xxxj. A maruailus work of Dictamnum.
Dioscorides reports, that wild beasts, and Goats among the Greeks, when
they were wounded with arrows, did feed on this herb, whose virtue cast
out the Arrows, and healed the wound. It will do the like also to mankind,
if he be not smitten witha mortal wound. The smoke of this Dittan, called
Dictamnum, does drive away any living thing from man, that is venomous, as
Tode, Neute, Skorpion. etc. And the Noble Poet Uirgil does greatly commend the
same precious herb, Lib. xij. Aeneidos.
with these pleasant sweet Uerses, saying: Hic Venus indignonati concussa
dolor,
Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida,
Puberibus caulem folijs, and florae comantem
Purpureo: non illa feris incognita capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae.


Which Uerses are Englyshed thus. But Venus mutch apauld at this her Sons
unworthy pain:
Green Ditainie from Ida sacred mount in Creeti she bringes,
The stalk with tender leaves, and Purple flowers full fresh that springes
An herb to Roebuckes wild, and Beasts not tame right well be known.



Marcellus. I pray you, what is the nature of Helenium, called Enula campana,
which we common plain people call Alacam pane.


Hilarious. Enula ca^pana
THis herb of worthy Memory, has thus ben called, as some do say, from the
battle of Troie: which was before the incarnacion of Gods only son, A
fable perhaps.
our God and sa,+uiour Jesus Christ.1189. And then was named Eleniu^ of the
lamentable and pitiful Tears of Helena, Wife, to Menelaus, A bitter
diffinition.
when she was violently taken away by Paris into Phrigia, having this herb in
her hand. Or as other do say, this noble Helena made a goodly medicine of
this herb, against the deadly Uenome, or poysone of Serpents. And Pliny
reports, that Julius Augustus the Emperor, Auicen secum C^n. cap. Enula
campana.
did eat of this daily with his meat. It preuayleth against poison, it does
comfort the heart, as it is said: Enula campana, reddit praecordia sana.
Aicuen. The wine of this herb, does cleanse the lyghtes, breast, and iunges:
and swallowed with clean Honey, it causes to spyt, and breaks wind. Balm
and this herb be great friends to the heart: and if it be sodden with Rue, it
preuayleth against the colike, and ruptures, which come of wind: it is not
exactly hot and dry. It is very comfortable in bathes, to wash and cleanse the
body from filth, itch, skabbes, and to keep the parts of the body warm, and
to make them read that were pale: and is good for Ischias called Sciatica, or
pains in the huccle bones, applied plaster ways warm. The root is of great
virtue, says Galen Libr. vi. Simplic Medic. If it be champed, says Pliny,
fasting in the morning, it will confyrme and stablysh the teeth: and the oil
is good against the tourments of the guts, which be vexed with wind, and
helps the sinews. If any wild beast fall in any net, dyed with the same
Enula, they shall be poisoned therewyth, as Galen says in his book de Theriaca
ad Pisonem, but some wysemen do think rather it be a fable, than a true
history. And thus I do end of this good herb, whose chyef virtue is in the
root.


Marcellus. What is a Tassill good for, besides the Clothe workers business,
which is in his shop?


Hilarious. Tasell.
A Tasell is called Dipsacus in Greek, by a contrary name, for it receives in
the concauitie and holonesse, dew and rain, to releue the dryness. It is
also called virga pastoris, Sheperdes rod and Fuller Thystell. There be two
kinds, one wild and unprofitable: the other is a good Servant in the common
wealth, for trymming of cloth, and cappes, and it is a styffe Tasell. The
roots and leaves with the pryckes be dry in the second degree: if this herb
be sodden in water to a thickness, and drawn through a strayner, and sodden
again unto a more thycknes this laid upon chappes, or places, opened with
wind, as in March, it heals them. The same put into a Fistula, does heal
it, and takes away Wartes, so say Dioscorides and Pliny,


Marcellus. What do you say of an herb, called Hypericon.


Hilarious, DIoscorides calls this herb, Libr. tertio Capitulo. Cliiii.
Hypericum, Chamaepityn, Androsaemon, or Corion, with such coppye of names:
Hypericon S. John's herb, weeds grass. or woorte.
The seed does partly smell like Rosen: If this herb be chafed and broken
in ones hand* it sends forth a bloody Juice, says he, the seeds be
black, and the flower yellowe, it grows in the Month of July, and August,
and is commonly known in every place: and of temperament or nature, is hot
and dry* Galen says, it provoke vryne: Galen. Libr. viii. Simpl.
medicamen. torum.
all the herb must be put to the medicine, as to salues, then it heals moist
and stinkyng putrifyed sores. And being drunk, either the water, the Syrup,
the juice, or powder, heals Ischias, or the Sciatica, of the same mind is
Dioscorides, But they must drink of the seed, says he, by the space of.xl.
days. And this Sayncte Ihons worte or herb, helps tartians or quartaynes,
drunk with wine: the juice heals any burnte place, and is good for the
stone. Acyrum, Androsaemum and Coris, be kynsfolk. But the seeds of Acyrum
will purge, they differ in form. But for time, savor, place, and nature, they
be much like one unto the other: And are al named among us, saint John's worte
or herb.


Marcellus. OUr fyelds do grow full of Scabious, every mere and balke is full
of it in June: Some do use this Herb for the Pestilence, commonly called the
plague. Wherefore do the learned men, as Dioscorides and Galen say it is good.


Hilarious. SCabiosa so named of old time, because it is given in drink
inwardly, or oyntmentes outwardly, to heal Scabbes, sores, corruption in the
stomach, yea, Scabious for scabbes, it takes the name of the property, the
right name is Stobee or Psora-there be two kinds of it.
and is most fryend among all other herbs, in ye time of the Pestilence, to
drink the water with Mithridatum a mornings. It stops the bloody flixe, and
Hemeroides, and anoyntment made thereof, heals Antrax, called the Carbuncle,
or hot burning Pestilent botch, or fearful sore. Galen says Lib. vii.
Simplicium medicam. that it is hot, dry, and bitter, and has virtue to bind,
dry, and stop, it will join a fresh wound together. The juice dropped into
the eye, heals it, if it be pricked or bleed. It is good to be dropped into
foul running moist ears, it should seem, being both hot and dry, if it be
sodden in wine, and drunk, it dries superfluous humors. Dioscorides calls it
Stoebe, the flowers are like a Blew or white thrummed hatte, the stalk rough,
the upper leaves ragged, and the leaves next the gross roots be playner.
Under whom often times, Frogs will shadow them selves* from the heat of the
day: hoppyng and playing under these leaves, which to them is a pleasant Tent
or pauilion, says Aristophanes, who made a play, wherein Frogs made pastime.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Buglosse? Buglosse.



Hilarious. IT is an herb most temperate, between hot and cold, To comfort^ the
heart.
of an excellent virtue, a comforter of the heart, a purger of Melancholy, a
quieter of the Frensye, a purger of the vryne, wholesome to be drunk in wine,
Frensye.
but most effectually in Syrup, Dioscorides, and Galen do greatly commend
this herb, and to be praise worthy daily experyence proves.


Marcellus. Basil
What is the virtue of Basil.


Hilarious. THis herb is warm in the second degree, having the virtue of
moistnes: Ozimum or sweet oder, or redolent.

Dropsy For the brain and heart.


and if it be sodden in wine, with Spicknard, and drunk, it is good against
dropsyes, wyndes, fleumes, coldness of the heart, hardness of ye stomach. The
savor of Basyll does comfort the brain and heart, the use of this herb in
meats, does decay the sight,


Marcellus Polipodie.
What is the virtue of Polipodye.


Hilarious. IF this Herb be sodden with Beafes, and Mallows, in the broth of a
Hen, Fleume.
and drunk, it will lose the Belly, and cleanse Fleume: the root of this
herb, being dry, and beaten in fine powder, and drawn into the nosethrylles,
helps a disease called Polipus. Galen. and Actu^rius. affirms that.i. of
the roots of Seen, Actua in li. de compo. med.
sodde^ with Polipodye in Mede, or Honye, and so strayned, does purge choler
and melancholye, without pain. It is of the like virtue and effect, sodden in
the broth of a Hen, or Ptisane, and is of order temperate, and relaxyng:


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Burnete, which in Summer time is used to be
put in bowls, and glasses of wine, served at the table?


Hilarious. Potentilla.
IT is very pleasant to be put in clean Cups, Gobblettes, or pieces,
wherein is clean French wine: it makes it pleasant with the Juice of
Lymondes, and good white Sugar: it has golden flowers, green leaves, purple
roots of the out side, and white within, and does dry and bind, and
stops the bloody flyxe very well.


Marcellus. Spinach.
What is the virtue of Spinach,


Hilarious. Mollefying.
It is an herb mutch used in meat, cold and moist in the first degree: it
mollifyeth, and makes soft the belly, it is good for them that be hot and
dry, and ill for flegmatike men,


Marcellus. Vinegar.
What is the virtue of Vinegar?


Hilarious. Vinegar is cold and dry, and is hurtful for them that be
melancoly: but when it is drunk, or powered upon an outward wound, it stops
the blood, The property of Vinegar.
it also kills hot apostumacions of Erisypilas: it is an enemy to the
Sinews, Vinegar and Brimstone sodde^ together, are good for the gout, to wash
it wythall. Vinegar tempered with wolle. To help the gout.
helps a disease called Soda, in the head, applied warm unto the place. It
is good in Sause, for warm and moist men. Vinegar with clean clarifyed Honey,
Pains in the throat.
Penidies, and fair water sodden together, does greatly help the pains of
the throat, lunges, and, stoppyng of the wind, and quenches hot dyseases,
And sharp Vinegar mingled with Salt, Biting of a Dog.
and put upon the biting of a Dog, does heal it: and against poison it is
excellent, chiefly to drink a little thereof against the Pestilence, in a
morning. Against the Pestilence.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Setwall? Setwall.



Hilarious. IT is hoate and dry in the second degree, and is good: the powder
thereof to be drunk, is most of effect against the pestilence, Theophr^stus
of Setwall.
except Mithridatum. It is good against poison, windy, chollerike, and cold
passions of the heart, and does restrain Uomites, the wayght of.viii. G.
does suffice to be drunk in Ale or Wine, upon an empty stomach. Uomites
strayned.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Mellilote? Mellilote. Sertu^a, or kings
croun^



Hilarious. IT has virtue to ripe, and is more hoater than cold, Mellilote
Flaxsede, Rose leaves, Champhire, and womannes Milk, tempered together, do
make a goodly medicine against the hoate inflamacion of the eyes. For the eyes,
stomach and liver.

To help the Spleen.


If this herb be drunk in wine, it does mollifye the hardness of the stomach
and liver: the most excellent plaster against the pains of the Spleen, does
Mesuae describe, which is made of Mellilote. Vinegar, Roses, and Mellilote
together, do help the headache, it applied to the forehead in a cloth,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Time? Time.



Hilarious. IT is vehement of heat, with dryness in the third degree:
Dioscorides says, if it be drunk with Vinegar and Salt, it purges fleume:
sodden with Honye or Mede, it has virtue to cleanse the lunges, and the breast,
matrix, raines, and blader, and kylleth worms. The powder of Time eaten in
Potage, is wholesome for the eye sight: Theophrastus says, there be two kinds
of Time, the one white, the other blackysh. Theop lib. ii. Capi. vi.
There be no flowers growing in fields or garde^s, better beloved of Been,
then the flowers of Time: and that year wherein the greatest plenty of these
flowers be seen, that same year Honey does abound: and when they be scarce,
and not fertyl, the^ there is little, or no good honey yt year. Dioscorides
says in his.iiii. book, that Epithymum is the flower of the harder Time. One
ounce of Time dried, and beat in powder, mingled with.iiii. of Oximel, and drunk
of an empty stomach, before diner and supper, helps the stomach, guts,
matrix, and blader: and is good for them that have red blered eyes, and for
those that be tourmented with the goufe. Galen commends Time in his.vi.
book of Simples, so does Aetius with these commendacions aforesaid. The whiter
the Time is, with white and purple flowers, the better it is, the blacker ye
worse. And thus I do conclude of Time desiring God that we may spend the time
well to his glory, (...) cannot (...) called (...).
and profit of our neighbor: for time cannot be called again, but by little
and little slippes away, they which Godly observe the time, in time to come,
shall receive the fruictes of their own labors, with happy lives, quiet
minds, and blessed ends: whereas the shameful abusers of time, and mysusers
of themselves, although evil spent time, seem well unto them, yet their lives
be wicked, their labor fruictlesse, and their end horrible: as once shall
appear when death does come, which is the end of every time.


Marcellus. Sweet Calamus odoratus.
What is the virtue of sweet Calamus odoratus, called Calamus Aromaticus.


Hilarious, IT is an excellent sweet root, and profitable for men, if the
Poticaries keep it not until it be rotten: it is hot and dry in the
beginning, and to the mids of the second degree. It has power to cleanse, to
dry, and to wast all windines within the body, without hurt. Galen does
greatly commend the savor of it. To waste wind in the body.
They that drink of this root sodden in Wine, shall have remedy of ye white
Morphewe, and recover good colors in their Faces, and this have I often
proved. A remedy for the white Morphewe.
It helps to cleanse, purge, and dry the water that is between the skin, and
the flesh: being drunk with the seeds of Smalage, Parsely, and Fenel, sodden
well together and strained, it helps crampes, and syckenes in the sinews:
being drunk with wine, sodden with Sage and fresh Cappers, it helps the
coldness of the spleen, liver, and raynes. Also it augmenteth seed of
generation, Seed augmented.
and purges terms menstrual if the powder be drunk. What is better in
Wormewoode, or Sage Ale, then Calamus to be drunk, for them which have the
dropsy, as Ascites. etc. It will expulse and put out sores of the blader, and
make the stinkyng vryne to be sweet: truly it is a noble herb, but the
virtue is in the root.


Marcellus. Ginger.
What is the vettue of Gynger.


Hilarious. Auerhoisin v. in coll, Mesue in.iiii. disunt.
It is hot in the third degree, and moist in the end of the first, if it be
vncolloured, white, and not rotten, it is very good, most chiefly if it be
conserved and green, as Mesue says: it makes warm a cold stomach* and
consumes winds, helps evil digestion and makes meat go easily down
into the stomach.


Marcellus. Oil of Olives best.
What is the virtue of Oil made of Olives.


Hilarious. Green oil of Olives, is ye mother of al Oiles which does draw
into her own nature, the virtues of herbs, leaves, To digeste cold herbs.
flowers, fruictes, and roots: sweet Sallet oil is wholesome to digest cold
herbs, and Sallettes, tempered with sharp Vinegar and Sugar: new Oil does
moist, Anerhois commended oil in quinto de ouis* Oil of roses.
and warm the stomach, but old oil corrupts the stomach and cleaves to
the Lunges, and makes one hoarse. Oil of Roses, and sharp Vinegar tempered
together, is good to anoint the foreheds of them, Against Frensies.
that be troubled with extreme heat, or frensye: so that Buglosse be sodden in
their Possetale, or else drink the Syrupes of Endive, or Buglosse. There be
many goodly virtues in compounded oils, both to make hot, and to cool the
body, when it is extreme hot, as the great learned man Mesue, has descrybed
in his Antidotarie. Of oils, you shall have plenty followyng.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Rosemary. Rosemarye.



Hilarious. ROsemarye is an herb of great virtue, hot and dry: sodden in
wine, and drunk before meat it does heal the Kings evil, or pains in the
throat, as Dioscorides and Galen say. Kings evil
The sauoure of it does comfort the brain and heart, the flowers of Rosemary
is an excellent Cordial, called di Anthos, and is good after Fevers, or for
Mela^choly men. The brain comforted.
And ye seeds drunk in wine, help the falling sickness, and pains of the
breast.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Agrimonye. Agrimonie.



Hilarious. DIoscorides says, that if this herb with Swines grease, be
stamped together, and laid upon an old rotten sore being hot, Old sore.
it has Virtue to heal it. The seed of this herb drunk with Wine, it is
good against the bytyng of Serpents, stoppyng of the Liver, and bloody flixe.
Biting of Serpents.
The Syrup of it is good to open the liver,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Mugworte. Mugworte.



Hilarious. MUgwort, Fetherfew, and Tansy, be very hot and dry in the second
degree: Mugwort, Spurge, and Oil of Almo^ds, tempered plasterwyse, and applied
cold to the sick payned stomach, will bring health. It is good in bathes, A
payned stomach.
says Galen, it is wholesome for women: it cleanses, warmeth, comforts the
matrix, and breaks the stone. Pliny says, Breakyng the stone.
it is good against biting of Serpents, and wholesome for trauayling Men, if they
carry it, it lyghtneth them from wearines. Tansye does kill and cast Worms
from Children, drunk with Wine: Killing worms in children
a cold plaster stamped, and laid upon the Bellye of a Woman, whose Child
is dead within her, it will separate the dead Child, A present help of a
dead child
from the living Mother. Galen says in his syxt book of Simples, there be
two kinds of Mugworte, The one is commonly known to us, To neese,
the other grows nere the sea side: they be both of singular virtues, their
waters being stilled, their Syrupes prepared, be very wholesome for the
corrupted, or stopped Matrix, and also the herb is good for bathes, in such
purposes for Women. This herb was first found of a Noble Queen, named
Artemisia, wife to Mausolus King of Caria, who was both learned in herbs and
plants, chaste of Life, comely of person: and so loved her husband, that when
he was dead, she made a Sepulcher, which was so excellent, costlye, and rich,
that it was compted to be one of the wonders, and greatest maruailes of the
World, she called this herb Latifolia, and Tenuifolia, after her own name,
Artemisia.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Parsely, and Saxifrage?


Hilarious. THey have virtue to break the stone: Parsely is hot in the second
degree, and dry in the midst of the third. The seed drunk with white wine,
provoke the menstrual terms, as Dioscorides says: also Smallage has the
like virtue, as further appears,


Marcellus.. Now say on, and show to me, my good Master, I pray you of
Elleborus the white, and of Elleborus the black.


Hilarious. ELleborus Candidus. which causes vomites, very strong and
dangerous for conuulsion, is called Albus, because the root is whitish, it
has long stalks, reddish leaves, with ribs in them, in the form of Planten
leaves, many yellowe flowers growinge upon stalks by themselves, and growing
in cold Grounds. The roots must be gathered in Harvest: and this herb is
hot and dry, in the third degree. And is perilous to be given, to women with
child, old folks and Children, or to tender people, or in Winter, but in
summer only, and before supper. But one dragme, put in Milk or Furmentie: but
first do thus. Cut a Radish root in the great end, cleave it ouerthwarte:
then put your Elleborus Albus into it one whole night, How to correct Elleborus
albus.
or twelve hours, then press it hard, this will not only take the venom from
this Elleborus, but also give it virtue, that it shall not hurt nature, or put
the body into danger, when vomites approach. This will help the falling
syckenes, Vertigo, Melancholy, madness, white Leprosy, winds in the guts,
Dropsye, Timpany, Goutes Quartens, Coughes, and many such like; and provoke
neesynge. etc.

Elleborus niger, is called Melampodion, not only for the blacknes, but of the
inuenter who was called Melampus, Of Eleborus niger.
a keeper of Goats, It is hot and dry in the third degree, and is planted in
the Garden, and is called Bears foot: black, rough, hearie roots, like the
bush upon the breast of a Foul, which we call the Cock of a Turkaye. It has
all the virtues that the white has, and more: three penny weight in powder
drunk, casts forth Worms, cleanses fleume, melancholye, and dropsye. And it
will cleanse the matrix, and expulse, or cast forth the dead Child. It is good
for Pessaries for Women: the Juice is good for to be put into the cares against
defnes. In plasters, it kills worms: the juice thereof helps horses of the
bottes, and Swine that be infected. Or else if it be put into their ears, it
will help them, when they be payned in their heads. No beasts dare eat
thereof it is so bitter, nor fowls, but only Quayles: As Aristotle, Auicen,
Galen, and Lucretius affirm. These herbs be wholesome in outward plasters, to
cleanse melancholy, and to dry fleume.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Centaury, or fell terrae?


Hilarious. PLINY says, that the syrup of this herb, drunk with a little
Vinegar and Salt, does cleanse the body: the Leaves and flowers be of great
virtue, to be sodden and drunk against all raw humors of gross fleumes,
watery, or windy. It does cleanse cruent or bloody matter, within the bodies of
men or women: the powder of this herb, is good in pessaries for women, causing
the dead child, to depart from the mother. And is wholesome against the
Pestilence, in the time of Winter: and is hoate and dry, and of two kinds, and
heals both old and new wounds, as Galen writes ad Papiam, of the virtue
of little Centaury. This herb was found with his virtue, by that old noble
clarke Chyron Centaurus, the inuenter of Herbs, Astronomy, and Music.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Penicialle?


Hilarious. IT is an herb of mutch virtue and profit, hot and dry in ye
third degree: Dioscorides says, if this herb be sodden with Honey, and Aloes,
and drunk, it will cleanse the Liver, and purge the blood most excellently: it
helps also the lunges. Simeon Sethj says, if a woman drink it with white
Wine, it will also provoke, and cleanse the terms me^struall. And is also a
very wholesome Potherbe, and mutch used among Pudding makers: which was
invented of some Physician, because of the warmnes and goodness against
melancholy. The juice with Vinegar, put into ye nose, is good against the
Fransy, or Lunatike sycknes.


Marcellus. What is Lichen called Lyuerworte, that grows in Wells, dark
cold places, and rocks?


Hilarious. WIthout all doubt Lichen does so grow in darck places, and is called
Lyuerwort: for it is good against the sickness of the Liver, Hepatica liche^
called Lyuerworte.
it is cold and dry. Yet it has a watery humor, it is unpleasant in savor,
it stops the bloody flixe, it heals a ryngworme, says Dioscorides: and
stamped with Honey, it helps the yellow Iau^dice, Diosco. lib. 4. Cap. 48.
if the mouth and Tongue be anointed therewith. The juice stops wounds from
bleding: Galen and Pliny agree to the same.


Marcellus. What say you then of the herb, belonging to the Lunges, called
Lungworte?


Hilarious. LEonardus Fuchsius says, Pulmonaria does grow out of the Oak tree,
or stony places, Lungworte because it is like ye lunges of man.
having soft leaves, the vpperside green, and the nether whitish, with little
small bladers upon ye crumpled leaves, and the whole lump of this herb, says
he, is like the Lunges of mankind. It is drying and binding, and not cold and
moist, as some do affirm: and the reason is, because it grows from the Oak,
which is of ye same nature, and temperament. And this herb does close new
wounds together: most chiefly it helps the Lunges, or spitting of blood,
and stops terms immoderate, Super Diosco. lib. 4. Cap. 48
and the bloody flux. Mary Matthiolus says, that Lungwort has leaves like to
Buglosse, sharp, rough, white spots, purple flowers, very like to the great
Dogs tongue. It has the same virtue yt the other has, and works one
effect: therefore it is no error, to call them both a like, Lung worte, or
Pulmonaria. Specially, because two great learned men, so call them of their
elders and virtues. The last Lungwort. did Iulianus Marostica, Iulianus
Marostica his strupe for ye lunges.
a noble Physician use to sees in water, to the one half, putting in Sugar,
and made a simple syrup thereof to give his pacients, to stop spitting of
blood, and to heal sores of the lunges.


Marcellus. What say you then to Mercury, what is the virtue thereof, and why
is it so named?


Hilarious. THis ancient invented herb, was found of Mercurius who flourished
about.164. years, Mercury.
before Christ's birth. He was ye son of Maia, this man was afterward called
one of ye Gods, for his wondrous wisdom, and invention of Music, and other
Arts. He among al other herbs, so loved this, that he for ye singular goodness
thereof, called it after his own name Mercury. Whereof there be two kinds,
Male and Female: the first has blackishe leaves, Mercury helps conception.
the second whitishe: they be hoate and dry in the first degree. Dioscorides
says, that these does move the benefit of the Belly: they be very good for
women after their natural terms be past, to drink either in syrup, or
decoction, to help conception. The male Mercury for men, the female for women.
This Mercury is very good in Clisters laxatiue: we call Rumex Mercury, which
has golden Sands upon the backesyde of the leaves, which is also solutiue,
and beneficial for the belly. Sodden with Mallows, it purges the Belly, and
expulseth fleume, but it anoyeth the stomach, as says Pliny.


Marcellus. Mallows so called, ab emollienda aluo nomen traxit, it takes his
name of mollifying the belly: Mallows.
and they be good with Lettice, parboyled and eaten in fine Sallet Oil, to
mollify the belly. Mallovves for nature be very good,
To relaxe the belly, and purge the blood.



Hilarious. DIoscorides and Galen say, there be two kinds of them, one of the
garden, which is great with flowers like Roses, Galen. Li. vij. simplis.
called Bismalua, and the lesser kind of the field and wood: this herb is
commonly known. The more that Mallows be watery the lesser they be of virtue,
and the dryer the seeds are, the more they be of strength. And Mallows be
moist and slimy of nature, relaxing the belly, but hurtful for the stomach,
says Dioscorides: the leaves with Salt and honey eaten, heal the pains of the
throat, called Angina. But used in wounds or sores, put in no Salt, they
heal the stinging of Bees: they be excellent good in Clisters, to purge the
belly, raynes, and stone. The root sodden and drunk, and eftsoons vomited,
does prevail against poison: the leaves stamped, and tempered in oil, do take
running ulcers from the head. And sodden in vryne or piss, do take away
skurfe, skabbes. etc. from the Face. The root sodden soft, and laid warm
upon a Woman's breast, A medicine for women's breasts.
with black woolle, does heal the same, when it aketh, burns, swells, or
is hard. So will the leaves, one handful sodden in Oil and Wine, purge
Women, says Pliny. The leaves sodden in Wine, warm applied to the mouth of
the matrix, after deliverance of the child, do stay the falling down, and
makes soft. They are good against the Fever, called Sacer ignis, the holy
fire, which we call saynct Anthonies fire, sodden in Oil and Vinegar, and
applied to the member, where as it burns. The Seeds drunk in Wine, do
cleanse the Stomach from noysomnes, and rotten stinking fleume and melancholy.
The Juice of Mallows, often times drunk, helps the falling evil, and also
cleanses ye Lunges, and causes one to speak clear, says Simeon Sethi.

There is also an other Mallowe, called Althaea, Althos does signify medicine,
or remedy: this Mallowe so named, is excellent in virtue. Althos do signify
medicine
I think it to be that, which we call the French Mallowe: the leaves and the
flowers be hot and dry, in the first degree, and so be the roots in the
beginning of the second degree. Sodden with Swines grease, Goose grease, and
Terebintin applied to the belly, do aswage the grievous swelling, burninge, or
inflation thereof. The same medicine does open things venomous within the
members, that be stopped, says Dioscorides. Sees the root in wine, Dioscori.
lib. 3 Cap. 146.
and drink this Wine, it provoke vryne, cleanses the Raynes, eases the
stone, and is good for Ischias, called Sciatica, ruptures, and the bloody
flixe. Galen says Lib. vj. Simpli. medicamen. the Seeds be good for the stone
and Raynes: the roots sodden, do stop the bloody flixe. Theophrastus says, to
be drunk in sweet Wine, it helps ruptures, and the cough, and with Oil, it
heals ulcers. And sodden with flesh it does conglutinate, or join together
things separate within the body: and yet it digesteth, loses, and concocteth
crude matter, says Galen* The leaves sodden in white Wine, quench the heat,
and abate the swellyng of a woman's breast. Who is able to give more
commendation or praise to any herb, than to this herb, for the singular
medicine called Dialthaea, which is in ye book of Co^poundes? Mallows be
commended of all good Writers. Plinius says, that the Mallows in Arabia,
Plini. Lib. 19. Cap. 4.
within seven months be fertile, and lusty in growing, that they be as big
as staves forthwith, he calls them trees. Further he writes a marvelous
history of a Mallowe, which was monstrous to behold. There was says he, in
Mauritania, sometime a garden (where Hysperides which were the.iij. daughters
of Atlas, which kept ye garden) wherein grew Orenges, called the Golden Aples,
taken away by Hercules: in this Garden grew a Mallowe, twenty foot long: and
no man was able to fadome the same. Such like Mallows grow in Inde, and thus
I end of Mallows, good friend Marcellus.


Marcellus. Cursed fellows, and taunting Marchaunts, will say in derision,
skorne, and mockage, when they be angry with others: I care not for them, no,
not a Rushe: is a Rushe of so small an estimacion, and nothing worth, as it is
counted?


Hilarious. RUshes do grow in Fennes, and dry grou^des, and be commonly known.
And I my self did know a Rushe growing in a Fenne side, by Oxforde in
Suffolk, that might have spent three hundred Marks by year. etc. Was not
this Rushe of good estimation? Sir Thomas Rushe.
A few such Rushes be better, than many great Trees and Bushes. But
Marcellus thou doste not know that country, where sometime I did dwell, at a
place called Blaxall, near to that Rushe Bushe: I would all Rushes within this
Realm, were as rich in value: it would make a flourishing common wealth, and
mutch plenty, no Beggars, but riches, and a golden World.


Marcellus. THe old proverb is, Wishers and Woulders, be no good
householders: Poverty is better among the common people, than abundance of
riches.
And if there were such plenty* face well labor, art, learning, and
obedience: But need is the prick and whip, that causes the Plowman to
travel, the Mariner to sail, the Scholemayster to teach, and to conclude,
every man to labor in his calling, through which labor, and industry, the
teaching of youth, the government of age, the building of Cities, the
mayntenance of good laws, the rewarding of virtues, the punishment of vices,
the defending of enemies, and rewardinge of freindes, and obedience to Princes
be maynteyned. Whereas through such abundance, all were cast away, and every
man would be a master. Every one would disdain service, and so at length, all
should be turned into slavery, If harpstringes were of one degree,
unpleasant were that harmony.
and the harmony of the Common wealth, should be changed into horror, whereas
no order is. Example, if all the Pipes in ye Organes, were of one tune, or one
degree, unpleasant were that Music. But here will I stop, and lay a straw,
and fall into my byas again. I pray thee answer me, what a very Rushe is,
which grows in the field?


Hilarious. COmmonly known, and of sundry kinds, as Rushes growing in Rivers,
and running streams: as there be great plenty round about the Isle of Ely, my
native country, whereof the plain People make Mattes, and Horse collers of
the greater Rushes, and of the smaller they make lights or Candelles for the
Winter. Rushes that grow upon dry grounds, be good to strewe in Halles,
Chambers, and Galleries to walk upon, Old Rushes and old courtiers, be past
pleasure.
defending apparel, as traynes of Gowns, and Kertles from dust. Rushes be
old Courtiers, and when they be nothing worth, then they be cast out of the
doors, so be many that do tread upon them. A Rushe is called Iuncus, that is
a Bull Rushe: the Rushe bearing black seeds, is called Atrifer, whose seeds
drunk in Medicine, do stop flixe, and terms immoderate: Libr. viij. simplici.
medica.
and the same seeds be good for to cause sleep. Galen speaking of Iuncus,
says that some bare seed, which is good in medicine, that is, to bring
sleep. The other that have no Seeds, be unprofitable. Dioscorides says, the
seeds of ye Rushe of Inde do bring sleep, used in pocion.

There is also Iuncus odoratus, of two sorts, Pliny does call the first
Triangularis, it smells as sweet as the Rose, when it is broken. An other
Rotudus, the Apothecaries do call it Squinantum, and grows in Africa, Diosc.
li. pri. Cap. 16.
but yet Dioscorides is of this mind, that the best grow near to Babylon:
because this Squinantum is an English herb, used only of the Apothicaries,
we have it like Ote straw, and is called Iuncus. The flower is Anthos, as all
flowers be so named in Greek: this herb, flower, or root, drunk with Peper,
do help the Dropsy, being used: and is good for the lunges, spleen, and
Raynes. The root of Squinans herb, is hot and dry, and is good against
wind, collike, dropsy, fleume or crude raw matter in the body, or any member
of the same beaten into powder, and drunk in wine.


Marcellus. OH how sweet and pleasant is Woodbinde, in Woods or Arbours,
after a tender soft rain: and how friendly does this herb, Woodbynde.
if I may so name it, embrace the bodies, arms and branches of trees, with
his long winding stalks, and tender leaves, opening or spreding forth his
sweet Lillies, like ladies fingers, among the thorns or bushes? Is this
Woodbinde so profitable, as pleasant? I pray you tell me.


Hilarious. WOodbinde is called Siluae matter, Caprifolium, Lilium inter spinas,
Sundry names of Woodbinde, as Periclimenon, because it windeth about ye next
trees and Bushes, that it grows unto.
Periclymenon. This herb is so commonly known, that I need not discribe the
form thereof: for thou have done well thereof thy self. But to the virtue of
this Woodbinde, in temperament or nature, it is vehemently cuttinge and drying,
as Galen says, Lib. 8. Simplic. medicamentorum, the leaves be sower. The oil
of this is good to anoynte any part of the Body, that is numme or very cold:
and the water is good to be drunk against pissing of blood. And also the
Syruppe is good for the Lunges, or one dragme drunk in wine, is very good for
the Spleen, that is stopped, or corrupt Lunges. And there is nothing (in
oyntmentes for wounds of the head) better than this Woodbinde: and Woodbinde
water is wholesome for sores in the Throat and mouth. And it is said, that
women, which use to drink plentifully, or mutch of this water, are by the use
thereof made barren.


Marcellus. THere is a long winding weed, having the property of Woodbynde, in
spreding, winding, and imbrasing, or lasing, Bushes, branches, and hedges: the
Leaves somewhat like Iuie, and Flowers like to white Cups, or Belles, what
call you it?


Hilarious. The Bell woodbinde Smilax.

Dioscorides Lib. 4. Cap. 35


THis is called Helxine, Smilax, or Campanella, or the Bell Wodbinde, Antonius
Musa says, the leaves in likeness, color and form, be between Mercury and
Plantein. But Dioscorides says, they be like Iuie, and the Juice of the leaves
drunk, or sodden in Wine, do make the Belly laxatiue: and nothing else can I
report, but that it is noisome among herbs and Flax.


Marcellus. WHat is the virtue of Senturion, which grows almost in every
Meadow, in May, and June? It has sweet pleasant purple Flowers, and of diverse
colors, and is soon gone after June comes in.


Hilarious. Testiculi canis Dogs stones
THis herb has sundry names, as testiculus Canis, or Orchis, or in the Greek
Cynosorchim, Serapias, or Dogs stones. In the Byshoprike of Durisme, in a
place called Warrell shyre, the people do call it Crowfoote, although
Crowfoote be another herb. This Testiculus, or saving your reuence Ballocke
Flower, has two stones, and named Orchis, an other three stones, which is
called Triorchia, with many spotted leaves, like a Snake. These be of kinds,
Libr. iij. in Cap. 124.125 126.127.
Male, and Female, great and little, of both sorts. Some will have Satyrion,
which you call Senturion and Dogs stones, both one: but they do err, and
mistake the matter, that make no distinction between them. For there is
distaunce between them, by the judgment of the Eye: although that in virtue,
they be not mutch unlike, and thus says Petrus, Andraeas, Matthiolus, upon
Dioscorides and he does prove it by this reason: the roots of Dogs stones be
like other beasts stones, Satyrj are beasts having a head like a man, and
body like Goats and are named Gods of the woods, and they first found this
herb of Venus, to stir up carnal lust.
they be long, two ha^ging one higher then the other, that which hangs
beneath is full, and will sink in water, the other stone is hollow, and will
swim. And this conclusion did one master Ihon Sharman, an ancient good
Practicioner of Northfolke, show me long since: but the stones of the Satyr be
round without green, within very white, when the rind is of, and swelled
great, leaued like to ye garden Lilly, but smaller, bending to the ground: sone
broken, and three leaves in number. Then there is an other of the kind of
testiculi called Palma Christi, whose roots be like hands, with fingers Auicen
calls them golden fingers* and be of nature of the greater testicles. The
greater testicles be hot and moist, and eaten, either in Goats milk, Dia, or
Syrup, they will provoke abundantly to Venus. But the little kind, eaten
either whole or in powder, do quench, cool, and withstand the said Venus: and
brings to dame nature, cold, trembling Saturn, which is cold and dry. But
Galen says, Satyrium or Satires stones, be hot and moist, sweet to taste
upon, and do as the great testicles* and more abounduantly, and be good
against running of the raynes, and consumption. etc. Gieuen to the frentike
body, or one whose sinews be weak in hand, in Polsy it helps them: The
seed..j. fine in powder drunk in wine, morning and evening, or diner and
supper, used a long time, heals the falling evil. Nicolaus Florentinus
says, it helps the quartayne, and it stops the bloody flixe, sodden in
red wine, and heals stinking ulcers, made in a Plaster. Diasatirion is made
of this, which is of virtue most excellent, as appears in the compoundes.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Ligusticum, called Louage, with the long
black seeds, and long white roots?


Hilarious THe herb is great, with large branches, Fuchsius.
stalk and leaves smelling mutch like to Smalage, but mutch sweeter: it is
called Ligusticum, because it was first found in Liguria, Liguria is a part of
Italy from the hill Apeninus, unto the Tuscum Sea. Dios. li. 3. ca. li
and we call it Louage here in England, ye Italians call it Ligustico: the
root, herb, and seed, bruised and sodden in wine, or in the decoction of
Ptisane, or Barley water, will cleanse the lunges, open the vessels of the
vryne, provoke terms, or secret infirmities, heal wounds: being sodden and
applied to Phlegmon, or hardness in any outward member, the sore is made
softer. Eritius Cordus calls this common Angelica, but Manardus Epist. lib.
xij. Epist. iiij does call it Alexander. Ruellius calls it Louage Galen. lib.
7. simplici.
And warm applied in the manner of a plaster to the Belly of a Woman whose
Child is dead, eftsoons it is sent forth from natures most secret Chamber.
And the seed finely beaten in powder, put in to some wholesome thin broth, or
wine of a percing nature, does skower the Raynes, cleanse the spleen* and amend
the liver, expulseth the secondes after the birth of children, and dryueth
forth wind. Pliny says, that the seeds will stop the belly, and is good
against the biting of Serpents. etc. But the Seed eaten alone, provoke
vomites, and sometime therefore, says he, it must be given with Rewe, and so
the seed is good for the dropsy. The roots sodde^ and the decoction drunk,
is very wholesome for the Femenine kind, for ye matrixe, belly, precordials,
and breast: It warmeth and makes good concoction. Thus I conclude of this
Ligusticum. But Galen says, there be two kinds of them, the one he calls
Smirnium: the other does grow in the mount of Amano, called Hipposellinum,
which is called Smalage,


Marcellus. What say you to Apium, which is called Smalage?


Hilarious. THis herb is named Hipposellinum, the great Persiley of Macedon,
The virtue of Smalage, Louage, Alexander, Persiley is to open places, which
st^p urine and wind.
which we name Smalage: other say, it is Olus atrum, which is Alexander. Some
call it Smyrnion, Marcellus and Brasauolus do seem either to mistake, or else
untruly to report of this Hipposellinum. For they say the leaves be roughe,
and the root black: But Dioscorides Lib. iij. Cap. lxiiij. does say, the
root is white and sweet, the leaves be not rough. But Galen made very little
distinction, between Hippofellinum, and Smyrnium: but this is one kind of
Persiley, the horse Persiley, or the Mountain Persiley. Seseli, Smyrnium,
Imperatoria, Elaphoboscum, and Alexander, The virtues of Persileis.
al these seem to be Perseleys. Some greater, and of more puissancy than
other: some called Wyld, some tame. As garden Persiley, mountain water, wood,
or hedge Perseley* etc. and all these have power both in root, stalk, leaf,
and seed, to open the raynes, bladder, and to be put in every Antidotarie,
that moves vryne, breaks stone, or cleanses grauel. Or against collike, or
stopping of the spleen, with abundance of melancholy. Sodden in oil any of
these roots, or Seeds drunk, they cast out strong venom or poison: but the
seed is the strongest part of the herb. They be good to be put into Clisters
for the stone, or torment of the guts: and in pultases, for swelling of the
legs or arms. And all these be good against the stinging of Serpents, and
fevers: swelling in the stomach, or dropsy, both in plaster, Clister, or
drunk with clean white wine, or Ptisan.


Marcellus. There is a stinking weed called Dogs tongue, wherefore is the
same weed good?


Hilarious. IT is no weed, but a very good herb, and is called Lingua Canis:
Ruellius and Fuchsius do err says that famous man Matthiolus upon
Dioscorides, Cynoglossum. Dogstongue. But Licopsis is a kind of Dogstongue,
and called Anchusis. Dioscorides. Lib. 4. Cap. 24.
in calling Dogstongue Lycopsin, for it is not so named, but Dogstongue. And
there be ij. kinds of them, as says Matthiolus in Dioscoridem, lib. 4. cap.
12^. which about Adryans days the Emperor, were found in ye sands, near unto
Rome. This kind of Dogstongue, has neither stalk, flower, nor seed, but out
of one root, there springs leaves, low by the ground, in the compass of a
little we will, like Bean leaves, somewhat white, and with tender soft wolle.
This herb, says Pet^us Andreas Matthiolus, is like a widow having no
children. But there is an other Dogstongue, which has rough seeds, with
pricks in the mids like unto Targets: which seed sodden and drunk, heals
tertians and quartens, and these smell like each other, and be cold and dry in
the second degree. And stamped with old Swynes grease, do make a plaster for
a Dogs biting: It heals old and new cruent bloody wounds. And mingled
with Honey, it preserves the hair from falling, and will quench burninges,
tempered with Uynegar, and sodden in red wine, either drunk, or made in a
plaster. It stops the bloody flixe, Fuchsius.
and restrayneth Gonorrhaea, or distillation of the Seed, called nature,
ulcers, skabbes, pox, or such like. But the first Dogstongue is the best to
make Pills wythall, for the reume and Catarre. Galen makes no mention of
this, but Dioscoris and others do.


Marcellus. Dios. li. 4. Cap. 127.
What is the virtue of Hippoglossum, which is called Laurus, or Horse tongue, as
I have heard say, by one that read me a piece of Dioscorides?


Hilarious. THis herb, or small stirpe, is called Laurus Alexandrina, or
Daphne, the English people call it the laxatiue Laureola. It dies not in
Winter, it shyneth like Iuie, or Bays, but is whitish. It bears the berry
within the leaves, red: it is hoate and dry of nature. If..4. or.vj. be sodden
with Symphytum, called Cumphory, in Wine, and so strayned and drunk, it will
purge the belly. A little powder of this, is gieuen to children in potage, to
take away the abundance of humidity, and kill worms. It makes quick or speedy
deliverance, in childbirth, secondes, and terms drunken three penny wayght,
two or three times says Pliny: Galen affirms that it forces vryne. The
leaves stamped, and bound to the head, Lib. 4. Ca. 127
take away the pain, says Dioscorides. With this herb, did that most noble
victorious Alexander, sometime triumph, and his Captains, he wearyng the
Diadem. And sometime the best herb of this kind, did grow upon the Mountain
Ida, near to the dolorous City of Troy in Phrigia.


Marcellus. What say you to Sanicula, called Diapensia, Sauicula and
quinquifolium
or the great five leaued leaves, and other five leaued herbs?


Hilarious AMong the herbs for wounds, this is mutch praised, and does heal
wounds equally, with any other healing flower, root, or leaf. The Tops of
this herb, are not mutch unlike Straburies, somewhat whitishe, and is called
Sanicula a sanandis vulneribus, of healing wounds. Sanicle heals wou^des.
It grows in dark places in May, and is bitter, hoate, and dry in the
second degree: the syrup or juice of this herb, is very good to be gieuen to
wounded men, Women, and children, in small Wine, or their other drink. For it
takes effect both to heal, both within and without the body: if it be applied
hoate, upon a swelling part or member, it will assuage the same speedely. The
juice thereof is good also for Oxen, milche Kyene, Sanicle is good for Horses
and Kyen.
and horses that be bruised, or wounded: given either in their drinks, or
applied to the hurt member, or place. There is no speedier remedy to help the
lunges, than this herb sodden, and the decoction drunk upon an empty
stomach. And what soever Cumphorie, called Symphyton, can do in wou^des, the
same can Sanicle called Sanicula^ It stops the bloody flixe, or helps him
that has taken to strong a purgacion, and stops the immoderate running of
the raynes: now besides this Diapensia, whereof we have spoken, there be her
kinsfolks, called Pentaphillon, or Quinquefolium, which has five leaves in
number. There be three sorts of them, the great, the mean, and the little:
these be commonly known rather by the forms among the common people, than by
their singular goodness, which in deed they have. As Dioscorides says. lib
4. Cap. 38. the roots well sodden, and the same decoction drunken, helps the
tertian, and the Mouth washed warm with the same, and so kept in the mouth, it
takes the pains from the teeth, and stink, filthe, and ulcers from the same,
and is wholesome in a gargarisme, A good gargarisme, to wash the throat*
for pains in the throat. And if the leaves be well sodden, or the juice,
with Endive or Planten water and the same drunk eight days, helps the
yellowe Iau^dice: in quotidians and quartens, this herb helps sodden in
posset Ale. Also for the falling sickness, because it is hot and dry, in the
third degree: sodden in Vinegar, it kills a Tetter or ringworme, it heals
the fistula, tempered with Salt and Honey, and stamped together, and put into
the place or hole: The syrup of this, drunk.xij. times, heals Angina, or
swelling in the throat, and stops the immoderate flux of the Belly, and
terms.

Fragraria Comaron or the Straubery, of the swee^e odor, so named.
Master Andrewe Matthiolus, in his commentary upon Dioscorides, coupleth
Fragraria, called Strauberies, with these five leaued herbs. Although the said
Straubery have but three leaves, cold in the first degree, and dry the second.
The leaves and roots, will heal Wounds and ulcers, and a flux of blood, and
terms, it provoke urine, and helps the liver. If they be sodden in clean
white Wine, they do cleanse the raynes and bladder: and will cleanse the mouth,
and strength the teeth, when they be lose. The distilled water of Strauberies,
will cleanse the dark mistes of the eyes: and also quench heat in the face, To
cleanse the face.
and take away red spots. And the same water is wholesome to delay Wine at
dinner and supper, specially for cholerike persons in Summer. The berry it
self being ripe, is partly hoate and dry, so some learned do affirm, but
being not ripe, they be cold and dry. These ripe beries strawed into clean
clarifyed Honey, and put in the powder of white Peper, For a short wind.
do help them, which have short wind, and pain or strayghtnes in their
breast or do use mutch sighing, says Paulus Aegineta. There be two kinds of
Strauberies, the greater, and the lesser. Also Rubus idaeus, allow Bramble,
called Ribes, or Raspes. a bery like to the Straubery: these beries stop a
flixe, sodden in red Wine, and drunk oftentimes. Nothing may be compared to
them in that case, and they quench saynct Antonies fire. The leaves stamped,
For to heal the Hemeroydes.
says Dioscorides. Lib. 4. Cap. 34. do heal the Hemeroydes, to anoint the
place therewith: and also the virtue is to cleanse and dry. And this fruit or
leaf, does heal the sores in the mouth, and do close wounds new made with
any weapon: and this fruicte stamped, and applied plaster ways to the
stomach, helps presently Cardiaca passio, and hoate pains in the stomach,
For Cardiaca passio.
and the burning pains of the eyes, when the said eyes be almost starte forth,
as they term them, through great vomits, fall, footebaule, leaping. etc. And
they also kill these foul ulcers, that crepe through ye skin, growing upon the
head. The flowers of them, with fine clarified Honey, put into the eye, do
clear the sight, and quench heat, and dry up water contained in them. For
red eyes.
And of these Ribes called Raspis, be two kinds, the one with sharp pricks,
which be not so effectual and good, as the other with tender pricks. And thus
I end of these beries, which have the virtue of the Mulbery. Dioscorides.
being an Heathen man, served his prince in battle, and yet learned ye
knowledge of herbs: But many professing the name of Christ, will neither serve
(...) one, or learn the other, servants to idleness, and abusers of time.
And thus does that old famous Egyptian Knight and most learned man in herbs
that ever was, without all comparison, called Phacas or Dioscorides write, he
was subject to Cleopatra the queen of Egypt, and to Antonius, and learned to
know herbs in their kinds most truly, and commended these herbs and berries
aforesaid, whose works be greatly advanced, and most cunningly handled now,
by that famous learned Physician Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus Senensis. Anno
salutis. 1558.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Arum, which we in English call
Cockowepintell? And some call it the burning herb, or dragons mace?


Hilarious. THis herb is commonly known, it grows in the Springetime, Aron
called Cucko prick.
leaued like Dragons, in moist and dry places, and of natuure is hot and dry
in the first degree, and so it is without doubt in the third degree. The virtue
of this Leaf, Seed, or root, tempered with Cowes dunge, is good to make a
plaster against the Gout, says Dioscorides. Pliny says the seeds thereof
fynely beaten in powder and tempered with clean oil, help the soreness of
the ear dropped in, the juice heals polipus in the nose: and mingled with
clean Honey, it cleanses the darkness of the eyes: and sodden hot with oil,
it heals Hemeroydes, as Pliny says, as I have proved the virtue thereof
often times.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Maydenhayre, Called Tricomanes?


Hilarious. IT is an herb between hot and dry, if it be sodden in Wine,
Maide^ hair.
it breaks the stone: it cleanses the matrixe, brings down the secondes,
as Dioscorides and Galen say, the syrup of this helps ye spleen and lunges,
the best does grow upon hard rocks. Great plenty grows about Chiueat hills
in the North, called Ordo Lucis: so does Ad^antum, which is of the same virtue.


Marcellus. THat herb which you do call Symphytum or Cumphory, you said
before, Saniculum is equal with it. By this I do gather that this Cumphory is
then equal with Saniculum. Wherein is their equality, in savor, taste, or
other virtues, I pray you tell me?


Hilarious Neither like in form nor taste. Symphytum. Solidago. Cumphory.
Consolida. of the healing a comfortable herb so named.
First in form the leaves be like Buglosse, yea, or rather to Solanum, called
the great night shade leaves, the roots great and black without, and white
within, flowers yelow. Secondly, the savor and taste not pleasant, but ye
virtues agree in this point, to heal wounds, yea broken bones, because they
have power to draw forth, and also to glue the separated flesh together: it
grows in Rocks, even so does it in Gardens, it is of two kinds. etc. and is
hot and dry in the second degree. This herb will draw forth filth from the
Lunges, if it be sodden in sweet Water, and so drunk. And will effectually
stop the blouddy flixe in men, and menstruall terms, when they do abound in
women immoderatly. To heales broase, or a fall.
This herb assuredly does heal men, when they be fallen from some high place,
if the fall be not deadly. The like it does to al manner of beasts. Chirurgens
cannot miss it. Consider also, that there is a lesser kind of Symphytum, of
the third sort called Co^nsolida minor, which is of the virtue of healing, both
within and without the body, and for all broken bones, and does heal foul
sores in the pudent, or secret places of men and Women. These be sufferant
medicines in meats for the wounded men. These be herbs of great virtues, and
excellent in goodness for mankind: Consolido to heal,
and may well proceed of the verb Consolido, of healing ye which was broken,
or joining together things separated, to comfort or make them safe, either in
Oil, Salve, Plaster* etc. And thus I do end of this Symphytum.


Marcellus What is the nature of an herb, called Scilla or Squilla, or the Sea
Onyon?


Hilarious. THere be two kinds, which of nature be hot and dry, in the second
degree: and yet of a merueilous nature. For the outward rynde is very hot and
bitter, and the core is very cold: therefore they must be cast both away,
after the said Scilla is either roasted, baken, or sodden. For else it is evil,
and hurtful to nature, and thus it must be prepared. Cut of the leaves, which
be like unto the leaves of Aloes, but not so groase. The fruit is as great as a
boys head, of Scilla which is the greatest kind. Goodly medicines be made
both of Squilla, and of Pancras, which is the great and lesser sea Onions.
The second kind is lesser, of the bigness of a great Onion or a Pear, and is
called Pancras, these both spring or bring forth their yellow flowers three
times in the year: and in the Canicular days, roaste it under the coals in a
Paper, until it be soft, or else bake it in Clay, or else sees it in shift of
waters, until the water leave bitterness, then take it forth and let it dry in
a shadowie or dark place, covered with a clean Linne^ cloth then you may put
to it Oximell, that is clean Honey clarified, and sharp Vinegar sodden
together, which is called Oximell simplex: and when the Scilla and this has
stand to gether in a close double glass in the Sun, all the Canicular days,
or else to make more speed, all that is contained within this glass have bin
sodden together, set it in a vessel with hot boiling water, then it is called
Oximell Scillitici which is of great virtue. This Oximell is good to be eat of
them which have pains in the head, coming of cold, or for them which be
smitten with the fearful sickness, called the Falling evil, or Morbus
comitialis, with opilacion in the head. It also is good for cold rotten
Coughes, and stinking breathes, and chiefly for short winds in the spirable
parts. It helps to aswage the swelling of the Spleen, or the dolor therein:
and casts out filth from the guts, that causes pain and tormenting wind
in them. But beware if any Byle, or festred sore be in the guts, then use it
not to mutch. And it kills small Worms in the breast, and also cleanses the
raynes and bladder, moving vryne, and heals the yellow Iaundice. The wine
thereof if it be sodden in wine, after it is prepared, provoke vryne, and
cleanses the raynes, and is good against Dropsies. The oil is good against ye
Palsy, and coldness of the joints, or trembling, for the Spleen, and coldness
of the Brain or feet. The vinegar cleanses the inward parts, To heal
ryngwormes and Tetters.
and also kills Tetters, Ryngwormes, and Itche in the Skin.

The seed beaten into powder, and eaten with Honey, does cleanse the Belly.
Truly this is an herb of great virtue, To heal ring worms and tetters.
as says Hippocrates. li. ij. Cap. 167. and Galen. li.viij. Simplicium
medicamentorum. and is called the Onion of the Sea. And his Root makes a
mollifying emplastrum, to make warm and soft a hard cold sore, coming of
Melancholye, or cold and dry matter.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the Marigolde, with golden yellow flowers


Hilarious. THe Marigolde, named Caltha or Calendula, because it florisheth all the kalendes of the year: and is also named Solsequium, because it opens his
Flower, Marigoldes.
and turns round all the day after the Sun, and closes in his golden beams
at night. This herb needs no further description, it is so commonly known,
and is hot and dry, the flowers will change the hair, and make it yellow. To
move Sweat.
And this herb sodden in wine, drunk warm, moves sweat, and provoke
terms me^strua^, specially the flowers of this herb, or the Syrup. Perfumes
of the same, will do the like: the smoke of them to be made in a close
subfumigation, will do the same. The juice warm, put into the mouth, helps ye
teeth if the aching come of cold.


Marcellus. What say you of Nigella Romana?


Hilarious. THis is called Melanthium, which you do name Nigella: for
Dioscorides does remember this herb in, Nigella.
Libro tertio. Capit. lxxviij calling it Githe, like Poppye. It has black
seeds, the leaves much like Coriander: the knoppes wherein the seed do grow,
in the top have little horns, and is hot and dry in the third degree. Brose
it, and smell thereunto, put it in a Lynnen cloth, and hold it to the nose in
the morning, and it will stop a cold reuine: temper it with vinegar, and it will
take away headache applied thereunto Even so it kyleth Woormes in the Bellye,
applied thereunto plaster ways, mingled with an Ox gaul: and the juice
dropped into the eye, heals a disease called Epiphora, which is droppynge of
them. It is good for to drink, to cleanse the Lunges, purge terms, put away
wind and collike, and kyl worms. etc. Dronk in wine, by the reason of the
bitterness, it makes way and quick passage for the vryne: and skowreth clean
the bladder, except the stone be confyrmed in it. Against poysone.
It takes pains in the mouth, and teeth away. Received in warm with
vinegar, it preuayleth against poison, as eating of a Spider, or any venim: and
drunk in wine or whay certain days, it will draw milk into ye Breasts of
women, cleanse and increase the same: with many other singular virtues, as
Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, and Simeon Sethi affirm. Of Opium made of black
Poppy.
And wyld Cocle that grows in Corn, is of the same kind: and the juice may
be pressed forth, as Opium, and preserved to medicine to cause sleep.


Marcellus. What virtue has Poppye, I pray you


Hilarious. THere is wyld Poppye, leaued like Rocket, and flowred like Rose: it
grows in corn, the seed read, and is cold nere hand in the fourth degree,
Of Poppye wyld and tame.
Dioscorides affyrmeth, if this be sodden in water and applied to the head, or
drunk, it reco^sileth sleep. It also quenches S. Anthonies fire. called
Sacerignis, or shingles, made in a plaster with Oil of Roses and Uineger. Acacia
and this sodde^ together in red wine do stop ye bloody flixe and terms, which
behard to be stopped. But this herb makes the memory very dull, to use it
much: but saffron, Mirth and the Oil of Bitter Almondes, tempered with the
juice thereof, warm, put into the deaf ear, brings hearing, if it be not
incurable. Rose water, woman's milk, and the white of an Egg beaten together
put into the eyes, does take away dimnes, A medecin for sore eyes very
excellent
burning, rednes, and swellyng from them, and clears the sight. Now the
great Poppye, called Papauer of the Garden, which in Greek is named Mecon
there be of two kinds, white and black in their seeds and Flowers, the white
is best for it has all the virtues, and many more than I have written of the
wild Poppye. White Poppy is the best.
And the seed is good to be tempered with meat, to make bread, to give to
them that can not sleep: to be put into Milk and so eaten, at night, it
stops the belly Opiu^ is made of Black Poppy, which is cold, and is used
in sleaping Medecines: but it causes deep deadly sleapes. And thus I do end
of Poppye wyld, and tame.


Marcellus. What is Coriander of nature?


Hilarious. CORION called in Greek, Coriandrum in latten, and bears a round
seed, Coriander.
like in form to a worm called Corus or Crinex: this herb is commonly
known, and is cold says Dioscorides lib. 3. cap 62. It heals S. Anthonies
fire, Carbuncles, and such like, burning things, but Galen observing more
diligently the nature of this herb, whose judgment the greatest number of the
wysest, and best learned do follow until this day, does affirm in Lib. viij.
cap 4. de compositione medicamen, Galen does dissent in this place, from
Dioscorides, in the nature of Coriander.
that it is altogether hot, and says he Si Coriandrum strumas dissoluit,
quonam igitur pacto frigidum erit? that is, says Galen, if Coriander do
dissolve or wast the kurnels in the throat, called the kings Evil, By what
means then shall it be cold? for it is not possible that such gross hard
things should be wasted of cold things. But this does both wast and as Simeo
Sethi affyrmeth, the seeds eaten with, or after meat* do warm the stomach,
and retain the meat until it be almost concocted. Therefore the conclusion
must be needs true, Plini. lib. natu. hist. li x^. c^p. xx.
that it is hot and dry. Pliny writes to Marcus Varro Coriander beaten in
powder, and mingled with Vinegar, does preserve flesh from corruption in Somer:

But the virtue is in the seeds steeped with vinegar and dried. But to drink
much of the juice of the herb, does take away the speech, or causes madness:
thus I end of this Coriander.


Marcellus. What is Foenigraece, commonly called Fenicricke?


Hilarious. THis herb is like iii. leaued grass, Dioscor. lib ij cap. xcv.
and the seed grows in a long Cod. The meal or powder, of the sede of
Foenigreeke called Fenecrike, has virtue to mollify. Sodden in sweet water, it
quenches both within and without any inflammation of the body. The same being
sodden in sharp vinegar and Niter, applied warm to the left side, asswageth
the dolor and pain of the Spleen. Even so it does the like to the liver,
having Oil of Roses mingled therewith: Tenasmus.
this seed is used in many mollifying plasters. The decoction drunk, and the
seed applied to the belly, does help Tenasmus, which is a desire to go to the
stool, and cannot, or a stinking flixe. Flegmon.
And the oil does cleanse spots and skars in the flesh or skin where as
wounds have been, and helps Flegmon, which is an impostimation of blood
coming of heat above nature, gathered into some place of the body, and is
hoate in the second degree, and dry in the first, says Galen libro. viij.
Simpl. medicament. Master Luke of London.
Of Foenigreke is an excellent Fomentum made for the iyen, that be sore or dim:
which I have seen master Luke make, which is an excellent man, in the cure
or Regiment for the eyes.


Marcellus. What say you then of Flax?


Hilarious. Known of every body, but there be two kinds of Flax, Flax.
the wild Flax is not good: the common sown Flax, is good and profitable for
linen cloth, without which we shall be like beasts, both at board and bed.
Linen is comelye both for men and specially for women, and more commendable in
the temple tha^ holly, and is called in Greek Lynon, and our enlglishe word
is Linen, ye Latten Linum, much like to each other in name. Galen says. lib.
7. simplic. medica. The seed of Flax is hoare and moist in the first degree,
yet somewhat drying in the midst: it has virtue to mollifye ripe, and break
Apostumes, if it be made in meal tempered in swynes grease and Mallow tootes,
warm applied, in the manner of a Plaster. It is used in many medecins, and
Clisters, with oil of Roses, to cleanse sharp costife humors: but it will make
the belly to swel, if it be used in the manner of meat, yet it will stir up
Uenus, if it be eaten with pepper and Honey. The virtue of linte Oil.
The decoction thereof is wholesome to cleanse, mollify and rypen the
apostimations in the secret places of women so diseased or payned. The Oil yt
comes thereof has many virtues: as for Printers to make their Inck of, for
Paynters, to temper their colors with, and for varnishing of boordes: for the
Armorer in making clean Harnisse, and weapons, and Lamps. Flax Oil, washed
in iiii, or.vi. shifts of clean cold water with a stick, until it turn white,
the^ with a Spoone taken forth, for it will swim ever aloft, this will heal
burnings, scaldinges, and hot inflammations. This Oil mollyfyeth hard sores,
and is good for bone setters, for to strength the Sinews, Iointes, and bones,
for conuulsion, Hemerodes. etc. And if it be dronk after poison, it will cast
it forth by vomittes, and cleanses the stomach. Flax being fine, is used with
Repercussiues, as with Bolearmony, and whytes of Eggs. Without f^axe,
Chirurgians, can not work, nor help the eyes except fine flax be in it.


Marcellus. THere is an herb, which light fellows, merrily will call
Gallowgrasse Neckweede, or the Tristrams knot, or Saint Audres lace, or a
basterd brothers badge, Neckweede.
with a difference on the left side. etc. you know my meaning.


Hilarious. WHat, you speak of Hemp? marye you ferme it with many pretty names.
I never hard the like terms given to any simple, Hemp.
as you give to this, you call it neckweede. A, well, I pray you would you know
the propertye of this Neckweede in this kind being changed into such a
lace? This is his virtue. Sir if there be any yonkers troubled with Idleness
and loytring, having neither Learning nor willinge Hands to labor: or that
have studied Phisike so long that he or they can give his masters purse a
Purgation, Many good medecines made of hemp.
or his Chist, Shop. and Countinghouse a strong vomit, yea, if he be a very
cunninge practicioner in false accomptes, he may so suddenlye, and cashlye
minister, Perilous practicioners. be here discribed.
that he may smite his father, his Master or his friend. etc. into a sudden
incurable consumption, that he or they shall never recover it again, but be
utterly undone, and cast either into miserable poverty, prisonment, bankroute.
etc. If this come to pass, then the best reward for this practicioner, is
this Neckweede. If there be any swashbuckler, common thief, ruffen, or
murderer past grace, the next remedy is this lace or Cord. For them which
never loved concord, A quick. medecin.
peace, nor honesty, this will end all the mischief, this is a purger not of
Melancholy, but a fynal banisher of all the^ yt be not fyt to live in a common
wealth, no more then foxes among sheep, or Thistles among good Corn, hurters
of true people. This hemp I say, passes the new diet, both in force and
antiquity. If young wantons whose Parents have left them fair howses, goods,
and lands, which be viciously, idly, unlearnedly, yea or rather beastly
brought up, after the death of their said parents, their fruits will spring
forth which they have learned in their wicked youth: The misery of vnthri^tes
seems plea^saunt but shame and pain is the end.
then bankets and brotheles will approache, the harlots will be at hand with
delights and entisements. the Baude will do her diligence, robbing not only the
purses, but also the hearts of such young men, which when they be trapped,
can never skape, one among an hundredth until Hemp breaks the band among
these loytring lovers. The Dice which be both small and light, in respect of the
Coluering or double Cannon shot or Bollet, yet with small force and noise can
mine, break down, destroy, and cast away their own masters, houses, fair
fields, pleasant woods, and al their money, yea friends, and altogether,
this can the Dice do. And moreover can make of worshipful borne gentlemen
miserable Beggars or thieves, yet for the time aloft syrs, hoygh child and
turn thee, what should youth do else? I wis not live like slaves or pesants,
but al golden, glorious, may with dame Uenus, my hearts delight say they. What
a sweet heaven is this? have at al, Kockes Wounds, Blood and nails, cast
the house out of the window, and let the Devil pay the Malt man, a dog has
but a day, a good ^ariage will recover al together: or else with a Barnardes
Blow, lurki^ge in some Lane, wodde, or hill top, to get that with falshode in
an hour, which with truth, labor, and pain, has been gathered and toyled
for perhaps xx. years to the utter undoing of some honest family. Here thou
see gentle Marcellus, a miserable Tragidy of a wicked shameless life: I need
not bring forth the example of the Prodigal Child. Luke. xvi. Chapter, which at
length came to grace: It is, I fear me in vain, to talk of him, whose end
was good, The innocente sometime dies in the eyes of man most miserablye.
but a great number of these, flee from grace, and come to ends most
ungracious, finishinge their lives only by this Hemp: Although sometime the
innocent man dies that way, through perjury for his own propper goods, as
Naboth died for his own vineyarde, miserable in the eyes of the World, but
precious in the sight of God. This is one service which hemp does.

Also this worthy noble herb Hemp, called Cannabis in Latten, The
consideration of Hemp in Physic.
can not be wanted in a common wealth: no Ship can sail, without Hemp the
sail clothes, the shroudes, stays tackles, yearde lines, warps, and Cables
can not be made without it. No plow nor carte can be without ropes, halters*
trace. etc. The fysher and Fouler must have hemp to make their nets. And no
Archer can want his Bowstring: and the Maltman must have it for his sackes.
With it the belle is rong to service in the Church, with many more things
profitable, which are commonly known of every emanne to be made of hemp.
Now furthermore there be two kynds of Hemp, the wyld which is hot and dry in
the second degree, and is called Te^minalis sta^ped with Oil of wormewoord,
and warm applied to the Bellye, it does assuage swellyng, and with swynes
grease, the same does ripe apostumes of sores. This wyld hemp has leaves like
to the Garden hemp, but rotes and seeds like unto Mallows. Hemp will kill
woormes.
The Garden sown hemp is also hoate and dry Plini lib. xx. cap. xxiij. This
herb and seed sodden, and strongly pressed, or the juice strayned, and powered
upon the earth, does not only bring forth worms for Fishers* but also
dropped into the ears, does kyl worms that be crept into them. And Galen lib.
vij. simplicium medicamentorum says: that to eat much of the seed, does dry
up the seed of Generation, and is an adversary to the head and brings evil
humors. Simeon Sethi says: Hemp quenches natural seed.
it dries seed as much as does Camphire, and is hard of digestion, and
hurts as Coriander does yt is immoderatly eaten, which brings madness. How
be it the sede or leaves sodden, and warm applied to the hands or feet, do
help against the contraction, or shrinkyng of Sinews, which comes of cold
and is helped through the heat of this herb And all syngyng birds which be
plentiful in laying of Eggs, they rejoice greatly in Hemp seed, as in
their chief delicious food. And thus I have no more to say, but to answer
to the next question my dear fellow and Friend Marcellus.


Marcellus. Now I pray you, what is Barley of nature?


Hilarious COmmonly known (...) all this Realm, it is the mother of the best
Malt, Hordium. Barley.
whero^ both Bear and Ale is made: there is Barire double, or with four set,
and syngle two set The greattest and whytest is best, and it is cold and dry
in the first degree: and does not noryshe so much as Wheat. Of this Barlye,
being hulled and cleansed from the rynde, beaten or broken, is made the noble
drink called Ptisana: apound being put into ten pounds of Clean water,
sodden unto half, P^ison made of Barley, will quench choll^r
into a stone pot, or tynned vessel, close in the mouth, standing until it be
cold, and then let it run through a strayner, and so drynk simple of this,
for it will quench hot burninge Choler above nature, in vehement fevers. You
may put in the feeds of white Poppy, and Lettice not only to cool, but also
to reconsyle sleep to the afflicted with the Fever to cleanse corruption of the
Lunges, and horsenesse, with shortness of wynd Put in Figs, Liquoris,
Annisseedes, Reysynges of the Sun, and a little Hysope with Sugar: sees al,
and let it stand close until it be cold, and strain it with a strayner, and
so drink thereof, for the foresaid shortness of wind. To help the lunges.
Sees Barley meal, Lint seed, and Fenegreke seed, and the juice of Rue with
Malmesye, warm applied to the belly, will put away swellyng and pains in the
guts. The meal thereof sodden in vinegar, will assuage the hoate burning
gout: and this is good against all hoate inflammations of the body. And sees
Barley in Honey, Rosen, and the juice of Chelidon, and it will heal an old rotten
sore. With Oil and Fenegreeke, meal, Against inflamacion heat, or swellynges
in the body.
it will assuage the swelling of the precordal or stomach. Melilote, Poppy and
Honey tempered together, do help the swellynge heat of the Privy members,
pains of the sides or Flesh, which is gone from ye bone with many other goodly
virtues, which Barley has as affyrmeth Dioscor. lib. ij. Cap. lxxix. and Galen
lib. j de aliment. facult. and Theoph. lib viij. Cap. de plant^rum Historia.
The bread and drink of the poor be the life of the needy: and he that takes
it away from them is a murderer.
Barley is the Principal Uine grape of England, that our Malt is made upon.
And mother of our Bear and Ale, which Malte in the time of our extreme
need, has been sold away into foreign realms by certain old known
thieves called Humber, and Lin haven with their branches: from Cambryge, S.
Iues, and Milden haule, Thetford and Bra^don fery and also Yermouth in
Norffolke, I pray god amend ye market, and stay such practices, that for the
private comodity of a few, a great multitude be not famished. And now what have
you else to say.


Marcellus. IN the eight leaf of Simples, you speak but a little of Barley and
also of Beans and Pease, but smallye to the purpurpose, to mine instruction.
Therefore show me a little more of their natures, because I am a rural man of
the country* and love Pease and Beans, and as I hear tell, many good
medicines be made of them to help in the time of Sickness. I have good plenty
of them, more than any other Poticary stuff.


Hilarious. FABA called Beans among pulse be very wyndye, A more larger
description of Beans and Pease.

Pythagoras ^ayed thus: Faba abstineto that is abstain from Beaues. Pliny and
Tullie say, be cause of the ingendryng of gross humors he forbade the^
Aristoxenes. and Empedocles affirm yt by abstaining from Beans he meant
Lechery or filthy lusts.

Plutarchus says that it was to beware, to be in office. in a common wealth
be cause it is soperilious For coddes swelled.


and bring grievous dreams. Pythagoras would not suffer his Scholars to eat
them: be like terrible infernal dreams did follow, which did hurt the wit, and
the eye sight. They be cold and dry in the first degree, I need not descrybe
them: every man knows them. Being well sodden with Mintes, they do stop
vomittes and the flixe, if the first water wherein they be sodden, be cast
away, and then ye sees them in the second, so they be less wyndye and
hurtful. Bean Meal, called Lomentum, by it self* or with Barley Meal and
Uineger does quench inflammations, and mollify hot hard Apostumations, and the
Gout, sodde^ which swynes grease. This meal dries up wounds, and milk in the
pappes or breasts of women. Temper it with Fenegreeke and Honey, then it will
heal Furunculum, called a Fellon, and it does the like to pushes, in any part
of the body. Temper this meal with white Frankynsence, the white of an Egg,
and Rose water: this helps sore swelled or droppyng eyene. And this tempered
with oil and vinegar, does assuage the swellynge of the coddes of men and
boys, warm applied unto the^. This meal does cleanse the face of women,
washed therewith, tempered in cold milk at night. and strain it through a
cloth.xx. times, and let it dry on. And in the morninge with a hard Lynnen
cloth softly wet in cold water and Milk, stryke or wype the face therewith, and
keep it from the Sun, like good huswyues spynnyng a threede of small thrift
until night for their labor: Marye then if they will a mornings, rake in ii. or
iii. Reisynges, half a drame of yellowe Alows then flusshyng will the sooner
depart from the face, by that means of opening the Liver and specially if it
be in summer. I refer the worthy consideration of this Beans to Galen lib.
vij. simplicium medic. Although he thereto I have not only alleged him, but
other as Dioscor. lib. ij. cap. xcviij. which by him in Greek is called
Cyamos, Beans in the old time were used for lottes
in deed they will partelye move Venus lust. And in thold time the general
assent and consent, as in a parliaments, elections or questes, were al declared
by Beans. The white beans did grant or affirm, and the Black beans did
denay or refuse: And this manner does still continue, in many places of Europe.
As in that most worthy rich, and noble city called Uenice, which began Anno.
a partu virginis. 54. When Uenice first began*
Of a fearful number of people which fled from the cruel hands of a famous
Tyrant Called Attila, the King of Hu^gary, who brake into Italye, and distroied
many places, and among al ye most ancient city, and chief mart of Europe,
called Aquileia, which is now of no estimation. Of this lost city, be these
venecians come, which have used hitherto to number with Beans. The most
worthy, noble, learned, and valiant Family of the Romans, whereof took they
their names, The old Romans were more humble than the new Romans. and
late Popes, in keeping names of bafeltitles.
I pray you? Of any noble old city, as Thebes Troie. etc. Or of any valiant
beast, as a Lion, Tiger, Panthar. etc. No forsooth. They took their names
only of pore Beans: Fabius Portius, and their worthy ancestors were sowers
and sellers of Beans, and keepers of swyne, and for their virtues, were
advanced, and kept still their names. Although the sacred Uickar of Satan,
called the Pope, kept not his old name: as example. If he be christened Mark,
Laurence, Cornelius. etc. Well when he is degenerated, or triple mitred, then he
is new named, Leo, Clemente, Paulus, Boniface. etc. A very Anabaptiste, or
ashamed of his name received in Baptism. Welfare the old Ethnicke Romans,
which excelled the new counterfecte Christian Romans, which were not ashamed
to have Base names, as Fabius had of Beans and Cicero of a Fytche or Tare,
took his name, The time of Cicero.
and for eloquence, his like was never found: and was before Christ's
incarnation forty years. Piso that ancient name of a noble family of the
Romans, took their name only of Peson: whose parents were plowmen, Of base
parents spring noble children
and sellers of Pease.

Therefore of Pease, let us say some thing of their properties, and virtues more
than we have declared in lib. Simplic. And first from whence they came, and why
they be called Pease, and in Greek Pison, in Latin Pisum. The first spryng of
them was most plentiful in Greek in a Country called Peloporensus, Pease came
first from Piso in Greece.
in which was a noble city named Piso, by the river of Alpheus. About which
city every five years, the nobles and most worthy Grecians, did prove al
manner of maisteryes, and made tryumphes, pastimes, and plays, in the honor
of Jupiter Ovid ij. de art: Lo, this Pease came from Piso, and be now in the
most part of Europe, as well as among the Grecians. And of nature they be of a
mean temperament, cold and drying, and in all points like unto Beans, but
not so windy: and more better for nourishing the body, and more clensyng the
belly, says, Galen, and Paulus is also of the same mind. Let both Pease and
beans be well watered, hulled and tenderly sodden, the best pease pottage,
in shy^t of waters, before you do eat them, and drawn through a Colender or
strayner with Onions, Mintes, and Pepper. sodden with them. then they will not
hurt the stomach, or move wind, but cleanse the raynes, and make fatnes,
increase with seed of generation.

Tares do the same, and nourish Milk, cleanse the Liver, Gaul, spleen,
raynes, and the Mouth of the Bladder: sodden in wine, or with diuritike, or
opening herbs as Persely. etc. Theophrastus commends them. lib. viij. Cap. v
de historia. plantarum, the white be the best. There is thanks be given to
God, no small plenty of Beans, pease, Fytches and Tares, growinge in England:
both white and graye pease, the like of the Beans, to the great comfort of
men, A practice of Inholders and their horse stealers.
horse and swyne: Although many Inkepers with their hostlers, through a cast
of legerdemayne, can make a pecke of Draffe and Beans, buy three Bushels of
clean pease or Beans, whereby the pore Hackney horse if he cold speak, as
well as Balams Ass did, might call his host knave for his labor, and wysh
the Pillory to be his Ghostlye Father. For although an horse do both lack
money in his purse, and reasonable wit in his head: yet without all doubt, he
is the best bond slave, in the common wealth, and least can be forborne, as it
appears in his service, A horse is a good servant and takes most pains
for man of any living beast.

Pease growing on the one accord, without sowing where no earth but stones was.


both in war and peace. etc. And seeing his drink is so good cheap, it is
villayny to rob him of his meat. For of al creatures, he suffers most pain
in body: but I will meddle no further in stable matters, but end of that, which
I have taken in hand, that is of Pease Anno salutis. 1555. in a place called
Orford in Suffolk, between the Haven and the main sea. whereas never plow came:
nor natural earth was, but stones only, infinite thousand ships laden in that
place, there did pease grow, whose roots were more then iii. sadome long, and
the coddes, did grow upon clusters like the chats or keys of Ash trees,
bigger then fitches, and less then the fyeld peason, very sweet to eat upon,
and served many pore people dwelling there at hand, which else should have
perished for ho^ger, the scarcity of bread was so great. In so much that the
plain pore people did make very much of Akornes, and a sicnes of a strong fever
did sore molest the commons that year, the like whereof was never hard of there.
Now whether thoccasion of these peason and providence of god came through some
shipwreck with much misery or else by miracle, I am not able to determine
thereof: but sown by man's hand they were not, nor like other Pease. Of Otes
called Auena. or Bromos.
And thus I do end of Pease Beans and Tares which be good for man, horse,
swyne, geese, and hens.

And now I shall answer you of Otes which in Greek are named Bromos, and
Auena in Latin: they be wild and tame of nature, sown in March and ripe before
mid August. Otes do cle^se the Lunges.
And of Temperament they be cold in medecines, and are of the same virtue that
Barley is in cleansynges, and in plassters they have the same effect also. They
partly warm and dry inwardly: thus says Galen lib. vij. simplicium
medicamentorum, are of a bynding virtue against the flowing of the Guts, and
are good against Coughes, or foulnes of ye Lunges. And Pliny says lib. xxij.
cap. xxv. Otes sodden in Uineger do take away molles, blains or spots. And
Otes are a good grain in the common wealth, for men, horse, and fowls, as
they have little other bread in many places of Wales, and Darbishyre. In
Northumberland, horse have as great plenty to eat of them, Plenty of O^ in
Northumberland
as men have in most places of this realm either Wheat or Rye, for their own
food. And in the North this grain is called Hauer, the Southern people call
them Otes, the It alians, Vena, ye French Auoine, the Arabians Cartamum, or
Churtal: and thus I have ended of Beans, Pease, Otes and Fytches, my friend
Marcellus.


Marcellus. What say you of Wheat whereof our bread is made which is our common
food, and best grain.


Hilarious. THe Greeks do call Wheat Pyro, many years before the name of
Triticum was found: which is Latin for Wheat. Triticum vero dicitur, Tritticum.
Wheat, or our bread.
quod tritum ex spicis sit. It is called wheat, for that it is threshed, or
broken from the Eires wherein it grows) as says Marcus Varro. The kinds be
well known both red and white wheat, the tasseld o^ long eared wheat, and the
naked or polled Wheat. The time, manner, and place of Sowing, Reaping,
Thressinge, Gryndinge, Baking, and eating, is naturally known throughout all
this realm. Even so the ingrossiue keeping until it corrupt, and sellinge yt in
to other foreign realms, is known to the^, who neither fear god, obey their
Prince, or love their neighbor. And the natural complexion of Wheat, is hot
in the first degree, used in plasters. Wheat meal tempered with the juice of
Henbane, does stop the flux of the Sinews, and the inflammation of the
Guts, as says Dioscorides Lib. ij Cap. lxxviij. The Bread that is leauened,
is better to make a plaster for the stomach, than the meal. The juices of
Mintes. Reu, Sage, To feed of Branne, makes a man lean but flower brings
fatnes.
wormwood. etc be good to mingle with meal, or crummes of bread in Plasters
for payned stomachs, put in vinegar. A plaster of ye Bran with vinegar, and
the juice of sower Pomegranets, warm applied to the bellye, does stop the
flixe, and swelling in the guts. Many goodlye virtues belong to Wheat, the
Branne nourishes little, and bread wherein much Bran is left, Meal and Wax
have made great merchants at Rome.
shall make the common feeder thereof lean. And the pure meal norisheth, and
makes fatness to increase: of fine meal, Starch is made. etc. The kingdom
of Antechrist has not alitle enriched it self, by Meal and Wax: they have
sold them dear. And many a man has lost his life, by constantly affyrming,
The very Diuynes and Du^smen did never agree generally.
that meal would only be changed into bread, but not into flesh. The
determination thereof, I leave to ye learned Divines, but not to the Dunsme^,
whose distinctio^s ma^al, in ye chyefest point in our religion. etc

And yet more of Wheat, this precious grayn and corn Theophrastus. lib. vij.
cap iiij. does name in many places of the diversity of Wheat: as Aphrica
Thrasia, Pontus, Assiria, and, Aegipt. etc. And in all these places, Wheat
does differ in shape, color, greatness, he writes maruaylously of the kinds
of Wheat. He observes the nature of every soil and land, and of the mantions
under Heaven, and the climattes, and says in Asia beyond the Country of the
black Trions, the Wheat grains be as big as green olives, The sundry
kinds and matures of wheat.
which be as big as Nutmegges. The Sun and the soil is of such virtue, and
more prodigious wonders writes he of Wheat. Pliny. lib xviij. cap vjj. of al
Wheat in the World, there is none to be compared in goodness unto the Wheat of
Italy, for whitnes and wayght. In Spain there is little Wheat but the Wheat
which they have is very clean, and there bread as white as the mean bread of
York, Well, I have sufficiently written of bread in his place: Wheat will turn
and degenerate out of his kind, and be changed into Darnel. Specially in weate
years, so says Matthiolus in Discordis. lib. ij cap. lxxviij. Wh^at will
degenerate out of kind* that is from Wheat to Darnell.
I have seen the like in a Fe^ld named Helly, in a town called Kelshal in
Suffolk. There be Tongues and Irons made accordingly, which being made very
hot, do press forth the Oil of Wheat, which will heal vicers and wounds,
and all chappes, and open places in the hands, Lyppes and feet, through the
sharpenes of the North wind in March: Plasters of Meal, Leaven. Salt,
Vinegar, Butter and Oil of Roses tempered together, warm made in a Plaster
upon Leather, and applied to the breast, or any place of him, which has fallen
from some high place, A plaster for a brosed body
if he be curable, it heals him, geuinge him Vnguentum potabile to drink,
and roll the pacient with a long roller or towel, and thus I do end of Wheat,
the most precious and best grain, for the food of mankind, and is our daily
bread:


Marcellus. What be the Lupines which the Greeks call Thermos


Hilarious. THey be like Beans, having seven leaves. Lupines.
somewhat like Bears foot, and are commonly known: whose Meal mingled with
Honey or licked up, or drunk, does cast worms out of the bellye. And made in a
plaster, and applied to the belly, it does ye like to children: sodden in
Uineger, it helps the Kings evil, being made in plaster. And also does
break a pestilence sore, laid on warm. To kill worms wi^h Lupines.
And sees Lupines in rayn water until they be wasted, strain this water, and
when it is cold wash thy face and it will cleanse it from foulenes and spots.
Myrthe, Honey and Lupines incorporate together, and rolled in Wolle, make
thereof a Pessary, and convey it into the place, and it will dryng forth the dead
child, and force the menstrual terms. This herb and seed thereof, will kill
Cancers, and skales in the hedde: tempered with hogs grease, Uineger and
Brymstone. Diosco, lib 2. Cap. ciij.
Sees it in Persely water, or whaye, and it will cleanse the bladder, and
provoke urine: and drunk with Uineger, it cleanses the stomach, helps
digestion, and expulseth al noysomnesse, or abhorryng of meat. Lupines, says
Galen, be of an earthly substance, and engender evil humors: to be eaten as
meat, they be hurtful, but in medecin good. And they be bitter hot and dry.


Marcellus. What is the goodness of Staphis. Agria?


Hilarious. THis herb Staphis Agria; is called also Pedicularis: for if it be
mingled with Oil, it will kill Life, nothing better for Lousy children, and
Hawks. Staphis agria Pedicularis. a seed that will kill life in children, an
hawk.
etc The leaves be like the wyld Uine with blew flowers, and is hot and dry
in the fourth degree. If fourteen seeds stamped, or broken in sweet Water,
be Drunk, it will purge gross, crude, raw humors by vomit: but he which
drinks it, ought to walk after it, says Dioscorides. lib iiij cap ^j. And
further says he, the drinker thereof, most prouidentlye geeue attendaunce, to
drink sweet water, unless, else he be strangled with the medecin. This seed
with Oil of Tartar. kills tetters, itchinge, and as they term it, mangines:
sodden in Uineger, warm holden in the mouth does help the pains in the
teeth, and stop the reume. And with Honye heals ulcers in the mouth, but it
is perilous to be taken down, because it burns. And is good to make an
Apophl^gmatum with: A plaster to bring forth a dead child.
it cleanses the matrix of women, made in a plaster. Plenty of this does grow
in the countries of Apulia, and Calabria in Italy: and this I end of this.
What have you else to stay?


Marcellus. What is that sleaping herb called Solanum and his fellows I pray
you?


Hilarious. IT is called Solatrum, Solanu^, or Morel, in English ye great
sleping Nightshade, or Dwal. And of this there be.3 kinds among us in
England, as the great Morell, ye little pety morel, Solanum Nightshade* the
sleping Dwall.
or Night shade, and Alkakengi, which is the Uesicke or bladder herb, to
cleanse the same and open, skower, and purge the vessels of the vryne. The
great Nightshade, with black beryes, like round Plummes, which be venomous
when they be eaten, brings utter madness or death: the lesser causes much
sleep. These be cold and dry of complexion, as Galen says, lib. v. cap. ix.
Dioscorides says, that petty Morrell leaves, because of nature they be cold,
their juice with Barley Meal does quench Sacer ignis, or that we do call saint
Anthonies fire: and by them selves stamped, do help the burning of the head,
or swelling together under ye tongue, applied to them. This juice drunk does
help the yellowe Iaundice, and burning of Choler: Drink but a little sodden
wine of this morrell.3. ii. will suffice.
but if you be evil at ease after them, then drynk Oximel Simplex, with warm
hot water, and put your finger in your mouth, and vomit. The mad great
Nightshade, is cold in the extreme degree, if one drink one drame, says
Pliny thereof, then they begin to play their pagiantes, past shame. But if
they drink two dragmes, then they shall be star^ mad: but if they eat or
drink three dragmes, then ensues present death, and this venom is called
Doricmo^. The Alkakingi or Kengi has beries like Cheries wrapped in a closse
Husk with many synguler virtues to cool, to cause sleep, moderatly used or
taken, I mean their juices in Ptisant. But chiefly it excels, for the stone
with Parsely, Fenell, Asparagus, the four less cold seeds, ana.ii. and
damask Prunes.xvi. in number, stamped well together and put into clean whaye,
or Barley water, standing.xii. hours, putting thereunto.ii of fine Reubarbe,
Then strain it, and draw into the same Potion..ss. of good Cassiafistula, or
Uenice Turpentine, clean washed..ss. then drink the same in the Morninge: A
good medecin for the stone and raines
this will break the stone if any medecin can do it, and cleanse the raynes,
and heal any sore in the same, annointinge the back with Oleum Scorpionis.
And thus I do end of Solanum Hortense, called petty Morel, which is good in
medecin, both in wardlye to cool, and also outwardlye to cool the head, to
help the eyes from heat, tempered with the white of an Egg. etc.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Henbane. I pray you tell me?


Hilarious. HEnbane is called of the Greeks Hyoscyamus, it is also called
Altercum of the Arabians. This herb does kill swine, An herb of venom
through cold, called Henbane.
except they be driven incontinently, through a great stream of water, and is
called the Swines bane. The nature thereof was first found by Appollo. This
Henbane is of three kinds: the black, the yellow, and the white. Three kinds
of Henbane.
The white is more better for medicine, than either the yellow, or black. The
seeds be as plentifully growing within the codde, as the seeds of Poppie,
both in form and bigness: it grows upon dungehill sides, or else upon old
ruins, and about broken walls, and is ripe in the month of July. The
temperament or complexion of the white seed, is cold in the third degree. The
white Henbane is* used in medicine.
The other two seeds be venomous, and full of poison. This white seed is
good, with the ointment of Roses. to be laid upon an hoate gout, or swelling
of the priuye members, or breasts of a woman, which swells or burns. A
halfpenye weight of this seed beaten in powder, with asmutch white Poppie
seed, drunk in sweet water, or the water of Plantain, does not only
reconcile sleep, but stops also spitting of blood, and helps the rednes
of the eyes. The leaves of this white Henbane* Barley meal, and Vinegar, be
good to make a plaster, to quench the burning of the raynes of the back, or
extreme headache which comes of Choler, and also it helps all
inflamacions. Dioscorides says, this seed drunk in wine, does heal a
Fever called Hepyalas: even so does the juice of the leaves. But if this herb
be used, either in sallet, or in potage, then does it bring frenzy and
madness: the root sodden in Vinegar, does help the pain in the teeth.
Galen also does utterly refuse the black and the yellow seed, as poison: but
the white he does accept as medicinable. Pliny does commend the same white,
saying: if it be stamped with Honey, it heals the bityng of a mad Dog.
And with Wine, against ye bityng of Snakes, And against thoughes, and
streightnes, through great extreme filth of the lunges. The oil thereof
helps the deafnes in the ears, dropping in but little. Pliny would that
none should use more than four leaves of this herb, or the juice thereof at
once. For who so uses more, shall be in danger to sleep without waking. And
thus I end of Henban, which is also called the poison, or bane for Hens.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Humlocke, that stynkyng weed?


Hilarious. HUmlocke is called Cicuta in Latin: the Greeks call it Koneion, The
most cold herb and a poyson^
that is to say, a tiraunt or killer of men, for it is cold above nature, if it
be taken within the body. The cruel murderers of Athenes, did most
traitorously, maliciously and falsely, poison their chief patron, and well
spring of learning, called Socrates, an excellent Philosopher, Son to
Sophroniscus a Mason, and Phanarista, a midwyfe, which were his Parents. This
man when he had best the knowledge of natural Philosophye, gave himself to
moral Philosophye: he was virtuous in living, and disputed against them, that
were called Sophistae. This man's breasts of learning: gave forth the milk
of knowledge, unto the most famous clerks: Plato, Xenophon, Xenocrates. The
death of Socrates was with wine, and the juice of Humlocke.
And after he had taught a long time in Athenes, he was by the Malice of
Anytus and Miletus accused, to have spoken against their Gods: wherefore he was
condemned to death, whose death was the juice of this Humloke, called Cicuta,
mingled with wine. After which drink, he did expyre the breath of Life,
before the year of Christ's incarnacion.367. Dioscorides says, To help him
that has drunk Humlocke.
who so ever drynketh of this venomous juice, the remedy is only to drink a
great draft of clean new wine alone without any other myxture put thereunto
with speed. The juice of this, says he, does quench that disease, which we
call S. Anthonis fire, applied to the burning place. It does extinguish or
quench the heat, which is above nature, either in the breasts of women, or in
the priuye members of boys or men, called the colt evil among horses, but in
men the abundance of nature, with heat gathers upon a lump. Humlocke is a
venomous herb.
And it does quench and dry milk, in women's breasts. Plini writing of the
nature of this, says it was the public or common death, used among the
Athenians. The seed and the leaves, have power through coldness, to kill both
inward, and outward parts of the body: the remedy is this, says he before it
come to the vital parts, to drink hoate wine, but drunk with wine it is
incurable. But the juice of this, dropped into ye eye does quench the heat,
and cleanse the sight, and heals a disease called Epiphora says Anaxilaus.
And thus I end of this venomous herb, which here in England, women use to
bucke their clothes with: and Weauers do make quylles upon their stalks, which
be called Kexes.


Marcellus. What is the nature of the Artichoke, whose heddes be sodden with
Beef, and used among us for meat.


Hilarious. Scolimus. Cinara. Artichocke.
THe Greeks call it Scolimus, it is also called Cinara, because this herb
delyghteth to grow in earth, myngled with Ashes: Some suppose it to be named
Cinara, of a maiden who as the Poets did feign, was transformed into a great
Thistel, or an Artichoke: this herb is commonly known, and is of two kinds.
That which is full of pryckes, both in the fruicte and leaves is wild, and of
small effect, and that is taken to be Scolimus, Cinara the tame or Garden
Artichocke, is good. The root or leaves being sodden, or drunk with wine, do
heal the stinkyng and filth in the bladder or yard of a man's body: and make
the vryne sweet, and cleanse melancholy or fleume, which does abound. This
says Dioscorides and Galen, A nourishing herb.
in lib. ii. de alimentorum facultatibus. This fruicte does nourish the body,
and increases the seed of generation, both in Men and Women, if it be well
sodden, in potage or Wine, and is a prouydence of Nature, and heals. Pliny
does greatly commend this herb, saying: if the root be sodden in wine to the
third part, it is wholesome to be drunk, either after the bath, or after
Meat: and does cause vryne to be cleansed abounda^tly, through which the
corruption of the raynes and Bladder, shall be purged effectually. And thus I
end of the Artychocke, which is hot and dry of nature, as appears by the
taste in the Mouth, which will burn, and is bitter in the mouth.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Trifolium, called the three leaued grass?
Ttiple grass,



Hilarious. THis herb bears a sweet flower, and every day his nature is, to
leese vii. times his savor or odor in a day, and receives it seven times
again in the same day. But being dried, it keeps still his savor. Two kinds
of Triple grass.
Of this herb there be two kinds, the one of purple color and sweet, and the
other white flowred, and not so sweet. The roots be long and white: this herb
grows in every meadow in June and July, and is hot and dry in the third
degree. Dioscorides says, the seeds and leaves, sodden in water or wine, and
so drunk do not only help the diseases of the sides, but also the falling
sickness, Triple grass has many virtues, and celleth against poison
the dropsy, or water crepyng between the skin and the flesh, the strangurye,
both in men and women. And also purges the humors menstruall: three dragmes
of this, stamped with Oximel, and drunk in wine, does help the bityng of all
venomous beasts, and will not suffer any venime to come wtin the body. Even so
it helps both Tercians and Quarteins. Galen is of the same mind, and Pliny
does affirm the same: that it preuayleth against poison and venime,
drinking.xxv, grain weight, of the leaf, or the seed. And this says he, is a
goodly Antidotarie, and also there is no Serpent dare come near the tryple
grass: it is wholesome to make warm, and heal wounds, and cankers. And thus I
end thereof.


Marcellus. What is the blessed goodness of that worthy herb, Valerian*
called Ualerian, which some do call the blessed herb?


Hilarious. IT is named Phu in Greek, and Nardus Siluestris in Latin, or
Ualeriana and there be of it two kinds, the great and the little, and this herb
of some learned men is called Triacle, because it will cleanse venime from the
stomach and sides, and cleanse the stopping of the matrix, and the urine, as
Pliny affirms, being drunk in wine. Dioscorides says, if you dry this
herb and drink it, it will move vryne, and help the dolor in the sides, and
force Terms menstrual, and the best of this does grow in Pontus. We have good
Ualerian also of good virtue, to help inwardly for the stone, and outwaedly
for Wounds? and a goodly precious Balm may be made thereof, to heal wounds
with all. The Spaniards do call it Herba benedicta, the blessed herb because it
gives such health, to purge terms, and help the stomach. For wou^des.
It is not mutch inferior, to the Narde of Inde: but for the stone, it is
better. It is hot and dry in the second degree: and will grow in moist places,
Ualerian makes salues of great goodness.
of a great height. They do greatly err, which do take Calamus roots, in the
place of Ualerian: the root has many small roots, growing unto it, like unto
the Bears foot roots, or the roots of Iuncus Odoratus: somewhat yellow and
sweet are best, and must be gathered in Summer, and dried for pessaries, and
clensyng of urine: this herb is commonly known, for his singular virtue, among
Phisicions and Chirurgians, and also precious for women. And sodden in Wine,
with Fenell seed and Mastick, it is diuretike, and most best for them, which
have either the collike or stone.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Columbine which bears pleasant blew
flowers, whereof some also bear white?


Hilarious. A Columbine is called Aquilegia and is commonly known, the flower
of five heads, A columbine.
like unto Egles, meeting together in the neither part of the said flower, the
upper part spredeth out with wings, and feet answering unto the same,
therefore it is called the Egles herb: the Leaves be like unto the greater
Chelidon, but somewhat rounder and softer: For swelling in the throat.
it florisheth in the month of May, and is somewhat hot of nature, and does
dry up Scabbes and Fistulaes if it be stamped and applied unto them in the manner
of a plaster: it helps also to resolve, cleanse, and scour Struma or the
paynfull swellyng in the throat, called the Kings Evil, received in Milk,
sweet wine or Oximell squilliticum either drunk or used in a Gargarisme
warm: if the juice thereof be mingled with wheat meal and made warm this
way, it has in Plaster great virtue to dry up moist humors in Biles or sores
Many do affirm it to be Aegilops, wherein they do greatly err, for that is a
kind of Oats or else Iuncus odoratus whereof is mention made before. But this
Columbyne may be used in his place. It also cleanses young children if it be
put in their drink from a filth growyng in their body through the abundance
of heat, A. h. medice^.
called in the south the Redgome: but in the North it is called the Fellon, and
thus I end of this herb,


Marcellus. What is then the nature of Chelidon, commonly called Cellenden?


Hilarious. IT is called in Greek Chelidonion Mega. that is the great Chelidon
or if you will, Chelydonion.
ye Swallows herb, for a Swallow in Greek is called Chiledon: and it agrees
well to the reason that Pliny makes concerning this herb, which observed
first the Nature of the same, saying, it does grow when Swallows do breed,
and if through the heat of the swallows donge, their young ones loose their
sight, eft soones nature has taught the old ones to gather this herb, through
whose virtue the said young birds receive again their sight: this herb is
hot and dry in the third degree, Swallows dunge will make blind. example of
Tobias.
and is commonly known of every reasonable Man or Woman. Dioscorides lib. ij.
cap. clxxvj. says: if the juice be strayned into a brazen Uessel, and myngled
with Honey and so boiled into a thyckenesse upon a soft fire, this has virtue
to claryfye the Eyes, and to lyghten the sight. The leaves, stalk and root,
s^amped and streyned in Summer, and kept in a close Uessel, For sore eyes
and dried by little and little of it self in a shadow place, this juice is
good to make Trosses wythal, to heal the eyes. The root thereof sodden in
white Wine, with Annysseedes, and so strayned, is good to be drunk against the
yellow Iaundice and stopping of ye Gall And also it dryueth away all manner of
Choler aduste out of the body: if it be sodden with vinegar, Honey, white Rose
leaves, and Swynes Grease, it cleanses the body from Scabbes, Biles, Soores,
and Cankers. Many precious Ointments, waters, Salues, and balmes, be made of
this herb, as Galen, Pliny, and Ramundus Lullius, says: it may rather be
called Celidonum yt is a gift of heaven for the synguler gift and goodness
thereof, rather than Chelidonium, or the Swallows herb: and thus I end of
this most precious herb called the great Chelydon. There is a another lesser
Herb of this name which is also called Scrofularia minor, having Leaves mutch
like unto Azarabacka or Iuie, having many small roots white, in the form of
Pears, but very small, and this herb has yellow flowers, varnished with in
like gylte, which the common people call King Cups. Theophrastus says in.
lib. vij. cap. xiiij* this herb vanysheth away when Swallows come in, or
begin to breed: Dioscorides lib. ii. cap. Clxxvij.
Galen says that this Herb is hoatte and dry in the fourth degree.
Dioscorides says it will exulcerate or blister the skin, by which means it
cleanses, scoureth, and casts away foul scabbes, and leprouse matter from
the skin. The Juice being tempered with Honye drawn up into the nose,
purges the head. After this manner used in a Gargarisme, it does cleanse the
throat, and corruption of the stomach and longes. This Scrofularia or small
Cellenden is extreme hoatter in Asia than it is in Spain, and more hotter of
nature in Spain, than here in England. Scrofularia
In Scotland I have seen the people eat of this small root parboyled with
other cold sallet herbs, with clean Oil, Sugar and Uynegar: for every herb
flower and root must be observed according to the nature of the region as well
as of their own te^perament. And thus I end of these two herbs


Marcellus. What say you then of an herb called Pimpernell?


Hilarious. IT is called Pimpynella or Pampinula, whereof be two kinds, the
greater and the smaller, Pimpinella. is good against the Pestilence.
These Herbs be commonly known with long roots, cornered stalks, agged
leaves, white flowers and small seed, and does grow in every place, as
Feldes, Woods, Pastures and Meddowes, and it is hoate and dry in the second
degree nerehand to the third: the juice* of this herb is drunk against the
bityng of Serpents. If it be drunk in wine, it cleanses the raines and bladder.
Nothing is better against the Strangury, both in men and Women. The dystilled
Water of this Herb does dry up moist humors in the eye, which we call
blered watryng eyes: it cleanses spots from the face: and drunk with
Mithrydatum, there is nothing better against the Pestilence, and thus I end of
this herb.


Marcellus. What say you then of an herb called Sheperdes purse.


Hilarious. THis herb is called Pera pastoris, Sheperdes purse. to stop blood.
because it is like a bag which sheperds do use to wear. The seed is not
unlike unto a little heart of a small bird. The leaves be like unto Rocket, it is
cold of nature, and stops blood or flixe, being drunk with small Red wine or
Plaintain water A plaster made of this herb with vinegar and fresh swines
grease, does quench all inflamacions, or heat of the body, as the Shingels.
etc. The juice alone does heal a new wound, and stop the blood. Nothing is
better to restrain the immoderate flixe menstruall, than to make a fomentum,
and moist bath of this herb, and to sit over it close, and to drink of the
same clarifyed in Red wine. Many great learned men do affirm, that the only
holdyng of this herb in a man's hand, does stop the blood flowing at the
nose, or any other part of the body. Many marueiles might be declared of the
virtue of this herb, but to the ignorant and incredible, it is but vain to
write any farther, and thus I end of Shepards Purse, or blood stopping herb.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Lions foot, called Pes Leonis*


Hilarious. Lions foot. Pes Leonis.
It is in form like unto a Lions foot, with broad iagged leaves, with viii.
indented leaves together in one, small flowers, yelow in color, the stalk.vi.
handful long, with a root finger bigness, in color somewhat red, in nature
this herb is dry in the second degree: the juice thereof does join new wounds
together, and heals them quickly, the decoction thereof is wholesome to wash all
manner of wounds new and old, To heal wounds and sores.
with warm linen clothes, washed in the same: and the Decoction heals
women's sore breasts: if this be drunk in wine, it heals wounds inwardly, in
the breast belly, and guts: and draws up the guts in young children,
that are slypped down from the body, through occasion of weakness, coldenesse,
or the flixe. This is an excellent herb for Chirurgens, to heal wounds with
all, and thus I end of Lions foot.


Marcellus. What have you else to say of the nature of an herb called
Knotgrasse, or cumber field?


Hilarious. Knotgrasse, Kneeherbe, or Poligonon.
IT is called in Greek Polygonon, because it has so many knottes, like knees
or ioynctes, there is an herb that stops blood better than this does, and
it bears an infinyte number of small seeds. The leaves be like unto Rue,
somewhat longer, and by every lease the seed does grow, and bears a small
white flower. This herb is taken to be a weed of no estymation, and is cold
and dry in the second degree, and in the beginning of the third. Dioscorides
says, it has virtue to restrain and cool, if the juice be drunk, either of
them which spitte blood, pysse blood, or else have ye blouddy flixe.
Notwythstandyng, it does cleanse the raynes, and prevent or put away the fit of
a fever, if it be drunk one hour before the access of the same. It stops
the flixe menstruall, either in a vomit or a bath, or to drink the same with
wine. It does the like against the distyllyng of the whytes of women. Dropped
into the ear, it fortyfyeth the hearing of them which be dull or stopped.
This herb stamped with Honey, does heal soores, infectyng ^o corrupting the
privy or secret members: the leaves thereof do quench the burning Shingles,
hoate inflamacions, and join heal and cleanse new wounds. There is no better
plaster than this against the heat of the stomach, and this affyrmeth Galen
and Pliny, this mutch of this herb.


Marcellus. What is the nature or virtue of Stoechados.


Hilarious. THis is a noble Herb, and of great virtue, leaued like unto Time,
Stoechadus or Stoechas.
with knops in the top like Hoppes, whereupon grow purple Flowers, sweet of
savor, bitter of taste, the root is small and hard, it bears flowers in
June, and it is of a restraining temperament, somewhat cooling: the decoction
thereof helps the lunges even as Hysop does, and is put in many medicines of
great virtue: it does extenuate or cleanse the inward parts of the body, the
Liver, the Spleen, the Reigns, Guts, Stichados good for the Spleen. etc.
and priuye members: provoke terms menstruall, and helps all the dyseases
of the stomach, and thus affirms Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny: this Herb
grows in Arabia, and is brought from Alexandria, Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. xxvi.
Galen lib. 8. sim. medica.
even so there is great pleney growyng upon the Mount Gargane in Italy. The
Arabians do call it Astochodos, the Italians call it Stoechade: and thus I end
of this worthy strange Herb, which grows not commonly in England, but the
Poticaries have it.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Verbascum.


Hilarious. THis herb is of diverse kinds. The one is called Mullen, which is a
long herb like a wax taper, Verbascum.
bearing yellow flowers in ye top with small seades, which is called the
white male Verbascum: but the white female is in the same form, and bears
white flowers. Then there is a kind of black Verbascum with great roots,
sundry branches, and yellow flowers, and these herbs be called Lunge worte,
among the common people. The third kind is called Pagles, or Cowslips.
Cowslippes or Pagles.
These herbs are commonly known, and be of a drying nature, and do greatly
restrain or stop ye belly, in the time of a blouddy flyxe, the decoction of
the^ being drunk warm. The water of them quenches the inflamacion or burning
of the eyes. This herb stamped with clarifyed Honey in a Leaden mortar, puttyng
thereunto wine and Uineger, does make a medicine to heal Ulcers withal. This
same medicine is good against the stynging of an Adder, Snake or Waspe. The
juice of their leaves tempered with washed Oil of Lynseede, does heal
scalding or burning of the skin or flesh. The pith which is in ye root, is
good to heal Fistulaes. And all the flowers sodden in vinegar, do heal the
Kings Evil, applied to the place, or in gargarisme: ye root, seed, or leaf,
sodden in Wine, is good, not only to be drunk against all dyseases of the
lunges, breasts, sides, and raynes, but also casts out of the flesh any
thing therein fyxed, as Nail, Thorn, or prycke. Of this herb is there a
synguler medicine made for beasts, Horse, Cow, or swyne, after this manner.
Stamp this Herb, puttyng therein Fenicreeke and Madder with warm Ale, convey
it into the throat of the sick Beast, with a Horn or tonnell made for the
same purpose, and this will heal and cleanse their Lunges. For lack of this,
and many such good like medicynes, do many Beasts dye. Therefore, good
Marcellus, take here none occasion to dispyse this my regement for men,
although I here show a little medicine for beasts, for we without them should
live very beastly. They be the gifts of God, his creatures and our servant:
and thus I do end of this herb called Verbascum, Mullen, or Cowslip.
Primerose also is of the same kind.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Tormentill:


Hilarious. THis herb is calsed Ceptaphillo^, Tormentill, or of some Bistorta:
this has leaves like five fyngers, but that it has.vii. leaves in number
iagged or tothed like a Saw, Tormentill does grow and di^minish with the vine.
growyng about the stalk with yellow golden flowers. with a great root.
Pliny says lib. xv. cap. ix that this herb does begin to grow, and vanish
when the Uyne does grow and wyther: this herb also grows upon hills, and in
Heath ground, and in Woddes. The temperament or complexion of this herb is
cold and dry in the third degree, say the late writers, but others affirm not
the same, but rather that it should be hot in the third degree, 1. Fuchsius in
hist^ strip.
and that appears by his faculty, it wants coldness in the third degree, but
rather is of the nature of Quinque folium, and the root is dry in the third
degree, and hot. Paulus Aegenita says, if this herb be stamped with Oil, it
will heal the sorenes of the feet or feabbes, within three days, Against the
Pestilence
The new writers say, it will close and heal new wounds, and cleanse the eyes.
The powder of the root, with the juice of Planteine, is drunk against the
stopping or scaldyng of vryne, it is good against poiso^. pestylence, and
bloody flixe, Kings evil, fylth in the mouth, and sorenes or swelling of the
stomach or Spleen, Liver and Belly, and stops blood, if it be drunk in
the decoction, the Water, or powder. Sheep which feed thereupon shall not dye
on the rotte and that I have seen proved in sundry places in Norfolk,
Tormentyll keeps Sheep from the rot.
and in a place of Suffolk, called Blaxall, upon a little sheep walk, in the
same Town, whereas Sheep lived many Years without rottyng, through the
virtue of this herb: and Shepardes have observed the same. And thus I end of
Tormentyll.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Rocket Gentle?


Hilarious. Eruca or Rocket. Dioscor lib. 2. Cap. xxiiij. Galen lib. 2 de
aliment.
THis herb is called Eruca for it does ^rode and burn with heat, an byteth
the tongue, it also smells like a Fox, the seed grows in a cod like to
Rapes with a white root, yellow flower, and iagged leaves, and is very hot of
nature, and increases seed of generation, And the people of Spain, says
Dioscorides, did use this Rocket seed in the place of Mustarde: it has virtue
to provoke plenty of vryne. Galen says, eaten alone, it hurts the head:
therefore his council is to eat it with Lettice, to rebate the heat. The
roots sodde^ in water, will draw forth a broken bone, The seed is good against
the stinge of Serpents, and poison of Spiders made in plaster: and drunk, it
has virtue to expulse worms out of the belly, says Pliny.


Marcellus. What is Serpentaria?


Hilarious. OF this herb, there be two kinds, the male is called Bistorta,
Bistorta has a crumpled root, lying wrinkled like a serpent, but ye female
root is black, with out, and red within, and a great knot in the end.
ye female is named Colu^brina, the leaves be fashioned mutch like Beetes, a
small stalk with a bushe in the top, and grows in dark places, and is
cold, restrayning and drying in the third degree. The root hereof does heal
and glewe wounds together in a plaster, and does chiefly stop the blouddy
flixe: the powder or decoction restrayneth vomits: and it stablisheth the
teeth, the decoction warm holden in the mouth. It has the same virtue which
Britanica has in stopping or restrayning: it does retain the new conceived
seed without hurt in the Matrix of the Mother, and thus I end of Serpentary.


Marcellus. Giloflowers are sweet and pleasant, but are they good for any
medicine?


Hilarious YEa forsooth, they are no less profitable, than pleasant, and
greatly commended among the old Writers: Gillofloures. Matthiol. in Diosco.
lib. 2 Cap. 152.
for Dioscorides reports of them, that they do not only preserve ye bodies of
men from corrupt Airs, but also keep the mind and spyrituall parts, from
terrible and fearful dreams: through their heavenly savor, and most sweet
pleasant odor, they do fortify the brain: there is no Apothicary can by any
natural Art, make any confection so pleasant as this is, which nature has
wrought most wondrous in pleasing of the senses, both of seeing and smelling.
If Gilloflowers be stamped, Gilloflouers will heal wounds.
they heal new wounds of ye head, and draw forth broken bones. The
decoction of them is good to wash the head withal. The Oil of Gillofloures
does heal the biting of a mad dog, and wounds of the sinews, and cold
goutes. If this flower be sodden in white Wine, it drives away the terror of
a Tertian, and the horror of a Quarten, being drunk warm before the fit: and
by ye means also be Worms killed in the belly. This herb of nature is hot
and dry, and of this there be sundry kinds, some small and some great, and of
sundry colors, as white, red, carnation. etc. And is called Garyophyllum, or
a domestical flower, and in the old time it was used to be put in the Gardens
among the Romayne virgins. The root is good against the Pestilence and
Falling sickness, and thus I end of Gilloflouers.


Marcellus. What is the natural virtue of Houslyke?


Hilarious. IT is called Houslike, Sedum. Houslike.
and Seengreene in the South parts of England, but in the North it is called
Full, in Latten it is called Sedum or Semper viuum, that is evermore living,
and never dying: therefore the old Writers do call it Iouis barba, Jupiters
Bearde, and hold an Opynion supersticiously that in what house so ever it
grows, no Lyghtning or Tempest can take place to do any harm there. The
leaves be like unto Tongues, this herb is commonly known, and thereof be
three kinds: the greatethe mean, and the less, and of temperament and
complexion, they be somewhat drying, and vehemently cold, I mean the two first
kinds, But the third, which is the least, called Stonecrope, is hoate in the
third degree, and will burn the tongue, if it be bitten upon, Dioscorides
calls it Telethion. Diosco. lib. 4 Cap. lxxxvii.
The great Houslike does quench hoate Apostimacions, Biles, paynfull sores,
Fellons, Rednes in the eyes, Scaldyngs and burnyngs, and the richmannes evil,
Many goodly medicines made of houslike.
called the Gout: either stamped by it self, or else myngled with Barley meal,
oil of Roses and Vinegar: and this way it does help the head, and reconcile
sleep. The juice of this herb drunk in wine, preuayleth again the biting of
venomous beasts, bloody flixes, and wome^s terms flowyng immoderatly, and
kylleth worms in the Belly: and thus affirms the said Dioscorides, Galen,
and Pliny. But the third kind, called Telethion, has virtue to make hoate,
to blister the skin: and stamped with Hogs grease, it does heal the
kings evil, or pains in the throat, if it be warm anointed therewith
oftentimes. And thus I do end of this Houslike, which is commonly known,
growing upon walls, or house tops: and of the other.ii. kinds, growyng upon
ruins, rocks of the sea side, or broken walls.


Marcellus. I Pray you, be not Nettelles a noisome kind of weeds? Me think
they should be none other: as appears by their spyghtfull stinking, for they
be fearful, both to Man, Woman, and Child, and sondrye kinds of beasts.


Hilarious. A Nettel is called Vrtica ab vrendo, of burning, blistering, or
stingyng of the skin. There be two kinds of Nettelles, Vrtica the* Nettle.
the common Nettell, and the red Nettel. There is also the third, though not
commonly known in these parties, called Vrtica Romana, the Roman Nettel, of
the which, there grows plenty about the walls of Yarmouth. This Nettel
bears great beries upon it, and the other Nettles but seeds: and of nature
they be al very hot and dry. Dioscorides says the virtue of them, is to
heal the bitynge of a mad Dog, stamped with Salt, and so applied to the
wound. It does the like unto Cankers and to cold swellyng Apostumacions: ye
juice put into the nose* Netele seeds will serve in the place of Pepper.
stops bleedyng. The juice tempered with clarifyed Honey, cleanses the
lunges, stomach, and sides: drunk with Ptisant, it does cleanse the belly,
and matrix of a Woman. The juice also tempered with Mirrhe, will move terms
menstruall, if it be drunk warm. The seed thereof finely beaten in powder,
and drunk in wine or broth, does augmente and increase the seed of
Generation. The seed of read Nettels, being gathered between the saint Marye
days, may serve poor Men in steed of Peper, and has the very taste of
Peper, and is good to season Pyes, or what you will therewith. And of virtue is
accounted, of no less Ualue than Peper: the Leaves of Nettelles sodden with
Oysters, cleanse the Raynes of the Back, scour the Bladder, and provoke
Uryne. And they are good against obstructions, and stoppyng of the Liver, upon
cold causes, and kill UUormes: the syrup thereof is most excellent to be
drunk of women, in their paynfull travail of children, and causes spedy
delyueraunce. And thus I end, of the nature of Nettelles.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Paeonia?


Hilarious* This is an herb of an excellent virtue, Paeonia is called the chaste
herb.
and is called ye chaste herb: ye coddes thereof are full of graynes, in form
to the Pomgarnet. There be two of them in kind, the male and female. It is
said that the noble Clarke Bias was the first inuenter of this herb: this is
commonly known amongst us here in England. The flowers are like unto a Rose.
The seed does grow in a cod, which seeds be of color red and black, and it
florisheth in May: A good medycine for the falling sickness. and the yellow
Iaundice, made of Pionie.
the root is somewhat byndyng of nature, neither bitter nor sweet, but
between both. And is of a drying heat, in the second degree, and warming in
virtue. Galen declares yt a child did not fall, as long as he had this root
hanging about his neck, But we have oftentimes proved it contrary: but for the
falling sickness the powder thereof tempered with Mugwort water, and given unto
ye sick pacyent: preuayleth greatly again the falling evil. The juice of this
herb or powder, is good to be drunk against the stoppyng of the gaul, liver,
or raynes: if it be sodden with old red wine, and drunken, it stops the
bloody flixe. The red graynes, do stop the red menstruall humor: the
black graynes, sodden in red wine, do fortifye and strengthen the matrix in
them in whom the flux of blood does abound. The root sodden in wine and
drunk, purges the belly, puts away the collike, makes clean the guts,
defends against frensies and passions of the brain, strangury, and bityng of
Serpents. But there must no more be taken in medycine at one time, but four
drames: and what is better than Pionie against the yellow Iaundice, being
drunk in white wine, with the powder of Saffron? This and many more virtues
has this worthy herb, and is beloved of the Spaniardes, and of them it is
called Rosa De monthe. And thus I conclude of this virtuous Pionie, that the red is better than the black.


Marcellus. What is the nature of a strange herb, called Asparagus?


Hilarious. THis is an herb of great virtue, and full of roots, long stalks
and full of branches. Asparagus has many goodly virtues, specially to increase
seed.
The branches that spring first from ye root be prevented of them, which
grow after them. This is a garden herb: but of his own nature it grows in
rocks, chiefly in Italy. Galen says, that this herb of nature is
marvelous: for it is sometime coolyng, and sometime warmyng or heatyng. And
also cleanses and scoureth: if the tender branches of this herb, be sodden in
wine and drunken, they do not only molifye the Bellye, but cleanse the
raynes. Nothing is better to open the gall and cleanse the yellow Iaundice, than
this herb is: there is great virtue in the root, to be made in powder, or
sodden in medicine, for the same purpose. The beries be of a singular virtue
against the diseases of the teeth: the water of this herb, will clarifye the
eyes: the syrup does increase seed of generation, the decoction thereof in
Uynegar, preuayleth against the white leprosy. There is no herb sooner
converted into good blood tha^ Asparagus, notwithstanding the beries thereof
must be boiled and eaten with sweet Oil, Vinegar, and sugar: and then it
preuayleth against barrennes of women. Pliny does commend this herb, the.xx.
book, the.x Chapter, that it preuayleth against the pains of ye bone called
spina, and all these foresaied diseases. Auicen says in his last Fen. lib.
iiij. that this herb makes a pleasant odor in meat, and brings sweetenes
to the whole body, To make the urine sweet.
cleanses stinkyng vryne, and causes the bladder and all the vessels to be
sweet. Galen does not a little commend it, Lib. vij. de Alimen facultatibus.
And Dioscorides lib. ij. Cap cxviij. does first begin the praise. and laud of
this herb, with all his virtues. And thus I end of Asparagus.


Marcellus. This same is an herb, of incomparable virtues, and does excel
all other, for his synguler goodness to mankind: I trust to remember it
therefore. Now I shall desire you, to show me the nature of ye great Burre,
which is more commonly known, than commended: notwythstandyng, I would be
glad to learn the virtue, for every manne does know it, to be an herb of
great anoiaunce in pastures, and an unpleasant atire, for the maines and
tails of horse.


Hilarious, Bardana the great Burre
This great Burre is called Personata, lappa mayor, or Bardana, and is commonly
known, whose Burres will cleave to the apparaile of men: the leaves be
very broad, the root great, within white, without black and does grow
commonly in many places, and is dry. and byndyng of nature. Dioscorides says
lib. iiij. if one dragme weight of this be drunk with the curnelles of the
Pyneaple, it does help the cough, and spyttyng of blood, and fylthynesse in
the stomach, and is good against the contraction of the sinews, Rotten sores
helped.
and specially of the Arteires. If the leaves be stamped, and applied
plasterwayes, they do heal old rotten sores, and stinkyng fylthy ulcers: even
so will the juice of this herb do, for Galen affirms the same. The
decoction of the root thereof, is good to wash wounds withal: the root
stamped with Salt, does heal the biting of a mad Dog, applied to the wound.
The juice tempered with Honey, and so drunk, provoke vryne: and takes away
the pains of the bladder. The seed beaten in powder, Scalding and burning
help^^.
and drunk in wine, by the space of forty days, will take away the pains of
the huccle bones, called Sciatica. The leaves stamped with the white of an
Egg, also heal Burning or Scaldyng, thus says Apuleius. The root
preuayleth against the bytynge of Serpents, either inwardly, or outwardly: the
same root sodden in Wine, does cleave deliver a man from the horror of the
fever quarten, if he drink thereof, one hour before the coming of the fit.
And tempered with Swynes grease it makes a goodly Plaster, against the
swelling of the Throat, called Angina, and thus affirms Columella. And here
I do end of Burres.


Marcellus. What is the natural virtue of an herb, called Gramen, or
Stichworte?


Hilarious. THis Gramen is called Sperewort, Stitchwort, or Stitch grass: It
grows in dark places, Gramen is Stitchworte.
and an infynite number of stalks grow from one root: the root creeps of a
great length within the ground, but not deep. The flowers be white, growing
upon the top of the branches, with a pretty round seed in the mids. This herb
is commonly known, cattle delight to eat thereof in pastures: they do greatly
err, which take this herb for Eufragium. It florisheth in April, most
sweet, white, and pleasant. This herb is cold and dry, with a little
bitterness, having virtue to open: Dioscorides does say, the root has virtue
to close a new wound together. This herb sodden in Wine, does break the
stone: it is good against ye hardness of the spleen, stopping of the liver,
Stitchworte will heal the stone, and heal^ wounds.
and galle. It cleanses the raynes, scoureth the bladder, and conduites of
Uryne: Galen does call this herb Pernasus, for there grows great plenty
thereof upon a Mountain in Greece so named: which had two high tops,
Pernasus. herb.
under whom did dwell the.ix. Muses, as Poets feign. Pliny says, the seed
does vehemently purge the vryne, and stops vomites, with many other goodly
virtues. And thus I end of Stitchwort.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Sauine, that bitter bushe?


Hilarious. THis venomous herb, is commonly known, Sauine. A practice of
Harlottes wrought ^ Sauine.
from whom diverse Diuelishe drabbes, have gathered venim, to destroy their
bastardly children, to cover their filthy whoredom withal. And yet ofttimes it
happens, that the mother is slain, and the child is delivered, and by Gods
providence, is helped and saved. Yet this herb rightly used, is of a singular
virtue, and may rather be numbered among trees, than herbs, for no frost can
kill it. It grows very thick, like unto a bushe, the leaves do never wither
nor dry, it grows in gardens, the beries are gathered in Harvest, and it is
hot and dry in the thride degree. Dioscorides says, the first book.88.
Chapi. that there be.ij. kinds of Sauin: Sauine of.^^. kinds.
one has leaves like unto the Cipers tree, the other has leaves like unto the
Tamarice tree: They have virtue being stamped, for to heal all painful
sores, Byles, and pusshes, applied unto them. This herb is a good perfume
against the mother, to burn when Women do sownde, receiving the smoke in at
ye nose-Tempered with Honey, it breaks a Pestilent sore, made in plaster
ways: Drunk in Wine, it purges them that piss blood. And by subfumigation,
it does draw down the dead child from the Matrix of the Mother. It is
mingled in hot oyntmentes, against coldness of the joints and sinews. and
is good against the Palsy. Pliny does greatly commend this, in his.42. book.
A new practice for ye pox made of Sauin^.
Chap. xi. It is good to put Sinamon to this herb, being used in medicine.ii.
times the weight: It helps also the Kings evil, or pains in the throat*
made in the manner of plaster. The fume of this herb does prevail against the
French pockes: and thus I do conclude of this Herb, called Sauin, which the
Arabians call Abell.


Marcellus. Daisies
What is the nature of Daisies, double or single, I pray you tell me?


Hilarious. Pliny. lib 21. Capi. viii.
NEither did Dioscorides, nor Galen write of these herbs, nor any of the
ancient Greeks: but Pliny says, that one Bellius was inuenter of this herb,
called Bellis. And this herb has.l. little branches, or white beams growing
round about the yellow flower, which is in the mids* and some do call it
herba Paralysis. What shall I say any farther I need no more descripcion
thereof, because this herb is so commonly known and grows in every field
and pasture. Notwithstanding, the double Daisy does grow in gardens: and these
great Daisies do flourish in May, and of nature be hot and dry, as we may
gather of Pliny, who says this herb does heal swellings of the throat,
pains in the neck: therefore it must needs be hot and dry, for no cold thing
can help the swelling in the throat, This Juice is good for wounded men to
drink, for it does resolve hard and cold things, Gout, and Sciatica, and is
very good against the resolucion of the members, which in Greek is called
Paralysis, which we call the Palsy. With this herb Bellis, Paralysis.
and other good medicines, I Bullein did recover one Bellises, not only from a
spice of the Palsy, but also from the quarten* And afterward the same
Bellises, Bellis. Bellises. Bullein.
more unnatural than a viper, sought diverse ways to have murdered me, taking
part against me, with my mortal enemies, accompanied with ruffins, for that
bloody purpose, and deadly feed. Such was his shameless ungrateful nature,
Proverb. 10 Proverb. 17
Evil will stirs up strife, and a sedicious person, seeks mischief. This
man being worshipfully born, does bare the name and title of a Gentleman,
rather than any conditions of one in deed. R. Bellises of Iarowe in the
Bisshopricke.
And in complexion is more effeminate, than a feeble pale woman: a dweller in
the place, whereas holy Bid was borne, but yet possessing none of his Uertues.
And thus of Bellis the herb, I make an end: and of Bellises, which would have
ended me.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Seen, my gentle friend Hilarious, I pray you
tell me


Hilarious. THere be two kinds of it: the one is called Seen, which bears
Cods like Brom. Seen of Alexandria
The other is a lesser kind, bearyng his seed in a gross Codde. The Codde is
mutch like an Almond growyng on the tree, but as thynne as Perchemente. The
Flowers be like the Flowers of Brom, very yellowe. This herb grows in
Gardens, in the Month of May and June, and of nature is hoate, in the first
beginning of the second degree, and dry in the beginning of the first degree. A
dragme of ye codde, says Actuarius, may be drunk without any hurt: for it
has virtue to purge, both fleume and choler. The leaves and coddes be
wholesome, to be sodden in the broth of an Hen, against old pains in the
head, scabbes, falling sickness, and the itche. The juice in infusion or
steeped, is better to be drunken, than the powder, for all obstructions in the
body: and these be the words, of that great learned man. Doctor Actuarius.
This is used against the abundance of melancholy: and does open the
instruments of the senses, and the parts both Animal, vital, and
Neutrimentall. There is of this growing in France, but ye best comes from
Alexandria in Egypt, or else from Siria, which may be given to women with Child,
and young Children, without any hurt, chyefly in infusyon, it may be also
mingled with Cassia or Manna: or else it may be beaten into fine powder, and so
tempered with Syrup of Roses solityue, and so drunk: and this way it is a
gentle lenitiue purgation. But the deluting, steepyng, or putting these leaves
in wine, cold whaie, or distylled water, with a piece of Sugar, and some
Anisseedes, standing all the night in a close pot, and in the morning streyne
it, I assure you, this is more better to purge wythall than if it were in
decoction, or sodde^ in broth. Note also, when you do make a decoction with
sundry herbs, let all your other herbs be sodden soft, before you put in your
Seen, for it is so thin of substance, that else it will go away in a smoke.

Here will I show you a most excellent decoction, Sir Richard Alye, his
lenitiue, Matthiolus uses the same in Dioscoridem Lib. 3. cap. 70.
wherewith I purged sir Richard Alie, a knight of a synguler connyng: which
knight has been a profitable instrument to our common Wealth, in worthy
fortifications and buildyngs, as of the strong, and famous town of Barwick,
whose walls are invincible, as presently appears. Beside many of his other
worthy works. This man being sick, in whom diverse and sundry purgacions and
Electuaries took small effect, this only did him mutch pleasure: the best Seen
leaves, dragmes.vi, white Ginger dragme one, the flowers of Buglosse, dragmes
two, mingled together, in a new clean stone Pot, with a narrow mouth, and
one pynte of whaie of Goats milk: this pot was closely covered in the mouth,
that no air should go forth of ye mouth. Then it was set in a vessel, with
hot water, and so did sees, by the space of two hours, and then was taken
from the fire, and set in a close place til it was cold, and the vapor clean
delayed. Then it was strained, and given him to drink, in the morning
following, which did purge choler aduste and melancholy, which is his
complexion. This whaye being drunk, preuayleth against all passions of the
brain, Seen helps the head with all the senses*
from the head down to the bottom of the Blader. And helps all the senses,
both of hearing, seeing, and smellyng, and will strengthen all the Body: and it
does exonerate, and unburden the same of every humor that does abound, as
cholour, fleume, and melancholy. And this affyrmeth Mesue: Actuarius, Ruellius,
and Matthiolus upon Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. lxx.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Goose foot, which herb is like Geese feet,
Pes anserinus.
with iadged leaves?


Hilarious. Gosefoote an evil herb.
IT is called Pes anserinus, leaued like Night shade, but more iagged in the
said leaves, bearing small little red flowers, with great plenty of seed, like
unto Arage: it commonly grows in each place whereas plenty of dunge is cast,
and is cold in the second degree, and it is venomous as Solanum is, and
kills Swyne, if they do eat of it: it makes men to be mad, or die sleeping,
therefore beware of it.


Marcellus. What is Fellon weed good for, which is named Saynct James weed?


Hilarious THe old Writers made small mention thereof, it has leaves like
Rocket, S James wort called Fellon weed
many roots, flowers like Chamomill, growing by water sides, and in sandy
places, by path sides: it is hot and dry of nature, this will heal Furunculi,
called Fellons and other sores and wounds, and Fistulaes: and is wholesome to
make salues wythall to dry, ripe, and heal, and will not suffer any venomous
scabbe, or sore to spread any further, therefore it should be good, both for
Serpigo, the Canker, and Ringwormes. etc.


Marcellus. What will Spatula Foetida do?


Hilarious IT grows by hedges, the Berries grow in coddes, which cods opens
in three parts like the Paeoni, Spatula will kill Lyse.
the leaves be long flagges, this herb is vehemently hot, and has virtue to
kill Lyse, as Staphisagria has, and to heal scabbes. etc.


Marcellus. What can Orpin do?


Hilarious- This Orpin will long hang in an house, after it be cut, and grow
still geeene, Telephus. Crassula, or Orpin.
we call it Orpin. Telephus was a king of the Goathes, and Mysia, son to
Hercules, which warred upon the Greeks before christ's birth. Anno. 1212. This
man slew a famous capta^ne of the Greeks, named Thesandius, and his soldiers
vanquished Ajax, and Achilles, but yet Achilles wounded him with a Darte, which
wound was healed by this Crassula which he named Thelephium, and until this
day, it is so called: whereof there be two kinds, the great with white
flowers, and the small with yellow, Orpin heleth the morphew*
but these flowers be variable, and will change their couller, the leaf is like
Purssen, but grosser, and this does grow in moist places, under the droping of
houses in Gardens, and flourishes in July, and August, and is dry in the
second degree, and in the beginning of the third, and is very hoate. The
Juice therefore is good to anoint the place of the Morphewe every hour, so
that it be myngled with strong white Vinegar: But Galen affyrmeth that it
does not only cleanse the faynte Morphewe, To cleanse the Morphew.
which he calls Alphos, but it also cleanses a foul corrupt stinkyng ulcer,
scoureth and dries the same. Pliny says, this juice will heal a fylthy
Leprous sore of diverse colors to be anointed therewith, every hour, day and
night.iii. times in one month, and as you do anoynte the same to put upon the
same sore Barley meal. It makes a plaster for Hernia, and heals wounds, both
old and new, and Fistulaes. And thus I do end of Orpin, or herb Telephion.


Marcellus. What is the goodness of Paunsis, or three faces in one hodde? Some
call it Hartesease.


Hilarious. THis herb is called herba Trinitatis: Herba Trinitatis of iii.
colors so named.
but I read in an old Monkish written Herball, wherein the aucthour writes,
that this herb did signify the holy Trinity: and therefore was called the
Herb of the trinity, and thus he made his allegory. This flower is but one in
which said he, are three sundry colors, and yet but one sweet savor. So God
is three distinct persons, in one undivided Trinity. An allegory. of (...)
herb.
United together in one eternal glory, and divine Majesty. etc. Well, although
the three distinct persons be even so, whose glory is indiffinable: yet this
glory may not be comprehended of mortal men, nor Angels. The majesty thereof
may not with reverence, be compared or lykened, by any alligory, to any base,
vain venerous flower: but may rather be called, three faces in a Monks hodde:
John i.
That this day grows in the Garden, and to morrow withers as duste. Mutch
more the offense and danger is, for any christian man, to grave or paynt any
Image, calling it the sign or Image of the Trinity: which can not be done, of
any living creature, for God forbad the same. God has no man seen, but only
his son Christ, which is God of his substance, and of the same deitye.
Neither any mortal man may see him, Exodus. 20.
before he be cleansed by death, and transformed into an other life, says the
holy scripture: thus all glory be to the holy Trinitye. i. John. 4.
And now I will show the right diffinicion of this herb, fit and apt for the
same vain flower. It is called herba Trinitatis, that is, because it has
three colors: yet the old Pagan writers, did call it Jupiters herb, because
of the beauty of colors: it is like a Uiolette in shape and savor, and of
temperament, is mutch like Comphorie* hot and dry, and is good to be drunk,
both against the falling evil in children, and also against all manner of
rotten fleume, and filth in the stomach, sides, and lunges. Thus it does
inwardly help, in syrup, decoction, or ye water inwardly drunk: no less it
helps all wounded men, Women, and Children, and al them which have broken
bones. Outwardly, it cleanses from the skin, all itche, skabbes, shyngles,
ulcers, and ringwormes: and heals or closes green wounds together, without
the danger of any apostumacion, if it be made in plaster, or else the juice
preserved with oil. For herbs being stamped, strayned, and cleansed upon the
Fire, and made cold, and kept in a clean Glass, power thereuppon fresh
clean Oil of Olyues, this will conserve it, and keep it from the corruption
of Air, and so you may preserve your juice, as this and many other mo serve
for syrupes and Salues, for the health of mankind. And thus I do end of the
nature of Paunses, or the triple colored Uiolettes, called herba Trinitatis.


Marcellus. What goodness is I pray you in the Iuy, the Women's Christmas herb*
whose leaves be ever green?


Hilarious. Hedera or the Iuie bush.
THe Iuy is like a fresh lusty young pleasant body, still flourishing and
green, the Greeks do call it Cissos of Bacchus, for they called him Citton,
and this is Bacchus herb or his Winter Crown, and the Uyne is his Crown in
Summer. This is a very evil neighbor, for where as it does grow upon any
tree, the tree decays, although the Iuy do flourish still green, whereas it
is nourished. There be.iij. kinds of Iuy, the white, which is the male,
brings forth white beries: the second bareth black beris: Iuie has many
goodly virtues in medicine.
the iij. is fruitles, or ground Iuy so named, these be commonly known. Iuy is
of a contrary compounded faculty, adstringing, binding, or stopping which is
cold and earthly: and it is also bitter and hot, if it be green, but dry and
cold, The beries sodden in Wine and drunk, do stop the blouddy flixe, drunk
two times in the day and as mutch in the night: the tender leaves sodden in
sharp Vinegar, tempered with crumbs of leaven bread, will help the liver, made
in plaster. Stamped with Roses and tempered with oil of Roses, Vinegar and
Woman's milk, it does make a good frontall, for his forehead, that is payned in
the head. The juice, with oil of bitter Almondes, warm put into the ears,
helps the instrument of hearing: the leaves sodden in Wine, be good to anoint
or wash the^, which have spots, or scabbes in the face, skin, and pryuy parts.
Nothing preuayleth more against the Cancer, then the juice of Iuy, tempered
with clarifyed Honey, and Wine sodden together, and so use the same drink.i..
After the natural purgation of Women* if it be drunk, it causes sterility and
barrenness in them. The juice warm, powered into the contrary ear, does help
the teeth, on the other side, if they do ache, but if the beries of Iuy, called
Corymbi be often times drunk, says Dioscorides, they will vex and trouble
the mind. Honey and the beries of Iuy, To kill lyce.
will kill Lyce in chyldrens heads: the juice put into the mouth of the matrix,
will draw forth the dead child. The green leaves, sodden in Wine, says
Galen, do knit, heal, and join cuts, and great wounds together, and heal
the body: But yet this juice oftentimes drunk in Wine will heal the terror
of a Tertian, To heal wounds.
or horror, of a quarten, drunk before the fit, and also purges the head, put
into the nose, and will shorten the sickness. The Gum of Iuy will blister, and
is very hot, and they which gather it, must cut the barks from the Iuy: and
every morning, To gather Iuie gum.
when the sap does ascend, they shall find it in the nether cut of the bark.
Even so when it discendeth in ye upper bark or rind, renew your cut every
morning, and wash your hands in vinegar, and Rose water, and your face in like
case, To draw teeth with out pain.
before you gather it. But whipe it not, and then your gum shall not blister, or
hurt your skyn: this gum tempered with Wax, put to a payned tothe, will draw
it forth without pain: this gum must be kept close in a glass or box of
clean mettell: and these foresaid virtues are confirmed by the best learned,
as Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny. etc. Dioscor lib. 2. Capi. Clxxv. Plini. Lib.
16. Cap. xxxiiii. Theophrastus lib. iii. cap. 18. Galen libro simp. medic. 7
And thus I do end of this Iuie, whose gum, leaves, and beries, are wholesome
for mankind. Even so they are for beasts, as horses or Oxen, against the
sickenesses of ye Lunges, sodden in Ale or wine, with Anisseedes and ^ayes.


M^^cellus. What is the weed, which h^th leaves like Peers, growing in Marris
or moist ground?


Hilarious. THis herb has broune spots, in the midds of the leaves, and
knottes in the joints, stalks red, flowers like Lauender. First white,
Persicaria or Pereleues. growing in marris ground called Jasper.
then purple, roots yellow, small seeds, many in number growyng on the
branch. This of nature is cold and dry, the taste does declare the same: this
herb sodden in Planten water, Ptisant or red wine, does stop the bloody fliex.
And this same herb, is good to heal Fistulaes: it cle^seth rotten sores, and
furthermore heals new wounds. And thus I leave of this herb,


Marcellus. What be brakes good for.


Hilarious. COmmonly known, to lodge the Dear, Brakes called Filix or Fern.
to shroud and cover the Conie wythall. Dry Brakes be good Fuel, whereas small
plenty of woodis, or cole. There be brakes male, without flower and seed,
growyng from one great root many branches, with spots upon their leaves: the
female Brake is common in Warreins and Parkes, And grows long: if the root
be cut overthwart, To kill broad^ worms in the chest or belly.
there will apeare the similitude of an Egle spleid.iiii.. weight, of the male
Root, dried and beaten into powder, and drunk with sweet water, does kill
broad worms in the cheste or belly. But it is bitter, says Dioscorides: if
four halfpeny weight of prepared Scammonie, be drunk with the same,
Dioscorides.
it will work accordingly, or else as mutth powder of black Elleborus. The
female Brake roots..iiii* drunk, sodden in wine, do kill round worms: it is
perilous to give to women, it makes them barren. And if a woman with child
drink it, it makes an abortiue or dead Child come forth: the meal or powder
of Brakes, heals dangerous sores upon beasts bodies, as Swine, Kyne. Brake
seeds were never seen among christen people, but witches have used practice
with them, as foolish writers affirm.
etc. The young branches of Brakes, eaten, being tenderly sodden, do molyfy
very gently the belly. Galen, Theophrastus and Pliny, affirms the same. This
herb bears no seeds at any time, although Witches feign, yt great Secrets
may be wrought with the same: which must be gathered, say they, upon Midsomer
night: As sure I warrant you, as the sea does burn, it will do no less. This
herb is hot and dry, and is called Thelepteris because it has wings, or
leaves like byrds feathers.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the dead stinkyng Nettle?


Hilarious. The dead Nettle.
IT may be called a dead Nettle, it is like in shape unto the burning Nettle,
but stingeth not: it is called Archangell, with a stalk four square. There be
three kinds of Archangell, White, called Lamium, Yellowe, and Purple with
Black seed, hot and dry of nature: the white Flowers do help the Shingles,
stamped and applied to the sore places of the skin: this herb stamped with
Salt, makes a plaster for the gout: swelling in the throat, and Dogs
biting. The roots stamped with Salt, do draw forth thorns, or pryckes from
the body. And thus I end of this dead Nettle.


Marcellus. What be the properties of Cresses?


Hilarious. CResses be commonly known, there be both of the water, and also of
the Land: N^^turtiu^. Le^idion, or Cresses.
Garden, and River Cresses, spring from March, to the end of May, and are
near hand hot in the.4. degree, not so mutch drying: the seed is chiefly
used in medycine. Cresses help the Palsy.
The herb is good green, but nothing worth dry: these seeds sodden in Wine,
in a linen bag and holden under the tongue, or champed in the mouth, do help
a speachlesse man, or him which has the Palsy,
through a long or strong agewe. This will dry up moist humors, it provoke
vryne, sodden in white Wine: and stops Gonorrhaea passio, or wasting of
nature. And this herb so helped a Gentilman of Suffolk, called Thomas Colby,
which long time was troubled with the same, when other medicines* did take in
him small effect, during his service in the field or war, finally he was
recovered by this, This herb, specially says Dioscorides, the roots stamped
with fresh Hogs grease, do make an excellent plaster, against the pains of
ye joints, laid upon warm.4. hours: but for women, but.ij. hours. And also
the same for the Sciatica* and then quickly to sweat in the bath: then when
the pacient has sweat, to anoint it, with the Oil of Cresses, and warm
sodden Wine. And to drink of this Wine, Cresses do help many infirmities.
wherein Cresses be sodde^ is good against pains in ye joints, Dropsy,
Timpany, Gout, swelling, Palsy, Pore, Apostumacions, Reumes, bloody flixes,
broyses, and moystnes of the brain and eyes* etc. Galen commends the same.
lib. 1. de compos. medica. secundum locos, Cap. vij.


Marcellus. What is the virtue or nature of Horstayle?


Hilarious. Horsetayle. Caudae equin^.
This is also called Hippurus, that is, Horstayle because it busheth like hair
about the joint: and is of two kinds, soft and long: and grows in moist
ground, and watery places: it is called holy Water sprinkle or bushe. It dries,
and restrayneth, and is bitter: this herb sodde^, the Wine or decoction
thereof, is good against the bloody flixe, stopping of the Bladder. It
mundifyeth the Stomach, and sides, and cleanses the Lunges: and if the guts be
hurt and wounded, nothing is better to heal them, than the syrup or Juice of
Horstayle, says Dioscorides. To help the flixe.
Galen affirms that the same herb does heal wounds, and stop blood in the
nose, with all the deseases aforesaid, drunk with Wine. Goodly salues of
healynge may be made with the same: Pliny says* and that I have proved
oftentimes, that it heals ruptures. And further says Pliny,
it stops or defends Enteroclea, which is a disease very perilous, called
ramex intestinorum, when the guts are fallen into the coddes. Even so it will
heal them, To help the guts.
drunk oftentimes. And a plaster of this, with warm Vinegar stamped together,
and applied to the Belly, is good, for the same purpose: the Smoke or fume is
good to cause childrens Guts, to go back into the body, when as through flixe
or cold, they will hang forth. To stop the terms of women.
Even so it will stop the immoderate red terms in Women: and this shall
suffice, of the same herb.


Marcellus. What is the herb Botris?


Hilarious. THis herb Botris is so named, because the seed is so plentiful,
clustring with great number on the branches, it grows by Ryuers, Sweet^
Botris.
or Water sides, and is ripe in September. This herb is sweet, and when it is
dry, it is good to cast into Chestes, to preserve apparel from Mothes, and to
make both linen, and woollen sweet. This herb is yellowe, whereof is plenty
near unto Paris in France: It is hot and dry of nature. Drunk in Wine, it
helps the lunges, and cleanses them from cold coughes, and soreness in the
breast: and helps against the shortness of Wind, Dioscorides, Paulus, and
Pliny affirm the same.


Marcellus. What say you of Gentian?


Hilarious. This was found by Gentian, a noble King of Illyrica, which being
wounded in battle, had health by the same herb: Gentian a bitter herb.
having many virtues.
it is leaued like Plantan, the roots be also not unlike Aristolochia the
long. This root is gross and bitter, with yellowe Flowers, growinge upon
high Mountains or Alps, and we have plenty thereof among our Apotheca^aries,
it is hot and dry, and most bitter. Two dragmes drunk with Peper and Rewe in
Wine, do defend from poison, and biting of serpents: and it is good for
wounded men to drink: and casts dead children from the matrix. This is
profitable against all oppilation, and stopping of the Liver, gall, and spleen,
and will purge choler: but it is perilous for Women with child to drink.
There is nothing better for Illiaca passio, it strengthens the Stomach. This
is not only profitable to mankind against Dropsy, stoppyng of the body,
venime, poison, and pestilence, to be drunk in Wine or Water: but also it
helps the dumb brute beasts, as horse, oxen. etc. for all diseases of the
lunges, to be given them, as Pliny says. The root sodden, is good against
conuulsion, and shrinking of the Synewes. And thus I do end of Gentian.


Marcellus. What is the property and virtue of Lauender?


Hilarious. OF this kind, there is Lauender Spica, which is the great Lauender:
Lauender the sweet virtue thereof, wholesome for cold folks.
then there is the single Lauender. This herb is called the counterfayt, or
false Nardus, and is named Lauendula, because it is good in bathes and washing,
and gives a sweet odor. This herb is commonly known and is hot and dry in
the second degree: and is good against the coldness of the stomach,
hardness of the spleen, and swelling of the guts, stopping of the Liver, and
the raynes, it provoke vryne. Nothing is better against the diseases of ye
Synewes, the coldness of the Brain, Palsy, and Falling evil, either to be
drunk, Lauender helps the Synewes.

Oil of spike does warm.


or else smell of this herb, or also to be anointed with the goodly warm oil
made thereof. Which oil has virtue, against all the dyseases of the Synewes:
and thus I end of this herb.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Mandragora?


Hilarious. MAny supersticious, and foolish things have bin devised of this
herb: a very inuencion of Wytches, and Hypocrites, through the suggestion and
motion of the devil, to delude the weak heart of mankind wythall. For they
do affirm, that this herb comes of the seed of some convicted dead men:
and also, without the death of some living thing, it cannot be drawn out of
the earth to man's use. An old supersticion, invented by wytches, and a practice
of Satan.
Therefore, they did tie some Dog, or other living beast unto the root
thereof with a cord, and dug the earth in compass round about, and in the
mean time stopped their own cares, for fear of the terreble shriek, and cry
of this Mandrack. In which cry, it does not only dye it self, but the fear
thereof kylleth the Dog or Beast, which pulled it out of the earth. And this
herb is called also Anthropomorphos because it bears the Image of a man,
and that is false. For no herb has the shape of a man or Woman, no truly, it
is not natural of his own growing: but by the crafty invention of some false
man, it is done by art. As many roots may be made, in the forms of men,
fowls, and beasts, and secretly covered in the earth: Mandrack is made like a
man or Woman by craft, for nature gives no ma^s shape to a Beast, mutch less
to an herb.
which when they are found, by the crafty hyder thereof, the beholders be
driven into no small admiration and wounder, supposing there by, that some
strange fearful thing, shall quickly follow the same. My Friend Marcellus,
the description of this Mandracke, as I have said, was nothing, but the
imposterous subtilty of wicked people. Perhaps of Friars, or supersticious
Monks, which have written thereof at length: but as for Dioscorides, Galen,
and Pliny. etc. they have not written thereof so largely, as for to have head,
arms, fyngers. etc. But there is an herb called Mandracke, whose leaves be
large and long, like unto large Lettice: whose apples be in the form of
Cheries, very cold, properly given to help conception, some say, as it
appears by the Wives of the holy Patryache Jacob. The one was fruictfull, the
other did desire help, by the means of Mandracke, brought out of the Fyeldes,
by the hands of Ruben Leas son. This herb has a long large root, Gene.
xxx. This place proves not ye Mandracke will help co^ception, but Mandracke
will cleanse the matrix, or cast forth the dead child from the same, then it will
kill the living seed. Dioscorides* is of that mind.
with two Legs in form, one wrapped about the other: and fine roots like
hair, growing upon it. But no arms, feet, fingers, hands, head, nor
stalks, but ye leaves creep out of the ground: of which herb be two kinds,
male, and female, the male greater than the female. This herb is cold in the
third degree, and has virtue, to cause deep sleep: the strength is in the
Apple, and in the rynde of the root. The remnant, that is in the leaves, and
inward parts of the root, is but weak says Galen: the seeds of the apple,
says Dioscorides, being drunk, will purge the Belly. The juice of this herb
pressed forth, and kept in a close earthen vessel, according to art, brings
sleep, and casts men into a trans on a deep terrible dream, until he be
cut of the stone. etc. This herb sodden in Wine unto the third part, does
purge black choler as well as Elleborus niger will do. This herb stamped,
and applied upon a wound or ulcer, does heal the same, and so naturally, that
it will suffer no scar or mark called Stigma to remain: the leaves be
preserved in Salt, for the same purpose. The green leaves stamped, and applied
with the white of an Egg to the eyes, do assuage the swelling, burning, or
dropping of them: if the root be cut in sundry places, The virtue of Mandrack,
is to make one to sleep.
there will come forth a worthy juice to anoint the forehead, to bring sleep.
Pessaries be made of this, which will draw forth dead children, from the
matrix: Therefore rightly to say, it does rather hinder then further concepcion:
the root is unpleasant to smell upon, and pestiferous, says Pliny. The
juice must be gathered, when Grapes be ripe, and clarified in the Son, and
kept close. The aples must be dried in ye Su^ne, and the root must be sodden
in old dark colored Wine, which Wine must be sodde^ to ye third part: the
aples may be bruised and kept in unripe oil Olife in ye Sun. All these be
good to cool, to cause sleep, moderatly used. Two halfpeny weight of the
powder of the rynde thereof, Mandrake was called Circaeum and also
Anthropomorphos.
may be drunk in sweet Water for the Kings evil, or lack of sleep. The
juice thereof with oil and Honey, heals wou^des: and thus I end of Mandrack,
which in old time, it was called Circaeum, of Wytches, which had virtue (said
they) or craft to transform, both man beast, and herb out of kind. Among all
other, they wrought Wonders by this herb, to provoke, bewitch, or cast men
into mad blind fantasies, or fre^ses, called Love, which rather may be termed,
noisome beastly Lust, and when it is wrought by herbs, foolishness.


Marcellus. What is to be said of Crowfoote, wherefore is it good?


Hilarious. This herb is called Ranunculus, or Frogwort: Of sundry kinds of
Crowfoote called Ranunculi, or little Frogs grass.
of this Crowfoote Dioscorides found four kinds, lib. 2. Capit. 171. But
since his days, three kinds more be found: these be herbs both of the
water, whereas Frogs do cast their Sperma or seed, in which herb, they do
greatly rejoice. And also of ye land, as Garden, Medowe, and Wood Crowfoote:
this herb is commonly known. Some have white Flowers, some yelowe, some
Purple: some have Leaves like Coriander, some have Leaves like Bears foot,
growing upon the top of the stalk, having long roots. Another has broad
iagged leaves, growing near the ground, but upward smaller leaves like
Crowfoote, do grow upon the branches. These herbs be vehemently hot and dry,
Dioscorides lib. 2. Cap. 171
and do vlcerate and blister the skin, wherewith valiant beggars, do blister
their legs and faces, which makes them to seem Leprous, and whosoever does
eat of these herbs, shall be smitten into madness. Their sinews shall be
shronke, and they shall laugh them selves to death, if they do eat of the
kind of Crowfoote, called Apium risus as Pliny does testify: the root
thereof dried, provoke neesing, and is good to be put in an hollow toth, to
break it, and draw it forth without pain. The juice of this herb, tempered
with Bears grease, will bring hair to the balde head. Also this juice takes
away skabbes, and crusty scurfes from the legs and arms, of sore people. And
tempered with swines grease, it helps the swelling of ye throat. And thus I
end of Crowfoote.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Aconitum?


Hilarious THis herb is venomous, whereof be two kinds: the one is called
Pardalianches, A conitum Libardes. bane.
or Liberdes bane. The other is called Licoctonon, or Wolfes poison. The first
has three or four leaves, growing in the top, with a round bery in the
mids, and no leaves upon the branch, having a long root like a Serpent,
very rugged. The second has many leaves upon the branch or stalk, like
unto Crowfoote, with yellow flowers in the top like Brom, with long divided
black roots. This herb grows in May, and is acorosiue burning, poisoning,
and killinge. The powder of this root, put into pieces or baytes of flesh,
poysoneth Wild beasts: as Wolfes, Foxes, Grayes, Polcattes. etc. and is
venomous for mankind: To poison Wolves and Foxes.
and there is no remedy, but to drink oil, and to provoke vomit, to expulse
the poison.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Geranium, called Sheepherdes needell?


Hilarious. This herb is called the Storkes bille, or Cranes beak, for there
grow out of the flower, Sheepherdes Needle. Geranium.
seeds like Bodkins or Needels, whereof there be six kinds. Some of their
leaves be like Crowefoote: and some like unto Mugwort. Some have purple
Flowers, and they be the first kind: and some white, with red roots, but some
of them have white roots. And they be all of nature stopping and drying, the
roots be sweet of the first kind, Diosco. lib. 3 Cap. 114.
and red also. Dioscorides says, that if a dragme of the first kind of the
herb, be drunk in wine, it does aswage the swelling of the matrix, and Belly,
and heals the cough of the lunges: Paulus Aegineta is of the same mind. But
you must take the first kind, whose leaves be in form, between the leaves of
Rocket and Mugwort: with the long red root, called Geranium primum. This root
will break ye stone, and cleanse ye raynes and bladder. This herb and the
third kind, with blew flowers, do heal wou^des and sores: and the same third
is called Douesfoote, which if it be sodden, and applied on sores, it will
heal them. The first kind with Mirrhe, Doves foote^
and Peper, sodden in Wine, is good against the Dropsy, collike, wind, and
wounds within the body, and cricke in the neck. There is also a kind of this
Geranium, which is good for wounds, called herb Robert: but rather I take it
to be called Ruberta, a rubro color, an herb of a red color. Herb Robert
And thus I do conclude of Geranium, called Storkes bill, or Sheepherdes
needle: Whereof the first kind, is the best for the stone, and raynes, and
outward wounds. The Doves foot is good for sores and festers, so is herb
Robert: all the other be evil and venomous inwardly taken, but yet for drying
may sores outwardly, they be tolerable. And thus I make an end of Geranium,
called Crow foot.


Marcellus. What virtue is there in Angelica, that sweet root?


Hilarious. This herb Angelica is very long leaued, indented, Angelica, or
Angels blome,

Some call it Radix sancti Spiritus, the root of the holy Ghost.


or has small teeth like Eldren, a great stalk, and hollow, a big sweet
root, black without, and white within, Purple flowers with white spots, and
great broad seeds. This is called the Angels herb, which is of.ij. kinds,
of the garden and of the field: this herb excels al other, against poison,
and is hot and dry. It does open, warm, dissolve, and is good against the
fearful dangerous plague, called the pestilence, if it be but bitten upon,
mutch more it is effectual being drunk in the morning. The powder drunk with
Wine.x. grane weight, or the water drunk.xx. drops in the morning in Wine,
is a goodly armor against poison, foul air or plague: this cleanses the
Lunges, Breast, Guts, Raynes, Angelica. defends the pestilence.
and Bladder. This herb soden in Wine, and Water, does heal inward wounds:
and this does strengthen the heart, and dries superfluous moisture as ye
dropsy, and Timpany. And they which can not keep their meat, for weakness,
through vomits, let them drink this. It delivers from biting of Serpents,
as Snakes, or else any prick or wound, if it be sodden with Rewe, Honey, and
Wine. It has one virtue, excellent for young lusty, Angelica preserves
chastity.
single People, to quench carnal rage, or youthful lust: if one do byte or
swallow.ss. of this, it will extinguishe the same* with many more virtues, for
ye which few herbs, are to be compared to it.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Lagopus, with three leaves growing upon the
stalk, and a rough flower, like an Haresfoote, it grows in Corn, in Harvest
time?


Hilarious. This is called Lagopus, or Hares foot, it has growing near the
flowers, three Leaves together, in sundry places, Hares foot Lagopus.
and is also called the triple Hares foot. And is of a drying virtue, says
Galen, and sodden in Wine and drunk, it does stop the Belly in a Flixe: and
this also affirm Dioscorides and Pliny.


Marcellus. What say you of Lunaria, that increases and deminisheth in one
month?


Hilarious. Lunaria or the herb of the Moon.
THis herb springs in the end of May, sending from the stalk.xiiij. leaves,
growing seven against seven, in the form of little hearts, but green in
color, in the top it bears seeds, like Beat seed, and is cold and dry of
nature. Oh how this herb preuayleth, or excels in healing of wounds,
knitting them up, making no scarre* Goodly salues be made thereof so there be
Balmes also: this herb in red Wine drunk, does stop the Whytes and Flux which
passes from Women unnaturally. Lunaria heals wou^des.



Marcellus. What say thou of Lysimachus, which is a long herb, bearing a
leaf like Sallowes, and is called Woodwaxen?


Hilarious Lysimachus stops blod Lysimachus a king of Macedon, found this
herb, he was scholar to Calist henes, and one of Alexanders most worthy
Captains.
THis herb grows also among Salowes, of two kinds: one bears red flowers,
and the other yellowe or golden flowers, and was found by Lysimachus, it
florisheth in June, and is of virtue drying, and bynding: it gleweth wounds
together, stops blood at the nose, applied to the same: it stops bloody
Flixe, and terms menstruall, drunk in Wine or Planten water. And the smoke
thereof, kill Gnats and Flies, this affirms Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny:
it is so bitter, that no beast will feed thereof. And it is in English
called Woodwaxen, it dies green.


Marcellus. What is that herb, called Hearts horn?


Hilarious. Hearts horn or the stars he. ^.
THis herb called Cornu Cerui, Hearts Horn, some call it Pes Cornicis, Crows
foot. Some herba Stellae, because it spreads abroad with iagged leaves, or
beams like a Star, growing flat, near ye ground, with flowers growing mutch
like small Lauender, but yellow. Pliny writes of this herb. lib 24. Cap. 19.
This herb helps the flixe, and is good in Sallets. The roots sodden and
eaten, says Dioscorides, and Galen, do help the Ilias, and stop blood in new
wounds. etc.


Marcellus. What say you of Safron?


Hilarious. OVID that pleasant Poet fayneth, that a young man called Crocus,
was transformed into Safron, Crocus Safron.
for the lout of a Uirgin named Smilax as it is written: Crocus with Smilax was
turned into small flowers: Ovid.
Et Crocum in paruos versum cum Smilace flores.


This Safron is commonly known here in England, both in Norffolke, Cambridge
shyre, and Essex. etc. with purple flowers, with yellowe small Chiues, and
heads growing in the ground, wherein be cloves of yearly increase. The best
Safron in all this world, does grow say sundry Writers, The best Safron of this
World, where i^ is.
upon a Mountain called Coricos in Sycill, ye next in Lyca in Asia the less.
etc. But let us go no further than this our natural realm, in which assuredly
there grows such Safron as there is no better in Europe. The flower does
spring of this before the leaf, it is hot in the first degree, Against
dru^kennesse, Safron helps.
and dry in the second: it does warm, make, soft, digest, provoke urine, and
make good color in the face. It comfort the heart, and defends
drunkenness, moves Venus: and..ij. is good against poison, and it will
reconcile sleep: tempered with Rose water and Woman's Milk, and dropped into
the eye, A singular medicine for the pestilence.
it will take away dropping and dimnesse. Oil of bitter Almondes, and the
powder of Safron, warm powered into the deaf ear, does help the organ of
hearing. The powder of Safron.x. graynes, Walnuts, twenty graynes Figs..ij.
and six Sage leaves stamped together, with..j. of Pimpernel water, and three
graynes of Mithridatum: keep this in a close glass, and eat thereof in the
morning twelve graynes, and this will defend the receyuer thereof, from the
Pestilence. Many godly Medicines be made of Safron, as Diacurcuma against the
Iaundice: and it is put in many Antidotaries, and also plasters, as Oxicroceum.
etc. and with oyntmentes against Palsy and Gout. Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny
affirm the same. Simeon Sethi says, Safron, Milk, Rose water* and Opium
tempered together: do make a goodly medicine against the pains of the feet.
Safron has many virtues
Safron stamped with Beat leaves, do reconcile sleep, applied to the
forehead. Safron is good against all manner of swelling in the breast, wind in
the Belly and Guts: and stopping of the mouth of the matrix, either in
ointment, or drink. It is a good cordial, to be used in the meats, of
melancholy persons, to rejoice, and make glad a weak heart. And thus I do end
of this our English spyce, my dear Marcellus.


Marcellus. WHat say you of a Thistell, growing near ye Sea side, called
Eryngium, or Carduus Marinus: I have seen mutch thereof growing between
Lestoffe rode, and Orforde nesse, by the Shore side in Suffolk.


Hilarious THis in deed is called Eryngium, The sea Thistle, called Eringus,
which is so called, be cause if the root be sodde^ and conserved with Honey
(...) Cloves it will preserve nature, or lift him up, which is decayed, it may
come of Erigo, gis, ere^i to lift up, o^ repair. Diosco. lib. 3. Capi. lxxj.
but the true name is Centum capita, because of the number of the heads: which
is like a Thistell with thick pricking leaves, and long roots, whose leaves
being yet tender, if they be boiled, they may with Salt, and Oyse, be trimly
preserved for Sallets. This herb with the roots, as Pliny says, must be
gathered, when the Sun is in Cancer, in the midds of Summer. They be black
without, and white within: but some roots of them, be white both within and
without, very Aromatik and sweet like spice. This root or herb, being made
in powder, infusion or decoction, and drunk, does cleanse the raynes, bladder,
and matrix, and cause the stopped terms to pass. And it greatly prevails
against the Collike. and torment of the Guts, drunk, in, or with Hydromel. It
is good against ye falling sickness, drunk a dragme at a time: the roots must
be tenderly sodden, and preserved in Succate, to the use of m^^te or medycine
in Winter, Galenus lib. 7. Simp medi.
as to restore nature, or help the conception of nature: Plinje says, of this
root., i. drunk in wine, heals the prycke of any venomous beast, or worm
or fever. The juice or oil of this, does clean recover any venom of the
body, infected with a Spider. Heraclydes the Physician did affirm, Against
poison.
that this herb, the leaf or root, being sodden and drunk, did prevail and
overcome the poison of any venomous herb, which any have eaten ignorauntly. As
Aconitum called Leopardes bane. etc. Aetius affyrmeth, to drink this xvi.
Euenyngs to bedward, and as many mornings, does heal all infections of the
raynes, Eringium helps them which can not make water, or which have eaten any
venomous herb sayerh Ateius and Heraclyde^.
stopping of the urine, or stone. This Eryngium is of nature somewhat warm, and
very dry.


Marcellus. There is a Thistell called Chamaelion, wherefore is it good, and
why is it so called?


Hilarious. FIrst, to the virtue of this Thistel, it is ripe in August: and the
root is hot in the second degree, The Bore or carle Thistel^ (...) Chamaelion.
and dry in the third. This root sodden in Ale or Wine, and drunk, does kyl
the worms in the chest and belly One dragme of the powder thereof, drunk in
sharp old wine, wherein Organ has been sodden, will help the Dropsy, and also
the same will provoke urine, and break the stone. The Thistell heals the
Pestilence.
It is drunk in wine in place of Triacle, says Dioscorides, lib. iij. Cap.
ix. when Charles the great, his army began to be diminished, through an
horrible Pestylence, he was warned to use none other medicine, but only that
every soldier should drink. Note that the black Thistel root with swines
grease and Bri^sto^e will heal scabbes and itch.
.i. of it in wine: which being done, the said Pestilence did cease presently*
This root sodden, the decoction thereof holden in the mouth, will lose rotten
teeth, so that with little help, they may be drawn. Theophrastus lib. ix. Cap.
xiij. de plantarum historia says, that there is distaunce, between the virtues
of these two roots. The one is black, the other white, which white is best, to
do as is aforesaid. Further, the Juice of these roots, will kyl dogs and
swyne: if it be put into their meats, Pliny affirms ye same. Now to ye
name, which is called Chamaelion not only because it is diverse of color as
having blew flowers, speckled leaves, which is ye black kind. etc. The white
has a long root, no stalks, Leaves like wild Artychokes, great head, many
sharp pryckes, with plumes shaken, or blown away with wynd. And to conclude,
look upon what soil or Earth so ever these thistles* grow upon they will
change their colors like the same. As a little beast, which is in Inde, called
Chamaelion, spotted like a Libard, which changes into diverse colors, Of the
littie. beast called Chamaelion.
according unto the thing, which it sees. This beast does never eat nor
drink* nor wink, but lives by the air only: which little beasts, be yearly
brought from Barbary, by the ships of London, into this Realm.


Marcellus. UUhat is to be spoken of Diars flowers, called flos Tinctorum.


Hilarious. This is along herb, with yellow flowers, having small black Cods, in
which the seed is like Lentelles, the leaves be like Hysope, Flos tinctoris
but mutch larger and longer. This is hot and dry, in the second degree, and
is of the nature of Brom: To vomitte.
and this herb is good for a man..j.ss. either the herb or seed to drynk to
provoke vomit, to cleanse the stomach, and purge the raynes. Drunk two sundry
times, it will provoke urine, when it is stopped.


Marcellus. What say you of rubia Tinctorum, called Madder?


Hilarious. THere be of them two kinds, the garden Madder, Madder with red
roots.
with quadrangle stalks, and sharp, and at every ioynte, the leaves grow
round about the stalk: the berries be round and green, when they are young,
being ripe, then are they black: the roots long, small, and red of color.
The wild Madder is less, with stalks four square, leaves compassing them
like Stars: flowers white, but roots not so rough. Dioscorides lib. ^ cap.
143
This herb is called of the Greeks Erythrodanon, with this, Diars color their
Wool wythall: it is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. This
will cleanse the bladder, break the stone, and force vryne, says Auerhois, and
is good to be drunk against bruses, and the Pestilence: Against the Pestilence.
drunk in sweet water, it helps the kings evil. The roots or berries
sodden, says Galen lib. vj. simplic. medicamen. will cleanse the Liver,
Spleen, Gall, Urine, Matrix, Brusinges, and the pains in the Joints, chiefly
the huckle bones, called Ischias or Sciatica.


Marcellus. What is Paritorie of virtue?


Hilarious. PArtriges do delight to feed upon this herb, Galen says,
Parietaria that g^o^ upon stone. walls.
it has virtue to cleanse, stop, and cool: therefore it has virtue to help
flegmon. From the beginning, augmenting, unto the state of the said flegmon,
the hoatter any Apostumacion is the better this herb will help the same: if
you make a plaster of this Parietaria, it is good to cleanse the lunges* when
they are stopped, for it has virtue to scower or cleanse. No herb is better to
make clean glass, then this herb as Galen affirms, if it be incorporate
with Salt: it will help the Hemeroydes, and a Fistula. The juice of this being
drunk, cleanses the raynes, and by little and little, does break the stone:
and anoint Shingles, or saynct Anthonies fire therewith, and health will follow
the same with speed. For the gout
The same juice with Wax, and Goats tallow melted together is a good plaster,
for to take the pain of the gout away says Pliny: this Juice also with Oil
of Roses, powered warm into the ear, will take away the pain.


Marcellus. What say you then to Cartamus?


Hilarious. IT is called wild Safron of the garden, with indented Leaves,
Cartamus or wyld sa^ro^
sharp ends, the flowers yelow, and knoppes as big as Olives. The Seeds
white and read, long and cornered: the Seed is hoate in the third degree:
the juice of this seed pressed forth, drunk with the Broth of a chicken, will
purge the belly, and to the stomach it is noisome: the juice tempered with
Niter, Cartamus cleanses humors.
Almondes, Honey, and Anisseedes, beaten together, is very beneficyall to
cleanse the guts. To eat thereof the third part of a Walnutte, before supper,
it is very good for to conueigh excrements, and superfluous humors, and it
fortifyeth digestion.


Marcellus. What is Spurge, or Purge of Nature?


Hilarious. THere is one kind* called Ricinus or palma Christi: whereof there is
Oil made for Lamps, Great spurge called Ricinus in Dioscorides days xxx.
Seeds, but now.viij. will suffice because nature is weaker, Dioscorides lib. 4.
cap. 158.
and plasters called oleum Ricinium. Dioscorides says if.xxx seeds thereof,
be clean blaunched from the rind, and stamped, then drink this says he, and
it will purge fleume and choler, and Water downward. This seed will trouble
the stomach, and cause strong vomites: the juice thereof will cleanse the face
from pimples and spots, and make smoth the skin from wartes, broken with
Oil of Tartar, and anoint the place withal: this is hot in ye third degree,
and skowreth, warmeth, and cleanses: the leaves be like fig leaves. Then
there be seven kinds of the Tithimal^, Larhyris, or Cataputia minor, or the
leave Spurge.
says Dioscorides lib. iiij. Capi. Clix. and other old writers: which herbs
be called Goats Lettice, or the Milk herb, for if you break of a piece
thereof, drops of bitter Milk will follow* But to our common Catapucia or
Spurge, this is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second and is used to
cleanse the body from fleume, To purge choler.
choler, and melancholy, sodden in the broth of a chicken with Polopodie,
Damask Prunes, and Mirobolans, and also the herb called Mercury. I do here
by occasion put to Mercury, this word (herb) because through the absence of
a Cook, Note.
in the time when he should have made his Lords broth in the Kitchen, an
ignorant fellow, did put into his pot Mercuri Sublimated, Quid pro quo was
given to the Lord Wharton in his potage of ignorance to his great peril of
life.
that is Chalcantum, Quicksiluer, Uyneger, and Salt Armoniack together, which
he sent for quickly to the Apothicaries shop: thynkyng it had been a
pleasant, or else a very wholesome confection, or at the least the same Mercury,
which the forsaid Cook, did put daily into the pot, for the health of his Lord
and master. But eftsoon, contrary to his purpose, or intent, this broth in
whom the lurkyng, sleepyng, venom was spread, was received into the body, of
the good LORD Wharton, in whom if wythall speed, medycine had not gotten the
happy victory by vomits, etc. this Noble Gentleman had there lost his life,
whose death had been no small want unto the publyke wealth of his country. Nor
yet no little comfort unto the foreign enemy: sutth a violence I say, would
dedly poison have done in one hour by death upon him, whom Fortune, Wisdom,
and honor had advanced, and nourished many years with happy life. And now
again to the matter, Marcellus, I neither do abuse the time, nor yet use to
mutch copy of words, when I speak of Mercurye, to put this word (herb)
thereunto. Unless some should, or would, mistake ye matter* as this good
fellow did. And further note, Tithimalus Characias. or Lathyris is good in
medicine to purge melancholy. Choler and fleume.
that the powder of this Spurge, supped up with a little Cinnamon* in ye broth of
a Chiken, or else a rear Egg in the morning, will purge gross fleume very
gently, Even so it will do, if it be taken with Honey of Roses. Seven seeds
eaten, says Dioscorides, in a Fig, will purge melancholy and Water. The said
Seeds seem sweet, but they purge by vomitte vehemently. Pliny affirms,
that if one which has the dropsy, Sundry kinds of spurge, but yet very
perilous, the great spurge and the second excepted, for they be good.
do drink twenty graynes of them in pure sweet water, he shall be delivered
from the dropsye. All the other Spurges as Mirsenites, having leaves like Mirte,
are perilous that grow by the sea side. Ciparistus like a Cipresse tree.
Helioscopius that tourneth with the Son, from morning until night. And the
rest of them, be all hot in the fourth degree, and venomous, burning, as Galen
says, and what part of the Body so ever they take, forthwith they do blister
the same, therefore it can not be taken without danger. Howbeit, Dioscorides,
Galen, and Pliny affirm, that it will help the toth ach, tempered with wax:
and a dragme of the root, drunken with Hydromell, will purge fleume
downewarde. etc. Thus I do end of Spurge.


Marcellus. What is the yellow wall Gilloflower, and the white and yellow
Gilloflower, called sweet William, or hearts ease?


Hilarious, THis sweet herb is called viola alba, or Cheiri, the white Uiolet
that is one kind: there is also a purple, the third is yellow, Viola Lutea the
yellow, Uiolet, the wall Gillowflower.
these be all sweet, and very pleasant. They flourish in May and grow a
cubitte long: and when their flowers do fade, the seed does grow in coddes,
they be garden flowers, and of nature be hot and clensing. The yellow, says
Dioscorides, is best in medicine, the flowers may be kept dry to be drunk,
to purge the stopped terms. And of the seed. li.. sodden in wine, and drunk,
do quickly conueigh, or bring forth the dead child, and the secondes. The
roots sodden in Uineger, be good to anoynte flegmon, and the gout: and the
same root sodden softly with Uineger, and Oil of Roses, will help the liver
and spleen, to anoint them, when they be swelled, or hardened. This will the
yellow Gilloflowers do, besides there is a precious Oil made thereof: which
will help the raynes and bladder, Flegmon is a certain apostimacion of
corrupted blood, gathered into one place.
or pains in the joints, or sinews, As appears in the compounds, and it is
there called Olium de violata alba. Now to conclude of this herb, the juice
thereof tempered with Honey, heals sores in the mouth and head: And with wax,
the broken skin fretted with wind in March, called chappes, be made whole.
And thus I end of this herb, which is commonly called Sweet William, or Hearts
ease: God send thee hearts ease, dear Marcellus. For it is mutch better with
poverty to have the same, than to be a king, The greatest treasor of this
world, is a quiet mind.
with a miserable mind. For, from thence spryngeth either felycity, or
adversity: an Image of heaven with joy, or else hell with inward horror of
mind, and vexation.


Marcellus. I Do heartily thank you, for wishing to me so precious a Jewel,
so rich a treasure, Hearts ease, or quietness of the mind.
and so heavenly a comfort. For what is more to be desired, than hearts ease?
Nothing. For when adversity comes in at the one door, eftsoon, hearts ease
does run out at the other. For they can not dwell together in one place. Why
so? They be, ii. extreme contraries, and merueilous affections of the mind
felt, and not seen, although oftentimes things, which are seen, may be a
means to bring quietness to the mind, and ease to the heart for a time. But
rather my dear Hilarious, there be which affirm that hearts ease or rest,
comes by the ear, For say they, there is no rest in the heart of the
Infidel, but in the believing man: Perfect hearts, rest and true quietness of
mind.
and there can be no faith, without hearing. and not the sight of things
worldly brings faith, which faith gives the true hearts ease, passing all
other jewels. And albeit Hilarious, thou art not without wordly hearts ease,
which I grant, does please sometime thy vain delight. Yet I pray God give
thee, but one handful of heavenly hearts ease, which passes all the pleasant
flowers, that grow in this World. Now what be the virtues of Hermodactilj, I
pray you tell me.


Hilarious. Hermodactili. of.ii. kinds. Colchicum and Ephemerum, called the
fyngers of Hermis* or else of Mercurius, one is like
HERMODACTILI, be of two kinds, the first is Colchicum wyld Bulbus, or great
wild Safron, having great round heads within the ground like Onions, and with
black rindes, and Flowers like Saffron, red seed, but shinyng white and red
chiues, but very great, and a span long: sweet juice, and it florisheth in
the Spryng. The second is like a Lilly, with tender leaves, white flowers,
bitter seed, one long root, of the bigness of a finger. Safron, the other like
lyllies.
And both these Hermodactilj be called Mercuryes fyngers. Colchicum is of
nature hot and dry, in the second degree. Paulus Aeginetae. lib vij. says
the root of Colchis, sodden by it self, do purge the belly, and helps
morbus articularis, which is the sickness of the joints: as the Gout, the
Sciatica, and the pains in the joints of the hands, called Chyragra. The
roots be perilous to be eaten, as other wholesome roots are in meat, as a
Sallette: for they will put one in danger of choking, or stranglyng. Cholchis
roots will strangle one take heed thereof, although they seem sw^ete
But they will purge the superfluous humors, and blood downward and be
venomous, says Dioscorides lib. iiij. cap. lxxix, Yet says he, they be
sweet, and sometime the ignorant do eat them for Bulbi, a kind of sweet
roots: but the remedy is, only to drink a great draught of milk. Their
roots and flowers stamped, will kill Lice, anoint chyldrens heads therewith.
The second kind of Hermodactilj is called wild Iris, or Flowerdeluce of the
fyeld, Hermodactilus will kill Lice.
or Lillium conuallium, the roots sodden, the decoction of them, does cleanse
the fylthy teeth that stynketh: the leaves sodden in Wine, do dissolve
humors, gathered into apostumacion, if it be warm washed often times
therewyth, specially hot apostumes, or swellynges gathered of Choler. Galen
does remember these Hermodactili, calling them Ephemerum colchicum, or Iris,
describing the same, as is aforesaid, with the same Uertues, lib. vij.
simplicium medicamentorum.


Marcellus. WHat virtue is in the herb Rumex, called the great Docke, Of
Rumex* the Docke. Monks Rubarbe, or bastard Mercury.
I mean not the Sorel, called Acedula, whereof you answered me before in this
book.


Hilarious. I Know your meaning very well, of that wild herb, which grows
commonly by paths, hedges, and waters sides. Monks Rubarbe.
And of this kind, there is one called Monks Rubarbe, which grows in gardens,
the other is wild and with lesser leaves. Marcellus, the blind ignorant
people, have of long time not a little erred, in one kind of Lappa or Rumex. I
mean neither Sorell, nor the common wyld Docke, or the bastard Rubarbe: They
which call Rumex with the golden Sand, Mercury, do greatly err.
but that which is commonly called Mercury, with golden sands, upon the back
sides of the leaves, great roots, clusters of seeds, leaves like a broad
spear head, not purfled about with iagges, or small teeth like a saw, which in
deed the very Mercury has, with one only root. Whereupon many small fine
roots do grow, like a bush: and this Mercury is mutch like unto wild Hemp.
But this bastard Mercury, whereof I have now spoken called Rumex, is none
other but a kind of Dockes, which being sodden, or used in Clyster, will move
the belly to be laxatiue. And is good to be sodden in brothes for them which
have the yellow Iaundice. And the root of this Docke, which is yellow, is also
good for the same purpose, and for the Timpanie of water: Of the great Docke,
how it purges.
a dragme of the powder, of the Munkes Rubarbe, called the garden Docke, drunk
in wine, will purge fleume, water, and choler downward. The herbs well
sodden in Wine, and applied to the swelling of the throat, will speedyly help
the same. And thus I do end of Rumex, called the Docke, and also of the bastard
Mercury, which master Leonard Fuchsius, does affirm to be Rumex, in his
books of Plants. Chapit. Clxxiiii And some there be, Of the herb called
Atriplex or Arage
which affirm this bastard Mercury, to be one kind of Atriplex, but red
Atriplex is Arage, a garden herb, which will quickly spryng forth, to do
pleasure to mankind. And is called the golden herb, because of his yellow
flowers: and of nature is moist in the second* and cold in the first degree,
The kings evil.
And this herb raw or sodden, will move the belly to be laxatyue, and is good
in Clysters: the seeds thereof drunk with sweet water, will very quickly help
the kings evil, says Dioscorides, and Galen affyrmeth the same. And
furthermore, that it will open the Gal, and purge choler: Pliny would that the
Water, Shift water. often times* when Atriplex is sodden
wherein Atriplex is sodden should be often times shyfted or else it will hurt ye
stomach and infect the face with little spots or pimples. With Beats, says
Hyppocrates, it is good to wash, or cleanse the mouth of the matrix: with Honye
and Vinegar tempered, it heals the Shyngles. This Garden Atriplex is good for
medycine: but the wyld Atriplex, To die the hair.
or golden Arage is only good to change the color, and make the hair
yellow, with Barbery barks, and the Flowers of Calendula, called ye Marigold.
And thus I end of Atriplex, called Arage or Chrysolochanon, or the golden
herb. Chrysolochanon.



Marcellus. What then of Germander, called Quercula minor, the little Ox?


Hilarious. Quercula minor the little Oak, or Germander.
IT is called Quercula minor, because the leaves thereof be like unto Oken
leaves, although very small: It is even so named Chamaedris, of a very low Oak
of the ground, it is named Serrata, for it was first found by this Germander
is commonly known, and dies not in Winter, the flowers be Purple. And this
will grow in rocky places of his own nature, although plenty grow in Gardens:
it flowrisheth in July, it is hot and dry, says Galen, in the third degree.
But my friend Marcellus, understand this, that although Galen says so, yet for
all that, the herbs here in England, be not so hot of nature, as they be in
the hot country of Greece, A good note of the nature of herbs.
where as Galen was borne, therefore, observe the Climate and Region, and then
you shall do very well. Now to this herb, which is scant so hoate and dry,
Dioscorides affirms that this herb green or dry, sodden in Wine or Water,
and so drunk, has all these virtues. It helps conuulsions, coughes, hardness
of the spleen, stopping of urine, Dropses, and forces the terms to pass. And
in the time of peril, ye Midwyfe may give it to the Woman, whose child is
dead, to come forth. Drunk with Uineger, it does rebate the swelling of the
Liver, and preuayleth against poison. And drunk with good Wine, and pills of
this herb, with Honey, and then swallowed it will purge sores and ulcers. It
opens the stopping of the joints, and dries gross humors, thus says
Galen, Many good ve^tues of Germander.
Theophrastus affirms that the leaves stamped with Oil, will heal wounds:
and the seeds draw forth yellowe choler, being drunk, and be good for the
eyes. The Juice of the leaves, tempered with clean oil Olife, will cleanse the
dimnes of the sore eyes, says Pliny: and these be goodly virtues, which God
has given to this herb, my friend Marcellus.


Marcellus. What is Psyllium.


Hilarious. Psyllium called Flewort.
PSyllium is called Fleawort, because the seed is like to Flees, black and
hard, which Flees in the North country, be called Loppes: or else as some do
say, whereas this herb is cast green into any house, no Fleas will remain
there. It grows in dry places vnsowen, the seed is cold in the second
degree: with Oil of Roses, Vinegar and this seed stamped together, is good to
anoint the joints, swelling, and hot burning pains in the forehead. For
pains in the head coming of heat. or burning.
This herb or seed, broken in a Leadden mortar, with hogs grease, is good
to to heal a foul, burning, rotten ulcer or sore. The Juice thereof with
Honey, dropped into the ear, will kill Worms, or any Flea cropen therein: and
thus mutch affirm Dioscorides, and Pliny, of this herb.


Marcellus. WHat say you of Fox Gloves, commonly ye Finger flowers: the
flowers of some be yellow, Digitales.
and there be of them Carnation in color? Thus I know them by name and color:
but no further, I can say of them.


Hilarious. THou say well, I need no further description of them: Yellowe
and Purple Fingers.

Bitter herbs be hot and dry.


it grows in mountains, shadow, or rocky places. It is bitter, and therefore
it must needs be hot and dry, for Galen lib. iiii. de simplic. medi. facul.
cap. xvij. those herbs says he, which be bitter of taste, do cleanse and purge
and do cut away gross matter in ye veins. Therefore with bitter things ye
terms menstrual, and the fylth from the breast, and lunges be cleansed, what
more? To cleanse the stomache.
This herb will do all, or asmutch as Gencian will do: in whose place, this
herb called yellow or Purple fyngers, is used: these be Galen his words of
this herb.


Marcellus. ALthough you have showed me the nature of common Gardein Mints I
had almost forgotten Calamyntes, Organ, and Mariarum I pray you show me some
things of them.


Hilarious. IT is called Calaminte, the profitable Minte, Calamintha Montana
Nepeta. Pulegium. Siluestre.
the virtue thereof causes Serpents to fly from it: mutch of this Calamynte
does grow upon Mountains, and is called Calamintha Montana. An other kind is
called Nepeta, or Neppe of the garden: an other is Pulegium Siluestre, the wyld
Pulyall royal of the Wood, with great leaves than Peneroial, called Pulyall,
growyng in Woods, or moist places. And Calaminte, is of essence, Diosco. lib.
3^ Capi. 36.
or being hot and dry in the third degree: the roots be of none effect: or
profit, but the leaves be very hoate, and eger to taste upon. The virtues of
Calaminte be many, as against poyso^ and stingyng of Serpents, either drunk,
or anointed: against the strangurie, or the stoppyng of vryne. or stone,
conuulcions, pains in the stomach Orthopnaea, which is a disease, Orthopnaea
difficulty of wind.

Tormina fretting of the Gutts.


that a man can not take his breath but holding his neck vpryght: Tormina, or
pains of the guts, stopping of ye terms in women: tercians, and the kings
evil. All these be cleansed, opened, and healed, by, and through Calamintes.
drunk in wine: the powder and sirupe have the like virtues, the water thereof
is but weak, except to stop vomits What more of this herb, it will kill great
worms, drunk with Salt and Honey: even so it will Ascarides, which be little
round worms, breedynge in the long guts of children. Who so has
Elephanticus morbus, which is a Leprie, bred of melancholy with swelled flesh,
and black spots, and use to eat Calamintes sodden, or raw, and then drink
the juice in Wha^e, shall be healed of the same leprosy. This sodden in wine,
does take away blew, or black spots from the skin, made by a stripe of hand,
wand, or rod, or stumblyng against ones fyst in the dark, applied to the same
stripe: a plaster made thereof, or hoate laid upon the huckle Bones, will
assuage the pain of Sciatica, and it will draw down humors. The juice will
kyl worms that be in the ear. Galen does write very mutch of Calaminte. The
oil of Calamintes does warm the body, and is good against the Sciatica.
lib. vij. simplicium medicamen. agreeyng with Dioscorides, and does mutch
commend the Oil of the same, to anoint the body, saying: it will enter
quickly, and that it is a present remedy for the Sciatica. And through the
bytternes of the same, it will skoure, and cleanse the yellow Iaundice. and open
the Galle. And to conclude, the Mountain Minte with the Purple flowers, having
leaves like to Ocimum, Organ.
called Basil, Nipotellae, called Neppe, is one of the Calamintes. So is an
other called S. Marie Mint, with flowers like to Chamom^ll. Dioscor. lib. 3
C^p. xxviii.xxix.xxx.viii.
Some there be, that do take Organ, to be a kind of Calamyntes: but it is not
so, for Organ is a proper herb of it self, in name and nature. And is
distinguished in four bye names. Heracleoticum, Onitis, Syluestre, and
Tragoriganum, these be sweet herbs: Goats and other beasts love to feed of
them. Some of them have leaves like Hisope, but broader: Some like Sauerye,
called Satureia, of increasyng of seed, which Sauorye is near kin in nature
to Organ, Sauerie. Maioram
so is Amaracus, called Maioram, or Sampsuchum. These all be herbs very
sweet, wholesome, and pleasant, good to mankind, and enemies to venom, and
poison of corrupted worms or Serpents: and of nature be hot and dry in the
third degree. These herbs will warm all the body, either in bath, or to be
anointed with the Oil, against all cold syckenesses, or rigours of tremblyng.
These herbs sodden green in broth, or the powder simply of them put into the
same, or else drunk in Wine, or the Sirupe thereof, will do thus, as follows.
Help the dullness of sight: provoke neesyng, Against evil sight* Sauerie
prevails.
either in oil or powder: open ye raynes: provoke vryne: force terms
menstruall: kill worms in the belly: Cleanse gross fleume from the Stomach:
make good digestion: help the green sycknesse, nothing better for melancholy,
and pains in the left side. Good for the collike, palsye, stinkyng breath,
shortness of wynd, or vomytes, or swellyng with dropsy: There is a forgetful
sycknes, called Lethargus or Veternus, which is placed in the head, in which
the power of reason is contained, through a sickness of fleume. as a quotidian
not purged, or else of Peripneumonia, which is a sickness of ye lungs. When
through heat, Lethargus helped with herbs, hoate and dry in the third degree.
phlegm is melted, or made thin eftsoon, drawn to the head: the best remedy
is then, to purge the head, with Hierae simplicis. i.ss. and to wear a
garland, or cloth full of these herbs, of Organum Maiorum, or Sauerie. and
health will follow: and thus I do end of them.


Marcellus. What is Ormyn, Which we do call Clarie, Gallitricum?


Hilarious. ORmin has stalks four square, leaves grosser than Horhound.
flowers in form like the Archangel: but purple colored, growyng about the
stalk, Orminum Ormyn. Or Clarie.
with black seeds in the Cods. This herb is hot and dry: Dioscorides says,
the seed drunk with wine, will move Venus, with Honye it will cleanse the
bloody spots in the eye, this affirm also Paulus and Pliny: and it is good
for to cleanse the whites in women, sodden with Planten in red wine and drunk:
Clarie good for women.
stamped and put to a prick, it will draw it forth of the flesh.


Marcellus. WHat is the virtue of wyld Basil, called Ocimastrum, having stalks
four square: flowers Purple, seeds black, and leaves like unto the king of
herbs, Ocimastrum wyld Basil
for sweetenes called Basil.


Hilarious. THis grows in sundry places, and florisheth in October: bearinge
the Seeds and Cods, is hot and dry of nature with Bytternes. The seed sodden
in Wine and drunk warm, helps the biting of Serpents, and drunk in wine,
with Mirrhe and Pepper, it heals the Sciatica, says Dioscorides.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of wyld water Peper, an herb so named


Hilarious. IT is called Hidropiper, because it grows in water, Hydropiper
water pepe^
and the taste thereof burns in the mouth, as the spice Peper does. It has a
very tough stalk, leaves like Myntes but broader, thynner, and whyter, the
Seeds grow by the Leaves upon slender Branches, it florisheth in August. It
is hot and dry, Dioscorides lib. 2. cap. 155. Gal. lib. 7 Simp. medic.
not so much as Peper Dioscorides says, this herb with the seed stamped,
annoint the black spot, or hard knot through a strype therewyth, and it shall
be healed. If this seed be dried and beaten unto powder mingled with Salt, it
is good to eat with meat, or to season flesh. Hydropipe one has leaves like
Mintes: the other is Persicario with leaves like Peches. and will serve in the
place of Peper.
The root thereof is good for nothing: of this herb be two kinds, the one
having leaves like mintes: of the second speaks Matthiolus saying he takes
it to be Persicaria. which has Leaves like Peaches, with color spotted,
somewhat like Puke, of which Persicaria. I have spoken of before.


Marcellus. What be the virtues of Aristolochia rotunda, and Longa


Hilarious THis Herb is good to quicken the time of Child birth, Aristolochia
Rotunda Longa Clematis. Dioscot. lib. 3. Cap. 155..
and expulse the secondes, whereof there be three kinds: one round with leaves
like Iuie, but rounder, with round rotes: from which herb comes a pleasant
sharp savor white flowers upon pretty read knoppes, this is Rotunda, or
round, ye Female: an other is called Longa, or long with long roots and
leaves, small branches, purple flowers, and stinking, when it does grow: and is
of the fashion of a Pear. Both of them have berryes like Capers very bitter,
of color like Box, and do stink. Galen. lib. vij Simplic. medic.
Now to the third which is sweet having small roots and flowers like Rue or
herb grace. The round root is the best in medecin, as salve, powder, and
Oil. The fume or smoke thereof put under beds, or the cradels of young
children, is very wholesome and puts away air of infection: this herb is
most bitter and somewhat sharp hot and dry in the second degree. This herb
has virtues to incarnat ulcers and wounds, with clensyng and mundifyinge
them: and will extenuate and make thin Gross humor, and knitteth. The root
or curnelles thereof, dried and beaten into powder with Peper and Mire mingled
together, is wholesome to rub the gummes and teeth, when they be foul and
cankred. The powder is good to takeaway ded flesh, to be put into a fistula, to
cleanse it: even so it will help the conduite of the vryne, conueyghed in with a
syrynge or instrumente when it is corrupted with burninge heat, or vlcered: a
foment Oil and wine, and this root will bring forth a young child. Gentian
Aristolochia, and Honey, make a wholesome confectio^, for a stinkyng breath.
Aristolochia helps Cankers and burninges.

Many good virtues of Aristolochia.


The second ii. kinds says Pliny, drunk with wine, or water, be good to be
given them, which have the cramp, or have fallen down from some high place,
being sore bruised. The seed drunk, is good against the plurisy and worms, with
rosen and wax, this root, or roots, in powder, withdraw corns from the
feet, and also draw pryckes, needles, and arrowe heads from the Flesh. With
vinegar, this powder will, heal a green, wou^d: it is drunk against the
falling sickness, and shortness of wind. And this root must be gathered in
April.


Marcellus. VUhat is the virtue of that wild clyminge Uine, with the great
whyght root, stinkyng berries, red of Color, and leaves like unto Hoppes, or
wild Fyges?


Hilarious THis is a hedge weed in every place commonly growing, and creeps
about busshes, Brionia vitis alba, or the wyld tunning Uine.
branches, boughs and trees it florisheth until Harvest the branches be
somewhat bitter and sharp, and stopping of nature. The root does dry with
moderate warmes, in the second degree, it has virtue to cleanse skoure with
maturation or rypenes. To heal sores with Brionia.
The root of this Brion, or the powder of ye rotes, with Smalage. Mallows,
clean Honey. Flaxeseede in powder, and Barley meal clean Terebinthin, and a
little white wine sodden softlye together, makes a medecin to heal Fellons
and vncomes withal. or pushes. This herb being young and tender, may be eaten
as Asparagus may be, says Dioscorides, for it moves or provoke the belly
and vryne, the leaves, fruit and roots be sharp, and will byte the tongue, if
you taste of them. Therefore they will stamp them with Salt, to heal Cankers,
fylthe in hands or feet, or Legs, etc. as sores, foul pushes. etc. This
root will cleanse all the fylth from the body, To cleanse the face with Brionia.
and black spots, blaynes, blisters, shingles, pimpels called good Ale
pearls, tempered with the Powder of Fenegreeke and the Oil of Tartar. Or else
Bryona sodden in white wine, from a quarte to a pynt, then strain the same,
puttyng some Champhere* and wash the infected face every Night with a Sponge,
Briomia defends poison.
and let it dry in. The roots pressed in the Spring, and the Juice Drunk
with sweet water does purge fleum: drunk daily in the morning with wine or
Ale, well sodden, they help the falling evil, and vertigo Two ounces drunk are
good against the poison of Serpents, or venomous drynk. But yet it will kill a
young child, in the mothers womb. Mary, if the child be dead, by any casualty
in ye belly, the^ it will bring it forth by the way of a foment, or aplication,
by iniection into the mouth of the Matrixe. The berryes of this broken, do
help to cleanse scurfe, and fylthy Leprosy from the skin. If nurces do kneede
their Wheat meal, Brionia. increases Milk
with the juice of the Bryon beryes and bake it in bread, if they eat the
same bread, it will increase milk in their breast. But to use it much, except
cause of infyrmity move the pacient, it is hurtful for memory: it helps the
lunges, Liver, and spleen to be drunk, and draws forth pryckes, and heals
wounds.


Marcellus. What is Pellitory of Spain good for?


Hilarious. THe flower thereof, put into the nose, Sternumentaria

Pyre^hrum*

Ptermic

Pellitorie


will provoke much nesyng: and therefore it is called Ptermica, it has Flowers
like Chamomel, branches much like Sothernwood, It will grow in hard stony
places, the root must be dug in the end of Harvest: it is hot and dry in
the third degree and in the beginning of the fourth, specially if it be dried.
The leaves with the flowers stamped together, Dioscoridesi lib. 3. cap. 71
will make a good oyntmente to take away Marks made with strypes, causynge
blewe or black spots in the face or any part of the body. The roots have
virtue to draw fylth and cold humor from the corrupt payned teeth, says Galen
lib vij. simplicium medic. But if the said roots be first steeped in strong
Uineger and beaten in a mortar, and small round pills made of them, Pellitorie
has virtue to help the teeth.
putting them into the mouth, they will draw much fylth from the paller of the
mouth and gummes, and finally ease the tooth ache. Or the said roots or juice
of the^ sodden in Oil, will put away a cold Fever, Pellitorie will take away a
cold Fever.
if the body be well anointed therewith against a Fever before the fyt do come,
either in tertian or quarten. And it is a good oil for a cold stomach, that
is swelled: and thus I do end of Pellitory.


Marcellus. VHat virtue is in a wede which we call Goosegrasse, some people
calit Hare weed? It grows it hedges, in has rough leaves, and berries which
berryes hang by couples, and will cleave to men or women's clothes, and therefore
some do call it cleuer grass, with white flowers, white round seeds, like
nauelles.


Hilarious YOu have rightly described this herb, Philanthropos A perine
commonly called goosegrasse, and hareweede. Dioscor. lib. 3. cap. lxxxviij
which in deed bears al those names among the people: it is called
Philanthropos, for it loves to hang or garment, and go with men. This is a
name of property, ye very true name is Aparine, it is dry and clensyng: and
this herb and seed drunk in wine, preuayleth against stinginge of venomous
things: and the juice distilled in the ear, helps them, that cannot well
hear, This herb tempered with fresh Swynes grease, heals Struma, or pains
in the throat, applied to the same place: the juice thereof says Pliny
stops blood in a fresh wound, and heals the same.


Marcellus. (...) sundry (...) of (...) this viscum.
WHat is the virtue of Mislen, growing upon Thorns, Peretrees, and Oaks, whereof
I have seen great plenty growing in the country of Suffolk, with many goodly
herbs and flowers: (...)
as in these most ancient Parkes of Framingham Kelshal, Nettlestede,
Lethringham, Parham, Somet, Heningham* Westwood, Huntingfeeld, Henham, little
Glenham, and Benhal etc. These Parkes be old neighbors, God send them continual
friendship with each other in unity, for where as unity is broken, the Park
pale will not hold, but fall into sodayn ruin and decay, and the Dear will
scatter.


Hilarious. I Know the places which you have named right well. Furthermore, I
commend your good zeal that you bear to that worthy country: wishing their
continual unity and concord. I desire the same. For they be people of no less
ciuility then of most ancient good fame and worship: Uery gentle men spring
not by extortion* but by true serving their Princes, and living of their own,
hurtinge not their poor neighbor, preferring the favor of the c^untry before
lucre. which is their chief treasure
descended from houses of fame, worthy of memory, I mean no parkes, but
people, nor them which have crept under a goose wyng, drawing forth a bastard
sword no longer the^ a writing pen, fyghtyng their combat upon the backsyde
of a shete of paper, to the hurt of many perhaps, and profit of none, but to
theimselues only. But of them speak I* whose blood has been shed in the just
quarrel of their Princes: whose houses be builded upon hard rocks, of true
gotten goods: whose doors be open, keeping hospitality according to their
calling, who with the love of the country guard themselves, and with justice
defends causes of the pore. These be they which be worthy of laud, that thus
fears god: these be the right gentlemen, otherwise not. Now to our matter,
from which we a little have digressed. For this Mislen, which is called in
Latin Viscum, Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. lxxx.vij Mislen heals many pertilous
sores.
which is hot and tart, having ye complexion of air and water. This herb
with Rosen and Wax boiled together, will make a medecin to mollifye, dissolve,
draw forth swellyng cur^els, distilled of foul humors, gatheryng behynd the
ears: or any foul push, fester, or fellon, in any other place of the body:
tempered with Rosen, it heals an old ulcer. Take the berries of this Mislen,
Misteltow or Mislen will make a good ryping plaster and heal corns

Galen. lib. 6. Simplic. medic.


put thereunto the powder of Ieat, make it warm apply it to the left side upon
Leather when ye spleen swells, and it will help it. Temper it with
Auripigmentum. or vnsleaked Lime, and it will draw forth corns. This Mislen
says Galen is one of them, which after the first puttinge to in any medecin
will not be hot but requires a time, by little and little, as Thapsia does: and
this mislen grows of no seed, nor will grow upon the earth, but upon the
tree through the dounge of birds that syttte upon them by night, which by
little and little, breaks through the barks of the tree, into the sap: from
whence at length this Viscum does spryng and grows green in Winter, when the
poor naked tree seems withred and ded Virgil observing the nature thereof.
in the Aenedos. liber. vj. says thus of it. Quale solet syluis brumali
frigore Viscum
Fronde virere noua, quod non sua seminat arbos. Virgil

The Misteldine by kind, in storms of Winter cold,
Is never sown yet green does grow on trees bouth bare and old


Pliny the xvi. book the last chapter, says there be certain plants,
Misteltow is not natural in kind but ^ basterd brau^ch growing upon some
other tree.
which cannot be engendered, or bred upon the earth: for whom nature has
prepared, to take their beginning and nutriment of trees. For when they have no
places of their own, then they live upon other, as this Viscum or Misteltow
is wont. But now by the way of protestation. What benefyt has that tree, upon
whom this Misteltow does grow? No more than any member of the body, upon whom
a Canker is placed: it will at length desstroy altogether, except it be pulled
from the tree, unless it be a mighty tree, strong and full of humor, with
plentiful increment, Even so, into what realm or common wealth, Country,
Borough, or Cittye, that unnatural strangers, or forriners, be planted,
placed, or as they say, made naylfaste: Misteltow is like a stranger that
waxes ^ych and florisheth by the hurt and loss of a freeborne man of his
natural country or city.
forthwith they wax high, I mean welthy, lusty, and green in Winter: they
lack nothing in the time of dearth and miserye. When as the natural people,
upon whom they have their gain profit, taste of sore labor, lack, loss,
honger, and poverty. And thus I do conclude, both of miserye, and Mistleden,
remembryng Plinies words in the foresaid Chapter: Namque cum suam sedem non
habeant, in aliena viuunt, sicut Viscum.


Marcellus. VUhat virtue is in Ebulus, called walwort, which in Suffolk they
call Danes weed: it grows like Eldren, which leaves be like Walnut leaves,
and berryes in the top?


Hilarious THis herb is of the nature of Eldren, called Sambucus, Sambucus
Ebulus.

Eld^r^e and walewoorte.


of one Sambix, which first found out the virtue of this Eldren: and of nature
is hot and dry, resolves, and dries moist sores and ulcers, but is very
hurtful to the stomach. Dioscor. lib. 4. Cap. Clxviij.
Notwithstanding the tender leaves sodden, and eaten like a sallet, purge
fleume and choler. And it is good to heal the dropsye, Walewort makes
medecin for the gout, and pains in the joints
and does mollify the mouth of the matrixe, to make a fomente therwt. The juice
of this Ebulus or the berryes stamped with fresh Grease, and Barley meal, will
cleanse deep rotten sores, and cool the burning of a Gout, and pains in the
joints. Paulus Aegineta says, these ii. kynds of Elders, do glue and heal:
and either eaten or drunk do cast forth water by the belly, and nether parts.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Epithimum?


Hilarious. THis Herb does wrappe and fold about Time, Eythymum. Diosco. lib.
4. Cap. 172. Galen. lib. 6 Sim. medica.
and is therefore so called: the flower is used much in medecin, and is hot
and dry in the third degree, And purges Melancholy, Fleum, and gross humors
from the head, and does comfort the heart. Cassutha is hot in the first, and
dry in the second degree, and is of great virtue to open the Gall, cleanse the
raynes, deminish the Spleen. It purges, skowreth, fleume and Choler, and
heals ye Iaundice: drunk in decoctions, potions, Syruppes. etc. And this
Cassutha grows grosser, Epithymum. and Cas^utha helps the Liver Gal and
spleen.
and larger than Epithimum with white flowers, and no roots: but grows upon
other herbs, as Paritorye, young Flax, and other Plants, as Pliny lib. xvj*
Cap vltimo* writes.


Marcellus. What say you of Vngula Caballina or Tussilago?


Hilarious. IT is called Vngula Caballina, yt is horshoue, because no herb is
liker: but the Greeks call it Bechion, which is Tussilago, yt is, to help ye
cough. It is commonly known, some call it clot leaves: white on the one side,
Vngula Cab^llina.

Horsehoue.


and green on the othersyde. And grows nere waters, and in fallow lands:
the flowers florishe in May only, but the leaves all the Somer, and of nature
be cold and moist. These leaves stamped and strayned, the juice will heal
shingles, skaldinges, burninges, and hot inflammations. Dioscorides, Galen and
Pliny affirm, Diosco. lib. 3. cap. 10^. Galer. lib. vi. Sim. medica.
that these leaves and roots, being dried and cast upon the coals and so to
receive the smoke thereof through a reed or Trunk into ye mouth* will cleanse the
Lunges, and help them, and quickly deliver them from old rot^es, and cold
coughes.


Marcellus. Apiastrum.
What is Apiastrum?


Hilarious. APiastrum or Melissa which we name Balm: be of two kinds, garden,
and feelde. Bees love this herb above al other, and it is called the Bees, or
Honey herb: and is dry in the first, and warm in the second degree. Melissa
Balm. Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. ^01. Auecennae in libro medicin.
The juice of this herb, heals stinging of Bees, Serpents, mad dogs, and
wounds, drunk in wine, and cleanses also the terms menstrual. Nothing does
more comfort the heart, then this herb in decoction, or the water thereof:
Burrage water, and syne Musk sodden in a clean vessel and drunk when the
heart is weak, or in a great Hicker, this herb will cleanse the Lunges, and stop
the bloody flixe, and pains of the throat called Angina made in a warm
plaster. Galen lib. 7. Simpli medicamen.
It keeps vomits, and helps collike dronk in wine: Balm and Nuttes, stamped
with Honey, help to lighten the Dull blemished dark iyen, and the sight. It is
like Horhounde says Galen.


Marcellus. What is Carui, which we do call Careawayes?


Hilarious. THis fine small seed comes from the country of Cari in Asia which
is ye place, Caros.
where as they grow very plentifully: this Carry seed, is hot and dry in the
third degree. Dioscor. lib. 3 Cap. 57. Galen. lib. 7. Sim. medica.
Dioscorides says, this is the virtue of the seed, pleasant to the mouth,
and profitable to the stomach, it provoke vryne, and helps digestion, it
is good in medecines, and of the nature of Anisseedes: the roots be yellow and
to eat upon be better than the Past nippe. The seed does not only
extinguishe hot swelling and move vryne: but the plant also, says Galen:
the decoction of Carry wine, is best to be drunk to cleanse the raynes.


Marcellus. What is Cartafilago


Hilarious CArtafilago has red stalks two cubits long, and hollow long leaves
like Sallow, with small teeth like a saw, about them yellow flowers, many
Roots, and red without: it florisheth in August, Cartafilago ^ulnararia. Herba.
it is dry, stoppyng, and byndynge. This herb is equal to the best healinge
wound herb: and it will incarnate and heal the said wound, and cleanse ye same
stamped and put into it. You may dry this herb and make powder thereof, and
cast it into a fresh wound, and it will heal speedelye. A goodly. wound herb.
What is better for a fystula? Prove it I pray you.


Marcellus. What is Grummel seed?


Hilarious. GRana solis, Millium solis, is comonlye known, these seeds be good
to be fynely beaten in powder, and drunk, Grana Solis.
to cleanse the raynes and cause vryne to pass, that is stopped: Fenel,
Parselye, and this seed broken in white wine, and let it stand all one night,
puttyng some Seen leaves to the same, and in the morning sees this in a stone
vessel, put in Sugar then strain it, and drynk the same: To c^use vryne to
pass plentifully.
it will purge fleume, choler, and open ye raynes and bladder, and force forth
vryne most plentifully.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cichory?


Hilarious. THis Herb is called in Greek Serin, in Latin Intybum, whereo^ are
two kinds, the wyld and tame, Sponsa Soli^. Intybus. Endiuia. Cichory.
these be the names of Endive and Cichory, that with broader leaves, somewhat
like Beats, is Endive. The Second with Iagged Leaves, like unto Dandelyon, is
Cichorye: these have hard stalks with trim blewe flowers like hats, some have
white flowers. Dioscr. lib. 3. Cap. Cxxv.
These be cold and dry in the second degree: the Endive is more cold then the
Cichorye, and be both of a restringing, or stopping, bynding nature. These
herbs green, both roots and leaves, has virtue to cool the hot burning of
the liver, the stoppyng of the gall, the yellow Iaundice, the heat of the
heart, the lack of sleep, the stoppyng of vryne, hot burning fevers, being
first digested. The syrup thereof is excellent good against the said
sicknesses: the Water cannot be missed in all potions and coolynges, or purging
drynkes, to purge mankind withal. The waters of Endive, Planten, Roses, and
stylled Milk, with fine Bole Armoniake, or seefe without Opium, is good to be
cast with a Syryng into the fylthy, burnt swelled, or corrupted yardes, or
Conduictes, of unclean persons.

For the heat of the liver. R. Endive or Cichory, whytes of Eggs, Barly^
flower, A very good medecin for the ulcer in the yard.
Sanders, clean young fresh swynes grease, the oil of Roses, Uiolets, and
water Lillies, wrought together in a Leaden mortar, and applied to the side,
spread upon leather. This plaster is very good, against the hot burning gout
in the feet, A plaster for the liver and gout.
or shingles, or burninge in any part of the body. Dandelion is of the same
virtue.


Marcellus. What is that root Napus called the Naue?


Hilarious. IT is called Napus Bunias, because of his own nature, it grows
great and round, whereof be two kinds: one bears leaves like Rapes, The
other like Rocket, but greatter, and has yellow flowers, the Seeds grow in
coddes, and of Nature be hot in the second degree. The roots of Napee increase
wynd, and less norishe then Rapes, the seeds be good in many medecines, and
prevail against poison. The roots sodden and preserved in salt, be wholesome
to eat upon: in Egypt the people make much of this herb.


Marcellus. What say you of Rapes.


Hilarious. THis Rape is a rural common root, and no less known than common,
of two kinds: the tame has leaves like Radix, and yellow flowers. The other
has blew flowers and small sharp leaves, Napus. Bunias.
in the length of a finger, with small teeth like a Saw, round about the said
leaf. The garden great Rape does noryshe, inflate, engender, loose or weak
flesh, and moves carnal lust. The root sodden, and warm applied, helps a
kibed heel, and eases the gout, make this Root hollow, put therein oil of
Roses and Wax, then roast it in hot Ashes, and this will heal kybes, which be
deeply rotten or festered within the heel. Sees Asparagus in the decoction
of Rapes and drink the same to purge the blader, Goodly virtues of rapes.
cleanse the raynes, and force vryne. The seed of Rapes is good in many
medecines, Plini. lib. 17. cap. xiij.
and in Triacle, and expulceth poison: wild Rapes be put in medecines, to
cleanse the face, as with Lupines, been m^ale. etc. Pliny says, the seed
being sown, within three months following, it will be a great root: but it
is very hard in decoction it increases wind and seed, says Gal. lib. vi.
Simplicium Medicamentorum. There is great plenty of the oil thereof made in
England, as in Marsland nere to Lin. etc, Uery profitable to our common wealth.


Marcellus. What is the root called Rhoyda?


Hilarious. ROyda is a goodly root, whereof is great plenty in Macedonia, and
now in many places of Germanye, growyng in gardens, and is hot and dry in the
second degree: it smells much like a Rose and these roots stamped, and made
warm with oil of Roses applied to ye forhead, will assuage the grief, burning
heat, lack of sleep, and frensye, that mankind does through weakness fall in to.
This herb will grow in England also, Roid^ helps the dead.
if idleness were not the let.


Marcellus. What is the root called Doronike


Hilarious IT is a precious root, growyng in Egypt, and is called Doronicus.
Actuarius calls it Carnabadium: it has many knottes, Doronicu^. Alexandrie
Doronicus do help dig^stion.
and is no bygger than a man's finger, and is put into confection, for lack of
perfect digestion, and against poison, there is no berter Root than this.
Ruellius supposes it to be that, which the Greeks call Arnabo.


Marcellus. What is the good of Liquorice roots


Hilarious. LIquoryce called Glycerrhiza of the sweetness, Liquorice.
grows great plenty in hoate Countries. Even so there is much here in
England, the yellower and moyster, the better: it is sweet, warm and moist of
nature. Liquorice is wholesome against the exasperation, Dioscorides.
Liquorice helps the lunges. and wounds.
or sharpnes in Arteries, to byte upon this root, or keep it in the mouth,
for that purpose. For the burninge heat In the stomach, and sycknes of the
Lunges, spleen, and old rotten cough, Scabbes in the bladder, and sorenes in
the raynes, drunk in pocions or broken: Liquorice heals wounds, if it be
anointed therewith. The powder thereof put into the eye, will help Pterygius,
which is a little skin growing from the corner, coueryng the sight.
Liquorice, Wine and Honye, heals both wounds, without and within also


Marcellus. I would as gladly learn the virtue of Radish roots for medecin
as I have been desirous to feed of them with meat.


Hilarious. First I shall declare unto you the name thereof, it is properlye
called Raphanus because it Spryngeth soddaynelye, and Radix is a name common to
all Roots, Rapha^u^* Radix. Radishe.
But this Radish bears the chiefename among other roots: and therefore it is
called Radix. Pliny makes mention of Radish roots lib. xix. cap 5. that were
as hyg as young infant children. Of Radish roots there be no small store
growing about the famous city of London: they be more plentiful then
profitable, and more noisome, then nourishinge to man's nature, ingenderyng of
wind, enemy to the stomach, says Dioscorides. These be nombred rather among
roots used for meat, tha^ accounted of perfect wholesome nutriment: good to be
eaten before meat, Diosco. lib. 2. cap. 106.
to vomit and cleanse the stomach. But wholesome in the end of meals, for
choleric stomachs, a little at once, to help digestion* and to distribute
the meat: but Galen affyrmeth, that tender young Radish with Uineger, is good
sauce in the beginning of Meals, to loose the bellye.

For the plain people do eat these roots with bread, taught by nature, and
not by art: Gal. lib. 2. de ali^n ento^^m faculratibus.
And so is Organ being green, Cresses, Time, Sauery, Peneroyall, Germander,
Mintes, Calamintes, Paritory, and Rocket. These herbs and this root, be
rather eaten of necessitye, then of will and fantasy. But sodden and then
prepared with sharp vinegar, Sugar, and sweet clear oil, How to use Radi ^
roots
are more profitable than crude, raw herbs or roots. Many learned and
unlearned, do maruayle, says Galen, why men use to eat them raw after supper,
to help digestion: who answers, long custom has so taught them.
Notwithstanding, the example of such is not to be followed without peril or
hurt. Pliny affyrmeth, that Raddyshe, sodden in wine, drink that wine in the
morning, and it will deminishe, and cast forth the stone, open the gall,
deminish the spleen, move Uenus, cleanse spots and bruses made in the skyn by
some strype. Hyppocrates says that if women chafe their heddes, Radix helps
the belly.
with Raddysh roots, the hair will fall, and applied to the Nauel of women, it
will quickly assuage the torment of the belly and Matrix. The juice will h^lpe
any pain within the ear, dropped in warm: with many mo virtues used in
medecin, although abused in meats, through ignorance, in eating them so raw,
and out of time. Of nature, Garden radishe is dry in the second and hot in
the third degree. The wild Radish is hotter and dryer of nature: the seed is
good in medecin to cleanse vryne, and Radix loves to grow in fat grounds.


Marcellus. What of Pastnippe*


Hilarious. Pastnips their roots.
THey be called Pastinacae a Pascendo, that is of Fedyng, or noryshing, or
warming nature: they be pleasante in taste, and move Venus, whereof be wild
growing in stony places* but the best are sown in Gardens, and of nature be
hot and clensyng, The seeds of wild Pastnips drunk will provoke terms
menstruall and vryne. heal dropsye and Pluritici, and are good against venom,
and stinginge of Serpents, and help conception. But this Herb applied into
the Matrix, by the hand of the mydwyfe. Draws forth the dead Child, stamped
with Honye put upon a spreading ulcer, Diosco. lib. 3 Cap. lii. Gal. lib vij.
Sim. medica.
it is healed thereby. Those of the Garden are more apt in meat then the wyld:
and the said wyld are more affectuall in medecin: one of these parsenips is
called yellow Caret, the other a Rape.


Marcellus. What is the Sicer, or sweet white Carret good for?


Hilarious. Dioscor. lib. 2. cap. 107, Gal. lib. 8. Sim. medica.
THis root is commonly known, it is no less pleasant to the Mouth, than
profitable in meat for the Stomach: it provoke vryne, and helps appetite,
and is hot in the second degree, And is so^what bitter, and is called white
Pastnip, with yellow flowers, leaued like Pimpernel. The seed sodden in wine
and drunk, helps the collike, and wynd in the stomach, or hicket, which
follows after vomits or weakness of the heart.


Marcellus. What say you of Rubarbe?


Hilarious. RHeum Barbaricum, or Rhabarbe, is a noble root of great virtue,
Rhabarbe and Rhapontike.
and does differ from Rhaponticum, is better in purgynge, in savor, in
substance, compact and heavy, golden colowred with gray Turkey colored
veins. dry and in taste bitter, whereas Rhaponticum is light not heavy, not
hard with drynes, but soft with moystnes, not bitter but tart, not compacte,
but slender. And therefore Rhabarbe and Rhapontike, The difference between
Rubarbe and Rhapontike.
be not both one, as many have most foolishly affyrmed, then with good
arguments truly proved. And the best Rabarbarium comes from Troglotide
which is a hot country, in the fardest part of Aphrica beyond Ethiopia, where
as ye people to avoid the extreme heat of the Sun, From whence Rhabarbe.
does come co^^
are constrained to inhabit in Caves, under the earth, and feed on Dragons
Flesh, which were called Barbarous people, from whence many precious gummes
and spices be brought, as Galen. says. lib. vj. Simplicium medidicament. and
lib. 4. cap. vj. de tuenda sanitate. Ginger is brought says he, from
Barbarye, which Pliny in lib. xij. cap xxj. calls Trogleditis which was
Barbary. And in his xix. book says he. the cause why Cinnamon is so scarce
and of no plenty: the Ireful Barbarians, do burn the Spice trees. For Myrrh
comes from thence Galen and Plini, agree this to be that Barbary, calling it
Trogloditis Pomponius Mela, a great writer in his first book of the situation
of the world says: the vile people, whereas these precious Spyces and roots do
grow, do rather grin like Dogs, than speak like men, and dwell in Holes, and
feed on serpents flesh. And Strabo lib. xv Geographia does testifye, that all
kind of Spice and plants begin in Arabia Foelix, and in the South part of
Inde, For the Sun takes like force in them, But in Arabia Foelix, The
cruelty of the Barbarians, is to burn the Spice trees and plants. Pomponius.
Mela lib. 3* de situ orbis.
which is between the Seas Arabicum and Persicum, is so Fertile that it has
two Haruestes yearly, with all spices, fruits and gummes. whereas the people
live ever in peace, without War, or walled towns: out of these Places
comes Rhabarbe to Alexandria, and then to Uenice, and so is dispersed into
many places, to the great comfort, health, and help of mankind, to purge
choler, and humors, superfluous in the body. What is better to comfort the
liver, to cleanse the blood, and heal the kings evil called the Iaundice than
Rubarbe. How many goodly Electuaries, Pills, Syrupes, and purgations, have
Rubarbe in them? Uery many. Simple by it self, by infusion, how maruailous
does it purge, cleanse, skower, and expulse venomous fylthe from the body? It
asswageth timpanies, tertians, dropsies, reconsyleth sleep in dry collerike
persons: by correcting hot choler in the^ if it be slysed into clean Goats
whay, Cichory or Buglosse water.iii. and Spicknard.i. standing all the night, in
the morning, strained and dronk, it will cleanse the Blod, and expulse choler.
Mesue affirms, that Rhabarbarum excels all other Rhaies, both turkish and
Indishe.

It is a purgation hurtles, very gentle, and here is an infusyon thereof most
excellent, An excellent infusion of Leonellus Fauentinus to cleanse the blood.
to cleanse the Blood: written by a famous man of this time, called Leonellus
Fauentinus. R. Rhababaru^ of the best.i. Spicknard. G. iii. make an infusion
according to art in the waters of Borage, Uiolets, Sorel or Mallows, as much
as shall suffice: after that it has stand viii hours, strain it hard, and put
into the same infusion Diacatholicon.vi. and Electuarie e Succo Rosarum and,
Diaphaenicon any. ss. dissolve them in the decoction of Flowers and fruits:
and this drynk will very gently purge all foul humors. If any man have a
Bloody flyxe, to help the same, or let him slyce a piece of of Rhabarbe, and
tossed it hard, and eat the same, or crome it warm into red wine, and planten
water, and drink it. In Italy there is Rhabarbe, which will purge choler, but
not so good. as I have descrybed above: Rubarbe must be preserved in Wax or
Honny, Flax sede, or the seed of Psyllium so it may be kept.iii. or iiii.
years. Rhapontike, grows by a famous city called Pontus, Marcellinus. lib.
xij. says, it grows by the river Tanais, which seperateth Europe from Asia.
Of this says Paulus Aegineta, it is earthly and cold, but the subtilier
parts thereof, are moist and warm, and but meanly tarte of taste. Therefore it
will help fractures, Paulus Aegineta. lib. 7. litera. R
conuultions, and shortness of wind, and strypes: it has virtue to direct, to
draw forth, and cleanse spitting of blood and pains in the guts.


Marcellus. Of Agarike
What say you of Agarike?


Hilarious. OF Agarike there is the Male, which is compacted round, and the
female being broken, Diosco, lib 3. Cap. j.

How to know good Agarike


has directed straight veins, and is flat: these Agarikes. be white, light
compact, thycke together, and sweet in the beginning of theiretast, and then
very bitter in thend of the same, with biting on the tongue. It grows upon
the region of Sarmasia, in a place called Agaria, whereas is a famous river and
City so named. Some say, that the Root thereof does grow, and bring forth
this Agarike: other that it grows like Musroms, on Ceder trees. There grows
Agarike in Italy says Pliny. lib xvi. Cap vij. Agaricke cle^clenseth the
guts, and expulceth raw humors.
But because it is a stranger unto us, it shall suffice us to know the virtue
thereof. It is hot of nature, and is good against a tourme^t of ye guts,
raunesse in the stomach, abundance of Phlegm, ruptures, dropsies, brewses or
falls, stoppyng of urine, strangury, swelling of ye matrix, falling evil,
poison, or stinging of any venomous worm. One ounce steeped in sweet wine or
sweet water, and strongly strayned, and dronk before the coming of a Fever
quotidian puts it clean away. Agarike helps ye falling sickness.
Drunk with vinegar and Sugar sodde^ and then well strayned, it helps
Sciatica, and the falling evil. This Agaricke is no less commended then
much used in sundry electuaries and pills. etc. to the great help of Mankind
Galen. lib. vj. Simplicium medidicament* does remember Agarike among some kind
of Roots, and that grows on the trunk of a tree. First in taste sweet, then
bitter, Agarike purges all the orgaynes of the senses.
and so forth he declares the virtue thereof, to purge the guts, heal the
Iaundice, and open the galle, and discharge all viscous humors: who did ever
commend any purging thing, more than Mesue does Agarike? says he, it cleanses
fleume and choler, and all the instruments of the senses, and the brains,
back bone, muskles, sinews, lunges, breast, Liver, Gall, and spleen.
Democrites says, it is a familiar medicine to all the Pryncipall parts of the
Body, and from them, to all the other parts: It purges and does not weaken or
decay, any natural or animal virtue, with many goodly comme^dacions which, he
gives to the same Agarike. And thus I end, giuyng you warning, that it be very
fynely beaten, and close kept, and Spicknard put to it in medicine.


Marcellus. What say you of Cassia, and Lignum Aloes, and Cassiafistula.


Hilarious. GALEN makes mention of Cassia in lib viij. Simplici. medica.
saying it is dry, and hoate in the third degree, Cassia Aromatike.
and does warm the body, and strengthen the instruments thereof. This Cassia
is of Aromatike nature, and is good for UUomne to drynk whose terms be
suppressed: a goodly medicine of Cinnamon beaten in powder, with Lignum Cassiae,
is thus made. A precious water made with Cinnamon, Cassia, rose water, (...).
white wine, for all cold causes.
R. Cinnamon l i.i. Cassia.ii. water of Roses. l i iiii. clean white Wine. l
i.vi. put these altogether in a close pot covered: put this pot into a warm
vessel of leuke warm Water, during.xxiiii hours, making a small fire under
the receiving vessel, wherein it is put. Then take it from the same vessel, and
power it into the pan of a common stillitorye, then set on the helmit close,
and with a soft fire distill ye same, keep it in a close glass, to give it to
them, which have any cold syckenes, as dropsy, quotidian, abundance of
fleume, stoppyng of the Galle, raynes, or conduite of vryne, Collike, weakness
of the heart, dullness of spyrite, Lignum Aloes called Agallocum which is
Aromatike.
moystereume, or lack of memory And if you cause this water to be distilled
two times, it is the better and of the greater strength. As for Lignum Alces,
which is hot and dry in the second degree, it is called Agallochum, and
grows in Inde, and Arabia Foelix, and is spotted, Aromatike, smelling sweet,
Dioscorides Lib. 1 cap 20.
and is a little bitter to taste upon, with byndyng nature, and it has a
pleasant verdure in the mouth. Serapius faith the best is black, with
varyable or diverse colors, full of sap, heavy, and hard, gross* and
compacted together, Lignum Aloes comes not from Paradise, but from Mondella
city of Inde
with sharp sweet smell. This wood comes from a city called Mondel in Inde,
and not from Paradyse as some do foolyshly fansy, it does, and so is conveyed
by the River Ganges. Well to the virtue thereof. It will comfort the brain,
when it is dystempered with cold, through the sweet savor. The decoction
thereof, made with Barley, Madder and Sugar heals Ulcers, and UUoundes in the
Guts: and it is good against bloody flixes, and hardness of the Spleen, and
is a very wholesome Perfume. Cassiafistula* comes from Egypt.
Cassia solutiua, or Fistula, called the Coddes of Egypt, can not be spaced
among old Persons, and tender People: for the gentle purging of the Body,
clensyng of the Raynes, prouokyng Uryne. Either drawn with Endyue water,
Goats whaie, or eaten new from the Cane, tempered with Barley water,
Cassiafistula have many virtues to help mankind it can not be forborne.
or Morell UUater. It makes a good Gargarisme for Angina or pains in the
throat, or Apostumacions in the Guts. It is good in washyng or clensyng
Clisters, and it will make soft a hard Apostumacyon applied thereunto, in any
part of the body. It is good for the Gout to be made in plaster, for the same
purpose. Who so has great pains in the Guts, it is not good to give Cassia
simply alone, Note.
but to mingle it with the powder of Hiera Picra, and for the raynes, to put it
in the Syrup of Liquorice. It is hot and moist in the first degree, the
heavier, the Ramisher in savor: the shynyng black of color, is best
Cassiafistula, and from Memphis, and Alexan^ria in Egypt comes Cassia.


Marcellus. There is a very sweet Moss, which grows upon trees, men say it
is good in medicine, what say you to the matter?


Hilarious. Dioscor lib. 1. Capi. xx.
THE best Moss that grows upon any Tree, is of the Ceder: the second of the
Popular Tree, the third of the Oak. The white is good* but the blackishe is to
be refused. It is sweet and odoriferous, and has virtue to stop: the
decoctyon thereof is good to wash, and help the pains of ye mouth, and of the
matrix. This white Moss is good in Bathes, and in comfortable Ointments, for
the weakness of a cold feeble stomach. Pliny do commend it, Lib. xij. cap.
xxiij. calling it Sphagnos or Brion: saying. it grows in the Province of
Cyrenaica, which is a country in Afrike. etc. In other places, as Cyprus,
Egypt, and Phaenicia: there grows very good in France and Italy, both
sweet, and will molify Galen lib. vj. s^mplici medica. says, Brion, which is
Splanchnon, is found among Oaks, Pine trees, and white Populors: it has power
to stop or bynd, but very weakly: it is neither hoate nor cold, To comfort the
spyrites.
but mean. It has virtue to direct and molify, chyefly that, which comes
from the Ceder trees. Auicen says, it will make a wholesome Cordial medicine. And
also the savor is good for the brain, and spirits or senses, that be weak.
Of sweet Musk Serapius says, it comes from a beast, mutch like a Goat,
that feeds upon Aromatike trees, Ruellius and Simeon Sethi affirm that Musk
comes from a city in the East, Sweet Musk.
called Chorasa, the Barbarians call it Pat, and of color is somewhat yellow An
other Musk comes from Inde, not comparable in virtue to the first: and this
is black of color, The beast which gives Musk, is like a Goat that which
brings S^uette, is like a Catte. The blaunching of Musk.
and this comes from a beast like a Goat. armed with one horn in his
forehead. And this comes from between their legs: and also is gathered in
the clear air, and bright shining days from the dunge, and closely preserved
in Uessels: and sold to the merchants, both this pure du^ge and sweet coddes,
and or it comes to our uses, it is adulterated by the Apothicaries, by many
craftye ways, as with Mouse dounge, Charcoles. etc. But of the own nature it
is most pleasant and comfortable to the weak spirits of mankind, against
frensy, collike* Cardiace, Palsy, lack of memory, heaviness of mind, dropsy,
lack of digestion etc. And what is pleasaunter in sweet water, Swette things
be good.
to wash hands, head, and beard, and good in apparel and may be rightly used,
it is Gods gift, to adorn and garnysh Mankind with, although, light wanton,
lecherous people, for mankind but yet abused of youthful wanton^ are not to
be suffered in them.
do make it an Instrument of prouocacion to naughtines withal. Yet the good use
thereof among the honest, is no more to be forborne, than the abuse is worthy
to be suffered among the harlots. Precious Balmes and perfumes are not
forbidden by Gods word: although Judas did murmr, when the Woman did anoint
Jesus, with the precious Nardus. And Isaac being blind, did rejoice in the
precious smell, which came from the Garments of his Son Jacob, Marc. xiiii.
when he blessed him, saying: behold the smell of my Son, Gene. xxvi.
is as the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed. And thus I end of
Musk, which is hot in the second, and dry in the third degree. Some affirm,
Musk.
that if Musk do swim in water, then it is good, but the contrary if it
synketh, As for Sibetto, called Siuet, is a beast like a Cat, which Beast
comes from Syria, and sometime there be seen of them here in England brought
from Venice: Of the Siuet Cat.
and between the testiles of this beast, comes the sweet Siuet, which is
hot and moist of nature: if Women be stopped in the matrix, put some of this
anointed upon a pessarie, into the mouth of the matrix, and she shall be sone
helped. Matthiolus, reports more thereof. Lib. 1. Dioscorid Cap. xx. which I
will not name, it is so venerous. As for Amber Grice, or Amber Cane, Diverse
opinions, how Amber Grice is found.
which is most sweet myngled with other sweet things: some say it comes
from the rocks of the Sea. Other say it spryngeth out of the earth, in Arabia
Foelix, or Inde, upon things that smell like Mosrumes, and so is pressed forth
and preserved. Some say it is gotten by a Fish called Azelum, which feeds
upon Amber Greece, and dies, which is taken by cunnyng Fishers and the belly
opened, and this precious Amber found in him. Other do say, it is found
swimming upon a fountain of pure water: and that is thought to be the best
inuencion. For Symeon Sethi, says Amper called Amber, is increasyng, or found
in diverse places. and is gathered in Fountains swimming above, as Bitumen is*
or Brimstone, whereof be three kinds, the first is Fuluus, which mixed of
green and red. yeldeth a dark yellow, Amber Grice of three kinds
which is brought from Inde. An other kind comes from Arabia Foelix, which
is dark, white, or gray in color: the third is blackish, and is the worst, a
very counterfeit Amber. This Amber Grice is of nature hot and dry, the savor
thereof does greatly comfort the heart and brain of old People, or weak women:
and to comfort the heart, it is equal to any other odoriferous treasure. It is
put into many precious Cordials, and wholesome medicines: and nothing is more
better to quicken the spyrytes and comfort memory, tha^ this rych Amber Greece.
Gloves sweetly perfumed with Musk, Siuet, Amber Greece, and Oil de Ben, be
very wholesome for Cytizens, Sweet Gloves, their profit.
that dwell in close, corrupted foul air. In deed, it can not be forborne
of noble Princes, Lords, Ladies, and gentle folks: God give them grace to know
it to be his gift, to pleasure the Sense of smellyng, and to defend evil
airs, and not to move, or to be an instrument of Ungodlynes. Whereas to use it
well, it is of no small profit to Nature, as example. R. Storax Calamite.iii.
Beniamyn.ss. Cloves..ss. Lignum Aloes..ii. Galia Muschata..iii.ss. Amber
Grice..i.ss. Musk. G. xvi. Siuet. G. xii. a little sweet Terebinthin, all put
into a warm mortar, A good Pomamber against coldness of the brain very
pleasant.
and strongly beaten with the pestell, pouring in sweet Rose, or Damask
water. Of this is made a precious Poma^ber. to be worn against foul stinkyng
air: weakness of the brain, coming of cold. And thus I do end of this most
sweet Oders.


Marcellus. What say you of the Wood, called Ebenus.


Hilarious Diosco. lib. 1. Capit. iii. Ebenus of.iii. kinds.
THe best Ebenus comes from Ethiopia, and is very black, it has no veins in
it, but abyting sharp taste: yet very sweet in perfume, and is gummie, this is
the best. There is an other dark yellow, and spotted, and this has a byndyng
virtue and is good to be put in Colliries, for sore eyes. And Galen lib. v.
simplj medicam. Ebenus is one of the woods, beaten into powder and resolved in
water, to be drunk to help the Stone: and of Nature is hot and scouryng. And
for that cause, it is good to be put in Medicines, for to help the sight of
the eye. A goodly medicine for sore eyes, of Ebenus.
or blysters in them. If Ebenus be fine ground. upon a whette stone, and with
a Knyfe taken from it. G. iiii. and the powder of Lapis Calaminaris. G. ii.
Seef. G. iii. Chamfer. G. i.ss. the white of an Egg, Rose water, and Woman's
Milk ana..ss. myngled together: this will most effectually, cleanse and scour
sore darkened Eyes. Theophrastus lib. 4 cap. vi. de historia plantarum. says,
in Inde the wood is common* and of two kynds: the one is precious, and does
service, and the other is of no estimacion. The Princes of Inde do esteem
Ebenus, Sceptees for Kings* and the Heathen Idolles of Ebenus.
rycher than gold, for of that Wood, they do not only make their drynkyng
Uessels, against poison, but also the Scepters of regal honor. And finally
their Idols of their Gods, whom they do worship. Thus the Indyans do both use
and abuse this rych Wood, which will syncke like Metal, and not swim. When
Pompey did triumph over Mythridates the King of Pontus, one of the greatest
gloryes the Romans had, was in this strange wood, When Ebenus came first to
Rome. Seades of Ebenus.
whereupon the Scepters and vessels were made of it. This Ebenus also though
it be good, yet it has been an instrument of Idolatry, in many places of
England: whereof beads have been made, not only of Ebenus, but of Corrall,
Iette, Amber, Jasper, Granites, Glass, Amyll, Gold and Silver: which creatures
were ordained for man's bodily health, and not for their Contemplacyon, and
Spiritual prayers. I did know within these few years, Two Witches in Suffolk
Charmed with Ebeni Beads.
a false Witch, called. M. Line, in a town of Suffolk, called Perham, which
with a pair of Ebene Beads, and certain charms, had no small resort of
foolysh women, when their Children were syck. To this lame Wytch they resorted,
to have the Fairie charmed, and the Spyrite coniured away: through the prayers
of the Ebene beads* which she said, came from the holy land, and were
sanctified at Rome. Through whom many goodly cures had been don, but my chance
was to burn ye said beads Oh? That damnable witches be suffered to live
unpunished and so many blessed me^ burned: witches be more hurtful in this
realm than either quarten, Pox, or pestilence. I knew in a town called
Kelshall, in Suffolk a Witch, whose name was M. Didge, who with certain Aue
Mary's upon her Ebene Beads, and a wax Candle, A Witches blessyng for sayncte
Anthonies tire.
used this charm following for S. Anthonies fire, having the sick body before
her, holding up her Hand saying: there came two Angels out of the North east,
one brought fire the the other brought frost, out fire. and in frost. In nomine
patris. etc. I could rehearse an. C. of such knackes, of these holy gossips,
the fire take them all, for they be Gods enemies.


Marcellus. THis is wood of great virtue, and excellent goodness, few woods may
be compared to it, for the estimacion: yet for the French disease, there is an
other rich wood, called Guaicum, I pray you speak something of that wood.


Hilarious GVAICVM, or Guaiacanum called Lignum sanctum, or the holy wod, or
wood of Life, is of a kind of Ebenus. Of the Wood of life called Guaicum.
And as almightye God prepared a tree of great virtue, for Moises to cast into
the water called Mara or bytternes, through which tree, the same water was
made pleasant and sweet, for the children of Israel to drink upon in the
wilderness, when as they murmured against God and his holy Prophet Moses:
Even so it has also pleased him to ordain and prepare this Guaicum: whereby
through his mynisters knowledge, Exodus xv. d
it might be a mean to make whole, and cleanse the fylthy stinkyng corrupted
bodies of his dysobedient children, which have lived in most shameless lust
and lechery, among painted stinking harlots, for which offense, they be smitten
with the plague, called the French Pockes, The Pox of France.
an evil most noisome to nature, cousin Iarman to thincurable Leprosye. This
Guaicum I say will not only make a Pocky body clean, but also is good to
cleanse any of the princypall humors, when they do abound, whereby there shall be
a temperance most perfect in nature, it will cleanse the raynes, itch, and
skabbes. And nothing may be compared to the same, to rebate, assuage, cleanse,
consume, and wast without hurt* great fatty gross bellyes of idle men and
women, which be puffed up with eating, drynking, sleapyng and sytting in the
house al ye day without labor, the tables, cards, and Pot, excepted which
causes them but little to sweat, and less to thrive: for such folks Guaicum
drink is incomparable above all others for the goodness, to renew them and make
them appear young again: for the Gout, Dropsy, Sciatica, Canker, and
Timpany. This is equal to the best medicines, therefore it may be called
Lignum vitae, the wod of life, because it has virtue to renew. This worthy wod
of life, God has given to the christian people, in these last Days; which wod
was unknown to the old Fathers as Dioscorides, Theophrastus, Antonij Musae
exam. omnium, Simpl. de lignis.
Plinius, Gale, Paulus, Aetius. etc. And yt is no marvel, for ye part of ye
world whereas this wod does grow, was never found forth by the famous
Cosmographer Ptolomaeus, Pomponius, and others, but of late years only. This
wod was found by the sailors into the new Islands, called Corterali,
Hispaniola, dista^t somewhat from the Equinoctial line, and in many other parts
there about, whereas the people of those lands be often infected with soores,
biles, and a sickness mutch like the Pox, or else the very same in deed: and
to recover the same, the sick folks do eat of the fruict of Guaicum, and are
made whole: this fruict will sone rotte, Three kynds of Guaiacum but the white
is most excellent.
but whereas the fruicts can not be gotten, then they do make a decoction of
the wood or barks of the same which brings the like health. The Spaniard
perceiving the same, did bring this wood in to Europe, not only for to heal
their own Pox, but also for France, Italy, Germany, and for England, in whom
this wood takes no small effect for the foresayed Pox: of this Guaicum are
three kyddes, the first is black within, in the heart, pale colored, having in
it ru^let lines, very hard and heavy. The other black within but white without,
having very small lines, is hard and heavy, and not so great as the first. The
third is al right whyt^ within and without, having very small lines, and the
heart of this Wood is the best, The consideracion of Guaicum.
the arm of the tree is better then the body the bows nearer the fruicts has
more virtue, warmnes and drynes, than the lower parts of the tree, which are
groser and more earthly of nature, and the more vncteous the wood is, it is the
better, the sap is not so good as the heart, neither the bark as good as the
sap. But the white wood is sweet and most excellent in operacion, and is
Lignum sanctum, the holy wood. The bark of the straight young branches or
bowghes, being heavy and white, moist and without lines hard compacted be the
best barks for the Pox. All these woddes called Guaiaci, have a rosin or
matter like Beniamen or pleasant Gum within the wood. which is the spyrite or
lively helpyng humore in decoction for the Pox For the ertreame pains in the
joints sinews, Man's nature is subject to many evils for want of perfect
temperament.
veins muskels, head hands, feet, and the bones, no sycknesse is so sharp
and cruel to nature, but this precious wood will both quickly and gently
assuage the pain and grief of the same, if it be ministered accordynly in
decoction, namely to them whom either the Pox has tormented, or else the Gout
has torn or racked with intolerable grief: Among all mortal infirmites,
which is more grievous to nature, than the Strangurie, pyssyng of blood, or
stoppyng of the stone: what diseases again be more Enemies to man's nature,
than swelling of the Belly, Hydrops, putrefaction of Humors, opilacions, he
dach, Vertigo, Fevers through heat above nature, with fire in the arteries,
shingles and horrible apostimacions, with a great number of plagues more. which
be all mortal enemies to the nature of man, as a contynual fire to burn him,
or else a merciles drowning water of utter destruction, or finally a deadly
earthly Grave to swallow him up, through the corrupcion and infection of air?
Thus the.4. eliments or humors in mankind, through evil mixture, or one
abou^ding above the other, grow to corrupcion. The cases of deadly peril, and
an hard matter to bring the body again into good order or perfect healthful
estate. What evil have happened through the abusing of Guaicum among the
imperikes.
As I have said. what is better tha^ Guaicum, called wood of life, which wood
was not a little abused of a great number of ignorant, murdering, shameless
practicioners, which have taken upon them to bynd sick men to a law, observing
the new diet, only with Guaicum, wherein they have sodden in the decoction
thereof many drugges Colocinthis, Briony, Turbith. Diacridium. with an hundredth
sundry more such like simples sodden or brewed with this Guaicum: this, they do
use one geenerall rule, to every complexion a like, to every age the same, and
to the Man: Woman, and Child al a like, neither obseruyng the quantity, place
or time: but as I have said, one only general rule. Close Chamber like a Be
in a box, bread by the ounce, a few Raysons, and sometimes a chickens Leg,
Beware of the new diat except you-haue two lives. or else a wise minister of
the same.
with many such folish Ceremonies, mutch cost and small good cheer, if one be
healed by chance medly, a hundred are slain through this diat wilfully. or else
very foolishly: and who so goes to board to such an host, first let him make
his last will and testament, perhaps he shall not die the sooner, but live the
wiselyer For this diat with close air, Raysons and Chickens legs, is very
good victail for mareners that purpose to sail through the dangerous rocks,
and sands of the fearful passage between Scylla, and Charibdes. Experience
has learned us sufficientlye, by the deaths of many which have been slain in
this purgatory of this folysh Phisycke, ignorantly used, or this Guaicum rather
folishly abused for money: as many goodlye creatures, by. and through money,
are changed, transformed and altered out of kind, for money is a marvelous
instrument a chaunger, a transformer, or a bewytcher of mankind, and an
instrument whereupon the covetous man does continually play his infernal
discordes upon: as example, if lawers take wrong matters in hand: if djuines
desire many spyrituall promocions, and be careless of their heavenly duty,
Covetousness and Money, do make blind, both Divines, Lawers, and Phisicions,
and tra^sforme the^ from the nature of men into infernal monsters.
if Phisicions prolong or abuse their times, with their miserable syck
pacients, then what is ye cause? nothing but coueteous Hearts, and Money.
Covetousness is the Mother of all the euilles of this world, and gold and
Silver ar^ ever deceiptfull, and beguile mankind. Gold is the prince of evil,
ye shortner of time, the waster and consumer of virtue, love, liberality rest,
peace. and quietness, the instrument of treason, war, theft, whoredom,
slaughter, bloudshedyng, and perilous periurye: this wretched money should not
thus be abused of the Chrystians, saying one of the Heathen wise men most
vehemently does count it a vice most hurtful and intolerable in any common
wealth, according to my words aforesaid, crying out against covetousness,
with her instruments (Gold and Silver) which is abused saying. Auaritia matter
est vniuersae malitiae,
Aurum argentumque semper insidias struunt hominibus,
Nummus dolosus
O aurum maloru^ princeps, vita^ distruens omnia denique minue^s.
Vtinam non esses amabile nocumentum mortalibus.
Tua enim eulpa pugnae, praedae, coedesque vita^ humana^ perturba^t. etc.
Therefore God grant of his mercy to three kynds of callyngs in this world yt
they may walk truly. obedie^tly, and charitably, in the sight of God and man,
Three most notable and best instruments of the common wealth The Divine the
Lawer and the Physician*
whereby that Christ may be chiefly honored, and his people profited. First, to
the^ of the church which should be ye mouth between God and his flock. Secondly
ye Magistrate, or Lawer, that righteousness may be ministered, and Justice,
boserued, and no Man wrongfullye oppressed. Thyrdly, for the preseruacion of
the Body, that the Physician mar not, or cast away that which God has so
richly garnished with the Gifts of Nature whi^he is Mankind. And now let us
return again unto our Guaicum or Lignum vitae, called the wood of Life,
which through covetousness, has been rather made the wod of death, through
long new diates, to small effect to many, though fortunate to few. Marcellus my
brother, when your fryend Senior F. Neopolitani was smitten with the Pox, his
hair fell away, he could not sleep for boneache, his breath did stinck, Lord
how pale he looked, his muskles consumed, the skabbes appeared, under whom
were deep hooles graven with putrifyed matter. etc. but now his head is
covered with hair his skin clean, rose colored in his cheeks, full of
strength, he sleeps very well, and is in health.


Marcellus. I Am not a little glad of ye good tidings, but gladder, I would be
to learn how he was healed, and with what medicine. For a man may through
chance medly fall into this peril: then a present remedy for a Myschyefe
would do well for that purpose.


Hilarious. March and Apryll are the best time to help the Pox.
THus he made his drink for him self and one of his companions in the month of
March and Apryll last past. R. The best Guaicum, most heavy, and full of gum l
i.iiii let it be well rased with a rape or turned into fine chips by a Turner.
and of the same barks. l i ii. Carduus Bened^ctus, which is called the blessed
Thystell, Dioscorides lib. 3. cap. xci. Atractylis is Carduus Benedictus.
which Thistel Dioscorides calls Atractylis, with pricks like Carthamus,
with many leaves, which Thistell is good against pryckyng of Serpents, and
among herbs it excels all other against poison. And in decoction with
Guaicum, says Petrus Andreas Matthiolus, it will help the French Pox.
Therefore of the said Thystell, put. l.ss, Maiden hair, Cetrach, the flowers
of the wyld, and Garden Buglosse, ana. l.i. sweet Cassia..vi. Anisseede..i.ss.
white Sugar l i.v. cast all these into a Wine vessel, clean and apt for the
same purpose, upon which pour of the cleanest and best white Wine, that may be
got, very hot, in quantity. l i. one hundredth and fyfty, cover this Uessell
close three days, then strain it through an hair cloth. then keep this in a
clean vessel, for the Pacient at Dinner and Supper, but not to drink in the
Morning, and evening, like unto Syrupus, or medycines as many men rashly have
used. Besides the drynking of this Guaicum at Dynner, A good way to sees
Guaicum for the Pox.
and Supper, the Pacient may between the times, as one hour before and after
Dynner and Supper drink..iiii. or.v. Also your foresaied receiptes may be put
in clean new white or claret wine, being fined, and made in the prescribed
manner. Furthermore, the pacie^t which has the Pox, Dropsye, or Gout, may
drink among, this worthy medycine following, the dosse or quantity is..ii. or
more according to the age and complexion of the pacient. Take maiden hair,
clean fresh Hops, Fumitorye Sitrach, called Asplenu^, Seen of Alexander, of
each.M.iii. great Ce^tauri roots Liquorice, Polipodie, wyld and Garden Buglosse,
ana..iiii. Anisseedes. Nigella, Romana, ye flowers of Bugloss, ye three Sa^ders,
Cinamo^, an..v. put this into. l i.xxiiii. of the Guaicum water, sodden after
the description in the Compoundes following, then put it in a close Uessell, and
stop the mouth. and when that is done, set the said Uessell, in an other
seethyng kettell upon the Fire, so let it stand and sees for.xx, Hours
fair and softlye, then strain it, and keep it in a clean close vessel, for
the use aforesaid. But if the pacyent be very full of humors, then do thus. The
most excellent and best manner to sees Guaicu^ in composicions with other
simples to cleanse the Pox from all the members of the body.
Take Seen of Alexander l i.ii, Succorosarum solitiue l i.vi. white Sugar. l
i.vii. Rhabarbe elected, iii. finely cut, Turbit of the best..i. put these in a
clean stone pot with a narrow mouth. pour into this pot. l i.xxjiii. of
the common Guaicum water, made in manner in the compounds following, stop your
pots mouth, sees it in the foresaid manner upon a soft fire.xxiiii. hours
until it come to a thin Sirupe, called a Iulep, then strain it and keep this
precious pourging drink for mornyngs, the dose..i.ss. according to the age,
complexion and strength the pacient must also eat bread..iii. well baken like
Bisquet, and the flesh of Chicken, Hen, Capon, Patrige Fesant, small Birds of
the wod roasted, excel sodden meats: and if the common drynk be to strong, The
diat for the pox, shortly declared.
then the pacyent may pour thereunto some small clean wine or beer: let the
pacient be merry, kept in a fair clean chamber with sweet perfumes, not mutch
feeding but little and fine, with clean warm apparel, and a fire of
charcoles. eschewyng venery, wynes, fruicts, fish, gross flesh potage, and
white meats. Care, anger, cold, mutch heat: and thus I do end of this
precious wodde Guaicum called Lignum sanctum.


Marcellus. I pray you what is the nature of Mumia, Bytumen, Sperma Caeti,
Tartar, Terra sigillata, and Dragons blood?


Hilarious MVMIA, is of nature hot and dry, in the second degree, Mumia, or
Mumme.
and comes from Arabia, and is made of dead bodies, of some of the noble
people: because the said dead are rychly embalmed with precious Oyntmentes and
spyces, chyefly Myrhe, Saffron, and Aloes. This Mumia has virtue to staunch
blood, to incarnate wounds, to help the Falling sycknes, Against running of
blood or bruses.
beaten into powder and squirted with a syringe with Mariarum water into the
Nostrylles. Tempered with Cassiafistula and drunk with Planten water, it is
very good against bruses: but Dragons blood, Planten water, Madder, Terra
sigillata, and Mumia, Bitumen of the dead Sea
tempered together and drunk, helps great bruses, bloody flixes, and
stauncheth wounds applied to the place. Bitumen, which is a foam of the ded
sea, Sperma caeti of the whale*
and turns into a matter like Rosen, and is hot in the second degree. it
has Virtue like unto Mumia, to staunch blood. to heal wounds etc. The Greeks
call it Asphaltos, Sperma Caeti, the seed of the generation of the monstrous
Whale, Tartar, made of wine lies.
has virtue being drunk with Planten water, Ale, Malmsey or other old clean
wine, to help bruses of great falls. Tartare, is made of wine lies, hoate and
dry in the third degree, it is most excellent against itch and skabs, put in
ointments when it is beaten into powder, it cleanses the Morfew. A little Seue,
Mastick and Tartare, sodden in a Chickens broth, is beneficial to purge ye
belly. Terra sigillata* is stipticke and will cleave to the tongue, Terra
sigillata stops blood.
of nature hot and dry, and is put to oyntmentes to stop bloody flixes, new
bloody wounds, and has virtue of Bitumen* Sanguis draconis, is cold and dry
in the third degree stypticke of nature, therefore it stauncheth blood, and
bloody flixes: If it be stamped with Mouseare and Planten, it will stop Blood,
applied to the place. But myngle the powder of Dragons blood with Terebyntine.
and Frankensence, it is good for to stop a new bloody wound.


Marcellus. What Virtue is in Masticke, Rosen, Frankensence, Beniamen, Storax,
and Mirrh called Stacte. etc,


Hilarious. MAsticke is a fine sweet droppyng Gum, from a tree of great virtue,
and is hoate and dry in the second degree, and is good for the Reume to
champe upon, Mastick, is wholesome to champ upon for the reume.
and pleasant against corrupted air in perfume. The pylles be of synguler
Virtue for the said Reumes. The Oil will mutch comfort the Synewes, and also
will incarnate the flesh. Mastick^ with Stauesager provoke humous, by
retraction from the brayn to the mouth, Myrrh preserves the body from
putrefaction or rotting.
champed upon. Myrrh a noble gum of most singular virtue, which is hot and
dry in the second degree, and preserves against rotte and putrifactyon, and is
of great virtue in fresh wounds to defend them from apostimacions or rotten
matter: to heal a wound quickly, nothing is better: in balmes artificial,
Mirrhe is pryncipall. In wound waters, Mirrhe takes the chief force. In the
pylles of Ruffius against the pestilence, Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, do resyst
the poison of the same pestilence: for wounds in the head, Mirrhe is of great
virtue. The bodies of Princes are long preserved after death through Myrrh.
The savor of the same and daily drynkyng in Betony water, Thus called
Frankensence or Olibanum Dioscor. lib. 1. lxx.
G. vi. of Myrhe, defends from the falling Evil, and sorenes of the lunges.
Thus, called Frankensence is hot in the second and dry in the first degree,
and droppeth from trees of the same name, which we do call Furre trees, it has
virtue to nourish and engender flesh in the tender bodies of men or women: and
this Frankensence is used in many salues, to help mankind, and is more
profitable for mankind in medicyne then commendable to be wasted in Churches,
in parfuming the insensible Images. Frankensence is good to parfume the
Clothes, for them which have the bloody flixe, and thus I end of Thus called
Frankensence. Olibanum is not mutch unlike in nature to this Frankensence. but
the very same in Greek. Gum Sarcocole.
Gum Sarcocoll, is dry in the first degree and hot in the second, it is a
sanatyue gum to incarnat wounds and sores, and nothing excels this gum to
put into Collyries for sore eyes. as when the sight is covered with white
spots. Resina.

Rosen.

Diosco. lib. 1. capi. lxxiiii.


Rosen called Resina pini, has warming, mundifying, and dissoluing nature.
This Rosen no Ship, or Chirurgian can want. Rosen dries and warmeth cold
Melancholy, sores Apostimations and Ulcers: and furtermore it will produce
Flesh in the Wounds of strong persons: Picea. Pix naualis and Tar.
there be sundry kinds of Rosen, as dropping from the Ceder. etc. but all of
one nature. Also a little I shall put you in remembrance of Pix. commonly
called Pix Naualis, of nature hoate, and dry, and has virtue to dissolve,
Consume, and is put into Plasters, against cold Dyseases, it is also put into
inward Medicines to be drunk against Bruses, as Mummea is. There is another Pix
called Liquida, which is more h^at^r and thinner, ever moist commonly called
Tar, which has virtue to spread, consume and wast humors, put into sundry
goodly Ointments against cold soores, and also to heal Skabs. Tar is not
only wholesome for Mankind to kyl sundry skabbes and soores, and scaules (as take
Pix Naualis, Tar, Litarge of Silver, Honey, ana, q.ss. sharp Uyneger, Planten
water, Bean meal, a little Salt, boil all these in a little close vessel,
stir it, and shave the head, A goodly place for a skaule in the head.
and make a plaster, and lay it on hot.xxiiii. hours, and then tear it of,
and put on another, and so do until the skabbe be rooted forth). But also
Tar, grease and French Soap, tempered together, is good to anoint skabbed
Sheep, horse. etc. with a tent of Baken and Tar, I have healed the Fistula
often times: and thus I do end of Tar.

There is a goodly Gum called Galbanum which comes from ye Galbanum trees
in Syria, which is put in sundry plasters, Galbanum is a wholesome gum.
and is hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in the second, and
it has virtue to mollyfy and spread. Dioscorides affyrmeth, Galbanum will draw
forth dead children.
that if it be applied plaster ways or in subfumigacion, it will not only draw
forth the stopped Terms, but also a dead abortiue Child: The smooke thereof
makes venomous things to flee. It preuayleth against poison. And a little
Galbanum with Myrrh dru^k, cleanses the lunges, cough, and stoppyng of wynd,
but yet it is very noisome to savor upon: therefore it helps the Mother. To
cleanse Galbanum, To cleanse Galbanum.
put it in very hot water, and by little and little the filth thereof will
separate from the clean part, and so you may use the said clean part for your
Plasters, as it is written in the book of Compounds. You may also resolve
Galbanum all the Night in Uineger, and in the morning boil it: and in water or
vinegar you may do so to other Gummes. and some other hard Gummes you may break
into powder in a mortar, or upon a stone. Eupherbium of Lybica.


Euphorbium comes from a tree that does grow in Lybica. The best Euphorbium
is that is clean, like unto Glass, and is sharp of taste: this is hot and
dry in the fourth degree, and is very good for wounds in the head, To help the
prycking of synewes.
dropped into them. It is wholesome in Linaments and Cerots. If it be sodden
with Oil of Elder, Bean flower and earth worms, it is good against the
pricking of the sinews. In plasters and Cerots, for the French Pox it is
profitable. Plinius affirms, that Iuba the king of Libye did first find this
Euphorbium upon the mountain Atlante beyond Hercules Pillars, and called it by
the name of his Physician which healed Augustus the Emperor: it will not only
draw forth raw fleume, but water abounding, as in Dropsy: but it is evil for a
dry cholorike body to drink in medicine, it is so hoate of nature.

Ammoniacum comes from Afric, by the place where as the Oracle of the false
God Ammon was. Ammoniacum of Ammon.
This gum Ammoniacum is mutch like Frankensence, bitter in taste, and smells
like to Castorium, it mollifieth, warmeth and draws. It is good in any
Linaments. And being drunk, does lose the belly, and casts forth the dead
child, helps the Spleen, and Sciatica, one dragme being drunk. And thus I
do end of Ammoniak, which is hot in the third, and dry in the first degree.

Assafoetida does stink yet it helps the Mother and Lunges.
Assafoetida stinketh, and is good for Women to smell upon, that be commonly
sick of the Mother, it is hot and dry in the second degree, some do affirm
in the third. It has virtue to dry, to consume, to cleanse, and spread. Five
pills of Assa, taken in a rear Egg at midnight, do cleanse the lunges, and
helps a short wynded Man or Woman. Oil of Spike, Mastike, Safron, Wax,
Castor, and Assafoetida* stamped and sodden together, make an excellent
medicine for the gout, or pains in the ioynctes: and thus I do end of
stinking Assafoetida.

Sagapen, or Serapinum, a goodly gum
Sagapenum or Serapinum is a precious gum, running from a small tree, like a
Kix or a Reed, and is hot in operation. The best of this gum is yt which
shyneth through, and in color is dark, yellow without, and white within.
Dioscorides lib. 3. cap. 79 Sagapen will help ye lunges, and spleen.
This Gum is good in many Lenetiues, and also inward medicines: as to pourge
Fleume, to help the Falling sickness, to cleanse the Lunges, help ye swelling or
hardness of the Spleen and is good against the resolution of the Synewes,
conuulsyon, ruptures, first steeped in Wine or Hydromell, then drunk.

Bdelium helps hard Apostumations
Bdellium is a goodly tree, growing in Arabie, from which tree distilleth a
worthy gum like Wax, but clear shyning, unctuous, and sweet of savor, and
bitter in taste: it is hot in the second degree, and is put in many
oyntmentes: it resolves, consumes, and disperseth apostumations yt be hard.

Boras.
Boras, is hot and dry of Complexion, whose virtue is to knit, and glewe
wounds together by attraction.

Glaucium, is good for to cleanse sore eyes.
Glaucium or Memitha, so called, is cold and dry in the first degree, and
comes from Syrra: Pliny affirms this to be the lesser Celidon, and that
cannot be, for Celidon is hot, and Glaucium is cold: therefore they cannot be
one, seeing they be of two sundry natures: yet in couller it is yellowe, and
marvelous good for to make Syef, for to cleanse and help sore eyes.
Dioscorides does commend this Juice. lib. 3. cap. lxxxiiij

Gum Arabike will stop a bloody wou^d
Gum Arabyke, is hot and moist, of virtue will staunch blood in wounds,
because it is slimy, it will also mollify and make things soft yt be hardened,
as apostimations, and it will stop the bloody Flixe, resolved in Red Wine, and
drunk.

Glue, called Glutinum, of nature is hot and dry, and is made of the skyns of
beasts: Glue,
the best is made of the strongest beasts, as Bulls, Oxen, red Dear. etc.
that which is whytest, and clear shynyng, is very good. Resolved in Vinegar
all the night, Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. 85.
the same will cleanse Leprous fylth, and Marmols from the skyn, the place being
warm anointed therewyth. And sodden in warm Water, Glue has many virtues
with Oil of water Lyllyes or Flare, it will help skalding and burning of the
body, to anoint the sore place therewith. Wou^des be helped with Glewe resolved
in Vinegar, and tempered with Honey, and put into the said wounds, or else with
Vinegar resolved for the same purpose. And thus I do conclude of Glewe, made
of Skins, which cannot be forborne, 3. Glewes, of Beasts skins, of Fish,
and of Corn.
neither of Bowyers, or Fletchers. There is a Glewe made of Fyshes, as of the
Bellyes of Whales or other great Fyshes, which will quickly be resolved. And
this is very good for to make Emplastrum for the head, or cleanse ye fylth or
red spots from the face. There is another Glue made of Corn, as Wheat. etc.
good for Paste for Stacyoners, which Galen does remember libro. vij. simplic.
medic.

Gum Opoponax, is a gum coming from an herb called Panax, Opoponax, does
resolve.
and of nature is hot and dry, and of virtue resoluyng, warmyng, and making
soft things which be gross, cold and hard, and is used in sundry Oils and
Linaments.

Tragacantha comes from Mons Gargano, Gum Tragacantha helps the raines.
and is a noble Gum of great virtue, and helps wounds inwardly in
Linaments: and resolved in Fenel water, and drunk, helps the raynes of the
back and bladder. And with clean clarifyed Honey..i. does cleanse the lunges,
and will clear the voice from coughes, and is of great effect to help sore
eyes. Many good Pills, and mixtures to be put under the tongue be made of this
gum, Diosco. lib. 3. Cap. 20.
against Angina, and all the pains of the mouth and throat.

Laudanum, is a precious gum, having virtue to heat and humecte or moist in the
second degree: the best comes from Cyprus, and is sweet of savor, Laudanum.
Galen does commend it lib. 7. simplic. medica. because it puts away cold,
and gives heat, and is good against the coldness of the brain, or cold
reume. And Laudanum melted with Bears grease, Laudanum, does help the hair
from falling says, Pausus.
will keep the hair from falling, to anoint or emplaster the naked or bare
pallet. It makes goodlye Pessaries for to comfort the Matrix that is cold, and
opens the mouth of the veins. Melted in hot Oil of bitter Almonds, it
makes a singular ointment for deaf stopped ears: in subfumigation close
under the secret clothes of Women, which be newly delivered of child, it will
eiect or cast quickly forth the seconds, it moves vryne. If it be drunk in
old Red wine it will stop the guts in a bloody flixe. Masticke and Laudanum
incorporate together, do fasten lose teeth, and this Laudanum is used both
inwardly and outwardly, for the health of mankind, and has a sweet savor of
singular Virtue.

Lycium or Pixacantha, so called of Dioscorides. lib. j. cap. Cxiiii. which
comes from a sharp thorny bush or tree, leaued like Box, Lycium comes from
Lycia.
fruict like Pepper black and bitter, it grows in Cappadocia and Lycia. The
branches being cut, stamped and sodden, and so strayned, from them comes
a Juice, which is as thycke as Honey, which is sophistical with sundry
substaunces* as the juice of Wormwood, Ox gauls etc. This Lycium is yellow
and bitter drying and percing, of substance very earthly, and stiptik, it has
Virtue to help the Eyes, dries moist Skabbes, and is good to be given them
which be bytten with a mad Dog, and have Tenasmus or the bloody flyxe. For
yellow hair.
It will make one have a yellow hair, and stops the immoderate flixe,
either Red or white abounding in women. And thus I end of Lycium. Acacia
comes from a thorn in AEgipt, which has coddes growing upon it like a
Broom, out of which coddes, leaves, and seed, Acacia stops the blouddy
flixe.
is pressed forth the gum Acatia, which will restrain and stop most
effectually, and is cold and dry. This Acatia above all gummes has virtue to
cool and stop blood, and bloody flixes, and cool the burning of the eyes, and
in the commendacion thereof read Dioscorides. lib. j. Cap. xxv. Theophrastus
lib. 4. cap. de plant. historia. Galen lib. 7. simplicium medicamentorum. etc.

Terebinthus, is a goodly tree, hard and black, and grows in Arabia, from
which droppeth a precious liquor, Terebinthus or Terebintine has great virtue.
Galen. lib. 8. Sim. medica.
or thin guin called Terebintine, although from every Rosen tree a kind of
Terebintine does drop. Terebintine is hot and dry of nature in the second
degree, and is used in many outward parts or pains of the body, and is put in
sundry oyntmentes and Cerots. etc It will help the Synewes and muskels, it
stops Tenasmus, which is a running of the guts or flixe, made in a
subfumigation upon ye coals. Clear Uenice Terebintine washed and tempered
with Honey, will cleanse ye lunges. Taken with Sugar in Pills, it will cleanse
the raynes, open the Bladder, purge Gravel, The virtue of Terebyntine.
cause mutch urine, help the Yard, and also mollify ye Belly. Terebintine..ij.
often washed in Fenell or Time water, then put into it ye powder of new Safron,
and Hiera simplex, an^a..ss. and keep this in a box and who so feels grief
within their guts or raynes, let them eat of this..ij every morning,
during.iiij. days. There is a fine Terebintine coming from the tree Larix,
used mutch: and thus I leave of Terebintine which is sweet, Gum Larix is
equal to the Terebinthin reed in Aetius
and shining clear, yet somewhat noisome to the stomach. There is mutch
counterfeit Terebintine, made of Rosen and Oil. etc, which the Chirurgians can
craftily Sophisticate.

Styrax calamite, and liquide Styrax; be sweet and wholesome.
Styrax Calamite and Styrax liquide, be both hot and dry, the best of this,
says Galen, is brought from Pamphilia, it is good to be incorporat with
Laudanum, clean new Wax, Musk, Siuet, it will make a pleasant Pomambre
against stinking air, or coldness of the brain or melancholy. Styrax calamite,
or of the Reed so called, makes good Parfumes. The black is worst, the gum
with shining couller is best: but to say ye truth, the Apothicaries can so well
Sophisticate the same with Wax. etc. that we can have but little true Styrax,
as Myrrh, Amber, Musk. etc. the Apothicaries do gieue them al their
blessings with adulterate baggage, The craft of subtle Apoth^caries, does
mucch harm.
with a cast of legerdemayne, to fill their purse, but if we had them in their
right kind, little Wax were worth mutch money: and now in sundry places,
mutch Wax is worth little money, or nothing at all. This very Styrax calamite
does mollify, warm, and drunk with Wine, helps the greatest griefs in the
stomach and Reume, and lets ye terms slip naturally: and helps stinking
breath. Tempered with Oil, makes a precious ointment for the head, of them
which be overcome with cold. Styrax liquide is good in Oyntmentes for skal^s,
skabbes, and French Pox, and is good to be burnt in Parfume against a
pestilent Air.

Diacridium is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and is pressed out of an
herb to purge with all, Diacridium.
the best is shining in substance, and black, there is good which is whitish,
To know good Diacridium.
but mutch is sophisticated with spurge, Colophonie. etc. but that is not good,
if it be bryttle and bitter in Savor: and if you lick Diacridium with your
tongue, so that white foam do remain after it, then it is good to purge
choler, phlegm and melancholy: beware you receive not Scammonie, before it be
well prepared as you may see in ye book of Compou^des: for this Scammonie is
very venomous before it be prepared, and expulseth good matter, and retayneth
still the evil or hurtful humors to the great peril of the Receyuer, and
will put the body in danger of a blouddy flixe incucurable: therefore prepare,
I say, your said Scammonie in Quinces made hollow, or in gray Costards, after
ye same manner: put in your Scammonie, sprinkled with Oil of Uyolets, and bake
it in Paste, yt the venime may pass away: when it is cold, then it is
Diacridium fit to purge, being corrected with Mastik: and why shall Mastik be
put in? Scamonie is perilous, except it be first prepared.
Because it will abate the violence thereof, and keep the stomach and heart
from danger, and guts from the bloody Flixe. Gum Arabik is also wholesome
therewith. Chollerike persons may be purged with lesser prepared Scammonie, or
Diagridium, tha^ the Flegmatike or Mela^choly, and it may not be occupied.15.
days after it be prepared as with Myrobalans. etc. It is used in sundry
Electuaries, pouders, and Pills. And indiscreetly mynistred it anoyeth the
heart, dries good Humors, and wastes nature, yea disolueth and finally
kills the body. Read in Valerius Cordus, which is a good Apothicary, not
only to prepare this, but also all other things profitable for nature.


Marcellus. I Thank you with all my heart, I have conceived no less pleasure,
to hear you all this long day, than you have taken pains of your part to
teach me, the virtues of so many things without many questions moved: yet I
had almost forgotten to move you, what virtue is in Myrobalans, which even
lately you have named to be good with prepared Scammonie?


Hilarious. MYROBALANVM is a noble fruicte of Inde like Plumbes which has
virtue to purge superfluous humors, Myrobolans of.v. kinds.
and comfort nature, To seem yo^g how to do it.
and who so uses to eat often of Myrobalans being condite, shall not seem
old, says Mesue, and makes pure color. There be.5. kinds of them, as
Flauj, Chepuli, Indicj. or Nigrj, Empelicj, and Belliricj, which do differ one
from the other: for yt Flauj, and Chepulj, do grow both upon one tree, for the
Flauj are gathered unripe, and the Chepulj have their full nature and
rypenesse. Myrobalans, Flauj, Indicj, Chepulj, and Belliricj, be cold in the
first, and dry in the second degree Empelicj are cold and dry in the first
degree, and be good for the Liver, Gaul, Spleen, Raynes, and Bladder: and put
in infusion of the Juice of Quinces, standing.24. hours, and then strayned,
then put prepared Scammonie, they will purge choler, as for example: Take
Myrobalans Flauj..j. the juice or syrup simple of Quinces..iiij. stamp your
Myrobalans, and then mingle them with the said Juice, the Juice being made
warm, and let it stand in a close stone vessel.24. hours, then strain it
forth, when this is done, beat your prepared Scammonie fine into powder..iiij.
and temper it together, putting it in a close warm place to dry it by little
and little, and of this.j. or little more will purge choler, and humors
superfluous without hurt. Myrobalans may be stamped with the Syrup of
Wormewoode, and then sodden with ye infusion of Agarike, and Rhabarbe, to purge
phlegm and choler: To purge tender parsons.
it may be drawn with Chassia and Manna, for noble persons or People of tender
nature. This fruict defends the body from corruption, trimbling of the heart,
heaviness, Melancholy, and brings to nature, Cleanlynesse, favor, and mirth.
And drawn with Fe^ill water and Sugar, To cleanse sore eyes.
it will cleanse the sight to be dropped into them morning and evening. The
powder of them with Rosen will heal sore Ulcers. And thus I do end of
Myrobalans, which will draw back the venomous force of every purgation that
does abou^de in operation.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Gauls, called Galla?


Hilarious. Gauls will bind, and nothing will cleanse the mouth from filth
better, gauls grow like Akorns. D^oscorides. lib. 3. cap. 123
applied to any sore therein. When the intolerable pains of the teeth do rage
on still, a piece of Gaul applied to the place, will so one aswage the same.
Gauls sodde^ and stamped, apply them to ye Matrix when through weakness it is
displased or faule down, and it will go back to his natural place again.
Gauls will stop the Flixe
Gauls will staunche blood, and make hair black, and stop the bloody flixe
in Clisters. Galen. lib. 7. simplic, medic. says Gauls be cold in the second
degree. The cups wherein they do grow be of the same nature. And thus I do
end of Gauls, which are good to make Ink wythall.


Marcellus. What say you of Acorns of the Oak tree?


Hilarious THe Oak tree of all noble trees for strength excels all other for
substanciall buildinges, The Querke or Oak tree, will stop the bloody flix or
blood, so will the Bark, Akorns, or leaves, with the Cups.
which Tree shall be once in no small estimation in this Realm of England to
uphold houses, dwellinges, and the royal Nauies: although the Oak be of
little price, yet for the Age, strength and virtue, few other trees excel it:
the Bark cannot be forborne of Tanners to make Leather to serve the common
wealth. The timber, as I have said, is pryncipal in buildings. The Acorns have
virtue to stop Dysenteria, and Tenasmus, which be extreme flixes. Of al trees
that be glandiferous or bearing nuts, or Mast, nothing does restrain more than
the Oak and Acorns, as says Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap. 121 and Theophrastus,
The Beeche tree, with his fruit will stop flixes.
lih. 3. cap 8. and 9. de plantis historia. Fagus the Beeche tree, and Ilix do
bear Mast, not only good for Swyne to feed upon, but also in medicine does
stop terms imoderat, or restrain or drive back guts that be relaxed, or the
precipitation or coming forth of the Matrixes of Women, ^f either the barks,
Leaves, Buddes, Acorns, or Cups be sodden in red Wine, running Water, and to
sit close over it warm, and to drink the decoction thereof in clean Red
Wine, Cynamon, and Sugar. Suber the Cork Tree with his Fruict, Suber the
Cork, will stop blood and flixe.
has the foresaid virtue to stop the Flixe, or Blood* Read Pliny. lib. 11.


Marcellus. What then of Castania the Chestnut?


Hilarious. CHestnuts be commonly known, Castania the Chestnut.
which of nature will stop Flixes and restrain, make fat, and indurate the
Spleen. In many places of Italy and France, the people does live by these
Chestnuts in winter, wha^ they want other fruicts. Stamp Chestnuts, Honey, and
Salt together, Chestnuts help the biting of a Dog.
and apply it to the biting of a mad Dog, and it will heal it. Chestnuts
move Venus or carnal lust, being roasted and eaten, they do offend the
head, and Spleen, because they do inflate and stop, they be called Iouis
glandes, that is Jupiters Nuts, says Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap. 122.


Marcellus. What say you of Myrtus?


Hilarious. MYRTVS the black, Myrtus has virtue to restrayn.
that grow in the Gardens be of more virtue to restrain, than they which grow
upon the Mountains, which be white, the seed has great virtue to restrain.
The seed is good to be given to them which have the bloody flixe and spit
blood, and it opens the vryne. The Juice of Myrtes drunk in Wine, does stop
the flixe, and heals filth, breading about ye priuy-me^bers being washed
therewith, and it does cle^se ye eyes. Myrtes has virtue, restrayning both
inwardly, and outwardly, and do dry, To stop the flixe, called Dyscenteria, and
Tenasmus with Myrtes
as Galen affirms lib. 7. simplic. medic. it is partly overcome with coldness
and earthly nature, yet it has also a thin substance of warmness, which
gives it dryness. And thus I do end of Myrtus, called so of the Latens: and
of the Arabians it is called Alas, whereof be three kinds, Saliua, Tarentina,
and Exotica, and all be of virtue good to help the bloody Flixe.


Marcellus. What say you to Coloquyntida?


Hilarious. IT is most bitter, white like a baule, full of seeds, Coloci^this,
or Coloquyntida Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. 171
leaves like to Cucummers, hot in the second, dry in the third degree. Good in
Clisters against the collike, resolution of synewes, and purges fleume,
choler, and raw humors: it opens the mouth of the veins, yet it is
perilous to be given to Women with child, or weak people, A piece of
Coloquyntida knit in a clout, and steeped in a draught of white Wine al a
night, with.iiij. or v. Branches of ^^sop, strayned in the morning, and so
drunk, To kill worms in ye ^elly with Coloquyntida.
will purge a strong body from mutch filth and Iliac: even so it will being
sodden in sweet Water, cleanse all the body. Coloquyntida, Ox gaul, Honey,
Meal of Lupines, and Oil of Wormwood, and Aloes, ana..j.ss. stamped
together, and warm applied to the belly, eftsoons a lax will follow, To help
the Teeth with Coloquyntida
with Worms if any be within the guts. Sandarak..ij. vinegar..ij.
Coloquyntida..j. in powder incorporate and sodden together put into sore Teeth,
takes away the pains, if it come of cold: the Oil of Coloquyntida will kill
Worms, help Sciatica, and put into the ears will take away the sound or
tingling in them: and thus I do end of Coloquyntida, which is most bitter, and
must be taken with discretion, the Arabians do call it Chandell.


Marcellus. UUhat is Turbit?


Hilarious TUrbit is to purge phlegm, but as for the very Turbit, most me^ be
uncertain what it is. Turbit which purges phlegm.
Actuarius says it is the root of Pytiusa: Manardus and Mesue, affirm it to
be second kind of Tithymalus which is called Mircyniles. But Dioscorides
plainly does affirm it to be Tripolium, Mutch varitie of Turbit what it is.
as some suppose by the mind of Serapio. Antonius Musa supposes it to be the
second kind of Spurge agreeing with Manardus and Mesuae.


Marcellus. What are Tamarindes.


Hilarious. TAmarindes are a sower fruicte of Inde, which be wyld Dates, called
Tamardactyli, Tamarindes or Tamardactylos.

Dioscorides lib. i. cap. 126.


and be cold and dry, says Mesue, in the second degree. This fruict will
assuage the heat of choler, open the Gaul, and purge the belly. A decoction of
Tamarindes with Ptisant, and the juice of Pomgarnets, will quench hot
Apostumacions in the throat: when humors be to sharp, and bitter in the
increasyng or augmenting of the said Apostumacio^s. The very pure Garden Dates,
Dates of the best kind.
be fruicts of great Virtue. This Date is the very fruict of that tree which is
called the Palm tree, which fruict makes precious wine in the La^d of Syria,
these Dates be commonly known here in England. To help Emeroydes.
Sodden Dates in old wine will help the Emeroides. A Date stamped with Honey of
Roses, will glue and knit a new wound. But mutch eaten upon, being raw, are
unfriendly to the head, and make gross Blood, and stop the Liver. Dates good in
stewed broth.
Notwithstanding clean pared Dates be good in stewed broth, as we do commonly
observe by custom. Galen does remember Dates. lib. 7. simplic. medicamentorum,
saying they be sweet and warm, and used mutch in meats etc.


Marcellus. UUhat say you of Tamariscus, or Tamarix.


Hilarious. TAmariscus, is a wod mutch like Quickbene, whereof there is plenty in
one part of Germanye, Tamariscus is a little tree like Quicben
within a certain Island belonging to one of the Germayn Bishops: and this
Tamariscus, is the better known here in England by the famous learned Man
Wylliam Turner Physician: not only this, but many other simples, by the same
Doctor, which Doctor is a Jewel among us Englysh men, Doctor wyllyam Turner
as well as among the Germaynes, as Conradus Gesnerus reports of him for his
synguler Learning, knowledge and judgment. The wynd of the decoction of
Tamarix is wholesome to drink against the hardness of the Spleen, and stopping
of the vryne or strangury, because it does open so mutch. The powder thereof in
bread is wholesome for them to eat which have the quarten or Dropsy, Tamarix do
help the Spleen.
it is as good as Asplenum for the Spleen. Galen affyrmeth that Tamarix or
Myricae lib. 7. simplic. medic. has virtue to cleanse and open, and is hot and
dry. Sodden in Uineger, it helps the Spleen, and also the tooth ache.
Dioscorides, lib, j. cap xcix. does commend Tamarix, Tamarix against the flixe.
and says it is used oftentimes in the place of Galls, and is good to be
drunk against spitting of blood, and flixes. etc.


Marcellus. WHat say you of the Nut called Pistacia, which is a Nut of Italy.
The Iuglans called a Walnut, the Hasell Nut, Nutmegges, Almondes, and the
vomiting Nutte,


Hilarious. PLinius affirms that the Pistacia is a fruicte of Syria, Pistacia.
a nut of Syria or Italy.
and was first brought into Italy by the famous Censor called Lucius Vitellius,
in the time of Tyberius Caesar's days, and now there be great plenty of these
Nuttes in Italy. Galen reports of them lib 2. de alementorum facultatibus,
that they be but little profitable to nutriment, notwithstanding good to the
liver, clensyng evil humors from the same. But whether good or evil to the
Stomach, profitable or noto ye belly, relaxing or bynding, he does not affirm.
Auicen says thus, one says he, affirms that the Pistate does not profit the
stomach: but I, says Auicen, say, that the said Pistate, does not only
prevail against the noysomnesse of the stomach, The virtue of the Pistac^
Nuttes.
but also will coroborate and make strong the ventricles. And to conclude,
Dioscorides. lib. j cap. cxl. says that Pistates of Syria be friends to the
stomach, stamped and tempered with wine: either eaten or drunk they prevail
against the stinging of Serpents. Nux Iuglans the Walnut, Quasi iouis glans as
Jupiters nuttes, with which fruicts the people lived by, before they knew
Tillage, Walnuts against poison* as Mithridatus reporttth.
and called the^ the great Gods nuttes. These be commonly known, sweet within
and bitter. without. And this tree, with all parteining to the same is
adstrictiue of nature, and good oil is made thereof, and is bitter, and sooner
digested than the Fylbyrd or Hasel nut, and is used in medicines against
poisons. They be hoate in the first and dry in the second degree: and wholesome
clean pycked and washed in wine, to be eaten after Fysh, and best new. Pliny
reports that, when Mythridates the king of Pontus was dead, there was found
in a chest of his, his own hand writing, in the land of walnuts, against Poison
R. UUalnuts, in number.ii. Figs.ii. Rue leaves xx. stamped together with a
little Salt, and eaten fasting does defend that day from the Pestilence or
poison put Honey to it, and it helps the bityng of Dogs, laid upon the
wou^d. The oil of nuttes with Honey, or the grene nutrindes will kyl the Canker,
to anoint the place, and also bring hair, and defend baldness.

Fylberdes be good of digestion, not good to be eaten before meat, Filberdes
are good after. meat and does help the reume.
for then they be not a little noisome to the lunges and head. Notwithstanding
if they be roasted and eaten with a little Peper or Aster, then they shall be
comfortable to help a moist reume. Stamped with Honey and Hysop water, the^ they
be good for old coughes. Walnuts.
There is a good ointment made of small nuts and Beeres grease, for to anoint a
bald head to bring hair, Galen affyrmeth that they be more cold and earthly
than the Walnuts. To heal a prycke.
Diocles says they do less nourish than the Almonds, how be it the green be
more wholesome than the dry. There is a comen medicine made of Hassell nuts, or
Filberdes, the juice of Dittany and black Soap stamped together, and this will
draw forth a prick fixed within the flesh. And these Nuttes be tolerable
after fish, to dry up moist matter and the Greeks call them Karia pontica,
because they came first from Portus, and now be almost in all the places of
this World.

Almondes sweet and bitter.
Almondes: the bitter Almondes, their Roots sodden, the decoction of them will
cleanse the Face from spots. Bitter Almondes stamped with oil of Roses and
Vinegar, will assuage the pains of the forehead to anoynte the Head, Almondes
to help the biting of a Dog
Temples, or Forehead therewith. Tempered with Honey and Rue, they make a good
plaster for the biting of a mad Dog, and the reason is this, the plaster is
very hot, and the byte of the Dog is cold with Melancholy. The oil of
bitter Almondes is wholesome for many things, as to warm the body, stomach,
Matrix etc. and to pour into the ear to help them which be deaf, if it be
curable. Bitter Almondes be hoatter then the sweet, they cleanse the guts,
Liver, and Stomach, and draw foul humors from the Lunges, Almonde milk, the
virtue thereof.
says Galen. lib. 7. simplic. medic. Almond milk will cleanse skower, and cut
gross humors, and may be made in the decoction of Hens, Partrige, or Chycken,
to strengthen nature, or with cold herbs, as Sichory, Endyue, Uiolets. etc. to
quench choler, and to reconcile sleep. To cleanse ye raynes, stamp Almondes
in clean washed Uenyce Terebintine, and eat it, both for the Collike,
Strangury and the Stone: eat Almondes before meat and drink, if you be
afraid of drunkenness: quench Gold, Silver, Steel, Flynt, or any of them in
Almonde Milk, wherein is put the powder of Ryce, and it will stop a flixe to
drynk the same. Many great virtues be written of Almondes, Gum of Almondes
stops the Flix.
as Dioscorides libro primo. cap. 139. etc. The gum of Almondes sleeped in Wine
and drunk, helps the Flix or spitting of blood, so will gum of Cheryes.

Nux vomica to vomit how to do it.
There is a Nut called Nux vomica, which if it be stamped and eaten by it
self, or else with a little Salt, or Oximell simplex..j. it provoke vomits of
choler and phlegm. And mingled with Honey, the seed of Fenell, Dill, and warm
Water, it makes a most wholesome vomit for a foul stomach, but beware ye take
no more than..j. for then it is most perilous to nature or life. Dog leches.
With this Nut and Helleborus Albus, many dog Leches do put the ignorant
people in danger of their lives. As of late one called Edwardes, a doltish
impericke, came to Newcastell, and had like to have killed Cutbert Blunt,
Edwardes the imperike. Cutbert Blunt.
a gentleman of the same town, who through drinking of the Syrups of Uyolets,
Quinces, and Mintes, was happily recovered, and after through infortune
finished his careful Life in London, being Prisoner in the Fleet. Anno. 1660.

The Nutmegge or Musk Nut most odoriferous, pleasant, and sweet, used in many
Cordials and wholesome receites against coldness, Nutmeg, or musk nut, have
many singular virtues against cold.
and comes from the hot Country of Inde, from an Island called Badan, and is
enclosed with Maces, as with a Nutshall, which Maces is a spyce most wholesome:
the cloue is not the stalk whereupon this worthy Nut does grow: the
Mauritanians affirm that they be hot in the second degree. The old Writers
speak but little of this Nut, it is proved to be good against wind, collike,
phlegm, weak digestion* vomits, headache, coldness of the Liver, cardiakes,
stopping of the spleen, Dropsy, swellings, bloody Flixes: it comfort the
Synewes, muskles, and Ueynes of cold, or old people: makes sweet breath,
puts away trimbling of the heart* and is wholesome to be beaten in powder,
and tempered with oil of Myntes, and to anoynte the forehead and temples
against coldness of the head, or dullness of memory, and is wholesome in
plasters for the stomach, quilted in Leather and Sylke: good in stewed
brothes, for them which be long sick, and the Oil is comfortable for cold
Stomachs: Nutmegs not good for hot co^plexioned men.
but Auicen speaking a little of the Nutmeg says, it is euel for a Sanguine
man to use it, because it will adust the blood, (and make one appear with a
face as though he had a visor of Currall) be cause of the dryness: so to
conclude, the Nutmeg is the fruicte, the Mace the flower, or Rose that does
enclose it, the Cloue is the small Stalk that bears it, as they say. But
Cinnamon is a another manner of Bark. Sinamon.
Dioscorides says there be diverse kinds of Cinnamon which are hot, and dry of
nature in the third degree, and help the stopping of ye Liver, Dropsy, Flixes,
and all the pains of the Guts, Lunges, and breast, and cause a sweet breath,
and are wholesome in blanch powder or soppes. Cloves come from Inde, and grow
like nails upon Trees, and be hot and dry, and odoriferous, Cloves.
and be good against cold.


Marcellus. What say you of Fraxinus, the Ash tree?


Hilarious. THis tree is commonly known, Fraxinus the Ash tree.
whose leaves being stamped or sodden in Wine, do heal the stinging of
serpents. Pliny says, ye leaves of Ash trees be deadly to beasts, but that
should seem to be erroniously spoken of Pliny, because we see the contrary:
but there is an herb which has leaves like Ash leaves called Ditten* Ditten.
of which Matthiolus makes mention in his comment upon Dioscorides, which herb
is good for man against poison, Worms and swellings, but no beast dare eat
thereof. And I suppose Pliny meant this Dittany, which I have proved to be good
against the Tympany of Water. I have proved it at Tinmouth Castle, where plenty
does grow upon the Rocks. But to conclude of the Faxin, or Ash tree, the
leaves being sodden with the Oil of S. Ihons grass and Terebintine are good
against Cuttes, sores, and open wounds to glewe, To help broken booes
or draw them together again: they also be good with Consolida, Compherie,
Bean meal, and oil of Myrtes, to lay upon broken Benes. To help the Spleen.
And ye kayes of Ash tree sodden in Wine, Citrach, fresh Capers, and Sugar,
are good to drink to diminishe the swelled Spleen, and of nature are cold and
dry in the second degree.


Marc^llus. What say you of Populus, called the Popler tree?


Hilarious. THere is the white and the black Popler, Populus the Popler tree.
which be cold and dry in the third degree. Of the Popler is made the goodly
Unguent called Populeon. The Juice of the Leaves be wholesome to be dropped
into the hot stopped Ears. The Popler young Buddes, incorporate with clean
Honey and Rosewater, be wholesome to assuage the pains of the eyes, coming of
heat. And the Juice of the bark sodden in red Wine, will stop a bloody Flix.
and the Sciatica: read further. lib. 1. Dioscorides. Cap. xciij.


Marcellus. What say you of Brom called Genista?


Hilarious. THe Brom, and the Whin or Furre Bushe be hoate and dry in the
second degree: Brom.
ad the seed will provoke vomits, cleanse filth in the stomach, and kill
Worms. The Juice tempered with Staphisagry, oil of Wormewod and Aloes, To
kill Lyce.
will kill Lyce. The oil of Brom will heal a Tetter.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the Ienuper?


Hilarious. Ienuper
DIOSCORIDES is his first book Cap. 87. says, there are.2. kinds of
Ienupers, or bigger than the other both sower or tart of taste, hot of nature,
moving urine, Serpents will flee from the smoke thereof. Ienuper beries be
wholesome to cleanse ye Stomach, Ienuper will drive away Serpents.
help the coughe, inflations, and the torments of the belly. There is a
precious Oil made of Ienuper to warm the synewes and comfort the head, being
overcome with cold. Ienuper beries be wholesome to put in medicine against the
Pestilence, and biting of Serpents. Pliny in the laud of Ienuper says,
Ienuper was the beams of Dianas Temple. Pliny. lib. 16. Cap. 40.
that the beams in the rich temple of Diana of Ephesus, were made of Ienuper,
the which remained many hundred years unperished, until the burning of ye
same. The Chemistes or Distillars of Waters, make their ardent hot Fyres of
Ienuper.


Marcellus. What virtue is in Hypocistis?


Hilarious. Hiposistis.
HYpocistis is cold and dry in the second degree. Galen says, lib. vij
simplic* medicamentorum. Cistus is a binding fruicte, the leaves and. small
buddes do dry and bind and glewe Wounds together: Hipocistea will stop blod.
but the flowers be of most effect. Drunk in Wine they are good against the
bloody flix, or weakness of the belly: and also for Women, that have to mutch
red flux menstruall. And with Sanguis Draconis and Bosearmen, with the white
of an Egg, it will stop a bloody Wound.


Marcellus. What say you of the Pomgranet, and Balaustia, Lymondes, and Oringes?


Hilarious. Malum Punicum the Pomgarnet.
EMplasters made of Pomgranets, be good against hot Fevers: the Wine of
Pomgranettes, is good to comfort the Stomach after meat. There are two
kinds of them, the sour, and the sweet the sour be cold, Balaustica the
flower of Pomgarnete which will stop a flixe.
and dry in the second degree, but the sweet be cold and moist in primo.
And this Fruicte is called Malum punicum, the flowers be called Balaustium, of
the Wild Pomgranet which flower has virtue to stop flixes, by the reason they
be cold and dry, and slipticke of nature, and very good to be put in Clisters
and in the drink of them, which have Disenteria, or Tenasmus. The sower
Limondes are cold and dry, Limondes Orynges.
but the sweet are warm, the tindes are al dry. And Limondes are good in Wine
and do resist poison: Oringes are weaker of nature, and are cold and dry.


Marcellus. What is Cubebes, I pray you of nature?


Hilarious. THey be hot in the beginning of the third degree, Cubebes have
goodly virtue against melancholy.
and be good to cleanse the breasts and bellies, of raw flegmatike persons,
which be full of gross humors. They help the spleen, and coolness of the
Guts: with Mastike they will draw filth from (...). And with Balm Water, there
is nothing better against Melancholy trembling of the heart, and the falling
evil. And these Cubebes be used in many goodly medicines.


Marcellus. What say you of Figs?


Hilarious. Figs be of diverse sorts, but hot in the first degree, Figs
will ^ipe apostumes, best of al fruictes and are wholesome to be eaten.
and dry in ye second: and be full of maturity or ripeness, and will open ye
poares, cause sweet breath, breed Lyse, by the reason the foul humor is
cleansed through the skin by them. Relaxe the belly, and sodden in Wine with
Hysop, strayned and drunk, help the throat, lunges, and old rotten coughes.
Figs be good against Melancholy, and the Falling evil, to be eaten. Figs,
Nuts, and herb Grace, do make a sufferent medicine against poison, or the
pestilence. Figs make a good Gargarisme to cleanse the throat, and stamped
with Shomakers ware, will heal an ulcer. Figs will ripe hard apostumacions,
of ye plague sore: Snayles, Swynes grease and Figs, with Bean flower stamped
together, Figs heal ulcers.
and warm applied to a sore swelled throat, will ripe it, and help Angina. The
Wine of the decoction of Figs, is wholesome to be drunk against bruses, or
falls. Figs be fruict most worthy and commendable to man's nature, both
inwardly in meat to cleanse the blood being also a goodly Medicine: Figs be
both meat and medicine.
and outwardly in wholesome plasters, to ripe an hard Apostumacion or sore: by
the reason they will warm, and make the skin thin. And thus I do end of Figs.


Marcellus. What say you of the Mulbery?


Hilarious. GALEN. lib 7. simplicium medicamen^orum says, Morus the Mulberie.
the ripe sweet Mulbery will somewhat relaxe, but the Tarte unripe will
restrain and stop the belly: so it is then of nature relaxing and binding. The
Bark of the Mulbery tree root sodden in Water, to drink that Water does
resolve the belly, Dioscorides. lib. cap. 143. the leaves stamped with Vinegar
do heal scalding, or burning, to anoint the place therewith. Tricoctus called
the Medler, Mespilus.
or Mespilus has virtue also to restrain, stop, and cool.


Marcellus. What is Sebesten good for?


Hilarious. Sebesten will help Struma
SEbesten and Iuiubes be good to help the grief in the throat called Struma
if they be sodden in sweet water, Meede, or in the decoction of Lyquorice and
Figs. And they be both of a temperate heat and moystnesse, used in many
medicines.


Marcellus. What say you of Leven?


Hilarious. Leven dissolueth hard things, and makes them soft.
Leven called Fermenrum, is hot and moist, and will quickly dissolve a hard
apostumation: and if it be stamped with Figs it will speedely ripe and draw.
And Leven is wholesome to help the prick within the flesh or Synewes, made like
a Cerote.


Marcellus. What say you of Ceruse?


Hilarious. Ceruse tooleth inflamed sores
IT will scour, and is used among the Chirurgians, for to quench hot ulcers:
it has virtue to dry, and is cold and dry in the second degree.


Marcellus. What then of Licium?


Hilarious. Licium.
LIcium is very subtle, drying and penitrating: and of nature is cold and
stiptike.


Marcellus. Wherefore is Litarge good?


Hilarious. GALEN remembering Spuma argentj: says Lytharge does dry, as other
medicines do, Gale^. lib. 9. simp. medica.
that be made of Mettell, Stone, or any other earthly thing, of a strong
faculty, and is used in sundry linementes, against hot burning Ulcers. Litarge.
And is naturally cold and dry, and is tried out of Sand, called Molybdis.
Look Dioscorides. lib. 5. Capt. lxiij.


Marcellus. What say you of Galanga, and Cost?


Hilarious. Galanga.
GALANGA is hot and dry in the third degree, and biteth as Gynger does upon
the tongue, with burning like Peper, and will take away coldness of the breast,
heart, guts, matrix and raynes: drunk with Planten water, it stops the
bloody flixe, and strengthens nature, Ciperus.
comfort the brains, and trembling of the heart. Ciperus, which is called
Aspalathum, is very sweet, and of the nature of Galanga, and is called wild
Galanga, but it does more vehemently expel the terms being drunk: the roots
be like Ginger. Cost is diuritike, hot and warm, and resists Uenime.


Marcellas. What say you of Iris, called Ireos?


Hilarious IRIS is so called, because of similytude of the Raynebowe, Ireos.
and is commonly known: it is called the flower Delice, hot, and dry in the
end of the third degree. And is of two kinds, Garden, To resolve.
and Field Ireos: and it will resolve, soften, and open, and is put in
mollifying Cerotes, with grease of Duckes, Capons, Hens, and Geese, and the
Powder of Flax, Bean meal, Holioke, and Wax accordingly. Ireos powder
tempered with Honey, and therewith a convenient Pessary made, is good to draw
forth the dead child. It is wholesome for Struma, or swelling in the throat, in
lynamentes. And the Powder thereof will heal a Fistula, or a rotten Ulcer.
Vinegar, Oil of Roses, and Ireos, sodden and strayned, To cover a bone with
flesh.
put thereunto Honey of Roses, and it will cover a naked place, whereas ye
flesh is gone from the Bone, and will quickly cover it again with fleashe.
The whyter it is, and the meaner it is, the better: Pliny does not a little
commend it libro.xx. for ointments, so do Aetius lib. xiij. cap. iiij. but not
inward in medicines.


Marcellus. What say you of Peper?


Hilarious. PEper comes from Inde, Peper.
the black grows upon clusters like to little black Ienuper Beries: Some
grow in Husks, and both the white Peper, long Peper, and black Peper be all
hot in quarto, and dry in the second: the long is most biting, because it is
gathered before it be ripe, therefore it has still the hot humor. The black
is perfect ripe, and is wholesome: the white is sweetest, but weakest of them
three. Peper is used in sundry medicines, and in meat against coldness: Peper
dissolueth and consumes moist humors.
it draws dissolueth, and consumes moist humors, and dries them, and
helps an Agewe, being drunk many times, specially before the Fit. Gross
Peper will help digestion, and never hurt the Liver. There is a goodly Dia
made of the three Pepers, called Dia trion Pipereon, which has great virtue
against horsenesse, stopping of the lunges, and cold Reumes.


Marcellus. What say you then of the three Sanders, have not they the same
virtue, that the three Pepers have?


Hilarious. NO sir, for ye Sanders be Wood, or a Tree called Santalum, The three
kinds of Sanders.
of three kinds: the pale, the white, and the red, cold in the second degree.
And all these be wholesome to stop flixes, and wounds: and with Rosewater,
Saunders be wholesome, to be applied to ye foreheade in a clothe, with a piece of
a Rose cake, to aswage the hot burninge pains in the forehead. Sanders be
wholesome in Drynkes, to be gieuen to quench a hot Fever. Temper the Juice of
Solanum, and Purssen, Sanders do^ cool the head and reconcile sleep and help
the Gout.
with Saunders, and the oil of water Lyllies, and anoynte the raging Gout
therewyth, and the pains will vanishe away, through the virtue thereof Auicen
in libro de viribus Cordis, affirms Sanders be put in sundry good medicines,
against the trembling of the heart. I noble Dia is made thereof, called
Di^trion Santalj.


Marcellus. What say you of Cardamomum?


Hilarious. Graynes of Paradise called Cardamomum.
CARDAMOMVM, is a precious spice, called the grain of Paradise, growing in
Arabia Foelix: the best be the heauiest and sharpest, bitter of taste in the
mouth, with a pleasant verdure, flening up into the head, or Pallet of the
mouth: these be hot of nature, and to be drunk against the falling sickness.
Cardamomu^ helps the Faling sickness.
Sciatic^, Cough, resolution of the Synewes, Ruptures, pains in the b^lly, and
kill Worms in the Belly, and provoke Uryne. A dragme drunk to Wine, with as
mutch of the bark of Laurus, breaks ye stone: the common graynes be nigh
hand as good, and are hot and dry.


Marcellus. What say you of Laurus, called the Baie?


Hilarious. IT has been in great estimation, since Tyberius Caesar's time, which
was crowned with Bays: it signifies victory, and is of a fiery nature. For
example, cast two dry Baie sticks over each other, and cast a little powder of
Brimstone between them, and eftsoons fire will flame forth. Merueylous things
be written of the Bay tree: read Theophrastus. lib. 4. Cap. viij. Galen. lib.
7. simplic, medic. says, the Baie tree leaves and beries, do dry, and warm
vehemently: Laurus called the Bay.

Against the stone.


the more they be bitter, the more they are adstrictyue. They will break the
stone, and are good for a cold Liver, drunk in strong Wine..j. yet they are
evil for Women with child. The berry is hoatter then the Leaf, and the Oil
is wholesome against cold Agues, and goodly plasters be made thereof.


Marcellus. THe children of Israel, in their hunger had Manna falling from
Heaven, during their passage in the Wilderness: and after their coming over
the River of Jordan, they were fed no more therewith. And as I do hear say,
there is a certain Manna, which our Apothecaries do sell, to delicate persons,
to quench the heat of choler, and purge their blood wythall.


Hilarious. Manna. Exodus xvj. Sapi. xvj. Psalm. 78. Ihon. 6.
THE children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were fed by the providence of God:
because he^ was their God, and they his own people. He provided for them by
miracle, because they should love him, and honor him above all earthly
things, for feeding them with heavenly Bread, called Manna, which as the holy
Writers affirm, was ye Spiritual food, even Jesus Christ: with which the
true faithful Chrystians, are most comfortably nourished within the blessed
sacrament of Christ's body, which is our redemption, once bodyly offered on the
Cross, and daily in the congregation of ye faithful, spiritually mynistred in
the holy Sacraments, until the end of yt World according to his promise. But
this Manna, which we do use in bodyly medycine, is a sweet lyquour, which does
still from the Air, in the time of the Canicular days* Manna of Calabria.
falling upon Trees, Branches. Herbs, Flowers, and Stones. etc. Some Manna
comes from the Orient, and other from Calabria, which is sweet, light and in
small graynes, mutch like unto Mastike. Manna of the Ash tree in Italy.
There is a City in Calabria called Coslentia, and the Ash trees about the
same once a year in the Canicular days, have great plenty of Manna hanging
upon them. There is but little dyuersity between Manna and Teryniaben, but that
this is like drops of Honey, and will quench heat, purge blood, and relaxe the
belly, and Manna will do the same, and is white and clear like gum. And yet
these two do descend from heaven. Galen, Pliny, and Theophrastus, remembrynge
Manna, say: that in one time of Summer, there is Honey rayning from heaven upon
trees. etc. At which time, the Husband men play, and singe, The great virtue
of Manna for mankind.
saying: Jupiter rayneth Honey, Jupiter Melle pluit. This Manna is wholesome for
to cleanse the breast, lunges, raynes. etc. And of nature is hot* temperate,
and moist, and the more it is to be lamented, by false craft it is
sophisticated, or it comes hither. And when it comes into England, it is
but little helped among some Apothicaries: and this Manna with Cassia is
wholesome to purge: and you may receive Manna Simple..ij. in your drink, or eat
it like bread in the morninge, or at noone: it is most delicious, and pleasant
to tender Folks. Children may eat..i. at once, and young Babes in their
milk, may receive..ij*ss.


Marcellus. What say you of Sugar of the Cane?


Hilarious DIOSCORIDES remembering Sugar. lib. 2. cap. 75. says, Sugar of the
Cane.
there be Reeds in Arabia, in which is a thing contained like Salt, and
breaks in the mouth like Salt, and is both pleasant, and good to the Belly
and stomach: deluted or steeped in water if it be drunk, it helps the
raynes. And Sugar is good to cleanse the darkness of ye eyes. Sugar is used in
most Sirupes, and Iuleps, Manus Christi. etc. Sugar cannot be spared in
bankets, or garnishment of feasts: Although Sugar cannot be simply made, from
the panell, or sand, which comes from the Cane, without some art, yet there
is much craft in it, by sophisticacion, to make it trim to ye sale, sweet and
pleasant, like Musk to the mouth more pleasant, than profitable. But the
clean clarifyed Honey, Honey is more excellent than Sugar to preserve.
does excel for health the Sugar, specially the Honey of Athens, where as the
Bees feeds most upon time. Sugar Candy is good for the Lunges.


Marcellus. What say you of Spiknard?


Hilarious. SPiknard is odoriferous, pleasant and sweet, comfortable to the
brain, and synewes, and warmeth each part of the body being cold, Spicknard of
Spain* help^th ^he bray^
and is good to be drunk against ye falling evil, Collicke, Flix, Cardiaca*
Dropsies, and Hickit, and it will increase hair, ye powder being tempered with
Honey to anoint ye place. Spicknard beaten into powder tempered with the Waters
of Fenell, For sore eyes to help them.
Roses, and Eyebright, putting a little Lapis tutia and Aloes Epatike, standing
all the night together, and strayned in the morning* this dropped into dim
eyes, will comfort, scowre, and stre^gthe^ the sight. And of nature it is hot
in the first degree, and dry in the second. And thus I do end of Spica Nardi,
whereof there be two kinds, one of Syria, and the other of Inde. Read more
thereof. Dioscorides. libi 1. Cap. 6.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Caphura, commonly called Campher?


Hilarious. Caphura called Campher, a gum of a great tree of Jude.
IT is a Gum of a tree of Inde, whose bigness, and breadth of the branches be
so large, that a. C. men or more, may be shadowed under the same: this tree
grows near the sea side, and the people of Inde do cover theymselues from
the heat of the Sun under the shadow of the same. There was a certain king
among them called Riach, Riach found first Campher
which found out the worthy virtue of this Gum, and from the base coullour
thereof did by art change it into shining whytnesse, which is the best
Campher, all the other is but base and of small estimation. Some also say that
Campher is a heavenly influence, Sundry opynions of Campher.
cast down by the violence of thunder, and lightning, and is gathered out of
the earth like unto Sulpher or Brimstone, although it be by the judgments of
Serapio and Auicen cold and dry in the third degree, and comes from the
Meridian part of the World: but there is mutch craft and sophistication of the
Campher, through the craft and subtilty of strangers before it is brought into
the Realm. But if you will know good Campher, How to know good Campher.
do this, take a new Manchet hot from the Oven and cut it a sunder in the
mids, then put in the Campher and cloase the loaf loose together, then if
the Campher do cast a moystnesse, it is the best argument to prove it to be
good Campher, but if it remain dry like unto earth, then it is false, and
counterfeit: good Campher will burn upon Snow, and also in Water, it ought
to be kept close, covered about with Flax seed, Pepper, or such like, for by
it self it will waste away quickly: it is put in many goodly ointments to
quench the heat that is above nature and to extinguish carnal Lust, Campher
will quench nature.
as to temper it with the Juice of Nightshade, Vinegar, and water Lillyes, then
to anoint the Testicles or priuye parts, and this shall quench the heat of
nature: it will also reconcile sleap, to make an oyntme^t with Rose water, Oil
of water Lillyes, and Woman's Milk, To cause fleape.
and to annoint therewith the Temples* and Foreheade. Planten water and
Campher, will stop the bleeding at the nose: it is put in goodly oyntme^ts to
cleanse ye spots from the face, and the filth from the skin: it preserves the
eyes from blindness te^pered with medicines accordingly. It stops the running
of ye Raines and white Fluxes passing from Women, To stop the whites and
running of the Raynes.
drunk with the Juice of water Lillyes: it is good against ye Pestilence, and
finaly it will preserve a dead body from stinking putrefaction. And thus I end
of Campher called Caphura. Vitex called Agnus Castus is also of the Nature of
Campher, Agnus Castus or Vitex for chastity.
to dry up the seed of Generation, but in complexion as Galen says, it is
hot and dry in the third degree, bitter of taste and bynding Read Galen
thereof. lib. 24. cap. 9. And Dioscorides the first book the. 116* Chapter of
the nature of Agnus Castus does greatly laud it for ye syngular virtue, being
so goodly an instrument for chastity. And how the Women of Athens that
professed chastity did straw the Leaves thereof about their Beds. And thus I do
end of Agnus Castus, that is to say, chaste


Marcellus. What is the nature of Sulpher, called Brimstone?


Hilarious. SVLPHER called Brimstone, Sulpher or Brimstone.
is hot and dry in the fourth degree: with this Sulpher, and fire, God plaged
the People of Sodom, and Gomor, for their abominable Sins against Nature.
Su^pher is one of the simples put into the receypt of Gunpouder, wherewyth God
by his instruments has plaged the proud World with, through merciless
Gunnes, Sulpher is found in diverse parts of ye world, as in veins of the
Earth, Wells, Pittes, as well in the cold parts of Iseland, as in the hot
parts of Inde. Of a sulpherous humor it is presupposed that the waters of the
Bathes here in England have their continual warmness. Also in Italy in the
field Senensis, Bath spring came from a vain of Brimstone.
upon ye mountains not far from the warm Bathes of S. Philip, is mutch
Brimstone found, therefore it is none error to say that the hot Bathes have
their original spryng of Brimstone. Sulpher has virtue to dry up Scabbes
being tempred with fasting spittle, Vinegar, and Swynes grease. It also helps
Leprous, Scabbes, and Poxes, being sodden in Oil Debay, and sharp Vinegar.
And Galen says, that it does resist the venom of Serpents. To cleanse scabbes.
Notwythstanding through the heat thereof it will exulcerat, if it be not
corrected. And thus I end of Brimstone, the whytest and clearest is the best.


Marcellus. Hitherto have I not remembered the noble Rose, with his singular
virtues, I pray you show me the nature of the same?


Hilarious. DIOSCORIDES writing upon the Rose. The Rose, a friend to the brain,
and eye^.
lib. 1. Cap. 112 says that the Rose is cold, and bynding, and is friendly
unto the eyes. Roses being first dried in the shadow, and sodden in Wine, the
same lyquor is good for ye pains in the head, Eyes, and ears, Oil of Roses
for ye head.
the places to be washed or anointed therewyth. The Oil of Roses is of a
syngular virtue to be put in Linementes, for to cool hot burning Ulcers,
inflammations, and such like, because it will resolve, and also extinguish, and
comfort wounds in the head, through any stripe or fall. And of this Galen does
remember lib. x. simplic. medic de sanguine. There is a precious ointment of
Roses called Vnguentum Rosarum, whose virtue is to extinguish the heat of the
Raynes of the back, and it reconcileth sleep for to have the Temples, and
Forehead anointed therewith, if it be made sweet and white according to Art.

There are sewe Cordials can want the help of Roses, and Rose water. And as
Dioscorides says, when the Rose is pulled from the bushe, the whitest must be
cut away from the red with a pair of Sheeres, which red leaves must be dried,
preserved, or stilled to the use of medicine. There be diverse and sundry
kinds of Roses, as the red Rose, the white Rose, and the province Rose, Sundry
kinds of Roses all of great virtue.
which is excellent in medicine, and most pleasant to be smelled upon,
comfortable to the Brain, and Heart: among all Flowers none excels the
province Rose for his manyfolde virtues: as against ye trembling of the heart,
dimnesse of sight, frensies, lack of sleep, corruption of the Air, heat
above Nature, Flixes. etc. Of Succus rosarum is made the most excellent
electuarie to purge choler with all. The waters of Roses excels all other
waters, if they be purely stilled. Read Pliny the 21. lib. cap. 4. which
writes most copiously of the natures, shapes, and virtues of Roses. The more
leaves that Roses have, the preciouser they be. The best Roses of the World do
grow in Italy, The best Roses be in Italy.
and France. The Roses of England be not mutch inferior unto them. The
little yellow tuftes growing within the Roses, finely beaten into powder, be
wholesome to stanch blood, to kill Worms, to cleanse the Canker in the mouth, and
to take Pollipus from the Nose. There be also many wild stinking Roses, as
Theophrastus makes mention. lib. 6 cap. 6. de historia Plantarum. There is
also Rosa Solis which is distilled to make a water compounded to preserve
nature withal: and thus I do end of this precious flower called the Rose,
which the Arabians for the excellent sweetness thereof* does call Narde.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Alum?


Hilarious. Alum.
DIoscorides does remember the same in his.5. book, the 22. cap. saying it
comes out of Egypt, found where as metals do grow, and in many other
places, as in Melo, and in Macedonia: also there is great plenty thereof in
Italy, which is most white and clear, it is hot and dry in the fourth degree,
and is very wholesome in the cure of Cankers: Alum for the Canker.
and if it be sodden with Planten water, it helps ulcers yt seem incurable:
sodden with Honey and Vinegar alone, it will stablishe and make fast teeth. Alum
does cleanse and scour, and is used in many medicines: brunt alone, Burnt Alum
consumes flesh.
makes Corosiues to corode, consume, and take away dead flesh: you may read
more thereof in Galen. lib. 4. simpli. medica. of ye virtue of ye clensing, and
the scowring. Alum is profitable in every common wealth, where as good clothes
be made.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Quickesiluer?


Hilarious. THere is mutch variety wheather it should be hot or cold in the.4
degree, Quicksiluer or Mercury.
but it should seem rather to be hot, by reason it does dissolve and pearce:
it has virtue to consume, and it is perilous to be used in ointments to kill
scabbes with all, for it is percing, and subtle, that at length it will come
into the inward parts, where as finally it will mortify and kill. It is
found in Minerals of Silver, and is a destroyer of other metals. With this
Quickesiluer and Sal Armoniake, is made Mercury sublimate, which must be kept
in a close vessel, Mercury sublimate.
adusted in a Oven, or burnt until it come to the color of white Sugar, which
Mercury sublimate is used of Chirurgians for to cleanse foul ulcers and
soars, and is a poison inwardly to be taken, except with all speed after the
same a vomet be taken of Oil or Azarabaccha. If Quickesiluer be taken
inwardly, it is also pearillous, and nothing better to help it, than to
drink Wormwood wine with the seed of Clary boiled therein. Marvelous
things be done by means of Quicksiluer as the Chimistes does know, and yet
for all that we see little Gold multiplied thereby. Thus to conclude,
Quicksiluer may be conveniently ministered in oyntmentes, to heal the Pox.


Marcellus. I pray you what is the nature of Atramentum, of the Mineral?


Hilarious It is a natural Corosiue, and hot and dry in the third degree.
Atramentum.



Marcellus. What say you of vnslecked Lime, called Clax viua?


Hilarious. IT is hot and dry in the third degree: vnslecked Lime, oil of
Roses, Calx vius Lime, helps rotten soars.
ye Juice of Enulacampana and Uynegar, strongly beaten together in a leaden
Mortar with putting in Terebintine: makes an Ointment which will heal
scabbes, infecting the Thighs, or Legs, and al rotten ulcers.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Uerdigreace?


Hilarious IT has virtue to consume superfluous flesh, Uerdigreace.
and does mundefie rotten humors, filthy ulcers, deep stinking soars, and
rebateth and consumes proud flesh, and is the chief thing in Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
for Uerdygreace. Honey, Roche Alum, Wax, Oil, and Uynegar, sodden together in
a convenient vessel, sturred together with a stick till it come to a
thycknesse, this ointment is good Aegyptiacum which has the foresaid virtues,
and is hot and dry of nature.


Marcellus What is the nature of Spodium?


Hilarious. SPodium is cold and dry, and tempered with Roche Alum, Spodium.
it will heal ulcers, and Cankred matter in the mouth.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Minium?


Hilarious. MINIVM is used in diverse linementes, and Cerotes, Minium and Cerusse,
and by burning in the Furneis, it is made of Cerusse, and of nature is cold,
and dry.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Uernishe?


Hilarious. Uarnish.
IT is good for Armorers, it has virtue also to scower and cleanse soars, and
wounds, and is hot and dry in the second degree.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Soap?


Hilarious. SMigma is called Soap. Soap cannot be forborne in any common wealth,
Smigma or Soap.
for washing of Lynnen, and clensing of the Bodies of Men and Women, which be
defiled with sweat and filth, through travel and labor. But it is perilous
to be put into wounds, because it makes separation: notwithstanding, it is
hot and dry, yet it does neither burn, nor adust. French Soap, Nighter,
common Salt, French soap.
ana..j. put in a little close stone vessel, with three spoonefulles of
Vinegar, let it stand in the Fourneys, until it be dried. This is good to
wash the head, in a little Malmesy, wherein Azarabaccha has bin sodden,
against al coldness, and dullness of ye Brain. French Soap mingled with the
powder of Elleborus Niger, called the root of Bears foot, Uerdigreace,
Litarge of Silver and Gold, Tartar, and Quicksiluer corrected, beaten all
together in a Leaden Mortar with the Juice of houselike, and Stonecrop, makes
a goodly Ointment to kill Tetters, black Morphew, Soap will kill Tetters.
Ringwormes, Spots, and Melancholy, infecting the Skin. French Soap, Oil of
Roses, and the white of an Egg beaten together, are good against scalding, or
foul stinking Scabbes, or itch. It Soap be applied in a Walnut shell to the
Navel of a child, forthwith it will cause the vryne speedely to purge. Soap
is used also among the emperikes, or unlearned practicioners to be taken
inwardly, to provoke urine and stool: but this practice is not to be
commended. And thus I end of soap, called Smigma.


Marcellus. What say you of Lead?


Hilarious. Lead will cool* and help soars.
GAlen. lib. 9. simpli. medica. says Lead to refrigerat and cool, it has
also humidite, and is a little earthly of nature, cold and moist in the second
degree, and is good against foul cankred soars, and filthy ulcers, fistulaes,
Emeroides. etc. thus washed. White or red Lead beaten with an Iron Pestill in
a Leaden Mortar pooring in oil of Roses, Burnt lead.
or Vnguentum Rosarum, labor it well, and then it will make a good ointment
for hot burning soars, and will resolve ye hardness of them. A plate of Lead
is good to cool the burning of the raynes: Plumbum vstum burnt Lead with
Brimstone, has virtue to corrode and waste superfluous flesh.

Iron do mu^difie and cleanse.
Iron does mundify mutch, and is cold and dry in the second degree, so is
Scoria or Rubigo, called ye skales or rust of Iron, but more dryver: stamped in
a Leaden mortar, with Uynegar and oil of Roses, it makes a good cooling and
drying ointment. And the rust of Iron beaten fine and sodden with strong
Uynegar is wholesome to be dropped into soar running ears, read Galen, lib. 9.
simplici. medicam. Calebs, or Steel made hot, quenched in red Wine and
drunk, does stop the Flixe.

Spodium is cold and dry of nature, Spodium stop^peth blood.
blackish and heavy, tempered with Olibanum, sanguis draconis, and Beanemeale
beaten in a Leaden mortar, it will stop blood. Spodium with Roch Alum, and
strong Vinegar, beaten together, will kill the Canker in the mouth. Spodium
comes from Furnaces of Brass, or Copper Read of this Dioscorides, lib. 4.
cap. 46. and Galen, lib. 9. simplic. medic. Of Spodium and Pompholix, Cadmia.
it is rather a kind of Cadmia than Tutia, and is tolerable to put into
Collyries for sore Eyene.

Gold, the most pure and undefiled mettell, Gold ye most undefiled, and pure
mettel.
not Leprosse which Sol has digested by heavenly influence. This mettell is
most rich. This gold is not more profitable to our worldly business, than
wholesome for medicines, specially as Auicen says, for to put away Melancholy,
and to make burninge actual cauteres of Gold is holsom, as if any filth be in
the mouth, to burn the same with Gold is most best, so it is when ye uvula is
fallen: a Cautery of Gold is best, in medicens of Cordials. Gold put into
Cordials.
Gold is wholesome to deaurate, or gilde Losinges. And for the dimnesse of sore
eyes, Gold is tolerable for the^ in some Colories, and is good for Leproses:
all Mettels will corrupt, when as Gold will remain undefiled. God grant we
use Gold as a servant, but not as a Master, for then we are bond Slaves:
for Gold will not help in the day of vengeance.


Marcellus. What say you of Salt?


Hilarious WIthout Salt we live not, it is used commonly in our meats. Salt,
what it is.
With Salt, Flesh, Fish, and many fruicts be preserved. The great Ocean Sea is
Salt, through which Saltness the earth is kept from poison, through the
exhalacions, or vapor coming from it. Salt is of nature hot and dry, Salt
has virtue to warm and dry.
and has virtue says Dioscorides lib. 5. cap. 85. to scour, stop, warm,
dry, and mundify, and defends from putrefaction, and is put into
supposytories and Clisters to cleanse, with Honey and Vinegar: with Organ, and
Hysop it makes a good medicine against stinging, or biting of Dogs, Snakes,
Adders. etc. Salt, Vinegar, and Sugar sodden together, makes a good wholesome
drink against the drynking of Opium, or eating of the Moys^oms called Fungus.
Salt is good against the ulcers of the mouth, to burn Salt, and make it white,
wash it once in Water, To dye Salt.
poureforth the water, and gather the Salt in the bottom, and put it into a
stone vessel covered, and put it into the Oven, and cover it with coals, and
dry it, and so it may be used in medicine. Oribasius affirms Salt to be
compou^ded of matter Abstersive and stiptike, which is matter bindinge, and
drying moist humors: but salt is not good for lean persons, Salt not good
for lean persons.
it will make them seem old, and moves anger to the Chollerike. Mutch salt
is made in England, as of Sand and Salt water Pits, in Hollande in
Lyncolnshyre, and only by a marvelous humor of water, at the Wytch, far from
the sea: and in ye North there is salt made, at the shiles by Tinmouth Castle.
I Bullein the author hereof have a pan of salt upon the same Water. At Blithe in
Northumberland is good salt made, Sir Ihon Delauall, a good knight.
and also at sir Ihon Delauals Pannes, which sir Ihon Delaual knight has bin a
Patro^ of worship, and hospitality, most like a famous Gentleman, during many
years: and powdreth no man by the salt of extorcion, or oppressing his
neighbor, but liberally spends his Salt, Wheat, and his Malt, like a
Gentleman, I need not put his name in remembrance in my book, for it shall
live by immortal good fame, The floweyng of Salt at Nilus.
when my poor book shall be rotten, dear brother Marcellus.

There be also sundry kinds of Salt, among which there is a Salt flowing about
the brinkes of that famous River Nilus called Flos Salis, the flower of Salt,
of a Saffron color, of taste and savor unpleasant, which Flos Salis is put
into sundry Oyntmentes to heal soores about the priuye parts, or other places
of the skin. In colliries it is tolerable for to cleanse sore eyes. And
tempered with Vnguentum Rosarum, or other Ointmentes, it moves sweat to all
the body, Sal Gemmae
well rubbed with the same.

Sal gemmae, is a Salt of the earth, plenty is dug thereof in Calabria in a
place called Altomonte, and is cut forth like stones most clear Translucens,
or through shinyng like to Crystal, which if this salt be cast into the fire,
it will not crack nor break, but keep still whole, burning like Iron. Pliny
makes large mention of Salt. lib. 21. cap. 7. saying that Salt is either
growing naturally in the Earth, Pliny of salt.
or in veins of hills. etc. or else made of Salt water sodden in Pannes, unto
a thycknesse, whereof common Salt is made.

Salt Ammoniac is hot and dry in the fourth degree. says the Pandact, saying
that it comes from Ammoniac, and is made of Camels vryne: but it is called of
the best writers Sal Ammoniacus, Sal ammoniac. does cleanse th skin.
that is found under ye sands in Aphrike near unto the Oracle of the God
Ammon, and also in the regio^ called Cyrenaica, which salt is black without
and white within like Alum, but not very bright, noisome to the mouth, but
wholesome in medicine, to cleanse the skin, myngled with Campher and Rosewater
tempered together and made warm: Salt of Inde
Many and sundry Lotyons for Apostimacions and soores, he made with these
saltes, and they must be mingled with other simples.

Sal Indus grows in Inde, through the heat of the Sun, upon Reeds, which
salt is mutch like Sugar. With Sugar and common salt, the Apothicaries do
sophisticate and craftily counterfeit this Salt. Sal Niter. or Peter, for Gun
powder. Spuma nitri or Barach.


Sal Nitrum, or Saltepeeter. is dug in vaultes, flowers of houses, or
walls, which Salt is white, when this is prepared: thereof with other
receiptes, as Cooles, Brimstone etc is Gunpouder made, which do shote of
Gunnes, which are the instruments of Gods wrath. And Spuma nitri, is is called
Barach of the Arabians: Salt of Mare Mortuum. whereas Sodom stood. Asphaltum.
of these saltes read Dioscorides. lib. 5. cap. 86. Galen. lib xi. simplicium
medicamentorum: further says Galen in the same book, there is salt made of
the water of Maremortuum, the dead sea, whereas Sodom and Gomor stodde, called
Asphaltnm.

Salt of ye Earth is grosser, and more colder astringing, than the salt of salt
water: but there is a salt called salt upon salt, which is very good to the
use of Man, so is Baie salt, which through the March wynd is so made and
fynished, which will continue for ever like stone, being kept close but yet
Salt peter will grow therein at length: and thus I end of salt, which the
Arabians call Mesha.


Marcellus. I Have seen sundry saltes before this time: as white salt and Bay,
Bay Salt.
which we do use to powder Flesh, and Fish wythall. I would your salt Peter
had never bin known, whereby Gunnes do so mutch mischief, and ye noble state
of Mankind through them are decayed, Boys can kill the strongest men with
Gunnes.
yea through a very vile Coward or Boy, often the valiant man is slain and
cast away, But Hilarious, I will a little more proceed in simples, and leave
Gunning matters, to the Men of War, or Seruitors to ye noble Princes: now I
pray you what is the nature of Spuma maris, and Fumus terrae?


Hilarious. THese are two clean contrary simples, of.ij. sundry natures, the
one of the land called Fumaria, Spuma maris Fumus terrae.
an herb engendered of the Fume or vapor of the Earth, Dioscorides. lib 14.
Cap. 105. in form mutch like Coriander, and in color like Ashes, purple
flowers, bitter of taste, ye Juice will make clean sore eyes, and this Herb
drunk, Against stopping of the Spleen. Fumitery does prevail.
the Decoction thereof will purge choler by urine. Fumus terrae, or Fumaria, is
good against the stopping of the Spleen, Liver, Gaul, or Raynes, and does make
strong the Uentricles, through the dryness, warmness, sharpness, and
bitterness, sodden in Wine, stilled, or in syrup, and so drunk. And so I do
end of this Fumus called Capnos: but as for Spuma maris, the Foam of the Sea,
it has virtue to cleanse, Spuma maris does make clean ye teeth*
scowre, and, dry and is cold and dry in the third degree: it is good to rub
the Teeth, to cleanse them: and the fine powder thereof with the white of an
Egg, Rose water and Sief beaten together, put into the eyes, To cleanse sore
eyes.
does cleanse them, and takes away the Web: and thus I do end of Spuma maris,
or ye Stone which the Scriueners do rub, and make clean their Parchment
wythall. What have you else to say?


Marcellus. What say you of Spongia, the Sea Sponge?


Hilarious. GALEN. lib. 11. simplic. medic. says that they did use Sponges to
be a manuel instrument to receive blood, Sponge of the Sea.
wherewith they used to wype and dry blood in Wou^des: and also they do receive
things to stop blood. A sponge is hot in ye first degree, and dry in the
second, it is of a resolving virtue. Sponge good for wounds.
A sponge adust, or burnt not mutch, the powder thereof will consume flesh,
which is superfluous, and may be put in Wounds of the Head. With a Sponge
which is soft, tents for the head may be made. With sponges sodden in Wine,
and Oil of Capers it is good to wash, and chafe the left side: nothing is
better to anoint the Stomach for a Pleuresy than with a spong in warm Oils,
as of Myntes, Chamomel, Roses, the grease of Hens, Capons, and Duckes. Sponges
new are good but old are evil.
New sponges are wholesome of them selves, and will heal wou^des, without any
thing put to the^. Old sponges be evil. Pitch and the Ashes of Sponges
together, will stop blood. A sponge sodden in Honey, will heal and resolve
Wounds, and hard Apostumations, Sponge stones do break the stone.
Read more thereof Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 96. and Aristotle of the nature
of sponges, which grow among the rocks of the Sea, and have stones in them
beaten in powder, and drunk, will break the stone in the bladder.


Marcellus. What say you of Coral?


Hilarious. THe Indians have Coral in no lest estimation, than we have their
Diamondes and great Perles. Coral grows ^n ye Sea.
Diosco. lib. 5. Cap. 97. calls Coral Lethrodendron, which is a branch
growinge in the bottom of the Sea, which by certain means is drawn forth,
and soon turned into hardness, and eftsoon into a stone: we do see of this
Coral great plenty of beads, more vain glorious, Coral of two kinds.
than religious godly. Of Coral be two kinds, ye red which is best, and white
which of nature be cold and dry in the second degree, and be restrictiue and
stopping. Coral beaten in powder, myngled with Dragons blood, To stop blood.
whytes of Eggs, Bolearmeni and the Juice of Sheperds purse, Knot grass, and
Rabbets woll beaten in a Leade^ Mortar, will stop blood. The powder of Coral
drunk with Wine, provoke urine, and will rebate the swelling of the Spleen,
and finally as Auicen says, does comfort the heart, Coral provoke vryne,
and helps digestion. The Powder of Coral will cleanse wounds, in whom
flesh superfluous does remain, and also heal ye same. What is beter to stop a
bloody flixe, called Dysenteria? it stops both the flix of men, running from
them in their sleep, and also the whites from Women. Read more in Matthiolus
upon Dioscorides. lib 5.


Marcellus. What say you of Pearl called the Margarite?


Hilarious The Margarit or Perle -- good in Cordials.
THe Pearl is not only rich and pleasant to behold, but also wholesome and good
in medicine. Pliny. lib. 9. cap. 35. says, that there be plenty of Pearls in
Arabia, in the mouth of the Red sea, growing within the shelles, called the
mother of Pearl, in which they are conveyed: the union which is clean,
bright, white, round, and heavy, is the richest. The powder of Pearl is good
to be put in cordialles, as Manus Christi, and the same powder with the white
of an Egg, will cleanse the eyes. About this Realm many Pearls be gathered in
Muscels, and other Shell fish, but not the most orient.


Marcellus. Is there any virtue in Lapide lazulj?


Hilarious. THere is nothing better to purge Melancholy. There be Pills called
Pilulae de Lapide Lazulj, Lapis lazulj.
against old Quartens, or Madness: this stone is cold and moist.


Marcellus. What say you of Saphyrus?

DIOSCORIDES affirms, Saphyrus resist poison.
this heavenly colored precious stone, is wholesome to be drunk against the
stinging of Serpents, to resyst the poison: and being drunk it helps all
exulcerations of the Guts, and also is wholesome for sore eyes, to clear the
sight. Many goodly virtues are belonging to the Saphyr, as chastity etc Yet it
is not cold enough for the quenching of Venus They say the Turquois will keep a
man from falling, but it is a lie. The rich Hemerald, some say, will declare
when the knot of Marriage is undone, and than it will separate and break a
sunder, and that were a perilous case to lose a good Jewel for an evil wife:
Fables gathered.
with many such folish old fables gathered out of some writers which have
rather vnwittily reported, than truly proved the nature of stones so far
passing their natures, although they be of great virtue, and both pleasant and
profitable to mankind, and nothing under heaven more rich or costly.


Marcellus. IF the Emeraldes would so quickly break or crack when such parts
be played, I assure you there would be great loss in costly Jewels, and some
separacion of friendship, but they be of mutch virtue and patience when such
offenses be committed, that they will tell no tales by breaking them selves:
well let this matter pass, it is but to fear folks withal, and I pray you
what say you of Lapis Naxius, and the Jasper.


Hilarious. THe powder thereof with Bears grease will increase hair, Lapis
naxius, helps to increase hair.
and keep one from baldness. This stone will make small a maidens Breasts, and
defend them from growyng: if the powder thereof with Uineger be drunk, it will
consume the greatness of the Spleen. And this stone is good against the
falling sycknesse. Jasper does comfort digestion.
The Jasper is wholesome to be hanged about the neck, down to the mouth of the
stomach, for it is comfortable to the same says Galen, lib. ix. simplic.
medicamentorum.


Marcellus. What then of Lapis Tucia, and Lincis.


Hilarious. IT is used in many ulcers, and foul stinking Cankers, Lapis Tutia
and lapis Lincis.
for through the coldness and drynes, it does cleanse and incarnate foul
sores: and this Tucia is most excellent, if it be prepared, to be put into
Colliries to cleanse the eyes. What is better with Planten Water to cleanse the
yard? Lapis Lincis, is hot and dry, engendered of the vryne of Lynx, and is
good in powder. iij. to be drunk at once, or put into Cassiafistula..i. to
consume the stone, and cleanse the Raynes.


Marcellus. What say you of the stone called Byzabar.


Hilarious THe Arabians do call it Bizabar, which Stone is precious, and
resysteth Poison, Bizabar ^ precious
and is put into precious Antidotaries which prevail against all foul air,
pestilence and venim. This stone is yellow without oder or smell: stone against
poison.
if it be hanged upon the left arm, touching the flesh, it will prevail
against the foresaid evils. look Matthiolus lib. 5. Diosco. cap. 73.


Marcellus. What then of Lapis Phrygius?


Hilarious GALEN lib. ix. simplic. medic. with this stone combust says he* I
use to help or cleanse stinking ulcers, Lapis Phrygius for sore eyes.
and it has the same Virtue that Lapis Pyrites has. And of this stone,
medicines be made for sore eyes, myngled with Colliries accordyngly. And this
stone called Pyrites looks like Brass, and wrapped in Honey, then put it in a
small earthen Pot such as Goldsmithes do use, Pyritis lapis. against proud
flesh.
and set it in the fire blowyng until it be red hot so coule it: and this
stone in powder will cleanse scower, and consume flesh superfluous,


Marcellus. What say you of the Haematist?


Hilarious. Alexander Tralianus upon the Hematist for the flixe.
IT is cold and bynding of nature. Alexander Tralianus says, I have often times
without any Thyriaca or any precious medicine cured many, namely by the
Haematist stone, for them that had the bloody flix: and with the Powder of this
stone, the juices of Pomgarnets, and Knot grass, myngled together: of
this..iiii. was his dose in this juice for the flix.


Marcellus. What say you of Iette.


Hilarious. Ieta for the Mother.
THereof is great plenty in England and Ireland, and at Whithe in the North: it
has virtue being drunk to cleanse the bladder: and burnt, the Smoke does help
them which swell and are in peril with the Mother.


Marcellus. What say you of Lapis Magne?


Hilarious The magnet stone.
THe best is that which will draw Iron or Ste^le to him: given three half penny
weight in powder tempered with sweet water, it will cast forth fylth and
groose matter out of the body. Pliny shows. lib. xxxiiii. Cap. xiiij. that
one builded a Temple, covered with this Magnes stone, wherein his Image with
pomp was brought in, which was made of Iron, which ascended by attraction, and
did hang in the roffe; his name was Arsion. The Arabians and Mahumetans did in
like case bring in the steel Toumbe of master Mahumet (their iuglyng false
Prophet) into a Temple of Magnes stones, whose nature was to draw the said
Toumb up. But the best service that the Magnes does, is in the Ship, for the
compass of sailing in true setting the needle. Also in plasters the powder
thereof to draw forth Iron or pricks from the flesh.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the flesh of Oxen, Steeres or Bulls, and
Calves.


Hilarious I Will not undertake to show mine opinion at your request only, but I
will also declare the mynds of some wise and learned men: and first of Simeon
Sethi, who says that the flesh of Oxen, Of the flesh of Oxen, steres, Bulls,
and Calves.
that be young does mutch nourish and make them strong that be sed with Beef,
but it breeds choler adust, and melancholious diseases, it is cold and dry
of nature, and hard to digest, except it be eaten of chollericke persons, but
being tenderly sodden, Beef good for the cholorike, but evil for tender
stomachs.
it nourysheth mutch: Beef customably eaten of idell persons, and nice folk
that labor not, brings many diseases, as Rasis says: and Auicen says, that
the flesh of Oxen, or Kine, be very gross, ingendryng ill Juice in the Body,
whereof oftentime come scabs, Cankers, and Biles: but unto hot strong
chollerike stomachs, it is tolerable and may be used as we have the daily
experience thereof. The broth wherein the Beef has been sodden, Beef broth
against the flixe.
is good to be supped or drunk half a pynte every morning against the flix of
the belly, and running forth of yellow choler, if the said broth be tempered
with Salt, Mustarde, Vinegar, or Garlike, commonly used for sauces to digeste
the said Beef with all: for the said sauces do not only help digestion, but
also defend the body from sundry inconveniences, and diverse sycknesses, as
Dropsies, Quartens, Leprosies, and such like. The Gaul of an Ox, or a Cow
distilled in the Month of June, and kept in a close Glass, Ox Gaul cleanse
the eyes
does help to cleanse the eyes from spots, if you put a drop of this water
with a fether into the eyes when ye go to bed: the Milte of a Bull dried, and
the powder thereof drunk with Red wine, will stop the bloody flixe: Ox Mylte
stop the flixe.
light poudred young Beef is better: than either fresh or mutch poudred* in
specially of those cattle that be fed in fair and dry pastures, and not in
stynking Fens. the great learned man Gesnerus in his description of beasts,
does write more of the virtues of Bulls, Oxen, Kine, and Calves, Gesnerus
writes mutch of breasts, the male better then the female.
than any other has don and thus to conclude, the flesh of the Male beasts, is
more better than of the female, and the gelded beasts, be more commodious to
nature than any of them, and the young flesh more commendable than the old,
for it is moyster, and a friend to the blood. Haliabas says, roasted flesh
does greatly nourysh the body, for it is warm and moist: baked meats be very
dry: clean boiled meats with wholesome herbs, and fruicts. be excellent in
virtue to comfort the body if they be nutrimental flesh. Calves flesh the
profit thereof.
Calves flesh does greatly increase nourish, and make good blood. Specially
the brawne or Muskels of the thigh, are best, says Master Conrade Gesner, and
further says he, if a man be wounded, then lay Calves flesh newly slain to it,
and this will defend the wound from apost^macion or swelling: and sodden in
vinegar, and warm applied to any part, as armeholes, Against Ramishnes under
ye arms.
breast of them that stink like a Ram or Goat, it will take away the said
stynke: also it helps the bityng of a Man or a mad Dog, so that this flesh
remain upon the said wound, during five days, and v. nights close and not
taken away. Celsus for a vomitte.


Celsus in his medicines against the biting of Serpents, if nothing can suck
it forth by medicine or boxing, says he, then drink the broth wherein Geese
or Ueale has been sodden, and then provoke vomit.

Great is the goodness of this flesh, both in meat and medicine. Take the
knuckel or sinew part of a Calfe, sees it in Wine and water, puttyng in Dates,
Prunes, Reisynges of the Sun, grated bread, Maces, Cloves* Fenell roots,
Liuerwort, Planten, Purs^en, fresh Capers, Borage, and Rosemarie flowers,
sodden all together in a silver, iron, or stone pot, close boiled that no air
can go forth. You may put in half a Cock: this flesh and broth gives health
to them that are in consumption, weak bodies, or them which be evil
complexioned, or cold of nature. overcome by Melancholy. etc.


Marcellus. What is the goodness of Porke, or of gelded swine, Pigges, and Bores
flesh. etc.


Hilarious Porke the commendacion thereof.
MOst of the ancient, and wisest Phisicions that ever were in this world, did
consent, that of all flesh, the flesh of young gelded swyne, partly salted or
poudered, was ever meat of the best nourishing, moyster, and colder than other
flesh. For Isaac says, it is a flesh most moist, except it be the flesh of
Lambs. as Galen reports: yet it is not good for every complexion, nor to
every age, but unto youth and myddle age. And whereas Almighty God, did
prohibit the Jews to eat. swynes flesh: it was a figure to abstain from
unclean things, which I leave to the divines. The Mahumites abhor swynes
flesh, because their drunken false Prophet and Pseudo Apostle was torn, and
rent in pieces with Hogs: Swines blood.
being drunken and fallen into the mire: and now we must give credence to time,
and to learned Phisicions. The Blood of Swine does nourish mutch, as is seen
in Puddinges, made with great Otemeale, Pigges
Peper, sweet suet, and Fenell, or Anisseedes. Young Pigges be very moist,
therefore Sage. Peper and Salt does dry up the superfluous humors of them when
they be roasted. Tripes.
They be not wholesome to be eaten, before they be three-weekes old: Bacon.
the Trypes and Guts be wholsomer, and do nourysh better, than any other
beasts Gutts. Bacon is very hard of digestion, and mutch discommended of some
men. and is hurtful only unto a hot Chol^rike labouryng body* but a tender
gammon of Bacon is tolerable, and very good flesh with wine as custom does
prove it.

Swine of Inde have horns.
Agatharsides says, that the swyne in Aethiopia have horns growyng upon
their heads, there be diverse kynds of swyne, both wyld, and tame: whose inward
parts, be not mutch unlike unto mankind, and for that Galen began to make
Anatomies of them, in the beginning of his practice, teaching the Chirurgians
to do the like. Why hogs are diseased.
These kind of beasts do hear very easily, and be given mutch to sleep, and
will eat their own Pigges, and feed upon most vile things: for which cause
they have most vile diseases, as Angina in the throat* sores, botches, and
byles. If they be letten blood in the vein under the tongue, and Madder be
given them and an herb called Pancis, otherwise named in Latin herba
Trinitatis, it helps them, if it be sodden in Whey. Those swine that use to
feed by the sea side. and eat of young Crabs, be delivered of many diseases:
if they do feed upon Polipodie, they shall be delivered of the Pestilence.
Among the Christen Men, Bores flesh is had in great estimacion, to be eaten in
Winter: and chiefly upon Chrystmas day. Galen does greatly commend the same
flesh, or Braune, to be eaten in winter: and also this Bores flesh is proved in
the time of Pestilence, to break a plague sore. Bores grease, and his stones,
or any part of them stamped together and warm applied to the same sore,
works that effect. And thus I do end of Swyne, which in their lives be most
vile, noisome, and never good until they die.


Marcellus. What is the virtues of Lambs, and Weathers flesh?


Hilarious. SImeon Sethi says, Lambs flesh is partly warm, Lambs flesh good
roasted. evil sodden.
but superfluous moist, and evil for flegmatike persons, and does mutch
harm to them that have the Dropsy, boneach, or a disease called Epialus,
which is spitting of phlegm, shyning like Glass. Therefore, if Lambs flesh
were sodden, as it is roasted, it would bring many dyseases unto the bodies of
them, without it were sodden in wine, and some hoate Grosseries, herbs, or
roots. When a Weather is two year old, which is fed upon a good Ground, the
flesh thereof shall b^e temperate, and nourishes mutch. Hippocrates says,
that the Lamb of a year old, does nouryshe mutch. Galen seems not greatly to
commend Mutton, but that which is tender, sweet, and not old, is very
profitable, Mutton.
as experience and custom do daily teach us. The doung, Tallow, and UUolle,
be very profitable in medicines, as Pliny says, and Conradus Gesnerus, de
animalibus* and Galen in his third book de Alementis,


Marcellus. UUhat be the virtues of Goats, or Kiddes flesh?


Hilarious. THese be beasts very hurtful unto young trees and plants but Simeon
Sethi says, Kiddes flesh very good.
that Kiddes flesh is easy of digestion, in health and sickness, they be very
good meat, they be very dry of nature. Hippocrates says, it behooves that ye
conseruers and kepers of health, should study that their meat be such as the
flesh of Kiddes, Flesh good for sick persons.
young calves that be sucking, and lambs of one year old, for they be good
for them that be sick, or have evil complexion. Haliabbas says, that the
flesh of Kids, does engender good blood, and is not so flegmatike, waterie and
moist, as the flesh of Lambs: they remain Kiddes for six months, and
afterward come into grosser, and hoatex nature, and then be called Goats: the
flesh of them that be gelded are wholesome to eat, The lunges of them eaten
before a man does drink, does defend him that day from drunkenes, Goats flesh.
as I have heard, by the reports of learned men: but the flesh of old male
Goats is evil, and engenders Agues, or Fevers. Conradus. Gesnerus de
animalibus Matthiolus super Diolco.
If the Uriue of Goats be distilled in May, with Sorel the water distilled is
not hurtful nor noisome* but whosoever uses to drink thereof..ii. morning and
evening, it will preserve him from the Pestilence. The Milk of Goats I will
describe in the proper place.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Red, and fallow Dear:


Hilarious. Dear red and fallow* be spoylers of Corn.
THey are more pleasant to some, than profitable to many as appears once a
year in the corn fields, the more it is to be lamented. Hippocrates, and
Simeon Sethi do plainly affirm that ye flesh of them does engender evil juice,
and Melancholy, cold diseases, The winter Dear better then the summer.
and Quarte^s: the flesh of winter Dear, does less hurt the body. than that
which is eaten in Summer, for in winter man's digestion is more stronger, and
the inward parts of the body warmer, and may easelier consume gross meats,
than in summer, as we see by experience, in cold weather and frostes,
healthful people be most hungrest. The lunges of a Dear sodden in Barley
water, and stamped with Penidies, and Honey, of equal quantity, The lunges o^
the Dear.
to the said lunges, and eaten a Morninges does greatly help the old coughes,
and dryness in the Lunges: there be many goodlye virtues of their Horns,
bones, blood, and tallow. Look Conradus Gesnerus de animalibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Hares and Conies?


Hilarious. Of Hares flesh and Conies.
AVICEN says, the flesh of Hares, is hot and dry, an engenderer of
Melancholy, not praised in Physic for meat, but rather for medicine: for in
deed if a Hare be dried in ye month of March, in a Oven or Furnice and beaten
into powder, and kept close, and drunk mornings in Bear, Ale, or white wine,
it will break the stone in the Bladder, if the pacyente be not old: The powder
of the Hare, for the stone.
if chyldrens gummes be anointed with the brains of an Hare, their teeth will
easily come, and grow. The gaul of an Hare mingled with clean Honey, does
cleanse watery eyes, or red bloody eyes. The flesh of Hares must be tenderly
roosted and well larded, and spyced. because of the grosenes, but it is better
sodden. The flesh of Conies, is better than Hares flesh, and easyer of
digestion, but Rabets be wholesome, for meat of sick people: and thus to
conclude of Conies, experience teaches us, that they are good: they be cold
and dry of nature, and small mention is made of them among the ancient
Phisicions, Galeni de simp. medica.
as Galen says. I need not to speak very long of every kind of beasts, as
some of the beasts that be in Hiberia, like little Hares which be called Conies.


Marcellus. What is the nature of a beast called Erinaceus, called the
Porpentine, and Echinus called the Hedghog, which is full of pryckes?


Hilarious. DIOSCORIDES lib. 2. cap. 2. says, the skins of them combust or
burnt, and beaten in fine powder, Erinaceus or Porpentine for baldness* to
increase hair.
and tempered with Tar, is a good ointment for to increase hair, and keep of
baldness. The dried flesh of them sodden in Uineger and Sugar, is good to be
drunk against the stoppyng of the raynes, conuulsions, Leprosies of phlegm, or
an evil complexion. The powder of this Porpe^tine must be kept close in a
vessel for medycine. The powder of the Hare which is dried in March, Hares
powder for the Raynes.
must be used for the purging of the Raynes, and clensyng of the bladder, ye
said powder is to be drunk with white wine, and Cassiafistula. Also the
grease of the Propentine, or Hedghogge, with Bears grease and Laudanum,
ana..i. beaten in a Leaden mortar, this is a good ointment against baldness or
loss of hair, to rub the place daily therewyth The Livers of Porpentines
dried and beaten into powder are good for the Raines, or Morbus Elephantiacus.
Tese beasts be of cold nature. better for medicine than meat. and be vermen
or beasts of the night, armed against Dogs, with long pricks, and headed
mutch like a Hare, with teeth according, and ears like an Ape. etc. The Urchin
or Hedghogge is commonly known, and headded like a Swine or young Pigge. The
powder of them as Pliny affyrmeth, being drunk, will help and defend the
consumption: and thus I do end of this beast called Echinus, which the
Arabians call Caufed. The Urchin or Hedghog.
The Urchin of the the Sea is good for the belly, stomach and vryne.
Dioscorides lib 2. cap. 1.


Marcellus. uWhat say you of the Fiber, Beuer, or Castor?


Hilarious THis Castor lives by water and land, he loves to feed upon Crabs
and Cankers of the Sea. Castor or Beuer.
The stones of a Castor are a warm medicine, and prevail against poison, to
be drunk or in ointment. And the powder of ye same stones be good to move
sternutation or neesyng, blowe^ into the noose Of the powder..ii. with
Penyroyall, called Pulial. ii.ss te^pered together in wine and drunk, will
cause a woman in her travel soon to be delivered, and the seconds to follow,
and finally to cleanse the body, and helps swellings, collickes Iliaces,
syghinges, Cordiaces, Lytharges and poison drunk with Uineger: and in fine it
is so warm, that it helps all the passions or sickenesses in the breast,
belly, liver, and sinews, Castor stones do help all cold infirmites both in
men and women
coming of cold: the Beuer stones be best, that be most grave and strong of
savor and have a liquor mutch like Cerase within the Cod, and covered with a
natural coueryng. Pliny. xxxij. cap. iij. Castor is good to help the
Comitiall or falling sickness, to be drunk. The Oil of them is also good for
the Teeth, raynes. belly, breast, and to be dropped into the Ears.


Marcellus. What say you of the little beast Mustela. called the Weesell or
Wezell, which is commonly known?


Hilarious. This Mustela called the Weesel, is commonly known: and this Weesel,
the flesh thereof sodden in Wine and drunk, The Weesel is good against the
falling sikenes and Struma. Angina or swelling of the throat.
is a present remedy against all venim, poison, and the Falling Sickness.
with Uineger the grease of the Weesel sodden, is a goodly medicine to anoint
the Gout with all. The Blood of Weesels is good to anoynte the Necks.
Throats, and stomachs of them which have Struma, that is, the swelling of the
Throat or the Falling sycknesse, or Palsy. The donge of the Weesell with
Honey, Fenigreeke, and Lupines beaten together, is good to anoint warm the
throat, for the sycknesse called Struma: the gaul of the weesel tempered with
the water of Fenell, is a present remedy for the dimnesse of the eye, to be put
therein: and all the spots as Morphew of the skin, is cleansed therewyth. The
Lunges of the Weesell is good in powder, For to heal ye Morphew.
to be drunk against all the infirmities of the Lunges, with many other Uertues
of the Weesell, and properties, as to kyl Mise and Rattes, to serve in the
house like Cattes, but the savor of the said Weesel is mortiferous and
deadly. Pliny lib. 8. cap. 22.


Marcellus. What say you of Raynard the Fox, and the Bear?


Hilarious. THe Lunges of the Fox is good in Medicine, for the sick Lunges of
mankind. The Fox the Bear the Badgarde.
The grease of the Fox is also good for all Coldness, Palsy, and the
contraction of the sinews, and tremblyng of the body. The Bear is a beast
whose flesh is good for mankind: To help baldness.
his fat is good with Laudanum, to make an ointment to heal balde headded men
to receive the hair again. The grease of the Bear, the fat of a Lamb, and
the ointment of the Fox, makes a good ointment to anoint the feet against the
pain of travel or labor of footmen. Bear, Fox, and Brocke are good to
help the Palsy.
All the parts of the Fox, the Badgar, and the Bear are good in medicine, or
meat against the Palsy, tremblyng or coldness of the flesh, or any of them.
There is a common fable among the people, that is to say a Bear has a
disformed Whelp in the time of delyueraunce, without Members, which is not
true: for the Bear in the birth has all the members, as other beasts have.
Read Matthiolus in Dioscorides lib. iii. cap. supra.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of a Bird, called the Osspraye.


Hilarious Haleetus the Ospray a water Egle.
LIke as the Egle, and all kinds of Hawks, do pray and feed upon the flesh
of birds: even so God has ordained ye water Egle, called Haliaeetus the
Osspraie, to fear the Fishes, and feed upon them. And all Hawks, or Birds of
the Nature of Egles, with hard crooked bills, are compted unclean flesh.
Leui. xi. are not used common among us, unto this day. Ospraies oil good to
put in water to gather fi^h ready to be taken.
Howbeit, the Oil or grease of the Osspraie, is had in great estimacion to
take Fish withal: and the head thereof dried and beaten into powder, makes a
good medicine for young infant children, to be put into the Nosthrilles, to
break wind very gentle. And the Gaul is wholesome for sore eyes to be dropped
with the white of an Egg into them. And the geease and Gaul, Medicines made
of the Ospray.
will heal the stinginge and bityng of Serpents, and also is good to be
dropped into the ear to cleanse them, and h^lpe hearing Read Gesnerus. Lib.
iij. de Auibus.


Marcellus. What say you of Iuery.


Hilarious. IT is good, to astringe or bynd, and to race it with Turmerike and
Saffro^ putting in Diacurcuma in Tabulis, sodden in the water of Endive, Iuery.
wherewith many people are helped of a perilous hot and dry sickness called
R^gius morbus, or the yellow Iaundice. A drink for the Iaundice.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Chickens and Hens?


Hilarious ALL fowls, which have hard pens, be strong of nature, Of house
Cocks. Capons and Chickens. Their flesh mutch commended.
as Chickens or Hens, says Auenzoer, which be most commended, and laudable
of any other flesh, and nourishe good blood and are light of digestion, and do
also comfort the appetite. Cock chickens be better than Hens. the Capon is
better than the Cock, they do augment good blood and seed, as Rasis
reports, and experience proves in men. both whole and sick. An old Cock
which is well beaten after his feathers be pulled of, until he be all bloody,
and then cut of his head, and draw him, and sees him in a close pot with fair
water, and white wine, Fenell roots, Burrage roots, Uiolettes: Planten.
Suckerie, and Buglosse leaves, Dates, Prunes, great Reisons, Maces, and Sugar,
and put into the Marie of a Calfe, and Saunders, makes a very good broth, for
them that be sick, weak, A good broth for a body which has been long sick.
or consumed: the brains of Hens, Capons, or Chickens, be wholesome to eat,
to comfort the brayn and memory: and will cause young Childrens Teeth to grow
quickly. And thus to conclude, these foresaid fowls be better for Idell folks
that labor not, than for the^ that use exercise, or travel, to whom gross
meats are more profitable. The Cock is the best clock, to keep the time.
Gesnerus lib. iij. de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Geese?


Hilarious. THe flesh of wyld Geese and tame, Of Geese and Goslinges.
are very gross and hard of digestion, as Auicen says: the flesh of great
fowls, as of Geese, be slow and hard of digestion, for their humidite, does
breed Fevers quickly: but their Goselinges, or young ones, being fat, are
good, and mutch commended in meats, Galen says, of the Flesh of Beasts, and
Birds. Goose flesh breeds Melanchory.
But undoubtedly, Geese, Mallardes, Pecockes. Swans, and every foul having a
long neck, be all hard of digestion, and of no good complexions: but if these
be well roasted, and stuffed, with Salt, Sage, Peper, and Onyons. they will not
hurt the eaters of them. The Barnakle of Scotland, never lay Eggs, but are
bred only of the Ocean Sea, dead Gesnerus de Auibus. lib. 3.
There be great Geese in Scotland which bread upon a place called the Basse,
there be also Barnacles, which have a strange generation, as Gesnerus says,
which never lay Eggs as the people of the North parts of Scotland knows, and
least it should seem incredible to many, I will give none occasion to any,
either to mock, or to marvel: and thus I give warning to them which love their
health, to have these foresaid fowls somewhat poudered, or stopped with Salt,
all the night before they be roasted.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cranes flesh?


Hilarious. Cranes, are hot, and increase seed.
SImeon Sethi says, their flesh is hot and dry, the younger be good but the
old increase Melancholy, they do engender seed of Generation, and being
tenderly roasted, does help to clear the voice, and cleanse the pipe of the
Lunges. Cranes be birds of a wonderful providence, Gesnerus de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Duckes flesh?


Hilarious. THey be the hoatest of all domestical or yard fowls, and unclean
of feeding: Duckes are very hot of nature and Melancholy*
notwithstanding though they be hard of digestion. and marvelous hoate, yet
they will nourish the body, and makes it fat. Hippocrates says, that they that
be fed in puddels, and foul places, be hurtful, but they that be fed in
Houses, Pens, or Coopes, are nutriue, but very gross, as Isaacke affyrmeth.
There are sundry kinds of Duckes. Gesnerus de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Pigeons, Turtles, or Doves?


Hilarious THe flesh of Turtles is merueilous good, and equal to the best
birds: and Auicen says, Doves are very hot.
they be best when they be young, and wholesome for flegmatike people* Simeon
Sethi affirms, that the house Dove is hoater than the Field Dove, and does
engender gross blood, the common eating of them is evil for cholerike
persons with red faces, Of Doves.
for fear of Leprosy* therefore cut of the feet, wings, and head of your
Pigeons or Doves, for their blood is that, which is so venomous through heat:
they be best in the Spryng time, and Harvest, and Isaac says, because they
are so lightly converted into choler, they did command in the old time, that
they should be eaten with sharp Uineger, Doves flesh. must be eaten with
Uineger.
Purssen, Cucumbers* or Citro^s. Roosted Pigeons be best, the blood that
comes out of the right wynge, dropped into ones eye, will sone help the eye,
if it swell, or prycke: and thus mutch have I spoken of Pigeons, or Doves.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Pecockes?


Hilarious. Peacocks flesh is hot and moist in the first degree Gesnerus lib. 3
THE Peacocke, his voice fears Serpents: Aristotle de natura any. and is hot
and moist, in the first degree. But Simeon Sethi says, it is a raw flesh, and
hard of digestion, unless it be very fat, but if it be fat, it helps the
Pleurisy* Haliabas says, that both Swannes, Craines, Pecockes, and any great
fowls, must after they be killed, be hanged up by the necks, two or three
days, de Auibus.
with a stone waying at their feet, as the weather will serve* and then dressed
and eaten, provided that good wine be drunken after them. Their Eggs are
noisome to be eaten, Dioscorides.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Swannes flesh?


Hilarious Every gross foul is Chollerike, and hard of digestion. Swannes
flesh, cholerike
The Swanne is gross, therefore flow of digestion. But the Signets be better
than the old Swannes, if there gal^ntines be well made, it helps to digest
their flesh The Swan is numbered among the unclean byrds, Leuiticus. xi. and
will sing a little before his death. Pliny Gesnerus de Auibus.


Marcellus. Swans sing.
What is the virtue of Her^nes, Bittures. and Shouelers.


Hilarious. THese fowls be Fishers, and be very raw and Flegmatike, Bitters*
Herons. Shouelers.
like unto the meat whereof they are fed, the young are best, and ought to be
eaten with Peper, Cinnamon, Sugar. and Ginger, and it is good to drink Wine
after them, for good digestion: Such meat, such co^plexio^,
and thus do for all Water fowls,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Partriches, Fesantes, Quayles, Larkes,
Sparrows, Plouers, and Black birds?


Hilarious. PArtriches will bynd the belly, and do nourish much, the Cocks be
better then the Hen Birds, Partriges
they do dry up fleume and corruption in the stomach. Fesantes be the best of
all Flesh, for their sweetness is equal unto the Capon or Partrich, Fesantes.
but they are somewhat dryer, and Rasis says, Fesants flesh is good for them
that have the Fever Ethicke, for it is not only a meat, but a medecin,
Quails.
and does cleanse corrupt humors in the stomach. Quayles although they be
eaten of many, yet they are not to be commended, for they do engender Agues,
and be evil for the falling sickness For as Conciliator says, of al fowls
that be used for meats, a Quayle is the worst, Dioscorides says, Larkes
roosted be wholesome to be eaten of them that be troubled with the Collike.
Black birds taken in the time of Frost be wholesome and good of digestion, The
dunge of Black birds tempered with Uineger, Larkes hel^ the Collicke. Black
birds Plouers Sparowes, Woodcockes* small Birds.
and applied to the place of any that has the black Morphew, or black
Leprosy, oftentimes anointed with a Sponge does help them. The flesh of
Plouers does engender Melancholye. Sparrowes be hoate and provoke Uenus, or
lust. Pliny does descrybe their propertyes: the Brains be the best part of
them. Woodcockes be of good digestion, and temperate to feed upon. Al small
birds of the Fyeld, as Robin Redbrest, Linnets, Finches, Read Sparrowes,
Goldwinges, and such like: if they be fat, they be maruailous good, and do
greatly comfort nature, either roosted, or boiled: and thus I do conclude with
thee of birds: that the small fyeld birds are most wholesome for sick folks:
Read Gesnerus lib. j* de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Fishes.


Hilarious. IN many Islands of this World, placed near unto the Ocean seas, the
people live there most chyefly by Fysh, and be right strong and sound people
of complexion, for as Aristotle says, consuetudo est tanquam altera natura,
custom is like unto another nature: but because I speak of Fish, I will divide
them in three parts. Three things considered in fish.

Sea fish wholesome then yt of the fresh water.


First of the Fishes of the Sea. Secondly the Fish of the fresh runnyng Rivers.
Thirdly of the Fishes in Pooles, and standing waters* The Sea has many gross,
and fat Fyshes, which be noisome to the stomach, but the small kind of Fyshes,
that feed about R^cks, And clear stony places, be more dryer, and less of
moystnes than the fresh water Fish, and do engender less phlegm, and wynd, by
reason of their Salt feedyng, as Galen says: they be the best fyshes, that
feed in the pure Sea, and chyefest of all Fyshes, for the use of mankind, and
Haliabas says, new fysh lately taken, is cold and moist, and flegmatike, then
the best of all next the sea fysh, is that which swimmeth in fresh clear
Rivers or stony places, whereas the water is sweet, being fishes that bear
skales, these be marvelous good: but if they feed near unto places where
mutch fylth is daily cast out, Muddy Fish not wholesome.
there the fishes be very corrupt, and unwholesome, as the said Haliabas says.
Fyshe that feeds in Fennes, Marshes, Ditches and muddy puddels, be very
unwholesome, Fish that have skales. be good, but fish without skales are not
wholesome.
and do corrupt the blood, they be gross and slymie, corrupt and wyndie: but
those that be fed in fair pondes, whereunto running Water may ensue. and
whereas sweet water, herbs, roots, and Weeds, that grow about the banks,
do feed the fish, those fyshes be wholesome* Galen says, Fysh that is white
skaled and hard, as Perches, Breames, Cheuins, Ruffes, Carpes, Roches, Troutes
etc. be all good, but vnscaled Fyshes, as Eeles, Ten^hes, Lampres, and such
like be dangerous. unless they be well baked or roosted, and eaten with
Pepper and Ginger, and Uineger. And note this, that it is not wholesome
travailing, or laboryng, immediately after eating of Fish, for it does greatly
corrupt the stomach, and as Galen says the nourishments of Flesh are better,
than the nourishments of Fish: and thus mutch generally I have spoken of Fysh.
Of the natures of Fyshes, read Rondoletius* and Conradus Gesnerus de Piss*


Marcellus WHat, it seems by these words, that great Fishes, which be
deuourers in the Sea, as Seal, Porpose, and such like, be unwholesome, and
that the small Fishes, as Cods, Whitynges Plaice, Smelts, Buttes-Soole, Pike,
Breme, Roche, Carpe and such as feed in clean stonye Waters, thou say they
be very wholesome. Eeles Lampers, and other muddy Fishes, thou do not greatly
commend, There be also some kinds of Fish soft, and some hard, but which be
the best.


Hilarious IF Fysh be soft, the eldest Fysh is best: if Fish be hard, the
youngest Fish is best, Fish soft and hard.
for it is either soft or hard, of hard Fish take the smallest, of soft Fish
take the greatest: provided that your Fish be not very slimye, and thus says
Auicen in his book of Fyshes.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Shelfishes.


Hilarious. CRauises, and Crabbes, be very good fyshes, the meat of them, does
help the Lunges, Shel fyshes.
but they be hurtful for the bladder, yet they will engender seed. If Crabbes
of the fresh water, be sodden in pure green Oil Olife: this Oil dropped into
the ear luke warm, does heal burning obstructions, and stoppinge matter, For
deaf^es,
that hinders ye hearing. As for Lympetes, Cockels, Scallopes, as Galen says,
they be hard of digestion. Muskels, and Oysters, would be well boiled, roasted,
or baked With Onions, wine, Butter, Sugar, Ginger, and Peper, or else they be
wyndy, and Flegmatike: Oysters
cholorike stomachs may well digest raw Oysters, but they have cast many one
away, yet raw Oysters will cleanse the raynes.


Marcellus. What say you of Milk, Butter, and Cheese?


Hilarious. Women's Milk is the most gentle nutriment for young children, which
milk is of the decoction of pure blood, Milk of women is the best of al
Milkes.
by natural heat and drawn forth by the Nibles from the breasts or Pappes,
this is the first food of mankind: for like as bread is a blessyng of God for
men, even so is Milk one of the great blessings, as appears in the promise
which god made to Israel. Without Milk, it is not possible to bring up man or
beast. The best milk is of women, and most temperate, for it preserves
against consumption. The second is Goats Milk, which does norysh, and is
hoatter than wome^s. Milk of Goats.
Sheep Milk, is not so much noryshyng, and not pleasant to the stomach.
Young Cows milk is thicker, and full of Butter: Note also that iiii. things
must be considered in milk, the whitenes of color, Milk of Kyne Milk four
things considered in it.
the sweetness of savor, the pleasantnes of taste, the substance, neither
thick nor thin: it is good Milk, when a drop will stand whole upon your
thum nail, without sheading. There be three essences of Milk, Cheese, Butter,
and Whay, the best milk is of the youngest and fattest Kyne, or Goats, that be
fed in ye cleanest, dryest, and sweetest Pastures. whereas plentye of sweet
flowers are growing, and purest Clay or Chalk water, with wholesome layer. The
best time of milk, is in April, May, and June. The new Milk is most wholesome
for them to drink, which has clean stomachs, to drink i^ with Sugar, as it
comes from the Cow three hours before al other meat or drink, and then it
will not coagulate nor crude in the stomach, but quench Choler. Moreover milk
is not only good to young children and helthful people: but if it be sower,
then beware the stone in the raynes, Milk hurtful to whom.
and bladder through the same: and to them which have Fevers or headache, Milk
does much harm, as Hippocrates says Lac dare caput dolentibus, malum: malum
vero febricitantibus and quibus hypochondria suspensa murmurant, and
siticulosis: malu^ autem in febribus acutis, quibus biliosae sunt deiectiones,
and quibus sanguinis multi deiectio facta est: conuenit autem tabidis, qui non
multum febricitant and in febribus longis and paruis si nullum ex supradictis
signis affuerit etc,

That is Milk says he, is very unwholesome to such as have pains in their
heddes, Hyppocrates of the hurt of Milk, and ye vtility thereof
or that be sick of any Fever, and also to them which have any noise or wind
in the upper part of their bellye called Hypochondria, and that have
choleric decoction in hot fever, or have lost much blood: notwithstanding
milk is good for such as have a consumption without a Fever, and may be given
to them. which have had Fevers long time, if none of the foresaid tokens do
appear etc. And to conclude of milk, seeing oftentimes it is very evil,
and will through the couldenesse, and wind offend the whole Bodies of men,
Milk is a good thing in a common wealth.
what harm does it than to Sicklye persons? how be it, we se Milk is a
goodlye stay in a common Wealth, and the feeders thereof are people of a good
temperament, or complexion, as in Wales, Suffolk, Essex, and in a place in the
Mountains in ye North called Alston More, Alston Moore in the North
whereas little* tillage is, but bringyng up of Chattel: in this country the
people be al chiefly nourished with milk, little other drink they use, milk
excepted. This country was sometime the land of a worthy knight, called sir
Thomas, the Baron of Hylton, to whom I dedicated my little Book entitled the
Government of health, Sir Thomas the Baron Hylton his land.
promisyng in the same Book to set f^rth an other book, whereof the copy
perished with my Books, in shipwreck: and when I came to London to have
reuined my dead book, one William Hilton gentleman, brother to the said sir
Thomas Hilton, accused me of no less crime, William* Hilton let William
Bulleine to fynish his book of healthful medecines
then of most cruel murder of his own brother, who dyed of a Fever (sent only
of God) among his own friends, fynishing his life in the christen faith. But
this William Hilton caused me to be arrained before that noble Prince, the
Dukes grace of Norffolke, for the same: to this end, to have had me dyed
shamefully: That with the covetous Ahab he might have through false witness, and
perjury, obtained by the counsel of Iezabell, a Uine yard, by the price of
blood. But it is written, Testis mendax peribit a false witness shall com to
naught, his wicked practice was wisely espied, his folly deryded, his bloody
purpose let, and fynallye I was with Justice delivered. Notwithstanding, yet
am I by the same William Hilto^ still molested and troubled as much as lies in
him, to shorten my days, by some means or accidente, who with neither lawful
pollicye, nor false testimony, cold hitherto accomplish his wicked intent* Now
therefore blame me not my dear friend Marcellus, though this man be remembered in
my book hear of health, and preserving of life, seeing I was sometime in his
book of a false indightment, conspyring my death This man has let me, in
so much that I cannot run to the mark, that I did set before mine eyes,
therefore I must make a shorter course, fynishing with fewer things, trusting
not unprofitable for the commonwealth: whose profit I do seek, and more
would have done, this his malicious factes excepted, whose malice does the
less molest me, being a Stranger to him, seeing he has vexed a Lady,
which was his own Brothers Wife, whose shame, loss, yea and Blood he has
sought: which Brothers Wife redeemed mutch of his Land from loss, A bloody
practice against ye lady Hilton.
in lendyng him a great Sum of Money. And when this man should thankfully
have repayed this lady her Money, then he gratifyed her, as he did me.

And so to conclude, you that are gentlemen, beware of shameful ingratitude,
whereas you have reaped comodity. For it is the most leprous sickness against
nature, to do evil for good, preferryng a little lucre before honesty. worldly
worship, shame, and finally, Gods wrath or vengeance, due for such wyckednes
against conscience, and nature. What a very gentelman is
For ingratitude does degenerat mankind, and transform him most monstruously,
into an evil vile nature, from gentleness, into Churlishnes. For like as
gentleness with virtues makes a very gentle man: although sometime obscurely
borne: so does ingratitude, blemish, and defyle them, which can bring nothing
else for themselves, but Pedegrees, lines, cotes. and standerdes, most
aunciently descended, yet themselves void of al goodness. Thus I leave to molest
thine ears with him, who has thus molested me, profitable to few, and noisome
to himself. A lover of few, a flatterer of many, a vessel of ignorance, full of
ingratitude, unnatural to his Children, if that he spoyleth in law, Cataplasme
for M. Hilton of Bidicke, of the Bishoprik of Duresme.
which should be their relief: and thus I commend him to this Cataplasma, to
his mortifyed conscience. Faythles and fruitles he is.

Butter of nature is hot and moist, and has virtue to mollify hard
apostimatio^s yt are above nature, as Galen says: fresh Butter does ripe,
cleanse, and warm ye inward parts in meats, ointments or drynks. Fresh butter is
good to anoint ye swelling of Hypochondrion or belly, and for ye Phlegmon and
Bubo. Further to cause young children their teeth to grow, through the anointing
of the place and it is good to make annoyntment for the Pleuritici, And to be
drunk in wine or Beer, for the stopping of the lungs, Butter, Honey, Butter
the virtue of it.
and bitter Almonds, be wholesome for to cleanse the breast, and being put in
suppositories, and Glysters, do mollify the belly. New Butter meanly salted,
is good with Bread, Flesh, and fysh. The old Butter changing with many colors,
is the worst, it is noisome to the stomach. Butter is good in the morninge,
but not wholesome at night: yet Butter preuayleth against poysone in wou^des, it
will purge, cleanse, and increase Flesh. When y^ Butter is first made, there is a
mylk coming from the same somewhat sharp, sower, and cold, very wholesome to be
drunk in the morning or evening, Butter Milk called Char^n Milk is good
against hot burning choler: it opens the liver, cle^seth the gaul,
provoke urine, causes, sleep and nourishes much if it be eaten with Sugar,
and new white bread.

Cheese which is a part of Milk of the grosser substance, Cheese fresh is
best.
through the coagulation or cruddes, being gathered and pressed together,
from ye moist whay, the same cheese is finished: and if it be made of clean
milk and the Cream therewith, then it is beneficial to the stomach,
specially, if it be fresh and good it norisheth the flesh much, Green cheese
helps wounds.
and is good for green wounds to knit them, and will also quench heat, or
cleanse a spot in the eye, being laid thereon.xxiiii. hours. Cheese meanly
salted nourishes but little, by ye reason of the Salt. old Cheese stops the
flixe of the Belly, but it is hard to digest hurting the stomach, gaul, and
raynes, Cheese old stops the flux, but bredeth the stone.
and will breed the stone in the bladder, and cause the increase of melancholy
with much coldenes and drynes Gal. lib. 4. alimentorum facult* commends the
Cheese of his own native country, because of the pureness of milk, and sweetness
of the Cheese, but in his x. lib. of Simples, he refuses Cheese for the
sowrenes. etc. when stone pottes be broken, what is better to glue them a gayn
or make them fast, Sundry kinds of Cheese
nothing like the Syment made of Cheese. Know therefore that it will quickly
build a stone in a dry body, which is full of choler adust. And here in England
be diverse kinds of Cheeses, Much good Butter little good cheese
as Suff. Essex, Banbury. etc. according to their places and feeding of their
Cattle, time of the year, layre of their Kyne, clenlines of their dayryes,
quantity of their Butter, for the more Butter, the worse cheese. And thus I
conclude of Cheese. like as the Welchmen love it roasted, even so do Flemminges
love Butter at al times, and of all makings refusyng none, what color soever
it has, and from whence soever it comes, their stomachs are such.

Whay the virtue thereof.
Whay is the thinnest part of Milk. Whay with Fumitory sodden in May, and drunk
cold in the morning and Evening* has virtue to scowre, cleanse and open the
parts of the body that are stopped, provoke vryne, and makes clean the
Bladder, and is good to quench choler, helps the bellye, asswageth thirst,
yet it inflameth, and brings wynd to the guts but recocted or two times
sodden whaye, is the best whay and will bring sleep, and also is good in
Clisters, to cool, scower, and quench choler in the guts, or help the
^xcoriation in them, made by bloody Flixe: Galen commends Whaye lib. x.
simplicium medic. and Mesue does not a little praise the Whay of black Goats,
Gotes whay
and how it is hot and dry in the first degree unto the second: this whay is
good to be given to them which abound with much melancholye, or frensies, and
cleanses the water between the skin and the flesh, opens the Gaul, and
mollifieth the Spleen: in sharp acute Tertian Fevers, or stopping of the
vessels, with yellow choler, this whay does much help, to drink ye same, and
nothing is better to be dronk against hot Leprosy tha^ whay, it makes a clean
skin. Whay is used in many decoctio^s, and infusio^s, for lenitiues to purge
the belly* and thus I do end of Whaye, which is a good drink in Summer in
the common wealth, whereas good dayries be, as in Suffolk, the best country of
Milk, as about Lethringham, Stratbrooke, Laxefield Keishal* etc.

Eggs be commended of the most excellent Writers, as Dioscorides, and Galen,
Eggs of Birds.
that they do excel al other nourshing meats, and also are good in medecin
Isaac the Arabian, in his diates, does praise Hens Eggs, for that* they be
pleasant to the mouth, and profitable to the Stomach and that they nourish
more then other meats, and are soonest turned into good blood, and ef^soones
into seed of generation, specially Eggs that be new and white, but old Eggs
be most fylthy and noisome to the stomach. Furthermore Eggs have no part of
the Foul, says Galen Simplic medi. but a portion of the thing from whence
they come: Eggs three things in the^.
and Symeon Sethi says.iii. things must be considered of Eggs, the first is
the substance and cleannes of nature: the second is their age, either new or
old: the third is of the manner of their dressinge, as potching, see thing or
rostinge. Potched Eggs be wholesome to be supp^d up in the morning upon an
empty stomach. To cleanse the Lunges, breast and the rayns: hard Eggs do
bind: fried Eggs be hurtful to the stomach: next in goodness unto them are the
Eggs of Fesantes, and Partriges, and the Eggs of small Birds of the wood,
whose Eggs are white, but ye Eggs water fowls, as Swannes, Gees^, Duckes,
with all their kinds, be gross and not pleasant to nature, Eggs of great
^oules be not good,
although good to strong stomacked laborers. Doves Eggs, because of their
great heat, are more better for medecin then meat. Pecockes and Estrige eges,
be not good: of an evil nature and ennemy to mankind: In food, Of Eggs
their virtue.
the yellowe parts of Eggs be warm, and nourish the blood, and the white
of the Egg, is cold, and flegmatike. Galen does commend the white of Eggs,
because they freat not, but cool: and therefore they are good for medecines for
the eyes, and ulcers and wounds of the head, and other places whereas blood
does flow. Raw Eggs, with Oil of Roses beaten together, are good for Flegmon
in the Ears, breasts, Arms, Legs, or privy members. The white of an egg
the juice of Pomgranets: Uineger, and the oil of water Lillies, Eggs for
^^eepe.
are good beaten together, to annoint the forehead, to cause sleep. Eggs
sodden in strong sharp vinegar, until they be hard, eat them, and they will
stop the belly. Whytes of Eggs, the powder of the flowers of Pomgranetes,
Planten water, and Hypocistes, with oil of Roses, and Alume, For burninge
beaten in a leaden Mortar, will heal a burning or skalding in the flesh,
coueringe the place with a Launde Clothe, and annoynting the said Launde with
this ointment. Oil of Eggs is good to heal Serpigo the breaking or Crames of
the Lips, hands, skalding, burning, payns of the ears, stomach, Oil of
eggs
raynes, belly, and the privy members, which have great burninge, fylthe. or
heat: and finally, all the pains of the joints.

Of Eggs come all fowls, save Barnacles, which are ingendered of the
marvelous work of Occean Sea: Read Gesnerus, of the nature of Fowls. The
horrible Serpent called the Cockat^ise, is bred in the Egg: so is the
Crocodile, and many more Serpents, and many fyshes of the sea, Eggs of
serpents.
and little Worms, as the Antes. And thus I do end of eggs, whose yolks or
reddes be first bread, within the Fowls body^s, as it does appear when they be
killed, by the great plenty of the said yolks and no whytes, of which Yolks
the byrd is bredde. and nourished of the white: So is mankind engendered, and
formed of one part, and nourished of an other, Read Hippocrates in libro de
natura pueri


Marcellus. What virtue is in Coagulo Leporis.


Hilarious. THree half penny weight, after the old weight of the Apoticaryes,
tempered in wine, Coagulun or the cr^ddes of young beasts* that suck
and drunk does prevail against venim, or pricking of Serpents, bloody
flixes, and pains of the matrix, after the time that the ^termes menstruall be
past: it helps conception, but to drink it, it will dry the Seed, and let
conception. Aristotle does remember Coagulum lib. iij cap. 12. de historia
Anima* saying: it is the substance of Milk, of those beasts which chew the
cudde, and suck of a curdye substance, as Calfe, Lamb. Kidd, etc. And of
nature is sower and drying, and drunk with vinegar, it helps the falling
sickness as Galen afyrmeth lib. x. simplic. medic.


Marcellus. What say you of Sepum called Tallow, and Adeps, which is fat or the
grease of beasts and fowls. I pray you tell me?


Hilarious. FIrst of Tallow, understand that of nature it is warm, and therefore
it has virtue to resolve, Tallowe of male best are hotter the^ the female.
and make soft: and is used in sundry medecines, among the Chirurgians.
Notwithstanding, you must understand, that one Beast bears more warmer
tallow than an other: and the Male hotter the^ ye female As example, the Heart
hotter then the Hind: the Ram more warmer then the Ewe, etc.

But for the fattes of beasts and byrds, they be al warm and moist: some
more, and some less, according to their ages, fatnes, and natures, as example
following shortly said.

The fat or grease of ye Swannes, Geese, Duckes, Bustardes. Hens and Capons,
being fresh, does comfort the Matrixe, breasts, and joints, and are warm.
Gelded Swyn not salted is much like Oil, and moist and good against the
pleuresie, and used in many oyntmentes. Goats is harder than ye Swynes, and is
also dryer, and is good against the pains of ye great guts, in Clisters or
Suppositers Bears is warm, and melted with Laudanum, makes an ointment to
increase hair. Foxes, is good against cold and palseye, and pains of the
ears. Porpentine against baldnes, as the Bears grease is. Bulls and Calves
does warm, and are good to bynd and stop flixe, put in Clisters, ointments
etc. Male beasts, hotter and dryer than the female. Lions is most subtle and
hot of all fattes. Cattes hoate, and good, to annoynte Aches, and Goutes.
Seals or other Seafish, clarified with Honny will cleanse the iyen that are
dim Snayles cleanses the iyen helps the Cares, and is wholesome for bone
ache. Uipers good to annoint the dim sight, dropped into them, Young lusty
creatures, not salted and clean clarifyed, is best kept close. Raueninge
beasts hotter then them, which eat Grass: and the water Fowls, hoatter than
the land birds. Wolles called Oesypus, will resolve heat apostumations, and
Struma in the throat.



Marcellus. What say you of Mary, which in some place is called Marthe:
contained within the bones of Beasts.


Hilarious. IT has power to mollify, and make hard things soft, and of nature
is hot and moist, as Galen says. lib. xi. Simplicium medicamentorum. Example.

The Mary o^ Medulla of the Stagge or Heart is the best of al beasts, to mollify
Muskles, ligamentes, tendons, and the guts. Calves or young Steeres is next in
goodness, used in sondrye oyntmentes, and linimentes. Bulle and Goats are very
warm, and good in pessaryes for women. Ox, is good for the stomach, and the
Lunges, and increases, seed of Generation. Fox, for the palsy, and
tremblyng of the memberss. Back bone of beasts is dryer than other Mary, and
unpleasant to the stomach, drunk with Aligante, it stops the whytes in
women.


Al these must be kept in clean vessels, a loft in a chamber, with Windows
toward the North. For the South wynd, or standing in vessels nere to ye
ground, will soon corrupt Maryes, except they be clarifyed upon the fire, To
preserve fat.
and preserved in clean closse stone or Glass vessels.


Marcellus. What say you of the Gauls of beasts, or Fyshes?


Hilarious. THe Gaul is the most hottest and bytterest part of albeastes, the
place of Choler, and choler it self and dry, specially in hot Beasts, as
Lions, wolves. Foxes, Dogs etc, Gauls of Beasts.
more then of the other Beasts, which denyde the hooues. Even so it is among
fowls, the crooked bylled birds, are hottest of al next them which feed upon
weeds or seeds, and the water Fowls, more then the fyeld birds, as
Dioscori. affyrmeth- lib. iij. cap. lxxj. and are used in medecines as example.

The Gaul or fell of ye Scorpion of the Sea, the Sea Snaile, or such like of
the Sea for sore eyes. White Cock, and Capon, Hen, Fesant, Partrige, Dove,
against sore eyes, dropped into them. Crane, Osspray, for pains in the ears,
with oil of bitter Almondes dropped into them. Swanne, Mallard, will kill
worms. Bull, Ox, Cow, Goat, Ram, good for wounds or swellynges, and to kyl
worms in the belly made in Plaster. Swyne, For ulcers in the ears. Bears, to
annoint the heads and nosetrels, of them which have the falling sickness.


Also Gauls with Honny, and the juice of Rue, make a good oyntmente to annoint
the belly, to kyl worms, and help the Collike, and are used in inward
medecines. There are stones found within the Gauls of Oxen and Bulls, the
powder of them drunk, will cleanse the raynes and Bladder. As you may se,
Matthiolus in Coment. Dioscor.. lib. ij. cap. lxxj.


Marcellus. What say you of Brains


Hilarious. Brains are cold and moist of nature, of every beast or foul,
according to their kinds. Some not so moist as other, as you have had example,
of heat and cold beasts: and their brains are used in medecines. As example.

The brains of the Hare sodden or roasted are good to make young childrens
teeth to grow Hens, Capons, or Fesauntes, to be drunk in wine against
poison, says, Dioscorides,. Wesel or Ferret, dried, and dronk in vyneger,
against the falling sickness. Swallow mingled with honey, against the dinnes of
the eyes. Sheep prepared, good to cause teeth to grow, and mollifyeth
apostumations. Field birds costed are good to nourish the brain of man, when
it is weak. Calfe and Pigge, not good for Flegmatike people.



Marcellus. What say you of Livers?


Hilarious. THe liver is the Nutrimental part, and the fountayn of Blood, a
spongie matter, whereas the veins do begin, and is warm and moiste according
to the nature of the animal or Beast, and is used in medicine. As example.

The Liver of ye Mad Dog, roasted and eaten, helps him which is bitten
with a mad dog, Goats being clean, do comfort the sight, applied raw or
distilled, and is eaten to help the falling sickness. Wolf with Liver wort
dried, makes a goodly powder, to help the liver and lunges. Fox, clean
washed and dried does the same. Ass or Horse Broyled and Eaten against the
falling Sickness. Bore, both in meat and medecin, against the slinging and
biting of Serpents. More Hen or water Hen, against the stone, or grauel in
the raynes. Hen, Capons Chikens Partrige, Fesaunt, and al field birds does
nourishe and comfort nature.



Marcellus. What say you of the Horne^


Hilarious. NOt much, I assure you, although many things may be said thereof,
both for nature and property: I commend the discriptio^ to them, that covet to
be merry. Horns their nature.
And thus much will I say with Aristotle in lib. de natura Animalium, who says:
al beasts wanting their upper teeth, have naturally horns, for their defense:
as we do see the Bull, the Heart. etc. and they are good in medecines, as
example.

The horn of Unicorne is most excellent, to be drunk against venim and
poison, and helps the yelow Iaundice. Heart rased and dronk against Collike,
or Iliacke, Iau^dice, and the bloody flyxe. Goats makes good powder to cleanse
thee teethe, and stablish them, so does ye Hearts horn. Bulls in powder,
drunk with wine, helps to heal the Hemeroydes burnt in powder. The
Elephantes tooth will help the yelowe Iaundice, rased and drunk in Endive
Water. Sundry monsters of the Sea, are good against poison,



Marcellus. What say you to the Hooues of Beasts?


Hilarious. THey are their natural Shoes, keeping stil^ their old fashion*
Hooues of Beasts
which God has prepared for them. For neither horse nor Ox should be
profitable for mankind, but for the Houe: without which he cold not go or
travel, or have any shoe made fast. They are also good for mankind in,
medecin, as example.

The houes of ye Horses rased are drunk in wine, and good to help the falling
sycknes. Asses will do the same, and help the mother: burnte in perfume, sodden
in Oil, they will help Struma. Goats, with Uineger and Laudanum, will increase
hair^ annoynting the place. Any beast burned* the smoke thereof helps the
mother, and kylleth Gnats that trouble your chamber: Any Beast drunk in powder
makes women baren and fruitless. Mule, will retain most strong Poison, or
deadly venime. Them which are divided in two parts, are clean beasts. Leuit
Chap. xi.



Marcellus. What say you of Bones?


Hilarious. BOnes are the timber and strong posts which couple the body of every
living man, beast, fish, and foul together: without which we might not be
perfect. If any of the^ are broken, then are we lame. Thus bones be not only
good to nature when we are living: but ossa humana man's bones are good in
medecin. As example.

The bones of Man beaten into powder do greatly dry moist humors and sores.
etc. Lions strongly smitten together, will bring light fire and are most dry of
nature. Hogs beaten into powder, and dronk, are good against falling
sickness. Hens burnt with Egshels, made in Powder, make a frettyng powder.
Pigges are good for writing Tables, and to kyl worms in the stomach, drunk
in wormwood wine. Many sea fyshes are wholesome in medecin against poison.
Sepia or Cuttle, cold and dry will cleanse the skin* and Eyes.



Marcellus. What say you of vryne.


Hilarious. IT is the Whaye of the blood, conueyghed by the raynes into the
bladder: hoate and dry of nature, very salt according to the complexion of
the body that makes it as Manne and Beast. Fowls Pysse not, for the moyster
is turned into Feathers. Aristotle de nature Animalium. vryne is used in
Medecin. As example.

The urine of ye Man is weakest, except gelded swyne, and is wholesome to be
drunk against venime. Young boy, to be distilled with Litarge of Metal, a
water to wash against Leprosy, is made thereof. Mule, to wash hands and feet,
and against the gout and pains of the Joints. Goats or Cammels, to be drunk
against the dropsy, or swellyng of the belly. Boore, with oil of Wormwood, to
annoint the belly and kill worms. Dogs will kyl wartes, and ryngwormes.
Urchyne, will corrode and frette, cleanse, and skower corrupted humors.



Marcellus. What say you of blood?


Hilarious. THe life of every living thing consists in the vital blood*
without which, the soul can not remayn within the Body, and it is used often
times in medecin. As Example.

The blood of ye Geese, Duckes, and Kiddes is used in sundry Antidotaries.
Stock Doves, Turtle Doves, House Doves, and Partriges, is good for sore eyes,
and new wounds. Hare, for the stone, and bloody fly^e: Dear, for ye flix, or
terms immoderate running in women. Goats, which are fed with opening herbs
killed in June for the stone. Calfe fed so, for the same stone and also the
flix. Dragons is declared before. Swyne is cold blood: yet it is used in
puddings, but not commendable. Bears, and Bulls, are horrible, not good.
Sheep helps the Emeroides. He^nes, Cocks and Capons, stops blood, and
wounds. Duckes, keeps a goodly color long time: the Idolatoures did practice
therewith, dereyuynge the People at Hayles, with a Blood which they called holy.



Marcellus. What say you to the nature of ordure, the dung of Beasts?


Hilarious. ORdure or dunge, is the corruption or fylthy excrement, which nature
expulceth to the earth by the office of the guts. without which no creature
should live, if the dung were still retained, in the said guts. and yet it is
good in sundry salues, plasters, and medicines. As example. And they are hot
and dry of complexion, according to the nature of beasts,

The dung of Oxen and Kyne, does mittigate inflammation of wounds, and helps
stinging of Bees. Calves, sodde^ with vinegar, helps Struma in ye throat, or
swelling of ioints. Goats, does resolve and make soft: a plaster thereof applied
to the Matrix forces the child to the birth. Horse or Mule, sodde^ in wine,
strayned and drunk helps ye Iaundice. Sheep sodden in vinegar and oil of
Roses, resolves, quenches and heals burning and skalding. Dogs fed with
bones, helps the bloody flixe, drunk in milk: with Honey, it helps Angina,
to anoint ye place of the throat withal. Mise does cleanse, and with Honey
tempered together does increase hair in oyntmentes for the head. Swyne,
cleanses, it stops blood in flowing wounds. Curlues drunk in wine, helps
ye falling sickness. Corocodisus of Nilus cleanses the skin, the best of this is
white. Man is best in medecin, although most abominable to the sense of
smellyng: yet there is art to make oil for the Gout, swelling of the throat,
and to help Flegmon, of this ordoure of Mankind, and a water to be dronk
against the Falling sickness, Stone, and the Water between the Flesh and
Skin. And finally to help evil complexion. Read. Gal. lib. x. Simplicium
medicamentorum, and Dioscorides. lib.ij. cap lxxiiij



Marcellus. What say you of the Scorpion* Frogge, Mouse, Lasarde, Cantharides,
Horseleeche and earth worms?


Hilarious THe Scorpion is a cruel woorme, whose sting will prick to death,
Scorpion.
except the oil of Scorpions be gotten, which reconcileth the hurt, anointing
the place therewith. Also this oil is good to anoynte the raynes, to break the
stone, Frogge
and provoke vryne.

The Frog sodden with Salt, and clean Oil, and so eaten, helps against all
venime of serpents Dioscorides. lib. ij. cap xxv

Mouse.
The Mouse being roasted, is good to be given to children, that piss their
bed, to help the^. Further it will dry up the Foam and spattle in their
mouths. There are sundry kinds of Mise Aristotle's. lib. vi de Historia
animalium.

Lacert.
Lacerta with legs, a long tail, an earth Serpente. The head broken and
applied to any place on the body, whereas either prick or nail is fixed,
forth with it shall be drawn forth. This worm is much used of Chirurgens.

Cantharides are flies hot dry, and burninge, of nature, and have power to
blister and make issue, Cantharid.
and draw forth water: there be that write in their books of Physic, how
these flies may be drunk inwardly against the Dropsy and the stone, but I
dare not here commend the same, for fear of no small peril that might follow.

Horsleech.
Horseleeches are wholesome to draw forth foul blood, if they be put into a
hollow Reed, and one of their ends cut of, whereby the blood may run forth.

Snayle.
Snayles broken from the shelles and sodden in white wine with Oil and Sug^r
are very wholesome, because they be hot and moist for the straightnes of the
Lungs and cold cough. Snails stamped with Comphory* and leven, will draw forth
prycks in the flesh.

Earthwormes
Earthwormes are hot of nature and of the^ is a precious ointment made to close
wounds, and if they be sodden in Goose grease and strayned it is a good
ointment for to drop into a dull hearing ear, perouring it into the contrary
s^de. Earth woormes stamped, are good for payned teeth. The Oil of woormes is
greatly commended for the comforting of the sinews, ioints, veins and gout,
Oil of wormes^
they must be washed in white wine, and the Oils of Verbascum or Cowslops, of
roses, of Lyllies, of Dil. of Camomil, al sodden to geather, when it is cold,
put in your earth worms* stop your glass, let it stand xl. days in the
Sun, then strayn it, and it will make an excellen^e oil against ache,
Sciatica, gout. etc,

Read more of them Plini. lib xxx. cap ix. And thus I do end of Earthwoormes,
Earth the mother of every living creaure.
which are the bowels of the ground or earth, which earth is cold, and dry of
nature, yet the mother of each living wyghte, fostereth and gives food to
every creature, both sensible and insensible, and remains still, firm and
stable, and each creature has his original spryng, and first life upon the
earth: when they have run the race, some in pleasure and other some in
wretchedness, the earth does devour them again at length and swallow them, as
though they had never ben: Generation falls into corruption
and thus is generation turned into corruption, as Aristotle affyrmeth. But how
mighty is that Lord God, which with his blessed word did for our sakes make
the Earth to be our own free dwelling place during this our Mortal Life, to
what end, to abuse the same, as the old World did, for whose sakes he did
destroy all flesh, his small chosen people excepted? No forsooth, but to use
the Earth with diligent travel, in tillage, sowyng, cherishyng herbs, plants,
grass. etc. which be Gods gifts, both for our medicines and meat: not to
despise the sweet Creatures of God, Math, 6.
which spring in sundry times of the year, as flowers, fruicts, seeds,
barks, roots, with conning to be preserved for man's use, against the daily
danger of cruel sickness, which assalteth each man, Woman, and Child, through
the corruption of humors, and other evil accydentes of our Life. And for as
mutch as we can not make one flower, The prouydence of God.
neither can give to any of them his proper beautyfull shape, virtue, or
savor, which Solomon, when he was florishyng in his regal estate, was not
comperable to any of these flowers for their excellent beauty: Psalm. 103. Psalm.
104. Job. 26. Ier. 5. Genesis 3.
Therefore let us daily behold the Earth whereunto we must once come, and also
in the mean time, humbly laud and praise the high divine providence of the
almighty our Lord and God, who has laid the foundations of the Earth, that it
should not move at any time, and has covered it with the deep, like as with a
garment, the waters do stand between the Hills, yea he sends his Sprynges
to the ryuers, which run among the hills: all Beasts of the Field drink
thereof, and the wild Asses do quench their thyrst: besides them all the
fowls of the air have their habitacion, and singe among the branches, and
he watreth the Lillies from the Clouds. The earth is filled with the Fruicte
of his works: he brings forth Grass for the Cattle, and green herbs for
the service of Mankind, that he might bring food out of the earth, and Wine
that makes glad the heart of man, and Oil to make him a cheerful
countenance, and bread to strengthen his heart wythal. Wine Oil and* bread,
Gods gifts.

The trees of the lord are full of sap.


The Trees of ye Lord are also full of sap, even the trees of Libanus which he
has planted Therein the Birds do make their nestes: and the Fur trees are a
dwelling for the Storke. The high Hills are a refuge for the wild Goats, and
so are the stony Rocks a refuge for the Conyes. He appoynteth the Moon for
certain seasons, and the Sun does know his going down: he makes darkness,
that it may be Night, wherein all the beasts of the Forest do move. The Lions
roaring after their pray do seek their meat at God, the Sun aryseth, and
then they get them away together, and lurk them close in the dens. Then man
aryseth, and goes forth to his work, and labors until euenyng. O Lord how
manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all. The Earth is full
of thy Riches: so is the great and wide Sea also, Psalm. 92.
wherein are things innumerable both small and great Beasts: there sail the
Ships, and there are g^eate Whales, whom thou have made to play therein: all
these creatures weight upon thee, that thou may give them, meat in due time:
when thou gyuest them, Esa. 27. Io li. xi. Psalm. lxii.
they gather it, and when thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good
things: when thou hydest thy face, they are troubled, when thou take away
their breath, they dye, and they are turned again to their Dust. etc.

Every thing tourneth to dust.
Lo here my dear brother Marcellus I do end simply of Simples, praying thee
in the mean time to take them in good part: waying my present case,
disquietnes, and trouble. Good will ever was with me and shall be to my small
power, although leasour lacked, and time would not serve for the purpose:
Trouble has so hindered me, that I am constrained, presently to stay.
but when it shall please God that we shall talk together again, I will make
amends for all faults escaped, GOD willing, who ever keep thee, thine own,
Hilarious. Moreover, behold two old friends approach at hand, the one is called
Soarenes, and the other Chirurgerie. Let us hear what they will say, a little
while.


The end of the Simples.
A horned Still.
Bagpipe Still.
Two heads.
Pelican Still.
The little Glass


These stilles are very good to desti, cleanse and rectify al waters

Walnut.
Satirion.
Wormwood.
Strabery.
Solanu^ the great nightshade.
Radishe.
Cherie.
Hyssope.
Chickenweede.


Scabious.
Peache.
Lauender.
Endive, or Southistell.
Onions.
Parietory.
Parsiley.
Plantein.
Pemroyall*


Rose.
Sage.
Chicorie.
Housleeke.
Alkakengi.
Tilia.


A.
AZarabaccha or wild Nardus. Fol. 1. Aspleno^ called Scolopendrion or Citrach.
Ibidem Absinthium called Wormwood. Fol. 2 Anisseedes. Ibidem Anagallus called
Chickenweede. 7. Apples. 13. Aloes of two kinds. 14 Agrimonie. 18 Apium called
Smalage. 22 Aron called Cookoprick. 24 Arthichoke called Scolimus or Cinara. 31
Asparagus. 36 Aconitum two kinds, Perdalianches, and Licoctonon. 42 Angelica
Angels flower, or radix sancti spiritus. 43 Aristolochia rotunda and longa.
49 Apiastrum Mellissa or Baulme. 51 Agaricum or Agaricke. 54 Amoniacum, of God
Ammon. 60 Assafoetida a stinking Gum. Ibidem. Amber Grice most sweet. 59
Acatia a fruit of a Thorn in Egypt. 61 Almondes sweet and bitter. 64 Agnus
Castus or Vitex. 68 Alum, or roche Alum. 69 Atramentum. 70 Alston more in the
North. 79
B.
Beats. Fol. 8 Betonie. Ibidem Beer, and Ale. 12 Barberies. 14 Buglosse. 16
Basil or Ozimum. Ibid. Burnet. Ibid. Bell Woodbynde called Smilax. 21 Barley,
called Hordium. 27 Beans. 28 Bardana the Burre. 36 Brakes, or Filix the Fern.
40 Botris a sweet herb of France. 4^ Basil wild called Ocimastrum. 48
Brionia vitis alba the running wild Uyne Fol. 49. Boras. 60 Bdellium. Ibid.
Balaustia the flowers of Pomgranet. 65 Bay, or Laurel. 67 Brimstone. 69
Barach. 76 Bay salt. 71 Bores flesh and Bakon. 74 Bear, and Badgar. 76 Black
bird. 78 Barnacle wondrous. 82 Bitter the bird. 78 Butter the virtue. 80
Brains of sundry kinds. 82 Byzahar the stone. 83 Bones of sundry kinds.
Ibidem Blood of sundry beasts. 84
C.
CAmomill. Fol. 7 Cucumers. 9 Cabage or Brassica, wortes. Ibidem Claret wine.
10 Cheries. 14 Capers, and Olyues. Ibidem Scabious. 16 Calamus Aromaticus. 17
Centaurium or fell terrae. 19 Campher^e called Symphitum. 24 Consolida minor
Daises. Ibidem Coriander. 25 Chelidon ye great or Chelidonion mega. 32
Collumbin. 32 Cresses or Nasturtium. 40 Crowfoote or Ranu^culus. 42 C^ocus or
Saffron. 45 Cartamus or wild Saffron. 45 Calamintes of the Mountain. 48 Clary
called Orminum. Ibidem Carawayes of Carintha. 51 Cartafilago. 52 Chicorie or
Sponsa solis. Ibidem Carrets the roots. 53 Cassia lignea a sweet wood. 55
Cassiafistula to purge. Ibidem Castanian the Chestnut. 6^ Cola^iuthida. Ibidem
Cutbert Blunt. 68 Clo^es* Ibidem Cucubes. 6^ Ceruse. Ibidem Ciperus. Ibidem
Cardamon. 67 Campher or Caphera. 68 Cadmia. 72 Corrall. 72 Calves flesh. 74
Cocks flesh. 81 Cheese fresh and salt. 80 Co^gulum leporis. etc. 81
Cantharides the Fly. 84
D.
DRagons. Fol. 6 Dandelion. 10 Dictamnum. 15 Diapentia ye great fine leaued
grass. 23 Dogs tongue or Cynoglossum. Ibid. Darnell. 31 Dayses called
Bellis. 37 Diers flowers called flos Tinctoris. 44 Dockes the great called
Rumex. 47 Digitalis called fingers or Fox gloves: 48 Doronike a precious root
of Alexandria. 53 Dragons blood. 59 Diacridium called Diagridium. 61 Dates. 68
Ditten. Duckes flesh* 77 Doves flesh. Ibidem
E.
ENula Campana. Fol. 15 Elleborus Albus and niger. 18 Ebulus or Waleworte^ 51
Epithymum. Ibidem. Eringium of the Sea. 54 Ebenus Wood. 56 Euphorbium. 60
F.
FEnell or Fincle. Fol. 6 Filipendula. Ibidem Fenum Grec^ Fenegreeke. 26 Flax
or Lint. Ibidem Felonweede, or S. James worte. 38 Flos t^nctoris for Diers. 45
Fox Gloves, called Digitalis. 47 Frankincense, or thus. 49 Filberd Nuttes. 64
Fraxinus the Ash tree. 65 Figs. 66 French Soap. 64 Fumus terrae. 66 Fallow
Dear. 75 Fiber. 76 Fox. Ibidem Fesant. 78 Fish. 75 Fatness of beasts. 81
Frogs. 84
Garlike. Fol. 3 Groundsill. 9 Grapes. 14 Ginger. 17 Gallowgrasse or Hemp. 27
Giloflowers. 35 Gramen. 38 Goose foot. Ibidem Geucian. 41 Germander. 47 Goofe
grass. 50 Grummell. 52 Gum Sarcocolle. 59 Galbanum. 60 Glaucium. Ibide^ Gum
Arabicke. Ibidem Gum Tragacanthe. 61 Gum Larix. Ibide^ Gaulles. 62 Gum of
Almondes. 68 Galauga. 66 Goats. 75 Geese. 77 Green Cheese. 79 Goats milk.
Ibidem.
H
Honey. Fol. 3 Hoppes. 7 Horehounde. Ibidem Hysope. 10 Helenium. 15 Henbane. 31
Humlocke. Ibidem Houslike. 35 Horse tail. 40 Hearts Horn. 43 Hermodactylus.
46 Hypocistis. 64 Haematiste. 73 Hernes. B. S. 78 Hippoglossum. 23 Hypericon.
16 Hemp. 26 Hilton of Bidick. 80
I.
IEnuper. 65 Ire^s. 67 Iette. 73 Iuy. Fol. 39
Iuery. 77
K.
Knotgrasse. 33
L.
LIllies. Fol. 6 Lettice. 10 Liuerworte. 19 Lunges, 1 L^gusticum. 22 Lupines.
30 Lions foot. 33 Lauender. 41 Lagopus. 43 Lyquerice. 53 Leaven. 66 Licium. 61
Litharge. 66 Lautus. 67 Lime. 70 Lead. Ibidem Lapis Lasulj. 72 Lapis Tutia. 73
Lapis Phrygius. 73 Lapis magnes. Ibidem Lambs woolle. 80
M.
MOuse Ear. Fol. 2 Mustarde 8 Mintes. 10 Mellilote, 17 Mugworte. 18 Mallows.
19 Marygolde. 25 Mandragora. 41 Misten, or Viscum. 50 Moss. 55 Mumia. 59
Mirobalans. 62 Mirtus. 63 Mulbery. 66 Minium. 70 Margarit. 72 Milk. B. C. 79
Maiden hair. 24 Masticke. R. F. B. S. 59 Mustela. 75
N
NEttles. Fol. 35 Nigilla Romana. 25 Napus the root. 52
O.
ONions. 5 Oil. 18 Orpin that lives so long. 38 Oak tree. 62 Ostpray the sea
Egle. 76 Oats. 31 Oil of Worms. Otter that lives by fish. 90
P.
Philitis or Hearts tongue. Fol. 1 Pursleyn or Portulace. 6 Plantein, or
Plantago, Lambs tongue. 7 Pease, or Beans. ^ Pears. 13 Peaches, or Persica.
Ibide^ Prunes. 14 Polipodie of the Oak. 16 Peneroyall, or Pulegium. 19 Poppie,
or Papauer. 25 Pease, or Pisum. 28 Pimpernell. 33 Paeonia, or Pionie. 36
Paunsis, or herba Trinitatis. 39 Paritarie. 45 Purge, or Spurge, called
Ricinus. 40 Psyllium, or fleaworte, 47 Pepper of the water. 49 Pellitorie, or
Sternumentaria. 50 Phylanthropos, that will hang upon (...) Apparel, called
Goose grass. Ibide^ Pastnippes, or Pastinaca. 53 Pixnaualis, or Pitche of the
Ship. 60 Pistaciae a kind of Nuttes. 64 Populus, or Poppler tree. 65
Pomgranet, or Malum punicum. Ibide^ Pepper, or Piper. 67 Pearls, or Margarite
stones. 72 Porke, or Bakon. 74 Pigges. Ibidem Porpinti^e, or ^renaceus. 75
Pecocke, their flesh. 77 Partriches, their flesh. 78 Pl^uers. Ibidem Playce
the fyshe. Ibidem
Q.
QUinces. Fol. 14 Quercula minor. 47 Quayles. 78 Quicksiluer. 69
R.
RIce. Fol. 8 Rue, or herb Grace. 9 Raysens. 14 Rosemary. 18 Russhes. 2^
Rocket gentill. 34 Rumex, called red Docke. 47 Rapes. 52 Roydes. Ibidem Radishe
roots. 53 Rubarbe. 54 R^sine. 59 Rose. 69 Roche. 78
S.
SAge. Fol. 5 Sorrel. 7 Sauery. 8 Senecion, or Gronsell. 9 Scabious. 16
Spinach. Ibide^ Se^walle. 17 Senturion, 21 Smallage. 32 Simohitum, or Comfery.
24 Scilla* or Squilla, or the Sea onion. Ibi. S^a^esaker. 30 Solanum. Ibidem
Shepherdes purse. 33 Sticados. 34 Serpentaria. 35 Stitcheworte. 37 Sauine.
Ibidem Seen Alexan. Ibide^ Spatula foetida. 38 Shepherdes needle. 42 Saffron.
43 Sperma Coeti. 59 Storax. Ibide^ Stat^e. Ibide^ Stirax Calamite. 61 Sanders.
67 Sugar of the Cane. 68 Sulpher, called Brimstone. 69 Spodium. 70 Soap. Ibidem
Salt. 71 Spo^gia, the sea Spounge. 72 Sapbyrus. 73 Sparrowes. 78 Shelfishe. 75
Sepum called Tallowe. 86 Scorpion. 84
T
TAsill* ^^brum veneris. Fol. 15 Time. 17 Triplegrasse. 32 Tartar of Wynelies.
59 Terra Sigillata. Ibide^ Turbit. 63 Tamarindes. Ibidem Tamariscus, or
Tamarix. Ibidem
V.
VIolettes. Fol. 6 Ueruen. 8 Ualerian^ 32 Verbalcum. 34 Vngula caballina, or
Tussilago. 51 Uerdigrease. 70 Uernishe. Ibidem
VV.
Wormwood. Fol. 2 Water of Rivers. etc. 11 Wine. 10 Woodbynde. 21 Wheat. 29
Wild water Peper. 49 W^^sell. 76 William Hilton. 79
A.
AZarabaccha, called Vulgago, hot, and dry in the third degree: provoke
urine, helps the Liver, and purges terms menstruall. etc. Fol. 1 Azaron is
good against the Fever, Dropsy, and Frenzy. Ibidem Asplenum, is good for the
Spleen. Ibi. Absinthium, helps soar Ears, Eyes, Spleen, and the Dropsy. 2
Anisseedes opens the Raynes. Ibidem A good reamedy for the runninge of the
Raynes. Ibidem Against the blouddy flixe. Ibide^ Against poison. 3 A medicine
for the Fistula. Ibidem An healthful drynk for Summer. Ibid. An excellent
Pille, which helped. W. Bullein th'aurthour of this book, for the Reume. 5 A
medicine of Fenill for the Raynes, and Bladder. 6 An example of Pur^^en. Ibidem
An encreaser of the seed of generation. 10 Against the biting of Dogs* and
Serpents. 9 A glass^ for a drunkarde. 11 Ale* and Beer. 12 Ashes made of
wild Pear tree they^ virtue. 13 Apples their virtues. 14 A medicine for the
small pockes. Ibide^ Against stinking Breath. Ibidem Against drunkenness. 14
Against hot choler. Ibidem Against the Pestilence. Ibidem A cause of the
Emeroydes. 15 A marvelous work of Dictamnum. Ib. A payned Stomach. 18 A
present help to be delivered of a dead Child. Ibidem A medicine for Women's
breasts. 20 Althos, does signef^e medicine. Ibide^ A good Gargarisme to wash^
the Throat Fol. 23 Against poison. 25 A good Medicine for soar Eyes. Ibidem A
quick Medicine for a sta^e Ruffen. 27 Against hot inflammation, or swelling of
ye body. 28 A more larger description of Beams, and Pease. Ibide^ A knauishe
practice of Inholders, and their Hostlers. Ibidem A Horse is a good servant.
29 A plaster for a bruised body. 30 A plaster to bring forth a dead child. Ibi.
A good Medicine for the Stone, and Ray^es, Ibidem An hea^be venime, called
Henbane, or Altercum. 3^ Against the Pestilence. 34 Asparagus has many Uertues
as to increase the seed. etc. 36 A good Medicine for the fallinge Sickness.
Ibidem An alligory of an herb, an old Supersticion, invented by Witches, a
practice of Satan. 39 Angelica defends poison, and preserves chasticy. 43
Against drunkenness. Saff^on does help. 44 Against poison. Ibide^ Against
the pestilence. 45 A good note of the nature of herbs. 47 Against evil
fight, Sauery preuayleth. Fol. 48. Aristolochia helps Cankers. 49 A very
good medicine for the Ulcer of the Yard. 52 A p^aster for the Liver, or Goule.
Ibidem A good wound herb^. Ibidem An excellent infusion of Leonellus
^auentinus to cleanse the blood. 54 Agaricke cleanses the guts* and expulseth
raw humors. Ibidem Agaricke helps the fallinge Syckenesse. Ibidem Agaricke
purges all the Organes of the Senses, 55 A precious Water with Synamon, and
Cassia. Ibide^ Amber greece of three kinds. 56 A good Pomeamber against
coldenesse of the Brain. Ibide^ A Witches blessing for saynct Anthonies fire.
57 A good plaster for a soar skabben ^ate. 60 Ammomacum comes from the
Oracle of God Ammon. Ibide^ Assafoetida does stink, yet it helps the
Mother, and Lunges. Ibidem Acatia stops the bloody flixe. 6^
B.
Biting of a Snake. Fol. 3 Bees be an example unto us, both of love, and
working in the common wealth. Ibide^ Bies maintain no Strangers, for they be
not profitable. 4 Bread of a day old. 13 Black Friars Pears in Norwiche.
Ibid. Beans in the old Time, were used for Lottes. 28 Bistorta has a
cru^pled root, lying wrinkled like a Serpente, but the Female root is black
without, and red within, and a great knot in the end. 35 Brake Seeds were
n^uer seen among christian people, but Witches has used practice with them
as foolish Writers affirm. 40 Bitter herbs be hot and dry. 48 Brionia vitis
alba, or the wild running Uyne. 49 Brionia defends poison. Ibide^ Brionia
increases milk. 50 Epi^hymum, and Gassutha h^lpeth ye Liver, Gaul, and
Splen^. 5^ Beware of the new dyate, except you have two lives, or else a wise
minister of the same. 58 Bitumen of the dead Sea. 59 Balaustia the flower of
Pomgranet: which will stop a flixe, 65 Bath springes come from a vein of
Brimstone 69 Burnt lead good for Chirurgians. 70 Boys can kill the strongest
men with gunnes. 72 Bizabar a precious stone against poysone and the bloody
flixe. 73 Beef, not good for the Choleric, but for tender stomachs. 74
Beef broth against the flixe. Ibidem Bear and Badgard have virtue in
medecin. 76 Bear, Fox, and Brocke, are good to help the palsy Ibidem
Butter, the virtue of it. 80
C
Coughes how to help it, 3 Corrupt fleume, to help it. Ibidem Cold coughes, to
help it, ^ Coloquintida is perilous, 63 Comfort against hot choler in the
stomach. 10 Claret wine warmeth the body. 10 Capers and Olives: good for the
spleen. 14 Couslippes, or Pagles. 34 Cresses help the palsy. 40 Cresses do
help many infirmityes. Ibid. Cartamus cleanses humors. 45 Clarie good for
women. 48 Cassiafistula comes from Egypt. 55 Cassiafistula has many virtues
to help mankind, it cannot be for borne among us Ibidem, Covetousness and
money, does make blind both Divines, Lawers and Phisicions, and transform them
from the Natures of men, into infernal monsters, 58 Cubebes have goodly virtue
against mela^cholie. 66 Ceruse cools inflamed sores, 66 Cardamon helps the
falling sickness, 67 Caphur called Camphora, of a great Tree in Inde. 68
Camphire will quench nature. Ibidem. Coral grows in the Sea. 72 Coral of
two kinds. Ibidem Calves flesh, the profit thereof. 74 Celsus for a vomit.
Ibidem Castor stones do help all cold infirmities, both in men and women. 76
Cranes are ^oat, and increase seed. 77 Dioscorides was an Heathen man, yet was
he most cunnyng in the natures of Simples. 23 Drink but two dragmes of night
shade in Wine. 30 Doronicus helps digestion. 53 Dates good for nature, 67
Duckes flesh is very hoate, and corrupted and unwholesome flesh. 76 Doves flesh
nourishes cold folks, and is very hot it self. Ibidem Diverse opinions, how
Ambergrice is found. 56 Dragons blood is very good to stop the bloody flixe.
62 Doctor William Turner, found the very Tamarix in Germany, which is best
for the Spleen. 63
E
Epithimum and Cassia help the gaul. 51 Edwards, a foolish Emperike, had
almost killed Cuthbert Blunt, with Elleborus albus, at Newcastle. 64 Eggs of
birds, three special things considered in them 80 Eggs of great fowls, are
noisome to the stomach. Ibidem Eggs their whites help the eyes and quench
heat. Ibidem Eringium maris, to increase seed. 44 Earth is the mother of
every thing, and into earth each creature shall return. 84 Earth worms are
very wholesome for Mankind, so is their oil. Ibidem Every thing shall turn to
Dust in the end. 85
F
For to help the biting of a Dog. 6 For the brain and heart a good medicine.
16 For the Stomach, Liver, and the Spleen a good medicine: 17 Fragaria has
virtue to cool. 23 Fragaria has virtue to cool. 23 For to help the
Emeroydes. Ibide^ From eating of beans, what Pithagoras meant* 28 For coddes,
when they are swelled a remedy. Ibidem For green wounds, use Ualerian to heal
them, 32 For to help the swelling of the throat. Ibidem. For sore eyes to
help them. Ibidem Flegmon is an appostumacion, gathered of corrupted blood into
one place. 46 Framingham, Nettlestede, and Lethringham, ancient parkes. 50 For
pains of the head coming of heat, a remedy. 47 From whence Rhabarbe does
come. 54 Filverdes are good after meat, and also for moist reumes. 64 Figs
are both meat and medecin. 66
G
GArlike will provoke vryne, but it is not good for Choleric persons. 3 Green
sickness. 5 Guaicum is of greater virtue than ye Bath or Bukstones well against
the nosegay of Naples. 12 Good for the shortness of wind. 6 Goodly syrup to
cleanse the Stomach is made of Squilla. 24 Gose foot is a perilous herb. 38
Genesis.xxx. does not prove that Mandrake helps conception. 4 Great Spurge or
Ricinus makes strong vomittes. 45 Goodly are the virtues of Rapes. 55
Galbanum is a Gum of great virtue to bring forth a dead child. 60 Gauls do
grow like Acornes, and have virtue to stop flixes. 62 Guaicum will cleanse the
eyes 63 Gum Arabike will restrain the flix, and wounds. 60 Glewe will heal
wounds. Ibidem Gum Larix is equal with the best Terebintyne. 61 Gold the
most vndefyl^d metal is good for Cordialles. 75 Generation comes again into
corruption. 88. Gilloflowers are good for the heart and help wounds. 35 Goose
flesh breadeth Melancholy. 77
H
How to correct Elleborus albus that it shall not hurt. 18 Honey is not good for
hot people, for it will turn most soonest into Choler. 3 Honey is an heavenly
dew. Ibidem Hair how to preserve it. 6 Hydropiper may be used in the place of
pepper. 49* How to know good Agarike. 54 How to use Radish roots. 55. Hemp
will kill worms in the belly and destroy seed of Generation. 27
I
IF Harp stringes were of one degree* unpleasant were that harmony. 20
L.
Leekes. 6 Lethe, a flood, whose water did cause men to forget them selves when
they drink of it. 1^ Lungworte so called, because it is like the lunges of man.
20 Liguria, is a part of Itali from the Hill Apeninus unto the Tuscan Sea. 22.
Lauender the sweet virtue thereof, holsom for cold folks: 41 Lauender ^ealeth
the sinews, Ibidem Lunaria heals wounds. 43 Lysimachus, stops blood,
Lysimachus a king of Macedonia, found this herb, when he was scholar to
Calistenes. and one of Alexanders worthy captains. 43 Lathiris or Cataputia
minor or the less Spurge 45. Lithargus helped with herbs, hot and dry in
the third degree. 51. Liquorice helps the kings evil. 53 Lignum Aloes called
Agallocum, which is Aromatike. 55 Lignum aloes comes not from Paradise, as
fools affirm, but from Mo^del, a city of Inde. Ibidem Laudanu^ does help the
hair from falling says Paulus. 61 Licium comes from Lici^. 6^ Leven
dissolueth hard things, and makes them soft. 66 Laurus called the Baie,
against ye stone. 67 Lead will cool and help sores. 70 Lapis naxius helps
to increase hair. 73 Lambs flesh is good roasted, evil sodden. 75 La^kes help
the Chollicke, black birds, Plouers, Sparrowes, Woodcockes, small Birds. 78
Lime helps rotten sores. 70 Livers of Beasts. 32
M
Monseare is good for the falling sickness. 2 Monseare helps the throat.
Ibidem Michell ye Chirurgian of New castle. Ibid. Master Roger Straunges
medicine brought from Uenice, written by a Learned Italian Doctor, for runnyng
of the raynes. 13 Marks of strypes in the skin* 15 Mercury helps
conception. 19 Master Luke of London. 26 Many good Medicines made of Hemp
Seed. Ibidem Meal and Wax, has made great Marchaunts at Rome. 29 Many good
Medicines made of House ^eke. 35 Mandrake is mutch like a man, or a Woman by
craft, for nature gives no man's shape to a beast, mu^ch less to an herb. 41
Mandrake was called Circaeu^, and also Anthropomorphos. 42 Madder with red
roots, against the Pestilence. 47 Many good virtues of Germa^der. Ibidem Many
good virtues of Aristolochia, longa and rotunda. 49 Mis^en heals many
perilous sores. 50 Missel^owe or M^s^en, will make a good ripyng plaster, to
heal the corns in the feet. Ibidem Misseltow is not natural in kind but a
bastard branch, growing upon some other tree. 51 Misseltow is like to a
stranger, that increases and florisheth by the ^urt and loss of a ^ree borne
man, of his own natural Country or City. 51 Man's nature subject to many
Euilles, for want of perfect temperament. 57 March and April are the best times
to heal the Pox. 58 Mirrhe preserves the Body from putrefaction or rottyng.
59 Mirtes have virtue to restrain 63 Manna of the Ash trees in Italy. 68
Medicines made of the Osspraie. 76 M^ddie fish not wholesome. 78
N
Nettle seeds will serve in the place of Peper. 35 Note that the black Thistle
root with Swines Grease and Brimstone, will heal Scabbes and itche. 44 Note,
Quid pro quo, was given to ye Lord Wharton in his potage of ignorance, to his
great peril of Life. 45 Nutmegge, or Musk nutte, has many singular virtues
against cold. 64 Nutmegges, not good for hot complexioned men. 65
O
Onions provoke sleep. 5 Oil of Olives best. 17 Old sores. 18 Oil of Roses,
Ibidem Old Rushes, and old Courtiers be past pleasure. 21 Of the healing
comfortable Herb so named: 24 Of Popie wild and tame. 25 Otes do cleanse the
Lunges* 29 Orpin heals the Morphue. 38 Oil of Spike does warm. 41 Of sundry
kinds of Crowfoote called Ranunculi, or little Frogs grass. 42 Of the
little Beast called Chamelion. 44 Of Rumex the Docke, called Monks Rubarbe, or
bastard Mercury. 47 Of the great Docke, how it purges. Ibid. Of the herb
called Atriplex, or Arige. Ibid. Orthopnaea is difficulty of Wind. 48 Of the
wood of Life called Guaicum. 57 Oppoponax does resolve. 61 Oil of Roses for
the head. 69 Of the flesh of Oxen, Steeres, Bulls and Calfes. 74 Ox gaul
cleanses the eyes. Ibidem Ox milte stops the flixe. Ibidem Osspraies oil,
good to put in water, to gather fish ready to be taken. 76 Of house Cocks,
Capons, Chickens, their flesh mutch commended. 77 Of Dragons, which helps
against the pestilence. 6
P
Poverty is better among the common people, than abundance of riches. 20
Perilous practicioners be here discribed. 26 P^^san made of Barley, will quench
choler. 27 Pichagoras said this Faba abstineto that is abstain from Beaues,
Pliny and Tullie say, because of the ingendryng of gross humors, he forbad
them. 28 Plutarcus says, it was to beware, to be in office in a common
wealth, because it is so perilous. Ibidem Pease came first from Piso in
Greece. Ibid. Pe^se gr^wi^g on the own accord, without Sowing, where no Earth
but Stones b^. 29 Plenty of Otes in North humberla^d. Ibid. Pimpinella is good
against ye Pestilence. 33 Poor men's Peper. 35 Paeonia is called the chaste
herbe^ 36 Paralises, or Palsy. 37 Persicaria, or Peache leaves, growing in
marrice ground. 40 Parietarie that grows upon Stone Walls. 45 Perfect
hearts rest, and true quietness of mind. 46 Psyllium called Fleewort. 47
Purple fingers. 48 Pellitorie has virtue to help the teeth. 50 Pellitorie will
take away a cold Fever. ibi Ph^lanthropos, Aper^ne, commonly called Gosegrasse,
and Hareweade. Ibidem Pistacia, a nutte of Siria, or Italia 62 Peper
dissolueth, and consumes moist humors. 67 Pyrites lapis, against proud
flesh. 73 Porke the commendacion thereof. 74 Pigges. Ibidem Peacockes flesh is
hot and moist in the first degree. 77
Q
QUinces are wholesome. ^4 Quinces raw hurt. Ibidem Quercula minor, the little
Oak, or Germa^der. 47 Quails unwholesome. 78 Quicksiluer or Mercury. 69
R
Raw herbs. 9 Red wine corrupts blood. 10 Rotten sores helped. 36 Bellises
of Iarrow in the Bishopric of Durisme. 37 Roida heals the head. ^^ Rose
water and white wine, for all ho^te causes. 5^ R^ach a Heathen King, found
first Camphire. 68
S
SOre ears to help them. 2 Serpigo to help it. 3 Sweet breathes. 6 Stinking
fleume, 7 S^oppyng of the liver. 8 Sow Thistle the virtue. 10 Sroppyng of
vomites. Ibidem Sickness in the Lunges. Ibidem Salt water heals scabbes. 11
Sodden bread not wholesome. 1^ Sarfettes of Ale and Be^r^. 12 Swellynges to help
them. 14 Sweet Prunes be laxatiue, but tarte be bindyng. Ibidem Scabious for
scabbes, it takes the name of the property, the right name is S^oebe or
Psora, there be two kinds of it. 60 Seed augmented. 70 Sweet Calamus
odoratus. Ibidem Sir Thomas Rushe Knight. 20 Sundry names of Woodbinde, as
Periclimenon, because it wyndeth about the next ^rees and bushes, that it
grows unto. 21 Satyrus is a beast, having a head like a man, and body like a
Goat, and these are named Gods of the Wooddes, and they first found this herb
of U^nus, to stir up carnal lust. Ibidem Sanicle heals wounds. 23 Sanicle
is good for horse and kyen. Ibid. Staphis Agria Pedicularis, a seed that will
kill Lice in Children, and Hawks. 30 Solanum, Nyghtshade, or the sleepynge
D^ale. Ibidem Swallow dunge will make blind, example of Tobias. 32 Sheperdes
purse, to stop blood. 33 Stica^os good for the spleen. 34 Scaldyng and burning
helped. 36 Stichwort will heal the stone, and heal wounds. 37 Sauen of two
kinds. Ibidem Seen helps the head, with all the senses. 38 Sir Richard Alie,
his pocion, Mathiolus uses the same in Dioscoridem. Ibidem Saintie James
woort, called Fellon weed. 38 Spatula will kill Lice. Ibidem Sweet Botris. 41
Saffron has many virtues. 44 Sundry kinds of Spurge, but yet very perilous,
the great Spurge and the second excepted, for they be good. 46 Shifte water
oftentimes, when Atriplex is sodden. 47 Saueri^ the virtue. 48 Sweet Musk is
pleasant. 55 Sweet things be good for Mankind, but yet abused of ^outhfull
wantons, are not to be suffered in them Ibidem Sweet Gloves their profit. 6
Scepters for kings, and the Heathen Idols of E^enus. Ibidem Sagapen, or
Serapinum, a goodly gum. 60 Sagapen will help the Lunges, and Spleen. Ibidem
Scammonie is perilous, except it be first prepared. 62 Suber the Cork, will
stop Blood and flixe. Ibidem Sinamon. 65 Sebesten will help struma. 66
Sanders do cool the head, and reconcyle sleep, and help the Gout, 67 Sugar
the Cane. 68 Spycknard of Spayn helps ye brain. Ibid Sundry opinions of
Camphire. Ibidem Sulpher, or Brimstone. 69 Sundry kinds of Roses, all of great
virtue. Ibidem Smigma, or Soap. 70 Soap will kyl Tetters, Ibidem Spodium
stops blood. 71 Salt, what it is in virtue. Ibidem Salt has virtue to warm
and dry. Ibid. Salt not good for lean persons. Ibidem Sir Ihon Delauall, a
good knight. 71 Sal Gemmae. Ibidem Sal Ammoniac. Ibidem Sal Ammoniac. does
cleanse the skin. 76 Salt of Inde. Ibidem Sal niter, or Peter, for gun powder.
Ibidem Spuma nitri or Barach. Ibidem Salt of Mare mortuum, where as Sodom was.
Ibidem Spuma maris. 72 Spuma maris does make clean ye teeth ibi. Sponge of the
sea. Ibidem Sponge good for wounds. Ibidem Spunges new are good, but old are
eu^l. ibi. Sponge stones do break the stone in the raynes. Ibidem Saphyrus
resists poison. 73 Swines blood. 74 Swine of Inde have horns. Ibidem Swannes
flesh cholerik^. 78 Swannes s^nge. Ibidem Such meat, such complexion. Ibidem
Sea fish holsomer, than that of the fresh water. 78 Shell fishes. 79 Sundry
kinds of Cheese. 80 Stones of the Ox bladder. 82 Scorpion breaks the stone.
84 Sna^les help a^he. Ibidem
T.
THe Arabians call that Nill, which we name Viscum, or Misseltow. 1 The
splenaticke love. Ibidem To increase hair. 3 To cure Serpigo. Ibidem To cleanse
the face. Ibidem The property of a good huswyfe. 4 The king of Bees, and his
army. Ibidem The juice of Sage, helps conception. An Example. 5 To stop blood
runnyng at ye mouth how, ibi. To kill the Canker, and quench Robin good fellows
Fever. 5 To cleanse the stomach. Ibidem To break the stone. 6 To wash feet,
Ibidem Two kinds of Fenell. Ibidem To help a moist reume* 7 To help the
sight. 8 To help the kings evil. Ibidem To make fat. Ibidem. To kill worms,
Ibidem To gargarise the head. Ibidem To help the eyes. 9 To provoke vryne.
Ibidem To cleanse Leprosy. Ibidem To increase m^lke. 10 To abate the lust.
Ibidem To kill worms. Ibidem To help the chollike. Ibidem To make sweet
Breath. Ibidem To purge the head. Ibidem To lose the belly. Ibidem To help the
sple^^ Ibidem The goodly virtues of common water. 11 The cause ^hy Nilus does
flow. Ibidem The cause of Barnacles* 12 The cause of Crystal. Ibidem The
effects of the ba^hes at the town of Bathe Ibidem The dead sea. Ibidem The
mean b^ked bread the best. 13 The operacion of Pears Ibidem The operacion of
Ap^es. Ibidem The operacion of Peaches, Ibidem The operacion of Quinces. 14.
The operacion of Cheryes Ibidem To comfort digestion. Ibidem Two kinds of
Al^es, Ibidem To help watery eyes, Ibidem To cleanse choler and f^^ume, 15 To
comfort the heart. 16 The property of Vinegar. Ibidem To help the Gout. 17
Theophrastus of Setwall. Ibidem To help the spleen. Ibidem Time can not be
called again. 17 To wast wind in the body. Ibidem To digest cold herbs. 18
The brain comforted. Ibidem To neese, Ibidem The ^elle Woodbinde, Smylax. 19
The virtue of Smalage, Louage, Alexander, Perselle, is to open ^ places, which
stop Urine, and wind. 20 The virtues of Perselies. Ibidem To heal a bruise
or a fall. 24 To heal Ringwormes, and Te^ters. 25 To mo^^ swea^e. Ibidem The
virtue of Lint oil. 26 The misery of unthrifts seems pleasant. but shame
and pain is the end. Ibidem The innocent sometime dies in the eyes of men,
miserable. 27 The consideracion of Hemp in Physic. ibi To help the Lung^s*
Ibidem The bread and drink of the poor, be the life of the needy: and he
that take it away from them, is as a murderer. Ibidem The ol^e Romans were
more humble than the new Romans, and late Popes, in keeping names of base
titles. 28 The time ^f Cicero. Ibidem The best Pease potage. Ibidem Ta^e^.
Ibidem Triticum, Wheat* or out bread. 29 To feed on Bran, makes a man leave,
but flower brings fatness. Ibidem The very Divines and Dunsmen did never
agree generally. Ibidem The sundry kinds and Natures of Wheat. Ibidem To kill
Worms with Lupines. 30 Three kinds of Henbane. 31 The white Henbane is used
in medicine. 31 The most cold herb, and a poison. Ibidem The death of Socrates
was with Wine, and the juice of Humlocke. Ibidem To help him which has drunk
Humlocke. Ibidem Two kinds of Triple grass. 32 Triple grass has many
virtues, and excels against poison. Ibidem To heal wounds and sores. 33
Tormentill does grow, and diminish wych the Uine. 34 Tormentil keeps sheep
from the rot. ibi To make the urine sweet. 36 To cleanse the Morphew. 38 To
kill Lyce. 39 To heal wounds. Ibidem To gather Iuie Gum. Ibidem To draw teeth
without pain. Ibidem To kill broad worms, in the Chest or belly. 40 The d^ad
Nettle, Ibidem To help the flixe. 41 To help the Guts. Ibidem To stop the
terms of Women. Ibidem This place proves not, that Mandrake will help
conception, but Mandrake will cleanse the Matrix, or cast forth the dead child
from the same; also it will kill the living seed. 42 The virtues of Mandrake,
is to make one sleep. Ibidem To poison wolves and Foxes. Ibidem The best
Saffron of this World, where it is. 44 The sea Thistle, called Eringus, which
is so called, because if the Root^ be sodden, and conserved with Honye and
cloves, it will preserve Nature, or lift ^ym up, which is decayed, it may come
of erigo, gis, eroxi, to lift up, or repair. Ibidem The Bore or carle Thystle,
called Chamelaeon. 44 The Thistle heals the Pestilence. Ibid. To vomit. 45
Tithimalus Charatias, or Lathyris is good in medicine, to purge Melancholy,
choler, and Fleume. 46 The greatest Treasure of this World is a quiet mind.
Ibidem They which call Rumex with the Golden Sand Mercury, do greatly err.
47 The Kings Evil. Ibidem To dye the hair. Ibidem To cleanse the stomach. 48
The oil of Calamintes, does warm the body, and is good against ye Sciatica.
ibi. To heal sores with Brionia. 49 To cleanse the Face with Brionia. Ibidem To
cause urine to pass plentifully. 52 The difference between Rubarbe, and
Rapontike. 54 The cruelty of the Barbarians, is to burn the Spice trees and
plants. Ibidem To comfort the spirits. 55 The Beast, which gives Musk is
like a Goat: that which brings zinet, is like a Cat. Ibidem The blaunching
of Musk. Ibidem Two Witches in Suffolk, charmed with Ebenie Beads. 56 The
pox of France. 57 Three kinds of Guaicum, but the white is most excellent.
Ibidem The consideracion of Guaicum. Ibidem Three most notable and best
Instruments of the common wealth the Deuyne, the Lawer, and the Physician. 58
The most excellent and best manner to sees Guaicum in composicions, with other
Simples, to cleanse the Pox, from all the members of the body. 59 The Dia^e for
the Pox* shortly declared. Ibidem Tartar, made of Wine Lies. Ibidem Terra
sigillata stops blood. Ibidem Thus called Frankincense, or Olibanu^. ibid To
cleanse Galbanom. 60 To help the prickyng of sinews. Ibidem Three glewes, that
is of Beasts skins of fish, and of Cor^e. Ibidem Terebinthus, or
Terebintine, has great virtue to heal. 61 The virtue of Terebintine. Ibidem
The evil craft of subtle Apothicaries, does mu^ch harm. Ibidem To know good
Diagridion. Ibidem To seem young, how to do it. 62 To purge tender persons.
Ibidem To cleanse sore ey^n. Ibidem The Que^^e, or Oak tree, will stop the
bloody flixe, or blood, so will the Bark, Akorns, or Leaves, with ye cups.
Ibid. The Beech tree with ^is fru^cte, will stop flixes. Ibidem To stop the
flixe, called Dysenteria, and Tenasmus with Mirtes. 63 To kill worms in the
belly, with Coloquintida. Ibidem To help the teeth, with Coloquintida. ibi
Turpit, which purges phlegm. Ibidem Tamarinds, or Tamardactylis. Ibidem To
help Emeroides. Ibidem Tamariscus is a little tree like Quyckbene. Ibidem
Tamarix does help the Spleen. Ibidem Tamarix against the flixe. 64 The virtue
of the Pistac^ Nuts. Ibidem To help broken bones. 65 To help the Spleen.
Ibidem To kill Lyce. Ibidem To resolve. 67 To cover a bone with flesh. 67 Three
kinds of Sanders. 67 The great virtue of Manna, for Mankind. 68 To cause
sleep. Ibidem To stop the whytes, and runnyng of the raynes. Ibidem To cleanse
scabbes. ibi. The Rose a friend to the Brain, and eyes. Ibidem The best Roses
be in Italy. Ibidem To dry Salt. 71 The flowing of Salt at Nilus. Ibidem To
cleanse sore eyes* 72 To stop Blood. Ibidem The Magarite or Pear^e, 'good in
Cordials. Ibidem The Magnet stone. 73 Tripes. 74 The Winter Dear, better than
the Summer. 75 The Lunges of the Dear. Ibidem The Powder of the Hare, for the
stone. Ibidem The Urchin, or Hedghog. 76 The Weesel good against the falling
sickness, and Struma, Angina, or swellyng of the throat. Ibidem The Fox.
Ibidem To help baldness. Ibidem The Barnacle of Scotland, never layth Eggs,
but are bred only of the Ocean Sea: read Gesnerus de Auibus lib. ii^. 67
Three things considered in Fish. 68 Tallow of male beasts, are hoater than
(...) Female. 71 To preserve fat, 72 The providence of God. 85 T^ooble has so
hindered me, that I am constrained presently to stay in this little work.
Ibidem
V
Uiolets be great colors, and to cold for the heart. 6 Uomits strayn the body
17 Ualerian ma^eth salues of great goodness. 32 Vrtica the Nettle. 35 Viola
Lutea the yellow Uiolet, the wall Gilloflower. 46 Uery Gentlemen, spring not
by extortion, but by true seruyng their princes, and living of their own,
hurtyng not their poor neighbors, preferring the favor of the country,
before lucre, which is their chief treasure. 50 Uirgill. 51 Vngula Caballina,
Hor shoue. Ibidem Vnguentum Aegiptyacum. 70
VV
Wormwood has many virtues. 2 Welshmennes drink. 3 Where plenty of Onions do
grow. 6 UUounds kept from corruption. ^ UUhyte UUyne. 10 UUine is an enemy to
children. Ibidem UUine imoderately used, comfort. 11 UUhat kind of UUater
is best, Ibidem UUhyte Popie is the best. 2^ UUhen Uenice first began. 28
UUheat will degenerate out of kind, that is, from UUheat to Darnell. 29 Walwort
makes medicine for the Gout, and pains in the ioynctes, 51 When Ebenus came
first to Rome. 56 What evil has happened, through the abusing of Guaicum among
the Emperikes. 57 Walnuts against poison, as Mithridates reports. 64 Why
hogs are diseased. 74 William Hilton, let William Bulleine to finish his
book of healthful Medycines. 79 Whaie the virtue thereof. 80 Wine Oil, and
Bread, Gods gifts. 85
X
XXX. Leaves of Azarabaccha do serve in infusion, but other ways three,
four, or five, do suffice. ^
Y
Yellow and Purple fingers. 4^
FINIS.
HEREAFTER ensues a little dialogue between two men, the one called Sorenes,
and the other Chirurgi, Concerning Apostumations, and wounds their causes, and
also their Cures, gathered by William Bulleine the Aucthour and Collectoure
of all these.

Dialogues, contained within this Book Uery profitable for every Reader, and
true obseruer of them.

And first begins the Sore Manne to speak, as Follows,

(:)

1579:



A LITTLE DIALOGVE Between Soarenes, and Chirurgi.
Soarenes. NOw our old Freindes have done all their long talk. very profitable
to each other, and also to as many as have heard them* I trust we shall spend
the time to the like effect, with no less profit, tha^ Marcellus and
Hilarious, which had comfort in seeking forth the sweet flowers of sundry
shapes in the fyeld, to their no small delight, all this last Summer. But now
the horie, stormy, dark Winter weather approaches nere, as Persius says:
Admouit iam bruma foco te Basse Sabino. Bassus, cold Winter does draw thee to
the fire, in the Mountain called Sabinus, says he. Cold weather says he,
draws nere, Flora is fledd, Boreas, perceth, and causes al beasts to
tremble, bereuinge them of their pleasant So^mer shroudes, under the sweet
leaves of green Trees. The Earth is new covered with white Snowes, hard
craking Ice, Sabius a famous Mountain in Italy Flora a Gods of Flowers a
harlot of Rome. Borias the Northeast wind
and horye frostes. Birds do quiver and quake, lurking in the holes of Rocks
and old Barnes, for their relief. The Beasts with slender empty bellies and
cold tremblyng Carcasses, do cluster in flocks, or shroud them selves under
the naked Bushes, with their faces from the fierce wyndes. These short Days,
and long nights, cause both man and beast to draw together in warm places,
and close houses, now the pore Bees, if they labored well in Summer, have their
close sweet delytes in warm Hyues in winter. Thus does Nature give providence
to sundry creatures, to foresee dangers to come, as honger, cold, storm.
Furthermore, God and Nature, have from the beginning, taught both man and
beast, not only to relieve themselves in health, but in the time of sickness,
and Soarnes: each of the^ are taught how to correct, stop, and purge such
humors, as do offend nature.

Thus man artificially, and beasts naturally, have a wonderful providence,
whereby the glory of our Lord, and God does appear of no small Majesty, and
deuyne power: which prepared his incensible creatures, as Man, Beast, Fysh,
Foul, Serpents. etc. And one of them to be both meat and medecin for an
other. His name be praised therefore. Amen.


Chirurgi. HOw beit good brother you have reverently spoken, of the Divine
providence. I perceive you did hear and mark well, what end our good friend
Hilarious made, Praising God with the holy Prophet David. Psalm ciii.


Soarenes. YE forsooth, although I be sore in body, yet I trust to begin with
good comfort, with a pleasant Comodye, and not end in a fearful Tragidye,
Tragedies begin ever evil and end the same.
For I have hard say in the writing of the holy Euangell, which reports from
the mouth of God, saying: before al things seek the kingdom of God, and then
shall all things be given unto you. If al things shall be given unto them,
which pray unto God, than shall comfort be given to the Careful, First seek
Gods kingdom.
Bread to the Hungrye, lyberty to the thrall. And fynallye health to the
Sick, and Soar. etc. As example, Christ gave health unto the Lepors, Lame,
Blind, etc. Even so I trust, being a soar Body, to be relieved at the mighty
hands of God, or through him, by his cunning ministers, among whom you are one,
which have done many happy Cures, as I have heard. Well, say further, we have
present occasyon, and time conueniente given unto both: you, to warn you
labor continually, and I again for health, patiently to suffer and learn
some wholesome doctrine, for my relief. For if the Builders of Houses, wherein
our Bodies be shrouded, be not to be sorborne: much less the repayrers of the
Bodies of men, wherein the Soul remains, can be spared when either Wound,
Soar, Botche, or such like assaulteth our mortal mantion of the body. To
conclude with you I will, followyng all this short Winters day, in the warm
house, to demand questions as well as I can, for my health and learning.


Chirurgi. Say on your mind a Gods blessyng.


Soarnes FOr that I never did Drink upon the sweet Fludde, or Well Spryng of
Philosophy, in my tender years: neither have sleapte under the noble
Mountain, and sweet two topped Hill, called Pernasus, Further, I did never
slumber, or forgotte my self, through Golden Sleapes upon Helycon that Noble
high Hill, and pleasant place, where sometime the nine Muses, gave forth
their Sacred gifts. But rather I have Drunk and Bybbed upon the cold
seuerus flood of the pale Water called Perenne: Ignorance.
and washed my self in the Dark Streams, of the forgetful Hellish Broke
Lethe in Clean forgetfulness. Therefore to say the truth of my self, my sore
Body and dol^ish Brain, can receive but small health, and Comfort, except it
shall please thee, gently to hear me: For curtesye is a goodly Schole
maistres, Curtas^e.
and Comfortable are sweet Cordials, and wholesome salues: and bitter* words,
are biting corosiues, to feeble Minds.


Chirurgi. YOu say the truth. Even so, soft Chirurgians make foul soars*
sweet words are pleasant to Women and young Children: Soft Chirurgians make
foul sores.
but plain true tales, ought to be among Men of knowledge, without curious
Cyrcumstau^ce, or Rhetorical colors.

Therefore go to your matter, the day is cold and short, the time passes
spedely away, and can never come again.


Soarenes. FOrsooth that is most certain: therefore let us spend the time well.
For my part I would know how to heal my soars which you do se here present
before and behind.






Chirurgi. I see them very well, and I trust by Gods grace t to teach you those
things, which I have learned my self of others* for cure


Soarn^^ WHat men of credit, both old, and new, have written of this most
worthy Art, of the hand craft of Chirurgi, or means thereunto, show me some
of their names, for to encourage me to love this said Art.


Chirurgi. I Shall call to mind, and note with Pen, a number of worthy men,
both old and new, Heathen and Christians, strangers, and Englishmen although a
great number whom I know not in this realm, which be worthy Persons, and
cunninge men, profitable to our common wealth. As the most worthy Fraternity
of the Chirurgians, of the most aunciente and famous City of London: whereas
through learned Lectours, and the Secret Anothomies, by, and through the
learned doctor, M. John Kaius, reueiling unto this Fraternity, the hidden
jewels, Doctor Turner.
and precious treasures of CL. Galenus showing himself to be the.2. Linacer,
whose steps he follows.

Who shall forget the most worthy Doctor William Turner? Doctor Kaiu^.
whose learned acts, I leave to the witty commendations, and immortal praise
of Conradus Gesnerus. Yet his Book of Herbs, will always grow green, and
never wither, as long as Dioscorides is had in Mind, among us mortal wightes.
The noble estate of knights, among the English or Brytish nation, which of
them did ever in ra^e, give a trippe, out run, or win ye victory of sir
Thomas Eliot knight? who has planted such fruitful trees that his graftes do
grow in each place in this our common wealth, and his Castle of health, cannot
decay. Sir Thomas Eliot knighte


Thomas Fair Doctor of Physic is not dead but is transformed and changed
into a new nature immortal: Thomas Fair Doctor
he has left a piece of dark earth behynd him, and gone over Lethes fludd^,
forgettinge this world, and with pleasure spends the time among the heavenly
Muses under the two topped Hill of Pernassus. Full well he knew Plini which taught
ye goodness of clean creatures, and also the pestiferous venom of deadly
Mela^choly Serpents, and their present remedy by the virtues of herbs of
so^dry kinds.

Doctor Androw Board, wrote also well of Physic, to profit the common wealth
withal. Doctor Androwe Board did see at Rome, no order, gnashing of teeth,
dw^llyng in wretchedness Thomas Panel.
This man declared how he was in a great city where he did see three hellish
Tragedies: the one was Nullus ordo, the second was Stridor Dentium, the third
was Horror inhabitans, and yet this Board was a bird of this nest or Cage,
called Rome, whereof he makes this report. I will not forget M. Thomas
Paguinellus, or Panel, who has played ye good servant, to the common wealth* in
translating good books of Physic.

Doctor William Kunyngham has well travailed, like a good soldier against the
ignoraun^ ennemy: setting forth the commendacion, praise* and profit of
Astronomy, Cosmography, and Geographye, etc.

How well was he* seen in tongues, learned in Arts and in Sciences, Natural
and moral. A father in Physic, Doctor william Kuningha^
whose Learning gave liberty to the ignorant, with his VVhetstone of wit,
Castle of knowledge and finally giving place to sliding nature, dyed himself in
bondage, or prison. By which death he was delivered and made free, and yet
lives in the happy land among the Laureat learned, his name was Doctor
Record, with many other, which I must give place to time. For their virtues be
not unknown in Physic, and Chirurgi, although I name the^ not. Yet if thou do
further delight. without disdayn to know the names of them which have been
execellent in the worthy art of Chirurgi, Physic. etc. I will declare their
names in order as I have noted and known. As following herafter by letters.
Achilles. Aesculapius. Aetius. Aggregator. Augustinus Doct. Medic. Albucasis
Mahumetan. Alexander Aphrodisiensis. Alexander Benedictus Veronensis Alphonsus
Seruius Neopolitanus. Amatus Lusitanus. Antonius Fumanellus. Aristoteles
Philos. Princeps. Arcagathus Peloponensis. Auicenna. lib. iiij. Fen. vij.
Arnoldus de Villa Noua Comen. Aurelius Cornelius Celsus. Albertus magnus.
B.
Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum. Bartholomeus Montognan. Bartleus Doc.
Medi. Bunus Doc. Medi. Cant. Buttus Doct. Medi.
C.
C. Plinius secundus. Cassius Iatrosophista. Chyron. CL. Galenus. Conradus
Gesnerus. Constantius Cataplasmatis. Carrus Doct Medic. Clemens. Doct. Medic.
Calduellus Medicus Doct. Oxo. Chamberus Doct. Medic.
D.
Damocrates. Damoxine. Diocles.
E.
Eucharius. Euelpistus. Euonimus. Edwardus Medicus Doct. Cant. Edmundus
Chirurgus Ebor.
G.
Gariopontius. Gorgias. Genus Medic. Doct Oxo. Guido Caliacus. Gulielmus
Placentius. Gulielmus Turnerus Medic. Doc. Cant. Gulielmus Variginanus.
Gulielmus Kunynghamus Medic. Doct. Galus Chirurg. Lon.
H.
Hatcherus. Medic. Doct. Cant. Helyodorus. Heraclides Laurentius. Heraclius.
Hera Cappedoc. Hyeron. Hyeronimus Bruns. Hieronimus Cardanus. Hyppocrates.
Cous. Princ. Medicorum. Hugo. Huycus Medic. Doc.
I.
Iacobus Hollerius. Iacobus Ruffius. Ioannes Kayus Medic. Doct. Cant. Ioannes
Almanner. Ioannes Bauerius Ioannes Barnardus. Ioannes Frerus Doct. Medic. Cant.
Ioannus Manardus. Ioannes Tagaultius Ioannes Vigo Genuensis. Ioannes Porterus
Norwic. Hilius. id. est Albanus. Montanus Doc. me.
L.
Lucas Euangel. Medic. Linacrus Doctor medic. Lanfrancus Mediolanensis.
Leonardus Bareapalia. Leonardus Fuchsius Ludouicus Bonaciolus* Ludouicus
Caelius. Langtonus Doct. Medic. Canta. Lorkinus Doct. Medic. Can.
M
Machaon. Mantias. Martianus Corinbekus Docto. Medic. Marianus Chirurgus. Meges
Chirurgus. Michael Angelus Blo^dus. Masterus Doct. Medic. Montanus
N.
Nicolaus Massa. Nicolaus Myrepsi. Nicolaus Pol.
O.
Oribasius Otho Brunfelsius.
P.
Podalyrius. Paulus Aegineta Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus. Petrus Tolenus.
Philopenus.
Q.
Querenus.
R
Rasis. Rogerus. Rolandus Capellatus. Robertus Balthropus Chirurgus.
S.
Sebastianus Aquilanus. Socrates Chirurgus. Soranus. Sostratus. Simon Ludfordus
Doct. Medic. Oxo.
T
Tertius Damianus. Theodorus Epist. Theodorus Priscianus. Theophrastus
Paraselsus. Thomas Eliota Eques Angl. Thomas Philologus Raven. Thomas Colphus
Pharmacopulus Ang. Tryphon.
V
Vidus Vidius Florent. Wendius Medic. Doct. Cant Vickarius Chirurgus Lon.
And thus I do end of the names of many men, besides no small number of them,
which have, and do profess this worthy Art, both of Physic, and Chirurgi, to
the great profit of each common wealth.


Soarenes. Why do you rather call Surgery an Art, then a Science? which I take
it to be.


Chirurgi BBecause it takes the name of a Greek Nowne, call- Chir, an hand in
English, and ^rgon ministerye, What is called Chirurgia.
and although both together called Chirurgia or hand mystery should be rather
hand craft, and not a Science: and this is my probation of this difinition. For
there be two kinds of Chirurgi, the first is Theorica, which is the mother
Scholemistres, nourish, and Learner of this profitable Art, without the which
the workers thereof, have but one eye, and see this Art But through a dark
pair of Spectacles.

The second and last part is called Practica, which is to put in ure, that
which Theorica has learned him, Two kinds of Chirurgia.
although Practica be very aunciente, and to some men fortunate, for healyng is
the synguler gift of God, as the Apostle says. Yet the former called Theorica,
is reckoned a science, how be it unprofitably, and by time usurped. Also the
last named Practica, I mean not as the common people do term every tryfeler,
or light does, to be a practicioner, that is able to separate the qualityes of
oyntmentes, and to decerne perfectlye of Herbs, Gummes, stones, trees, fruits
etc. And to compound symples together, through knowledge, judgment, and
quick invention. For compounded oyntmentes make plasters, and aleie Cerotes,
according as it is seen in the worthy works of Nicolaus, Valerius Cordus,
Leonardus Fuchsius. etc And when the bodies of their pacientes, be sore or
sick, then the practicioner must minister, and the medicine must take his
effect, with nature, and God to geeue the health, through his good
instrumente, whom the ancient Learned Men do term, the artificial
Chirurgian to whom great reverence was given, and such Men were in great
estimation sometime, but now not very much.


Soarnes WHat is then the cause, that so many Chirurgians now a days be
despised, and live so basely and are coumpted the abiectes of the common people
if the Chirurgians should so be honored, as thou fayste they should be, being
repayrers of decayed men?


Chirurgi. REpayrers? No, rather destroyers, marrers, and manglers of the
bodies of men, women, and children: and these me^ lack not only learning, An
ignorant Surgean is a man ^lear.
and knowledge, but also wit, and honesty, through whose wickedness, the
ancient practicioners and sober doers in Chirurgi, be greatly abused among
the common people: as commonly we see the good men are despised, through the
light behavior of the wicked. For under ye name of Chirurgi, many young men,
live in the Saintuarie of Idleness, forsaking their own handy craft: Chirurgi
is become a Sa^tuary.
and many crafty varlets, committing sundry crimes, eftsoon they do flee into
straung countries, wandryng up and down. And what be their shifts? Mary, to
buy some gross stuff, with a box of Salve, and cases of tools, to set
forth their slender market with all: For Dogleeches and Tinkers shall have work
in every Uillage. Then fall they to Palmestry, Of Uacabond Chirurgians worse
then thieves. Linx can serve best of a^y creatur^, and his vryne. will turn
into a stone H^im.
and telling of Fortunes, daily deceiuyng the simple: like unto the swarms of
the vagabound Egiptians, and some that call themselves Jews, whose eyes were
so sharp as Lynx, for they see all the people with their knackes, straung
looks, pricks, domifying and figuring with such like fantasyes fayning that
they have familiers and Glasses, where by they may find things that be lost,
and besides them are infinite of old doltish witches, with blessings for ye
Fair and coniuring of cattle: And yt is the cause yt so much idleness and
infidelity is practiced, in this evil, estate. Of land leapers, and many simple
inhabitours, worse than the subtle Limetours and beggyng Freers, which deceived
many through Ipocrisye: and more hurtful then the crafty Pardoners, The soldier
is hurt more by an evil Surgion, tha^ by his ennemies wepons often it is so
proved.
which preached remission of sins in every Parish church, with belles and
Pardons from Rome. These be worse then vagabounde Beggars, robbinge the
people, and more hurtful than private murderers, in kyllyng men, for lack of
knowledge, and in wars oftentimes, the good Souldioure is cast away sooner,
through the villayny of such Chirurgians, than by the weapon, and hand of the
Ennemy. And this is a lamentable, and most pitiful case, and hurtful to the
common wealth: but forasmuch as mankind being the principal Creature of Amighty
god the Angels excepted, The miseries of man, when he is hurt in body.
which do dailye behold the presence of his majesty is so excellent a thing,
yet this mankind, through daily casualtyes and missehappes, eftsoons is hurt
with faules, bruised with strypes, pricked with Spear or Dagger, wounded with
Weapon, burnte with fire, bytten with mad Dogs, Many god medecines are made
of the Plain people, to help in the absence of the Chirurgians.
whereby his body stands in daily danger and peril of Death. Therefore poor
brother Soarenes, like as I do here discover these rabelment of Mineruas
Servants, which live only by theft, yet God forfend, but in the absence of
the learned Chirurgian, the wholesome medicines, prepared of good people, and
charitable neigbours, should be greatly preferred, to help in such cases, when
time, place, and danger do require, or else a great number should be cast
away for lack of help. Where as many for lack of wit and wealth, of these Dog
leaches, Dog Leeches.
which never knew letter of book, behave themselves daily as follows, with
their co^sorted fellows as, I have written in plain gross words followynge,
SOme men in misery strange shifts will make,
Spending time vainly, and labor forsake:
To live like Lurchers, what force they of shame,
Preferring knauish knackes before a g^od name.
In countenaunces haut, and netnesse of clothes,
Roysting like Ruffians, thundering forth oaths:
Furderers of Frayes, with long Dagger or Sword,
Sowing of dissension, at each man's board.
Caryers of news, proclaimers of lies,
Livers by Lechery, blood sucker, and spies.
Braynlesse as brute beasts, and Furious fell,
Like Plutoes whelps, trained up in Hell. The description of an vnchrist, or a
U^^layn of natu^^ stryuing against grace* and virtue, unprofitable for ^ common
wealth.

Murcia does teach them, no la^our to use,
But slouthful to live, and virtue refuse.
Lauernia thieves Gods, al days of their lives
Arm them with horned thumbes, and fine sharp knives
In Church, Play, or Market, they hunt for the purse,
And Preach often on Pillory, their Ears are the worse
Their thumbes be blaunched, with a. T from the fire,
Such wooke as the use, so paid is their hire.
Dame Paena with Palenes, that Lady of need,
Brings men into misery, and evil for to speed.
Then are they make shifts, deceivers of other,
Small forcing to rob, friend, father, or brother.
To each wind that blows, the thief sets his sail,
As careless as the Fox, which waggeth his tail.
Not forcing who see him, in runninge to his borough,
Though hounds him hunteth all the covert through,
When he has most curses, then fares he best,
When spent is his spoil, he takes his rest.
The^ eftsoon he sercheth, holtes, felles, woods and fe^nes,
For ravening of Lambs, and stealyng of Hens.
Thus lurketh wyly Raynerd, with out any care,
But thend of his progress, is the gallow and snare*
Such Foxely feats are used, among a great number.
To the public weal, much loss and comber.
More hurtles then fat Monks, and Friars of disceit,
Which lived in Idolatry, but had plenty of meat.
To give to the pore, that had honger and need,
But the Ruffen will rob, meat, money, and weed.
And under long cloak lurketh, with tucke and sharp knife
For goldes sake the gitles, to reaue them of life.
Thus hurting the innocent that travel with truth,
To suffer such villains, it is a great ruth.
No more then Thistel, which choketh the Corn.
Great pity if it please God, such wretches were borne.
Evil parents what fruits they bring forth, and to what end they come.
Their parents do fancy them, like relikes and halowes
And will never correct the^, til they climb the gallous
To no learning nor art* they train them up in youth,
But in idleness and picking, with tales of untruth,
In horehunting, beastlines, and belly joy of life,
In backbiting and baudrye, defiling maid, and wife.
Yet pare^tes your tender branches, easelie you may twist,
But when it has great strength, you cannot when you list.
Then in stryuing for victory, it is no great wonder
Old boughs will not bend, but first crack asunder.
Yet instruct your children so, while youthful days do last
That they may serve the common weal, when you are gone and past
Then shall they be no brokers, to usurers hands,
VVherby many often do lose their goods and lands.
Neither to be petty Foggers, in cases of the Law,
To make mountains of Molhils, and trees of a straw.
Or oppressors of poremen, with writs in their bags,
Cloth themselves like Princes, when other lurk in rags*
Then shall they not be Parasites, in time of prosperity,
But succor the helples, in the storms of aduersitye.
For counterfayt Chirurgians.
Neither shall the ignorant, counterfeit Chirurgy,
Seming to ye simple number they are seen in Astronomi.
With flattring words, and trim tales, glosinges they can tell,
As though in natural Philosophy, they were seen full well.
With retrogradation, and Lord of the ascendent,
Plasters, Oils, Pouders, Salues, and matter defendent.
In seeming to be skilful, in every evil malady,
Whether it be moist, cold, burning, hot and dry.
Yet neither read Tagaltius, Marianus, Guido, nor Galen,
Old Hyppocrates, Dioscorides, Rasis, nor Auicen.
Latin nor English, little or none, do they reed,
Small is their knowledge, mutch less is their speed.
Yet lack they no Brimstone, Quicksiluer, or Litarge,
Oils gross and loathsome, to bear out the charge.
They have Palmestry, and Charms, at each wyghtes desire,
Good store of blessings, for tothache, and saynct Antonies fire.
If young Babes through Fevers, with cold be shaken,
Then they say an evil spirit, the child has taken.
A bad Angel of the air, an Elfe, or a witch,
When in deed, dear friend, there be few sitch
To molest the faithful, to bring them to confusion,
But to the infidel and faythlesse, it is Satan's delusion,
Wrought by his instruments, Loyterers, and Liars,
Worse then the valiant beggars, and mendicant Friars.
Murderers of mankind, in knowing of no art,
Banishe them from Chirurgi, commend them to the Carte,
To the flayle and the rake, the trace and the tog,
To the doung Forke, and Mattocke, to the Sheephoke and the dog,
To the Naule and the Lingel, the Bristel, and the Shoe,
What should the Shomaker, with the Chirurgians works do?
For it is the noblest work, wrought by cunning hand,
Excelling al other arts, in each City, and Land.
If Princes be wounded, when noble men are sore, The virtue of Chirurgy.

The Chirurgen them helps, of Chirurgians what more?
When bones are broken, and members displaced,
When the features of the face, with weapon be disgrased,
When blood is shed, in cutting of the veins,
The Chirurgian alone, helps him from pains,
Repayreth mankind, and gives him rest,
So of al knowledge, Chyrurgi is most best.
For no treasure or art, can help the wounded man,
When the Chirurgian, by his cunning only can.
Now let this rhyme pass, Gond send us of his grace,
Ask an other question, I will answer to that place.



Soarenesse. GOD gieue me grace, to beware of such fellows, as you have
spoken of before, which are an evil company: and that I might learn what a
very Chirurgian should be, which in your conclusion, you have commended, and
what things he should do in his office.


Chirurgi. He must begin first in youth with good learning, and exercise in
this noble art, Eight things or propertyes of a good Chirurgian.
he also must be clenly, nimble handed, sharp sighted, pregnant witted, bold
sprited, clenly apparayled, pytefull hearted, but not Womanly affectionated to
weep or trimble, when he seeeth broken Bones, or blouddy Wounds, neither must
he gieue place to the cry of his soar Pacient, for soft Chirurgians makes
foul soars. Of the other side, he may not play the parts of a Butcher to
cut, rend, or tear the body of man kind. For although it be frail, soar,
and weak, yet it is the pleasure of God, to call it his Temple, his
Instrument, and dwelling place, and the Philosopher does call it Orbiculus,
that is, a little world. Therefore seeing every crafts man does take great
care, both day and night in his vocation, to help and amend dead things, which
be insensible, as Ships, houses, Walls, Brydges, and an infinite number of
things, which mankind does make, and when it is old, does renew it, and
preserve it from ruin, and utter destruction, although it be not perdurable:
Should not therefore mankind himself, The Chirurgian is ye best hand craft
in the world.
for his reward, be diligently cured, amended and renewed, when either through
fall, wound, or stripe he is decayed, and that with wisdom, and diligence?
for when a house is fallen down ye Carpenter may build it up again. But when
mankind departs, desolueth, and dies, he cannot be revived again, by the
policy or cunning of mankind, Job. 14.
because one mankind, cannot make an other, but rather thorough art, when they
be decayed, help to amend them, through the work of nature, The Chirurgian, is
natures servant.
and the ministration of the Physician: for Claudius Galen says, that Natura
est ope^atrix, Medicus vero eius minister. That is, nature is ye worker the
Physician is but her minister. Therefore the Chirurgicall Physicion, is Natures
servant.


Soarenesse. What then does Nature work in Chirurgj?


Chirurgi. Nature works three ways to help her self.
NAture works three manner of ways, by the reason that convenient instruments
and means are applied in the time of need, to help her. For first she
deuideth the things that are contained, or unnaturally knit together.
Secondly, she unites, knitteth, and joins together, The strength of nature.
the separated parts. Thyrdly, she expulseth, purges, and cleanses
superfluous matter, that does abound, or offend nature.


Soarenesse. Then it should appear, that nature needs no Chirurgj?


Chirurgi. Nature must be relieved by sundry means in ye time of danger.
YEs. Nature in the time of Soarenesse, can no more be without ye Chirurgian,
than the Smith can be without his hammer, or the Tailor without his Sheeres:
and as I have said before, although you seem to be forgetful, yet let the
Chirurgian be dyligent, if he love to be clothed with honesty, to live
virtuously, and to do things artificially, and not to geeue quid, pro quo,
Chalk for Cheese, or Dirt for Drink: for if they so do, if it springs of
ignorance, then they are worthy to be punished, and after to be reformed. But
if they be Men of knowledge, and thus abuse their Pacients, they are worthy to
be punished, as malicious murderers: but here I stop and lay a straw, I will
meddell with no matters of the Law, I am no Judge, although it be good and the
chief Regiment, of our common wealth, yet I have received as small profit by
Lawers, and unquiet men, as wounded men get perfyte health, by ignorant
Chirurgians, or quiet Men, lead happy lives with angry Wives, for whom there
is no remedy, but patience perforce, quod Socrares, to Xantippa.


Soarenesse. IS your name Chirurgj? Me think by your talk, you have a
domestical grife, how help ye your self, when your Fever takes you, you
bear out the matter as well as you can.


Chirurgi. IF I be diseased of any such Fever, I do not intend to seek
counsel at your hands, neither of Hippocrates, nor Galen. etc. But only of
Diogines, which loved to be alone, and Socrates was taught patience: but to
conclude, no man knows the grief of a straight shoe, but the Wearer
thereof: but for asmutch as many Hands make light Work, and many shoulders
pass small of great burdens, I care the lesser, having so many parteners. The
remedy is this, when storms be past, fair Weather comes at last.


Soarenesse. WEll, well, seek a salve for that sore, I can no skyll of your
disease, God wot, mutch less to help mine own grief. I pray thee therefore
help us both, yet by your leave although you be called Chirugj, or Sanitas, yet
I do consider, that there is no continual sanite of body, or perfect quietness
of mind, during this Life of mortal men For if a man would descend down into
his own conscience, and see himself within, he shall easily perceive, the
words written of saynct Job the.18. Chapter in his most lamentable and
pityfull Book: says he, a man that is borne of a Woman, lives but a short
time, and is filled full of mysery, and comes up and falls away like a
Flower, Man is but miserable, and yet is quickly gone.
and in the end passes away like a shadow, and never continues in one
estate. For truly we daily see, adversity follows Prosperity, bondage after
liberty, poverty after riches, sickness after health, beside an infynite number
of the passions, and afflictions of the mind. As zeal, strife, Ielousy, love,
Joy, care. etc. And as the wise man says, Omnia tempus habent, al things have
their time. And God has given affliction to the children of men, to be
exercised in the^ among whom, I for my sins am plagued with this kind of
malady, as thou see me have: I beseech God of his mercy, send me health, and
as many as are soar.


Chirurgi. Thou have spoken wisely, for all thing is in vain, where God does
not put to his helping hand, and by his Prophet he says, Psalm. 50.
call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will help thee, make thee whole,
and deliver thee. Behold, how many Lepers, sick of Palsyes, bloody Flixes,
Matthew. 11.
blyndnesse, deafness, possessed of evil spirits, yea. and death it self,
all these has God helped, restored, and made perfect: for there is Tempus
occidendi, and Tempus sanandi with God, Eccle. 3
for he is ever occupied, either in punishing the wicked, or comforting of his
elected.


Soarenesse. WOuld GOD, there were such miracles now a days, as was then. It
were a great comfort to an infinite number of such as I am, Christ is not
covetous.
neither should it be paynfull, nor costly, for Christ coueteth no money,
although Simon magus delighted in nothing else.


Chirurgi. SOarenesse, Soarenesse, Thou say not well, for it is rather a
tempting of GOD, A faithful man belieueth without miracle, for faith is not
seen, but miracles are seen.
then a beleeuinge in GOD, to look or wyshe for Miracles, for faithful Men
need none. And I trust thou art faithful, therefore thou need no Miracle:
but rather consider this, Christ healed the bodies of sick men, two manner of
ways: the one by virtue of his Heavenly word, whereby we be taught that he is
GOD. The second, he healed sometime with Clay, with spittle. etc. wherein we be
learned, and he also has learned us, in the time of our soarenesse, prudently
to use Gods Instruments, Two manner of healinges.
and means, yea, not with Clay, or Spittle, yet with precious Herbs,
Fruictes, Gummes. etc. For GOD has ordained them only to help his people, to
this end, that his people might serve him. Tobias healed his fathers Eyes,
with the Gaul of a Fyshe, an Angel prepared the Medicine. Ezechias the King
in the time of his Pestilence, was healed with a cluster of Figs, Esaias. 38.4.
Regum. 20
The great Prophet Esaias, gave him this Medicine. Eliseus did cleanse through the
virtue of a sweet tree, the foul stinckyng Waters. Christ in the Gospel,
commands the Apostles to carry Oil with them, to heal the sick. S. Luke
the holy Evangelist was a Physicion, Luke.
and some of the antiquityes of his Physic, remain unto this day. It is said
also that holy Esdras made a goodly Medycine, when the people were in captivity
in Babylon, to cleanse them from their Melancholy, and heaviness of mind,
which Medicine is called after his name unto this day: These and such like
examples Soarenesse, should move thee to use these means to help thee.


Soarenesse. I Heartely thank you, I shall by Gods grace, observe your sayings.
and use Gods Instruments reverently, by whose means we poor Men be healed.
And sometime the rych Infidels, still tormented with soars. etc.


Chirurgi. Even so be rich also, for Sycknesse, as we do daily see, does not
perticulerly dwell in poor men, but rather generally in all, although the
kinds of sickness be variable, and the Complexions diverse, and the causes many,
and every sickness, and soarenesse, have his proper name, although men, either
through ignorance, shame, or craft do abuse their names, Men do use pretty
terms for soul ^ores and call them by one name, when they are an other,
although the effect do still remain, as in clenly terms by your license,
they will call it nothing else, but a sausy flemed Face, red or high colored,
when many times in deed, it is not only so, but the very Leprosy with all. It
is nothing say they, but breaking out, or pains of the body, weakness of
Lymbes, or a green sickness, through the obstruction of ye Liver. etc. with
such nicke names, whose very sure name is, the Buttens of Naples, Gallicus
morbus, commonly called the French pox.


Soarenesse. Hitherto yet stand I in doubt, although I be payned, how to
name truly my desease I cannot, although of it self it be definable, felt of
me, and seen to us both, and known only to thee, what think you it is, I pray
you tell me?


Chirurgi. It is none other then apostumation, as it does plainly appear to me.


Soarenesse. Then I pray you, gieue me a difinicion, and division, of an
apostumation.


Chirurgi. APostumacion is a very evil disease, compounded of.iij. kinds of
maladyes, gathered, Apostumatio^ is compounded of three sundry evils.
and growing together in one quantity, first of an evil Complexion: Secondly
a naughty composicion: And thirdely, the continuance of time. These three make
an apostumation, or swelling wtin or without the body, notwithstanding, as
Galen says, not all kind of swellings make apostumations, but such only as
anoy the body, and the root thereof is the corruption of the four
temperamentes, when they be altered, and changed into Fleume, Blood, Choler,
and Melancholy, through them the shape of a member is altered, Breach of
contynuaunce is, when the whole parts are cut, or broken.
when it is changed from his natural form, into any strange, or deformed
figure. Also the breach of continuance, is caused through incitions,
corosians, breaking, or strecching, as Galen says, in the second de art
medendi, nevertheless the chief cause is through stretching, whereby the
parts of the body be severed one from an other, and this is my conclusion of
this diffinicion.


Soarenesse. How many kinds of apostumations be there?


Chirurgi. THere be two, the one is hot, and the other cold, Three kinds of
Apostumacions, hot, and cold.
for every apostumation is hot or cold, touching their humor: but
accidentally they be diversely hot, as Galen says the hoate have their proper
signs, to be known by, even so have the cold, whereby he perceived.
Apostumations, wherein is boiling, and burning, with continual heat, are
judged to come of blood, or Choleric humor, even so judge them of
Melancholy, or Fleume, when they seem to be cold, Pale, How to know
Apostumation.
deaddishe, or partly not felt, and thus thou shall perceive their kinds, and
although they be named a like, yet they differ one from another in cure, as
they do in complexion. Moreover, the apostumation of blood, has great
swelling and heat over all the body, and is seldom seen without some Fever,
and ye color is a dim dark red, also hardness, if you press it with your
finger, because so mutch matter, is gathered grossly in the place. The pulses
will beat very soar, the matter being over laden, will keep down the artery,
and therefore nature attempting to rease and lift up the same, will cause great
beating in the veins, wherefore the more arteryes be kept down, ye greater is
the labor, and beating of the Pulses, after which, sometime follows such
dolor and pain, that all the parts of the body come to destruction, The
abundance of blood in the apostumation.
as oftentimes in hot evil complexions, where evil matter is heaped together
in apostumation. That in fine, replecion, and tencion, of all the course of the
veins do come, for all the veins in the said apostumation, by the means of
the abundance of blood, will swell and become great, although before, they
were right, strayte, clean, yea, and some as small as hayres, and these be
the apostumations of blood.


Soarenesse. What say thou then, of them that be Chollerike?


Chirurgi. The cruelty of the Chollerike apostumacion, but ye bloody
apostumation is gentler.
APostumacions Chollerike, be gentler as touching their swelling, but they do
excel more in pain, and be far crueller, because of sharpness, and biting
of the humor, with bitterness, and dryness of Choler, whereas bloody
apostumations, although they do swel through moystnesse, yet the same humidite
or moystnesse, causes ye soar to be more gentler, and of lesser pain than
the Chollerike, for they be two contraries, as Aristotle says in his Book of
generation, and corruption, Ignis qui est in vltimo continentis, non est in
fine ebullitionis, and in another place he says, Of co^traryes of elements.
Elementa omnia adinuicem contrarietatem habent, and that is well said, for heat
is an extreme contrary to cold, so is moystnesse to dryness, and m^re pain
in the one apostumation, than in the other.


Soarenesse. What be apostumations in quantity, which of them be greatest, and
which of them be least, I would feign know, good Chirurgj?


Chirurgi. The quant^ty of the apostumations.
AS touching their quantityes, know you, that ye Chollerike, is less then any
other, by the reason of his dryness, and heat, which restrayneth extencion,
but the accident of the pain, is most cruel and sharp, and these be destroying
qualityes in this quantity, what time they are come to ye extreme degree of
heat: but apostumacions, depending of cold humors, such will bring their own
proper signs, beating of arteries, notwithstanding they be not comparable to
the beating of a Chollerike, or a bloody apostumatio^ but more duller, colder,
paler. etc. You must also note, that apostumations that spring of blood, Sundry
names of apostumations, but in effect are but apostumations.
or Choler, be diversely termed by sundry names, as Botches, Shingelles,
Fellones, Pushes, Uncomes, saynct Anthonies fire, blaynes, Bladders, or
Blisters, crustes Carbuncles, Pestilent soars. etc. eue^ so on ye other side,
apostumatio^s of Fleume, or Melancholy, have joined unto the^ these names, as
vndimies, knots, wou^des, Carnelles, Wrates, Cankers, Esthachelles, with such
like evils of mortifycation, in their beginning, and be all called
apostumacions, but when they be grown to a ripenes, and do break forth, then
call them ulcers, specially if the matter proceed to the breach of
continuance. Also apostumacions are soars compounded, and stand not in one
humor alone, yet oftentimes we say simply, that every one of them, spryngeth
of one humor, heat, cold, moist, or dry, of whom in deed they do take their
names, as Aristotle judges in his Naturalles, as where blood is excessyue,
Soars compounded.
it is called a Bubo, or a Sanguine botch, and where as Choler does abound,
it is called a Chollericke malady. And so of the Flegmatike, and Melancholy the
like, according to their natures.


Soarenesse. HItherto I have heard, but only the diffinitions of ye names, or
natures of apostumacions, but me think to talk of the cures, were more
profitable, for only unto that end, do I move these questions unto you?


Chirurgi. I Will speak somewhat of their cures, but or I enter any further in
this matter, I think it rather necessary, to speak a little of things that
be comen, and would be prudently observed in their cures, for asmutch as every
apostumacion, depends of some cause, and may not well be cured, except,
cause, sign, judgment of the same with effects, be perfectly known. Blind
Bayard is bold.
Therefore seeing there is nothing bolder then blind bayarde, which falls
often in the Mire, nor none so hurtful to ye health of mankind, as ignorant
Chirurgians, setting the carte before the horse, and the roots of the trees
upward, which shote at the mark like blind men, sometime hitting by chance,
more than by knowledge, these things considered, Soarenesse: think therefore
no time lost, to hear me speak of the causes of apostumacions, for thereby
the sooner, they may be healed, therefore I will speak a little more of the
causes.


Soarenesse. Why? Be there any more causes of apostumacions, whereof should
they rise? I pray you shortly show me.


Chirurgi. YEs, Says he, which is the Prince of all Physic called
Hippocrates, there be three kind of causes, whereof apostumacions do rise,
the first is the Primative, the second the Antecedent the third the
Coniunctiue. The Primative, where maladies happen by misfortune to the body,
from the outward parts, as incicion, breakyng smiting, falling, vlceracion of
the hands and feet, or any other part. whereof insueth apostumacion. For when
great dolor is caused in any part, soon after follows, that the part
anoyed cries upon nature for help, (for such is his goodness and providence)
who sends out of hand some succor, to the impouerished, and soar parts But
it chances ofttimes, that this succor, or nourishement, rests there or
some where by ye way, in the vacant and weak parts, and so grows it at
length to an apostumation, in case the virtue degestiue, or expulsive be not
able to master, and dispatch it. The Antecedent is diversely named, and by
diverse terms, as replecionall, humorall, complexionall, and composicionall, it
is called replecionall, when the humors increase beyond their due measure.
Albeit al these have respect to the quality of humors, yet for all that, when
all the humors grow beyond measure, it is termed replecionall: humorall, is
when one humor alone, grows to apostumation, as the shingles comes of pure
Choler, and an hot botch of pure and laudable blood. Also they call it
complexional, if the said humors be distempered from their first state or
qualities, I say from their first qualities as if their form in a body were
limited, Composition. Replecion, Complexion, what they are.
within the quantity of.ij. inches, and then if they had gotten them iij.
inches more, thereof would spring diverse diseases, taking their names of the
qualityes, that have dominion and pre-eminence over them. It will be named
compositionall, where one humor exceeds the rest, in degree of his quality,
given him of nature in composicion* and hereof it comes to pass, that the
whole body compounded, goes to ruin, through Fevers, and other kind of
maladies. Wherefore no man may doubt, that ye complexion should be holden for a
cause Antecedent. Some number dolor with the same causes, whereunto may be added
weakness of a Member, as watrishnesse, and windiness. etc. Also a cause
Coniuncte, is nothing else but the Antecedent, when it comes to a place
vlcerated, or well nighe vlcerating, Here may not we pass over this with
silence, that any apostumation as touching riping* or to speak playner,
rotting, and breeding of matter, has property four times appropriate to it,
that is to weete beginning, augme^tyng, state, and fall. The beginning is, when
the causes Coniunct, begin presently to appear. Four notes in an apostumatio^,
beginning, augme^ting, state, and declining.
Augmenting is known in that it largeth, and grows to bigness, and the
accidents increase: the matter gathered, and heaped together, without further
increasinge, shows plainly the state. Finally, the fall is known (if it be
well looked on) by a certain softness, and faynting in the place. And these
times must be as well observed, I think, as the self maladies: for Auicenna
with express words, gives this admonition, saying it is not possible thou
should cure a disease, if thou know not, what the disease is. Me thynck he
does infer, and conclude, where the times be unknown, the cure also will be
unknown, for why? In as mutch as the time in the apostumation is diverse, the
disease is diverse, and the cure will be diverse.


Soarenesse. ALthough you seem to speak somewhat obscurely, and darkly, yet by
oftentimes reading, I trust to get some more knowledge, for it is said of a
very wise man, Omnes homines naturaliter scire desyderat. And I also being a
man, am desirous of knowledge to help my self, without the which I am ye worst
kind of beast, and most unprofitable upon ye earth: but hither unto, you have
spoken, but of the beginning of apostumations, as seems to me, but how be
they ended and finished? I pray you let me know the way?


Chirurgi. GALEN, the best that ever was, and the greatest learned next to
Hippocrates, and one to whom chief credence must be given as unto a prudent
Ship master, which through running, wisely does set his course in the raging
Seas, defending his Ship from Rock, Storm, and Tempest, to the end, to arrive
at the port, and end of his travail, so does Galen, like to a worthy master,
defend his Pacientes from shipwrackes, both soarenesse, and sickness, and
says, if apostumations turn not back again, then they do end by insensible
resolution, or else by rotting out, and they be ended four manner of ways: Of
resolution.
first by resolution, as is aforesaid, which is vnbynding, remoouing, or
undoing of the matter: secondly, to convert, change, and turn the
apostumation into a thing called matter, or waire. The third is by rotting.
The fourth, is putrefaction, and of this speaks Auicen, which is one of the
chyefe Princes of Phisicions, in the end of his chapter, concerning a hot
apostumation, and in this cure there is two things principally to be observed.
The one is, whether the thing be yet a doing, the other is, whether it be full
done, or ended. I mean by doing, that is, whether the matter be yet running,
or fleting to the place of apostumation, and by the thing that is don, that is,
whether the matter be past, and come already into the place of Apostumation or
not: and note also, that in all such cures, you may not prolong, or abuse the
time, but diligently go about your business, for a little lost time, puts
the Pacient to great pain, and the Chirurgian to great dishonesty.


Soarenesse. THerefore I pray you to spend no more time any longer in
definitions, names, causes, and signs, of Apostumations, but rather I pray
you, begin the manner of their proper cures, and helps, for else hetherunto, all
is but a laberinth, and a crooked way unto me.


Chirurgi. WEll. If you will needs take upon you to mynister, in your
beginning, you must prepare repercussiues, which will greatly comfort the soar
Member: for Auicen says in his first book, the fourth doctrine, that a strong
Member actyuely. does cast from him his superfluous humor, unto the weak
passive or suffering Members, and pulls it back again, and eftsoons does
power it forth again, to the great hurt of the weak part where by the weak
Member is oftentimes Choked, and Strangled with the strength of the humor,
whereby the whole Body is Ruined, and finally brought to destruction.
Therefore, to the intent that the weak part be not utterly Destroyed,
Ouerladen, or Choked, with such Superfluous humor, you must, to avoid the
Danger, make Restraynt with repercussiues, repercussiues, and medicines
defendent. And this shall thou do, apply cold, and binding receipts, as Galen
shows in the third of the art, saying: Repellemus a paciente particula si
infrigidemus and stiptica apponamus etc. We shall put of from the sick part, if
we cool, and apply bynding things. etc.


Soarenesse. Do repercussiues help then in this case generally?


Chirurgi. Of repercussiues, when they are good.
NO. But for asmutch, as this place offers occasion, to speak of
repercussiues, which I do laud: even so I shall have occasion to show, where
repercussiues ought to be abhorred and fled, with no less care, than Shipmen
do the rocks in the sea. For it is no less pleasure to the Chirurgians, to
obtain their purpose, and finishe their cure, than it is joy unto the
Mariners, luckely to arrive in their own port, or restinge place. Therefore
Soarenesse, to the end that we may eschew Shypwrackes, and dangerous places,
let us a little enlarge our course, and call to remembrance, the wise words,
of that learned man and famous clark (master Ihon Uigo) of Genua, which wrote
a learned Book unto Julius the second, wherein he says, that apostumations in
unclean bodies, do utterly refuse repercussiues, except they be first cleansed
by purgations, for mutch matter cannot away with repercussion. In case we
should fall sodeinly to the cure before purging, then should we greatly err,
for in driving it back ward, we rather should couch it up, in the place so
fast, that it could not be removed, Foul bodies refuse repercussiues,
therefore they must (...) cleansed.
whereby occasion should be given of evil accidence. And furthermore, if this
come to pass, as God forbid it should, then would it plainly import, or
threat putrefaction or corruption of the member. Secondly, the emunctory or
cleansing places, will not desire any repercussiue. Thirdly, take heed how you
use repercussiues, when ye matter is fat and clammy. For Galen says in the
third book of the Art, Corpus existens plenum repercussionem non admittet.
Fourthly, thynk it no matter of deliberacion, concerning repercussion, when the
cause is venomous, cruel, or furious: but be occupied wholly, in provoking of
it forth, for if you drive it backward, after mine opinion, says Tagaltius,
then do you range far from the high way, for this is the cause, why ye shall
err, and not do well in your cure. First, ye shall shut and close up the
matter, within your centure, which of necessity, ought to be dispersed abroad,
in the whole circute, and thereof will follow, by the means of the malice,
venim, and poison assembled together, and so taking their force in one place
will practice no small incouenience or mischyfe, What peril is in the
application of a repercussiue, although in some case it is most best.
against the natural virtues: you shall therefore, first use repercussiues, if
the matter be pressed, stopped, thrust, or shut up together in one place, do
this, for fear of deforming of the member, where ye soar is, which soon will
ensue, if it come to putrefaction in that place. Sixthly, if nature cause any
apostumation, by reason of crisis. Hoc est Iudicum, that is of judgment to
avoid, (...), or put out matter, superfluous, in this case, think there will
be no means found, to put it back, without great danger, and hurt to nature.


Soarenesse. WHy? Would it hinder any thing in this case, to apply a
repercussiue, or medicine, to drive it back? show me some reason why it
should not be? Or what hurt would come thereof, if it were done?


Chirurgi. MAry, this evil might eftsoons ensue, for if it be put back,
What hurt ensues of a repercussiue.
or returned in again, nature will then invent, and find out some other by
path, from the unclean, to the clean places, and were not this a great hurt
to nature? Yes surely, it were no small Ieopardy: therefore we must in such
cases, make euacuatio^ of ye matter, putting a helping hand to nature in her
crisis, as Galen says upon this Aphorismus: quorum crisis fit, haud facta est.
etc. For the cure of all these causes, you must use mollifications, and
softning Medicines.


Soarenesse. Yet again, I put this question, why you do use repercussiues at
any time?


Chirurgi. We use repercussiues, that we may apply them, to the intent that
the matter yet fleeting, be kept of, and not that, What goodness comes of a
repercussiue.
which is already flowing, become stubburne, against us in our workyng, and
therefore, doing according to our rules, we shall order and apply repercussiues
in the beginning, and augmenting of apostumations, for why, the matter at that
time, is chiefly flowing to and fro: and Galen writes in the third of his
art, that vessels refreshed with binding medicines, put of mutch matter from
them, howbeit this ought to be done successively, by little and little, because
the flux of the matter, is with a continuance, and when it is come where it
should be, then must it be resolved, and not driven back.


Soarenesse. I pray thee gentle Chirurgi, take in hand the cure of
apostumations.


Chirurgi. THE Prince of the Philosophers, Aristotle says, contraries be, and
pertayneth to one science, and doubtless, the cures of Apostumations differ
not, but in distaunce of more and less: for this cause, must I wrestle
earnestly, that the knowledge of natures, and simples escape you not, for why,
the more ye shall excel herein, the better shall you form your Medicines,
for the Pacientes behooue, who have joined themselves to our company: now to
obtain this purpose, ye shall advisedly look whether the apostumations fall in
a body full of humors, Consider whither apostumations chance in bodies replete
with humo^^ or empty.
or void of the same. If they happen in an empty body, ye shall reckon it
long of some cause primative, whose cure must be in drawing forth ye matter,
with resolutiues, or softning medicines: you shall resolve, if you apply cold
and binding things together with hot and moist: with cold you must
restrain, and keep it of, if any part of choler were approaching, by reason
of dolor, and with binding, you shall comfort the member, as I said before,
according to the sentence of Galen, in that hot things, cause the relenting of
the matter: finally, use moystening of the same, that ye poares harden not, nor
be coagulated or stopped, and this speedely must be done at ye beginning,
afterward if it take not place, as I have said: What have you to say, in any
other matter?


Soarenesse. Show me some wholesome medicine, for Apostumations, I pray you?


Chirurgi. A good medicine for an Apostumation.
I Shall compounde this medicine, for an example. R. Juice of Houslike, and
Lettice, ana..j. Oil of Roses, and Camomell. ana..j.ss. oil of Mirtes..x.
Eggs in number.ij. Swing all these with the Yolks, and Whites, unto such
time, as they be well incorporated, and then apply it in linen. Either thus. R
Bole Armoniacke, Acacia. ana..j. oil of Roses, Mirte, Camomell. ana..j.ss.
Bean meal.j. dust of Mirtelles, and of Cipers nuts. ana..ss. with a little
Wax, all which must be incorporated at the fire, and applied to the soar
place. Further, for the resolving, of an hot apostumacion, of what cause so
ever that it come of, ye shall apply this, which the learned have greatly
commended, and in very deed, I ever found it, as they have said, the order of
it was thus. R. Heads of white Lillies. A more excel^ent way to help an
apostumacion.
.v. roots of ye Marishe Mallows. l i.j. Camomel, Mellelot. ana. M.ss. and a
handful of Bran, seathe all these in Water, till they be thoroughly sodden, and
then strayn, and press them, as the Cook does commonly grated bread, when he
makes his potage, putting it into a clean pan, unto the which, ye shall put
oil of Roses, of Camomill, of Dill, and of Lillyes ana..ij. of the mary of
Calves, or Cowes legs, and of Capo^s grease. ana..j. of white Wax..ss. of
the soft aples, roasted in hot Embers, if they may be gotten..iij.ss. Let al
these be melted together, with yt, which was searsed at a soft fire, and be
boiled, by ye space of half an hour, wrought always, that it be diligently
stirred all the while, and this will be a Cerote, whereby ye shall get
profit, and commendations. Another also in form of a Cataplasme, more strong
for the same purpose. Take the meal of Lyn^seede, and Fenigreeke. ana..iij. ye
meal of Orobus..i. flowers of Chamomill, Mellilote, Elder. ana. P.ss. red Rose
leaves..ii. flowers of Dill..iiij. powder of Ireos of Florence..ss. boil these
in Wine and Honey, or in the Juice of Smalledge. Anon add of the dragges of
oil, and of oil of Lillyes..iiij. oil of Uyolets..ii. and so frame a
Cataplasme. Now if the apostumations, will not be ruled, and give place to a
resolutiue, for so it fares oftentimes with them, then prepare mollificatiues,
or softning medicines, which may be made two ways, with Embrocacions, or
plasters.


Soarenesse. I pray you tell me, which is the best way or means, to make an
Embrocacion?


Chirurgi. AN Embrocation, is made after this manner. R. Of a decoction of
Mallows, Of an Embroche.
Uyolets, Barley, Quince seed, Lettice leaves. l.v. of Barley meal..ii. oil of
Uyolets, and Roses. ana..i.ss. of Butter..i. and then sees them all together,
till they be like a broathe, puttyng thereto, at the end four yolks of Eggs,
and the manner of applying, is with pieces of cloth, dipped in the foresaid
decoction being actually hoate, which must be often changed one after an
other, by the space of one third part of an hour: This will allay, and abate
the pain, and cause resolucion, drawing forth the matter into the Skin. Such
decoctions may be also made, of a Wethers Head or other flesh, so that the
Brothe be ^atte, howbeit, this shall be according to thine intent, whether thou
mean the rypyng, or the resoluyng of it* immediately after the imbrocasion, let
this or the like plaster follow. R Of Leaves, of Mallows, Uiolets, and Lettise
ana. M.i. and afterward they shall be sodden, brayed, and s^arsed, make an hard
plaster thereof at the fire, with Barley Meal putting thereto. ii.ss, of oil of
Uiolets, and.ss. of Butter, this done, take it of the ^yre, and then
incorporate the yolks of three Eggs, and so apply it to the soar, now if he
be loath to take so much pain, and thynk plasteryng sufficient appoynte: the
Pacientes fryendes to use this. R. of crummes of bread l.i.ss, let it be
steped in a decoction of Mallows, Uiolettes, and Lettice, or in a Bro^he of
Ueale, or Mutton: it may be done to with Ewes or Goats milk, hoate from the
dugges. Finally, let it be pressed, and stamped, and drawn round in a mortar,
and then soft, it with Oil of Uiolettes, and Roses. ana..i.ss. and of
Butter..i. with a.i.ss. of Saffron. After let the whole be thicked at the fire
alittle, and then put the yolks of two Eggs to it: or else take the leaves of
Mallows, and Uiolettes, of every of them, one handful, and so boil, and
stamp them together, with Boares grease, and use these hardly. For one of
these I assure you, shall ripe a Cholerycke apostumacyon, which thing ye shall
perceive by the softness in feelyng, and by easyng of the pain, as Auicen
says, Cum videris lenitatem quandam and sedatione^ doloris, tunc scias quod
scit in via ad maturationem: When thou see a certain softnes and delaying of
pain, then thou may know it is in the way of riping: now when the place is
ready to be launced, above al things s^e the inscision and the opening be made
alongest, with the lying of the hears, and sinews for why, nothing will be
done more better, to cause a Cicatrice. A Cicatrice.



Soarenes. This is very well said: Now I pray you tell me how you make an
Incision?


Chirurgi AN Incision must be made in the lowest part, so that the matter may
the better avoid: in especially, if any humor do use to fall to that part,
Incision, how to make it.
from whence issues would most naturally fall from. Often we conduct them, by
their convenient regions, as says deuyne Hippocrates, and thincision must be
made, as it lyketh the learned, after a half or crooked moon, except, the
place be synewes, for if it be so, then must it be made alongest with the
course of them. For why if I would open it overthwart, I might cut some synew
a sunder in working: immediately upon the incision, the place must be covered
with Lynt, dipped and wette in the white of an Egg: Nevertheless before ye
so do, ye shall fill the hole of the appostumation with a Tente, made of the
same moysted lin^e^, to the intent the matter gush not out, al at ones, which
thing if it were suffered, and the Apostumation, great, the virtue natural, will
be much assembled thereby, whereas we ought most warely to save the same, that
it be sufficient to feed the place, and work rightly. For as Mesue following
the mind of Galen, says it is nature who works health: the Physician is but
her servant. This also must be well remembered, and had in consideration, in a
place apostumated, (...) a member (...) the (...) do rot^e.
whether the apostumation, fall in a fleshye or synewye place. For when there
does rise a knot in a synewy place, there look to be opened before it be full
rypened, lest any sinew should rotte by means of corruption, but in the
other, by reason of the freshness thereof. We may a^yde the perfyte riping,
sith we be moved by no inconvenience, to open it before time, which thing is
not to be permitted in the other without some good cause. Now when ye have well
filled and covered the incision, let it alone, and meddle no more with it, for
the space of xxiiii. hours, and when that time is expyred, ye shall visit the
apostumation, with a digestive made of yolks of Eggs, and Terebinthyne., in
continuinge the same, two, or ^hree times. until you see more or less,
according as necessitye in digestion shall show you. At the end ye may finish
the cure, with an abstersive mingled of Barley meal Terebintyne, and Rosed
Honey. But if it shall be hollow as it is often seen) we give you this
abstersive in that behalf. An abstersive. A digestive.
R. of Rosed Honey, strayned..i.ss. of clear Terebinthine..ii.ss. of ye juice
of smallage.ss. let them boil, til ye juice be wasted, afterward whiles it is
yet warm put thereto, ii.ss. of Barley flower, and mingle them together, which
ye may keep, til need shall require, for the cure.


Soarnes. What if proud, dedde, or rotten putrifyed flesh, chance to be in
the sore, or aposiumation, what remedy then?


Chirurgi IN deed often times there grows dead flesh in such places. I have
therefore here to say how the same must be displaced and removed, How rebate
flesh superfluous.
certaynlye my self did ever use in removing of superfluous, and festered
flesh the mixed oyntmentes, which were compounded of Vnguentum apostolorum and
Egiptiacum of like portions, and if the part had been very sensible, I used the
powder, which ye old ancient Chirurgians did use to remove such flesh over
and upon that ye shall aply this ointment, which the old ancient Chirurgians,
had in ure It is descrybed after this manner, ^. Oil of Roses, of Camomell,
ana..iii. of fat Weathers..iiii. of fat Calves..iii. of the mary of a Cowes
huckel bone..ii of Lytharge of gold, and silver, ana., i ss. of Ceruse:.ss. of
Uermilion. iii. of Terebintyne.iiii. of new Wax..ii. mingle al these together
according to the art. And let them boil first at a soft fire, encreasinge and
fortefiyng the same after a season, and so boil and ster it withal, and so do
it, til it get a very black hue, and thus have you an ointment to spread on
the soar, like a Cerote. But I saw one thing coming to remembrance, that
may not well be forgotten, by reason of ye fearfulnes, of a certain faint hearted
man, dwelling hereby, now this white liuered Lad, that I speak of, was
excedingly tormented with an apostumation, which needed opening howbeit, he
cold abide any thing, rather than the openinge thereof, with an instrument.
When I perceived the importunity of the man. and the necessity of the work. I
rotted ye apostumation with a potential cautery which we made after this sort.
I took a cup full of the best Soap lie, ye first destilled forth from the
stepefat men term it the mother lie, and cast it into a brazen cauldron. with a
dragme of Roman vitriole, which I caused to boil, til all the lie was clean
wasted, and then gathered I the foam, and frothe which remained thereof for my
purpose, and truly this is so effectually in writing, that it seems to work
suddenly the act, Cautery potentiall.
and seeing the work began to receive profit. when as the color of the place
began to be dark and black. This is to be used in the time, when the
paciente is very feeble. But or ever it was applied, I mean the Cautery, the
hole apostumation was covered with a piece of Leather, least that the, Cauterie
should perse or hurt some other place, than that which I did intend to meddle
with al: And further, that a hole be made in ye mids of ye same leather, And
further to annointe ye leather with some ointment, and in the same hole, to apply
the said Cauterye. And then with annother piece of Leather to cover the hoale,
and so let it stand by the space of one hour and a half. close covered, and
then remove the Cauterie, and then apparel the place with a plaster as
follows. R. Leaves of Mallows, and Uiolets. ana one handful, let them be
boiled and stamped, putting thereunto..ii of Barrowes grease, of Butter..ss of
leaven. iii. and..i. of Saffron, mingle all together, and plaster wise, lay it
to the place, for this will remove an hard crust and delay the pain.

Another cautery to open a sore, used by good Surgions. Take of sower
Leaven.ss. onions roasted under the Emeres. ii. pigions dunge, and hempseede.
ana..i. snayles in number, iii. black soap, swynes grease as much as will
suffyce, make hereof a little plaster, as broad as a groat and lay it upon ye
top or head of the soar, and lay a broader resoluyng plaster over it. Chal.
Now when the crust shall be removed, the ulcer must be cured, as it was before
declared. Hitherto have we talked of Apostumations, chauncinge in clean bodies,
Now because there goes one by, by whom I may well certify my friend of my
travel: I pray you bear with me, for a while and with all speed possible when
I have done, I will return to you a-gayn. For I intend to fynish our
communication, and speak of the Appostumations which hurt Bodies, that be
replete of Humors foul and paynfull. etc.


Soarenes. Sometime an apostumation, is placed in a gross foul Bodies, full of
humors, in such a case, what is then to be done, master Chirurgian, I pray
you?


Chirurgi THen above al things, my dear friend. you must do your diligence to
labor and travel, Four intentions, and six unnatural things to be
observed.
more then you did in my Primative cause. And for the cure thereof it is very
necessary, that you set four intentions dilligently before your eien, and
six things not natural.


Soarenes. Which are they I pray you heartily tell me?


Chirurgi. FIrst, that you order your pacientes life, accordinglye: and to
bring the humor to just equality.

Five notable good things to be observed in healinge
Secondly, to purge the evil humors which do maintain the apostumations hurt,
or offense.

Thirdly, to remove the cause coniunct or knitte to the same things,
accordingly.

Fourthlye, to correct and amend evil accidents, if any be in place.

Fiuethly, things not natural. as air, meat and drink, sleeping, and
wakinge, rest, euacuation, repletion and accidents of the mind, as ire care.
etc. All these must be ruled with diligence according to the ebbinge and
flowing of the matter, whether the cure do seem easy or hard, to that end, yt
very spedy work may be made with wisdom, and the cure quickly fynished.
Also, that the belly may be relaxed, and losed of ye humor which does most
abound. Further, that the appostumation be workmanly launced. And here must you
chiefly observe, that no local medecin be applied before the whole body be
cleansed and well purged of that humor, which does most offense to nature. No
local medecin applied before ye body purged.
For in so doing, mischief will ensue to the pacient, and reproache to the
Chirurgian: which may rather be compted a murderer, than a man belper in such
cases, whereof I have spoken in the repercussyue. etc. So note that I give you
warning, to observe dilligently to losyng of the belly, in all these causes. And
further, keep of ye matter with repercussyues, as example.

R. Oil of Roses, Bole armoniacke, the three Sanders, with the white and the
yolke of an Egg, A goodly repercussyue.
or else with this. Take Mallowe leaves, Uiolet leaves ana. M.i. Wormwood, Red
Roses ana. M.ss. Barley meal.i. Lint^ll meal,.i.ss. Oil of Chamomel, sees
such things as ought to be sodden* and let them be strayned, then mingle
them together, making a soft plaster at the fire according to the art. This
is a medecin of that great learned Manne Auicen his own invention for
resolution, and comforting the member as it may very easily be perceived,
Auicenes medecin.
if you mark well the receyptes. Now if these be found sufficient, fear not
to practice, discomfort not at all: But perhaps you shall find some matter,
very slimye or toughe, to strong for this in such case do thus. Take the
Leaves of Mallows, and Uiolets, ana. M.i. roots of white Lillies..ii. roots
of March Mallows.iii. boil al together, An excellent plaster to assuage
pain in a ^ore.
stamp and streine them with a strong strayner, or Colender, into a Kettle,
whereunto put fresh Butter.ii. Swynes grease.i.ss. sees them and make a
plaster in a stone mortar: Or else do this, Take roots of white Lillies..iii.
roots of Marish Mallows..ii. and rotes. of Garden Mallows, and roots of
Uiolets, ana. M.ss. sees them soft, stamp them and streine them, whereunto put
Capons grease.i. fresh Butter.ii. Barowes grease..i.ss. sower Leaven.iii. Barley
meal, as much as shall suffice..i, of Saffron, and make thereof with the former
decoction, a convenient plaster, apply it to the sore place accordinglye.


Soarenes. What is then to be done, after this business, I pray you master
Chirurgian.


Chirurgi WHen you be come to this point, do your feat hardely with aunce in
hand, trimble not: discomfort not your self* neither your paciente, but open
thapostumation. Some what in the form of a new Moon crooked and when that is
done, use the manner of digestion, and abstertion in manner as I have said. But
as concerning ye making sound and the skynning, use ye medecin which is
compounded of Uermilio^..i. oil of roses and Mirtes, ana..i.ss. This is of
good effect in causyng of a cicatrice, cut or scar, if ye place be anointed with
water of pla^ten, rose water, honey of roses, and a little Allume: it shall be
very comfortable, How to make incision.
with a soft Sponge to moist the place: and thus have the old ancient men, ever
used among their miserable pacientes. Then there is an other intention which is
very good: which is to amend evil accidents, which comber, molest and vex
apostumations often times. For if the pacient be long vexed with such evil
accidents, the virtue natural will then decay, and be quickly overthrown:
How to dry humors that do abound.
whereof will follow incontinently great danger and much hindraunce to the cure
of the same, that in fine it shall be scant curable: which accidents be
these two, the one is called extreme dolor or pain, the other is darkness,
and deadly black complexion of the same Place: these two be nere hand
desperate cures, Dolor and darcknes of complexion.
and most dangerous to be helped, in all Appostumations: But commonly these
Accidents, are found only to be the cause of evil Chirurgians necligences.


Soarenes. What moves the Chirurgian thus to do? I pray you tell me?


Chirurgi WHen ye matter in the apostumation, was already ripe, and flitting
and after the same should quickly have been expulsed or avoided by invisible
transpiration which is one of the forces, What harm (...) of an (...)
Chirurgian.
or benefytes of nature. Then the ignoraunte Chirurgian: ministers forth with
repercussiues, which drove backwarde, and pressed the water so fast in the
place, that these accidents did ensue of necessity. Wherefore I shall exorte
thee my dear friend, seeing thou art minded, to enter into the worthy ministry
of this work, which is not only profitable to thy self, but also beneficial
to the common wealth. That thou do use repercussiues, namely in the paynful
places, that may be the occasion of ryping of the matter, for fear that
otherwise thou repent thee, for when matter is ones placed, then need we not
but to open the pores, which thing every man may do very easily, if he do
resort to the repercussiues before discrybed.


Soarnes SIr, if in case these accidents whereof you have spoken, be in this
dangerous peril, it should seem then, either to be in the fault of the
chirurgian, or else in the malice of the humor: what is then to be don?


Chirurgi YOu shall make a plaster with these medecines following, which the
great learned men themselves, have used unto their pacientes. R, of hulled
Beans, or Beaneflower that is without the branne. l, i. of Mallow leaves.
M.ii: Sethe them in lie, til they be well sodden, and afterward, let the^ be
stamped and incorporated with meal of Lint, A good emplaster.
or flax,.iiii of Lupyne meal.ii: and form thereof a plaster, with Goats
grease, for this opens the pores auoydeth the matter by transpiration, and
comfort also the member: but if the place after a day or two after the
application of the plaster, fall more and more to blacknes, it shall be necessary
to go further, even to scarisying and incision of the place, according as it
may suffer. Certainly these are such accidents, that will not so-easely be
displaced, as I have talked of, but require most prudent and circu^spect
diligence, of the Physicians. Therefore who so will com unto this art should
dwell no small while with a learned Chirurgian, to this end, that he may both
learn his sayings and doings, What the Chirurgian must do.
and observe the same, and have them ever in mind, that he may ever be able to
trauice the air. with his own: propper wings, without the help of others.
And not be as a blind guide, neither apt to lead, nor tract the way himself,
according to profit art, Example.
and knowledge. For in so doing he shall be like unto an vnconning shipmayster,
which brings his Ship to ruin, rocks or wrack, so shall he fynish his course
with shame, and his pacient with death. Therefore when the place is scarifyed,
let it be done both quickly and suddenly, then lay upon the same scarification
bay Salt. After this is done, than apply this following in good order.

R. Of B^anemeale, and of Orobus. ana. vi of Lupine meal..iiii. And boil them
in Oximel unto such time as they shall be plaster thick, and after apply them
to the place, or else plaster it with beans and Lupines, boiled in Barbery lie,
and afterward strained and stamped in a mortar. Now perchance, if ye see evil
and corrupt flesh in the place, ye shall need no further council in that
behalf. Unguentum Egiptiacum of Auicen To^bate dead flesh.
But incontinent annoint the place with Vnguentum Egyptiacum, which must be
made after the mind of Auicen.

R. Uertdegrece, Roche Alume, Honye, Uineger. ana, q.ss. that is, as much as
will suffice, sethe them until they come into a red color, and with this
ointment you shall exasperate, and sharp the place by the space of two or three
days, notwithstanding, if you shall need, you may iterate or often apply the
same, until the fame come to an escarous crust or scabb and make separation*
which must not be roted up by any instrument. but rather may be renewed with one
of the mollificatiues, specially young hogs grease, as it is aforesaid, and when
this is fallen of, the same ulcer must be cured, as all other ulcers are,
whereof I shall give you further understanding hereafter Now you do perceive how
putrefaction ought and must be handled, but in the mean while, foresee with
wisdom, that this evil be prevented, and avoid the same, for when a cure is
not well handled, or is cast away, the^ it is to late to call again yesterday.
Prayer or weping in this case will scant prevail in the Chirurgians behalf.
Now consequently, after I have spoken of the asswaging or mittigating of the
doloure and pain of apostumacion, which oppresses nature, as the prince of
Philossophy called Aristotle, A Chirurgia^ must have providence to foresee cure.
affyrmeth saying: doloure and pain be the evils, that do dissolve, and
utterly destroy the humayne nature of Mankind: ie seems necessary that in due
order, some wholesome way be taken, to help this dangerous matter, and to avoid
the doloure.


Soarenes. What is best to avoid the doloure.


Chirurgi. NOthing truly, but artificially to alter and change an evil
complexion, so that it come not by stoppinge of the matter or by the breach of
continuance, or corrosion, for then such grief would ask other succors, for
where as dolor is fallen, there does plainly appear a soden alteration of
complexion in that part, as Galen affyrmeth. To alter complexion in a sore.


Therefore if you will make any alteration in nature, invent some apt proper
medecin, for the same purpose: as for example. Take Oil of Roses..ii the
yolke and whites of.ii. Eggs new laid, beat them al together, and apply
the^ to ye place, then the next day following in the morning, apply this in
place or stead of the former. Take crummes of white bread, sodden in Goats or
sheep milk: or else bread sodden in the brothe of a Chicken: or else you may
take a weathers head sodden from the bones, which you must press through a
cotton cloth from the same sodden flesh, save half a pynte of the decoction,
unto which decoction, then add Honey of Roses, and oil of Camomel, ana., i.ss.
with yolks of new laid Eggs. Al these must be beaten together and recocted, or
sodden again. upon a soft fire until such time as it be somewhat stiff, when
this is don, aply it warm to the dolours pained place, accordingly. This also
that follows is used to the same purpose. Take roots of Holioke.ii Mallows,
violets, ana. M.ss. Chamomil, red rose leaves. ana. p.ss. boil them well, and
slampe them together. Add unto these when they be so stamped, of fresh
Butter..ii. oil of roses, and violets ana..iii. make thereof a Cataplasme, and
apply it as warm as may be suffered.


Soarenes. WHat if this medecines prevail not, what shall I do then good
master Chirurgian: Choice of medecin is good
For I have hard say, that one medecin woorketh not health in every
complexion, but choice is good.


Chirurgi. THen you shall use this which follows. For often times extreme
doloure and pains of very necessitye, shall require mollifications, without
danger, wherein there may be put such cooling things, as will not hinder
mollification: thus Prince Auicen shows in his Chapter de flegmone,
therefore do thus.

Take Mallows, Uiolets. ana M.i. sees them, and bray them, and put in them
ii. of Barley meal, of Oil of Roses,.iiii. and eftsoons sees the^ again
until they be in the form of plaster thick, which in case serve not yet the
purpose, note this other.

Take of Fenicreke, meal of Lintseedes, of flowers of Camomel, of hens fat
melted, of Rosed Oil. ana..iii. let al these. (the Oils and fattes only
excepted) be mingled and sodden together with the decoctions of Mallows, and
violets, unto such time, as they be thickened, to make a plaster. This done,
warm the oil and fat, and incorporate the same, with a little oil of
Camomel, and of Dil, and so make it to a plaster. This will open the pores, and
hard pressed matter, which causes the pain. Now if it be in the augme^ting
of a malady: in this case, ye shall make it after this ^orme.

Take oil of Roses, and of Camomil, ana..i ss. the yolks of two Eggs..ss.
of Barley meal or more, which ye shall shake well together, and so lay it to
the place. This suppose I sufficient for the appeasyng of doloure: if not you
of your own head, by these may invent new and other confections, to the behofe
of your pacientes, and your own contentation. Since I have dispatched this, I
will retourn to an hardened apostumation, which truly might have bin omitted well
enough, ye matter being so manifest and plain.

Nevertheless, I will recite here, what ye learned have used in this case,
because I would not mayme my communication^. Certaynlye this invention shall
Minyster, diverse fetches and causes, wherein Men may employ there wits.
Howbeit (according as Mesue writes de lassitudine post purgationem, we will
convert our intent, to the cause of hardness to ye intent we may cut it of. For
as he says, this is the right way in cures, and ye foresight in working
Wherefore, if it appear yt the place tend to hardness, or ever it come to that
poynct, and be fixed, it may be redressed thus. Take.x. fat Figs, of roots
of Marish Mallows smally chopped..vi. Sees them well, and then Bray them
with..ii. of Barrows grease, putting thereto a little Saffron, wherewyth cover
the place, which ye would soften. and ye shall not fail of the purpose. But
if it were so, A softninge Plaster.
that the pray escaped your wits, or miste your fyngers, you may be sure to
entrap it with this.

Take of Terebyntin meddled and well incorporated with Butter and this doutles
shall serve your purpose. But or ever it be applied, the place must be prepared
and often made moist, for ryping of the matter, with blood warm water. Now when
it comes in rotting, open the place with a potentiall Cautery, or with some
other fetch or mean, forseyng always that it be done according to the rules
above mentioned. A potentiall Cautery.
In fine when it is opened proceed in the cure, as in other.

These be the things, which I had this day, to say, which though they be not
so fynely uttered, ne lively declared, as happily ye Looked for: ye shall bear
with my simplicity, in that behalf, For I never bestowed labor in Oratorye
(as I think ye perceive right well) to attein unto eloquence. And so where I am
simple and plain my self, I have handled such things, as I had to say with
semblable simplicity and plains: which if it like you also I shall right gladly
recite unto you after the same order and manner, such things as we have to utter
of wounds. Now if I have stombled or missed any where. I pray you correct it,
so if it be worthy of correction* Of God beginning and ending of all things.
And on the other side, if any thing praise worthy, be com to light, offer and
ascribe that to the living God (as I said in the beginning of our
communication.) That we may in our self, verify the saying of the Poet: Ab
Jove principium, nam sunt Iouis omnia plena. Of God take things their
beginning, for by him are al replenished, whose name be blessed for ever, Amen


Soarenes. You have handled your self very eloquently and freshly enough to
day, also you have given us cups of knowledge, able to quench the thurst of
better men then we are. And I assure you no man may greatly wonder at it,
seeing we are enuiro^ned on every side, with such gentle humanity, and brotherly
love of each others. Wherefore we pray unto God that for this your gift, he will
prosper you and your cures and long preserve you in health, to the behoue of
your country, and friends. For you have quenched our thirst* above
expectation, with worthy communication, and medicines. But to give you warning,
I pray you have hither to morrow with as great and quick speed, as ye can
pass, after ye have visited your cures, to the intent ye may pay us your
promise at full not without many thanks. Now therefore sith then of your part
time moves you, to tend your cures, depart in good time, and remember us, For
we sore people mind to repair hither again tomorow, to hear you, although
the weather be very cold.


Chirurgi Go ye on in the name of God, and doubt not, but that I am yours,
and all theirs, which be either sick, or soar, to help them, to my power.


Soarnes IT be falls ofte^tymes if any good or evil hang over men's heads: the
divine mind of man, has an inkling, and a smattering thereof, Man's secret
providence.
or ever it come to effect, which thing is verefyed in our self this day. For
where we feared loss of time, we have vaynly spent all the day in loking
hither and thither, for you master Chirurgian. And all this together is done
for you, wherefore to say truth we charged you with the matter, and spoke
liberally of you, Now therefore if ye recompense it not with diligence. we will
lay all the burden in your neck, because we have tarried so long for you this
day.


Chirurgi Do you herein as you think good For I am all together yours, and
would that you al were helped, specially, because ye begin plainly to show your
grieves. And this will I do gladlye, omittyng the definition, in as much, as
it lyketh you so well: notwithstanding, that al ancient Authors in writing of
matters, thought it best to begin at the difinition But yet they as I think,
were of that mind, and opinion, where the matter was strange and dark, and
where it could not be well perceived, but by ye difinition only, which gave some
light to it. And of truth so ought they to do, where cloudy darkness, and
crabbish knottes, require light and opening by the difinition, which thing, as
I trust, shall not happen in my plain words. For I intend to speak of
wounds, which to all men be as plain as a packstaffe. Of wounds.
For it is given men of nature, warely to avoid all noyance, and as much it
fears them also to be hurt. I say that wounds be manifest to all men. And
if it were otherwise with them, I might well enough begin my communication,
at this diffinition of wounds. For it were easily said, The definition of a
wound.
that a wound is a breach of continuance, newlye made, in an hard or soft
part of the body, being without putrefaction and corruption. Now therefore, sith
there appears no commodity curatyue to rise thereof, I Think it best to pass
it with silence: notwithstanding, if you be desirous of it, the saying, which
is rehearsed may serve the purpose. And now to begin the matter plainly, I
suppose. I may lay the foundation best in the division of wounds.


Soarenesse. YOu have rightly judged. But sir my desire is, that ye will begin
whereas I may hear one long profitable tale, of the whole matter, and I will
occupy mine ears and keep silence.


Chirurgi I was minded the same my self also.


Soarenes. Well, go on then, and speak to the purpose* without interrupting of
your talk, unless where necessitye shall cause you to pause, or breath your
self good master Chirurgian,.


Chirurgi. I Heard my friends and brethren say, that there were two kinds of
wounds which do no less differ in name, than in their cures, Two kinds of
Wounds. the one simple and the other double or compound.
The one Men call a simple wound, the other double or compounded. The simple
is where no substance is lost, and is ensounded and cured with one intencion
alone. And of this, we shall make no further ado, because of the facillity
thereof. For why? Cobblers, Carters, and women be able to cure such wounds. Now
that which is properly called a co^pounded*wou^d is where some substance is
lost, and necessarily requires diverse intentions in the cure, as thus. To
unite that which was separated, to restore that was lost, and to displace an
apostumation, if it be concurraunt with the same. But here note, that among
wounds, some be incurable. And it is not inconvenient to begin at the heart,
as the chief Forte and principal part of the body,

Then we say, that every wound, annoying and perishing the substance of the
heart, it is deadly and incurable. For why as Auicen says the heart during the
natural life, may not suffer any breach of continuance. And therefore to knit
up much in one knot, such wounds as give let, What wounds be mortal
and impeachment, to the virtue, which is necessary to life, take mankind away,
without remedy. As wounds in the substance of the Brayn: of the wind pype. of
the wessand: of the Lunges: of the Liver: of the Gaul, of the Midryfte, of the
Maw: of the Spleen: of the small guts: of the kidneis, and bladder: and
generally all such wounds, which perce through the bulk and inward parts, be
very dangerous. Because the inward parts be altered by mouyng of the air from
out forth. and the spirits be offended within, Parts most dangerous to be
hurt.
and the virtue natural, which maynteineth life, is destroyed. And the reason
why, is that, when these parts be wounded, they be most hardly helped by
reason of their continual mouinge and labourynge. And when this may not be made
whole, they be notable, ne sufficient to do their offices, requisite to nature.

Now must we speak somewhat of wounds, that happen in muskelles, and lacertes.
For they may be thought as dangerous, as the foresaid, Wounds in the Muskels.
For as in the one, be manifest tokens of death, so in ye other be
Prognosticable signs, for men enflamed with high and divine foresight. Example.
For a wound in a Muscle does much like a wood Snake, which lies in wayt for
men out of their way, lurkyng under the green flowers, where he puts them
yt go by in doubt or hasard of their life. Therefore my friends let us reason
somewhat of them also, yt they lead us not forth with vain hope, and oppress us
among other, as careless, and idle heads. Wherefore we suppose that wounds
chauncing.3. fingers above and beneath, Of conuultio^ mortal.
the heads of ye Muskels or lacertes nigh unto the ioints, be exceeding
dangerous: and that pricking of synewes do often cause conuultions, by reason
of the great fealyng and fellowship yt they have with the brain. Wherein ye
saying of Hippocrates* apeareth true who says, yt a spasme or co^uulsio^
chau^cing upon a wou^d, is mortal for ye most part Wherefore the wounds in
such parts must be handled warely, and with aduysed deliberation. For why,
they will to notablye hinder the Chirurgian his estimation, if he prognosticate
warely of the same to them that stand by: which thing truly had befallen to my
self, when I promised a man his life, had not I been admonished by master
Rasis, who secretly and wittely, unknown to all the family, plucked me by the
elbow, and warned me, with these or like words in effect. And then the
pacientes strength was agreeable to health, and no apostumation risen, but he
slept as he ayled nothing at all. Consider with thy self, says he, as thou
do lightly always, the signs which induce conuultion in wounds. Whereas
there appears no swellinge in the soar, in good faith, I conceive an evil
opinion in, the patientes life, which I have gotten me, with long observation.
For the matter which should come forth, to the payned place, is supped up of
the synewes. Wherefore I se a conuultion even at hand, For if the matter,
though it were little (for in much it fares like) had issued and gathered to
ye place it would give me occasion to think well of him. For it should
signify, that the matter did relinquish the synewes, and draw outward.

A goodly note to be observed when death is hand.
Now in as much as it remains, as a sleep within, surely I think evil of it:
and truly, it was marueilously said of him. For, or ever the fifth day came,
the man gave up the breath, by reason of a spasme or Crampe, where at I was
greatly abashed* reseruyng the signs in memory, and mind hereafter as I also
advise you to do. Yea, and if there be any other else, worthy of observation,
mark the vein also diligently, that it may stand you for steed, when need
shall require. For this will require a vigilante Eye of the Chirurgian.
Wherefore I appeal here to your secret hearts, and bid you beware, that ye
disgrace not your selves through rashness, but be ripe in Prognostications, and
circumspect in obseruinge of the times of your workinges, Both for one help
and others.

Now all other wounds, these only excepted, which I have recited, no doubt be
curable, And as for the help of these that are curable. there are two
principal found, the one by the first intention, the other by the second. The
latter is, where divided parts are joined together through a portion of an
other kind of matter. As for an example

Bones are joined, together, with a certain hard matter, much like a bone but
not a bone which is much like to Alasarte. The other, when parts are joined
together, with their like in kind, as flesh with flesh. And these ways, we
must needs have before our eyes, to the intent we minister not any thing in
wounds, which we might afterward repent. Wherefore to avoid these evils I judge
it best to begin with such things as may be used generally, in all kind of
wounds, to help mankind.


Soarenes. For Gods sake show me the best manner of wounds,


Chirurgi. WHen ye have determined, to take any such wound in hand,
incontinent remember to observe these things: that is to say, an order of the
Life, local medicines, and amendment of evil accidents. The first, ye shall
obtain by due administracion of the six things, called not natural. If the
Chirurgian be ignorant therein, the Phisicians may rule the matter. For it
belongs to them, to give an order of living, to bring humors to a quality*
to try out inward causes, of variable ebbyng and flowyng. And finally to give
just redress of ye same: What the (...) must observe*
which thing for the most part, Chirurgians labor not to attain to, because
the matter is so secretly hyd, as it were among stones, but only by means
of covetousness, and gready desire of Chirurgians. For when they have gotten
only a little taste, without all exercise, under their master, which thing
is mother to Arts, as Aristotle says: They take money hungerly, they seek in
hand, and rent their skin with their teeth, making no conscience at the matter
at all. Now as touching the second, in applying of local medicines: ye shall
not play, make or mar, ne go at all adventure, as ye sought blyndfield. But
persuade your self earnestly, that you made Argus, to be your companion in the
matter. For in case ye miss but a little, or negligently omit any necessary
thing in the cure, ye shall first bring your self into a peck of troubles, and
after will ensue many inconveniences* as says Aristotle: grant one
absurdity, and many inconveniences will follow. Wherefore, least this do
chance, it is good that ye look narrowly on the matter, with advised
circumspection. Now therefore, when ye stand before the wounded, first ponder
with your self, how the wound was given, of what sort it is, and how large a
gash? For be the wound small and in a fleshy part, without losing of
substance, it may be cured only with conuenable bindyng. Who so does grant
to one absurdity, many one will eftsoon follow.
But if it be great and deep, first staunch the blood, if any be, with some
medycine convenient, as I shall declare hereafter, in the place of bleedyng and
Ulcers. whereunto I refer thee at this present. For there I entende to give
medicines, and means for that purpose. When the Blood is stanched, ye shall
sew the wound, with a fine thread, well twisted and waxed, A small wound.
between your fyngers. But or I speak of sewyng. I will recite certain causes
where sewing is dangerous, and therefore forbidden as unprofitable. And then
will I to my purpose again in order for your sake.


Soarenes. I pray you show me that order?


Chirurgi. YOu shall first remember, that wounds made, with any long and round
weapen, as an arrow or dart: must not for a few days, be cured by the first
intencion, notwithstanding they be cured partly by the first. Some do say they
be not cured, by the first, for why? Example.
We keep the^ open, least the matter be imprisoned here. For if it were so,
wounds might incur extreme dolor, by reason of alliance, with cords and
sinews. And therefore we say plainly, they ought not to be shut up in the
first days. For my self saw this in a valiant Captain, at Barwicke, who
had a wound in the Neck. And a certain Physician took the man in hand, and
wylling to have the helpyng of the wound, which ought to have been kept open,
Pate Hardy the Scotte a good Chirurgian.
he closed it up with a seame: whereupon, the pacient fell into extreme pain,
and as it were, into a continual conuulsion, insomutch, that if a cunning
Chirurgian, called Pate Hardy, a Skot, had not put to his Hand the sooner, he
had borne his own message to ye dead. But to our purpose, where I said,
notwithstanding, they be cured by the first intencion, this is understood,
that is where there is no lost substance, newly produced in them. For if there
were, Of the first and second intention.
the cured should be after the second intencion. And where any substance is
lost, and ought newly be produced, sewing shall be right strange and untoward.
For why, it can not otherwise be well cured, but by the second. Matter does
covet digestio^
For nature seeks ever restitucion of the lost part, with no less
carfulness, than the mother her only lost Son. Wherefore, if we mind to
restore that, we may not sow up the wound, or it be recovered. If the wound be
deep, and greatly altered, by the receipt of the air, think of no sewyng.
His name was Iue, of Swasa in Cambrigeshyre.
For matter is now secretly caused, by reason of the air, which cries out for
digestion, and abstersion. And if the impericke, whom ye know of, had thus
handeled the matter, the honest man ye wot of, had been yet a live. For when he
had taken a large gash in his Leg, and long had left it open to the air,
thynking to be notablye well cured: caused a Chirurgian to be sent for, which
immediately in all the have (a Gods name) seweth up the wound. What will ye
more? Immediately after the sewyng, importable dolours did arise, A wound of a
bruise.
and on the third day, the leg was so feastred, that in the.vii, the man
would needs take his Vltimum Vale, and say farewell to the living. Now if the
imperike had first used digestion with abstersion, and then sewing of the
wound: perchance the matter had not grown, to that extremity of death. And
in case the wound come by means of a bruise then attempt not to sew it. For
without doubt, ye shall shortly perceive, that ye labor in vain.

Whereof Galen gives us a warning word, saying: that it follows of
necessity, It is peryllous to sew a wound coming of the biting, or rendyng of
some beasts.
that a bruise should putrify, and turn to corruption. I add, and understand
it, if it be an extreme bruise: for in a mean, it takes no place. Therefore,
if it be sewed, the seame will soon be corrupted. As we saw our self, a
lusty young man, who came to see a Bull baityng in Parisse Garden, and fallen
before the same, I wot not how, the Bull gave him in the thygh a rent, with
the horns. Now when a Chirurgian had taken him in hand, incontinente he sewed
the wound, which putryfied right soon. And certainly, unless master Backter
had helped it, I think assuredly, the man had dyed of it. Further we say, that
sewyng is not good in a wound, caused by bityng of some beast. For a bytten
place, is hollow and abated, or otherwise, somewhat sauoreth of the nature of a
bruise. Howbeit, we leave this case to the good Chirurgians Judgment. For
parts severed by bytyng may well be joined with a threede, in some cases.
Sewynge is to no purpose, where a Wound uncovers a Bone broken, or whole,
for it will not have ado with ensoundyng through sewyng: except the discovered
be first clad, and the second united together again naturally.

Also a wound in a musculous place, specially overthwart the Muskell, Of wound^
of the muscles
utterly refuses sewyng, as Auicen says in ye chapter of bynding of wounds
in Lacertes and Muskelles. Or be it a Lacert, which is rent in latitude, it is
not drawn together, but rather some thing is put between, least the skin
grow together. etc. Wherefore he would the wound went at large, whiles the cure
is after the second intencion. The same do sinewie places desire also, for if
they be sewed, the Lyppes will grow to one, and the Synewes under couerte, will
cast reumetike matter, and shortly cause apostumacion, so that ye shall be
driven, whether ye will or no, to louse the seame or make a new incision.
Therefore to avoid this inconvenience, we shall suffer such wounds, to run at
large for a season: and so ye shall have them, more tractable in handlyng. How
be it, here is a tedious disputacion moved. whether a cut sinewe should be
sewed, or not. For there be sundry opinions, and aucthorityes of the learned,
of the one side, and of the other. And verily, if I should dispute the matter,
I would maintain both the opinyons, although at this present, I assente with
master Ihon de Uigo, not for that I have sworn, to say as he says, but
because his words, seem most consonaunt to reason.

And to Auicen, where he says, if the sinews be broken in latitude, then it
is necessary to sewe the wound: and if it be not sewed, Of sinews
the Wound will not grow together. Howbeit, I will omit the prosecution of this
question since it is not necessary unto this treatise. But yet by the way, mark
well the saying of Auicen, where he commands to sew the wound of necessitye
Certes, I, after Marianus would let it go open. But he means of a large.
wound, which would cause great deformitye, if it be vnsewed. And likewise, if
it be sewed, that there be a great distaunce between stitch and stitch And on
the other side, where I said, I would suffer it to be louse. I meant of a small
wound, which experience shall teach you to be true. Moreover, many dolorous and
apostumated wounds, will none of sewing, which, what for the facility, and
manifest appearance, needs no further declaracion. For the cause is open to
them, that will diligently consider the matter. These be the causes, where we
use not to sewe Wounds, How to sewe a wound, and how not.
and be worthy to be put in memory. Now will I return, from whence I
degressed. Now these cases excepted, sewe the wound, with a well twisted thread,
drawn through Wax, as we said before, always remembered that ye leave some
place open in the lowest part, where matter may have issue forth. When ye have
so done, ye must apply this medicine, which is mingled of the white of an Egg,
and a little Oil of Roses. This is done, because the Paciente should not
greatly be troubled, at the removing. For ofttime is caused so great pain,
namely in hearye places, The Chirurgian must look pleasauntly upon his pacient.
that the pacyent seems to be cramped, or ^a^kt with conuulsio^* And let
this remain.xxiiii. hours in ye wou^d if ye fear any bledi^g. And when this
time is expired, visit your pacie^t again, with a gladsome countenance, and
whiles ye be merely talking with him take of all the coueryngs, and then
enbaulme it, with a degestiue of yolks of Eggs, and clear Terebintine, laid
in a cloth. But if the wound be in the head, or any place of mutch feelyng,
take Oil of Roses, in steed of Terebintine, wherewyth proceed in the cure,
till matter be caused in the place. And when that is done, set the degestiue a
part. For if ye proceed further, it were but to put putrefaction, to
putrefaction. Nevertheless, the brinkes of the wound, must be oyled with Rosed
omphacine, that is Oil of Water Lyllies. After ye have so visyted the wound,
ye shall spread this defensive, one hand bread from it.

A defensive.
Take of Rosed Oil., ii.ss. of all the Saunders ana..ii. of Bole
Armoniack.ii.ss. the white of an Egg, and a little Uineger, if the wound be
distaunt from a sinewie place, if not Wine of Pomegarnettes, in steed of
Uineger. All which, cause to be drawn in a mortar that it be at hand, when
need shall require. When ye have thus proceeded four or five days, the^ must
you give over the degestiue, and use a mundyfication, which is thus myngled
Take of Rosed Honey,.ii. of Terebintine..iii. let them sees a little, puttyng
thereto.i.ss. of Barley meal, with..i. of Saffron. All which must be
incorporated at the fire, and used the space of.viii. days, or there about, as
is expedient. And as for the sounding, use the ointment, that I descrybed in
apostumacions, wherewyth I ensound or make whole, almost all kind o^ breaches,
as our fryend can witness, which (because he would have the certayntye) would
needs be present, when we cured a sore man of an apostumacion under the arm
hole, which Albenzoar Rasis reckoned for incurable. If any fattysh flesh grow,
at the inclosyng thereof, ye shall remove it with Vnguentum Mixtum, myngled of
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and Vnguentum Apostolorum, of each like quantity, or else
take this powder, which my self did mtuch use. Take of Citrine Mirabolanes..ss.
of Terra Sigilla^a..i. of burnte roch Alume..ii. let them be stamped small, and
the powder used for a corosiue, wherewyth ye shall get the victory and triumph
over the Maladye.


Soarenes. Thus have ye spoken of a simple deep fleshie wound: now I pray
you, proceed to the double wound, and the cure thereof.


Chirurgi. REstitucion is made, with a matter of an other kind* as in bones
and sinews. Howbeit, some aucthors affirm, that broken and displaced bones in
young children, be united again, with matter of the same kind, For why
members* which Phisicians call sparma^icall, being once loosed, will not be
joined again, with Poros sarcoides* which is of an other kind. Now therefore,
here have we to declare, how this, means may be obtained, in a double wound,
of the elbow or hand. For of all wounds, they be most hard and dangerous, and
specially of the hand for the multitude of sinews and cords, and otherwise,
scarcity of nutratiue humors* Therefore let us take in hand, even as it were
now newly come to our c^re*

Now then my fryend, when ye be called to any such chance, remember ye look
seriously, that no shiuer nor gobet of bone be left in the wound, which might
sharpen and anger the virtue natural, through some dolor and prycking.
Captain (...), Reed of the holy Island.
As it has chanced in a famous worthy Gentleman and Soldier, called Captain
Read, whose arm was broken at Lith, in war, Anno. 1559. and many bones
remained, to his hurt for a time. For if these accydentes a rise, they show an
apostumacion at hand: the affect and coming whereof we ought by all means,
ways, and pollycies to imbarre, To cleanse the wound* and draw forth broken
bones.
l^ast it creep to the wounded place. And ye shall obtain this, if ye observe
this order, which I will give you. First cleanse the Wounds of all sheuers of
bones, and then if any bones be fully cut of, place them in their roumes as
orderly as ye can. When ye have done, have a table at hand, well couched and
covered with soft lint, that the hand or member may be placed to rest thereon.
And forthwith sewe up the wound, in case it be large, For a small wound as we
said before, must be left open, to the intent reumeticke matters may have free
liberty and issue, to come forth. But take heed in sewing that ye pryck no
sinewe, and that passage be left in the lowest part, for sanious matter, which
shall grow, or be caused there, to issue forth When the wound is sewed, and
the hand laid on the table, then must you apparel the same with fine lynt,
dipped in the whites of Eggs: and so leave it ge^tly enrolled, for the space
of xxiiij, hours, giving the pacient a convenient regiment of life in diet
according to his nature.


Soarenesse. What shall we do then, when this is done. as you have commanded,
in this most goodly wholesome order?


Chirurgi. AS soon as that time shall be expyred, return again to the pacyent,
taking a Harbor with you, to make a convenient blood letting, on ye other
contrary part: and this is done, When to let blood on the contrary side of the
body.
that the matter ready to cause apostumacion, fall not to the place, which is
made weak by means of the wound. And the vein must be opened for bledyng the
second day, for saving of good blood. For if the vein were opened the first
day* then good blood might be drawn, as well as evil. Now when ye have done
with the blood lettyng, open the wound* and apply these Medicines, for the cure
thereof, as follow in order. R. of most clear Terebintine..ii. of oil of
Hipericon..iii. mingle them at the fire, power them warm into the wound. For
if it be applied cold, inconuenyence might ensue thereof, as Hippocrates
says: cold is an enemy to the sinews, teeth, bones, brain, Cold is an evil
enemy to the sinews.
and nuke of the neck, but heat is profitable and friendly. Therefore it is
right convenient, that in all your works, about double wounds, ye eschew
medicines, which shall be actually cold, and see ye keep the member warm, as
a Woman delivered of her burden. Moreover, in the brinkes and circuit of the
wound, ye shall apply pieces of cloth, thoroughly weated in Rosed oil, wherein
Anglet witches, or earth worms have been sodden. For this will comfort the part,
and also cause euaporacions of humors, if any should approach. Again, anoint
this defensive about the cubite or Elbow, to defend the Wound from fletyng
matters. For this do thus. R* oil of Roses. and of Mirtille oil, ana..i.ss.
of Bole Armoniacke, Terra sigillata, Dragons blood, Abu^erflue to cleanse and
dry.
ana..i.ss. of all the Saunders. ana..i ss. of white Wax. q.ss. and let it be
made to a soft defensive, in manner of a liniment. And when ye have thus
proceeded in the cure.6. or 7. days or more, as unto the time the sinews cast
some reumaticke matter, then it shall be time to go to abstersive, or drying.
The first, whereof is thus made. Take of Terebintine..i.ss. and of Syruppe of
Roses..i sees them a little, and whiles they be seething, put thereto q.ss. of
Barley meal, A god abstersive. q.ss. is as mutch to say as will suffice
and of Sarcocole, and Frankincense, ana..ss. of Saffron..ss. and stir them
well, till they be incorporated, and mingled together. This is a gentle
abstersive, without biting or nypping, which is necessary in such Wounds.


Soarenes. All this shall I gladly do to my self and others, but a Gods name,
what shall I then take in hand, to proceed any further?


Chirurgi. YE shall minister this ointment, as the learned Chirurgians did
order it, which is. R. Of Calves and Cowes fat l.ss. of oil of Roses, of Rosel
ana..ss. of litharge of silver..iii.ss. of fresh odorant Wine..i. of Anglet
wiches or yerth worms.ii. of Honey, S. Ihons Wort, Madder, and flowers of Rose
Marie, an. M.ss. Let all these be boiled together, the Terebintine and Litharge
only excepted, until such time, as the Wine be wasted, and then strayn the
foresaid decoction, and boil it in a new together with the Litarge, till it
have gotten a very black color, and lastly put the said Terebintine to it, A
good ointment for wounds.
with q.ss. of white Wax. And so this will be a soft ointment, most convenient
for wounding of sinews. And this kind of ministracion, must be continued,
unto the time of sealyng and ensounding: for which purpose, ye may use this
decoction following, or that, which was discriued before, in apostumacions. But
ye shall find this decoction following better because it does ensound and
comfort the member withal: and therefore ye may boldly use it in this place.

Take of Roses, Mirtilles, UUormewood, flowers of Pomegarnetes ana. M.i. ten
Cipres Nuts, and boil them in red Wine, unto the wasting of the third part,
which use, and apply with a Sponge well pressed, for the repair of the member.
To end a double wou^d and begin accidents.
And this was mine order, my friend, which in good faith, gat me both honesty
and profyt. This I suppose sufficient, as far as it appertains to the help of
a double wound. Now is it time, to come to the accidents, whereof we mentioned
a little before: which thing, yet nevertheless, I would have omitted, had I not
perceived, that ye were so desirous of it, and doubtless, not without good
cause. For why, the greatest part and feat of curyng of wounds or ulcers
(whereof by Gods help, we shall reason to morrow) stands in the removing of
the evil accidents. And therefore, Nature subject to many calamities.
least I should be seen to defraude you, of your desire, I will once venture my
self for your sake, under this Burden, heavy though it be. Uerely I can
not but mutch marvel, how it should be, that our nature is subject to so many
chances, and so great ieopardies: when I consider the accydentes, in sewyng
UUounds, which when they be fallen, they bring not only the slender wytted and
learned, but trouble wittye and far castyng men also. when the Chirurgia^ is
put to shame.
UUhat think you the common sort of Chirurgians will do when they see learned
to seek, to be uncertain, and to run from medicine, to medicine, thynk ye
not, but they will make Light of the matter: if they see a man, to be
tormented, with pain, burst with apostumacion* vexed with evil complexion, to
burn in Fevers, to be rackt with crampes, to have Apoplexes, yea, and to be
distracte of their wits to? Therefore least we be reckened of their number,
and charged with ye crime of vnmerci^ulnes: let us endeavor our selves, to the
uttermost of our possibility. that we master every of them with many
medicines, when they befall. For if they be not well handled, they will rob us
of our honest name health and profit, and all the pacients of their lives,
which is their chief Jewel. Wherefore, we must besterre us in the matter
diligently when Nature is extremely vexed with dolor: and way with our selves,
whether it come of the breach of continnaunce, or drying of the wound, or else
by reason of gathering of some humerall matter. And it it come by breach of
continuance, or drying of the wound, then shall a molificatiue be best, for
the openyng thereof. But if it come by heapyng of humerall matter, then dryinge
medicines shall be best against the pain, without any respect of time, which be
mingled of Oiles, meal and other drying simples. These things well
considered, first if the wound be pained, through lack of digestion, it may
be eased with this.

Take of soft bread sodden.M.i. Goats milk., vi. of oil of Roses, and
Camomell. ana..ij. and yolks of three Eggs, all which do myngle together in
a pot, the yolks reserved, and boil it, till the oils be well drunken up of
the Bread, and then take it from the fire, and mingle the yolks wythal. Thus
shall you have, if ye boil it accordingly, an hard Plaster, to be applied
warm to the place.


Soarenesse. But what if this your medicine serve not to the purpose, have ye
no more plenty of medicines then in store?


Chirurgi. YEs forsooth, that I have a medicine of great virtue following. Take
a quarter of a pynte of ye decoction of Mallows, and Uiolets, or Mutton broth
of the Weader, or else of any beast that men use to eat, and let bread be well
steeped therewith, and afterward boil it, as it was said before. But remember
to put a little Saffron in this, as it may in the former also, if it please the
Chirurgian.. But if it come of heaping of matter, use these medicines that
follow.

Take of small ground Branne.M.iii. of Barley and Bean meal ana..ii. of
Camomell, Melilote, and Worm wood, finely shorn, ana M.ss. of Odorant Wine,
three cupfulles, boiling them at the fire, with sufficient Sape, and in the end
put thereto oil of Camomell, and of Roses ana.ij.ss. oil of Dill..ss. with a
little Saffron, and make hereof a soft plaster, after the manner of a Cerote. I
warrant you, with these ye shall assuage the dolor, which for the most part
draws matter to the place, as a cuppyng Glasse^, namely if it be cold. And if
it come of heat, then alter the hot receiptes, according to the necessity. And
when the dolor is once appeased, ye shall easily win the Bulwark as touching
the rest of the cure. Now ye shall repress apostumacion, if ye apply the
defensive above described, when ye have let the pacyent bleed, with a
diuersiue blood lettyng a clyster going before: But if there appear swart
redness about the Wound, the cause is an evil complexion, To correct a smart
wound.
for correcting whereof, ye may use these receiptes. Take Oil of Roses. iii.
and mingle the same with the yolks and whites of two Eggs, which apply, being
well shaken together in linen. Or thus. Take. ij. of Vnguentum Rosatum, oil of
Roses..i. and put them in a Leaden mortar, casting thereto of juice of Lettice.
i.ss. of Litharge..ss. of Terra sigillata..i. and draw this, till it be as a
fine liniment, whereby ye shall fully remove, and correct the evil complexion.
But if the pacient shall be vexed with any fever, conuulsion, palsy, alienacio^
of mind, swonyng, or such like, by reason of moving of the humors, take a
Physician to you, and he will amend these accidents. For if I should now order
Siruppes, and Pocions (albeit that I entend also at more leisure, to speak
more of them in that place, but not now) I might seem to put my sith in an
other man's corn. For why, here we talk not of Physic, but of Chirurgi,
which is somewhat contented with Ointments, Fomentacions, Plasters, and
Linaments. This is the Money, which I had to coin this day, to ye intent I
might be able to pay you, without further suite in the Law. For ye bound me so
strayghtly, with an oblygation of an oath. Albeit in this case, every honest man
will wyllingly keep touch to discharge his credence to his power.


Soarenesse. OH, how ryghtly judge you? But now gentle Chirurgi, in as mutch as
you have yielded us the use of this day, let us depart for the time. Howbeit,
let us repair hither again, I pray you to morrow, to the intent the rest, if
any be, may be paid: and so we receive the whole sum in assurance, whereof ye
have given us, sore people, this earnest penny. And in the mean^ time, we Sore
and Lame, give thanks to the living God, for his dear benefyts, which of his
mercy, he has plentyfully bestowed upon us to relieve us with his gifts, God
gives health.
and by his means, that we have learned, to help and heal ourselves when we
are lame and sore, whereby we may be profitable to our common wealth, I
therefore desire you, when you be at leisure, to treat somewhat of ulcers,


Chirurgi. NOW, an ulcer is a breach of continuance, with putrefaction and
rottenness, caused in process of time. What an Ulcer is.
And their breedyng or ingenderyng* commonly (as Auicen takes it) is of
vlcerated breakyngs forth of pushes, and of wounds evil handled. Wherefore,
wounds) as our chyeftayn and graund master, affyrmeth in the first treatise
of ulcers) as soon as their due time of digestion, and abstersion is expyred,
and yet nevertheless, they remain foul and full of corruption, must be called
Ulcers properlye, and not wounds: whereof it is a consequent, All sores
voiding virulent matter are called Ulcers.
that every breach of continuance, which voydeth matter, or virulencie, shall
undoubtedly be called an Ulcer. Whereof some be fathered of an hot, and some
of a cold humor. The ulcers* which be found with redness, and itchyng in the
edges, come of the hot the other, which be without great redness and itch,
and have also wide roots, are fed and nouryshed of cold. Again, among
Ulcers, some be of small importance, and some be right dangerous. All be
dangerous, which breed no sanious matter* when the time is to breed it: or
when some apostumacion is co^currant, which shall be hydden secretly, without
euydent cause. For if the apostumacion vanysh, by reason of some medycine,
having power to work that effect, it were no matter, but if it vanish without
cause, and lie secretly a lurkyng: Certes, it imports no good, but evil, as
spasmes, destractions and alienacion of mind. Howbeit, there be also Ulcers,
as Auicen says, which properly, and as it were of their own nature, produce
their effects now and then, as ulcers of the back, of synewes, of the knees,
of the hanche, and all such as have great aliaunce with the Nuke, whereof,
some be tractable, and some repine utterly against Chirurgj, in their cure.

All kind of Ulcers be most hard of cure, which succeed any syckenesse* and
end the same, by the way of euacuacion: Ulcers be hard to cure that follow a
sickness.
For nature uses to unburden her self, at that place, from thenceforth, of her
evil and unprofitable superfluities. Likewise bodies, which be accidental,
moistye, or dry, will not easily be cured of their Ulcers: as women with
Child, and folk sick of the dropsy: which is the caused in the one through
abundance of accydentall moisture: in the other, by reason of retained
superfluities. Again, dry and ethicall members, may not easily be ensounded,
for want of good blood: We see the like effect in old selie bodies (which, what
for lack of digestyon of their meats, their natural heat being almost
extinguished* and what for lack of good blood) be contynually eaten up of
Ulcers. Often time an evil Complexion, is cause why, an Ulcer is not healed and
ensounded. Wherefore in especyall, have the Complexion in consyderation, and
never rest till ye have corrected the same. For why, otherwise the
nourishment, which creeps thither, will be turned into an evil matter when
it is not ruled and maistred of nature. For what is an evil matter else but
corrupted Nutryment, which Nature could not order* ne was able to convert into
the second Humidyties? And to the intent ye may atchieue this well, ye shall
bestow a little Labor, to know the Natures of simples, and Signs of
Complexions, which ye may learn of Galen, in his Book, de art medendi. And
spend not your time in trifles and words, that pass with the wynd,
Chirurgians do not agree.
neither in crooked and distorted arguments. For what good shall you do to your
pacyents, when they cry for your help, when ye have made a great sort of
subtle arguments. Whether there may be a neutralitye, or mean between sycknes
and health, in any body. Again since we see that they, which have made mention
in their books, be all at square, and none wholly of others opinion. Why do we
embrace such losyng of time? Therefore I will advise you, to follow with all
diligence, Master Ihon Tagaltius, who groundedly and pythlye in his doings,
seeks out fruictfull matters, omytting trifles.

On the other side, the Ulcers, which may be easily cured, are those that
chance in bodies of good complexions, and be nouryshed with good blood,
without affluence of many superfluities. Ulcers in good complexions, ^r sone
cured.
Amongst which some abide in their newly caused continuance, and some fall to
discontinuaunce again. The Ulcers which fall again to discontinuaunce, b^e (as
Auicen teaches) where flesh is caused and generated or ever the mundification
be complete. For in as mutch as unclean superfluities, be there secretly
hydden, it follows of necessity, that the continuance be loosed and broken
up again. And for this cause, such breaches of continuau^ce and sores, be
reckened for fistulaes, with the learned Phisicians.

Five kinds of Ulcers.
Further note here, that there be five kinds of ulcers in general an ulcer
virule^t, fylthie, hollow, rotten and corosiue. But me thinks it is meet
first, or ever we meddle with the cure of these generalles, that we recite ye
accydents of ulcers, which cumber and hinder us, in the cure: And when we have
so done, then shall we recite, and treat of their cures. For in case we correct
not the accydents, which make most for the knowledge quod quid est rei, as
Aristotle says in his books, De Anima, we shall never win the victory of
the ulcers, though we strive right stoutly in the cause, because the accidents
hold of the sore, and be of part against the cure,

Now the accidents which happen in ulcers, be these, bleedyng superfluous
flesh, Accidents in ulcers, their names.
evil in savor, Lips, dolor: apostumacion, hardness, corrupted bones,
swellyng veins, and roundnesse, and every of these require properlye a cure by
them self, which if it be denayed them, when they call for it, either we shall be
conuented before A Judge, to give every man his own, or the debt not paid,
there may be no confederacion in amity with men. Therefore least we be troubled
in the law or charged with tyranny, let us see how we can discharge our hands,
of these accidents, and first of bledyng.

Every flux of blood, dear brother Soarenes, commonly proceadeth from a
primitive cause* The flux of blood proceeding of a prymitiue cause.
For the antecedente, we will omit at this present, least happily, whiles we
pass over our own, and rush rashely into other men's doors, we might anon be
thrust forth by the head for thieves. Therefore, to avoid this dishonestie, we
will only speak of bleding, coming of a cause primitive. Now therefore a
moresage or bleeding, comes of late division of the cont^nuaunce* Distilling
of Blood from the veins.
or by reason of putrefaction of the same, In wounds we find swe^^ng of blood,
from a vein, and sometime swellynge and ^le^yng of blood, by little and
little. A vein sweateth blood, when he is berefte of his proper covering.
Wherefore in this case, we judge it necessary, that the Physician have to
repair with gentle medicine, that, which was wasted with cruel weapon. This
is don by couenable sewyng of ye wound, but in case the vessels be broken,
and the blood run at liberty: it is to be considered, whether the blood run
gently, Of woun^^^ d^epe, and (...) deep.
or else spryng and amount fierslye in his stream. If it fleet myldlie, then
it is plain, that it comes of veins, and is somewhat gross, and dimmysh red:
but if it mount on heyght, be red, fomyng and clear, it is an artery, But as
touching the cure, these things must first be considered, whether the whole
vein be cut, observe the order, which shall be declared anon, Next consider,
whether the wound be deep, or superfyciall. If it be superficial, apply
incarnatyues to it, which shall be such as follow.

Take Sarcocoll, Mirrhe, Aloes Epatike, Dragons blood: Mastike, ana, as ye
shall think convenient. For so of every of them, may be ordered by your self,
according to the pacyents complexion. Repercussiues
And with this ye shall withstand this kind of bledyng, which is wont to comber
men very much Afterward, when this medicine is cast into the Wound, ye shall
roll small quisettes of lynte, and weate the same in the whytes of Eggs, well
shaken and beaten with dust of Bole Armoniack, and lay them orderly in the
wound. These also must be covered with a lynnen Cloth, well weate in the same
white of Eggs, and afterward be bound, obseruyng always, that the bindyng be
handsomely done, that it cause no dolor. But if the Wound be deep, ye shall
consider with dilygent heed, whether the gappe may be suffyciently stopped, if
it be deeply stytched, and if reason allow, that ye shall not in any wise
omit the sewyng: that done, immediately let follow a linen cloth, infused
in the same whytes of Eggs, and dust aforesaid. If ye see that sewyng will
not serve. follow the order, which I my self followed, and had ever good
Success, as my Pacyents can tell and witness them selves.

And first ye shall wash the wound, with red or bynding wine, and that for two
causes. The one is to comfort the place: the other to wash of ye blood that
none may hinder the sight, To stop a bleding vein.
to see where the medicine ought to be applied. Again, that no blood be left,
to cause corruption. For ye shall shortly after, feel with your Instrument,
what watrysh and fylthy savor it will cause, if ye let any remain. Now, when
ye are at poincte with these matters, a new ^abour and care will take handfast
on you, that ye shall not be idle. Then ye shall lute the gappe, or mouth of
the veins, which spout loute blood with this medicine, R. The dust or powder
of Galls, Bean meal, and Mill dust. ana..ii. Ihon Uigos powder called
Praecipetatum..i. and mingle them with sufficient white of an Egg, and apply
it to the gap of the vein, When to incarnate, and when to separate a sor^.
as I said. Now if it shall come of putrefaction, lay all incarnatiues aparte,
and set your mind to the separacion thereof: which ye shall do with Vnguentum
AEgyptiacum, if the putrefaction be but small, and between two parts of the
flesh. And AEgyptiacum must be made, after the description of Auicen* even at
home, Uert greece. Roche Alome, in quantity parts a like if it be deeper then
so, then apply the Trochiskes, which I will descrybe in the end of the book:
which will remove the rotten flesh, from the good without great pain. But this
can no man ryghtly mynister, except he have seen it ministered before:
therefore if ye set your minds to attain to this, choose some exper^
Chirurgian for the purpose, which can distinct these things unpractice. And in
good faith, if trouble did not withdraw me from practycing, I would show you
this poinct my self.

On the other side, when the vein is but partly opened, incontinent ye must
remember these two poinctes, to wete, that the vein must fullye be cut of,
or be bounden and knit. The one poinct we call incision of a vein, the other
bindyng of a vein. Of incision of small veins.
Incision is made and used, where the things before mentioned, did not serve,
as some, where they do not in deed. And this is practiced for this purpose,
because the ends of the vein being cut of, should run back, and be hid
within the flesh, and so be covered, whereof will ensue stoppyng of the vein.
Howbeit* this may not be practiced indifferently in all veins, but only when
they appear small. For when they be great and gross, then shall you use one
other fetch, not mutch unlike the former. Mark then, before ye make the
incision, whether if a small drawyng of the flesh be made, it were possible to
knyt the vein in the upper part, which thing were mutch tolorable in this
work. If that may not be, cut of the vein with an hot Iron, or Instrument,
made fyt to that, or to the like purpose. But take heed, that ye make not the
incision to deep, lest ye cut the artery, which accompaneth the vein: for
there be few veins, which have not arteries associated with them. Now one
cunning Man when he was called to one, who had bled two days, and many right
skillful in the matter, had been in a pecke of troubles, about staunchyng of the
blood: perceiuyng by questionyng with them, that were present, that they had
omitted nothing: Deep incision hurts the arteires.
that men commonly use in such cases, least he should seem a Dorre amongst
laboring Bees: and again, least he should have failed them who had said mutch
upon his head, used this feat, wherewyth he procured him self profyt, and his
pacyents saue^ie, though men dispayred of his life. For some of them that were
present, remembered the saying of Auicen, Evil accydents follow bledyng.
who says, that evil accydents, are wont to follow bleding as conuulsions,
through emptines, yexing proceedyng of drying of the villes of the stomach,
and alteracion of mind, with other symptoms which in this case are arguments
and signs of cold Death, For these be the accidents that follow bledyng,
Signs of death.
and when they appear, they sygnify death to be at hand, but to my purpose He
perced the lip of the wound* in the upper part, even unto the cut vein, and
left the same untouched of the needle, on the one part: then conueighed he his
needle underneath the vein: to the other part, and perced again the lip, from
the lower to the upper part, in such wise that he altered the vein, A good
practice.
knitting the ends of the threde together, and fastening it to the lips of the
wound, and thus delivered he the pacyent, even from Deaths door, and present
danger. But I say my Friends, one thing more, remember that about all your
Works, of staunchyng of blood (when* ye have filled the wound with quisets)
lay some piece of cloth upon the same, well weate in water, and Rosed Vinegar,
To staunche blood.
so that the piece may compass the whole member, where the bleeding is. Now
with such f^ates and engines, shall you triumph over al unbridled blood
flowinges, with mutch praise, and erect up worthy Monuments of your acts. We
have now, as it may be thought, spoken enough, and enough of bleading:
wherefore least the time fail us, being so swiftly measured, by ye first
mouable, let us now take the cures of ulcers in hand, where we shall bridle the
rest of the accidents belonging to ulcers. For if we would treat properly of
every of them, it should be a long matter, and displeasaunt. For why? the same
things should needs be iterated, and repeated again, and yet again in
diverse cures.


Soarenesse. BUt yet my brother, me thinks it were not superfluous, in our
communication, if you did shortly declare, or ever you entered this matter,
whereof ulcers take their name in especial, sithen we have found in writing,
that they are here and there named, of their causes, as of a matter that went
before, or else of their accidents, by reason of their causes.


Chirurgi. THey be named sanguine, chollerike, flegmatike, and melancholic,
according as any of these humors, shall excessiuely abound in the^. Sanguine.
Chollorike, Apostumacions.
Or of their accidents, they call them hard, cauy, fistulous, rotten,
cancrous, corrosiue, dolorous, apostumated, evil lipped, and so forth, as any
accident shall cumber the ulcer. Howbeit the true causes, where of ulcers take
their names, essence and being, be but two, even the antecede^t, and coniunct:
the antecedent, is, where is corruption with an excessive quality of evil
humors, proceeding of an inordinate regiment of life, having power to fret,
viciate, and corrupt the parts of the bodies. The cause coniunct, is nothing
else but a malicious complexion, caused of Wounds breaking forth, and opened
pushes, Anticedent, and Coniunc^^.
namely when they be evil handled of Chirurgians, and Phisicians, as we see
daily in our time: we can also devide ulcers otherwise. For some be plain,
some deep, and of the same some hard, some soft: Again some standing, some
running or creeping. And likewise, some of them be corrosiue, some putrified:
but because such definicions, make better for the dulling of the wit, than
quickening: I purpose not to make any special mention of them in cures. Ye may
note, yt often time, they be turned after some property or quality of the
matter, or Sanies, which shall be in them. For our Doctors, and chief Phisicions
say, Sanies is matter coming of corrupted blood* or else putrefaction, and
sometime it is taken for poison.
there be four kinds of matter, or Sanies, which the Latins thus term, and
cannot well be Englished, Sanies, Pus, Virus, Sordities whereof they surname
them* with like derived terms. And according to these number and terms. I
mind to speak of ulcers here consequently in their order. But first of a
sanious ulcer.

And thus shall we do, if God so will, when we have said somewhat of Sanies. For
in as mutch, as we entend to speak of a sanious ulcer, it is reason that we
know first, what Sanies is, whereof it springs, and what be his causes. And
by the reason of this, we shall easily know the correction of ulcers, which
thing (as we take it) consists in knowledge of the causes, rectification of
complexions, and comforting of members. Now Sanies is nothing else, but
corrupted food or nourishment which nature was not able to digest, neither
turn into the second humors, which they call glue, D^we, and the humor
unnamed: Sanies is caused and generated, when nutrityue matter, coming or all
ready come to a member, may not be converted into the nature of a member, by
reason of the weakness of ye same, or superfluityes of other members approaching
together. Strong members do oppress the weak.
For as Galen writes, the strong members do oppress the weak, and put of
their superfluities to them, which be turned into Sanies, or virulency
Wherefore, when we purpose to cure any weak member, we must endeavor our
selves with all possibility, to stre^gthen it with some Medicine co^fortatiue,
that it may put of strange superfluities. And verily bynding medicines, being
of such heat, as shall not exceed the natural heat of the weak part, shall
comfort greatly, as Galen says in the third De art medendi. The same effect
have defensiues also, if they be likewise qualified. And after what sort this
must be don, the nature of simples it self, will inform you. Therefore*
bestow some labor, in the search of simples, to the intent ye may fetch them
readily, as it were from a store house, and not seek at al adventure by
chance medly, as they grope for a pin in the dark. The like mischief is
committed in administracions of Oyntmentes, which be hot, or moysty of
complexion, and both the qualityes do promote a soar to putrefaction. For in
heat and moisture, if heat rule not the same, then they are causes at first
dashe, to cause putrefaction, as Aristotle Prince of Philosophers affyrmeth*
Therefore, who so ever purposes, to exercise Chirurgj, must labor wi^h all
industry, to know the nature of oyntmentes, at his fingers end. I speak not
of the names of Ointments, as the imperickes, and some of our Men do,
Chirurgians must know Simples.
which profess Chirurgj, as soon as they can name and recite Vnguentum
Basilicum, Nigrum, Aureum, Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, Rosarum, Album
Camphoratum, Lithargicum, Ceracinum. etc. whereof they brag, and spread a
Peacockes tail against the simple. But I mean the qualities of ointments,
which must be diverse, in diverse maladies, according to our entencion curatiue,
in the malady. For sometime we comfort, sometime we moist, somewhere we dry, as
also oftentimes we cool, or heat. Therefore, it is not to be marueyled, that
such venterlinges and younglinges stumble so often at a Straw. For why, these
men be utterly lost in their books, and will not vary from them one finger
breadth, whereof spring many errors, specially when they understand not, which
one learned man records, considering he spared not to try out in the matter,
Fools with books, be worse than unlearned practicioners.
in his Aphorisms, saying, to work after Books, without perfect knowledge,
and a fine wit, is a right comberous thing. Wherefore I exhort you, most dear
Brethren, yt you order your medicines, according to the complexion of the
member, and your intencion in the cure. And if it be possible, make your
medicines your self, and trust not so mutch the Apothecaries, least ye be
deceived with ye blessed terms, I will not say cursed, entitled quid pro quo,
because he is dead that made it. For as men have diverse Phisiognomyes, diverse
qualities, and quantities, with sundry Complexions given them partly by
influences, and partly by tractes, and diverse Regions, so have the simples:
also as great variaunce amongst themselves, Uariety o^ Simples.
in as mutch as they be of sundry shapes, places, and countries, from whence
they acquire proper natures, qualityes and powers in working. Wherefore Auicen
cries out in ye Chanon of ulcers, saying: Medicamen quidem vnum, secundum
quaedam corpora facit nasci carnem, secundum quaedam est corrosiuum: which is
thus mutch to say: One medicine in diverse bodies, has diverse effects and
operacions. In one, by reason of the property of ye Body, it causes flesh to
grow: the same in some other is wastyng, and right abstersyue, specially, if
the body be soft and fine. Wherefore this is inferred, that ointments should be
made, Auicen.
according as the Complexion of the member shall require. And this sentence
touches the fine speached Cornelius Celsus, our dearling, saying: Ignorari non
oportet quod non omnibus aegris eadem auxilia conferunt: Wherefore, be you wise
and circumspect in your confections, least it be your chance, to fall into the
Noddyes had I wist. Now as touching the Judgment of Sanies, that Sanies shall
be called good, as Auicen says, which is white, smoothe, C* Celsus.
and like in every part: which sentence he borrowed of Hippocrates the Divine
Physicion. in his book of Prognosticacions, where he says, Ea putredo
laudatur. etc. White Sanies is praised, which is like over all, egall in the
utter face, and not ill favored, the contrary is most evil. Now if ye will
know why Sanies should have these properties, read Auicen in the Chap.
concerning the judgment of Sanies, where ye find even your fill, of causes
showed of the said property, which ye may seek at his hands, and not now at
mine, for it would draw us farther from our purpose. Ye may also have respect
to Galen, upon the first of the Prognosticacions: where ye shall read
certain divine things, for the perfect attaynment of this matter. Sanious
matter.
Ye have now sufficiently heard what Sanies is, whereof it comes, and of
what sort it is. Now we will join hereunto, the cure of a sanious ulcer.


Soarenesse. Speak now of ulcers, I pray you, that I and my soar brethren,
may perceive them plainly.


Chirurgi. WHerefore, for your better understanding, ye shall note, that there
be two sorts of ulcers: Two sundry sorts of Ulcers.
Whereof some be simple, and some be compounde. I mean not, that they be
simple absolutely, but simple, after some manner of simplicity. For why, their
being is of an evil Complexion, breach of continuance, and sometime
composicion, also with a concourse of evil qualities. But I say, they be
simple, so farforth as they be opposite to ulcers, where accide^ts be found,
letting the true ensounding of ulcers. For here we call them co^pounde, which
have such accidents. Wherefore, when I name a sanious ulcer, as we reckon the
matter, ye shall understand it, of that which is fully void and clear of the
said accidents, not wythstanding it be tangled, with some doublenes and
composicion. Therefore we will speak first of a simple ulcer, which is in the
plain: and then of a simple deprest, or hollowed, which done, we shall in
like manner and order treat of the compounded, from which kind, the almighty
and merciful God, preserve us all.

Ulcers hot cold, and biting.
And first we note, that all ulcers in that and as farforth as they be Ulcers,
require drying in their cure: whereof there be two kinds, the one hot, and
the other cold. Again, some be with mordicacion and ^yting, and some without.
All be biting, which in a certain degree of heat, be dry of complexion, which
is because heat is yoked, and coupled felowshipped with drought, as Aristotle
most learnedly first taught, as ye may read in his books of Generation,
Aristotle a good note of Elements.
and Corrupcion. And he says thus, concerning the mixture of elements: If the
coldness of the earth, were changed to heat, it might no longer be named
earth, but fire. He says further, if the drought of the same, were changed to
moisture, it should lose ye name of earth, and be called water. Whereof it
follows, that things so dried, in case they be found with like Qualityes,
they will not only waste and gnawe, but also burn, when they be applied. And
this do the qualities of the fire, and Mercury Sublimated apartly show.
Nevertheless the one shall be so mutch the less of mordicacion or freting, as
his qualityes shall more be oppressed in it, than in the other. And therefore,
be you somewhat the wyser, Of exiccatiues.
in choosing of your simples, least ye take one for an other. Now to the intent
ye may the rather eschew this foul error, I will give you the difference of
exiccatiues, or drying Simples, which we use in Ulcers. For by the knowledge of
them, ye shall soon come to the cure of Ulcers. These exiccatiues be cold:
The three kinds of Sau^ders, Mirabolanes, Terra sigillata, Dragons blood,
Bole Armoniacke, Tutia, Camphire, Ceruse, Litharge, Uermilion, Sinaper, red
Coral, Gum Arabicke: these be hot, and without biting or gnawing: Aloes
epatik, Mirrhe, Sarcocol vnholed Galls. etc. Hot with biting and mordicacion:
Uerdigreace, Alum. etc. Of these ye may make Medicines to the purpose, for all
kind of, ulcers, To know whether ulcers be hot or cold.
so ye know perfitly ye property and working of them: ye shall know, whether
the ulcer be hot or no, by his edges. For if he be reddish in ye edges, it
declares heat: as also, if the flesh be remiss red, and hot in feeling,
which may be rectified with Vnguentum Album, made after this manner.

R. Oil of Roses..vj. Weathers fat..iiij. Marow of the hucclebones of
Kyne..ij. white Wax..i.ss. Cerusse..iij.ss. Camphory..iij. making it to an
ointment, according to the art, which ye shall apply upon ye ulcers, when ye
have first cast in this powder, Vnguentum Album.
in the soar. R. Of all the Mirabolans, of Terra sigillata, of red Coral.
ana..j. of Cerusse..ij. of Roch Alum brent..j. of Creuishe shelles..j. stamp
all these together as small as Sand, which cover, as I said with the ointment
above described. But if the flesh be so mutch ouergrowne, yt the lyppes do
appear upon it, ye shall use Vnguentum Apostolorum for ye correction thereof,
observing always warely, that the ulcer be not inflamed again. For some
complexions be so tender and soft, that they will be altered almost at ye name
thereof, as I saw my self in a Citizen of London, whose name I omit, because
he has bin unkind to our Art. When I perceive any such complexion as he was
of, I order my rectificatiue, with such cautell, that it shall both comfort
and rectify. After this sort. R. of Oil Rosed..iiij. of Oil Myrtine..i.ss. of
Bean flower..iij. of powder of Roses, Myrtils* and Cypress Nuts, ana..ij. of
Acatia..ij. of Bole Armoniacke, of Terra sigillata. ana..i. of new Wax. q.ss.
and so make thereof a defensive, between hard and soft. And this at two
applicacions, with Vnguentum Apostolorum will rectify the member, To make the
skin whole.
and make the Ulcer ready to a Cicatrice. Thus cured Ihon Backter, the learned
Chirurgian, such ulcers in a month, where other, whom ye know, had them in
hand a year and more. Now when the flesh is suppressed, and ye purpose to
skin the ulcer, it is most expedient, ye use this Lotion. R. Of good clear
Wine, one cup full, of red Roses.M.ss. of Rosed Honey strayned..ss. of roche
Alum..iij. and as mutch Saffron, as shall be able to color the Wine, and sees
all these together, till the Alum be melted, and then moist the Ulcer with
this Lyquore, being luke warm: And maintain it, as soon as it may be, dry
the ulcer again, with a fine Linen cloth, that none of the lyquore remain
there. For it will cause matter and corruption, as it befell under his hands,
who is my sworn Enemy. For whiles he labored to skyn the soar, as I did,
even with the same Medicine, he caused hollownesse in an ulcer. Now when ye
have so moysted ye ulcer, as is said, lay yet a little cotton in the Ulcer,
that the moisture, in case any remain, be fully dried up. Applying upon the
same this Ointment, which is very effectual in working of a Cicatrice.

. of Oil of Roses, How to make a Cicatrice.
and Myrt. ana..i.ss. of Uermilion..ij. and seethe them together, till they get
a very black hugh, and so shall ye fynishe the cure. Lo, here have you the
cure of a sanious plain ulcer. Now will we to the hollow, whereof ye shall
receive, large gifts and rewards, if ye handle your self well, in the
reformacion of humors, that fall to the place ye know that sharp Humors,
will properly freate, and consume the Flesh newly grown, and let the growinge
of the same, Three sundry intencions. Of regiment. Of matter. Of growing.
wherewyth the hollownesse of the Ulcer, should be filled and restored. For the
reformacion hereof, shall follow three intencions. The first must be to order
the life, with couenable regiment. The second to keep of matter, which
approaches thither. And the third, to cause new Flesh to grow, with the
skinning of it. The first is had by ordering of the soar things, called not
natural, and chyefly with Diet, which must be wholly bent, to the contrary of
the humors and qualities, which feed the soar. The repulse of humors may be
wrought two ways: either with competent Purgacion, or with some unctions and
cataplasmes, which comfort, and put of, as will the defensive above ordered.
Flesh is caused to grow two ways, by letting of the contraries, and by
applying of dustes and Ointments, being of like qualities. The dust must be
made, by myngling of the exiccatiues above rehearsed, which ye must indosate,
according to your need. But if ye delight more in Ointments, ye may make
that, after this manner.

R. Of the clearest Terebintine..ij. of Honey rosed and strayned..i.ss. of
Plantayne water..iij let them seethe, till the water be wasted, An incarnatiue.
and put thereto of Barley and Bean meal. ana..ij. of Frankencense..i. with a
little Saffron. And so this will be an incarnatiue, with some sturring, which
ye must cover with Vnguentum Alb^, above described. Besides this, the defensive
there ordered, must be noynted about in ye circuit, that it be not inflamed to
heat again. (...) flesh.
Now if the flesh grow to fast, it will be suppressed with Vnguentum
Apostolorum, applied once, or twyce, or more if need require. And when that is
come to equality with the Edges, then finish your cure, as it was said above,
in a plain ulcer. There be other feats and Engines, which cannot be written
but are left to Chirurgians estimacions. For some while one quality, some
whiles an other* frouneth or flattereth, and must be ru^ed now hither, now
thither, as a Sheep amongst Wolves. Of which poyncte complayneth Auicen, in
the entrance of his work, Auicen.
saying: The tradicion of Physic, contains less, than is necessary for the
Physician. For the overplus, which is left to their judgment and estimation,
may not be expressed, and put in writing. Wherefore, to th'entent ye may get
this Judgment in things, left to Estimacion, ye must not loathe, nor be high
in the instep, to see other expert Men's Work. For there by, with dyligent
aduertence, ye shall assuredly gather judgment, and ^e ascertayned in your
inuencions. Now for asmutch, as we have gieuen you the taste, in a hot
sanious ulcer, we will venture (I hope luckely) the cure of the cold, observing
the same manner and order, which we used tofore in the hot Ulcer.

Now, when a sanious cold ulcer, comes to our hands (which thing may easily
be perceived by the Eye: Cold Ulcer.
for the flesh will be remise white, or wan, notwithstanding, yt sometime dim
palenes comes to an ulcer, through blood, running with choler: it is also
perceived with feeling of the hand) now then when such ulcers, I say, come to
your hands, ye shall not depart in any poynct from the order, which before was
discribed. Nevertheless, we say for certain, yt their remedies as far
differ one from the other, as the ulcers in heat and cold. And here we will
begin with the defensive, which offers it self, first in the cure, where our
composicion was thus.

R. Of oil of Camomell, and Mirte, ana..ii, powder of Camomell and M^lilot.
ana. ^ij. powder of red Roses, A defensive.
Mirtilles, and Cypress nuttes. ana., i.ss. of Barley and Bean meal..ii. of
new Wax. q.ss. and so make the defensive, between hard and soft, wherewyth
anoint the circute of the ulcer. R. Of Aloes, Mirrhe, Sarcocol* ana..ss. of
Frankensence., ij. of Dragons blood, and flowers of Pomegranets, ana..iii. of
Saffron..i. and make a powder of all these, covering it afterward with this
Ointment following.

R. Of Oil of Roses..ij. of oil of Camomell, and Mirte. ana..iij. of Weathers
fat..iiij. of Hens grease..i. of Marow of the Cow and Heart. ana..i.ss. of
Litharge..ii. of Cerusse..i. sees them, till they be black, and then put
thereto of clear Terebintine. A sanatiue.
.i.ss. of Ship Pytch..i. of new Wa^e.ij.. and let them sees a little again:
and when ye have taken the^ of from the fire, stire them still, unto such
time, as it be congeled and fyrme, otherwise, the Minerals will fall to the
bottom in a residence. This Ointment is Vnguentum Basilicum, after our
descripcion and intent. Now in case the Flesh appear foggy and fattishe, then
Vnguentum Apostolorum, shall be necessary to dry it. For that without question,
will bring it to equality of ensounding. And then ye may fynishe your cure,
and skin the same with the lotion above ordered.

Now in as mutch, as we be at poynct with the Simples: or right and congruent,
we must lay a foundation for the Compounde, A good foundation.
so that we may like workmen, build in the humayne body, or repair ruinous
and decayed places, and prop up such as are like to fall. Wherefore, once
again remember the accidents, before mentioned, to the intent we may be able
to redress, and amend them one by one. For where this may not be obtained, we
shall to our reproach, be kept from the true ensounding of the Ulcer. And
therefore we purpose, to prosecute the amendment of them in their order
accordyngly. Now when a compounded Ulcer is offered us, let us look what
accidents be concurrant, hindering ye ensounding. For if many maladies or
accidents, were found in it, we must begin at yt, which does most comber the
ulcer, as Auicen says: if we will cure a malady, In healinge a compounde
ulcer, mark the accidents concurrant.
where diverse accidents be concurrant, we must begin at that* which has one
of these three properties, Vna earum est quod alia sanari non potest antequam
ipsa sanetur vt apostema, etc. The one is, where the accident is such, that if
it be not first cured, the ulcer may not be cured, as apostumacion joined with
an ulcer. For in this case says he, we follow the apostumacion, unto such
time as the malice of the complexion be displaced, and then we follow the cure
of the pryncipall. Wherefore, to follow and observe the Canons, accordingly:
we shall order pryncipally our intencions, First handle the accidents in a
cure, and note three things.
so that we first take in hand the accident, which shall chiefly comber and
molest the Paciente and us in the cure. And the first of these intencions shall
be, to order the Pacientes life conveniently. Next to purge the faulty humor,
according to the exigente thereof. Thirdly, to amend the maliciousness of the
quality, in the Ulcer. This last shall be divided yet again, according to the
disposicion of the Ulcer, requiring diverse intencions. Regimente of life.
Now as touching the order of life, you may by your own judgment consider,
what is to be done therein: partly by his regiment before time, and partly in
his syckenesse time, turning his Diet to the contrary quality. As thus: if he
used a cold regiment before, use him to hot, so if dry, moysty, but do it
moderately, and by little and little. For nature cannot away with sudden
chaunges: Howbeit this is not seen lightly in humors, without long use of
contraryes in Foodes. We shall know to purge the humors, Of urine
considered, in every sick or soar man.
by the showing of the sick Water, in two poynctes, that is, by the color and
substance: whereunto is added the residence, with his qualities mutch or
little. And by the sygnification of these well considered, we may try out all
the sick persons complexion.

For if the Uryne shall be thycke in Substance, and red in color: it means
that blood rules ye man. If it be thin of Substance, and red of color: doubt
not, but choler has the pre-eminence. But if it be thick in substance, and
white of color, then fleume has the maistrie: as if ye substance be thynne,
and color white, melancholy. Now of, and by the resydence, ye shall perceive
the time to give pocions, and purgacions: for when that begins to appear,
it shows digestion of the humors to be purged. But there be also refractions
of colors, and eleuacions, and depressions of residences, which signyfy the
denominacion and Service, of the Natural Heat, Of radical moisture.
and wastyng of the radycall Moisture: which things. now are not to be
prosecuted, because this matter partayneth to a Physicion, whereof if God give
me Life, I purpose to treat at conuenyent leisure: now let this be suffycient
for the cure of an Ulcer. If ye will know how an Humor shall be purged,
read Leonardus Fuchsius who teaches to purge, according to the fault of the
Humor. Other have at hand, Master Vygoes Book of Chirurgi, where ye shall
find, even to the full, how to purge an Humor* For if I would distemper
Pocyons, make Morselles, and myngle pylles, I should be troublesome unto you,
or ye might hit me in the Teeth with the Proverb: ye set the Carte before
the Horse: For my Communication should be unsavory, as it fares with a
Guest, which regards not delycate Iuncates, being filled before. And
therefore, leauyng these things to you as known, I will pass to the
amendyng, of ye Malyciousnesse of an Ulcer, when we apply cool to ye hot, and
hot to ye cold. Likewise, Apply contraries.
if ye Ulcer be moisty applying dry: if dry, applying moysty Medicines. We
shall restrain his Malice by digestion, Mundyficacion, corrosyon, incision,
and also burning and mollifying, as it shall please the Work man. But when,
and how, these means shall be put in ure, that shall we show, when we go
about to displace the accydents of Ulcers. All which things we do orderly,
omittyng the former matters, for a time, because trouble has prevented me.

UUe have entreated before suffyciently of bleeding, coming of a cause
primative, from whence ye must fetch hither, such things as there were
spoken. For it were superfluous, to speak more of the matter in this place.
Wherefore, being at poinct with that accident, I will make forth to the rest,
and speak no more of this. The like would I do with superfluous flesh, if I
had rehearsed the cause of it, when we speak of a sanious Ulcer. The cause of
superfluous flesh, is to mutch moisture and unclean mundyficacion, as Auicen
thinks, in the Chapter of Ulcers. saying: In some Ulcers grows
superfluous flesh, The cause of superfluous flesh.
and in some it grows* not. And the Ulcers where it grows, be they in the
which, to mutch haste is made, in the repair of flesh, before complete
mundificacion. Wherefore take you heed, that ye proceed not to far, in
moistyng of the Flesh. And as for remedies, the matter is plain, for that we
know the cause: but remember that ye quicken or delaie, in drought and
corrosion, the medicine, according as the matter shall require, and as the
Flesh shall be more or less swelled up with foggie Fat. We have seen that
this kind of maladies, has not felt, nor forsed of other remedies, and has
required an actually cautery. If this happen under your hands, if easy remedies
profit not (of which sort be Vnguentum Apostolorum, and Aegyptiacum, take a
corosyue powder, and brent Alum) fear not to dry it with an hot Iron also.
And if ye shall so do, and a blisterous crust be risen: ye may displace it, as
we showed before in our treatise of apostumacions, and then return to the cure
again.

If hard and discovered lyppes, be found in an ulcer, letting the ensounding,
set all your cure, upon the displacing of that evil: omitting no time or
hour. For if we do the contrary, we shall in the have labor in vain, and
afterward be compelled, to give over the purpose, and take that in hand at
latter cast. Therefore to spend no time in vain, begin with the shearing or
cutting of, of the lips. Ye shall cut them of by little, and little, without
causing of great dolor, if ye apply this powder, here beneath ordered. For
Auicen says, we should never cause dolor in an ulcer, Auicens providence.
unless we be constrained to it of necessity, which is, where gentle medicines
serve not, and he did not this without foresight. For he was well ware, as a
forecasting man, that there would come after him, which would be more lykely,
to subvert mankind, than to preserve: which would boast themselves of yt, that
they would imitate no rules of Physic in their works: but follow rather ye
frantike and pestilent saying, of certain counterfayts of our time, Soft
Chirurgians make foul soars. yet Butcherly manglers, ma^re all together.
which have this in their mouths, and have brought it to a common Proverb to,
saying: that a wound will breed worms, under a gentil Physicions hand. As
though ignorant and Bocherly cruelty of ye Physicion, should be cause of
health. I speak of the cruelty, which blind boosardes do use, with all
counterfayt boldness, and colored diligence, in every little felon, to the
intent, they may thereby win the name of learned, and expert Chirurgians: and
not a whit of necessary sharpness, whereunto we be induced, both by ye rules,
and autenticall counsel of learned Phisicions, and sweet persuasions of
Poets. For this says the fine wylted, and eloquent Naso, Immedicabile vulnus,
est recidendum. etc. Where the wound is incurable, Quid, a good u^te.
says he, it must be shorn of, that ye whole be not infected wythal. Again
Iuuenal with his Satyricall trick, one Grape draws color of an other,
Example.
only by reason of their aspect, as one Measelled Hog, measelleth the whole
Herd. Virgill also is with us at our Elbowe, saying: Culpam ferro compescite.
etc. Appease, says he, the fault out of hand, with the sword, Good counsel.
or ever ye cursed infection, go farther among the people. Wherefore, when ye
shall chance upon such cures, do that which shall appertayn to the
preseruacion of the Pacient, without all white lyuered womanlyke feeblenes. And
if ye so bold your self, and work accordingly, the matter well considered, ye
shall not be called vnmylde and cruel, but provident, and merciful: How bold
the Chirurgian should be in cure.

C. Celsus.


notwythstanding ye blustering blames of your Adversaries, because ye have
saved, and not destroyed your Pacient. For doubtless, many soars will not be
mended, without ye Knyfe, as Cankers, and others, as Cornelius Celsus shows
in his books, of hand working. We have now run out of our Race, occasioned by
blind Chirurgians, howbeit, we have found nothing to mutch, their deserts well
considered. For who could be so pacient to hear them, and would not ware hot
in the cause, namely, being exasperated day by day, of such Men? For they
cannot see the good live in quiet by them, but they lie in wait for them,
with all endeavored mischief. Well, I relinquishe this, least I should seem,
to be delighted in reprehension of men, where my mind is far distant, from
that path of writing. Wherefore, let them go play them: we will repair to our
powder, which ye shall put on the evil favored lyppes of wounds or soars, A
good powder.
which is this. R. Of Citrine Mirabolaynes..ss. of red Coral. ss. of vnholed
Galls..j. of Dragons blood, of Terra sigillata, and Cerusse. ana..ij.
Uerdigrece..ij. of Roch Alum brent..i Sarcocoll, Mirrhe, Frankencense, Mastike,
ana..i.ss. mingle them all, and powder finely as Alcocoll, upon the which, ye
shall apply Vnguentum Basilicum, after the description in the cure of a cold
ulcer. And thus must you proceed, until the accident be removed, which don,
prosecute the cure, as is above prescribed. And in case the powder, by reason
of his weakness, speed not well the matter, ye may go to stronger Medicines.
Whereof this is the first. R Of oil of Roses..iij. Weathers fat..ij. Marrowe
of the Huccle bone of a Cow..i. water wherein sublimatum has been melted..i.
sees them softly together, unto the time the water be wasted, and then put
thereto..i. of Cerusse, and sees them again a little, when it is taken from
the fire, ye must stir it, till it be thick. This must be spread on a piece of
cloth, and laid on the soar, and peradventure, ye shall dispatch the matter
with this: If not, take this in hand and without doubt, ye shall win the
castle. But yet be ye hereof warned before hand, that it be not applied in any
sinuie place, least while ye seek freedom, ye fall into bondage. As it
befell in my friend, when he would bicker with the like ulcer, in a Woman's
foot where he could never win the matter, though he left no stone unturned.
Nevertheless, if ye be constrained thereto, by any necessity, or ever ye apply
this, ye shall first use an universal Purgacion, of the whole Body, and also a
comfortatyue to the Nuke, least happily there arise any Pestilent fumes, ready to
cause a conuulsion, or Spasme: and when ye have so done, proceed forth to ye
local medicines, which may be thus, which is most excellent good.

R. Cerusse, Uermilion, Sublimatum, ana..iij. mingle them, and powder them
fynely, whereof ye shall sprinkle, so mutch in the ulcer, as is able (if I may
so speak) falt the part, which shall be removed: and incontinent, cover it with
this plaster, which shall make for the appeasing of dolor, and remoouing of
the escharous crust. To remove an escharous scab or crust.
R. leaves of Mallows, Uiolets, and Lettice. ana. M.i. sees them together in
Mutto^ broth of the Weather, and afterward stamp them putting thereto. l
i.ss. of Barley meal, of oil of Roses complet..ij. of Butter..iij, and Yolks
of three Eggs: with which plaster ye must proceed till the crust be taken of,
and then ye may prosecute the cure with digestiues, Abstersiues, and
Incarnatiues, as ye were informed before. If ye work after this sort, and
with these remedies, according as they have been declared, ye shall win your
Spurs, in such cures, and great friendship also. Now in asmutch, as we be well
trained in this, let us come nearer the accident of dolorous pain, to see how
we can rid our hands of that also. For why, this is now and then so extreme,
cruel and sharp, that it does not only exclude the cure of ulcers, but utterly
interdite and suspend almost, all the virtues, as well natural as animal, and
spiritual. Wherefore of very right we must put our helping hand to this also.

For as mutch then, as dolor is as it were a cupping glass, in drawing matter
unto the place, the writers have used mutch diligence, Example.
in appeasing of it, considering the accide^tes, which may ensue thereupon, as
overthrow of the virtue natural, failing of spirits, and contractions of
synewes. Al which accidents are perilous, and to be doubted in all maladies.
Wherefore, to the intent men may eschew this by a rule: they learn men
knowledge, in their publicated works, that it proceeds of two causes, that
is, of the breach of continuance, and alteration of qualityes. As Galen says,
Breach of co^tinuaunce or hurting of the whole member.
dolours where as they be, declare breach of continuance, or sudden
alteracion of qualityes: the contynuaunce may be broken four ways, by
incision, corrosion, breaking, and stretching, as in apostumation. Alteracion
is by heat and cold, moisture, drought, and other such like. Note, what
dyligence they took, to find the causes of dolor. Now if dolor arise,
Alteration, what it is,
by means of incision, as in wou^des: the first way to appease it, is to sewe
it, and next to anoint hot oil Omphacine in the edges and circuit of the
wound. And this must be don, not once or twyce, but continually* til it be
appeased in a great part. If it come to corrosion, which accident, Of dolor.
properly pertayneth to an ulcer, it must be removed also, if we entende to
cure the ulcer. But here note, that there be two causes of the matter, a
proper, Two causes of matter.
and a depending: the proper cause is, a certain malignity, or shreudnesse in
the flesh, which our men call, proprietas occulta, the secret property. The
cause dependinge is naught else, but evil humors, which fret and eat out the
flesh when they come to the conuinct, as does Choler, myxt with Salt Phlegm.
And certainly, this latter shall have need of euacuation with Cassia, Manna,
Diacatholicon, and other like purgations. But as for the former, it shall be
ruled after an other order, even by comforting of the edges of the ulcer, with
defensiues, able to cherishe and feed the complexion of the flesh, and with
the strong powder, Praecipitatus, cast in the ulcer whose description ye shall
find, at the end of the treatises. If it come by breaking, it is eased by
setting of the bones, and competent bynding, and situacion of the member. For
albeit, the breach be never so well restored, and set in place: there will be
yet discontinuaunce, if it be untowardly set to rest. And as for the setting of
Bone, ye shall learn at other Men's hands: For their Books are replenished,
with precepts and rules for the purpose, specially Galen. etc.

But if alteracion come of extension, or stretching, Alteracion of extension.
as it is in apostumacions, mollificatiue Medicines shall be best, to prepare
the matter to come forth: And Auicen sends us to such appeasementes, saying,
the veheme^cy also of Dolor, causes us of necessity, to use mollificatiues,
or softning Medicines. But of truth my Friend, if it grew through alteracion
of the Substance, the matter must be redressed by the contrary Qualities. For
Example. If an Ulcer be dystempered with heat (which is perceived by redness
in the circuit) it is redressed by a cold Ointment. And if the substance be
fallen to cold, When to use contraryes in hea^ing.
Vnguentum Rasum, or some like will qualify the matter soon. If it be engendered
with drought, moisture then will pacify all the gryefe. Again, if it be
disquieted with to mutch moisture, drought of an ointment, plaster or dust, will
dispatch it. To be short, if we work after this manner, we shall discomfite al
manner dolours, caused through excess of one quality, above an other. Thus
shall we with proper medicines, succor the humayne life of mankind, specially
when we attain to the cause of the malady, neither shall beg remedies, as
do these Dogleaches, Example.
which would be called Practicians, a Gods name, and wot not what practice is.
For they do as children do in their plays, which when they list to have some
sport, apoynct some Mark, and standing a little of, blindfilde, wherle
themselves about once or twyce on their foot, and then guess to the Mark at
al adventure, in which gropyng, they are found at last, when they think
themselves sure of it, further of then they were, where they stood at first.
Even so fares it with these groping practicians: for why? they be not able to
distynct, neither times of sickness, neither know the causes of them, or
properties of ointments, as he who bare men in hand, with gravity of words,
that he was a practician: and when one demanded, what quality Vnguentum
Rosarum had, he answered with great deliberacion, a Gods name, hot, yea Mary
sir quod the other a worthy aunsweare for such a practician. Wherefore I
exhort you to cast away all Sluggardy, and negligence, that ye may attain to
the knowledge* as well of Simples as of compoundes, and stumble not at matters
as they do. Ye have the causes, and cure of dolor: now we will go to an
apostumacion, as the order requires.

Now, as touching apostumacion, concurrant with ulcers, what should I say,
Apostumatio^ concurrant with an ulcer
sithen we have largely said in the matter, when we spoke of Apostumacions? But
yet to help them that be tangled herein: we will talk a little more of it, and
put somewhat to the enlargyng of our medicines, declared before. Then when an
ulcer is thus entangled, ye must use the remedies, appoyncted properly for
Apostumacions. But in case they shall not suffice, use this, wherein ye shall
find such profit, that for certain, ye shall maruayle not a little at it.
But first consider, whether the ulcer be vexed with an hot or cold
apostumacio^. For at that diversity, will follow ye diversity of making of the
Medicine. If it be hot, apply this. R. Leaves of Mallows and Uyolets, ana.
M.j. of hulled Beans. l i.ij. sees them al together, Hot and cold
apostumacions.
until the Beans be soft, which don, stamp them: and if it be requisite, to
put any Oil to the same, put a little Rosed Omphacine, and afterward spread it
on a cloth, and lay it to the apostumacion, for this will apease and resolve.
But if the apostumation be cold ye shall take the same plaster again, howbeit
ye shall search, and make it otherwise. R. Of Mallowe leaves. M.ij. hulled
Beans. l i.ij. of Barbers Lie. q.ss. and seethe them well, after stamp them,
and apply it to the place. Certaynely, this will work most aptly, for our
purpose. But note here, I pray you, that this plaster may be rectified in our
working, according as the Lee shall be mylde or sharp. Thus have ye enough,
for the displacyng of this accidente, if ye remember the sethings, with the
other above. Wherefore we will now talk, of hardness of ulcers.

Every good Physician, my friend, willing to cure his paciente rightlye,
Hardness of an ulcer
will appoint himself two principal intentions, that is, to preserve, and to
cure. The first searches for the causes, the other imagines ways to displace
theffect thereof. Therefore to the intent we may be able to remove this cause,
and withstand the effect, To search the cause, and displace the effect
let us see how many causes hardness has. When I was given to read Chirurgi,
and delyted in the antique books, I fell bechaunce upon Galens first book. De
simplicium medicamentoru^, where I noted him, to put three causes of hardness.
For it chances, Three causes of hardness.
says he, of to much drought of congelynge of matter, or else of fullness and
repletion. If it come of drought, moisture will ease it. And this must be done
with oyntmentes, plasters, and imbrocations, after the mind of Auicen,
Imbrocations be made with hot water, Imbrocasion.
and Mutton broth of the Weather, Plasters may be of all things, as ye hard
before Now the oyntmentes be of Muscilages, and sometime of Tripharmacon, as
Mirepsus thinks. How beit I suppose Myrepsus used it in hardness, caused of
frising, and not in drought. For I never saw Tripharmacon cause moisture, but
in hardness of co^gelacions or frising, it serves well, if it be made with
Uineger, which notably cutteth clammy and viscous humors. If it come of
fullness, (as it is seen in Apostumations) euacuation helps the matter: as
Hippocrates says, sicknesses, which come of replecion or fullness, be cured
by euacuation. Now if ye mind to resolve it, let it first be softened with some
mollificatiue, and it will the better vanish and transpire, the pores being
opened with the mollificatiue. And if it fall to hardness again, ripe it again
with the same medecin as Auicen writes in the cure of Apostumations, and then
let it be resolved. As for the making of these medecines, ye must return to
the treatise of apostumations, where ye shall find a special plaster made of
Melilote, Sapa or new wine and lie, and an other of the decoction of Beans,
Mallowe leaves. etc. But as for the third kind of hardness, parteineth to an
vlcere, and for an end, if the hardness will not be amended by these meansfrete
it with some corosiue, according to the manner, as it was prescrybed in the
correction of hard lips in an vlcere.

Now as concerning corrosiue, or gnawing in an vlcere, we would treat to the
full thereof, if we had not meddled with the matter, Corosion or bytynge.
when we were about the appeasyng of dolor, namely, for that that accident is
much more combrous then any of the other, But yet in as much as we have there
given no remedies, we will here have ye matter a little while in consideration
again. We suppose then, that corosion is termed of that, that it with his
sharpness, biting, and freting, resolves, wastes, and dries up the
moistnes of the member, after which resolution, the substance of the flesh is
minished, and so falls to vlceration. Wherefore, according to our
determination, there be two causes of this, the proper, and depending. And as
for ye proper cause, it is as we said before, a certain malignity, or
fylthynes in ye flesh, which Physicians call the secret property. And for the
displacyng of this, ye must consider the property of the member and then temper
and correct it with defensiues, linimentes, and oyntmentes, made according to
your intention, as is that, which I made, respecting both complexcion, and
purpose, in the mallady, or evil.

R Oil of roses, Mirte, and Uiolet ana..i, ss. Bole Armoniacke, Terra
sigillata, A good liniment.
and Dragons blood. ana..ii. Acatia.iii. powder of Roses, Mirtilles, and
Cipresse Nuttes ana. i.ss white wax.ss. make hereof a liniment, according to
the art, and annoint the vlcere and his circuit with the same. In case the
hidraunce come of evil flesh, sprynkle this powder on it, and ye shall
dispatch the malignity. R. Of Citrine, Mirobolanes, of Terra sigillata of
Cerusse, A consumer of Flesh.
ana. iii. of prepared Tutia..i.ss. of Dragons blood.ii. of burnt Alome..ii,
mingle them and let it be a fine powder to be cast in the ulcer. Which ye shall
cover with the same liniment, spread in a cloth: or cover it ye Vnguentum
album or Vnguentum de Minio. The cause depending, we take it to be the
antecedent, even a Choleric humor, mixed with salt phlegm, which gnaweth the
flesh, Antecedent co^iunct.
when it comes to the coniunct, or place. Now for the cure of this, we order
two intentions, the one to keep of humors, yet fleting, the other to
discomfyte them, which be already flowinge. The first may be done with
Cassiafistula, Diacatholicon, Manna, or any like purgative. And administration
of the dust and liniment which we ordered now, will accomplish the other, how
beit apply this ointment following upon ye powder.

R Oil of Mirte, Roses,, and violets. ana..ii, Weathers fat..iii. Goats
grease.i.ss. juice of Colewortes..iii. sees them together till the juice be
dried, and then put thereto., iiii. of vermilion..iii of Cerusse, and,.ii. of
Litharge, To make a cicatrice.
and play them again, til they become very black, stirrynge them still that
the Mineralles fall not to the botome, and burn. This done* put yet thereto..i.
of Terebintine..vi. of new wax and make it to an ointment between hard and
soft, in lykenes of a Cerote. And this will bring the sore to a Cicatrice, and
fill your had full of money for your labor.

Now rottennes and putrefaction follows, whose description I will rehearse to
the intent ye may thereby be assured of the Mallady. Of putrefaction or
rottenness.
Putrefactio^is when the dew breathyng of the spirit is inhibited and let
in a member, by whom the complexion should be mayntayned and defended. And when
this is corrupted, or else let in his due passage, the moisture of that part
is not ruled, and so does the part putrify and rotte, as Aristole says iiij.
Metheo. Moisture and heat, not ruling the same, is cause of corruption at the
first meeting. But to say truth me thinks it has three causes in all. The
first corrupts the vital spirit with holding his due breathing and passage as
do stupefactiues or dead things, as Opium, and to cool repercussiues things
letting pass, be gross thycke and clammy humors, which by their multitude,
thicknes and toughnes, stop the privy spiracles, and breathynge pores: and as
touching things that inhibit, they be causes primitive. As brusyng, smiting,
and bynding to strait, All these mortify a member, inhibityng his spirit and
specially bynding, which I saw befall in a Man of mutche honestye lyinge in
the Hospital of Sayncte Bartholomewes. He was pained of a push between his
tooes: and when one, who^ ye know had opened it, there gushed forth so much
blood that the Chirurgian thought it b^st to bynd the member, with a right
strayt bond, whereupon the pacient dyed the next day. Wherefore it is
expediente, How^ pa^ie^t dyed by evil cure.
that ye be ware ye fall not into such lewed ouersightes, whereby ye should
get the name of Boch^rly ma^quell^rs, as he did, not without his desert. Mark
here also that, that which corrupts, may two ways be considered. First as
it appears, the way to putrefaction, next putrefaction already caused. If ye
consider it, in the first respect, make your recourse to the contrary causes:
according to the saying of Hippocrates, Hypocrates.
sicknesses caused of repletion be dispatched by euacuation, which done, the
effect is at a point, as Aristolle says Remove the cause, and the effect is
removed, But if ye take on putrefaction the second way, ye must put one the two
eyes, Remove the cause, and the effect will cease.
which Galen ascrybed to a good Physician. Whereof the right shall behold the
cause, and left the effect, which is the putrefaction. The right shall use
contraryes to the least applied. Oyntmentes and plasters, to repair the
putrefaction, which shall be these, R Of Uertdegrece, of Rooch Alome, and of
Honey, like parts, with a little Uineger, and have it to the fire, till the
color alter from green, to red, which use, spreadyng this over it. Galen.


Take of Bean meal, of Barley, and Lupine meal. ana. li. ss. of Barbours lie.
q.ss and sees the^ unto such time, as they be well mingled together, like a
past, which must be spread on a piece of cloth But note, if the rotte^nes be so
far past, that it will not be displaced with Vnguentum Egyptiacum, of equal
parts, ye may use this, which undoubtedly will dispatch it. Take of honey. iii.
of Roch Alome and Uertdegrece. ana. ii. of sublimatum..iii incorporate them
altogether at the fire, til they be sufficiently sodden, and lay it to the
rotten place, and then the plaster appointed before. To help putrefaction. A
good medecin.
And if there be caused an eschara, remove it with digestiues, made of
Terebintyne, and yolks of eggs or with Butter. It may also be removed with a
plaster which was given for Apostumatio^, opened with a potencial cautery, when
this is removed ye ulcer shall be cured, as be wounds. Now ye se what is to be
done in putrefaction, or fyllthy sores.


Soarenes. What say you of corrupted bones?


Chirurgi. NOw to come to a corrupted bone, Of Bones which are corrupted two
things considered.
the signs of it must be noted, that ye may know, whether it be so or not. For
it has proper signs, to be kowenn by, as well inwardlye as outwardly. The
outward signs be dull, and loosse flesh as Auicen. says. in the chapter De
ventositate spinae.

The signs inwardlye may not be seen with the eye, but be found with the
searcher. For if a man search it well, he shall not only find it secretly frete,
but also minished and abated in substance Wherefore if we find this fault. and
mind to amend it, we shall above al things observe two points, one parteineth
to the cure, the other to eschew reproach and infamy. A good observation.
We shall avoid infamy, if we refuse to meddle with the heads of great bones and
joints. For if we would work in such places, we shall be endau^gered of
conuulsions, or some evil accidente, by reason of the fellowship and
colligance, while they have with great synewes. heads of cords, and muskles:
Auicen
whereby we might be utterly disgraced and shamed. as Auicen there declares
largely. And as for the cure (these causes eschewed) may be obtained, specially
if ye fault be in the mids of the arm or leg, bones, and tredes with
convenient medecines. There be also certain kinds of instruments which they
call Trapanes, and Raspatories, very mete for repairing of alterated and
corrupted bones. Again Vnguentum Egyptiacum, made after Auicens description,
shall be good, how be it, ye shall make better speed, if ye use an actual
cautery, that is if ye burn it with an hot iron. Uerily my self, when I
chanced in such bones, did ever use actual cauteryes, because they comfort
and rectify the weak member. Whereof there be two kinds in especial, the
first has this shape A. and the part is plain, which is applied to the bone.
C. the other is figured. R. Now in cauteryzing and burning, I use this
diligence, to eschew inconvenience. I prepared an other instrument, like a
finger of a Glove, These figures are in the end.
with an hole in the mids, through which I put my cautery, to save the flesh
from burning, this used I in plain bones. The second was appointed, which I
used in holes, and hollow places. There may be invented yet many other forms
of instruments, for cauterizing of Bones, according as the work and place
shall require.

Now as touching the causes of bones corrupted, they be the accident and
priuetiue: of which two the antecedent is the worse. For why the antecedent will
fester the bone, or ever the flesh be corrupted, for by reason of the cause
primetiue, corrupt, and freting humors will fleet to the bone, and frete it,
which Auicen terms Ventositas spinae. Now how this may be known and cured,
ye shall learn of him which writes a special treatise of it. For we mind not
to meddle with it, because it would draw us far from our purpose, by reason
of the number of intentions. The primative cause is what soever be falls from
outfoorth, as brusynge, incision, alteration of ye air (I mean not of
alteration of the air it self, but of alteration caused in the bone by the
air, and the use of some oyntmentes. And therefore consider you whether it come
of a wound, Alteration of the air.
or apostumacion, and so by dilligent calculation, shall ye come to the cause of
the corruption. If it proceed of apostumation, corrupt humors be the cause. If
it come of a wound, then applications of ointments, or occursaunce of their
have done it. And if it come of a wound, then consider again whether any hole
bone were cut of, or any bone minished, or else any part, Again there is no
diffrence whether a bone were taken out violently, or expelled of nature, For
Auicen says, a Fistula may be feared where nature expels it. Wherefore if ye
couete to know all these particular causes and observations: peruse Auicen in
that Chapter, Auicen.
where ye shall find al things to your full contentation. This is said
concerning corrupted bones. Now in as much as our time is so short by
appointment, let us go forth to the rest of our communication.


Soarenes I pray you, what is the cause of Uarices, and swellyng?


Chirurgi. VArices be swelling veins in the legs, Of swellings the cause.
filled with Mela^cholyke, blood. And these are bred diuerslyd, by stoppinge of
the spleen* weakness of the liver, to much feding on meats that increase
Melancholye, long standinge and waytinge before men, weariness of
footegate, and finallye bearyng of great burdens, as it is evident in them that
use it And this mallady is very hard to be redressed, and requires many
intentions and observations in the cure. The first is to order the life
conveniently. The.ii. to purge the humor. The third is to apply conuenable,
Melancholik metas.
local medecines. Now the regement shall be to abstain from meats, which
bread Melancholy. As Beeffe of the Ox, Bugle, and Cow. All salt meats,
Pulse, Colewortes, Water birds Salt Cheese and gross wine, with other like.
The matter is purged with blood lettynge, digestiues, and potions. Ye shall take
the blood of Basilica or the liver vein, making a large gash and hole, that
the gross melancholyke blood, may pass and comforth And it will be the better,
and more auayleable, a great deal if the pacient be exercised by going, or
some other way before, so that the humors be well mingled together. After ye
Bloudletting, these syrupes must follow syrup of Epythimum and of Fumiterre,
and then a purgatio^ of pills De fumo terrae, or Cappets. Al which ye shall
your self better indosate according to ye pacients state then I here make
farther mention thereof. This is spoken in respect of ye accident, which if ye
mind to cure well, apply it to the principal intention in the cure. Now as
touching the localles, and matter coniuncte: when ye will cure swellynge
veins, first use an universal purgation, First to the whole, then to the
particul^r
of the whole body, and then come to the particulare intentions, which
comprehend three considerations. The first puts of fletyng matter. The second
remoueth that which is fleeten. The third comfort the veins, strayneth them
together, and resolves congeled blood, ye shall keep of fleeting matter with
defensiues, applied under the knee, which may be such.

R. Bole Armoniacke, and clay, A defensive under ye knee.
an..iii. Dragons blood..i. Terra sigilata..iii. make them in fine powder, and
incorporate them with the white of two Eggs: with.i. of Oil of Mirtine, and
place it under the knee, byndinge it with a Roller indifferentlye fast. I say
indifferentlye fast, because to strayt bynding will mortify the member (which
were worse then the former evil) neither to slack. How to bynd a member
For that is not able to press the veins together neither inhibite the
discente of the Melancholikk blood to the place. Therefore let the bond be
indifferent, so that the blood be repressed, and the member not mortifyed. When
he have so done, ye shall the day following, smite the vein, which appears
above the holownes of the foot, making a large hole, that gross blood may
have his passage and walk, To open a vein to purge gross blood.
or press down the blood with your hands, beginning beneath the defensive,
til a great part of the blood of the veins be avoided. But note, that ye must
bathe all the leg with hot water, before ye press down the blood. When
the blood is emptied out, stop the vain, and cover the whole leg with this
plaster. R. Of Camomell, Melilote, and Wormwood. ana. M.vi. of Mirtilles. and
red Roses, ana M.iii. of Cipresse Nuttes.xx, of Acatia..iii. of Branne M, A
plaster for the Leg to resolve.
iiii. of Bean meal, and of Lupyne meal. ana. li. ss. braye yt is to be
brayed, and sees them in new white wine, and Barbours lie, wherein these
things were sodden before Tamarike, Moline, Smallage, and roots of Capers,
and play altogether, til it be like past: after this, put a little Uineger to
it, that it may the better cut the humors, and so inrolle the whole leg
therewith. This plaster (if a man consider it well has power to dry, to
comfort, to resolve, and to cut thin clammy matter, which be necessary
points, in this troblesome accident. What will ye more? If ye do thus, ye shall*
dispatch and rid your hands of it with honestye. But in case the defensive
so dry, and cause doloure, ye must change the plaster, and command the
pacient to keep his leg higher the^ his body, always in his bed, that blood
descend not down again. For this point is necessary, if he will be cured of
the mallady: according to the populer proverb, Gamba al and lecto braso al
pecto, Purge a sore man, after he is amended, for scare of dropsye. etc
which wills the hand to be kept at the bosom, and the leg in the bed.
And when the pacient is somewhat amended, purge him again: For otherwise it
were to be doubted, lest he fall to an Idropsie, Pthisicke, Phrensye, and
doting. For the matter, which was wont to descend would be witholden, and
in this case, his property is to rise, and cause such accidents, as
Hippocrates says, to cure old and antique emeroydes, if one be not left open,
puts the pacient in peril of an Idropsy, Pthisicke, and destruction of mind.
And in an other place he says, of men that be destracted. A conclusion.
A frensy is loosed at the rysyng of the swelling veins. Wherefore if a frensy
be dispatched at the provocation of them: it is consequente that the stop of
them, will be cause of the same. Wherefore Aristotle has this general rule, in
his book of places. If the presence o^ a thing be good, the absence of the same
is evil. Therefore to eschew this evil, we must purge the pacient once every
month, with some purgative, which will euacuate the Melancholic humor. There
be yet other things observed, as by bynding and cuttyng of veins, which, what
for Bocherly cruelty, and otherwise danger of the pacient, I pass them over,
sith I never practiced them, nor never intend to do the cures being so
perilous, and full of dangers.


Soarenes What say you of a round ulcer, Good sir Chirurgian?


Chirurgi SIr, as touching rou^dnes in an ulcer, we need not to say any thing
at all. For ye have sufficientlye labored the demonstratiue sciences,
Geometrical measures in Chirurgi
and have, as I understand right well profited in them For ye can erect
tryangles, cut lines, deuyde circles, yea, and square the^ also, if it were
need: al be it, to this day, the true squarynge of a circle, has not been
invented. But to the purpose. If ye will deuyde the roundnes of an ulcer by the
Dyameter, with a hoate Iron, or other Instrument, ye shall deuyde the
compassynge of Uilles and small here is well enough, which is one of the greatest
lettes in the ensoundynge of an ulcer. And so shall you withstand the
circuition: which done ye may prosecute the cure of the cut, burning, or
otherwise workyng to your pleasure. Now for that we have rydde your hands of
these troblesom accidents: we will return to the cure of the capital ulcers,
whereof we made mention before. Whereof the virulent is first.

Good Physicians have ever used to try out first, the cause of maladyes and to
cut them of, which done, the disease would easily be displaced. The cause of
Soarenes, is first not considered.
And in good faith, this seems to be the very path way^, to artificial
curing.

Wherefore we also, because we would not swerve from the right way of our
ancient master, will first declare the cause of a virulent ulcer, and then
order the intention in ye cure. The cause then of a virulent ulcer, is Cholerik
humors, which become sharp by reason of salt phlegm mixed with choler, and
after they get virulency, by adustion and burninge. For virulency is not
otherwise bread, as says Auicen, but of the subtilnesse of hot watery humors,
which originally proceed of evil governance, and order of life. Ulcer
Uirulent, how it grows.
Therefore we will first appoint the intencions which must be observed in their
cure. They be five. The first orders the life, the second purges ye humor,
the third keeps the flux of humors, Five good intentions.
the fourth dries them that be already fleetyng. The fyft ensoundeth the
ulcer, and comfort the member. In the first we must forbid all sharp,
pontike, salted, and hoate things, which shall be able to alter the blood, to
heat, and adustion, as Ginger, Peper, Cinnamon, and give him chicken broth,
Lettice and Borage, as al other things that moderate the blood, whereof Chicken
broth is thought to be best. For it reduces humors to equality, conserueth
complexions, and refreshed the virtue. All this is spoken for example, that ye
may take occasion by this, to choose and refuse things convenient, and
disconuenient. Ye shall purge the matter, if ye give purgations, that is, things
that draw cholere, as Electuarium e succo Rosarum* Electuarium solutinum,
Diaphaenicon or some other like in operation. The flux of humors is
prohibited if we apply this defensive in the circuit of the ulcer, four
fyngers less or more for the same. The defensive is thus receypted.

Take Bole Armoniacke, and Dragons blood. ana. ss. Bean meal..i. powder of
Roses and Myrtylles, Every goo^ defensive.
ana..iii. Oil of Mirt..iiii. juice of Housleke.i. Weathers fat,, ss. with a
little Wax: sees the oil and fat, with the juice, til the juice be wasted,
and then put to the remnaunt, making it to an ointment, after the art, and
order it as it was now said. And as for ye drying of humous, use the drying
symples: how be it, there must be diversity in compoundyng of them, according
to the natures and complexions, whereof one may be thus.

Take ashes of Dill, of burnt Lead, and of Terra sigillata. ana..i. Lytharge
of Silver, Flowers of Pomgranettes, and vnholed Galls. i.ss of Creuis shelles,
or house Snailes burnt, of Cerusse, ana..ii. of roche Alome burnte. i. mingle
them all together, and powder it fynely. which use for dryinge. And if this
profit not, use the red powder called Precipitatus doubtless, this will
rectify the ulcer, and digest it. And here note by the way, that digestion is
not causyng of matter as some unlearnedly holds opinion but it is
proportionating of humors to the natural heat, Digestion causes not matt^^,
but it is ye proporcionating of the humor.
so that nature is animated, to expulse them defyne it thus. Digestion is an
engrossing of thin humors, and thinning of thick things, with some
preparance to the expulcing. And for this purpose, we compound hot digestiues,
in cold maladyes and cold in hoate. Finally, we ensound with Vnguentum de
Minio, Tripharmacon, Vnguentum Caphoratum, and de Cerussa: Or spread the
defensive aforsayd in the ulcer. This also that follows is very good.

Take oil of Myrt, ii. of Rosed Omphacine..i. of Weathers fatt.ii. of
Uermilion.ss. of Cerusse..i. sees them til they be black putting thereto at ye
end..ss. of new wax. And after it is taken of the fire encorporat it with.iii.
of Camphere, and.ii. prepared of Tuti, and so will it be an ointment, like a
Cerote And this will comfort the member amend the complexion, and bring the
ulcer to skinninge, Now for skynning of it, wash it with Alome water which was
prescribed before in skynning of ulcers: But one thing I warn you of, if ye see
that the vlcere be enlarged, with these drying medecines ye must lay the^
apart, and use easier medecines. The sign of to much drying, or abstertion by
oyntmentes will be this. The sore will be like an apostumated sore, and the
pacient shall feel pain, nyppyng and bytyng, as Auicen says, Wherefore I will ye
forget in no wise, A sign of overmuch drying a sore member.
this token and sign, because it will be much for your advantage,


Soarenes. I pray you say some thing of fylthy ulcers


Chirurgi. IT is evident to see, what gluttonous, and ravening kind of living
we use, Glotony is no small ennemy to nature.
by the alteration of our blood: which is not only altered to heat, and
adustion, but also to foul rottennes. In good faith, reason would we should
foresee, that we fell not to such excessive eating and drinking, whereof might
ensue, sharp fylthy, and corrupt humors, which, cause vlceration, when they
come to ye coniunct, and afterward feed the ulcer. Well let them be their own
workmen and drink as they brew: we will to our purpose. And first let us note
what sordityes, Of filthy matter* what it is.
fylthy and corrupt rottennes is. They defyne it, to be a certain white thick
matter, congeled, propense unto blacknes and like lies This kind of matter,
properly requires abstertion and skowryng, as virulency does drying. Moreover
there be two kinds. a plain and hollow fylthy ulcer, which requires four
intentions: the first orders the life, the second purges the humors: the
third wypeth and s^owreth of the fylth: ye fourth pertayneth to ensounding:
Four intencions in two kinds of ulcers.
ye shall order the life, as in a virulent ulcer because these two differ not,
but by the way of more or less. And therefore the diet shall respect, specially
the quality, which we there respected in the order. Likewise must the purgative
be as there was said. And the filth shall be skowred away with these medecines
following. R. Of Rosed Honey strayned.ii. of clear Terebintyne..iii. play them
together, til they be well myngled and then put a, A good perfect mundification
q.ss. of Barley flower and a little Saffron to it. And it will be a good
mundificatiue, for yt purpose. But if this shall not serve, let this follow.

Take of clear Terebintine., iii. of Rosed Honey strayned.ii. of the juice of
Smallage..ss. sees them te to the wasting of the juice, then put q.ss. of
Barley meal to it., ss, of Frankensence,.i. of Sarcocol, and a little Saffro^
and let it be a soft abstersive, that may be laid in the vlcere, with tents:
And if ye be set besides the stool in this, then make this following. R. of
clear Terebintyne, of Rosed Honey strayned. ana..iii. Juice of Planten..ii.
iuce of dogs tongue..i, ss, of Sarcocol, Frankensence, Mirhe, and Aloes Epatike.
ana..i. play altogether, til half the juice be wasted, But stir it
continually, least it burn, After this let it be strayned, and applied in the
vlcere, whether it be plain or hollow. But if the pray shall yet escape your
nets, make this, wherewith doutles ye shall have your purpose.

Take of Barbours lie..iiii. of read powder Principitatus. i.ss. of Rosed Honey
strayned.ii. mingle them well together, To skower ^ dry al ulcers plain or
hollow
and doubtless ye shall scowre anb dry the ulcer with this abstersive. Some have
also used this mundificatiue with good effect. Take the juice of
Smallage..viii. the juice of Agrimony. iiii. the juice of Planteine..ii. sugar
rosate,, x. boil these a season, then cast into them the meal of Barley,
Lupines, and Fenigreeke. ana..i Boil them then to the consistence of an
ointmente, and at the end, put in..i, of Terebintine, Contraries when to use
them.
and use this to thy honor in clensyng and mundifying a sore or wou^d from
matter. For whereas there be but two moistures bred in an ulcer, as Galen
writes, whereof the one requires abstertion, ye other drying: both are
respected and considered in this medecin, as it may easily appear, if a man
consider the symples well. Now ye shall incarnate the sore with oyntmentes. that
contrary the strange quality of the vlcere: as with hoate if the ulcer be
cold, and with cold, if it be hot. For what is ensoundinge of discontinued
parts, but to rectifye the qualitye, which shorteth and hyndereth the virtue
nutritive, and to qualify the complexion of the member? Nature nourishes her
self
For if ye do thus, nature being fortifyed, will of her self cause flesh to
grow, as it appears not only in man, but also in brute beasts. And
therefore, I compound no other ointments in this case, than were ordered
before, in the cures of hot and cold ulcers, whither ye may resort, when ye
shall need. Thus mutch have I said, of the plain filthy ulcer. Now will we to
the holow and cauy ulcer.

Why should men maruayle, if men of old time, came to the knowledge of Natures
sickness and causes, for asmutch as they were taught. even by the leading of
nature, which they of that time, more diligently observed tha^ we do: And
therefore. they came to meruaylous great knowledge, which we in these days,
attain not unto, because we observe not in like case. I say this, in
consideracion of a Moulde warpes moinyng under Ground, which gave me occasion
to obseruacions, in a cauie vlcere^. For because I was present, where a
Gardener stopped the mouth of the earth, or hole, where afterward, because the
cause was not removed, An example of Calyus or Moldewarp.
seven Moldwarpes came out by sundry times. Truly I noted it, thinkyng it
worthy of consideracion in the cure, wherefore, when we be minded, to handle
this cure in his right kind, we must try out the cause, which we seek by
humors, accidents. and qualities of the matter. And therefore, when ye mind the
cure of any such Ulcere, consider aduysedly, whether any of the foresaid
accidents be the cause, why the sore refuses ensoundinge. And if any such be
found there, and ye think that the accidents, be the very le^te: Amend an
evil accidents and then the cure will prosper.
return then to the correction of that accident which hyndreth your purpose,
and when ye have amended that, ye shall have your desire. Now if the cause be
found in none of them, then mark the matter, whether it be sanious, virulent,
or fylthy, and then according as ye find it, so resort to the cure of the
Capital ulcers, and work as is there appointed, for in so doing, you shall be
assured to quite your self of it. On the other side, if humors be the cause,
which is lightly perceived, by the colors of the flesh, ye must purge them:
For if it be ruddy and itching, it declares Choler. On the other part, if it
be white, it is a token of Phlegm, and so of Melancholy if the color be dim
and broune. Wherefore if ye shall always behave your self thus in your working,
ye shall not stay, but have your eye still to ye mark, whereat you entend to
shoot.

Here should we speak of a festerd ulcer, unless we had talked of yt matter,
when we treated of the accidents of ulcers, where ye shall find the causes of
it, and the cure, Therefore ye must make your repair thither, when need
requires, and not look that I should double it again. Now have I, my friend,
paid my debt, and discharged my bond, according to my promise it shall be your
part to bear with my travel, and to take my diligence in good worth. And
though my stampes be not so fine, to coin such rych money, paraduenture as ye
looked for: yet have I labored diligently to give you current money, with which
I trust to content you. Wherefore thus remain, that ye be dilligent laborers in
this, and then within small time ye shall swim without Cork, and trauerse
great streams, by the aid of these things. But if here after ye shall look,
to be holden up by the chinne (which I think not) ye must procure and retain
some other. For I may not attend upon you, for business that I have my dear
friend soreness.


Soarenes TO say for my self, and my fellows (which I may because I know
their minds) we thank you, as far as we be able to say or think for your
faithful payment, brotherly love and gentle curtesy. Ye have so fynely coygned
al, so orderly laid it forth, every some by it self, and so gently deliver it,
that we cannot chose, but allow it, and highly comend it. But one thing
greeueth me (I think it does my fellows also) yt ye leave us in the stream to
swim without help. Ye know right well gentle Chirurgi, what a number of
Gulphes be in the stream of Chirurgi, which ye have not meddled withal, and
this requires the help of an expert workma^, Wherefore we shall desire you, to
grant us some aid. Certainly we will repair to you again. for other things,
which we will show you at your leisure.


Chirurgi Well your desires may do much with me, howbeit I may not promise at
this present, al your desires or requests, but of ye head I will say some thing.


Soarenes. Mary we pray you, show us the cures of the head, when it is wounded
and in peril. For the head is the prince of members, whose cures are most hard,
and so bid you fare well.


Chirurgi. NO man, dear Soarenes. that coueteth to gratify other, Of honest
request and frendshyp.
uses to make light of his friends requests, but rather imbraceth them with all dearnesse of mind, specially if the thing truly asked, shall be righteous and
honest, or bring the party, who is required to no hindraunce For if those
points should appear in any request, their petitions would seem dishonest,
and worthy of repulse. For why, honesty and righteousness should not please the
desired, more then the desyrer. Uerely men should be far of from the way, if
they thought, that justice and honesty might be acquyred by other men's loss,
and discommodity. Wherefore seeing we consider that the matter, which we covet
to get al our estimation (for we desire to hear you talk of the maladyes,
that come of a cause* primative in the head, with their cures) shall be no less
to you profitable, than to our selves quiet of conscience.


Soarenes. WHy should we not boldly require this, namely, sith both of us, you
to declare, and we to hear, be most at leisure at this present time? We have
also good cause our selves in that our conscience does stir, and encourage us
forth besides the charitable love, which we owe among our selves one to an
other miserably afflicted, in such causes. Again if we did demand any thing
rashly, perchance even that, which should be pleasant to other men, might
worthily be denayed us, for why, rashness seems to import two things:
unrighteousness in the demaunder, or else vanity in the thing demanded, yet for
as much as our suit is right just and honest, and you pleasant Master
Chirurgi. gentle and free hearted to your friends: let it be your will and
pleasure to re reason with us concerning the matter, to the intent we through
your apt and wise communication, may declare so many dangers in ye head (where
unto these commom practicians, rushe out on with all haste, as does Tom a Bedlem
in his naked prograce) and also redress the same, if any such chance under
our simple plain hands. For you are the Man, as we do think, who is skilful
to cure hurtes in the head, and avoid dangers in the same. And thus did we
perceive right well, not only at other times but specially in the places, where
wounded men are kept, where ye helped grievous and perilous chauces in the
head. Go to then gentle master and follow your friends desire, which be in
great love with you. And thus doing, ye shall do us presently great pleasure,
and unto our posterity. And al be it, ye cannot receive worthy reward at our
hands, for so great a benefyt: yet the almighty God, who does suffer no good
turn to be unrewarded, nor vice unpunished, will recompense your pain, and
prosper you in your Acts and deeds, who ever be praised, for himself and
his works Amen.


Chirurgi THe beginning of your matter, al be it, I did well perceive it, yet by
means ye tale was somewhat long, it was almost fallen out of my remembrance, I
being now feeble, and fallen into decay with much labor of mind, and anguish
that I take for my pore friends. For according to the debt of our corrupt
nature, they are decessed, and have given up their Souls, to whom the merciful
God, not in respect of their good deeds, but at the contemplacion of his own
bountiful cleme^cye, grant endless rest and salvation with his saints and
elected. But yet as far as I can remember, I noted in some, what we are bound
to do for our friends and acquaintance, in consideracion of our familier
conversation with them. Of truth we are not ignoraunte, dear friends, how
hard a thing it is for us, at this present, to satisfy your desire,
specially, for as much as my mind does not only take care, but melts away in
floods of sorrow, for the great affliction I daily feel. Is it possible, that
I should content your desires with like words as I used, when I talked of
wounds, apostumations, and ulcers? Uerely, I would I might gratify you, so
that ye should covet no further in the matter. But alas, I am racte and
tormented within my self, when I feel and consider, mine insufficiencye and
untowardness. But yet, lest I should be seen to turn my back, and give my
dearest friends a repulse or an vltimum vale (who be as mine own eyes) yet I
will take the matter for your sakes upon me. Nevertheless, this would I
desire and obtain at your hands, that none should interrupt me in my tale: but
in such places, where I end my whole matter. For the time is very short for
our discourse, which we mind to fynish. And certainly, If I thought otherwise,
nothing were better to me, than to be questioned with in every doubt, which you
shall not need.


Soarenes. GEntle sir, ye have most happily prevented us. For the matter which
we were appointed, to get at your hands or ever we came hither, by prayer or
favor, yt have you offered of your self Therefore seeing we are agreed of the
matter, set on a Gods name, and luckelye make the onset. For there may not be
greater pleasure to us, then to hear your words, and manner of talk, so yt
the precious fruit and profyt, which we look for in especial, be preferred,
for that is the matter.


Chirurgi. I Noted, dear Soarenes, and your friends, that R. R. in his famous
work, under whose banner I s^rued most and gat all that I have, at his hands,
or not without his especilall favor: did fatherly admonish his Scholars, and
hearers, that they should to their possibility, try and s^arche out, the causes
of diseases. Otherwise, they should attempt, to cure one thing for an other,
and gieue Chalk for Cheese. Chalk for Cheese.
And if they did so, they should greatly err in the cure or rather provide a
bear, to help their Pacients to their grave. Wherefore, I have determined with
my self, since your will is so, that I shall danger my self in the matter, to
recite unto you the sicknesses, which happen in the head, with their causes.
And this do I, to th'entent we fall not unadvisedly in that, had I wiste,
whereof we mentioned before. They be five in number, that is to say, Five
causes that do hurt the head.
apostumacion, ulcer, wound, bruise, and breaking. But as touching
apostumacions, and Ulcers without, we will here make no further a do, because
we have sufficiently spoken of them before, in our former treatise of Wounds:
whereunto ye may repair at your pleasure. But as for bruses, Wounds, and
Breakynges, we will lay our Foundation, as far as our Wit shall extend. Ye
have the Maladies, wherefore, we may proceed to the causes and cures.

And first, we will begin at a Bruise or Crushing, The cause of bruses, what
they are.
whose causes be falls and strokes, whereof follows the member of the
continuance broken. And here we use this term, of the continuance, broken,
or bruise: after a large manner, for every riuing or frushing of man's flesh,
which may be two ways, that is to say, by means of a Wound, and without a
Wound, As a bruise, which shall be without Wound, may easily be cured, except
the bone, which is under it, be riuen, the skin remaining whole and sound.
Which hurt, the sick himself, will show to the Chirurgian, by certain
signs, as by often scratching, or touching of the place with the Nails, or by
some other means. But if it be so, that ye cannot be persuaded, How to find
out a s^r^pe by what tokens.
by the Pacientes showing: or if ye be driven to and fro, and reasoning the
matter with your self, as in such cases, men's minds be plucked, now hither,
now thither. Ye must consider the smiter, of what strength and force, he might
be of, and where with the stroke was inflicted: as in like manner the place
also, whether any thing fell on the head, from an high. For the higher that the
place is, and the mightier the smiter, so mutch the greater and worse must the
bruise be deamed. For heavy things. falling toward their natural place, are
found of greater force and violence, at ye end of their descent and fall,
than at ye beginning, when they were first losed of their stays. Of incision
in the head.
These things considered, ye shall make incision unto the scalpe, ruling the
same after such sort, as shall be declared afterward, when we speak of
ryuinges of the scalpe, with depression of the bone. On the other side, ye
guess by the said signs, that the bone remain sound and unbroken, then set
al your intent, to the cure of ye bruise: which shall stand in a resolutiue
medicine, being somewhat bynding wythall, if ye stand in fear of putrefaction.
For what soever is bruised or frushed, must needs putrefy, as Galen writes.
But I suppose, ye are minded to ask me a question. How it is, that
resolutiues should be applied in bruses, wherein is great concurse, and showing
of matter, for asmutch as repercussiues should rather be used, as was said, at
the beginning of such matters. Ye have well and trimly doubted at the matter:
for this shall make mutch for the cure of a bruise in great peril, whereof ye
shall diligently mark, that effusion of blood does immediately follow upon a
bruise, because the veins be violently cut of, and the mouths op^ned. And the
blood which shall so once be Isshewed forth, can never return back, into the
veins again. Wherefore, seeing it is without the vessels, Of blood running
the chief cause, and the hurt that does follow the same.
it must needs putrefy. and so consequently, corrupt and rot the Flesh. For
this purpose gentle resolutiues, being bynding things wythall, must be applied
at the beginning: whhere the one resolves the blood, and the other being
contrary in working, closes the vein, that no more come forth. And hereof
appears the ignorance, and oversight of these Emperikes, and vagabonde
Chirurgians. For they mynister repercussiues, at the beginning of every bruise,
without resolutiues: whereof follows incision of necessity, if they will
avoid putrefaction. And therefore I will give you the medicine, which ever is
used in such cases, that ye fall not in the like reprehension and shame.

Take Camomell, Melilot, Bran. ana. M.i. of Beans, Lupines, and Barley meal.
ana..ij. of Mirtilles. M.ij. of Cipresse nuttes.xv. bray such things as ought
to be brayed fynely, and then sees all in new Wine and Barbers Lee, unto the
time it be like a Cerote. And at the end, ye shall put these Oils to the
same, that is, of Dill, of Camomell, and of Mirte. ana..i. But note, here the
Oils must be used, where no putrefaction is. For in case of putrefaction, I
would utterly forbid them. Then play them again, till the Oils be well
incorporated: and afterward apply it warm. Mark well this medicine. For it
were a long matter, and to mutch for one day, to recite to you, how many have
been cured, by the help of this medicine alone. Many men have bin cured by
this medicine.
But if the bruise be concurraunt with a wound, or ever ye work in the
matter: ye must diligently consider with your self, whether the rim or
pannicule, which from out forth, covers the scalpe, be cut or not. And if it
be not cut, the wound must be cured, as we showed in the treatise of Wounds,
sauinge that the digestive must be made, with Rosed Omphacine and yolks of
Eggs, over which ye must ever apply this medicine, which we above recited.
For it will keep of putrefaction, and hard corrupted blood. And after this
manner, proceed forth in the cure, till sanious matter be generated, that done,
lay aparte the dygestiue and apply an abstersyue, in his place. Which may be
made thus.

. Of clear Teretintine..ij. of Syrup of Roses..i.ss. of Plantayne water. A
good abstersti^e for the head.
.ss. play them together, till ye water be wasted, and then put thereto. qss. of
Barley meal, and a little Saffron as may be able, to color the mundificatyue.
But take it of the fire, or ever ye put to the meal, and s^e it be well
styrred, until it be well incorporated together. Now, when ye have thus
done, ye may use it, and apply ever the same Vnguentum Basilicum, after this
descripcion.

Take oil of Roses and Camomell. ana..iij. oil of Mirtine. Vnguentum
Balilicum.
.i.ss. play them together, till they acquire them a black hugh, and then put
these drugges to them, of clear Terebintine..ij. of Ship pitch..i. of new
wax.ij ss. And play them again a little, and so take it of the fire, and
stir it continually* till it be thick. And for asmutch as these wounds, by
reason of mutch sensibility of the part, be oftentimes vexed with an
Erysipelas: this place asks to show, how we may withstand that troublesome
malady. Erysipelas is a hoatred, round inflamacion soar, or choleric voyle with
a fever in the body.
And to thentent ye may so do, note this, concerning an Erysipelas, or
Cholerike apostumation, and Prynt it deeply in mind. It is this. An
Erysipelas may happen, by reason of boiling of the humor, or for that, that
corrupted matter, is retained within. Which thing we saw our selves come to
pass, by reason of matter, abiding within, in one worthy capitayn. Now this
thing is cured by purging of the cause: As Hippocrates says, Quaecunque
aegretudines ex plenitudine fiunt, euacuatio sanat. Diseases coming of
fullness. are helped by emptiness.
If it be sharpened and chafed, through heat and boiling of the Cholerike
humor: anoint it with Vnguentum Rosatum and lute the wound with ye same, as
the best learned Chirurgians did use. For if mordicacion or heat be caused, by
mean of Ointments: it will be pacified through coldness, which is in ye
Medicine. After ye are at poynct with this, cover the whole hole wound with
this.

R. of Rosed Omphacine, and oil Mirtine. ana..ij. of Vnguentum Rosatum. i. of
Populion..ss. of white Wax..iij. and melt all at the fire: this done and
prepared, infuse a lynnen cloth in the same ointment, and see it be all to
weated in it, and then take it forth, and cast it in cold water, yt it may be
thick again. This cloth also must be applied to the head, Clothes applied
to a wounded head.
for fear of a noying of the place: and be applied where the hair was shaven
of. Moreover, ye shall form and shape one other cloth, after the same manner,
with the said ointment, so that ye may make permutacion, at even and morning,
of the clothes. But if the panicule or rimme be cut, and the bone discou^red,
ye shall need more dilygence and circumspection, whiles ye search, whether the
bone be cloven, or riuen in pieces. And if neither of these faults be found,
then is nothing else to be done, A powder for the head.
otherwise than in wounds. saving yt this powder shall be sprinkled, where the
bone was dyscouered and opened. R. Aloes epatike, Sarcocoll, Myrrh, ana..iij.
Franke^sence..i.ss. Flowerdeluce..ss. and let it be made into fine powder, for
ye said use. And as for farther prosecution of the matter, ye shall do as in ye
cure of wou^des. But in case ye bone be riuen, an other manner of cure will
handfast you: which will be far distant, and unlike the former. And to the
intent ye may be able, to ascertayne your self, in such cliftes and reuinges,
ye shall here note the signs and tokens, that follow clites, and riuings of
above.

These things be signs of a broken bone, vomityng, daslyng of eyes, Signs of
broken bones en the head.
vertige or swinyng, blyndnes and falling. All which must be understand, to
happen at that present, when the stroke was given. And sometime an apoplexy, a
dumpysh priuacion of sense, and a fever with a vehement horroure and cold do
ensue. Now were the pacient taken of a Fever, without Cold, there were no
great Danger in the matter, for that accydente comes ofttyme, of a private
cause, which moves the accident. And where it is not possible. but the body
should be replet, or vacant of superfluous humors, so it cannot be, but there
should ensue great difference, at that diversity. For if this kind of
breakyng, occupy a vacant body, the Paci^nt will be without Fever: But if it
fall to a repleat Body, laden with evil humors, the Physicians may thyncke
the stroke to be dangerous, and hard of cure. For we have this lesson of
Auicen, saying: all Wounds, Dangerous wounds, how to know them.
and Ulcers be dangerous. which chance upon superfluities of a wayward, and
froward Body. And albeit, it be dangerous, if the Pacient be taken with a
Fever, at the beginning, yet is the matter more to be suspected, if he be
inflamed with Fevers, three or four days, after the stroke was gieuen,
because this should spryng of putrified Blood, retained within the Scalpe
upon the Rimmes, which thing is known by the increasing of the accidents.
Notwythstandinge, this may be also, when sanious matter is a generating. For
why, Hippocrates affyrmeth in his Aphorisms, Hippocrates. Aphorisms.
that Dolours, and Fevers will happen, more at Generating of matter, than when
it is generated. But this may easily be disceuered: For here the accidents fall
and be a laid, but there they be augmented and increased, Therefore, when
such accidents shall ensue upon a stroke, even the same day, ye may well
Judge, that the breach or breakyng is complet. Which if ye mind to cure
rightly, ye shall forthwyth provide these things before your eyes. First,
when the matter is come to that poynct, that ye must make incision, fear not
to cut the Wound, after the manner of a triangle, or one right angle, or else of
a cross, and remove the Flesh from the Bones. How to cut to the end to
heal.
When ye have so done fill up ye wound with small quisettes, well weate before
in the whytes of Eggs. Howbeit, note and observe this always, that the
quisettes, which shall touch the bone, must be weate in hot Wine, for fear of
altering and spotting of ye bone: better than if they were weate in whytes of
Eggs, by reason of the coldness. For why, Hippocrates says. Frigidum inimicum
neruis, ossibus, cerebro and spinali medullae: calidum vtile and amicum. Cold
is an Ennemy to the Synewes, How cold hurts.
Bones, Teeth, Brain, and the Nuke, or Marowe of the Back, but heat is
profitable and friendly: and therefore cold must be kept from the Skull, least
we stumble at that block by error, Now this operacion fynished, ye shall
give the Pacient in commandment, to rest him self after that manner until
the next morning, prescribinge him an order, how he shall rule himself, and
his diet. His diet shall be to eat Wheat bread, or tried and boiled Barley with
Almonde milk, A diet.
and drink boiled Borage water, for ye space of four days: and after the
fourth day is past, give him Wheaton, for Barley bread, dipped in Chicken broth,
or broth of Mutton of the Weather, least the sick be ouermutch weakened, with
the slender diet. Now the next day, return to your Pacient, and open his wou^d
ge^tly, which done, search the Bone well and warely, with a searcher of seluer,
which must neither be to blunt, to over run the rimmes, or clifts neither so
small or fine, that it should enter into them. Ye shall search it thus. Draw
the Searcher to and fro, pretely upon the Bone: and if it slide plainly
without stay, it is a sign the Scalpe is saulfe and sound. But if it stay,
and find some let, ye may then think well, How to search a wound.
that the bone is cloven and cut. But now, in as mutch as we speak of rimmes,
and because they be diverse, this place requires, to distinct them properly,
or ever we meddle further in the cure.

Fissures or Chinkes, be caused in the head two ways: with a thing, which
gives a blunt stripe, or else with a thing, which cutteth. Fissuries or chappes.
If it be with a thing, that gives a blunt stripe, the thing properly, is
called a clift or a ryuing. And if it be with a cut, it is called a chynke or a
clift. And all these varry in length, shortness, largenes, and smalnes, they
vary also otherwise. For every of them, I say, the chinke and clift, A clift in
the head.
may be with depression of the bone, or without depression. For an instrument,
which cutteth, may cause depression, namely, if it be thick or blunt. And
albeit, they agree in the former poynctes, yet they differ in this, that is to
say, the clift, which is caused by a bruise, is ever thought to be with
penetracion, or through going and percing of the bone, where it is not a like
always in a cut or incision. I say this of men's scalpes, and not of children.
For in children, which be within seven year of age: we may be deceived, as we
see by experience. For why, such sculles will be infolded, A note. between a
man's Scull, and a voyes.
because they be not yet hardened ne strengthened: and moisture also abou^deth in
them, which property is not found in men's scalpes that are come to ripe age.
For men's Scalpes will ryue. and be cut through, rather than be infolded, by
reason of the hardness, and drought of the Bone. Wherefore, men that are come to
hardness, are depryued of this, which is found in tender age. And after what
sort, every of these may be cured, we shall declare orderly, when we have first
premysed the intencions, which must needs be observed, if we intend warely, to
eschew dangers in such cases. And as soon as we shall be at poynct with this,
we shall accomplish our promise, both of a ryuing or clyft, with the
depression of the bone.

Presupposing then the regiment of life, these be the chief and pryncipall
intencions about this cure: that is to wit, to conserve the complexion of the
member in his proper state, to prohibit Apostumacions, and to apply local
medicines fit for the purpose. Certes we may conserve the complexion, and
rectify it, if it be decayed, with Emplasters, Auicen.
as Auicen writes in the chapter, of the wounding of the skin of the head. Et
principium quidem consistit in emplastris, and erit rectificatio. etc. The
beginning stands in plasters, and so will the rectification be soon had. We
shall prevent or put of apostumacions, if we shall work the things, which the
Pacientes strength shall be able to abide and suffer, as we have commandment in
the same place. And doubtless, the disposicion of the Body, shall away with it
well enough, if we proceed no farther than till the cause of apostumation, be
intercepted and cut of. These be the causes of an hot apostumacion, Siphac,
What thing do anoy the brayn most,
a gobbet of a bone, pryckinge the utter Rimme, which is called Dura matter,
annoyaunce of tents, cold approaching to the Rimmes, or Pannicules, plenty of
meat and Drink, and the secret evil (as they call it) which I understand, to
be a certain malignity of Complexion, and superfluities of froward bodies:
which we shall prevent and cut of by purgation and blood letting. The Pacient
shall be purged, according to the signification of his vryne. (...)
For why, that will show the humor, which is excessyue in ye body, as we said
in the cure of Ulcers. And as touching blood letting it has, as he says, two
intencions: the one to make euacuacion, and the other to prohibit, or
wythdrawe. But where we treat of blood letting, I pray you of good Fellowshyp,
note this well: for it shall greatly make for the preseruacion, and sauegard of
your Pacient, which is soar, and for your self also.

A goodly note (...) cure.
Note, dearly beloved, that it may chance, that the sick come under your
hands, the same day he was wounded, or else after the fourth. From the first
day unto the fourth exquisytely, you may use diverse blood letting, because this
is the time, when matter causing Apostumation, uses to flow* and turn again
to ye place. And this blood letting must be made in the common vein, called
Mediana, of the opposite arm. Here ye shall dyligently mark, and take heed,
that ye err not, in the signification of this word opposite, as some have,
which were not seen in this word at all. For this word opposite, To let
blood on the contrary part, why it must be by reason.
signifies contrariety, as when a thing is placed, over against the contrary
part. Wherefore, the parts of the right side, may not properly be opposite
one to an other, within themselves, but parts of the right side, to the parts
of the left. This will appear in the shape of man's body, which is erected and
fygured, after the manner of a Quadrant, albeeit, it be not fully square and
shaped with equality of corners, as is a true quadrant or square. M^n is made
Geometrically in order.
Now it is evident, that this quadrangle, in manner is measured, with two
Diameters, which also properly be opposite. So having respect to this
quadrangle, it shall be an easy matter to see* on whether part the vein shall
be opened. And this blood letting, as we said before, is made for two purposes,
according as the cause requires, that is to weete, to make euacuacion, or else
to divert or turn away the blood to the opposite part, If your intent be to
turn a side the blood, it must be done in the opposite part. Example of blood
le^ting.
For example: When the Wound is in the left side, a vein of the right side
shall be opened: and contrarily, when the Wound is in the right side, a vain
of the left, which must be the common. On the other part, if your purpose be
only to make euacuation, ye shall work the feate in the vain, which is most
proper to the part wounded. As be the veins in both hands, called
Cephalicae, that is. the head veins: which will void matter and blood from the
^ead. Wherefore, they do amysse, and euilly, yea, maliciously, who
indifferently take blood of the one, or other hand at the beginning, where the
intent should be to divert, and turn away the blood by fleubotomy. For they
make euacuation, and turn not away the blood, to the contrary part, and so
consequently cause they the feebled member, Poor men are corrected, for great
men's faults.
to be more feeble, and decayed in such wise, that other members send thither
their superfluityes, as he says, Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui:
What fault so ever be committed amongst the high counsayles, the poor People
suffers for it. For it is certain, that the member is feebled, as soon as
it is wounded. Wherefore in so doing, they open the way to apostumation whiles
they thyncke to prevent and stop it, and become occasion of the Pacients death.
And thus craftily work the Emperikes, and Heathen Uagaboundes, coveting not
only to slay, and sup the Chrystian blood, but utterly to extinguishe the
Chrystian name, if it were possible. Yet a Gods name, we can abide to call
them unto us, and intertayne them with al gentleness, where we should not only
forbid them the art, but also tread them under our feet, and make them bond
Slaves, as the Turks do us Chrystian men, when they take us, and use us worse
than Dogs.

Now, in case the Body be full, and replenished with humors, When to let
blood, two times in one place, and why.
ye shall let your Pacient bleed again, in the same place, where ye let him
blood before. But if the apostumation were in the clensing places, as under the
arm holes, Flanks, and ears, I would in no wise let my Pacient blede, for
that malady: because I find not, why I should so do. For an Apostumacion may
not a rise, in the emunctory places, but by euilnesse or malignity of some
pryncipall member, or by reason of the superfluities of some member adjacent.
If the place be apostumated through matter, expelled from a principal member:
Fleubotomy were not to the purpose, because the matter might be revoked
inward, which Nature had put forth. Neither should it be well to the purpose
also, if the swelling came of superfluityes, of ye next parts thereunto. For we
should put the matter from the unnoble and petite member, and burdein again
the pryncipall with it, whereof would ensue great inconveniences and dangers.
We be also fobidden to use repercussiues, for fear of the like dangers, in
the said emu^ctory or running places. But if I had occasion (in as mutch as we
live, and have a do with nyce, foolish, and wylfull people, which call for
things to their saufety, in such wise, that we must work against our Rules,
to satisfy their lusts) I would open in that case, the Basilica, or liver
vein. And it shall make no matter, whether ye open the vein in the right
side, or left, so the Apostumation be in the upper part of the body: but in
case the apostumation be in the lower part, If an apostumation be in ye midst
of the upper part of the body, then to bleed either on ye left arm, or else
right, is well.
blood may be taken from the Liver veins, in the foot of the opposite part,
according as ye shall thyncke it most convenient. Howbeit, it will be surer,
and farther from pearill, to take blood of the Liver, in the same part of the
Foot. For it were ieoperdy, least some humidite, retained in the glandeous
Fleashe, might by stirring and angering of the matter, cause Apostumations.
Well, I have said enough, as touching blood letting, now we will to the local
Medicines, which shall be declured in the cure. Wherefore, let us come to the
cure of a breacke in ye Scalpe, namely of a clyfte, or a ryuing: and first
here mark this Figure for blood lettynge, here after this place.

Under ye ton are.iij. veins, which are good to be opened against Apoplexia
Angina, and stopping of ye sprits of asperation, and respiracio^, and all the
evils of the mouth, tongue, and throat. R The vein called Sciatica, and
comes from beneth the Knee* downward, and are.ij. in number. and are good to
be opened in warm water to help ye swelling of the secret members and also ye
pain called Sciatica. Q Saphena, comes from the holownes under the kne, as
Sciatica does. It is in ye inside of ye ancle and is opened for the Spleen
Matrix. etc. P The vain of ye forehead, to be opned against frensy Megre^ ache
in the head forgetfulness, and. soarenesse in the eyes. etc. (...) this vain
springs from the outward throat vein. O Vena externa or Cephalica in the
arm, is opened with a large cut, not dep to let forth gross matter, and to
cleanse the head, from al greeues, as falling sickness dimnes of head. etc. A.
Mediana. which is in the myddest is the chief or gain or spring of the blood,
it must be opened to help the sides, Midrife, stomach, hot fevers etc D Vena
interna. or Basilica, coming from the heart and liver, by this vein is a
synew like to it, in which is contained ye spyxite of life, and under ye same
are mighty sinews, therefore it is perilous to open ye vein but by great
knowledge, but it help to be opened against pleuricy, pestilence. etc. B A
branch of Cephalica in the hand. H Funis brachij. G Saluatella. E These.iij.
last are of small force to ^open, because little blood does cu^ from the^, but
yet to open these small veins in warm water, does help Apoplexia.




But yet or ever we take the cure in hand, I think it mutch appertayning to our
duty, to show what way we mind to follow in the cures. For I have found two,
after Auicen, whereof the one does only moist, and the other only dry. But to
say truth, neither of them likes me, by it self alone. For if I used the way
of moysting, in a bruise, I might well doubt of putrefaction, because this way
greatly promoteth putrefaction. For it is done with oils, and yolks of Eggs,
When to dry ^ when to moist a wound in ye head.
which cause putrefaction in a bruised place. On the other part, the way of
dryuyng down, with Aqua vitae, and the powder, which Auicen describes in the
Chapyter, De incisione cutis, before alleged, does not fully content me,
though it have two parts: whereof the one defends from putrefaction, but ye
other parts not the bruised. Therefore, because I would not fall into either
extremity of only drying, or only moystyng* I have gathered a certain way of
them both, consistyng between them both. For it shall altogether have virtue,
to dry and to moist, because as I judge, medycines for the head, must actually
moist, and dry potencially. For by the help of drought, we preserve the
complexion of the bone, and pannycles which be dry of complexion, as Galen
writes. And by moisture, we procure dygestion, if any thing were turned and
bruised. All these things shall we obtain, with Rosed Honey strayned, Aqua
vitae, and the powder, which we shall order in ye cure. Neither must you
maruayle at the matter, my friend Soarenesse, and your Fellows, as did one, when
he heard a man say, that Honey was moist in feeling, and drying in virtue and
workyng. Uerely of his corpulency, if I may so say, it moysteth, but as
touching his qualityes and virtue, his operacion is drying. But it was no
wonder, that the young Philosopher, did not perceive the matter: Alas he had
not yet read over books of simples, neither the Prynciples of Philosophy. Lady
Ignorance caused him to muse, but not to search the cause, as did the
Philosophers, as Aristotle writes, in his supernaturals. He would not have
marueyled, if he had read Aristotle concerning the mynglinge of the Elements:
whereby he should have easily perceived, that Honey is of the Qualityes,
whereof I reported it to be, by reason of the complexion in mynglyng, if it
be advisedly considered, according to his essence and Nature. And if there
shall be any man, which shall not perceive thoroughly, the Nature of the
Symples, contained in Medicines, yet let him assuredly persuade himself, that
I will descrybe no other way of Cure, than I have written, and have got
thereby, both profyt and good well spent time: ye have heard the cautelles and
provisions, which I reckon necessary. Now will I orderly descrybe you the cure.

Then, when ye find a Clift, by reason of a Bruise, ye shall observe this
order: if ye mind to cure it rightly, in his kind. First, Beware of sharp
prickyng bones in the head for hurting of ye Brain.
before all other things, consider whether it be with depression, and enfolding
of ye bone, or not. For if it be with depression, or enfolding, all that, which
is bruised, must needs be taken forth: because it would otherwise provoke some
apostumacion. For why, in that case it could not be otherwise, but some gobet
of bone would be under the scalp, pricking the utter rimme, or Dura matter. And
in this case hear them not, which shall counsel and persuade, to remove
part of the bruised, and to leave part. For these men cannot remove the whole
cause, in as mutch as in every little part of ye bruised bone, may be some
shiuer, which by priking will come to apostumacion. Therefore to avoid, and
eschew the said cause, let us take forth all the bruised. But if the clift be
found, without depressing of the bone, ye may not cut out altogether, but only
make an hole in that part, where the matter shall most easily come forth. And
to the performaunce of this work, ye have three proper instruments, Saw,
Chesill, and wimble for the head
the Saw, the Chesill, and Wimble, amongst which we have most need of the
Wimble, because I find in it more commodity than in other instruments.

First, it will lightly make ye hole, yea, and that without mutch molesting of
the Pacient: which thing cannot be done, without raspatory. Again it will make
an hole, The Wymble is best to perse the head, to purge forth matter, if it be
used discreetly.
and euentacion, meet for the Passage of matter. Howbeit, there is one great
discommodity, in this instrument, which is, it will lightly pearce the Brain,
if it be not handled of a right expert Work man, in that behalf. But this
chances under his Hands, who always turns the Wimble about, after one
manner fashyon, where he should use a trimmeling kind of moving the Wymble,
for if the Wimble pass through. by the round moving, and so touch the Dura
matter, it will cut and rent the same, which does lightly happen in a tremblyng
moving. For if it touched the Dura matter, it might well prycke her, but not
pearce her through. A witty head and a steady hand, is fit for a good
Chirurgian,
Wherefore, it would leave her whole and sound. And therefore, who so would
exercise this feate, ought to have a light hand, and witty head together,
with a sad Judgment, and not to be taken from among them, that have used to
handle gross matters, and occupacions: as Digging, or Plowing, heauing of
Timber, and currying of Horses. For their hands be hardened with labors, and
may not lightly feel when it is through the bone, if they lay lode on their
work. And therefore this work must be done, with most exquisite diligence, and
circumspection, least we slay Men, whiles we labor to preserve them. For this
cause, you must gieue some attendaunce to them, which handle this work
manlike: so that ye may the better, and with more sauegard, attempt this cure
afterward. Now, as soon as the scalpe shall be holed, ye shall with al speed
possible, Make have in the ^ure of the head to defend ye air, which will
corrupt.
power in so mutch Rosed Honey strayned, as shall be able to cover the rimme of
the Brain. This have is made, least the Air be entered in, and made alteracion
in Caphelica, next power Aqua vitae upon the Honey, till the hole shall be filled,
whereunto ye shall cast so mutch of this powder, as may rise the depth of a
Knyffes thicknes, from the Rimme.

R. Aloes, Epatike, Sarcocol, Mirrhe, ana..i.ss. Incense..i. Dragons blood..ss^
and..ss. of Saffron myngle them together, and ponder them fynely, for the use
we spoke of. All this do we, to save the Complexion of the bone, and
pannicles, after the mind of Auicen, and Galen, as is alleged before. When ye
have thus done, take so mutch of a Sponge, as may be sufficient to fill the
hole: and this is done for two considerations. The first is, to exclude the
noyaunce of tents. Work (...) in ye (...) of the head.
For a Sponge will give place to the stretchyng of the brain, and tents can
not, but somewhiles cause apostumacion, by reason of their resistaunce and
stubbernesse. The other cause is, that the matter is sone drawn forth, from
the pannicles. For it might alter, if it remained any while, or else be
imprisoned, which is no rare and strange thing, to see daily in the cures of
these light and common Practicians. After al this, fill the wound with Aqua
vitae, powder, and linte: applying upon the same a piece of cloth, anointed
with Vnguentum Basilicum above described, to the intent the medicines be
retained there. And when ye have acccomplished all these things in order, lay
this plaster on the head shaven.

Take Camomell, Melilote, A very good emplaster for the head.
ana. M.iij. Mirtilles.M.ij. Cipresse nuts.xv. red Roses, and Wormwood. ana.
M.i. Bean meal, and Lupine meal, ana..iiij. Bray all that ought to be
brayed, and sees them altogether* in new, white Wine, and Barbers Lee, of
like porcions, unto such time as it shall be like a Cerote. After this,
spreede it on a cloth warm* and apply it to ye head. This plaster is used for
many purposes. First, to comfort the head, by strengthing of the complexion,
next to defend from cold, and rectify the air, which is enclosed. This is it
that Auicen says: Take heed of cold, in a Wound of the head.
Oportet vt vehemens caueatur f^igus, et^am in aestate, quoniam in eo est timor
magnus. Ice must beware of vehement cold, though it were in Summer, because
there is great fear in it. He means that the Air must be rectified,
namely, which enters into the head, at the opening of the Scalpe. For some
will go in. whether ye will or not to fulfill the room, in as mutch as nature
cannot suffer any place to be vacant, or empty, as the Philosopher does write.
He means not that the whole air of the Chamber, ought to be rectifyed, as
some Practicians think, and would feign be seen to be circumspect in the
matter. Thyrdly, to procure digestion. Fourthly, There is no place empty, for
air fills every open place.
to draw sanious matter, as soon as it is generated, and retained in the
Sponge, Fifthly, to resolve the matter, which is wont to cause Apostumacion.
For often times (as says Galen, whom Auicen cites) apostumacion follows
whatsoever instrument ye use, which ye shall preuente and eschew, if ye apply
the former plaster on the head. And this may easily appear, if a man consider
diligently, the Simples in the playsters. Now, thus shall you proceed in the
cure, unto such time as the Cicatrice shall be produced: always iterating and
renewing, the former medicines, as often as they shall be old, and dismitted.
But in asmutch, as the flesh grows here above his place, ye shall repress
and keep it down, with Roche Alum brent, applying it always, in the circuit
of the superflous flesh. But moderate the Alum in small quantity, that it cause
no dolor, To correct proud flesh.
by reason of his vytinge, and mordicacion. This is the self same manner, which
hetherunto has bin used in cures, wherewyth have bin helped above many hundred
persons, in our time: but I need not here make rehearsal of them, since a
manifest thing shall need no Witnesses. But I say, I remember one thing, which
was almost forgotten negligently, and is necessary to be observed about opening
of a scalpe, which is this. When ye open the scalpe, in such cures, and make
an hole for the foresaid purposes: be you ware that ye touch not any seame of
the scalpe. Five seames in the scalpe.
They be five in number, two vncomplet and false, and three true seames. The
first is named Coronal, of a crown, because the crowns be worn in that
place, and it is in the former part of ye head: the second Lambda or Lauda,
like ye Greek letter, l, which is in the hinder part of the head. The third
true seame, Sagittal, Sagittalis sine discriminalis.
like an arrow, under the partyng of the hair, whence one end touches the
seame Coronall, and the other Lambda, in the hinder part: the two false seames,
be at sides in the regions, or plattes in the temples, Now in case any clyfte
or chynne, touch either of the two, we must vs^ mutch diligence, and
c^rcumspection. Note here also, that clyftes and chynnes, may chance in the
said seames: either in length, which is, when the clyft together with the
seame, make.iiij straight angles: or else in breadth. If it chance in length,
the bone must needs be bored, and holed on both sides, of the seame, because
the particion of Dura matter may not ^ee touched in the Work. I say it must
needs be holed on both sides for as mutch as it may be, that blood be fallen
from the veins, in both parts, and there be congeled. For if we would feel,
or work in the seame where Dura matter is bound and stayed (as do they, How
suffocacion in the Brain may come.
which come fro practice to Chirurgi) we might well fear and doubt, of
suffocacion of the brain, because the rimme being losed, should press it
down, and so choke it. And that we should make no such loosing of Cephaljca
in the place, we are admonished by Cornelius Celsus, in the Chap. De calua^iae
curatione. Howbeit, he does it in consideration of Hippocrates confession,
where to the profit of his posterity, he confesses that he was deceived,
working in a seame. Where fore, ye shall not work in any seame, least ye be
deceived, as was Hippocrates, Prince of Physicions. But if ye fissure or
membrana chance in breadth ye shall make holes in the same, in both sides of
the seame: always observing this, that neither particion, neither seame be
touched at all. When these holes be made, ye shall finishe the Cura, according
to the order and manner, as was before prescribed. And as for the think, ye
shall do in like manner, if ye be assured, that it perce and run through the
scalpe. On the other side, if it go not through that part of the scalpe, which
they call vitrea tabula, that is, the Glassy table but only come to the
Spongious bone: Ye shall proceed to the cure, with Aqua vitae, and the powder
alone, which shall be sufficient. Now if ye list, ye may plain and abate the
bone* about the riuen place, whereof will follow sooner incarnacion, and
causing of the Cicatrice. These be rules, and orders in ye cures, which are not
mutch used in hard maladies proceeding of a cause primitive. Now therefore,
have you that, which ye so earnestly have required: A gift in mine opinion, as
great as my poor knowledge is able to bring to pass shortly for the help of
mankind, which is in Soarenesse, but yet I did keep these things long with
my self, to the intent I might once at least, so soon content your minds.
But whether I have so done, as mine intent was, I am uncertain. For why, I am
become in these treactises, as one that builds his house in the mids of the
Market steed, about the which, as touching the heyght, and breadth, among the
lookers thereupon arise alteracion, and controversy, whereas the Builder
thought his work of convenient proporcion. So fear I, least perchance my
doing, shall seem to some, abject and base, and to some other, to obscure or
dark. But certes, in asmutch as I am not able to please al sorts, I thought
it best, to retain the mean way in speaking, specially since I never lyked, to
fly over ye tops of trees: but plainly to go a soft pace, and as it were with
a leaden foot, to the intent, that who so listed to over get me, might the
easier attain thereunto, without paynefull travel in their Journey. And thus
gentle Soarenesse: wyshing God to send thee health, and us to meet meryly
again: I make an end with a Cautery good for thy purpose: and a rule to help
the stone.


Soarenesse. But first how make you the red powder, for the parting water?


Chirurgi. YOu must make it thus.. Of water wherewith Goldsmithes do separate
gold and silver, which is green, A goodly water of great strength, to
se^perate metal good for to consume rotten flesh.
when it has separated the mettalles: of this take..vj. of Quicksiluer..iiij.
myngle them together, and put them either into a little stone Limbecke, or
Still, or else into one of Uenice glass, well luted with clay, both the head
of the Still, and the part whereupon it stands, and also the receyuer,
whereinto it droppeth, that none pass away. Distill it on a soft fire, in a
close* Furneyce. Your parting water is thus made.

R. Salt Peter, Alum Roche, and Romayne Uitriall, ana. l i.ij. beat them
together in a Mortar, then put it into a double glass, well luted, or so
stopped, that no air do transpire, or go forth: this will make a singular good
Water, drop one gutta or drop upon the ground, and you shall see it boil, as
though it were on the fire. These are profitable, to the work of Chirurgj, in
foul soars, and Ulcers: here is good occasion mynistred, to speak of making
of Medicines. But I refer that, to the book of Compoundes, where there are
not only good store of them, but also good medycines, no less profitable to
Chirurgj, than needful to Physic.


Soarenesse. Now how make you Lee, to open, in the manner of a Cautery?


Chirurgi. MAke it after this fashion. A good Lee for a Cautery
R. A pretty round Tub of two gallons, with a hole in the bottom. stopped, put
into this Tub, ashes of the Ash tree. Make a hoale in the mids, to put in a
pottell or more, of vnslecked Lyme, and power upon it quickly hot Lee, as
mutch as shall cover the Lyme, and with all speed cover it with Ashes, that ye
air may be kept in, for two days: the third unstop the hole, and let the
water distill, from the Lyme and Ashes, and keep this in a close Uessell.
This will quickly open any part that is soar, as apostumacions without pain:
and if an Egg will not sink in it, but fleet, then it is good Lie, for the
purpose.


Soarenesse. THere are good pouders, profitable to your Art, I pray you learn
me some of them, to cleanse dead Flesh: and as for ye book of Compou^ds, I
will read that at more leisure.


Chirurgi. A good powder for rotten flesh.
I Will teach you to make a trosse, to cleanse rotten Flesh, which is. R. Water
of Plataine..vi. Mercury well sublimated, and made in powder..ss. Sees them in
a little Pan, to the consuming of the fourth part: then let it stand.xij.
hours, after kneade it with a little* Beanemeale, and roul^ them up into a
trosse. Note also, that you must mingle so mutch Uermilion, with the
Beanemeale, as will color it: dry this trosse, in an Oven, or hot Sun.


Soarenesse. How make you a potenciall Cautery?


Chirurgi. TO make a Cautery. R. Of the strongest Soap Lie, asmutch as will
suffyse, A potenciall Cautery.
put it in a brazen Kettle. Put thereunto..i ss. Romayne Uitriall, let all
sees until the Lyquor be consumed, then gather up the Foam, that does
remain: and keep this to open Apostumacions. For in opening without pain,
this does excel all other.


Soarenesse. BUt that the time is far spent, and I have put you to mutch
pains, else I would have learned some thing, to have taken away Gravel and
Stone, from the Kidneys, Raynes, and Bladder.


Chirurgi. AT this present, I have no time convenient, to serve that turn at
large: it requires no small travel. For like as among all mortal evils, the
Stone is the greatest: so the cure is most cunning. Notwythstanding, I shall by
Gods grace entreat, hereafter at large, For the stone a good regiment.
the diet, the proper medicines, cure, and cutting of the stone. But yet in the
mean time, let the Pacient keep him warm. Eat no salt fyshe, or Flesh
burnt, roasted meats, hard Cheese, or slimie things, ingenderers of viscious
humors, gross or clammy* Or drink hot Wynes, or eat Uenison, or any water
Foul, or be costiffe bellied, or keep their Back hot. etc. The signs of
the Stone are evident, as pains in the Raynes, Bladder, Yard, Loins. etc.
With paynfull lamenting and crying, stopping of the Uryne. etc. The causes are
many, as of Parents, of evil Diet, with many evil accidents. The vryne
often times does declare the evils of those parts, as Hippocrates in the third
part of the.ix. of his Aphorisms affirms, Hippocrates. Why matter comes
from the yard.
saying: Si sanguinem aut pu^ mingat, renum aut vesicae exulcerationem
significat. To make water, or piss blood, or else filthy matter: it signifies
Soars and Byles, either in the Raynes, or else in the Bladder: and assuredly,
such Soars, and Ulcers, Hyppocrates. why matter comes from the yard.
come from the stone the which do excoriate, fret, cut, and cause both Blood
and Matter without vryne, to come forth at the Yard. But sometime pure blood
is pissed, of the breaking of a Ueyne: and sometime from Women, for the secret
infirmity, or natural passion, through clensing of terms. But gravel in the
Uryne, Why men do pysse blood.
betokens the stone in the Bladder, says Hippocrates. lib. iij. Aphorism.
Quibus in vrina velut arenuae subsistunt, ijs vesica laborat. calculo.
Furdermore, it is skant possible, for old people to be helped in the Raynes,
or Bladder, A reward for Lechery.
for ye stone. Specially in great glotonous people, as Drunkardes with Ale and
Beer: or else them, which were never satisfied with Lechery in their youth etc.
Howbeit, to speak a little, for the help thereof, two things must be
considered. First, the preservative. Secondly, the curatiue. Preservative
Curatiue.
The preservative, by good Diet, and wholesome regyment of Life, as what ye do
eat, the manner of eating and drinking. The time, the place, the quality and
the quantity of the said meats and drinks: as meat of light digestion clean
Bread without Bran. Not to be to mutch hot or cold, neither mutch travel,
or sitting still idle, but good exercise. etc. And note, when the stone is in
ye Bladder, then it is harder than that which is in the Raynes, and more burnt.
Now, if your gravel come of heat, Galens Syrup for the stone.
or through hot accidents, as with hot Wynes, Labor. etc. Then follow. C.
Galens Syrup, which is most excellent also, in this our age, and is thus made.

R. Syrup of Endive, of Sorell, of water Lillies, ana..v. the Waters of
Fenell, of Endive, ana..i. mingle them together, and give the Pacient to drynk,
Morning and Evening: and anoint the Raynes, with Galens cold ointment, which
is written in the Compoundes.


Soarenesse. But what remedy, when the Stone comes of cold?


Chirurgi. GALEN must put to his helping hand, which wylleth, When the stone
comes of cold.
when such contraries do happen, when nature is so changed from heat into
coldness, or if it were cold from the beginning: then to help with warm
things, to dissolve, and this was his reamedy. R. Theriacae Galeni..i. Syrup
of the Barks of the Citri..i. warm water, Good potage, for the stone.
as of Carduus Benedictus. etc..ij. mingle them together, and give your
Pacient, or take it your self ten days: For it is no light trifling Medicine,
but most effectual, and substanciall, invented by Galen. And like as in hot
burning of the stoue, to drink clean Whay, or Butter milk is good, Men do
want providence, to foresee their own euilles.
and to eat Purslen: even so in the case of coldness, Hares flesh sodden
with Capers, and young Nettles is best, and a morninges to eat half an Ounce
of new drawn Cassiafistula myngled with Sugar: and to drynk Whay of Goats
milk. Oh that Men would foresee, the euilles against Nature, as Fevers, Pox,
Leapers, Goutes, Stone, Cankers. etc. And take in hand to help them, in their
first Spryng, for then they would be soon helped. As example. Fire and Water,
are good Servants, but evil Masters. For if they get the victory, who can
rule them? the proof is manifest: for it is easy to quench a fire in the
beginning: Fire and water be good servants, but evil masters.
but when it has gotten hold, of the Thacke, Sparres, Beams. etc. then it is
to late. So when vile humors have incensed the blood. Ueynes. etc. And have
gotten the vyctory, rebelling against good nature: then it is either to late,
or else to hard, to put them away, and bring nature again, to his good estate.
Yet it hurts little the Physicions, Chirurgians, and Apothecaries, to utter
their knowledge, and also their Wares, with promises fair and false, in
matters past cure. For gold has no corrupcion, although it be gotten with a
corrupted Conscience: But to our matter. Take things in due time, for time will
never be called again, do what you can. Howbeit while as the body is yet
living, there is left some help to relieve, or repair it again: and in such
case of grauel, or ye stone, what have ever done more pleasure, than Clisters,
or Enemaes, mynistred beneath at the Fundament? nothing truly, cutting
excepted. Yet in cutting, unless the Chirurgian be very cunnyng, Cutting of ye
stone, is perilous.
the Pacient will soon cry: Quare de vulua eduxisti me? And although the
Chirurgian have great knowledge, yet one Pacient does skant escape among an
hundred, happy man by his dole. On the other side, there be such bodies, when
they are newly cleansed, and delivered from Gravel, or the stone: eftsoons the
bodies are such, that they have it again as paynfully, as at the first time.
And some of those bodies, have the property of the North wind, in drying, or
turning into dust: And other some have the property of Frost, Example,
to coagulate, to make cold, and turn soft things into hardness, as Ise is.
Therefore in such euilles do thus. Make a Clyster after this manner.

R. Milium ^olis, or else the Berryes of Alkakengi..vi. clean running water. A
goodly Clister for to help the stoue
l i.iiij. sees this until the Water be half consumed, then strain it, of
this water take a Pynte or more, for your Clister, putting thereunto the Oils
of Dill, Camomell, and new Butter, ana..ij. and a little Salt: thus is your
Clister fynished, and made, mynister it warm but not skaldyng. Though this
seem a plain Clister, yet it is marvelous good in working: and cleanses not
only gravel, but also helps the Cholicke, and pains in the Guts. When.
ye have mynistred this, then followinge within three days, mynister this, for
it is of great virtue.

R. Of the decoction of Mallows, Pari^tory, Colewortes, Holihocke, Smalage,
Another synguler good Clister.
Sitrach, Polipodium, Carduus benedictus. Alkakengi feed of each like quantity
of these. l i.i. Oils of Dill, of Camomell, of Lilles, ana..i.ss. Butter..ij.
Hiera simplex. i. and a little Salt, mingle all together, and warm put into
the Clister bladder, and Mynister, as is aforesaid. If you have not this choice
of Oils, you may take common oil of Olives. This Clyster is most excellent
good, for the stone and gravel: it has virtue to open, cleanse, waste, and
skower without danger, peril, or hurt. When this is done speedely, have this
Cataplasme at hand, and warm apply it to the payned place: whether it be in
ye Raynes, or the lowest part of the Belly, or Flanks, let it be done
oftentyme, have two in store, to lay unto the place warm, one after an other,
it is thus made in good order.

. The Leaves, and Stalks of Prassium, of Mallows, of Holyhock ana. M.iij.
sodden in the Broth, A good Cacaptaine for the kene.
wherein a Weathers head has bin sodden. Sees herein also the roots of
Mallows, well beaten in a Mortar. l.i. the Muscilage of Fenigreeke, and Flax
seed. ana. l.v. then let it be strayned forth strongly, to this Juice put the
Oils of Dill, Camomell, white Lyllyes. ana..iiij. fresh Butter..vj. Honey..v.
boil all together in a clean Pan, put in Bran of Barley, and Meal, temper
all with a stycke, until it come to the thickness of soft Paste, spread it in
two several Cataplasmes, and warm apply one of them after an other, to the
dolorous place. And when one is cold, then apply on the other oftentimes, this
is of a singular operation: with this, that great learned Man, master Doctor
Marianus has done mutch good, A drink for the stone.
and this I have also proved many times. Then to make ye matter perfect, give
your Pacient to drynk Benedictae laxatiuae.vj. tempered with clean
odoriferous, warm white Wine, a quarter of a Pynte or more, when this is done:
wrap him in warm clothes, with head well covered, and so let him sweat. And
this cleanses the Raynes, and Bladder, equal with any other: except you will
hasard your Life, in cutting. Furdermore, note a great secret, which I do
disclose for the sake of mankind. Let the Pacient have the stilled Waters, of
Saxifrage, Parietary, Persily, Filipendula, and Smalage, altogether. ana..iij.
and put into this water, this precious powder following. A most worthy powder
for the stone.
.i.ss. or.. R. Persily roots clean washed and scraped, I mean their ryndes,
and Persily seed, ana..vj or more, and..viij. of the Flowers of Iringium, or
the Sea Thistil, and also Iringium roots, and the roots of Carduus
Benedictus. ana..ss. Cut your roots fynely and thyn, and put all together in a
close vessel, into the Oven, until they be dry, and then make powder: keep
it close from Air. And when occasion does serve, temper your foresaid quantity
into your Waters, or else with white Wine or Chicken broth, drynk it warm. Also
note well this Syrup for ye stone, wherein ye Pacient may take every second
night warm. A Syrup for the stone.
.ij. R. Roots of Holyhocke..iiij. the Leaves of Mallows, Filipendula and
Parietary. ana. M.ij. the seed of Persyly, Fenegreeke, and Flax. ana..i.
Iuiubes in number.xxx. clean scraped Lyquoryce. l.i. the roots of Sparagus,
Carduus Benedictus, Iringium, Persyly, and Fenyll. ana..ij.ss. sees all these
in.x. l j. wayght of clean running, or Well water, unto the third part be
wasted: then strain it, and put unto this Decoction. l.i.ss. of clean white
Sugar, stir it, and make your Syrup, and keep it in a close double Glass.
These foresaid things are excellent good, to be sodden in clean white Wine,
puttyng thereunto. l.i. of the white Guaicum rased, and put in a Uessell of
three gallons, made close in the mouth: and so put into a fair great hollow
Caldron of water, and so to sees four hours, then take it from the fire, and
let it stand until it be cold. Then open it, and strain it, and keep it
close, to drink at all times.

And thus also has Rychard Bulleyn, a zealous Lover of Physike, Rychard
Bulleyn his practice for the stone.
more for the consolation and help of the afflicted sick people, being poor,
then for ye lucre and gain, of the Money of the Welthy and Rich, written.
This Man I say, although he professes comfortable Cordialles, and Heavenly
Medicines for the Soul, being a Divine: yet he has good Experience of many
Infirmities, and Sicknesses, infecting the Bodies of Mankind, and has done
many goodly Cures, which I do leave unwritten, both for the proiixity of time,
and also for that no adulacion, flattery, or any private affection should
appear, or be suspected in him the aucthour hereof toward him the said
Rychard Bulleyn, because he is his natural borne Brother: but to the matter,
his Medycine for the Gravel in the Raynes, and Stone. And thus he writes in
his pretty Work, which if it please GOD, shall hereafter come abroad to the
profit of the common wealth, of the English Nation. And this is his
compendious order: Says he, the great Dolor, Phlegmon, or Ulcer of the
Raynes by the which Raynes, Uryne is conveyed into the Bladder. etc. or the
Stone in the Bladder: do cause great pains in making of Uryne, which Uryne is
often stopped, or else pisseth little at once, with excoriation, and Blood.
Where gravel, and ragged stones, coming of gross, salt, hot matter,
viscuous humors: after long hot burning Fevers, evil Diet, Cheese, old
poudered Beef, Bakon, Uenison, salt Fish, hot Wynes have bin used in Diet.
The stone is oftener in the Bladders of the lean hot Men, which have larger
vessels, then in fat persons having small vessels, and cold moist fat
bodies. etc.

Two things considered in the stone, for the cure of the same.
The stone, says he, after the Mind of Galen, in the Raynes is lighter,
lesser, softer, and redder, declyning somewhat into Graynes, but in the
Bladder, it is greater, heavier, harder, greeuouser, in color whytishe, or
more adust, and both these are dangerous, and skant curable. After one is.xl.
year old: as says Hippocrates. Aphoris. Quicunque nephretici sunt, non
sanantur post quadraginta annos: Who so has the passion in the Raynes,
after.xl. years, is past cure: the regiment in the cure is double. The first
is, to prohibit the generation of the stone. The second is to displace, or
remove it, when it is grown. The first intencion has five things, not
naturally, directly contrary against the stone. As air, gross, mysty, cloudy.
etc. to be fled* for it does engender gross matter.

Meats and Drynkes, as gross Wine, and salt meats, burnt, things, cold
water, which will bring gross matter, and breed the stone.

Labor immoderate, to mutch exercise, which ingrosseth the blood:

Solitariness, mutch study, no travel, or Lechery immoderate, which are great
enemies to nature.

Great affliction of the mind, watching, fasting. etc.

To help these euilles, do thus, as follows.

Use meats of light digestion, in due time, place, and order.

Moderate labor between meals, to help digestion, and make the body strong:
and to beware of Listes, Wrastlinges. etc. that will hurt the body, being used
immoderately.

Of all things to beware of Idleness, the mother of euilles, and nourisher of
as many sicknesses to the body, as are caused through glottony: and specially,
of to mutch copulacion carnal.

Use pleasant Music, and things to delight the spirits: for Melancholy,
which is cold and dry, is a great furderer of the stone: and when these are
done, use these things followinge.

R. Syrup of the two Roots, Honey of Roses, R. Bulleyns Syrup for the stone.
Syrup of Vinegar simple. Syrup of Fenell, Syrup of Saxifrage. ana..ss. the
water of Fenill, of Wormwood, of Persiley, of Maydenhayre, of Alkakengi.
ana..i. mingle them, and temper them* warm, and drink this oftentimes,
morning and evening, until the matter flegmatike be digested. Then use this
potion, to purge the said digested matter in this order following. R. Of the
decoction of the four great hot roots, into whom put these seeds, R.
Bulleyns electuary for the stone.
Persily, Saxifrage, Anisseedes, Smalage, Fenell, Asparagus. ana..i. sees
these together, then strain it, and put into the same, Electuariae de Cassia,
Diacatholiconis. ana.iij. Diaphiniconis..ij.ss. mingle them in warm drink,
with Honey of Roses, to make it sweet, and drink it warm in the morning,
within four days following, which are of great virtue.

R. Pills of Hiera Nicolai..i.ss make five Pills in number, round, new and
gilted, and take them early. Drynking the Broth of a Chicken, R. Bulleyns
Pills for the stone.
within.ij. hours following. Then apply this Emplaster warm into the Raynes,
the day next after your Pills.

R. Crummes of two Manchets new baken, and thyrty Fygges. three yellowe Yolks
of Eggs, R. Bulleyns emplaster for the stone.
Saffron..i. fresh Butter..ij. sweet Rose water..vi. let all stand in a
Mortar ten hours, then beat all with a Pestle. Then spread it upon a clothe,
and very warm apply it to ye Raines, renew it still warm, and apply it to
the Raynes again. Then have at hand this Clister following, to take after the
Emplaster has remained, by the space of fifteen hours.

R. Oil of Dyll..vi. clean white Wine..vij. new fresh Butter..iiij Capons,
and Duckes grease, without Salt, R. Bulleyns Clister for the stone.
Cassiafistula new drawn from the Cane..ss. the yolke of one Egg, with a
very little fine white Salt, temper all in a Pan, to the order for a Clister,
and warm put it into the Bladder, and so mynister toward Evening, and
assuredly these be goodly reamedyes for the Stone. The whole Regiment for the
stone, devised by the said Rychard Bulleyn, shall by Gods Grace, shortly come
forth, to the profit of the commmon People.

IN this place, good Reader, but ye unfortunate hap has prevented me with
lets, else assuredly, I would have written at length, the whole large Anatomy
of ye body of mankind: but here I do end, only with ye names of these bones at
this present time until hereafter, if God will suffer me to do more, I am then
youres.

i. Os frontis. vel coronale.

ij. Ossa furcu^ae.

ij Ossa petiosa, vel lapidosa.

ij. Os laud.

i Os basilare, vel polim^r^hon.

ij Ossa nasi.

ij. Ossa colatoris.

xx Ossa mandibulae, super.

ij. Ossa mandibulae infer.

xxx. Ossa spondilia. vera and mendosa.

ij. Parietalia

ij. Spatulae vtriusque. Humeri.

Os adiutorij.

ij. Focile vel radius.

xviij. Ossa manuum digito.

x. Ossa pectinis manum.

ij. Ossa focile minus brachorum.

xxiiij. Costae verae and non verae.

Malleoli.

vij. Ossa thoracis

i. Os cordis.

i. Os Epiglottale.

ij. Ossa ancarum.

ij. Patella and rotula genesis

ij. Ossa ^haab tibiarum.

ij. Canna tibiarum.

ij. Os nauicularis, b^^ nauifama,

viij. Ossa planta pedis.

ij. Os balistae.

ij. Tubercula femoris

Os maius tibiae.

Crus.

Cubitus.

iij. Ossa cauda.

i. Ossa pectinis.

Ossa digitorum pedum, quae (...) sunt.xxvij.

Dentes numero xxxij etc.

A tergo and a front me finxisti. Psalm. 139.



The Index between Soarnesse, and Chirurgj.


A.
A Faithful man needs no miracle. Fol. 8. Apostumation is Compounded of
three things. 9 An ignorant Chirurgian, is a man stear. 5 A good medicine for
apostumacion. 1^ A Cicatrice. 13 A digestion. Ibidem An abstersive. Idem A good
repercussiue. 14 Auicens medicine. Idem An excellent Emplaster to assuage
pain. 15 A very good emplaster. Idem A softning emplaster. 17 A Wound of a
bruise. 19 A good question. 20 A defensive very good. Idem An abstersive to
cleanse. 21 A good Ointment for Wounds. Idem A good practice. 24 Anticedent,
Coniunct. etc. 25 A good exiccatiue to dry. 26 Aristotle, a good note for the
Elements. Idem An incarnatiue to cause flesh. 27 A defensive. Idem A
Sinatiue. Idem A good foundation. 28 Auicens wise providence. 29 A good powder.
Idem Alteracion of nature, what it is. 30 Alteracion of extencion. Idem A good
liniment. 31 A consideracion of dead flesh. Idem Anticedent and Coniunct, what
they are. Idem A very good obseruacion. 32 Alteration of air. Idem A defensive
under the Knee. 33 A conclusion. Idem An other good defensive. 34 A sign of
ouermutch drying. Idem An other good mundification. Idem A very good abstersive
for the head. 37 A good powder for the head. 38 A Diet* Idem A cl^tt in the
Brain pan. 39 A note between a ma^s brain pan, and a childs. ide^ A good note
for a Chirurgian. Idem A witty head, and astedfast hand for a Chirurgia^. 41 A
very good emplaster for the head. 42 A Water to consume rotten flesh. 43 A
good Lee for a cautery. Idem A good powder for rotten flesh. Idem A potenciall
Cautery. Idem A reward for Lechery. 44 A Syrup for the Stone. Idem A good
plaster for the stone. Idem An excellent pocion for the stone. Idem A good
Clister for the stone. Idem
B
BOrias the North East wind. Fol. 1 Blind Bayard is boldest in the Carte. 10
Blood proceeding of a primative cause. 25 Breach of continuance. 30
C.
Courtesy. Fol. 2 Chirurgerj is a Sanctuary for vagabondes. 5 Christ is not
covetous. 8 Composicion, Replecion, and Complexion. 10 Consider in what bodies,
Apostumacions are bred. 12 Consider to open a member, before it do rot. 13
Cautery potenciall. 14 Choice of medicines are very good. 16 Captain William
Read of the holy Island. 21 Cold is the greatest enemy to ye sinews of al. id.
Chirurgians do never agree. 23 Chirurgians must know Simples. 26 C. Ce^sus. 26
Cold vicer. 27 Consider the vryne, and so work. 28 Corosion, biting, or
gnawing. 3^ Contraries* when to use them. 35 Chalk for Cheese. 37 Clothes
applied to a wounded head. 38 Cutting of the stone is perilous. 44
D.
DOctor Turner. Fol. 4 Doctor Kaies. Idem Doctor Record. Idem Doctor
K^ningham, Idem Doctor Fair. Idem Doctor Andrewe ^orde. Idem Dog ^eaches,
what they are. 5 Do^or in complexion. 15 Distilling of blood from the head. 23
Deep cuttes hurt the arteries. 24 Digestion causes not matter, but it is the
propo^tionating of the humors. 34 Diseases coming of fulness, are helped by
emptynesse. 38 Dangerous wounds, how to know them. Ide^
E.
Evil parents, their fruictes. Fol. 6 Example. 15 Example. 19 Example. 20
Evil accidents follow mutch bleeding. 24 Example of a Moldwarpe. 35
Erisypelas, is a hot, red, round inflacion soar, or Cholerik boil, with a
fever in ye body. 38 Example of blood letting. 39
F.
FLora a Goddess of Flowers, or an Harlot of Rome. Fol. 2 First seek Gods
Kingdom. Idem For counterfeyte Chirurgians. 6 Eight things or properties, of
a good Chirurgian. 7 Four notes in an apostumacio^, beginning, augmenting,
^ate, and declining. 10 Foul bodies do repulse repercussiues, except they be
purged. 11 Four intencions, and six unnatural things to be observed. 14 Five
notable things to be observed in healing. id. Fools with Books, be worse
than vnlea^ned Pra^tioners with practice. 25 First handle the accidents in a
cure, and note three things. 28 First to all the whole body, and then to the
particular member. 33 Five good intencions. 34 Four intencions, in two kinds
of vicers. Ide^ Five causes that do hurt the head. 37 Fi^^^res, or Chappes. 39
Five sca^es in the Brain pan. 42 Five kinds of Ulc^rs. 23 Fire, and Water are
good Servants, but evil Masters. ^4
G.
GOD gives health. Fol. 22 Galens note. 32 Great Clerks are not the wisest
men. 28 Geometrical measure in Chirurgi. 33 G^^tony is no small enemy to
nature. 34 Galens Syrup for the stone. 44
H.
HOw to know apostumacion. Fol. 9 How to rebate flesh superfluous. 13 How to
make incision. 15 How to dry humour^ that do abound. Idem How to sewe a wound,
and how not. 20 How to make a Cicatrice. 27 How bold the Chirurgian should be
in cure. 29 Hot and cold apostumacions. 30 Hardness of an Ulcer. 31 How a
Pacient died, by evil cure. 32 Hippocrates order. Idem How to bind a member.
33 How to find out a stripe, by what tokens in the lead. 37 How to cut, to the
end to heal. 38 How cold ^urteth. Idem How to search a wound. 39 How
^^^^ocacion of the Brain may come. 42
I.
Ignorance. Fol. 2 Incision, how to make it. 13 It is perilous to sewe a
wound, coming of the biting, or ^^nding of some beast. 19 In healing a
compounde Ulcer, mark the accidents concurrant. 28 Imbrocation. 31 If an
apostumacion, be in the midst of the upper part of the body, then to bleed
either in ye left arm, or else right, is well. 40
K.


L.
Linx can see best of any creature, and his vryne will turn into a stone.
Pl^ni. Fol. 5
M.
MAny good medicines are made of the plain people, to help in the absence of
the Chirurgians. Fol. 6 Man is but miserable, and is quickly gone. 8 Men do use
pretty terms, for foul soars. and call the^ by one name, when they are an
other. 9 Man's secret providence. 17 Matter does covet digestion. 19 Melancholy
meats. 33 Man is made Geometrically in order. 39 Make have in the cure of the
head, to defend the air, which else will corrupt, 41 Men do want providence,
to foresee their own euilles. 44
N.
NAture works three ways to help her self. 7 Nature must be relieved by
sundry means, in the time of danger. Idem No local medicine applied, before
the body be purged. 14 Nature nourishes her self, 35
O.
OF vacabond Chirurgia^s, worse than thieves Fol. 5. Of contraries of
Elements. 9 Of resolucion. 11 Of repercussiues, when they are good. Idem Of an
Embroche. 12 Of GOD, is the beginning, and ending of all thinge^. 17 Of
Wounds. Idem Of commision mortal. 18 Of the first, and second intencion. 19
Of wounds in the muscles. 20 Of Synewes. Idem Of Wounds deep, and not deep.
24 Of incision of small Ueynes. Idem Of exiccatiues. 26 Of urine considered, of
every sick, and soar man. 28 Of radical moisture. Idem Ovid, a good note. 29
Of dolor. 30 Of putrefaction, or rottenness. ^^ Of bones, which are
corrupted, two things considered. 32 Of swellings, the cause. 33 Of filthy
matter. what it is. 34 Of honest request, and friendship. 36 Of incision of the
head. 37 Of blood running, the chief cause, and the hurt that does follow the
same. Idem
P.
Parts most dangerous to be hurt. Fol. 18 Pate Hardy the Scot, a good
Chirurgian. 19 Purge a ^oare man, after he is amended, for fear of dropsy. 33
Purge the pacient, according to the vryne. 39 Pooremen are corrected, for great
men's faults. id. Preservative, and Curatiue. 44
Q.


R.
RE^ercussiues. Fol. 24 Regiment of Life. 28 Remove the cause, and the effect
will cease. 32 Richard Bulleins practice for the stone. 45 Richard Bulleins
Syrup for the stone. 46 Richard Bulleins Electuary for the stone. Ide^ Richard
Bulleins Pills for the stone. Idem Richard Bulleins emplaster for the stone.
Idem Richard Bulleins Clister for the stone. Idem
S.
SAbinus a famous Mountain in Italy. 2 Soft Chirurgians, make foul soars.
Ide^ Sir Thomas Eliot knight. 4 Sundry names of apostumacions, but in effect,
are but apostumations. 9 Soars compounded. 10 Signs of death. 24 Sanguine,
Choleric, apostumacions. 25 San^es is matter, coming of corrupted blood, or
else putrefaction, and sometime it is taken for poison. Idem Strong members, do
oppress the weak. Idem Sanious matter. 26 Soft Chirurgians, make foul soars
yet Botcherly manglers, marreth altogether. 29 Signs of broken bones in the
head. 38 Saw, Chesill, and Wimble, for the head are good instruments. 44
Sagittalis, sieve discrininalis. 41
T.
TRagedy begins ever evil, and ends the same well. Fol. 2 Thomas Phayre
Doctor. 4 Thomas Pannell. Idem Two kinds of Chirurgians. 5 The soldier is
hurt more by an evil Chirurgian, than by his enemies weapon, often it is so
proved. 6 The miseries of man, when he is hurt in body. id. The discriptio^ of
an unthrift, or a villain of nature, stryuing against grace and virtue,
unprofitable for a common wealth. Idem The virtue of Chirurgj. 7 The Chirurgian
is the best hand craft in the World. Idem The Chirurgian is natures
servant. Idem The strength of nature. Idem Two manner of healinges. 8 Two
kinds of apostumacions, hot, and cold. 9 The abou^dance of blood. in the
apostumacion. id The cruelty of the Choleric apostumacio^, but the bloody
apostumacion is gentler. Idem The quantity of the apostumacions Idem Three
causes, the Primative, the Antecedente, and the Coniunctiue, which belong to
the apostumacion. 11 To abate dead flesh. 26 To alter a completion in a soar.
Idem The diffinicion of a wound. 17 Two kinds of wounds, the one simple, and
the other double, or compounde. 18 The Chirurgian must look pleasauntly, upon
his Pacient. 20 To cleanse the wound, and draw forth broken bones. 21 To end a
double wound, and begin accidents. Id. To correct a swart wound. 22 The flux
of blood, proceeding of a primative cause. 23 To stop a bleeding vein. 24 To
staunche blood. 25 Two sundry sorts of ulcers. 26 To know, whether ulcers be
hot or cold. Idem To make the skin whole. 27 Three sundry intencions: of
regiment, of matter, of growing. Idem To abate proud flesh. Idem The cause of
superfluous flesh. 28 To remove an escharous scab or crust. 29 Two causes of
matter. 30 To search the cause, and displace the effect. 31 Three causes of
hardness. Idem To make a Cicatrice. Idem To help putrefaction. 32 These
signs are in the end. Idem To open a vein, to purge gross blood. 33 The
cause of Soarenesse is first, not considered of many. 34 To skower and dry all
Ulcers, plain, or hollow. 35 The cause of bruses, what they are. 37 To let
blood on the contrary part, why it must be, by reason. 39 The Wimble is best,
to pearse the head, to purge forth matter* if it be used discreetly. 41 Take
heed of cold, in a wound of the head. 42 There is no place empty, for air
fills every open place. 42 To corect proud flesh. Idem Two things
considered in the stone, for the cure of the same. 45
V.
VNguentum Aegyptiacum of Auicen. 16 Ulcers be hard to cure, yt follow a
sickness. 23 Ulcers in good complexions, are soon cured. Id Uariety of simples.
26 Ulcers hot, cold, and biting. 27 Vnguentum Album. Idem Ulcer virulent, how
it grows. 34 Vnguentum Basilicum. 38
W.
WHat is called Chirurgj. Fol. 5 What peril is in ye application of a
repercussiue, although in some case, it is most best. 11 What hurt ensues of a
repercussiue sometime. 13 What goodness comes of a repercussiue an other
time. Idem What harm ensues of an evil Chirurgian always. 15 What the
Chirurgian must do. Idem What wounds be mortal. 18 Wounds in the Muscles.
Idem What ye Chirurgian must observe in his cure. 19 Who so does grant to one
absurdity, many one will eftsoons follow the same. Idem When to let blood on
the contrary side of the body, and why. 21 When the Chirurgian is put to shame.
22 What an vicer is. 23 When to incarnate, and when to separate a soar, 24
When to use contra^tes in healing. 30 What thing does anoy the brain most of
all. 39 When to let blood, ij. times in one place, and why. 40 When to dry and
when to moist a wou^d in ye head. 42 Work tenderly, in the wound of the head.
43 Why men do piss blood. 44 When the stone comes of cold. Idem Why
corruption comes from the Yard. Idem
FINIS.
The end of the Dialogue, between the Soar man, and the Chirurgian, By
William Bulleyn. March. 1572.
The Book. of Compoundes.
Sickness. How make you Alypta Muschata?


Health. FIrst take the best Gum of Laudanum..iii. of Storax or Styrax
Calamita..ss. of lignum Aloes..ii. stacte or the fattest part of Mirrhe..i. of
Amber..i. Ca^phire..i.ss. of Musk..ss. of Rose water asmutch as you will, This
does help children which be short winded, and the straightnes of ye breast and
womb, which cannot keep their Milk: of this we may make excellent perfumes,
which noble men be accustomed to use, it is oftentimes mixed with electuaries.


Sickness. How make you your own Antidotarie which you use yourself?


Health. FIrst take of Mirrhe..i. of Opium, which is the Juice of black
Popie..xviij. of Amomu^,, vi. of Persely..xv. of smalage seed. The goodly
virtues of Aslucritum.
.xii. of Squinantum..ix. Cassiafistula..iiii. white Peper..iiii. black
Peper..xv. of the best Mustarde..xii. Storax..vi. Siler Montan..iiii. of the
best Mithrydatum Andromachi..v. of Honey clarifyed, as mutch as will suffice,
and as you judge meet. The quantity which shall be received at one time of
this is..ii. Take your Storax with Honey, sprynkell or cast the other on dry,
sees your Opium with sweet wine, sodden to the third part, until it be as
thycke as Honey. This, is good against a quarten Ague, long headache, the
turnyng syckenes, the falling evil, ouermutch wakyng, scensines, the pain of
the eyes, reumes, tothache, shortenes of wind. syghing, old coughes from the
Lunges: it causes also the Spitell to be thycker. and apt to avoid, taken
with Hydromell, which is made of Honey and water sodden together* and if a man
do spyt blood, then it must be taken with Acetum mulsum which is made of
Vinegar and Honey, or else it ought to be received with Vinegar mixed with
Water, or with..ii. of the juice of Knotgrasse, or Plantan, howbeit you must
add or diminish, according to the strength of the pacyent. It is also a
present remedy for the stomach, for it consumes superfluous humors, and
causes a good appetite. It cures the Hikeope and stops vomitting, it
moves a man to avoid wind, both from the liver, stomach, and lower parts.
It helps pain of the Liver, the yellow Iaundice, and all diseases of
Melancholy, the grief and heaviness of the Spleen: it ingendreth good color,
it purges downward fleume and choler, it does distribute meat digested in to
his parts: it provoke vryne, and causes the gravel in the raynes and
bladder to avoid, it cures Illijca and collica passio: taken with drink it
moves a man to the stole, and cures inflamacions in short time: it does
mitigate the gnawyng and pain in the belly: it does heal and take away the
ouermutch stretchyng forth of the Matrice: when it cannot be easily taken in at
the mouth, then let it be mynistred with the Juice of Fenegreeke at the
fundament, and so it will take away the pain in all the lower parts: it does
cure all dyseases of the matryce: it asswageth the pain of Women which labor
of child: it cures the Mother and drawing up of the Matryce and stretching of
the same, it stops unnatural Purgations, and purges corrupt and
superfluous humors, it stops Fluxes of blood from the Matryce* if it be
taken alone or with old Wine: we may also use this in ye gowt of ye feet, and
in Arthritica passio, which is a weakness in all the ioyncts of superfluous
humors, Spasinus called the crampe or contraction of synewes.


Sickness. FOr as mutch as you have showed me the virtue of sundry symples
before, now would I gladly learn how to compound medicines of sundry kinds, to
help me no to in the time of Sickness, and first what is Aromaticum Rosarum*
and how should it be made?


Health. FIrst take clean red Roses..xv. and the best Liqueris scraped., vij.
Lingnum Aloes, Sanders yellow. ana..iij. Cinamom..v. Macis, Cloves, ana..ij.ss.
Gum Traganthum..ij..ij. Nutmegs, the great Cardamomu^ called ye grayn of
Paradise, Galangall ana..i. Spicknard, Amber grise..ij. Muscke..i. and clean
white Sugar, as mutch as will suffice, and so dissolve all together in the pure
syrup of red Roses.


Sickness. What is this to my help being Sick?


Health. Gabrielis Ioannis Damascen. N^cholai Myrep. Leonardus Fuc. Decom-.
Medican,
This heals the weakness of the Stomach, and does comfort all the
pryncipall parts of the body, and will cleanse corrupt humors, foul and
gross matter remaining in the Breast, and Stomach: it also refressheth the
Brain, and comfort the heart, and causes good Digestion, and dries up
superfluous moyster in the guts. And even so reports Nicholaus Myrepsus,
Gabriell, Ioannes Damascenus, and Leonardus Fuchsius, men learned and daily
approved, to whom we must gieue credence as to most worthy Teachers.


Sickness. GOD is so just and merciful, that he wy^l neither suffer any vice
unpunished, or virtue unrewarded. Therefore these Men have received the
fruictes of their own Labors, being good instruments to comfort the troubled,
and heal the sick that be afflicted with sundry infirmityes. Where as an
infinite number through the beastly abusing of th^mselues, be plagued with fond
foolyshe delights, as inordinate riots, Banquets, surfeytes, acts Uenereons,
Wrath, and other Passions which bring them all to my house, except Diet with
his brother quiet, and merry man meet these Companions in the way, and turn
them back again, into the pleasant Palace of you master Health, which in all
poynctes are contrary to me poor syckenes, now subject to all myseries, as
Fevers. etc. Yet of Charity show me some wholesome medycyne for diverse infyrmites.


Health. I Shall show thee a very excellent medycine against sundry
infyrmities, which Leonardus Fuchsius in his compoundyng of medicines does
greatly commend, and it is thus made. Take of Asarabacca, Balm seed, Henbane
seed, ana..ii.ss. of Cloves, Myrrh. Cipres, Opium, ana..ii the juice of
Balm, Cynamom, Folium Indicum, Setwall, Gynger, Cost, Coral, Cassiafistula,
the Gum Tragagantum, Spike, wyld Fenell, Frankincense, Euphorbe, Storax
Calamita, Cardamomum, Siler Mo^tane, Mustard, Saxifrage, Dill, Anisseede,
ana..ii Lignum Aloes, Rubarbe, Rhaponticum, the confection called Alypta
muschata, the Otters stones, Galanga, Opoponax, the fruicte, Anacardin,
Mastyck, Brymstone vnsleked, Pionie, Seaholme, Roses, Time, Gladyan Peneryal,
both round and long Aristologia, Gentian, the outward rind of Mandrager,
Germander, Bayberies, yelow Carotes, Ualeryan roots, long Peper, white Peper*
the wood of Balm called Xylobalsamum, Carawayes, Amomum, Parselie, Louage, Rue
seed, ana..ss. fine Gold, little Perles, little Fishes called of the
Apoticaryes Vnguis Odoratus, the bone in the heart of the red Dear, the
shauyng of Iuerie, Calamus Aromaticus, Pelletarye of Spain, ana G. xi. of Honey
as mutch as you judge meet.


Sickness. And what is the virtue of this?


Health. IT helps reumes of the head, which come of cold, the moystnes and
runnyng of the eyes, the toth ache, and Head ache, if the forehead be
therewyth anointed: it does also cure the falling evil, madness, turnyng
syckenes of the head, and to conclude, all manner of dyseases, which be about
the head, it heals all those which be troubled with the cough, or have
superfluity of humors in the breast, the gnawyng and grypyng of the mouth of
the stomach, which the Grecians call Dispepsia, and the Latins Appetitus
prostratus, which is a corrupted appetite: it cures spittyng of blood, and the
ache in the hyppe, or huckelbone coming of humors, it asswageth also the
Collyke, and scoureth the reins, it provoke a man to piss, and cures the
strangurian, breaks the stone congeled, and takes away all dyseases in the
belly: it cures quotidian and tercian Agues, taken with the juice of
Stichados, in the beginning of the fyttes.


Sickness. I Do heartely thank you. I pray God I may receive comfort by your
wholesome composicion, called Aurea Alexandrina. Now sir, for as mutch as I have
red the bare names, both of simples and compoundes, even as men passing through
Cities, fyelds, woddes and rivers, smally regardyng their virtues, condicio^s
or properties, even so have I don: but now if it shall please your Maistershyp*
I would request that in short questions, you show me the Compoundyng of
Aromaticum Garyophillatum.


Health. WHereunto are we Mortal Wyghts borne, but one to help the other,
the Po^re to the Rich the UUyse to learn the ignorant, the whole to comfort
the sick? For we which now be in good health and feel no gryef, once shall
decay, and fall into your miserable estate, finishyng our time in dolor,
agony and pain. And thus I am persuaded, that our lives can not be prolonged
one minute: for the almighty has set our course and end, which we may not
pass, no more than the Son, Moon, and the Stars can go out of their
course and order, which they be placed in. But Medicine eases makes clean,
and comfort nature, takes away pain but prolongeth no life, and thus our
Divines say. But I being thy Potycary, neighbor Sycknes, dwelling near thy
Door, will teach thee many goodly medicines: and now how thou should make
Aromaticum Gariophillatum. First take of Cloves..vii Mace, Setwall, Galanga,
yellowe Saunders, Trochisdiarodonis, Cinamom, lignum Aloes, Spicknard, long
Peper, the great Cardomomum ana..i, Roses..iiii. grated Liquorice, Gallia
muschata, Folium Indicum, Cubebes, ana. iii. of Amber..i. of Musk.ss. of Syrup
of Pomecitron, as mutch as you judge meet. This comfort the stomach and
the heart, stops vomityng, it consumes also the corrupt humors in the
stomach, and does nourysh all the pryncipall members, it causes heat, and
dissolueth wind.


Sickness. How make you Acatia?


Health. TAke the plant or branch of a Bullais or slow tree, with the fruicte
and lay it in a vessel certain hours, and so let it stand, then sees it upon
the fire, and streine forth the liquour, the which streined, sees it on the
fire again, until it be thycke, and then keep it in fine vessels like shelles
and so dry it.


Sickness. How make you Amylum.


Health. TAke Wheat and beat it lightly, not to small, and put it into a
vessel of glass, and cover it with water, so that the water be above it, two
or three fyngers* and so let it stand by the space of a Night: in the Morning
press it down well, unto the substance, which Amylum is made or do descend
to the bottom, afterward strain it with a Sieve, and cast away the Bran, which
swimmeth on the Water above, let the resydue, which shall make Amylum, stand
till it go down to the bottom of the vessel, and the water swim above, then
cast forth the Water softly, so that nothing remain, and dry it with a little
Cotton: let this be done in Summer, and also Son dried least it wax sower,
and so corrupt. Cover the vessel with a fine cloth, that nothing fall in: If
you will make this in Winter, then you must take great heed, that it be not
sower ye must also provide, that it be soon dried, either in the Sun, or in
the wynd, or in the fire, and thus you may make Amylum of Rice.


Sickness. How make you Aqua odorifera,


Health. TAke of Rose water. l i.iiii. Storax Calamita, Beniamen, Cloves
ana..i. of Musk, Ciuet, Amber Greece, ana. G. xx, of Camphire..ii. some put
unto this,.i. of Lignum Aloes: let them be put into a vessel of Glass,
covered with a cover, having holes in it, then let them boil in a Uessell
full of water, as it is in Balneo Marie, which is a Glass or Uessell set
within an other greater on the fire: this done strain them with a fine lynnen
cloth, and so to be reserved in a vessel in the Sun, by the space of.xv.
days, and then it will prove an odoriferous water most pleasant.


Sickness. How make you Benedicta Laxatiua?


Health. FIrst take of the best Turbith, Sugar, ana..x. Diagridion..v. wild
Lillies, Roses, ana..v. Cloves, Spicknard, Ginger, Saffron, Saxifrage, long
Peper, Amomum, Cardamomum, Smalage seed, Salgem, Galanga, Mace, Carowais,
Fenell, Spinach, Kneeholme, or Butchers Brom, Gromell seed, ana.i. of Honey
asmutch as will suffyce. This does cure the weakness of the joints, and the
cold gout in the feet, it does also purge the reins and the bladder.


Sickness. How make you Balsamum artyfyciall?


Health. FIrst take Terebyntyne..xij. Gum Elemi..v. of Rosen..iii. let the^
be melted together, and when they be molten* myngle these pouders, following, of
Arystolochia longa.ii. of Dragons blood..iii. make these in great pieces. This
medycyne does heal both new and old Wounds, and chyefly those that be about
the head


Sickness. How make you Confectio Dulcis de musco?


Health. FIrst take of Safron* the sweet root Doronicke, Setwall, Lignum
Aloes, Mace ana..ii. white Perles, sylke in powder, Amber, red Coral,
ana..ii.ss the confection, called Gallia Muschata, Spycknarde, Folium Indicum,
Cloves, ana..i. Gynger, Cubebes, long Peper, ana..i.ss. Musk..i., ii. make
this with Honey not claryfyed, ye fowerth part of the weight of all the other.
This does cure the tremblyng of the heart, and all dyseases of the Melancholy,
and those men, which be heavy without a cause: it remedyeth also the dyseases
about the brain, as the tournyng syckenes, and falling evil, the wrythyng or
pullyng of the neck, or the mouth on the one side, and all dyseases of the
lunges, and shortness of wind.


Sickness. How make you Confectio Hamech.


Health. First take the four kynds of Mirobalans..iiii. Rubarbe..ii. Agarike
Coloquintida, Polipodie of the Oak ana..xviii. Wormewoode, Time,, Seen, ana..i,
Uiolettes..xv. the flower of harder Time. ii. Anisseede, Roses, Fenell,
ana..vi. the juice of Fumitarie. l i.i. Prunes in number.lx. of Raysens of
Coraynes the stones taken out. vi power all these into a vessel of Glass,
which has a straight mouth, and stop the Mouth by ye space of.v. days
afterward let them boil once, then strayn them, and dissolve into the
strainyng of Cassiafistula.iii. of the fruict of the wild Date tree, called
Thamarinde..v. of Manna or sweet dew..ii. break them with your hand, and
strain them. Then cast on Sugar l i i. of Scammont..i ss. sees them until
they shall be as thycke as Honey, then cast upon them the powder of all the five
kinds of Mirobolans, Reubarbe, Fumiterie seed ana..iii. Anisseede, Spicknard
ana. i. This cures all dyseases which come of fleume and choler, but chiefly
the ryngworme, scabs, keeper, cankers and such others.


Sickness. How make you Cerotum Stomachale?


Health. FIrst take of red Roses..xx. of Wormwood leaves..xv. of Mastycke..xx.
Spicknard..x. beat them small, then take of Uirgine wax..iiii. Oil of Roses.
l i.i.ss. make your confection. There be some which do wash the oil and the
wax, and then resolve them with a gentle lyre, and afterward myngle them with
the other, and so it is judged better. This does mitigate inflamacions, and
hot apostumes, which be jn the stomach and liver.


Sickness. How make you a confection for the eyes?


Health. FIrst take of white Lead washed..x of Amyle..iiii. of Gum Arabike,
and Tragantum ana..ii of Camphire..ss. make these into powder, and dissolve
them in Rose water, afterward make thereof little balls.


Sickness. How make you conserve of Buglosse?


Health. FIrst take of the leaves of Buglosse l i.iii. beat them in a Mortar
of stone, and then cast upon them l.iii. of Sugar, make your conserve like
Opiatum, which is a thynne Electuarie. This comfort the stomach, and
heals diseases which come of Melancholy, ^he sownynge and tremblyng of the
heart* it purges also Choler.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Rosemary.


Health. FIrst take of the flowers of Rosemary. l i.ss. of Sugar, ^'i.i ss.
make your conserve. This does comfort a moist brain. and molify hard and
stiff members, it also purges Melancholy and fleume.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Borage or Buglosse?


Health FIrst take of the flowers of Borage..iiii. Sugar..xii. make your
conserve, according to the art. This does remedy the trembling of the heart
and sownyng, it also purges Melancholy, and causes a man to be merry.


Sickness. How make you conserve of Roses?


Health. FIrst take of Rose leaves. l i.i. beat them in a stone mortar, and
cast upon them of Sugar, l i, iij. make your conserve after the fashion of
Opiata. This does comfort the stomach, heart and all the pryncipal parts, it
mollifyeth also those parts, which be hard. and purges Melancholy.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Uiolettes?


Health. FIrst take the flowers of Uiolettes. l i.i. beat the^ in a Mortar of
stone, and cast upon them. l i.i. o^. Sugar, make your conserve accordingly.
This does cure inflamacions of Choler, quench the thyrst, and moves a man
to the stool,


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Maiden hair?


Health. FIrst take of Maiden hair* l i. beat them and put Sugar unto them.
as in the other. This helps the Pluresie, diseases of Melancholy, and red
Choler, and the Spleen or Mylte.


Sickness How make you a conserve of Gladian?


Health. FIrst take of the roots of Gladian. l i. sees them in water, until
they be well sodden, afterward dry them, and searse them through a Sieve, then
set them on the fire again, and put, l i.iii. of Sugar unto them, make this
conserve like to the Electuarie Opiata. This remedieth diseases of the brain
and sinews, with all such as come of fleume.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Enula campana?


Health. TAke of the root of Enula campana. l i.ii sees it well, afterward
dry it, then searce it through a Sieve, and then set it on the fire again, and
put. l i.vi. of Sugar unto it. This does comfort the stomach, and pryncipall
parts against fleume, and helps the heart.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Cychory, or Succhory.


Health. FIrst take the Succhory flowers. l i.i^ beat them in a mortar of
stone, and cast upon them. l i.iii. of Sugar. This purges Melancholy and
Choler.


Sickness. How make you conserve of Sorell?


Health. FIrst take the leaves of Sorell. l i.ss. beat them as you did the
other, cast upon them of Sugar. l i ss. This helps Choloricke persons.


Sickness. How make you Conditum Cotoneorum


Health. TAke as many Quinces as you judge convenient, and sees them, and take
of the decoction of them. l i.iii. of Sugar. l i.j. sees them well, and
reserve the^, some Apoticaries put in the whites of Eggs when they be
clarifyed. I will also teach thee an other way to make this confection. Take of
the seed or kirnelles of Quinces..iiii. tempre them by the space of half a
day, with. l i.iii. of the juice of Quinces, then boil them a little. and
strain them, and cast upon them. l i.ii. of Sugar, afterward sees them well,
and keep them in boxes.

I will also teach thee an other way to make an other confection of the same.
Take of Quinces. l.vi. when they be sodden, put unto them l.iii. of Sugar, and
sees them well, as thou did before, keep them in little boxes,


Sickness. How make you Diagalanga?


Health. FIrst take of Galanga, lignum Aloes, ana..vj. of Cloves, Mace, Louage,
ana.iii, Ginger, long Peper, Cinamom, white Peper..i.ss. of Calaminte, Mintes
dried ana,.i. of the lesser Cardamomum, Spycknard, Louage seed, Fenell seed,
Anisseede Carowayes ana,.x. of Calamus Aromaticus., i. of the best Sugar..x ss.
of Honey clarifyed, asmutch as will suffice. This does cure the diseases that
come of wind, and belchyng which seems sharp in the mouth like Uineger: it
is proved to cause good digestion, and fortefieth the weakness of the stomach
and liver being cold.


Sickness. How make you Diacyminum Nicholaj?


Health TAke of Cummin laid in Uineger, by the space of a day, and afterward
dried..viii..i. of Cinamom, Cloves ana..ii.ss. black Peper, Ginger ana..ii. G.
v. of Galanga, Sauerie, Calamint ana..i. ii. Charuil seed, Louage, ana..i. G.
xiii. long Peper.i. Spicknard, Cardamomu^, Nutmegs, ana,.ii.ss. of Honey asmutch
as you judge co^uenyent. This helps the stomach and pryncipal parts, which be
troubled with wynd: it causes good digestion, and brings heat to the
stomach, and other pryncipall parts that be cold.


Sickness. How make you Diambra Mesue?


Health. TAke of Cinnamon, Doronicke, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegges, Leaves of Galanga
and Spicknard..iii. the great and lesser Cardamomum, ana..i. of Ginger,
Saunders, lignum Aloes, long Peper ana.ii. of Amber., i. of Musk..ss make it
with the best Sugar, and the water of Roses. This comfort the brain, heart,
stomach. and all the princypall members, it causes good digestion. and makes
a man merry, and ingendreth heat in the pryncipall parts, it is very
comfortable to old Men, and those which be cold of nature and complexion, to
women also, and cures the diseases of the matrice.


Sickness. How make you Diamargaritum calidum?


Health. TAke of Cloves, Cinnamon, Spicknarde, lignum Aloes, Galanga, Liquorice,
Trochisci Diarodonis, and little balls of Uiolettes ana..i.ss. Nutmegges,
Mace, the confection of Musk, Setwall, Reubarbe, Storax Calamita ana..i.
Perles, Ginger, the bone in the heart of ye red Dear, the shauyng of Iuorie,
Iuncus odoratus..ss. Musk, Amber, Cardamom, Louage, Basell seed ana..j. G.
ii. of Camphire G. vi. of Mel Rosatum, asmutch as will suffice. This does cure
the weakness of all the body, sownyng, and faynting, both of the stomach, and
also of the heart, and comfort the lively parts, and those that be pensive
and sad without a cause, it cures the cough and consumption, it does also
recover those which be weak with long diseases.


Sickness. How make you Diamargaritum frigidum.


Health. TAke the.iii. kinds of Saunders, the flowers of Roses, and Uiolettes,
the seeds of Melons, Trochisci Diarodon raw Silk, made in powder, ana..ii. the
bone in the heart of the red Dear, Spodium, Doronike, ye root both of red and
white Behen, Spicknarde, Saffron, ana..ii. shauynges of Iuorie, flower gentle,
Sapphire, Iacinte, Emeraude, Sorell, and Endive seed, Lignum Aloes, gray Amber,
ana..ss. of fine Gold..i. Camphire..i. of Musk.G ii. mix them and make
thereof a powder, puttyng in perles..i. and Corrals red and white, ana..i*ss.
and white Sugar.


Sickness. How make you Diathameron of Dates?


Health. TAke of Cloves, Ginger, ana..v. G. xvi. of Cinamom..iii. of the
Substance of Dates, Galanga, Spicknard, Setwall, Cost, Pellitarye of Spain,
white and red Coral, Rhaponticum, Spyke, the fruict Anacardium, Date stones,
Balm seed, Anis seed, Juniper Seed, ana..i..ii. of fine Gold, the bone of
the Heart of the red Dear, ana..ii.ss. of the shauyngs of Iuery, of Musk,
ana..ii. of Amber..i. of Honey Roset asmutch as you judge best: but few
Apotycaries do make this, for it is not greatly used, yet some do occupy it
very much. This will recover a man from dager of death unto Life. It also
helps those that be short wynded or have any disease in the wynd pype, or
have the coughe, or be in a consumption: it cures also all dyseases of the
breast and stomach, the dropsy and pain in the raynes, it brings Myrthe, it
makes a man lusty and fat.


Sickness. How make you Diarhodon Abbatis?


Health. TAke of white and red Saunders, an..ii ss, of Gum Arabike and
Tragantum, Spody. ana..ii. Asarabacca Masticke, Anisseede, Fenel, Cinnamon,
Rewbarbe. Basil seed. Berberyes. wyld Succhorye seed, Porselyne seed, white
Popy seed seeds of Gourdes. Cucumers, Melons, Citrons, ana..ss. Sugar Candy.
Roses, ana..i..iii. of Camphire. G. vii. of Musk..i. make this with the syrup
of Rose water. This hlpeth the yellow Iandice, weakness of the Liver,
consumptions, dyseases about the heart, and those which be troubled with the
heat about the stomach, lunges or the whole body, and also those which be
recovered from long and little agues.


Sickness. How make you Diacalamintha.


Health. FIrst take Calamynfs, Peneriall, Hysope, black Peper, Siler Montan,
Percellye, ana..ii..ii. of Louage..i..i. of Smalage, Amynthine, Dill,
Anysseede, Cinamom, Gynger ana..ii. of Honey asmutch as will suffice. This cures
dyseases of the stomach which come of cold, causes digestion, and chifly in
old men, it takes away the cough, which does come of a cold cause.


Sickness. How make you Diatrion Pipereon?


Health. TAke of the Pepers..vii.ss. Gynger, Time, Anisseede, Spicknard,
ana..iii. Amomum, Cinnamon, ana. aure. Cassiafistula, sil^r Montan, Enula
Campana dried, ana. aure. ss. make it with Honey claryfyed. This does engender
heat in the stomach and belly, it remoueth all pains of flumatike causes, it
purges the stomach of raw humors, and helps digestion.


Sickness. How make you Diaireos.


Health. TAke of Flowerdelice..i. Sugar Candy, Tragantum: ana..iii. myngle
them and so make them in powder.


Sickness. How make you Diairis Salamonis.


Health. TAke of Flowerdelyce.i. Peneryall, Hisope, Liquorice, ana..vi. the
Gum Tragantum, Almondes, Pineaples, Cynamon, Gynger, Peper, ana..iii. Figs,
Dates, Reasons of Corans pycked, ana..iii.ss. of red Storax..iii. of Honey
asmutch as will suffice. This is ministered against the Coughe, shortness of
wind, and also restores the speech lost.


Sickness. How make you Diatragacanthum calidum?


Health. TAke of Gum Tragantum Hisope, ana..iii. Pineaples both kynds of
Almondes Blaunched, Linseede. ana..vi. seed of Fenegreeke, Cinnamon, ana..ss.
Liquoryce, Gynger, ana..ii. make a powder of these. This is good against the
hardness and strayghtnes of the breast which comes of a gross and cold cause.


Sickness. How make you Diatrangacantha Frigida?


Health. TAke of white Tragantum..ii. Gum Arabike..ii..ii. of Amilium.ss. of
Liquorice. ii. of Penedies..iii. the four greater cold Seeds, pared and
pycked, ana..ii of Camphere, *ss. of the syrup of Uyolets, as mutch as will
suffice. This does cure all diseases about ye lunges, breast, and those which
be in a consumption, and evil lykyng: the Pluresie, Coughe, and those which be
hot and dry: the, roughnes of the tongue, and the weason, let ye pacyent hold
it in his mouth, and swalow it down, when it is melted.


Sickness. How make you Diamoron.


Health. TAke of the juice of Mulberies. l j.ss. the juice of black beryes and
straberyes. l j. honey. l j.ss. sweet wine sodde^ to ye third part. iij. make
it after this form. Take your juice, let it boil with your Honey and sweet
wine upon a soft fire in a vessel of glass or tynne, until it be well sodden,
and to know when it is well sodden you must take a drop of it, and lay it upon a
Marbell stone, and if it will abide upon the stone, and cleave like thycke
Honey, the stone being turned on the one side, then it is well sodden, and this
done strain it and keep it in a vessel of Tin. This is very good against
sores in the throat, and all kynds of stranglyng, and pains in the mouth,
togargaryse therewyth.


Sickness. How make you Diacodium.


Health. TAke.x. heads of ripe black Popye of a mean bygnes, cast upon them,
l i.ii.ss. of rain Water, and if they be more moist than dry then let them
lie in the Water a Day and a Night, but if they be dryer let them lie longer:
after this sees them until two parts of ye Water be consumed, then strain
them, then put in sweet Wine..iii. good Honey..i. then sees it again, and put
in Acatia, Hypocistis* Saffron Myrrh, and the flowers of Pomgarnets, ana..iii.
and sees it again: this helps Catars, pains in the lunges, and causes
sleep.


Sickness. How make you Diaprassium?


Health. TAke of green Horehound..v.ss. Tragantum, Pine aples, sweet
Almondes, of a kind of Nuttes called Pistici, the substance of Dates, Figs,
Raisens of Corans, the stones taken out, ana..iii.ss. Cinamom, Cloves,
Nutmegges, Mace, Galinga, lignum Aloes, Spicknard, Gynger Setwall, Liquerice,
Rhaphontike, Anacardin, storax Calamita, Galbanum, Turpentine washed, Mastike,
Mirrhe, Flowerdelice, Aristolochia Rotunda, the root of Cipres, Black Peper,
Anisseede, Fenell, Dyll, Smalage seed, Parslie, Saxifrage, ana. ii. wyld
Lillies, Organe, Wormwood, Squinantum, Cardimomum, white Peper, Carowayes,
Louage, Daysie, ana..ii.ss. Peletorie of Spain, water Myntes, Peneriall,
Ditta^, Cost, Sauerie, Basil, Pionie, long Peper, Amomum, Orobus ana*.i..iii.
the wood of Balm, Cassiafistula, Coral* shauyng of Iuorie. Balm seed, yelow
Carettes, ana..ss. Musk, Amber, the bone in the heart of the red Dear, ana.
G. xiiii. of honey clarifyed as mutch as you judge sufficient, make it after
this sort following: put into it. l i.iii. of Honey, and of green Horehou^d
Betony, and young Pine Aples pared, ana..v. put also unto them.iii. of the best
old wine, and let them boil together with a soft fire until the wine be
consumed, let your Fygges be made clean with in and without, dress likewise
your Dates, and let your Reasyngs be pycked, and then dress also your Pine
Aples, Almondes, and the Nuttes Pistaci, dry every one of them by them selves,
afterward beat them in a Mortar. and put unto them Turpentyne washed, after
this beat all again and let them be tempered with the same Honey in the Mortar
where they were before, and myngle them with the Spyces which we have spoken of
before. This does cure the weakness of the stomach, chyefly Reumes, and the
brayn which is cold, the. turnyng Sickness, the eye sight, the Wind pype
troubled* with gross fleume, it does also mitigate the tothe ache. The juice,
is mynistred in all fluxes, and chiefly in the bloody Flux, with the decoction
of rain water, in the which Spodie was sodden, or with Rose water, it stops
also the Flux of meat undigested. which the Phisicians call Lienteria.


Sickness. How make you Dipapauer.


Health. FIrst take of white Popie..xxv. sweet Almondes blanched, Kirnels of
Pineapple, Gum Arabike and Tragantum, the juice of Liquerice ana..x. of
Amilium. iiii. of Purslen Seed, and Lettice seed, Kirnels of Quinches,
ana..iii. of Saffron..i. of Penedies..iiii. take of the syrup of Popye asmutch
as will suffyce. This helps those which be in a consumption, and those which
can not sleep.


Sickness How make you Diacurcuma?


Health. TAke of Tragacanth, Saffron, of Azarabacca, persley, yellow Carrets,
Anisseede, smallage sede, ana..iiii. Rubarbe, wyld Fenel, Spicknarde. ana..vi.
Cost, Myrtle beryes, Casiafistula, Squynantum, Balm seed. Mader, the juice of
wormwood, Egrimony, and Balm. ana,.ii. Calamus. Aromaticus, Cinamo^,
ana..i.ss. wild Garlike, Ceterach, the juice of Liquerice..ii.ss. the gum
Tragantum..i. make it with clarifyed honey. This cures old diseases, and the
evil lykinge and deformity, of the body: when the meat being received, does
not nowrysh that is corrupt in the body: it also heals the dropsy, and
diseases of the liver and the Spleen when they be hard or indurate, it purges
the stomach of corrupt humors, cold and wyndy, it mittigateth pain in the
raynes and bladder, and provoke vryne.


Sickness. How make you Diasatyrion?


Health. TAke of the roots of Satyrion which be like stones, the ga^^den
Parsnyp, the Nuttes called Pistaci, Pineaple sede, Cloves ana..xii. Ginger,
Anisseede, Rocket, Birds tongue, The two stones of Satyryon or Orches, the one
will fleet, and the other sincke in water.
or Stichwort,, v. Cinamom, cloue Garlik. ii.ss. of Musk, G. vii. make it
after this form, put ye roots. of Satyrion in so much clarified Honey as will
suffyce, let also the Parsenipes and Pineaple seed be well beaten by
themselves, and then put them into the same Honey, and stirring them well, suffer
them to sees a certain space, then mingle with them your Pineapels and the
Nuttes Pistaci well stamped, and when they have boiled a little while, take them
from the fire, and put unto them, the powder of the spices and at the last put
in your Musk with Rosewater. This does restore and fortefy the weakness of the
reins, and of the bladder, it provoke urine, and moves a man to have great
devotion to pray in Uenus temple, or to be venerous.


Sickness. How make you Diaprunum solutiuum


Health. FIrst take a hundred Damsones, and put them in a Tin vessel with so
much water, that they may be well covered, and let them boil well til they be
soft, afterward take them from the fire, and when your water is so cold,
that it is but Luke warm, then take them forth, and put the^ into a sieve, over
a great vessel, and chafe your Prunes so long with your hands, that nothing
remain but stones, and skins. Then put into the water, in which the Damsons
were sodden in before...i.ss. of Uiolets and boil them, and make a syrup, with
li. ii. of Sugar, into the which Sirup put the substance of the Prunes, let
them sees, till they be thick, and then put into the same water..i. of
Casiafistula washed, put thereto also..i. of the fruit Tamarindes, dissolved
and strayned into the same water, remember also that ye boil in the same of
Prunes.i. of Uyolettes, sees them well, stirryng them continually, and when
they be sodden, take them from the fire, and sprynckle thereon these ponders,
following. Sau^ders, Spody, Rubarbe, Roses, Uiolets, Purslain seed, Succory
sede Barberyes, the juice of Liquerice, the Gum Tragagantum, ana.iii. of the
four greatter cold seeds, ana.i. if ye will make it laxatiue, put unto every
pound, when it is taken from the fire.ss. of Sca^monye, Diaprunes not losyng
this, is ministered in hot and burning agues, and chiefly in Synocha, which is
a continual Fever of abundance of blood: in this ague it may safely be
ministered in the beginning, increase, and at all times: and wi^h out
Diagridion, it may be given at al hours of the day, and with Diagridio^ but in
the morning, and that circumspectly, because it is very laxatiue.


Sickness. How make you Diaphoenicon?


Health. TAke of Dates infused with vinegar three days and three
nights.vi..i. of Penedies which be little wrethes of Sugar, dissolved in the
decoction of Barley.iii..i. of Blau^ched Almondes..xv. of Turbyth.ii ss. of
Sca^mony,.vi. Ginger, long Peper ye flowers of dry Rue, Cinamome. Mace, lignum
Aloes, Anisseede, Fennelseede, yellow Carottes. Galinga, ana,.ii* beat them
well and make them with clarifyed Honey. This does cure mixed Agues of diverse
humors, the Collike and pain in the bellye, it purges all raw humors of
cold.


Sickness How make you Diacarthamum?


Health. TAke the root of Tragantum..ss. the substance of Quinces. i. thickest
chiues of Saffro^, iiii of white ginger..ii. Diagridio^..iii. white Turbith.vi.
Manna, or sweet dew, Mel Rosatu^ strayned., i. of Sugar,.viii. wyld
Lillies..iiii. make an Electuary, putting unto it as mutche Honey as will
suffyce. This purges choler and phlegm.


Sickness. How make you Diacorallium magistrale.


Health First take of the Spyces of the confection Dyarodon Abbatis which I
did speak of before. iiii. of both Coralles, little pieces of Perles,
ana..ss. beat them to fine powder, and put unto them of Sugar resolved in the
Water of Roses.viii.ss. make them into small pieces. This does comfort the heart
and stomach, and chiefly those which have been long sick of cold.


Sickness. How make you Diacasiafistula pro aenematibus, or Clisters?


Health. FIrst take of Flowers of Uiolets, the leaves of Malowes, Marcury and
Parietary, ana^ M.i. of wormewod, M.ss. take al these green, and young make a
decoction of these in a sufficient quantity of water: then strain them, and
pressyng them with your hands into this strayner, you must dissolve a li. of
Casiafistula and* li. i of the best Honey or sugar, This purges and moves a
man to the stole, it is very expedient for tender and delicate persons, because
it is gentle in operation.


Sickness. How make you Diasene?


Health. TAke of lignu^ Aloes, Cloves, Galinga, Nutmegs Foliu^ iudicu^, Mace
Cinamome ana..ii. the stone Lazuli..i. of Seen, twyse as much as of all the
other, of Saffron..i. of the shauing of Iuory, Spodie, Anacardin, the bone in
the heart of the red Dear, little fyshes called Unguis odoratus, ana..ii. wyld
Lillies.i, Beries of Myrtes, Gentian, Bayberies, Eleborus niger, or Berefoote
ana..ii. Walnuttes made in powder, in number xv. of Amber.ii. of Honey as much as
will suffice. This is good to heal the Leprye some Physicians mingle with
these, serpents flesh, This does remedy al diseases of Melancholy and madness,
the gnawing and grypnyg about the mouth of the stomach called Cardiaca passio,
it takes away heuines, quarten Agues, and diseases of the spleen.


Sickness. How make you Decoctio pectoralis


Health. FIrst take of dry Hysop, Maydenhere, Figs, Sebesten, Raysens, of
Corantes, Barlye, Liquorice, ana, equal parts, boil these together in a
sufficient quantity of water, then strain them, and so reserve them This
asswageth al pain about the breast, it cures also the cough and hoarsenes,
and if Aster be put in, it helps the reume.


Sickness. How make you Decoctio communis?


Health. FIrst take of Prunes, wyld Dates, Raysons or Corans, Uiolets,
Lyquorice Barley ana, equal parts, boil them in a sufficient quantitye of
water, then strain them,, and keep them. This decoction is much used in hoate
Agues, and other hoate diseases, and when the year is hoate to temper
medecines withal, which be received in such hoate Agues, at all times. This
decoction is changed, according to the diversity of diseases, because some be
hotter than other.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium Catholicum?


Health. FIrst take Seen and Casiafystula new drawn, Tamarindes, ana..vii,
Reubarbe, Uiolettes, Polipodie, Anisseede. ana..iiii. the four grea^ter cold
seeds, ana. i. take li. i, of Polipodye, and beat it, and sees it well in
water, and strain it* then make a syrup with the best sugar, temper your
Casiafystula and your Tamarindes together, and when the decoction is almost
made, put them into it with the other spyces, and so make the electuary. This
is ministered in hot and burning Agues because it does mollify, disperse, and
comfort, it does also cure diseases of the Liver, and of the Spleen.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium Rosatum?


Health. TAke of Sugar, the juice of Roses, ana. li. i.ss, of the three
Saunders, ana..vi of Spodye, iii. of Diagridion.xii. of Champhire.i. temper it
after the form of an Electuary. with a sirupe made of the same sugar, and
Roses. This does purge Choler easily, and heals hot diseases in the joints,
the head ach, the pain of the eyes, tourning sickness, and it has been proved
against the yellow Iaundice.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium de psyllio?


Health. TAke of the juice of Buglosse, both hard and the wild, the juices of
Endive and Smallage, sodden altogether and syned, ana. li. ii. Anisseede,
Seen, ana..ss. of Maydenhayre. M.i. the juice of Fumitery.iii, of
Asarabacca..iii. Spicknard.ii. let them lie a day and a night, then set them on
the fire, and suffer them to boil once, then cast upon them.iii of Uiolettes,
of the harder time..ii. boil them once again, but with a soft fire, then
strain them* and when they be strayned, put unto them.iii of Fleaworte and let
them all stand a day and a night, but stir the^ continually, this done,
press forth ye slymye sap of them, and take li iiii, of it, and put unto it.
li. ss. of fine Sugar of Scammonye, roasted in an apple..iiii. after this set
it on the fire again, and sees it a little, and then put into it of
Trochisces, Dyarodon, Trochisces of Spodye, and Trochisces Rubarbary ana..i.
little Balls of Barbaryes, ss. then make your Asarabacca into a gross
powder, that it may be the more laxatyue, you may put also to these
confections, green Uyolettes, and dry Damasens. This purges yellow Choler.
and heals the turning sycknes of the head, which comes of a choleric
humor.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium Indu maius


Health. TAke Cinamom, Cloves* Spicknard, Roses, Casiafistula, Mace, Cypress.
ana.iiii, yellow Saunders, ii.ss. lignum Aloes, Nutmegges ana. ii. Turbith..i,
of Sugar Penidies an. xx. Galinga. Cardamomu^ Asarabacca, Mastick ana..i.ss. of
Scammony xii Beat these altogether with the Oil of Almondes, then take of the
juice of Quinces, Pomgranetes, the juice of Smallage, Fenel. ana li. ss. sees
these juices with clarifyed Honey, until they be thick, and then make the
Electuary with the other spyces. This purges superfluous humors, and chiefly,
Flegmaticke and corrupt humors in the stomach, and in the other principal
parts: it dissolueth wynd, and cures those diseases which come thereof, as the
pain of the stomach, and the inward parts, the Collik and pain in the raynes:
it does also consume corrupt humors in the joints.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium stomachi, to comfort the breast.


Health. TAke the Beryes of Mirtes finely beaten..xii. of Roses, Spodie Manna,
which is the Flower of Frankensence, of the three Pepers of yelow Saunders, the
flowers of the wild Pomgarnets, gum Arabyke, ana.i.ss. the kyrnels of the
Pomgarnets, made in powder. vii. of Coryander steeped in Uineger, and made in
powder..iii. Sorel, and Playntayn seed, of Roses, ana.ii. break them al well,
and rub them with your hands, then put them into Sorel water, and so make your
Electuary. This comfort the stomach and the inward parts: it stops a
Lask, e which comes of to strong a purgation, and moves a man to meat.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium de Gemmis?


Health. TAke of white Perles..ii. little pieces of Saphyre, Iacint, Corneline,
Emerauldes, Graneties. ana..i: ss. Setwal* the sweet root Doronike, the rynd
of Pomecitron, Mace, Basel seed, ana..ii. read Coral, Amber, shauyng of
Iuory. ana. ii. roots both of the white and red Behen, Ginger long Peper,
Spicknard, Fol^um Indicum, Saffron, Cardamom, ana..i. of Trochisci Diarodon,
lignum Aloes, ana.v. Cinamom, Galinga, zurubeth, which is a kind of Setwal.
ana.i ss, thin pieces of Gold and silver, ana. aure ss. of Musk..ss. make your
Electuary with Honey Emblici, which is the fourth kind of the Mirobalans with
Roses, strained in equal parts as much as will suffice. This heals cold
diseases of ye Brain, Heart, Stomach, and the Matrice, it is a medecin proved
against the trembling of the Heart, faynting and Souninge, the weakness of the
stomach, pensiuenes, solitarines, kings and noble men have used this for
their comfort, it causes them to be bold sprited, the body to smell well, and
ingendreth to the face good color.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum diachylon album?


Health TAke of Fenegreeke, Linseede, the root of Holioke, press out all
these the slimy sape, and take of it one part, and of Litharge well beaten, and
cle^sed from dross, one part. ss. of old and clear Oil iii. parts, beat
the Litharge and the Oil long in a mortar of stone with an iron pestel. Then
boil the^ on the fire softly, styrryng them until the Litharge run
together, then take it from the fire, and suffer it to cool, after this take
the slymy sape, and boil it once. Then cast by little and little, the slymy
sape of the herbs upon the Litharge, and the Oil, beatyng the^ with a
pestel, till it be thick: Ye may put unto this emplaster, the fine powder of
Flowerdelice, and you may use for your common Oil, which is sallet Oil, the
Oil of Flowerdelice, some mingle with this the slimye sap of Melilote. This
emplasster is very good against impostumes and hardness of the liver and spleen,
or stomach, swellinge about the throat, and all hardness of every place.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum diachylon magnum?


Health. TAke of Litharge broken and syfted..xii. Oils of Flowerdelice,
Camomil, Dyll. ana..viii. of the slymy sape of Lynseede, Fenegreke, Holyoke
roots, Fygges, Reasons of Corans, and of the fat in, the belly, of the Seele
syshe, the juice of Flowerdelice, Squilla, and of Hysope. ana..xii.ss. of
Turpentyne..iii. the gum of the Pyneaple tree, yelow Wax. ana..ii. make it
after this fashion: Beat the Litharge and the Oils which we did speak of
before in a Mortar of stone, with a Leaden pestell, by the space of half an
hour, then let it boil upon a soft fire, stirryng it continually til it be
thick, then take it from the fire and suffer it to cool, afterward take the
slimy sape with the other, and boil them until they be hard, then take it of,
and lay it upon a Marbel stone, and make it in great pieces. This emplaster is
stronger in operation, and better to ripe, and to resolve al hardness and
inflammations, and is daily used of good Chirurgians, for the excellent virtue
thereof.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de Musilaginibus?


Health. TAke you the slimy sape of Holyoke seed, of Linseede, of the inner
rynd of the Elm tree, of Fenegreeke ana..iiii.ss. of the Oil of Camomil of
Lillies, and of Dill. ana..i.ss. of Amoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax, Serapinum.
ana..ss. of new wax..xx. of Saffron..ii. Turpentyne..ii. make it in an
emplaster accordingly. This emplaster does mollify al hardness of apostumations.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum ad stomacum*


Health. TAke of lignum Aloes,, Wormwood, gum, Arabyke, Mastike, Cipers,
Cost, Ginger. ana..ss. Calamus Aromaticus, of the finest, Frankincense, Aloes,
ana..iii..iii. Cloves, Mace, Cynamum, Spicknard, Nutmegges. the confection
called Gallia Muschata, Squinantum* ana,.i.ss. mingle al these together, with
the confection called Mina Aromatica which is made of Quinces, Pears, and such
other byndyng things, lay al upon a cloth, and perfume them with a wood of
Aloes. This emplaster does comfort the stomach and Liver, it increases also
heat in them and makes digestion perfect.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de granis lauri?


Health. TAke of fine Frankensence, Mastike, Mirhe* ana..l. of Baiberries..ii
of Cipers, Coste^ ana..ss. clarifyed honey, as much as will suffice to make it,
then spread it upon a cloth, and so lay it to the soar. This is a very
excellent plaster against the Dropsy, and will assuage al swellynges of Wind,
if you triple the quantity of Cipers, and put unto the plaster a little
quantitye of Cowes Dunge, or Goattes dryes: it does also assuage all griefs,
which come of cold wind, and chiefly the pain of the stomach, bellye,
raynes, matrice, and Blader.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de Melilote?


Health. TAke Melilote, and Fenegreeke. ana..vi. the flowers of Camomil,
Baiberies, the root of Holioke, Wormwood. ana..iii. Smallagesede, wild
Carrowaies, Flowerdelice, Cipers, Spicknarde, Casiafistula, Anisseede.ii.ss.
Margerum..iii. Amoniacum..x. Storax Calamita, Bdellium. ana.v. Turpentyne..i
ss.xii. Fyges, the Fat of a Goat* Bucke, Reisons, ana., ii.ss. Wax..vi. Oil
of Mergerum. Oil Spyke, as much will suffice of^o beat them in. This emplaster
does mollify the hardenes of the stomach, Liver, Spleen, and all inward parts.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum. coroneum a plaster of great virtue


Health. TAke of the Pitche, which is about ships, pressed or strayned
wax. ana..ii..iii. of Serapinum,.ii. of Amoniacum Turpentyne, dry Pitche,
Saffron, ana..i..iii. of Aloes, Frankensence, Mirrhe ana. i. Opoponax Storax
Calamita, Galbanu^, Mastike, Alume Fenegreeke, ana..iii. of ye Dreges, of
Storax liquida, which the Apoticaryes call stacte, Bdellium, ana..iii. of
Litharge*.i.ss. Make it after this fashion: beat your Serapinum, Galbanum,
Opoponax and Amoniacum a little, and temper them with wine, then boil them
unto the wine be half consumed, then set it on the fire in a vessel of Tin.
and when it shall begin to boil, put unto it your Pytch and stir it well, until
it be melted, and when it is melted, put wax unto it, and that being also
melted, put in dry Pitch which is called Colophonia, the Storax beaten small
with an hot pestell must be put thereto, afterward Mastike, Frankensence,
Myrrh, Bdellium; and sone after these put in Turpentine, Alume Litharge, and
at last of all Fenegreeke: when it is sodden, power it upon luke warm water,
and than incontinently take it forth again, and press it with your hands,
til all the water be forth, this done, make your powder of Aloes myngled with the
Oil of Laurel, upon a Marbel stone. Then make of all myngled together,
baules or great pieces, with powder of Saffron, your hand being anointed with
the same Oil of Laurel. This emplaster takes away al pain which is caused in
spittyng, the grief of the stomach, which comes of cold, it does also
dissolve congealed humors in the stomach, and ye hardness of the spleen, it
helps the dropsy which comes of Coldness of ye Liver, and also the coldenes
of the Matrice, if it be laid upon it, it is excellent.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Oxycroceum?


Health. TAke you Pitche which is about ships, Saffron, Colophony of Wax,
ana.iii. Turpentine, Galbanum* Amoniacum, Myrrh, Frankensence, Mastike.
ana..i..iii make it thus, break the Galbanum, and Amoniacum a little, then lay
it in Uineger by the space of a night, in the morning set them on the fire, and
melt them, and when they be melted, strayn them, and sees them again, til the
third part of the Uineger be consumed, then put in your pitch being pressed or
strayned before. When as this is melted, put in Wax, the which also melted,
put in Colophony, and Turpentine, and sone after Mastike, Frankynsence and
Myrre, styrryng it always from the beginning to the end, when it shall be
sodden, put in cold water, afterward wash it upon a Marbell, anointed with
Oil, and make it soft and gentle, then cast upon it the powder of Saffron, and
so make it in great pieces. This cures broken bones, asswageth all griefs in
what part soever they be of the Body, it does also mollify hard impostumes, in
any part of all the body of man kind.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de Ianna.


Health. TAke of the juice of Giloflouers, Plantain, Betony and Smallage ana.
li. i. of Wax and Pytch, Rosen, and Turpentyne, ana. li. ss. make of these an
emplaster, sodden on a soft Fire, until the juice be wasted, then put in
your Turpentyne, but stir it well, that it burn not.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Gratia Dei?


Health. TAke Turpentyne. li. ss. Rosen li. i white Wax..iii. Mastike..i. of
Ueruin, Betony, Pimpernel, ana. M.i. beat these herbs, and boil them in
strong white wine, until the third part be consumed, then strain them and cast
away the substance of the herbs, put into this juice, the wax strayned with
the Rosen and Mastike, and let them boil, styrryng them till they be thick,
take them of, and put in Turpentyne, and mingle al together, and make your
emplaster, says Nicholas.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum contra rupturas?


Health. FIrst take of Pytch about ships, of Aloes, ana., of Litharge of red
wax, Colophonye Galbanum, Amoniacum, ana..i. Misseltoe of the Oak,.vi. of
Chalk or Plaster, Misseltoe is called Uiscum or Mislen ye grows on ye Oak or
thoru.
of both Aristologia, Longa, and Rotunda, Myrrh, Frankensence, ana..vi.
Turpentyne..ii. of common earth worms, of Oak Apples, iiii. of Campher, and of
Daisye, of Bole Armoniake, ana, iiii. of the blood of a man. li. i. Make it
thus, Blood of man is to be had at Barbars, or blood letters, it must be dried
in the Oue^
put the Misseltoe first into the water, and suffer it to boil long in a
decoction wherein a Rams skyn was sodden, and let it sees by the space of a
day and a night then take it from the fire, and put unto it Turpentyne,
Litharge, Colophony, Mastyke, the whytest Frankensence, Myrrh, Galbanu^,
Amoniacu^, and sone, after Comfery and Dayses, Chalk or plaster, and
Bolearmoniake, after this set it on the fire again, and put in the blood of
man, and both Astrologies, and last of al Alloes, you must stir it continually:
when it is well sodden, take it from ye fire, you shall know it to be well sodden,
when it will not cleave nor stick unto your fyngers, then lay it upon a Marbel
stone, anointed with oil of Uyolets, and make it soft with woorkyng and
labouryng of it with your hands, after this you must beat it again in a
mortar continually by the space of two or three days, then reserve it.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum pro Matrice?


Health FIrst take of the Root of Sinkfolye. li. i of Lignum Aloes. yellowe
Saunders, Nutmegges, Barberyes, of the flowers of Rosemary or Roses ana.i. of
Cinamum, Cloves, Squina^tum, Camomil* flowers, ana..i.ss, Masticke,
Frankincense* the confection called Alipta muschata, and Gallia Muschata, of
Storax liquida, which is called also Stacte. ana..iii. fine Musk..ss. of wax.
li. i.ss, of pitch about old ships. li. ii. make an emplaster


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Diuinum


Health. TAke of Galbanum..i..ii, of Ammoniacu^..iii*.ii. Opopanax. of
Litharge. li. i of new Wax..viii. of Oil Olive li. ss. Frankincense. i i. of
Myrre,.i.i. of Uerdigrease.i. of Bdellium.ii. of Aristolochia longa i. of
Amentis, which is a kind if Chalk..iiii. mingle al these together and make an
emplaster.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de minio.


Health. TAke of the oil of sweet Roses. li. i.ss, oil of Mirtelles, ye
ointment Populeon, ana..iiii. of Hens grease.ii. the Tallow of an Ox or a
Cow, ana. li. ss. Swynes grease, vii. Litharge of Gold and Silver, ana..iii.ss
of white Lead.iiii. of Turpentyne.x. of Wax, as mutch as will suffyce to make
your emplaster, according to the Art somewhat black.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de Cerusa?


Health. TAke of the Oil of Roses li. ii. of white lead. li. iiii. of white
wax..vi. make an emplaster. This is a very pleasant emplaster, against all
soars which come by reason of the heat of the son or by any other hoote
cause, against rubbinges, gallynges, or excoriations of heat.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Palmeum


Health TAke Litharge of Gold. li. iii. of Oil Olive, yo^g swynes grease ana
li. i.ss. of green Coporas. iiii. Buddes or tops of the Date Tree sees them
altogether on the fire, and stir them continually, with a stick of the same
Date tree, and if you cannot have the buddes or tops of the Date tree, you may
take the roots of Reeds. This is a very excellent plaster against wounds,
festered with blood, and against grievous impostumes, burnings, brusyngs,
shoting, and prycking of humors.


Sickness How make you Emplastrum Tripharmacon


Health. TAke of Oil Olife. li. iiii. of Litharge of Gold li ii. of Uineger.
li, ss make the plaster accordyngly. This emplaster does bring new flesh
again in wounds. and does heal them.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Desiccatiuum rubrum?


Health. TAke Litharge of Gold..iii Oil of Roses, oil of Uyolets, ana. li ss,
of wax li. xii. the stone called Lapis Calaminaris, of terra Sigillata, of
read lead, ana..iiii. of Camphur. i. make ye emplaster. This does dry up
Byles, and soars cleansed.


Sickness. How make your Hiera Picra Galeni?


Health. FIrst take of Saffron, Spicknarde, the wood of Balm, Casiafistula,
Cynamome, Masticke. ana..vi. of Aloes a hundredth. and take of Honey as much as
will suffice, beat them and work them al in the Juice of Colewortes,
Wormwood, or wine that they may be so mingled together, as Leaven in dow, put
unto them Scammony, that they may the better cleave together, and also purge
the body of Choler: if you will put thereunto Agarike, and the inner part of
Coloquintida, then it will purge phlegm, and if the flower of harder Time be
myngled with it, then Melancholy is thereby purged. To make it the more gentle
in operacion, and leasse noisome to the Stomach, the Potecaryes put unto this
composition, twyse so much Aloes, as of all the other kinds. Your Aloes must
be broken and washed, that it may the better go to the Botome of the water,
and the dross which swymmeth above, ought to be cast away with the water, and
this must be done twyse or thryse: when it is well washed* then it will be a
very holefome medicyne for the Stomach, and nothing hurtful to the inward
parts: after this the other Symples and medicines ought to be mingled, and so
it shall be a very good purgation for weak stomachs. This purgation which is
made with Aloes, does remedy the Iliaca passio, and consumes superfluous
humors, in the stomak, it does amend the palenes of the face, the eye sight
which is dymmed with gross humors from the stomach: it provoke a man
indifferently unto the stool, workyng and purging from the Liver, it does hurt
those which have a hot Liver, but the stomach thereby is helped which is cold
and flegmatike.


Sickness How make you a Iulep of Roses?


Health. First take of Rose water li. iii. of fine Sugar sodden and clarifyed.
li. ii. make your Iulep with a soft fire. This quenches the thirst in hoate
Agues, and does assuage the heat both of the liver and of the heart: it does
also resyst corruption of humors, and keeps a man in health.


Sickness. How make you a Iulep of Uiolettes*


Health. TAke of the water of Uiolet flowers. li. iii. of Fine sugar sodden and
clarifyed li. ii. myngle them and sees them with a soft fire. This is a
pleasant remedy in all burning agues, and for those which have a hot liver or
heart: it helps also those, which have any roughnes in the wind pype or
throat, it helps the pluresy, and dry cough.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de Pino?


Health. TAke of the kirnels of the Pine aples. xxx. of sweet Almonds,
Walnuttes made in powder, the gum Tragantum, gum Arabike, Liquorice, the
juice of Amilium, Maiden here, Lilly roots. ana. iii. of Dates..xxxv. of
bitter Almondes. iii. Honey mingled with the juice of great Raysens, fine
Sugar, fresh butter ana..iiii. of the best Honey as much as will suffyce. This
does heal old coughes, shortness of breath, and causes a man to avoid gross
spittle.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de Squilla, or Scilla


Health. FIrst take the juice of Squilla and of clarifyed Honey. ana. li. ss.
sees it until it shall be thick. This purges gross and tough fleame, congeled
in ye wynd pype, and causes it easily to avoid, it cures also shortness of
wind, and the pain of the breast and side.


Sickness. How make you Loche sanum.


Health. TAke Cinamo^, dry Hysope, juice of Liquorice. ana..ss. of Iaiubes,
Sebesten, ana, in number xxx. Reysons of Coranes. pycked Fygges, Dates,
ana..ii. of Fenegreeke..v, of Maydenhere, M.i. of anisseede, Folium Indicum,
Flowerdelice, Calamint, Linfede. ana..iiii. sees al these in four pound of
water, til half be consumed. Then put into this li. ii of Penydies with a
confection of Sugar, sees it until it be as thick as Honye, then mingle with
this of Pineaples pared..v. of blaunched Almondes, Liquorice, the gu^me
Arabyke, of Amilium, ana..iii. of Flowerdelice ii. labor this confection until
it shall be thick and white. This cures the cough and hoarsenes of the voice,
which comes of cold and fleugmatike humors which be in the breast and
Lunges.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de Caulibus.


Health. FIrst take of read Colewort. li. of Saffron..ii of Sugar, Honey, ana.
li, ss. make, your syrup.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de pulmone vulpis?.


Health. TAke the Lunges of a Fox dried, the juice of Liquorice, Maiden hair
Fenell seed, ana..iiii. make it with Sugar, sodden in water, asmutch as will
suffice. Some make it with the juice of Mirtes, and then it is both Laxatiue,
and also a comforter of the stomach This is a pleasant remedy in all
consumptions and diseases of the stomach, it does both comofte and cleanse the
lunges.


Sickness. How make you Mithridatum Manardi?


Health. TAke the Duckes and Drakes blood, the blood of a Goose, and of herb
Grace called Rue, Fenell, Dill, Nauewes, ana..iii. the root of Gentian,
Trifoly, Squinantum, Frankensence, dry Roses, ana.iii. white and long Peper,
Cost, Ualerian, Anysseede, Cinamom, ana..ii. Myrrh, Spicknard..vi.
Tormentill, Asarabacca, Amoniacum, ana. iii. Mace, Agarike. ana..ii.
Balmeseede..i. Flowerdelice, Saffron, Rhaphonticum, Mastike, ana.i. of
Stichados..v. make a fine powder of all these, and put four times so mutch
Honey as of the other, and myrt them, beat your poud^rs fynely, and sees them
softly.


Sickness. How make you Mithridatum?


Health. FIrst take of Storax Calamita..i..i. of Cloves, Spycknard, ye wood of
Balm, Orobus, Louage, the Gum Tragantum, Mastike, This is an excellent
Mithridatum. that is of Andromachus, but the best is made at Bisance.
Galbanum, Sandarike, the sweet thorn Aspalthus, the Otters stones, the Gum
of Iuie, Bdellium, Terra sigyllata, and Lemnia, Melilote, the Gum of Ladanum,
Opopanar, Ammoniacum, Opium, Brymstone vnsl^ked. Liquerice, Salt Peter,
Hipoquistis, Acacia, Roses, Germander, saynct John's worte, Sotherne wood,
Pionye, Hysope, Organye, Enula campana, Sauyn leaves, the leaves of Baye tree.
Aristolochia Longa, the flowers of harder Time, Worm seed, Rosemary.
Centaury, Scaholme, the flowers of the wyld Pomegarnet, the inner rynde of the
Mertyll tree, the flowers of Pomgarnet, Raddysh seed, Squilla, Anisseede,
Balm seed, Get, Henebane, Fenell, Common, Cardamomum, Sylecmontan, white
Mustardseede and Parsley seed, Rue, white Popye, Smalage yellow Carets,
Clarye, long Peper, Basyll, Amomum, ana. i. Gladium, the common Burre, Swynes
Nuttes, Capars, Tutsan flowers, the horn of the Red Dear, ana..ii. of the
juice of Balm, or of Myrte tree, Cynamom, Saffron, Cost, Squynantum. Gynger,
Folium Indicum, and in steed of it, Cloves or Spyckenard, Turpentyne washed,
Myrre, Frankynsence, Cassiafistula, Agaryke, Spyca Romana, Rhaponticum,
Flowerdelyce, Asarabacca, Dyttan, Horehound, the inner rynd of Coloquyntida.
Styca, dos, Mugwoort, Calamynte, Pelletarye of Spain, Ground Pyne, black and
white Peper, Manna or sweet dew, Cresses, Synkefoly, ana..i. of Bayberies. G.
vi.ss. of strong and old Wine..i. of Honye asmutch as will suffyce, This does
cure all diseases of the head, which come of Cold, and chyefly Melancholy, and
fearful persons, the falling Evil, the Mygram runnyng eyes and all other
diseases of them, the toth ache, and all gryefes and sores of the mouth and
jaws, if it be laid on the place infected, if any Reume distill from the head
then it must be laid to the Temples, after the fashion of an emplaster, it
cures also the Quincie and Apoplexy, which is when a man can neither feel
nor move, it helps also the Coughe, shortness of wynd, spytting of blood from
the Lunges, and all inward diseases, it cures also stiffness of members, when
the sinews be so stiff that the part cannot move, it also helps the
Crampe, Conuulsions, Palses, diseases about the Mydrif, Raines and the bladder,
it breaks the stone, provoke the Flowers stopped, and heals all diseases
of the Matrice, it mollyfieth all hardness, and cures the Gout, and it is a
chyefe remedy for all poisons, and against the biting of a mad dog, or any
other beast, if it be laid to the place or dru^ken, it cures also Quarten
Agues and Quotidia^ taken with it luke warm wine, an hour before ye fit
comes.


Sickness. How make you Micleta?


Health. TAke of the three first kinds of Micobalans dressed and made in
powder. ii.ss. Cummin, Anisseede, Folium, Indicum, Amios, Carowayes.
ana,.ii.ss. Cresses seed., ii.ss. Bellericum, the fourth and fifte kind of
Mirobalans made in powder, ana..ii. infuse all these in Uineger a day and a
night, afterward make them in powder, then myngle with them Spody, the flowers
of the wild Pomgarnet, Mastike. Gum Arabyke, Manna, or sweet Dew, ana..ii.
stamp them all with the Oil of Roses, and temper them with the syrup of the
Myrtle tree. This confection has been proved against the Emeroides. gnawyng and
gripyng of the belly, the bloody Fluxes of the body, and is to be given in the
Syrup of Planten..iiii. in the Night.


Sickness How make you Miua simplex seu Aromatica?


Health. TAke a hundred. l i. of the juice of Quinces, put it into a clean
vessel of stone, and let it boil softly, scumyng of it till it be half
consumed, then strain it, and let it stand.iiij. hours, and cast upon it,
lx. l i. of old Wine, this done set it on the Fire and sees it until it be
thycke, some Potycarpes make it with these spyces which follow, and some
without: they take of the best Cinamom, the lesser Cardamom, ana..iii, of
Cloves.ii. of Gynger, Mastyke, ana.i.ss. of Saffron..ii of lignum Aloes, Mace,
ana..ss. stamp all these grosely, except Saffron, and hang them in a clothe,
and make them sweet with..i. of Musk, and with..ii. of the confection called
Gallia Muschata, there be also some other Poticaryes which make this confection
with Sugar. This confection fortefyeth the stomach. liver, and all the
pryncipall parts, it causes good appetyte and digestion it stops also
vomyting, and fluxes of the body.


Sickness. How make you Mel Rosatum.


Health. TAke of Red Roses prepared and dressed, as in the Conserues before,
ana. ii. parts, of good honey, vi. parts, sees them with a gentle fire
accordyngly, some Poticaries put in equal parts, both of Honey, and of ye
juice of Roses without any leaves, some other put also of ye leaves.i. part and
ss. and of the juice.i. part ss. of Honey.iii. parts. This comfort the
stomach, and does digest and purge Flegmatike humors contained in the
Stomach, or in the Ueynes.


Sickness. How make you Mel violatum?


Health. TAke of the Flowers of Uyolets.i part, of good Honey.iii. parts,
sees them with a a soft fire. This is a singular good remedy in hot Agues,
because it makes the body moist and also laxatiue, it asswageth the dryness
of the stomach and breast.


Sickness. How make you Mel Anthosatum?


Health. TAke of Rosemary flowers.i. part, of Honey.iii. parts, make it as the
other before.


Sickness. How make you Manus Christi?


Health. FIrst take of Sugar claryfied and melted in the Water of Roses. l
i.ss. sees these two till the water be consumed and the Sugar hard, in the end
of your decoction put in..ss. of Perles or precious stones, made in fine
powder, then lay it upon a Marbell stone anointed with oil of Roses or
Uyolets, or Rose water.


Sickness. How make you Oximel simplex?


Health. TAke of good Honey.ii. parts, of Uineger.i. part, of well water.iii.
parts, your Honey and water ought to be sodden together, so that no foam be
suffered to abide above, then put in your Uineger, and let it sees well, until
your Honey sease fomyng. This does purge gross and Flegmatike humors, by
making of them thinner by dissoluyng them, by opening, and breakyng of them, it
does also digest the matter which remains of long Agues.


Sickness. How make you Oxymel Diureticum?


Health. TAke of the rynde of the root of Smalage and Fenell, ana. l i.i.
Parsilye, Kneholme, or Butchers broume, Sperage, Smalage seed, Fenegreeke
seed, ana..i. sees these roots and seeds in one. l i* of water, and one. l
i. of Uineger, until they come to the half and a little more, then take of
Honye asmutch as will suffice, and sees it well, and make a sirupe.


Sickness. How make you Oxymel Squilliticum?


Health. TAke of clarifyed Honey. l i.iii. of Uineger of Squilla. l i.ii* sees
it sufficiently. This dissolueth gross, toughe, and Flegmatike humors, it
cures also belching which comes of raw and undigested homors it heals also
the Bladder exulcerated in mollifying of it.


Sickness How make you Oxysaccara simplex?


Health. TAke of Sugar. l i.i. of the juice of Pomgarnets..viii. of
Uineger..iiii. sees it on the fire, till it come to the form of a Syrup.
This is very good in Tercia^, Quartan, and burning Agues. In the spring time,
it purges choler in the stomach.


Sickness. How make you Oxisaccara composita?


Health. TAke of Maiden hair, C^teracke, Hearts tongue, Liuerwort, Uiolets,
Fenell, Sperage, Kneholme, or Butchers broume, Stichworte, ana. l i.i. make it
after this fashion: lay your herbs and roots in the juice of Pomgarnets by
the space of three days, upon the fowerth day, boil the^ a little, and strayn
them well. Afterward put unto them asmuth Sugar as will suffyce, sees them
till they shall be thycke.


Sickness. How make you oil of sweet Almonds?


Health. TAke Almonds and blanch them, and take away also ye inner Rynd, then
stamp them well, and make them in massy pieces in a boat place, by the space
of five days, then beat and stamp them together again, and then press
them, so that the oil may issue forth, and if you will sees it again in a
vessel, set within an other, by the space of an hour, and then press it, it
will run mutch better: you shall have mutch plenty of oil, if you fill
bags with Almondes stamped, and then lay them under hoate ashes or sand,
between a cloth, and afterward press them. This oil mollifyeth the roughnes
of the throat, the hardness of the Lunges, and of all the inward parts, it
heals consumpcions, and increases seed in me^, it asswageth the heat of the
matrice, and of the privy parts of a woman, and also the heat of the reins,
and of the bladder, if it be laid to the place.


Sickness. How make you oil of bitter Almondes?


Health. THis oil must be made in all things like unto the other before. This
opens all obstructions and oppylacions, and causes wind to avoid, makes
the flesh smothe and fair, it does also take away spots, and deformities
in the face, ache in the sinews, and all hardness.


Sickness. How make you oil of Baye?


Health. FIrst take ripe Bayberies, and stamp them well in Water, and strain
them, when they be cold gather of the fat, which swymmeth above, and it shall
be your oil. This oil brings heat and mollyfieth, in so mutch that they,
which be troubled with scabbes, ringwormes, or any such sores, be cured
therewyth, if they be anointed, when they bathe them, Cholerike persons, and
all those which be suspected to. have the Leprosye or any part thereof, must
eschew and avoid this oil: it is a synguler remedy against cold complexions,
moist and flegmatike, and those whose joints be affected with cold, it cures
falling away of the hair, taken with the water of Saltpeter: this done, you
must also wash your head, with wine and Honey, and with the flower of
Fenegreeke, howbeit, if your head be vexed with any gryese of heat, then you
must vttrrly eschew this oil


Sickness. How make you Oleum Sesaminum?


Health. FIrst take and wash the little grayn Sesamum, from all fylth, then
sprynkell upon it a little water with Salt, and rub it with your hands,
then cast Water upon it again, till it be moist, afterward lay it forth to
dry, which thing done, you must take it again, and dry it better by the fire,
so moderately as you can, and after this put it into a bag of course cloth,
and rub it again with your hands, til the husk go of, when the husk is
taken of, you must then grynd it, and press forth the oil as you did in
making the oil of Almonds, you may make after this fashion oil of Lineseede,
Popie seed, or Lettyce seed, saving that your Lyneseede, may not have the
Husk taken away. This oil increases fatnes, and seed in a man, it
mollifieth the throat, you may also mingle this oil, with many other.


Sickness. How make you oil of Spike?


Health. FIrst take of Spike..iii. of wine and water ana..ii.ss. Oleum
Sesaminum, l i.ss. sees these in a double vessel, that is, one set within an
other, with a soft fire, by the space of four hours, and stir it
continually. This is a very good oil against all diseases of cold wind,
grieves of the sinews, stomach, liver, spleen, reins, bladder, and matrice,
the head ache, and megrim.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Costo?


Health. TAke of dry Cost..ii. of Cassiafistula..i. the buddes Tops of
Mergeram..viii. of sweet wine, asmutch as will suffice to lay the stuff in
two Nyghtes, take of the Oil of Sesaminum, l i.iii. sees it as the Oil
before. This oil engenders heat in the sinews, and in all parts of the
body, it opens obstructions and opilacions, it fortifyeth ye stomach and
Liver, it keeps the hair from falling of, and the head from horenesse, it
causes good color, and savor in all the body.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Rue?


Health. TAke oil Olyue, li. iii. the leaf and juice of Rue, ana..ii. make an
oil accordyngly. This does heal and dry, therefore it is a present remedy
against all distillacions and reumes, it asswageth griefs of the breast, and
brings heat to cold members.


Sickness. How make you the oil of Dyll?


Health. TAke of oil Olive. l i.ii..ii the flowers of Dill..xi. lay the
flowers of Dill three days in Oil, and sees them the fourth, with a soft
fire a little, and then take them of, this done put in to the same decoction.
iii. of Dyll flowers, and sees it in the same, and keep it. This oil
asswageth all griefs and aches, it opens, loses, and provoke a man to
sweat, it does mitigate the cold, and shaking in Agues, if the back bone be
therewyth anointed, it causes sleep, and cures the head ache.


Sickness. How make you oil of Camomyll?


Health. TAke of Oil Olive. l i.iii. of the flowers of Camomill. l i.i. make
it as the oil of Dyl. This does mitigate al aches, it stops fluxes of
humors, because it does loose, and not bind. Paulus Aegineta does take..ii. of
the dry flowers of Camomill, without the whytes, and does cover the vessel
with a lynnen cloth, so that the air may pearse through, and then does set it
in the Sun, by the space of forty days, after this the mouth ought to be
well stopped, and so kept, and if you cannot have green flowers, you may take
dry, and sees them in a double vessel, that is, one set within an other,
howbeit, the oil shall be of less strength and efficacye. This oil is
electuarius to the teeth anointed by it self, or by some other temperate
thing, does open the poares, and causes the skyn to be thyn, it cures long
Agues, and all griefs, if the place be anointed with it, and sweet Wine.


Sickness How make you oil of Mirtes.


Health. TAke of Salet oil. l i.iii. of Mirtes stamped. l i.i. of the best
UUyne l i.ii. myngle these together, and suffer them to boil, until the
Wine be consumed, then strain them, and so reserve it. This Oil does
refrigerate and bind, and therefore it cures the flux, which comes of
weakness of the stomach, burnynges, pympelles, Kibes and gaulynges, if the
place be therewyth anointed, it heals clystes about the Fundament, and the
broad piles, the weakness of the Members, it stops also vomytyng and
sweatyng.


Sickness. How make you oil of Flowerdelice?


Health. TAke the Roots of Flowerdeluce..ii. and of the flowers..iiii. and of
the Decoction of the Roots. l i.i. of oil Olyue. l i.ii. let them boil in a
double vessel, until the water be consumed, after this strain them, and
change the roots, and flowers, and decoction, this ought to be twyse, and
then strain them, and reserve them: the Poticaries commonly make it after this
fashion, how be it, you shall read in Dioscorides another form of making
this Oil. This Oil scoureth, purges, loses, opens, ripeth, and aswageth
aches of cold, it rypeth raw humors in the Breast and Lunges, it takes away
pain in the joints, and mollifieth the hardness of them, all impostumes and
swellyngs about the neck, or in any other place, it asswageth pain of the
Matrice of cold, the Crampe and pain about the Reins, and the stenche also
of the Nose.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Roses?


Health. FIrst take oil Olyue, or the oil of the grain Sesamum, wash it of^
with well water, then take a sufficient quantity of Leaves of young and red
Roses beaten, and cover them with the oil wherein they were washed, and stop
the mouth of the vessel, and set it in the Sun by the space of.vii. days,
afterward sees it in a double vessel, by the space of three hours, then
change again the Rose leaves, and take fresh and set them in the Sun other
seven days, after this sees them again, and change them as you did before,
and put unto them infusion of Roses, asmutch as of the oil, and stop the mouth
of the Uessell, and set it in the Sun, by the space of forty days. This
oil (as Mesue writes) does comfort, lose, open, and assuage all aches, it is
also good against inflacions, and fluxes of Humors, therefore being drunken,
it is a present remedy against the bloudye flux, and all other fluxes. There
be two kynds of this oil, the one is made of ripe Roses, Leaves* and the other
of oil Olive, and Rose leaves: the first kind does moilify, and make the skyn
thynne, it opens, and asswageth all manner of griefs: The second kind does
refrigerate and bind, and therefore it cures the headache in Agues, or of the
heat of the Sun, it asswageth burning* which is engendered of wind, in a
full stomach, and finally it cures all aches of the head, if the place be
there with anointed, it is also a present remedy against pain in the stomach,
or Bowelles coming of sharp humors, if it be mixed with..ii. of Mastike, and
with a 'ytle quantity of Wax, it aswageth all red inflamacions, if the place
be anointed with it.


Sickness. How make you oil of Uiolets?


Health. First take Oil Olive. l i.ii. of young Uiolets stamped..iiii. put
them into a Glass, and set them in the Sun by the space of.vii. days,
afterward boil them in a double* Uessell by the space of three hours, then
streyn and reserve them. Paulus Aegineta does call this oil, Iaton and writes
that it is made either of Purple Uiolets, or else of yelow Uiolets, which many
judge to be Hartesease: he wylleth also that the Uyolets shall stand.x. days
in the Sun and be thrice changed* and the vessel to be so stopped that no
air may enter in, and in the mean time you may put in dry Uiolets. This
asswageth all inflamacions in what part so ever they be, it mollifyeth
exulceracions and horsenes of the breast or lunges, it mitigateth hot
apostumes, and the pleuresies.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Quinces?


Health. FIrst take of the Quinces which be not fully ripe, and stamp them,
and of the juice of them, ana, equal parts, of the oil of unripe Olives.
asmutch as will suffyce, put it into a Glass, and set it in the Sun by the
space of.xv. days, then set it in a double Glass, which is one vessel set
within an other by the space of four hours, then change your Quinces, and
the juice of them once or twice, and make it as you did the other, after this
streyne it, and reserve it. Dioscorides does show an other and a better way to
prepare this oil, Paulus Aegineta does call this oil Melinon, and makes it
after this sort: he does take of Quinces vnpared..iii. of the oil of unripe
Olives..xviii. and does set it in the Sun.xl. days. This Oil fortefieth
the stomach, and the pryncipall members. and the sinews which be lose and
weak, it prohibiteth ouermutch sweating. it is also a present remedy against
all Fluxes.


Sickness. How make you oil of Masticke.


Health. This Oil is so good, that it is called the second, that is fewer
better, for the virtue thereof
TAke of Masticke. iii. oil of Roses..xii. of good wine..viii. sees the^ in a
double vessel accordingly. This Oil, as Mesue writes, is the second for his
virtue, for it comforterh the stomach, sinews, liver, and joints, it does
mollify hard apostumes, and asswageth aches.


Sickness. How make you Oleum Castoreo.


Health. FIrst take..i. of the Otters stones, and sees them in one pound of
oil Olive, until the third part be consumed, then keep the oil in the
powder of the O^ters stones.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Euphorbio.


Health. TAke of Euphorbe..ss. of Oil of Hearts ease..v. of sweet Wine as
mutch, sees it till the Wine be consumed, and then reserve it. This oil is
very good against cold diseases of the sinews, the ache of them* and of the
ioinctes, the pain of the Liver and spleen, the head and the Reume, the
Uertigo and forgetful diseases. Galen does make this Oil Olive of Euphorbe,
according to the Pacients infyrmitie, as it does appear in the second book
De composicio Medicamentorum.


Sickness. How make you Oleum vulpinum.


Health. TAke a whole Fox, except the vowels, and put him in a vessel, and
power upon him Well water, and salt Water..xviii. of old oil. l i.iii.
sees this over a soft fire, with..iii. of Salt until the Water be consumed.
then put it into a vessel, and power to it sweet Water, wherein the herbs
were sodden. l i.ii. and Time. M.ii. sees them again, till the water be
consumed. This oil is a chief remedy against the pain in the ioynctes, that
is called Arthritica passio, against the Gout in the feet, and pain in the
raynes, and back.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Tartaro?


Health. TAke of the lies of white wine. l i.ii. or else asmutch as you judge
best, make it in powder, and wrape it in a lynnen cloth, or in towe, then
myngle it again with strong white Uynegar, afterward dry it again under
hoate ashes, until it shall be very black, then make it in powder again, and
set it in a Uessell in a cold place, and so let it stand by the space of.viii.
days, till it shall be resolved into oil and run, and if it will not run of
it self, then press it with your hands into a Glass. With this oil women
do anoynte their faces, to make them smothe and fair, for it cleanses the
face merueilous well with Camphere.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Scorpione


Health. FIrst take twenty Scorpions, more or less, according to their
quantity, put them into a vessel of Glass, Dry your Tartar in an Oucu.
and power upon them l i.ii. of oil of bitter Almondes, stop the mouth, and
set it in the Sun.xxx. days, and so use it. This oil is the most present
remedy, to break the stone in the reins, or the bladder, chiefly if the
reins or the neck of the bladder, or the places there about, be anointed with
it, or else it be ministered in by the yerde, it is also made with old oil, and
mixed with many other medicines, which be good against poison: it is also a
present remedy against the pestilence, or stingyng of Scorpions.


Sickness. How make you Oil of garden Lillies.


Health. FIrst take of oil Olive. l i.i. of flowers of white Lylles. You shall
have Scorpions at the Poticaries.
.iiii. make this oil, as you did the oil of Camomill, Paulus Aegineta does
show another way of making of this Oil. This Oil is very good against women's
diseases, runnyng soars of the head, the scurfe, or any other breaking forth,
if yt place be therewith anointed, it is also good against al diseases, and
aches of cold, and inflamacions, also anointed with Saffro^: if it be drunken,
it will purge choler but it is noisome to the stomach.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Papauere?


Health. Nenuphar, is the water (...), white or yelow.
FIrst take of the flowers and green heads of Popie stamped ana...iii. of oil
Olive not ripe, l i.i..iii. make your oil accordyngly. This oil asswageth
headache, and causes a man to sleep when the cause of wakyng comes of heat
or vapors ascendyng to the head, if the temples, nose, eyes, or forehead be
therewyth anointed.


Sickness. How make you Oleum Nimphaeatum album?


Health. TAke of oil Olyue not ripe. l i.i. of the flowers Nenuphar when they
be fresh, and stamped..iiii. keep them in a vessel of glass and repare it as
you did the oil of Uiolets, both for setting in the Sun, and for the
seethyng and changing of the flowers, and the mixing of the decoction. This
oil has almost the virtues of the oil of Poppie, but because it is not so
cold, and does not so mutch dulle senses therefore we myngle with it the Oil
of Popie to cause a man sleep the better, it alters a hot complexion, unto
what part so ever it be laid.


Sickness. How make you Oleum Menthae?


Health. FIrst take of Mintes leaves, and of the juice of it. ana..iiii. unripe
oil Olyue l i.iii. put these into a vessel of Glass, and set them in the
sun by the space of.xv. days, stoppyng the Mouth of it, this done boil
them.iiii hours, then strain them well, this being don, afterward strain it,
and so let it be kept. This oil is good for a weak and a cold stomach, it
stops vomyting, and causes digestion, it moves a man to his meat, and
mollyfieth all hardness in what part of the body so ever it be.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Wormwood?


Health. TAke the buddes, tops, and juice of Wormwood, ana..iii. of oil
Olyue. l i.iii. you shall make this as you did the other. This does comfort
and bring heat to cold members, it fortefyeth the stomach, and causes good
appetyte, it opens obstructions and heals diseases which come of a cold
cause, it destroys worms and does bring them forth, if it be mixte with
ointments and plasters and laid to the place.


Sickness. How make you Oleum Lumbricorum?


Health. TAke of earth worms l i.i.ss. of oil Olive. l i.ii. of wine..ii.
boil them all together, and make an oil accordingly. This is comfortable to
the sinews vexed with cold, and good for the ache of the ioynctes.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Cherua or alba viola?


Health. TAke Flowers of Hartesease..xii. of Oil olive. This sweet herb
grow-vpon walls and in Gardens* it florisheth in Apryll and May.
l i.ii. the flowers of Hartesease must be laid.iii. days in Oil, sees them
well on the fourth day with a soft fire, this done, put unto the
decoction..iii. of the flowers of Hartesease, then set it in the sun and
reserve it. This oil opens, loses and asswageth pain of the Ioyncts and
Sinews, Breast, Reins and Bladder.


Sickness. How make you a Pomander?


Health. TAke of Storax Calamita..i.ss. of Benjamin..ii. of the gum
Ladanum..ss. of Cloves, white Saunders, ana..iii. of Roses, Mergeram,
ana..ii.ss. mingle with these pouders of Musk and Ambergrice, ana..i. make your
baule with the infusion of Rose water and Sinet, in a mortar somewhat warm.


Sickness. How make you Diahyssopus Nicholai, which is greatly commended of
Cordus?


Health. IT is a very wholesome medicine, and must be thus made as follows, take
Hysop, Yreos or Flowerdeluce root. Time, black Peper, ana.. -- xxx. Puliall
roial, Sauory, Rue, Commin. ana..xx. ye Fruict of Dates, Tragagant, Liquerice,
fat Fygges, Raysens of the Sun without stones, Fenell, ana..x. Ginger,
vncollered Caro ways, Louage seed, ana., v. and Sugar, beat your dried
things in a brass mortar, and your moist things in a stone mortar. and then
temper them together according to art as Manus Christi or softer. This Dia is
good to be eaten for the coldness of the head, and fastneth up the vuila,
purges the arteirs, stomach, Lunges, Cough. and helps Pleurises, and this
is good for thee, for thou art mutch troubled with these euyls.


Sickness. How make you Diacostum, after Mesue?


Health. YOu must make it thus. Take sweet Cost Arabicum, or for that Costmary
the whytest, the wood of Cassia, Cinamom, ana., v. the seeds of Smalage, of
Anisseede, and Rubarbe and Squinans ana..iii. Azarabacca roots, Saffron,
Aristolochia, Myrrh, ana..ii. and Sugar as mutch as will suffice, stamp your
dried things in a mortar, and serse them and stamp your moist in a stone
mortar, and myngle them together, and sees your Sugar with Rose water, put in
your receiptes in the end, and make ir as hard and as soft as you will, this
helps Dropsyes, and stoppings of the Guts, wynd, cold or rawnes, pains of
the collyke.


Sickness. How make you Diatrion Sandalon Nicolaj?


Health. TAke the three kinds of Sanders, white, red and yellowe, of red Rose
leaves, fine white Sugar* ana..iii. Rubarbe, Spodium the Sprupe of Liquerice,
Purslen seed, ana,.ii..ss. G. v. Amyle, gum of Arabike, and of Tragaganth,
the seeds of Melons, Cucumexs, Gourdes, Citrons Succorie. or Endive, ana.i.ss.
Camphire., i. and Sugar to sees it in, when the pouders be fynely serced, and
the Gummes resolved, and so temper them in your pan, having Endive or Burage
water: this is most wholesome against all the sickness of the liver coming of
heat above nature, and helps the yellow Iaundice and causes sleep.


Sickness. How make you that most worthy and excellent Cordial, Diamuscum
dulce?


Health. YOu must use these simples following Take Saffron, Doronike, Setwall,
wood of Aloes, Mace. ana..ii. white fine perle, raw white silk dried and
beaten into powder, Carabe or Crabfysh, red Coral, Gallia Muschata, sweet
Basell, or Balm, the white and the red Ben, or the flowers, Spicknard, Cloves,
ana.i. white Ginger, Cubebes long Peper. ana,.i. sweet Musk, Ambergrice,
ana..i.ss. beat these finely in powder, and with Sugar and Rose water sees
them accordyngly into a thickenes, te^per it still, and power it upon a Marbie
stone. This is good against the passions of the heart, in swellyng of the
stomach, lack of sleep, falling sickness. and shortness of breath to be eaten
morning and euenyng. You may make an other good Diamuschum Amarum, of a
stronger effect, against the Dropsy, to dry moist hu^mours, and to cleanse
corruption, or putrefaction wtin the body: if you add these things. Take dry
Wormwood, fine yellow Aloes, Castor which be Beuers stones, and Louage seed
ana..iii.ss.


Sickness. How make you powder of Uiolets?


Health. TAke of flowers of Uiolets. l i.ss. of Roses..iiii of Cipers..ss of
Merg^ra^, Cloves, ana..i. white Saunders, Benjamin, ana. iiii. of Storax
Calamita..i.


Sickness. How make you Puluis contra Pestem?


Health. TAke of Sinkefolie, Dittan, Tunis, Scabious, Buglosse roots, ana..ss.
the kernels of Pomcitron, Sorell, ana..iiii. of Coriander.ii. of red Roses..i.
of Purselin seed..ii the shauyng of Iu^rie..ii. of white and red Coral*
ana..i.ss. of Terra Sigillata,.ss. of Bole Armoniake.ii. mingle them and make a
powder.


Sickness. How make you Puluis de Boloarmenio?


Health. TAke of ye three Sau^ders, Gala^ga Aloes, Cinamo^, red Coral, red
Roses, the seed of Melons, ana..ss. the roots of Tunes and Sinkefolie.
ana..iii. the shauing of Iuerie, of Hearts horn, ana.ss of Anisseede, Fenell
seed, Ginger ana. G. xv. of Sorell seed, of the Kirnels of Pomecitron,
Juniper seed, Cloves, ana..ss. of Bolearmoniake. ii. make a powder thereof.


Sickness. How make you Puluis contra Lumbricos?


Health. FIrst take of Wormwood., i. of Lupynes..i.ss. myngle them and make a
powder.


Sickness. How make you Puluis bezoardicus?


Health TAke of Bolearmoniake..ii. of red Roses, or Sorell seeede, of the
Kernelles of Pomecitron, of Hearts horn made in powder, Rue seed, Let this
Bolearmoniake be put in a little Uineger. and to dried
the root of Doronike, Amber seed of Sowthistel or Carduus Benedictus. ana.
iiii of both Corals, of lignum Aloes, of raw silk, neither colored, nor
dyed. but as it comes from the silkeworme, of the three Saunders, of Perles, of
the bone in the Heart of the red Dear. ana..i. of the Emerode..ii. of the
powder of Perles, of Sinkefolie, Dyttan, Tunis, Scabious, Coryander, Terra
Sigillata, ana..ii. of Camphyre..ii. of Saffron. G. xv. of Amber,.ii. of
Musk..iiii and make a powder, if it be put in the syrup of Ribes, it is a
goodly Cordial.


Sickness. How make you Penides?


Health. TAke of the Best Sugar. li. i or.ii. and at the most three, and put
it into a vessel of Brass, being covered within with Tin or else into an
earthen vessel, one of Brass is better for this purpose, wet your Sugar with
such a quantity of sweet water as will cover it, and if your Sugar be very
good and strong, mingle with it for every pound of it.i. of Honey, then
sprinkle upon it oil of sweet Almondes, and if you have not this Oil, you
may use some other in the steed of it, set your vessel on a fire of coals
without smoke, and sees it until the water be almost consumed, you shall know
whether it be sodden enough or no, thus: take a dropof it, and lay it upon a
Marble stone, and touch it with your finger, if it appear like threads, and
will clean, and stick unto your finger, then take it from the fire, and lay it
upon a Marbel stone, and draw it abroad after that ye have mingled it with the
Oil of sweet Almonds, or of Sizamin, after this gather it together again,
as hot as your hands will suffer, afterward draw it forth again with your
hands, as sweet Elec^uaries be drawn, and then stick a crooked nail very
high in the wall* and cast it upon the crooked nail, and so draw it long til it
be white, you must keep it by the fire, as long as you do draw it, that it may
be hot, and more gentle to draw, when you judge it to be white enough, then
cut it with sheres in pieces, if you make this confection roundelong, or
otherwise, then take of white Amilum* break it and stamp it, and lay it upon
the Marble stone, and then cast upon it the paste of Penidies. and roll and
cut it, and so make it in what kind so ever you will, how be it, you must make
it quickly, least it wax cold between your hands, this done, lay it in a
sieve, or in some other like thing ny^ the fire, by the space of an hour, then
take it away, and reserve it: This is good for the Lunges or Cough.


Sickness. How make you Pignolatum?


Health. THis confection is made with Sugar, dissolved in Rose water, and well
clarifyed, and when it is sodden enough, put in Pineaples pared, and let it
stand and cool, til it come to the form of a hard confection, and then
reserve it.


Sickness. How make you piluliae sine quibu^ esse nolo?


Health. First take of Alo^s washed.xii of the five kinds of Mirobalans,
Reubarbe, Mastik* Roses, Wormwood, Uiolets, Seen, Agarike, Doder, ana.. temper
them with the juice of Fenel, into the which you shall put vi. of Scamony well
broken, how be it, myngle your Scamonye with the juice of Fenel, then press
forth your juice with the Scamony, so much as will suffyce for the c^nco^tion,
then make your pills with your hands, anointed with ye oil of Uiolets, or
Oil Olive. These be present Pills to purge Choler, Fleume and Melancholye
against evil sight which comes of abundance of humors, against pain of
the Ears, and of Iliaca passio.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Aureae?


Health. TAke of Aloes, Diacridion, ana..v. of Roses, Smalege seed. ana..ss.
of Anisseede, Fenelseede, ana..i of Mastike..i. of Saffron, of the inner part
of Coloquintida, make your pills, with the infusion of ^um ^ragan^um, these be
very excellent pills to purge the head, and to amend the Eye sight, the wynd
in the stomach or Bowelles, and they purge without any pain.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Cochiae?


Health FIrst take of ye powder of Hiera picra.x. of Coloquintida..iii..i. of
Scamony ii of Turbith, Sticados, ana., v. myxe it with ye syrup of Sticados
and so make your pills. These do purge the head marueilously well, but chiefly
of gross and cold humors, they assuage the head ach and reume.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae de octo rebus?


Health. TAke of Aloes, Diacridion, ana..ii. of the inner part of
Coloquintida, and of the flowers of harder Time, Agarike, Mastike, the third
kind of Mirobalans, Wormwood, ana..i. temper them with the juice of Night
shade.


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Mirobalanis?


Health. FIrst take of the five kynds of Mirobalans, Agarike, Diagridion,
Coloquintida, Seen, ana..ss. the flowers of the harder Time, Turbith,
Anisseede, Fenel, Mastike, ye stone Lazuli. ana..iii. of Aloes..i. make these
Pills with the juice of Wormwood, and if you mingle a little Ginger with them,
your pills shall be the better. These pills be very good against the ache of
the Hyp or Huckel bone, the Gout and ye spleen. They do clear the syghte,
and purge burnt choler.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Elephanginae


Health. FIrst take of Cinamom, Cubebes, lignum Aloes, Calamus Aromaticus,
Mace, Nutmegges, Cardamom, Cloves Asarabacca Mastike, Squinantum, Spicknard,
the fruit of Balm, ana i, of dry Wormwood and Roses, ana..v. stamp them, but
not small, and then put unto them. li. xii. of water, sees them til two parts
of the water be consumed, then rub them with your hands, and strayn them,
and press forth the water, this done, take of Aloes Succotrine. li. i. wash
it in a Skillet, or such like vessel of stone, covered, or else with glass: you
must wash it often, and with rain water, then dry it, and cast upon it. li. ii.
of that which you did press forth before, dry it in the Son, then myngle it
with your Aloes of Myrrh, Mastike, ana..v of Saffron.iii. beat them well and
cast upon them the residue of that, which was strayned, and rub them with
your hands until they be broken: many Poticaries wash Aloes with infusion of
Rubarbe. These pills assuage pain of the stomach very well, the brain, and
the instruments of the senses, from gross and corrupt humors.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Aggregatiuae?


Health. FIrst take of the first kind of Mirobalans, of Reubarbe, ana. iii. of
ye juice of Egrimony and Wormwoode, ana..ii of Diagridion, vi. of ye third kind
of Mirobalans, Coloquintida, Polipody, ana..ii, of the best Turbith* of Aloes,
ana.vi. of Mastike, Roses, Salgem, the Flower of harder Time, Anisseede,
Ginger, ana..ss. of the Electuarye of Roses, as much as will suffice to make it
thick. These pills be very good against long Agues, and those which be
vexed with superfluous humors, ache of the head, stomach and Liver, they
purge corrupt Choler, Melancholy and Fleume, they quicken and refresh the
instruments of the senses.


Sickness. How make you Pills of Reubarbe.


Health. TAke of Liquorice, juice of Wormwood, Mastike, ana..i. of the first
kind of Mirobalans. Citrine Mirobalans be taken for the first kind
.iii ss. of Smallage seed, wild Lillies, Fenel, ana..ss. of Trochiscie
Diarodon, ana..iii.ss. of Hiera Picra.x. of Reubarbe..iii.. make them with
Fenell water. These Pills cure long Agues, and those, which be also engendered
of diverse gross and corrupt humors, they assuage the pain about the liver,
and chieflye they cure the dropsy: some Physicians use these in the end of a
mixed tertian, you may make them stronger with other Symples as you judge best
for the pacient, take of these in the morning..ii. or.i.ss.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae de Sarcocolla?


Health. TAke of the gum Sarcocolla.iii. of Turbith..iiii of
Coloquintida.i.ss. of Salge^. i. dissolve the Sarcocolla in Rose water, and
mingle all the other with it, and so make your Pills, these purge Fleume, how
be it, few Physicians do use them.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae faetidae maiores?


Health FIrst rake you of Serapinum, Amoniacum, Opoponax, Bdellium,
Coloquintida, wyld Rue, Aloes, the flowers of the harder Time, ana..v. of
Spurge, Scammonie..iii. of Cinamu^, Spicknarde, Saffron, the Otters stones,
ana..i. of Turbith..iiii. of Gynger..i.ss of Euphorbe..ii. dissolve your gum
in the juice of Leekes, and so make your Pylles. These Pills purge gross
humors and be very good against ache in the joints and gout in the feet.
against pain in the back, knees, stomach, the Colike, why^e Leaprey and Pox.


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Eupho^bio?


Health. TAke Euphorbium, Coloquintida Agarike, Bdellium, Serapin. ana^.ii. of
Aloes..v. Make Pills with the juice of Le^kes. These purge fleame, and do also
mollify, they cure the Paulsey, and purge gross humors, A good pil for
S^ta^ica.
which have course to the joints and sinews, they cure the ach and pain in
the Hippe, and Huckle bone of humors.


Sickness. How make you pilulae lucis maiores?


Health First take of Roses, Uyolettes, Wormewoode, Coloquintida, Turbythe,
Cubebes, Calamus Aromaticus, Nutmegges, Spicknarde, the Flower of harder Time,
the seed and wood of Balm. Siler Montanum, Rueseede, Squinantum, Azarabacca.
Mastyke, Cloves, Cinamum, Anisseede, Fenell, Smallage, Casiafistula, Saffron,
Mace, ana..ii. of all the kinds of Mirobalans, of Reubarbe..vi. of Aloes
Succotrine as much as of them al, make them with the juice of Fenel. These be
present remedies against dimnes of the sight, they purge the instruments of the
senses, and superfluous humors, they keep the body strong and in health,


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Lucis minores?


Health. TAke of the wood of Balm, and the seed of Balm, ana..i. of
Selyden..v. of Roses, Uyolets, Wormewoodde, Eybryght, ana..iii. of Seen, the
flowers of harder Time, of all the kinds of Mirobalans, of Agarike,
Coloquintida, Squinance, the stones Lazuli and Licius, ana..ii.ss. of Aloes
succotryne, as mutch as of them all, make them with the juice of Selendine or
Fenell. These do purge Melancholy better then the other.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae de Lapide lazuli?


Health TAke of the stone Lazuli washed. v. the flowers of harder Time of
Polipodye, ana..viii. of Scammonie, of Salt, ana..ii.ss. of Agarike,.viii. of
Cloves, Anisseede, of Hiera Picra,.xv, make them with the juice of Endive.
These be excellent Pills against long diseases of, Melancholy and burnt choler,


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Bdellio?


Health. TAke of Bdellium., xii. of Anisseedes..iii. of al kinds of Mirobalans
of Amber, ana., ii.ss. mingle your Bdellium with the juice of Lekes and so make
the Pills. These Pills have been proved against running Emeroides, and the
soars of them, and to stop the terms menstruall in women.


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Hermodactylis?


Health. TAke of wyld Lillies, of Aloes, of yelow Mirobalanes, of Turbith,
Hermodactile be 11. kinds one like a Lilly having one rote the other like
Saffron both root and flower, but were ^ut greater, but this is called in the
Greek Ephemeron.
Coloquintida, Bdelium, Serapium, ana..vi. of the Otters stones, of the gum
Sarcocolla, Euphorbe. Opopanax, wyld Rue, Smallage, ana..iii. of Saffron..i.ss.
Mingle these with the juice of Colewortes, and make them in Pills.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Arthriticae.


Health. FIrst take of Ephemeron, Turbith, Agarik, ana..iiii. of Casiafistula,
Spicknard, Cloves, the wood and seed of Balm, Ginger, Mastike, Fenel*
Anisseede, Sarifrage, Sperage Kneeholme or Buchers Brom, Roses, Gromel seed,
Salgem, ana.ss. of Aloes succotrine, as much as of them all, make them with
the juice of Fenell. These Pills cure the gout of the joint of the feet.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae stomachisae?


Health. TAke of Aloes. vi. of Masticke, of Roses, ana..iii. make them with the
juice of Nightshade. Mesues pills for the stomach.
These purge the stomach and head. You may make them with mirobalans Citrine,
Aloes, Turbith, ana.x. Roses, Spicknard, Mastike, ana..ii.ss. Anisseedes.i.ss
sal Gemme, and Saffxon ana..i. make this with Syrup of Wormwood.


Sickness How make you Pilulae ante cibum


Health TAke of lignum Aloes, Cloves, Folium Indicum, Mastyke, ye wood and
seed of Balm, Cassia wood. Mace, Nutmegs, Cinamum, Cuvebes, Saffron siler
Montan, Spicknarde, ana..ii. of Reubarbe, and Aloes succotrine, as much as of
them all, myngle them with sweet wine, and make your Pills. These pills
cause good digestion, and distribute meat undigested, and must be taken before
meat.


Sickness. How make you Pills of Agarike, or Agarici.


Health. TAke of Agarike, Mastike, ana..iii. garden Lylly roots, horehound
ana..ii. of Turbith.v. Hiera picra.ii. of Coloquintida, the gum Sarcocol,
ana.ii of Myrrh..i make these with the juice of Herbs or fruits fined either
in the son or by the fire, and this juice so fined, is called of the
Pothicaryes Rob. These Pills purge the stomach from gross and corrupt
humors, and they be very good against shortness of ye wynd, and old coughes.


Sickness. How make you Pills of Fumiterre,


Health. TAke of the five kinds of Mirobalans, ana..v. of Aloes..vi. of
Scammony..v. mingle them with the juice of Fumiterre, and let them stand til
they be dry, then sprinckle on again the juice of Fumiterre, and suffer them
again, to dry and so do the third time, then let them stand until they be
thick, and then make your pills.


Sickness. How make you pilulae communes?


Health. TAke of Aloes..ii. Saffron, Myrrh, ana,.i. make them with sweet wine.
This pille is against the pestilence, and called Ruffi.
These Pills be much used of the Physicians if they be taken in summer, and if
you take them in the plague time, then you must put unto them as much
Bolearmoniake as of Aloes.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Assaieret?


Health. First take of Hiera Picra..i. of Mastyke, of yellow Mirobalans
ana..ss. of the best Aloes..ii. make your Pills with ye juice of Sticados.
These Pills be a present remedy against headache.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Bichicae


Health TAke of the juice of Liquorice, Amilum, Tragantu^. gum Arabyke,
sweet Almondes, ana..i. of Sugar..iii. make them with the slimy sap of the
seed of Quinces.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Imperialis?


Health. TAke Cinamom, Amomum, Anisseede, Mastike, Cardamom, Ginger, Setwal,
Mace, Nutmegges, Cloves, Saffron, Cubebes, lignum Aloes, Turbith Manna, or
sweet dew, Agarike, Senecods, Spicknard, of the five kinds of Mirobalans,
ana, i. of Reubarbe, as much as of them al, of Aloes as much as of all the
other, make them with the syrup of Roses or Uyolets,


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Hiera picra?


Health. TAke of the powder of Hyera picra simplex..i. make them with the
conserve of Roses as much as will suffice.


Sickness SOme time the bodies of men, women, and children, be so weak* and
feeble, that they be not able to receive purgations by Electuaryes, Pills or
Clisters, what easy means is then to be found, to purge the belly, I pray you
tell me?


Health. THere be diverse means to be found, as appears by Nicolaus Myrepsy,
whereas he teaches how to make Suppositores, as for example here is one of
them. R. Elleborus the black. To make good suppositories laxa^iue.
.ii. and good yellow Aloes..i. and Mousedung..iii beat these in pounder, seth
them in Honey, until the thicknes of a Suppositorye, then make one or two in the
form of a long small finger, then put a little fine Cotton upon the end
thereof, and so put it in the body, and this will bring forth both Choler and
fleume: also here follows an other to pull down the swellyng of the belly,
wynd in the great guts, Cholike or such like, take the seed of Rewe, called
herb Grace or of wyld Rue, Suppositories to help Colike
of Agarike, ana.iii. Commine well dried, Turbite, ana..ss. Diacridium..ss. G.
iiii beat these fine in powder accordinglye, then put in salt Peet^r, or common
salt. iiii. and sees it in Honey, as is aforsayd. Here also does follow the
making of an other, to relaxe the Belly take of the juice of Rapes, or Panis
Porcinus, i. and salt of the Earth, or common Salt. iiii, and Honey as much as
will suffice, as in the manner aforesaid. But if you will purge Choler adust,
fleume, or wind, in the belly, R. Colocinthidis, called Coloquintida, the
inward part thereof, but not the seeds..iii Polipody clean washed.iii. Bulls
or Ox gaul..i. and Honey, as example before. I have showed you ye way of
purging suppositers, now shall I show you ye manner to make some suppositers to
heal Dysenteria, or flux of Blood, coming from the apostumations bred in the
Liver, Suppositories to stop flu^es.
and sometime a perilous fl^^e, with rasyng or excoriation, continual torments,
and most grievous parties in the Guts, with casting out yellow choler,
sharpnes of blood, choler adust, salt fleume, which sicknesses have slain
many men, women and children, for lack of help.

R. Opium, which is ye juice of Poppye dried, Mirrhe, Castorium, which ^e the
dried stones of Beuer, (...) is Beuers stones
Saffron, Frankensence, Hypocistidis, ana..vi (...)..iii and a little wine and
Honey accordingly, and so sees your suppositer to the thicknes, and roll it
three finger length. An other for the same.

R. Opobalsamum, and the fine locks of Woll, roll them together in the manner
of Suppositer, this has a marvelous workinge, says Nicolaus Myrepsus in this
case: an other for the same.

R Opium, Myrrh, Saffron, Dragons blood, Bolearmoniake, Lemmy, called Terra
sigillata, Mastike, ana..i. the juice of Planten, and of Knotgrasse and a
little Goats milk, as much as will suffice, puttyng in a little of Aca^^a, or
the juice of Slose, or wild Plummes beaten together in a mort^r, and then
sees it in a little pan, powryng in a few drops of vinegar, and when it is
thick, r^ule it in a suppositer: Provided yt your said suppositers be.i in
wayght, and those be best, says that learned man* Nicolaus Myrepsus, also his
counsel is, to make them in length more than three fyngers. Now shall I show you
the manner of an other laxatiue suppositer, and so I will make an end of them.

R. Mercury, and wormwood, dried and beaten in Powder, the rynde of
Colocinthida, Agarike, and Hierapicra, ana..i. Common salt, or salt Peter.iii.
and Honey as much as will suffice, and then make your Suppositer.


Sickness. Oftentimes chance great perilles among women, when as either Nature
is to weak whereby Menstruall, terms are stopped, or the Child within the
Bellye dedde, whereupon women oftentimes do dye, I pray you tell me some spedy
remedy, and approved medecin that will so open the matrice, whereby the dead
child may come forth, to help the Woman.


Health. THere is no better medicine, then this following, Opophalion is an
excellent Emplaster, to deliver or bring forth a dead child from the mother.
called Opophalion. R. Rapeseede, Sal Niter, Elleborus, the white, and the
black, Colocinthidis called coloquintida, Staphesacre ana..iii. Scamonie.ii.
the juice of Elaterium, which is a wild cucumber, or Cucumeres
anguini..ii.ss. beat your dried things into powder, and put them into the
Oil of Iroes, and the gaul of an Ox or Bull, ana..iii. mingled together
with the powder of Carthamus..iii. also dissolve in your said Oil
Ammoniac..iiii. the^ stamp bitter Almondes. li. ss. with your foresaid
receiptes in a stone mortar, then spread it upon a piece of leather, and make
a great broad plaster, and apply it upon the belly of a woman, for such a
case as I have said, and it will work accordingly.


Sickness. How make you Pomatum?


Health. TAke of the fat of a young Kyd. li. i. temper it with the water of Musk
Roses, by the space of four days, then take fine apples, and dress them* and
cut them in pieces, and lard them with Cloves, then boil them altogether in
the same water of Roses, in one vessel of Glass, set within another vessel,
let it boil on the fire so long until all be white, then wash them with ye
same water of Musk roses, this done, keep it in a glass and if you will have
it to smell better, then you must put a little Ciuet or Musk or of them both,
and Amber grice: Gentilwomen do use this to make their faces smoth and fair,
for it heals cliftes in the lyppes, or in any other place of the hands and
face etc.


Sickness How make you Rosata nouella?


Health TAke of Roses, Sugar, Liquorice, ana..i. ii. of Cinamom. ii..iii. of
Cloves, Spicknard, Ginger, Galinga, Nutmegges, Setwal, Storax Calamita,
Cardamomum, Smalage, ana..i. G. vii. make these in Powder. This powder stops
vomitting and casting of the stomach, it fortifyeth those which have bin long
sick, and lets over much sweating.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus acetositatis citri?


Health TAke of the Tarte and sower juice of Pomecitron. li. xii. sees it in a
vessel of Glass* on the coals with a soft fire, til the third part be
consumed, then strain it, and let it stand til it be clear, and take of that
which is clear. li vii. and then power, upon it fined Iulep li v. sees these
until they be thick, if it be in Summer, then let it stand in ye Son til the
water be consumed. This is a present remedy against all diseases, which come
of gross humors, against the pestilence and al poisons, it does also quench
thirst.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Acetosa?


Health. TAke of the juice of Sorel clarifyed. li. iii. of Sugar clarified. li.
ii. make of these your Syrup. This Syrup is good against Cholerike
persons, and Tertian Agues, the burning of the stomach and the heart. it is a
synguler remedy in plages, and in Agues of corrupt^ humors.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Agresta labrusca, or unripe Grapes?


Health. FIrst make this syrup of unripe Grapes, as you did the syrup of
Pomecitron. This cannot be made, but only in Summer, because ye juice of the
unripe Grape cannot be gotten, but at that time.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Calamyntes, or de Calaminta?


Health TAke both of the Garden and wild Calamyntes, ana..ii^ of Louage,
yellow Carots, Squinantum, ana..v. of Raisons of Corans picked. li. ss. of Honey
li. ii. and so make it, you must take. li. v. of Water, to boil your Raysons
in them, then this being cast forth, take as much again, and let it sees till
the half be consumed, afterward put your Honey unto it, and make your Syrup
accordinglye. This Syrup is a present medecin against all diseases of the
Spleen, and chieflye if it b^e made hard, it does comfort those which have
their inward and principal parts, Cold, or be short wynded, or have any
Coughe, for it does purge the stomach, breaste, and Bowelles marvelous well of
gross and corrupt humors.


Sickness. How make you Syrup De menta?


Health. TAke of the juice of Quinces, and sower Pomgranets, cast upon these
juices of dry Myntes. li. i.ss. of Rose leaves..ii let it stand a day and a
Night. then set it over a soft fire, with honey and Sugar, until the half be
consumed: mingle with your syrup the confection called Gallia Moschata to make
them pleasant. This syrup is good for a cold stomach, it stops vomitynge,
and the disposicion unto it: it takes away the hycket, and Flaxes, and cold or
wynd in the guts.


Sickness. How make you syrup de Absinthio?


Health. TAke of Wormwood. li. ss. of red Roses, ana..ii, of
Spickenarde..iii. of good old wine and new, of the juice of Quinces. ana. li.
ii.ss, let it stand a day and a night in a vessel of stone, then sees it with
a soft fire, till the half be consumed, with. li. ii. of Honye, and then make
the syrup. This is an excellent medecin to fortify the stomach, and to cause
good appetite, to make strong the bowels and Liver, and chieflye when the
diseases come of a cold cause, it helps also in hot diseases, if it be
tempered with cold things.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Fumitarye?


Health. TAke of all the kinds of Mirobalans, ana..xx. of the flowers of
Borage, Buglosse, and Uiolets, of Wormwood, Doder. ana. i. of Liquorice,
Roses, ana,.ss. the flower of Garden Time, Polipodye. ana..vii* of Prunes, a
hundred, of Raysons of Corans piked, ana. l i.ss. of ye fruit Thamarind,
Casiafistula, ana..ii. let these boil in li. x of water, till it come to.li.
iii. make your syrup with the juice of Fumitary, sodden, and sined with. li.
iii. of Sugar, seething them according to the art. In this syrup making, you
must observe this order, in puttyng of your Symples* because some require more
time and some less, therefore first of all put in Polipodie, then Prunes*
Raysens* Liquorice, Wormwood, Roses, Doder and Borage Flowers, afterward
Uyolets, Mirobalans, Flowers of harder Time, Casiafistula, Thamaryndes, which
after some Physicians judgment should not boil, because they be very tender,
how be it, other learned men think it best to put them in the latter end of
the decoction, and so to suffer it to boil once, that it may the better be
myxed with the other: and i^ a man would contend, that soft and tender Symples
do leese their moystnes in boylinge, then we must answer that they lose not
their natural moystnes but the unnatural and accidental, and you must also
observe this order which follows, if you will make your syrup well, when your
decoction is made, then clarify your Sugar with well water, the which being
sodden and clarifyed, put into it ye juice of Fumitary, when it comes nigh to
the fashion of a Syrup.

The same decoction must be sodden oftentimes, by little and little, till it
shall be well and perfectly sodden, then put in your fruit Thamarinde and
Casiafystula, and so make an end of your decoction. This syrup opens, and
takes away all obstructions both of the Stomach, and of the Liver, and
fortefyeth all the members, it cures all the soars about the inward parts,
which come of Salt, and burnt matter, as the scabbe, leapreie, and french
Pockes.


Sickness. How make you sirupus de Fumoterrae simplex?


Health First take of the juice of Fumitarye, well fined. li. iiii. of Sugar
clarify^ i.ii.ss. make a syrup this cleanses the Liver.


Sickness. How make you a syrup of Liquorice?


Health. TAke of Lyquorice,.ii. of Maydenhayre..i. dry Hysope..ss. cast upon
these. li. i. of Water, and let it stand a Day and a Night, then sees it
till the half be consumed, this done, put these unto the decoction of Sugar,
Honye, Penidyes ana,.viii. of Rose water..vii. make of these a syrup. This is
a present remedy against the Pleuresye, old coughes, to purge ye stomach and
lunges.


Sickness. How make you Syrup of Hysope?


Health. TAke of dry Hysop, the root of Smalage, Fenell, Liquerice, ana..x. of
barley the husk taken of..ss. of the seed of Malowes, the Gum Tragantum, the
kirnels of Quinces, ana. ^iiii. of Maydenhaire..vi. of Iuiubes, Sebesten, ana.
xxx. of Raysons of Corans, picked..xii. of Figs, Dates, ana x of white
Penidies, l i.ii. make a Syrup. To this sirupe making take. l i.viii. of water
and sees it until it be come to three, then press it, and let it boil with
Pendies. until it come to the form of a syrup and in making of it you ought
to keep this order for your Simples first take Iuiubes Sebest. Raisons Fygges,
Dates, the root of Smalage, Fenell, then Barley, Malowseede, kirnels of
Quinces, the Gum Tragantum, Hysop, Maidenhaire. This syrup cures diseases of
the stomacke-the coughe, Pleurisy, shortness of wind, and all griefs of the
body.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Marubio?


Health FIrst take of green and young Horehounde..ii. dry Hysope,
Maydenhere, ana..vi. Liquoris., i of Calamynt, Anisseede, A good medecin for
old men to cleanse Fleume.
the roots of Smalage, and Fenel,.v. of Mallows seed, Fenegreeke,
Flowerdeluce, ana..iii. of Lynseede, Kernels of Quinces, ana.ii. of Raisons or
Corans picked.v. Fygges.xv. of Penedies, li. ii. of Honey. li ii. make of these
your syrup, you must take to the making of this sirup. li. x. of water which
shall boil til the half be consumed, because the honey and Penedies require much
seethynge. This syrup cures old coughes, long diseases of the Breast and
Lunges, shortness of the wynd, and chiefly in old men, if it come of Flegmatike
humor, gross, corrupt, and hard to be dissolved.


Sickness. How make you Syrup de Epythimo?


Health. FIrst take of harder Time of the garden..xx. of the two first kynds of
Mirobalans, ana.xv. of Doder, Fumirerre, ana.x. of Time, There be v. kinds of
M^robalans, whose names be Citrine Chebuli, Indi. Bellerici, Emblici.
Buglose, Calaminte, the fourth and fyft kind of Mirobalans, of Liquorice,
Polipodie, Agarike, of Stycados. ana..vi. of Roses, Fenell, Anisseede,
ana,.ii.ss. of Raysons, of Coranns,.iiii. of Thamarinde,.ii*ss. of. Sugar. li.
iiii. and here you must put to the making of this. li. x. of water which must
be sodden to three. li. this must be kept: Now as concerning the putting in of
your Symples, first take Polipodie, Agarik, Raysons, Liquorice, Fenel,
Anisseede, Sticados, Fumiterre, the Roses, Doder, Buglosse, Myrobalans the
stones taken out, and the Flowers of ye harder Time, dissolve your Thamarinde
in one part of the decoction, and let your Sugar boil with new wine, boiled to
the third part, when your decoction shall be as thick as Honey, yet sees it a
little more, To help a common known malady both in England and France called
the pox.
and in the end put in your Thamarinde, and let them boil once or twyce, til
they come to the thicknes of a Syrup. This is approved medecin against the
French Pockes, Cankers, falling of the hair, great and deep wounds, Lepres
and al diseases of Melancholy and burnt Choler. This does purge marvelous well,
if a man take thereof a good quantity, commonly we ought to take from., iiii. to
vi..


Sickness. How make you sirupus de Eupatorio?


Health. TAke of the rotes of Smalage, Endyue. ana. ii, Liquorice, Squinantu^,
Doder, Wormwood Roses. ana., vi. of Maydenhayre Carduus Benedictus the flower,
of Roots of Buglosse, Anisseede Fenel seed, Agrimony. ana.v. of Rubarbe,
Mastike. ana..iii. of Spicknarde. Asarabacca, Folium Indicum, sees the^ in.
li. viii. of water, until the third part be consumed, and make a Syrup with.
li. iiii. of Sugar, and with a sufficient quantity of Smallage, and Endive.
This sirupe is good in long Agues, chiefly to fortify the weakness of the Liver
and Stomach, it cures the dropsy, and evil Lyking of the Body, old and almost
incurable sores, Against dropsye.
delivers ye Stomach from wynd and coldness, it aswageth also the pain of ye
midref and swellyng thereof.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Sticados?


Health. TAke of ye flowers of Sticados..xxx. Time, Calamint, Organy, ana..x.
of Anisseede, Pellitary of Spain, ana,.vii. long Peper..iii. Ginger.ii. of
Raysons, of Corans..iiii of Sugar, li. v. put also unto the^ these pouders
following, Cinnamon, Calamus Aromaticus, Saffron, Ginger black Pepper, long
Peper, ana,.i ss. bynd them in a thin cloth, and hang them in ye syrup. This
has been proved against all cold diseases of the synewes, as the Paulsye,
falling evil, crampe, shaking, wrything of the neck on the one side, reumes
from the head to the breast, and does comfort the stomach, and the inward
parts of the body.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Violis or Uyolets?


Health. TAke. li. v. of the infusion of Uiolets, of Sugar clarifyed li. iiii.
myngle them together, and sees them with a soft fire, and keep them. This is
a present medecin against hoate Agues and heat of the Liver and heart, the
pleurisye, dry coughes, the roughnes of the wynd pype and throat.


Sickness. How make you syrup de Papauere simp. or Poppye?


Health. TAke of the heads of white and black Poppy, ana. lx.. sees them in
li iiii. of Rayn water until it come to li. ss. and with.iiii. of white Sugar,
and Penidies make your syrup. This syrup causes a man to sleep, and
quenches the thyrst, it stops reumes running to the breaste and does
myttigate the pain, this is not so cold, as the compounde Papauer


Sickness. How make you syrupus de Papauere Compositus?


Health. TAke of white and Black Popye. ana..l. of Maidenhayre..xv. of
Sugar..v. of Iuiube.xx. of Lettice seed..xl. of Malowes seed, of ye kernelles
of Quinces ana., vi, sees them in. li. iii of water, until the half be
consumed, then make your syrup with.viii. of Sugar and Penidies. This Compounde
syrup has the same virtue, which the Simple has, but it causes great cold,
and asswageth pain better. Mesue does judge it to be good against a dry coughe
and a consumption.


Sickness. How make you Syrup of Mirtes compound?


Health TAke xx. Mirtes, of Saunders white and red, of Manna or sweet dew of
heaven, the Flowers of wild Pomgranets, Barberies, ana.xv. of Medlers..l. of
Well water. li. viii. boil them all to the half, then strain them, and put
into the strayning, the juice of Pomgranets, and Quinces, ana..vi. of Sugar
clarified. li. iii. mingle these, and sees them until they come to the fashion
of a syrup.


Sickness. How make you Syrup of Myrtes, simp.


Health. TAke of the juice of Myrtes, li. xii. sees them in a vessel of Glass
with a soft fire, until the third part be consumed, then strayn it, and let it
stand until it be clarifyed, then take li. viii. of that which is clarifyed,
and put unto it. li, v. of Honey, sees it, til it come to the thicknes of a
syrup..i. if it be Summer, set it in the Sun, until the Water be consumed.
This comfort the Stomach, and all the inward parts, and cures also an
old Coughe.


Sickness. How make you syrupus Acetosus simplex?y


Health TAke of good white Sugar li. viii and put it into a Uessell of stone*
and cast upon it. li. iii. of clear Well water, sees it with coals, or else
with a little fire, without smoke, always scumming it, sees it, til it shall be
clear, and until the Water be half consumed. Then put unto it of Uineger, of
white wine very strong, li. iii. sees it until it be enoughe This is a
present remedy against all hoate diseases, subtle or gross matter* it
provoke Uryne, quenches Choler, and does extenuate and make gross things
soft, and cleanses stinking matter in the stomach.


Sickness. How make you syrupus Acetosus compositus?


Health. TAke of Well water li. x. put unto it the roots of Fenel, Smalage,
Endive, ana..iii. of Anisseede, Fenell seed, Smalage seed, ana. viii. of
Endive seed..ss. sees them with a soft Fire, until they come to. li v. then
strain it, and put to the decoction. li. iii. of Sugar, let it be clarified as
before, and mingle with it a sufficient quantitye of Uineger, according to the
form of the syrup before. This Sirupe purges gross humors, and fleume, it
scoureth and opens Opilations, and obstructions, which be about the Liver,
Spleen, and Reins.


Sickness. How make you syrup de succo Endiuiae? or of Endive simplex.


Health. TAke the juice of Endive fined. li. viii. of Sugar clarifyed. li.
v.ss. make your syrup, seething. This is a principal medecin to assuage the
heat of the Liver, the heart, and the other chief parts, and it cures the
Pleuresye.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Endive compositus.


Health. TAke the juice of Endive and Fliworte. ana. li. iii. these Juices
must be clarifyed, then take of Roses, Uiolets, Lettice, Borage, Egrimon,
ana..ss. of Maydenhayre, Barley the husk taken of, of the four great cold
seeds, ana..i. of Sugar as much as will suffice, make the syrup, and powder it
with white and red Saunders, Barberyes, kernels of Quinces, lignum Aloes,
Cynamon, the rynd of Pomeritrone, ana..i. This asswageth the great heat of the
liver and heart, and of the other principal parts, it is very good for all hot
complexions, it loses and opens all opilacions, and obstructions, it does
comfort weak members which be troubled with heat, it does also digest
choleric, and sharp matter.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Suckery, or Cichorii?


Health. TAke both of the garden and wild Suckery, and of both Endyues, ana
M.ii. of Gourdes, Lyuerwort, white Endive, Lettice Fumiterre Lupulus, ana. M.
Barley the husk not taken of, Alcakengi, ana..iiii. of Lyquorice, Maydenheere,
Ceteracke, Tentworte, Dodder, ana..vi. the roots of Fenel, Smallage, and
sperage, ana..ii. boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water and strain
them, and make your syrup with good sugar, and for every pound of Sugar
take.iiii. of Reubarbe and. iiii. of Spicknard bound in a thin cloth which
shall be often time pressed, til your Syrup be well sodden, the quantity that a
man shall take at one time is..iii. with the water wherein the four common cold
seeds were strayned.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Quinces?


Health TAke of the juice of tart Quinces, fined, and clarified, parts.x.
Sugar parts ii. make a syrup according. This stops vomittyng, quenches
the thyrst, and does comfort the stomach.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Nenuphar, or water Lillies?


Health. FIrst take. li. ii. of the flowers of Nenuphar, and sees them once,
then press them, and put into the juice pressed, li. ii. of Sugar, and sees
it til it come to the form of a syrup.


Sickness How make you syrup of Barberyes.


Health FIrst take of the juice of Barberies fined li. iii. of Sugar clarifyed.
li. iii make a syrup accordingly.


Sickness. How make you syrup of tarte Pomgranets?


Health FIrst take of the juice of Pomgranettes. li. ii.ss. of sugar
clarifyed. li. iii. make this syrup as before. This syrup is good against
hot Agues of choler and fleume.


Sickness. How make you syrupus de Bizantijs?


Health FIrst take of the juice of Endive and Smalage, ana. li. ii. of Hops,
the garden or wyld Borage, and Buglosse, ana. li. i boil them once, and then
strain and fine them, this done, take li. iiii. of the juice clarifyed, or
fine Sugar. li. iii. sees it with a gentle fire, until it be thick as
syrup. This is very good against Agues, which come of obstructions and of
choler, of Fleume, and also the yelow Iaundice.


Sickness How make you syrupus de infusione Rosarum viridium, or green Roses?


Health. First take of the infusion of young Roses. li. v. of Sugar. li. iii.
mingle them, and make a syrup. This is good for the thirst in burning Agues,
and to assuage the heat, it does comfort the Stomach, Heart, and Liver,
being troubled with heat, it preserves the Body from all corrupcion, and
from the Pestilence, it resists poison.


Sickness. How make you syrupus de Rosis siccis? or dried Roses


Health. FIrst take you of the infusion of dry Roses, and sugar ana. li. ii.
mingle them and make a syrup. This does comfort the stomach, and bind
marvelous well.


Sickness How make you syrupus de succo rosarum?


Health. FIrst take the juice of Roses fined. li. i.ss. of Sugar clarifyed. li.
i.ss. make a syrup accordingly.


Sickness How make you syrupus de Iuiubis?


Health TAke ^x. Iuiubes, of Uioletes, Malowes seed, ana..v. of
Maidenheyre..i. the kernels of Quinces seed, of white Poppy, Mallows, and
Lettice..i. the gum Tragantum, ana..iii. of Liquorice, Barley* the husk
taken of, ana..viii. sees them in li. iiii. of Well water or else Rain water,
until the half be consumed, then strain it, and put unto the juice strayned.
li. iii. of Sugar clarified, make your syrup accordingly. This is very good
against horsenes of the voice, and the cough, the pleuresy and exulcerations of
the bladder.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Maydenheire comp.


Health FIrst take of Maydenheire.M.ii. of Tentworte, Ceteracke, ana. M.i. of
Iuiubes, Liquorice, ana,.ii, make a decoction, puttyng unto it. li. iii. of
Sugar, make your syrup, then take of Maydenhayre. li. iiii. of Iuiubes. li.
iii. liquorice.iii of sugar. li vi. and this syrup is judged to be the better.
This purges gross humors, loses and opens obstructions* scoureth the
raynes, and cleanses the breast of gross humors.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Maydenhayre symp.


Health FIrst take of the decoction of young Maydenhayre. li. iii. of Sugar.
li. i make your syrup.


Sickness How make you an other syrup of the same?


Health. FIrst take of Liquorice scraped. ii. of Maydenhayre..v. cast upon
them, li. iiii. or Well Water, and so let them stand a day and a night, then
boil them until the half be consumed, and strain them, and put unto the
decoction.viii. of Sugar clarifyed, Penedyes and Maydenhayre, sees it til it
come to the form of a Syrup.


Sickness. How make you syrup of Mugworte?


Health. TAke of Mugwort. M.ii. of Calamint, Folium indicum, Sauerie, Organy,
Time, Quikebeme, Sticados, ana. M.i. of Camomill, Melilot, Mergeram, Roses,
ana..i. of Unguis odoratus Calamus Aromaticus ana..iii of Spicknarde..i.
Germander, Motherworte Geloflowers, Sothernwodde, ana. M.ss Gladien, Hor hound,
Madder leaves, Siler Montan, ana. Azarabacca, Squinantum, Anisseede, ana..vi.
Fenel, Smalage, ana..vi. boil them (...) a sufficient quantity of water
according to the art, then put unto them as much Honey as will suffice, and make
your syrup. This is a present remedy to provoke the natural Terms in women
being stopped.


Sickness How make you syrupus de Limonibus?


Health. TAke of the juice of Limondes. li. i.ss. of Sugar clarifyed. li. iii.
make your syrup. This is very good to consume gross and corrupt humors, and
Worms, it asswageth heat in Agues. and purges raw humors.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Cetrach?


Health. TAke of Cetrach, Hartestonge, Endyue, Liuerwort, Wormewoode, Sichory,
ana. M.ss. of Dodder, Linseede. i. the four common great seeds, flowers of
Borage, Buglosse, Langdebiefe, ana. M.i. Maydenhayre, roots of Fenel, Persely,
Kneeholme or Butchers Broom, ana. M.i.ss. make your syrup, and cast on these
pouders, Foliu^ indicum, Spicknarde, the gum Lacca, Casiafistula, ana.ii.
bind these in a thin cloth, and boil them in the syrup and reserve it.
This does comfort the Liver, scoureth the reins, and delivers the spleen
from al obstructions.


Sickness. Haw make you the syrup of Buglosse?


Health. TAke of the infusion of the flowers of Buglosse, or Langedebiefe. li.
iii. or Sugar li. ii. make a syrup.


Sickness. How make you an other of the same.


Heatlh. FIrst take of the juice of Buglosse, A present syrup for the stomach.
fined. li. iiii. of Sugar. li. iii. make your syrup. This syrup does comfort
the stomach, and makes a man merry, it is also ministered against sounyng and
fayntyng of the heart, and frensey.


Sickness. How make you Sapo Moschatus?


Health. TAke white Uenice Soap. li. iiii. cut it into small pieces, and ye
powder of Cloves, Iuncus, Odoratus, Spicknard, white Sau^ders, ana, i.ss the
powder of Beniamen and fine Masticke, and Sto^ax Calamite, A very sweet^ Bauic
to cleanse the skin.
ana.i. ^ine Musk, G. xxx. Amber grease. G. xxiiii. Ciuet. G. xvi. put these
in a mortar with some Rose Water, or else sweet compounded water: you may put in
Oil of Bee^, or else a little oil of Almonds or Ienuper: and so make this
sweet baule and wash therewith.


Sickness. How make you Theriaca Galeni?


Health TAke of Trochisci, Squillini or Scillini,.iii. of long Pepper..ii.
Trochisci Theriaci. Diacorallion, ana..i. of the wood of Balm..iii. ye juice
of black Poppy, Agarik, wild Rapes seed, Cinamom, ye juice of Balm, ana,.ii.
of Reubarbe, Saffro^, Spicknard, Yereos, Roses, Calamus, Cost, Squinantum
Ginger, Cassia lignea, Storax, Calamite, Mirre, Turpentyne washed, Nicholas
prepost^us does put in white Copeta.
white Frankensence, Calamint, Diten, Sticados, wild Time, roots of
Sinkfolly, Persely, white Pepper, ana.ii. Folium Indicum, gum, Arabyke,
Serapin. Terra Sigillata, Hipocistis Spicknard, Gladium, Germander, Gentian,
wild Fenell, the seed of Balm, Smalage, Amomum, Fenel, wild Carowayes,
Siler montan, Cresses, Anisseede, S. Ihons herb, wild Aspaltum, which is a
thing compounded and made of Jews Pitch, Castor Opopanax, Galbanum, Mummy,
Centauri, Aristologia longa, wyld yellow Carettes, ana..i, of Honey, as much as
will suffyce, This is judged to be the chief and principal of all medecines
because it brings quietness, This is a Triacle of an incomparable virtue
against poison, pestilence and venim.
and does cure the greatest diseases and griefs in every part of the body, as
the falling sickness, and insensibilitye, which is a disease, when a man can
neither move, feel, nor understand, it heals conuultions, the head ach,
pain of the stomach, Megrim, Horsenes of the voice, and straytnes of the
breast, shortness of wind, diseases of the wind pype, spittyng of Blood,
yelow Iaundice, Dropsye, and the diseases of the Liver, Iliaca passio, wounds
exulcerated in the Bowelles, Frensinesse, the stone, it provoke the Terms
stopped, and delivers Women of dead Children, it cures Lepreies, mesels,
and old diseases: It is a present remedy against cold, and al poisons, stinging
of venomous beasts, and here you must understand, that the quantity ought to
be changed in ministryng of it, according to the quanty, and quality of every
disease, this does refreshe also and comfort the senses, heart, brain, Liver,
stomach, and does keep all the body, safe, and pure from all corruption.


Sickness. How make you Trifera?


Health. TAke the juice of black Poppy..ii. of Cinamom, Cloves, Galynga,
Spicknarde, Set wall, Ginger, Cost, Storax Calamita, Calamus Aromaticus,
Cipres, Flowerdelice, Worm seed, Gladien, Mandrake, Spicknarde, Roses, Pepper,
Anisseede, Smallage seed, Perselye, yellowe Carotes, Hennebane, Comine,
Basell, of Honey, as mucthe as will suffyce. This is a present medicine against
al inward diseases of Women, and against the pain of the Stomach, taken with
decoction of Anisseede and Mastike: It cures also al diseases of the Matrice,
which come of cold, taken with wine, wherein Muggeworte was sodden, and if you
make a round thing of sylke, or wolle, to seen after the fashon of a finger,
and anoint it with ye Oil of a Wesel, or such other Oil, and put it into ye
Matrice, the^ it will move ye flowers of women which do not conceive. It is also
a singular remedy for children, which speak in their sleep, or can not sleap,
if it be taken with wine, wherein Mandrake or Elder has been sodden: it will
also help them, if it be taken with Women's Milk, according to the quantity of
the little grain Cicer.


Sickness. How make you Diatrion Sandalon?


Health. FIrst take of white, read, and yellow Saunders, of sugar. ana,.ii.
some Poticartes, take Fleawort for sugar, which is though to be better. And
Gallen does make composition, after this sort. Take of Reubarbe, Spodie,
Liquorice, Purselin seed, ana..i.ss. of Amile, Gum Arabyke, Tragantum, of
the four common great seeds, white Endive seed, ana. i.ss. of Camphere.i. so
put unto these four times as many Roses, as of all the other, and of the syrup
of Roses as much as will suffice. This does cure the pain of the Liver and
stomach, and those which be in a Consumption, or have the yellow Iaundice.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci Diarhodon Abbatis?


Health. TAke of Roses, lignum Aloes..ii. of Mastyke.i.ss. Wormwood, Cinamom,
Spicknard, Cassia lignea, Squinantum, ana..i. make your balls with old wine,
and with the decoction, of the common roots as Smallage, Percely, Louage.
These Balls be very good against old Agues, and those which come of diverse
causes, against the quotidian, and al other Agues, by the which the beauty and
form is corrupt, and this is put into great confections says Nicholas,


Sickness How make you Trochisci de violis?


Health TAke of the young flowers of white Uiolets..v. of Amilum..iii. the
seed of white Poppy.iii. of Reubarbe..v. the seed of Planteyne..i. of
Balm..i. of Rose water, as much as will suffice, make it after the form of the
balls before, this is not used, but when it is mingled with other compositions.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Squilla?


Health. FIrst take one whole Squilla, and bake it well in paste and cast away
the outward rind, beat the substance of Squilla in a Mortar, and put unto it
as much of the fine flower of Orobus, and temper it with wine and Honey, and if
you have not Orobus at hand, then take as much bread, well and fynely broaken:
make your little balls, and dry them in the Sun. Some Poticaryes, take in
this confection one part of Squilla, and two parts of Barley flower.


Sickness. Haw make you Trochisci theriaci?


Health. FIrst take a young Adder, of the length of a spanne, with read iyes, a
shaking tongue, and horns like the grain Sesamum, cut aaway the head and
tail, about three fyngers, that which is in the mids must be dressed, the
skin taken of, and the inward parts cast away, wash it often in sweet water, and
sees it so long, til the flesh fall from the back bone, and temper the
flesh and the juice of it together, put unto it as much of Orobus, or of
Bread, make little balls of the weight of..ss. dry them in the shadow.
These be not taken, but when they be used with other great compositions, except
it be in curyng the Leapreie.


Sickness How make you Trochisci Diacorallion


Health. TAke of read Coral, Cinamom, Mirrhe, Amomum, Popy ana..iiii of
Squinantum, Saffron, ana. ii. of Calamus Aromaticus, the wood of Balm,
Casiafistula, Folium indicum, Mastike, wild Time, Ualerian, Azarabacca, herb
Robert, ana..i. and these being first made in powder, form your little balls
with wine. These are a present remedy to staunch the bloody flux, they do
also fortefy the stomach, and cause good digestion.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Camphire?


Health TAke of Rose leaves.iiii. of Spodie. ii of yellow Saunders,.ii.ss. of
Saffron..ii. of Liquoryce..ii of lignum Aloes, Cardamom, Amiliu^, Camphyre,
ana..i. of Sugar, of Manna, or sweet dew, ana..ii. make your balls with ye
sappy part of Fleawort, and Rose water. These be very good in hot Agues, and
to quench the thyrstines and burninge of read Choler, or Blood: it
asswageth the heat of the Stomach, Liver, of all the inward parts, it
cures the yellow Iaundice and those which are in a consumptio^.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Alcachengi?


Health TAke of the Beries of Alchachengi, three of the four greater cold
seeds, ana..iii, ss. of Bolearmoniacke, Gum Arabyke, white frankynsence,
Dragons Blood, white poppye bitter Almondes, Liquorice, Tragantum, Amilum, the
kernelles of Pyneaples, ana..vi. of Smalage seed, Amber, Henbane, the juice of
black Poppye, ana..ii, make your Balls with the sappye Juice of the Beryes
of Alchachengi* These be (...) present medecin against Exculcerations in
the Reins, and the bladder, and the pain in pissing.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Myrrha


Health. TAke Mirrh.ii. of Lupus.v. ye Leaves of Rue, wild Mint Penerial,
Comine, Mader, Pellitary of Spain, Serapin, Opopanar, ana..ii. make balls of
the weight of..ii. of which let the paciente take..i. on the day time, in the
water wherein Juniper seed was sodden. These be so strong a medecin, to purge
the terms in women, that they will cause the child to discende: if they use
them often, the terms shall be moved very well: also in boxing the Crookyng, and
bowing of the ham, or in cuttyng the veyn, which lies by the ancle, you may
also use boxing about the thies.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Musco?


Health. TAke of the Wood of Aloes, v of Amber ii. of Musk..i. the gum of
Tragantum, with Rose water as much as will suffice to temper them together, so
make your balls. These do comfort the stomach, heart, and liver, and be
used with great medecines.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Rubarbaro?


Health. TAke of Reubarbe..x. the juice of Egremony..iiii. of Roses..iii. of
Spicknard, Anisseede. Madder, Smalage seed, worm wood, Azarabacca. ana,.i.
bitter Almondes..iiii. make your balls of the wayght of..ss. These do assuage
the pain of the Liver, and do deliver it from obstructions, they cure inward
impostumes, old griefs, the dropsy, and yellow Iaundice, and resstore good
color, to drink them is a present remedy for those which be of evil lykyng
or in consumption. Many Physicians do use them in hoate Agues, and when the
body begins to fall into consumption.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Spodio?


Health. TAke the red Roses..xii. of Spody, x. of Sorel seed..vi. of Purslayne
seed, of Coriander seed, infused in vinegar and afterward dried the rynd of
the Frankensence tree, ana. ii. Amile made in powder, the flowers of wyld
Pomgranets, Barberies ana..ii. gum Arabyke made in powder..i. make these with
the juice of unripe grapes. These Baules taken with the juice or seeds of
Sorel be very good against Agues of Choler, which have a continual flux,
they assuage the burning of ye stomach and liver, and quench also the thurst
and dryness.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Absynthio?


Health. TAke of Roses, Wormwood, Anysseede, ana * ii. of Rewbarbe, the juice
of Egrimony, Azarabacca, Smalage, bitter almondes, Spicknarde, Masticke, Folium
indicum, ana.i. make your balls with the juice of Endive. These be good in
long Agues, and deliver the stomach and liver from obstructions, and
strengthen the principal parts and do cause good appetyte, if they be
dronken in long Agues they profyt very much.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Eupatorio


Health. TAke of Manna or sweet dew, the juice of Egrimonie, ana. i, of Roses
i.ss. of Spicknard,.iii. of Reubarbe Azarabacca, Anisseede, ana.ii of
Spodie..iii.ss. make your balls with the juice of Egrimonye. These be
necessary against long Agues, and the cold and shaking of them, against
obstructions of the Liver and spleen, and inward impostumes, the yellowe
Iaundice, and the dropsye, if they be taken at the beginning.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de terra sigillata?


Health. TAke of Dragons blood, gum Arabike made in powder, Ciuet, Rose seed
and Leaves, Amylum made in powder, Spody, Acatia, Hipoquistis, the stone which
does stanch blood, the flowers of the wild Pomgarnet, Bolearmonye, Terra
sigillata, Hempseede, Cokel, Perles, Amber, ana..ii. Tragantum, black Poppy.
ana i.ss. Purslein seed made in powder. Frankensence, Oak apple, Saffron,
ana..ii. make your balls with the juice of Plantayne. These be excellent
balls to staunche spittyng of blood, and chiefly if they be taken with the
water of Plantayne: if the forehead be therewyth anointed, they stop the
secret terms. and to conclude, they stop the Flux, if so be that the place
be therewith anointed.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Ambre?


Health. First take of Amber. aure, vi. of Hearts horn made in powder, gum
Arabyke Coral in powder, Tragantum, Acatia, Hypoquistis, the flowers of wild
Pomgarnets, Mastick the gum of Ladanum washed, black Poppy made in Powder, ana,
aure. ss. make these up with the slymy juice of Fleaworte^


Sickness. How make you Tela Galteri^?


Health. TAke of common sallet Oil. l i.i. of Ceruse..iiii. of Litarge..iii.
Mirrhe.ss. make these like a ceare cloth, which is made of wax. This does
heal and dry up sores.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Apostolicum.


Health. TAke of Turpentine, white Wax and Rose^..xiiii. Opopanax, the powder
of Brass, ana.iii Amoniacum..xii. Aristolochia Rotunda, white Frankinse^ce,
ana..vi. Mirrhe. Galbanum, ana..iiii. Opopanax, Uerdegres. Bdellium..vi. of
Litarge..ix, infuse your Bdellium in good Uineger, and so dissolve it, and
sees it in Summer with. l i.ii. of oil, in Winter in three. This cures
easily old Fistulaes, swellyng, and hard kernelles, it eats away dead
flesh, and cleanses the Wound.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Rosarum?


Health. TAke of young swines grease, as mutch as you will, and wash it in
hoate water.ix. times, and as often in cold, then stamp it with a great quantity
of young Roses, and let it stand by the space of seven days, afterward sees
them with a soft fire, and strain them, then take again as many Roses, and
stamp them with the grease and so let them stand by the space of.vii. days,
then cast upon them one part of the juice of Roses, and of the oil of
Almo^ds.vi. parts, sees all together with a soft fire unto the juice be
consumed, and if you will put unto this Vnguentum Rosarum a little quantity of
Opium, then it will prove a very excellent medicine to cool heat, and to
anoint the back* with all,


Sickness* How make you Vnguentum basilicum maius.


Health. TAke of white wax, Rosen, Talow of a Cow, dry Pitche, the Greek
pitch, the fat of the belly of the Seal, fine Frankensence, Mirrhe, ana..vi.
of liquid or moist pitch..iii. of all the other ana..ii.ss. This is a present
ointment against wounds inflamed and wounds in the sinews, it does cleanse them
and bring new flesh again. The learned Surgens, think this ointment ought
not to be laid to hoate sores or wounds, because it is of his nature also
hoate, and so shall cause greater inflamacions, wherefore use it rather in
wounds without all inflamacions of heat.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum aureum?


Health. FIrst take of yelow wax..vi. good Oil. l i.ii.ss. Turpentine,, ii.
Rosen dried, Pitche, ana..i.ss. fine Frakensence, Mastike. ana..i. Saffron..i.
make your ointment. This has been proved for to heal bruses and strokes.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum basilicum minus*


Health. FIrst take of Rosen, Pitch, Wax and Oil as mutch as will suffice,
and make your ointment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Populeon?


Health. TAke buddes of Poplar tree. l i.i.ss. black Popie, Mandrake leaves,
the b^ddes of Bramble, Henbane, Dwale, Stoncrope, Lettice, Howseleke. Burre.
Uyolettes, Maydenhayre, ana.iii of young fresh swines grease l.ii. dry all your
herbs and boil them with the grease, and so make your ointment accordyngly.
This is good to anoint the temples, pulses, the palms of the hands and the
sooles of the feet in hoate Agues.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Martiaton?


Health. FIrst take of white wax. l.ii. of oil. l.viii of Rosemary, of Bay
leaves, ana..viii. of Rue..viii. of Quickebene..vii. of Sauine, Watermints,
Sage, Basell, wild time, Calamint, Mugwort, Enula Campana, Gelouflowers,
Brankursine, goose grease, Paritorie, Pimpirnell, Egremony* Wormwood,
Primerose, Borage, young Buddes of Elder, Orpin, Millefolie, Houslyke,
Germaunder, Centaury, Strawbery leaves, Synckfoly, herb Iudaice ana..iiii. the
root of Holy oak, Comin, Myrtell, ana..iii. of Fenegreeke..i.ss. of fresh
butter..i..ii. of Nettels, Uiolettes, red popy, of the third kind of Myntes,
of Balm, Dockes Maydenhayre, Walethistle or Carduus Benedictus, Woodbine,
Ualerian, herb Robert, Sorell de Bois, Hearts tongue, Ox eye, Camphire,
Storax, Dearesuet, ana..ss. Mastyke, and fat of a Bear, and of a whelpe,
ana..i. of Frankincense..ss. oil of Spyke..ii. let all your herbs be gotten
in May, in one or two Days together, if it may be, and from.iii. of the clock
in the morning until.xii. the^ stamp all your herbs together and infuse them
in sweet wine.vii. days on the eight day sees them over a soft fire, and
when your wine does begin to consume, then put in your Oil and boil them all
together until your herbs begin to consume, then strain them, and cast away
ye herbs, and set the juice strayned on the fire again, and when it boyleth,
put in Storax, and soon after the Butter and the Grease, the oil of Spike,
Mastyke, Frankensence, Wax, and when the Wax is melted, then take it from the
fire, sturryng it always till it shall be thycke, and then reserve it. This is a
synguler ointment for a cold headache, the pain of the breaste and stomach,
and against hardness of the breast, the spleen and the Liver, it cures, Iliaco
passio, if the place be anointed with the Ointment hoate, it heals the
Paulsie, the ache of the Hyppe, and the Gout in the feet, the frensye,
swelsynges hardened kirnelles, the Crampe, the conuulsions, and all other aches
of cold.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum aregon?


Health. TAke Rosemary. Mergeram, the root of wake Robin, or Kucko prycke,
wyld Time, Rue, wild Cucu^mer roots, ana..iiii.ss. of Bay leaves, Sage,
Sauin, ana..iii. of Horsemints, Laureola.ix. of Brionie roots.iii. of Neppe,
wild Cucumer leaves, ana, l.ss. of Mastike Fra^kensence, ana..viii. of
Pelletarie of Spain, Euphorbe, Ginger, Peper, ana..i. oil of Wesel..ss. Olei
Petroli, the Grease of a Bear* oil of Bay, ana.iii. of Butter..iiii. of Salet
Oil* l.v. of Wax, l.i. iii. gather your herbs in May, and use all other
things, as in the ointment before. ^ stamp them well and lay them in oil in a
Mortar by the space of.vii. days, and on the eight day set it on the fire
vn^yli the herbs go down to the bottom, afterward strain them and then set
the juice strayned on the fiec again, and when it begins to boil, put in
your oil of Bay, Butter, the Bears grease and wax, the which being melted,
put in Mastike, Frankensence, at the last* Ginger, Peper, Pelletarie of Spain,
Euphorbe, and when they be well sodden, then take all of and reserve it. This
cures cold aches anointed after this fashion, take an Eggeshell and warm the
ointment in it at ye fire, then anoint the place, when the place is anointed,
lay also the shell unto wherein the ointment was warmed. It helps the Crampe
and conuulsions, and when a man is so styffe for cold that he can not move his
Neck: it is good against ache ^and pain in the Hyppe and ioynctes, and
against a quarten Ague, if so be the backebone be therewyth anointed before the
fit come.


Sickness. Haw make you Vnguentum Dialthaea?


Health. FIrst take of Holioke roots. l.ii. of Linseede, Fenegreeke, ana l.i.
of Squilla l.ss. of Oil. l.iiii. of Wax. l.i. of Turpentine, To cure aches in
the ioynctes, coming of cold.
the gum of Iuie, Galbanum, ana..ii. of Colophonie. Rosen ana. l.ss. wash
the roots well, and beat your Fenegreeke, Lineseede^, and Squilla altogether,
afterward put them all into. l.vii. of water, by the space of three days. and
on the fourth day, boil them till they be thycke: then put them softly into a
bag and strain them, puttyng unto them a little hoate Water, to cause the
juice to strain the better, after this take. l.ii. of that juice, and boil it
with oil, until the juice be consumed: Then put in the wax and when it is
melted, put in Turpentine, Galbanum, Gum of Iuie, and at last Powder of
Rosen, and dry Pitche, when it is thycke, take it from the fire, and make your
ointment. This asswageth pain of the stomach of cold, and the Pleurisy, if
you anointe the place thererewith, it does also bring heat, mollifieth and
causes moystnes.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Agrippae?


Health. TAke of Brionie roots l.ii. the roots of wild Cucumer and
Squilla..vi. of Flowerdelice..iiii. of Fern roots..ii. of Walwort, and
Seathistell ana..ii. wash the roots twice or thrice and beat them in a mortar
of Marbell, then put them into. l i.iiii. of oil Olive, and Masticke. l i.ii.
by the space of seven days, to increase the better their heat, savor and
efficacy, boil them on the eight day, until the roots be soft, then
strain them, An ointment against the Dropsy and swelling.
and when they be strayned, set them on the fire again, and when it begins
to boil, take..xv. of white Wax, and when it is melted, take it from the
fire, and make an ointement of it, when it is cold. This is a present remedy
against the Dropsy, and all swellynges, in what part so ever they be: it
asswageth pain in the sinews, provoke urine, causes a man to be laxatiue,
and cures pain in the raines of the back.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum diapompholigos?


Health. TAke of oil of Roses..x. of white Wax..v. of the juice of
Nyghteshade beries..viii. of white Lead..iiii. of commmon Lead made in powder,
of Tuthie a kind of Lead, ana..i. of Frankincense,.i. make those simples in
powder, which be fyt to be made in powder, sees the juice of Nyghtshade, with
the Oil of Roses, until the Juice be consumed, then myngle the wax with the
pouders, Erysipelas to a red inflammation in ye body, with a Fever or horror.
and beat them in a mortar, and then make your ointment. This dries
Erysipelas and old stinkyng soars in the Legs and Thighs.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum de Enula campana?


Health. TAke of Enula campana roots sodden in Uineger, and afterward well
dried. Anoyntment against ext^eame itche, scabbes, and Pox.
l.i. of swines grease, oil Olive, ana..iii. of new wax..i. of sal^ made in
powder..ss of quick Silver, and Turpentine washed, ana..ii. make this ointment
accordingly.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum contra Scabiem?


Health. TAke of Swynes grease..v* oil of Bay, Quick Silver sleked, of Wax
washed, Another for the same.
of Frankensence made in powder, ana..ii. of Salt..vii. of the juice of
Planteyn and Fumiterre, asmutch as you judge sufficient. Make it after this
fashion, set the juices with the wax, oil of Bay, and Swines grease on the
fire, and let them boil until all be melted, then put to Salt,
Frankincense, Mastike, and boil them all until the juice be consumed. Then
take them from the fire, and put unto them ye Quicksiluer ^^eked as you did in
the other Ointment before and so use it. This is a very strong Ointment and
therefore you must take dilygente heed, least that you touch any pryncipall
Member with the Oyntement, because of your quick Silver, you must also myngle
a great quantity of Mastike with it.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum pro pueris scabiosis?


Health. FIrst take of Terebintyne washed..iij. of Butter washed..ij. of
salt.i. of the Juice of Pomecitrons, the yolks of.iiij. Eggs, of Oil of
Roses..i. mingle all these together, and make an ointment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum desiecatiuum Rubrum?


Health. TAke the stone called lapis Calaminaris, of terra Sigillata ana..iiij.
Litharge of Gold, white lead. an^..iiij. of Campher..i. of Wax..v. oil of
Roses, oil of Uyolets. ana..vj. make the Ointment accordingly. This will dry
moist humors.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum contra Lumbricos?


Health. TAke of bitter Almondes, and the Juice of Peache leaves, and
Motherworte, ana..ss. of Roses, Lupine flowers, the powder of Hearts horn.
ana..i. of Aloes succotrine..ij. some put unto these..ij. of Ox Galls. Take a
little quantity of Uynegar, and as mutch Honey as will suffyce, this applied to
the Belly, will kill Worms.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Resumptiuum?


Health. TAke of Swynes grease..iiij. of Hens grease, Goose grease, and Duckes
grease. ana.ij. of Hysop..ss. oil of Uyolets, Camomil and Dill ana..ii. of
fresh Butter. l.i. of white Wax..vi. of Tragaga^tum, of the slimy sap of ye
kirnels of Quinces, Lintseede, and Holyoke, of Gum Arabike, ana..ss. myngle
them together and make an Oyntmentment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Album?


Health. TAke of Oil Olyue. l.ii. of fine white Lead. l.i white Wax..vi.
some Poticaries put to these..ii. of Camphyer, make the Ointment according.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Matritum?


Health. FIrst take of Litharge of Gold..iii. of Salet Oil. l.ss. of
Uyneger..iii. make the Oyntmen in a Leaden Mortar accordingly: This cools,
and dries, and kills Itch.


Sickness How make you Vnguentum Aegyptiacum?


Health, FIrst take of the Flowers of Brass, called Uerdigreace..v. of
Honey..xiiii. of strong Uyneger..vii. sees them until they be thycke, and
make your Ointment. This is a synguler good Ointment against old Wounds and
Fystulaes, which stand in need of clensing. It does also ear away dead
Flesh, and purges also from all corruption.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Citrinum?


Health. TAke of Borar which is a kind of Salt Peter..ii. of Camphire..i. of
white Coral..ss. of Sea glass burnt..i. of the Gum Tragagantum, Amilu^,
Merbull, Cristall, of fine Frankincense and white, of Salt peter, ana..iii. of
white Marbell..ii. of Serpentarie, white Lead..vi. make it after this fashyon:
stamp your Tragagantum, and the Marbull stones in a Mortar with an Iron
Pestell, stamp the other alone in the same Mortar, and searse them through a
Syne with a fine cloth, with. l. of fresh Swynes grease, and Goats grease, and
of Hens grease..i. These greases must be put into a Skyllet, or some other
such like Uessell, the which Uessell ought to hang over the Fire, in a
Cauderne full of water, let the water in the Caulderne so boil that the grease
may be melted, by the heat of the water in the Caulderne. When ye grease is
melted, strain it through a fine clothe into a Dyshe, and put unto it all ye
pouders, except Camphyre and Borax, stirring it continually, until all go
together on a lump. This done, myngle with it two Pomecitrons or more, stirring
it all ways, and when it begins to boil, put in Camphyre and Borax, it
must be continually stirred till it be cold, after that it be taken from the
fire the which done, make the ointment. And here you must note that one pound
of powder, will require. l.viij. of grease.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Neapolitanum?


Health. FIrst take of Oil of Camomill, Dyll, Spicknarde and Lillies, ana..ij.
of Swynes grease and the fat of Ueale. These Ointme^ts be good for the butt^s
of Naples, Soars, Aches. etc.
ana. l.i. of Euphorbe..v. of Frankensence..x. Oil of Bay..i.ss grease of
Uyper..ii.ss. of quick Frogs of earth Worms washed in Wine..iij.ss. Juice of
Walworte, and Enula Campana roots. ana..ij. of Squmantum, Stichados, and of
Motherwort, ana. M.ii. of sweet Wine. l.ii. boil them al together until the
Wine be consumed, then strain them and put unto the strayning, Litharge of
gold. l.i. of Terebintyne washed..ii. make this Ointment or searecloth with
white Wax, putting unto it, when it is almost sodden. j.ss. Stacte, or of the
saftest and tendrest part of Myrrh, the^ take it from the fire and stir it
till it be luke warm, after this put unto it..iiij. of Quycksiluer sleked with
your spettell, styrryng it till the Quycksyluer be run together on a lump
with other Symples, and so make your Ointment.


Sickness. How make you Another. etc?


Health. TAke of Oil of Spyke..i. Olei de Tartaro, Oil of Baye, Olei
Petrolei, and Swynes grease,.iiij. of Frankensence..ss. of Euphorbe..i.ss the
ointment of Holioke, and of Agrippa, ana..j. of Quycksyluer..iiij. myngle all
together and make your Ointment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Galeni?


Health. TAke of white Wax. l.i. oil of Roses. A good cold^ vnguentum*
l.iij. let these be melted all together, and washed well and often with cold
water, until they be white, it were the better that they be washed with a
little Uyneger.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum ad Combustionem ignis, to heal burning with
fire?


Health. IT is an Ointment which I have oftentimes proved to help many, whose
virtue excels in healing the flesh, An ointment for burning.
when it is combust or burnte with Fire, and it must be thus made. Take of the
Rynde or tender bark of Elder, and the Pyth or Cork of the same Elder. ana..ij,
boil it in three pyntes of water until half be consumed, then strain it and
put in Oil of Nuts..iiij. and sees it softly in a cloase vessel until your
water be wasted, then put in new clean clarifyed Wax..ij. myngle them
together, and so is your Ointment made.


Sickness. How make you Sugar Roset?


Health. TAke fine Sugar and dissolve it with Rose water, and sees it well,
then cast it on a Marbell stone, till it be cold and hard, afterward cut it in
great pieces. Thus you may also make Sugar Uyolet, and Buglosse.


Sickness. I Have been troubled with a bloody Flyxe many a long day, Here (...)
describes the flixe with the effects.
with paynefull turments in my Guts, and runnyng out of yellow Choler,
excoriation. or as I think the scrapyng of my Guts, with pourynge out of
blood, my body is clean wasted, my flesh consumes, I cannot tell what to do,
I take no rest in my bed, I have a continual dryness, this pain has brought
unto my mind, an infinite number of cares, and miserable afflictions of the
soul: I have been with many, I have sought every where for help, but I have
found none. I pray thee, dear Health, bestow upon me some worthy medycine
which may recover me, and heal me of this sore, and great disease.


Health. This assure your self, I have helped many, and hyndered none that
have used it, for I my self have oftentimes proved it, even so do you. Take
the Juice of Planteyn, of Kno^grasse, A Clister to stop yt blouddy flixe.
of Sheapperds purse, of Nightshade, of Ribwort, ye water of Roses. an., ii the
whytes of.iij. Eggs, the seed of Rise, ye flowers of Pomgranets, ye rynde of
Pomgranets, the wild white Rose, finely beaten in powder and searsed, ana..ii.
Acatia..i. clarified Ox tallow*.ii. Goats milk pynte ss. sees al these
together, then put in Terra Sigillata fine in powder..i.ss put these all into
your Clister bladder, and receive it luke or more than blood warm in at your
fundament, and lie down upon your bed and rest, having the lower parts of
your belly warm anointed with Oil of Rue: and afterward take Wormwood,
Sothernewood, Rose leaves, Sauery, Puleole, Rosemarie, ana. M. the beries of
Myrtels, the powder of the bark of Pomgranets, ana..ii. wheat Bran.M.ii.
sees all these in rain water, and white wine, ana. l i.iiii. until p^^t be
consumed, then with warm clothes be washed, Bullein^ has used this oftentimes
to his friends.
and after apply all these things to your Raynes of your back and belly,
then drink Red wine, wherein tarte plumbes have been sodden, Planten water,
and unripe Mulberies: and this is mine advice, Sickness, to make the whole, for
with this I have helped many withal.


Sickness. How make you an Epithema to stop the flixe.


Health. I Shall teach you a very good wholesome Epithema, which has helped many
a hundred make it and prove it as occasion shall move thee. Take a Lynnen bag
a foot square, put therein Red Rose leaves, red Briar leaves, Myrtyll beries
with the leaves, Polei of like quantity to fill this bag, according to
greatness of the body so make this Bag, but commonly.xii. inches is used,
let this sees in Red wine, the^ apply it to the belly very warm, and make it
warm again, yea.x. or* xii. times, and keep it to the belly: and sometime
there appears knottes like lyt^le Figs in the nether parts, through the
abundance of humors, in such cases: with a Sponge wash that place often
times with the decoction of the Epithema aforesaid, and dry Mulberies, and
Briar bearies which be skant ripe, make them into powder and burn Hogs
hair, and the ashes thereof put into this powder, and.viii. grains of
Masticke in powder, cast or rub your sore placee therewyth, Epithema to stop
Fluxes.
four times a day, and hereafter follows a most excellent Epithema for that
same purpose. Take Gum Arabike, Frankincense, Mastike, Aloes flaua or yellow,
ana..ii. Dragons or man's blood, the stone called Hematist. ana..i ss. the
burnte powder of the cloue of a Crab or any shell fish..ss. with two hard
roasted Eggs, this gum dissolved with a little Red wine tempered with the
rest of these pouders and Eggs, make them warm and in a lynnen long bag
apply it to the raynes, and so make it warm between two platters upon the
Coals, and give the sick Theriaca. i. mingled with Red wine. iiii. warm to
drink at that present time, and this will stop any extreme flux: if you will
make a glister to help the Colyke or wind in the Guts, A Clister for the
Collycke.
Take Hysop, Centauri, ana..i* and one good-white Colaquintida, sees it in a
cloase Uessell in two quartes of Water until half be wasted, then strain it,
and take a pynte or more of this decoction, This did docter Mansfield use to
his* pa^ients at Norwiche, many ^ymes.
and put thereunto oil of Rue..i. and warm let it be ministered, if this be
somewhat weak to a very strong body, add to this Honey..i. Hie^a simplex*.i.
and common Salt,.i.ss.


Sickness* How make you Collyria which be used for sore eyes?


Sickness. How make you Collyria which be used for sore eyes?


Health? THey be made of two kinds, Collyrium, Sieff.
the one liquid or moist called Collyrium, the other dry, made in form of a
Sugar loaf, called Sief, but in wayght not..ss. and of them speaks Gale^,
lib. 4. medic. localium cap. 4. and Paulus Aegineta in libro septimo. Cap. 16.
They be made of juices liquors, seeds, fruicts, parts of Plants, Metals etc.
But I will show thee how to make some for the comfort of eyes: and first when
the eyes begin to be sore, hoate, red, dymme. etc. Take the white of an Egg
well beaten, and oftentimes drawn through a strayner with the like quantitye
of clean Rose water, and Planten water myngled together, and drop part of
this into your eyes. Another, take Tuthia or Lapis Tuti prepared, Uery good
Col^^ries. for sore eyes.
and the stone called Calaminaris, ana..iiii, the white of an Egg, Rose water,
woman's Milk, the decoction of the Kernels of Quinces, ana..iii. myngled
together, you may put in fine clear yellow Aloes..i. if you will. This
Collyrium will dry up watery and gummy matter in the eyes.

Another to quycken the sight. Take the stone Tuthia or Tuti prepared,
Amoniacum, Bras burned or adust, lapis Calaminaris, ana. xii. pennye wayght,
Myrrh, the stone called Hematist, Opium, ana. vi. penny weight, The best
learned of the Greeks and Latins use this for sore eyes.
yellow Aloes called Hepatyca, Bulls gaul, Galbanum, gum Sagapena, ana. iiii.
penny wayght, Salt Armonyake, the juice of Chelidon, ana. iiii. penny wayght, and
thereunto add Rosewater, and beat it in your Mortar, then roll them in small
sharp pieces, and dry them. keep them until you have need: and when
occasion shall serve, dissolve one of these pieces in Rose water, the white of
an Egg or woman's Milk, and put it into your eye. This is most excellent to
make clean the eyes, sharp the syghte, and make it beautiful.

Another for the same. Take Ceruse washed in Rose water.viii. sundry times in
several waters..i. white Gum, Sarcocol of Persia..ii. Amylu^, Traganth. ana.,
i. Opium. G, iiii. all lightly beaten or ground on a Stone put thereunto a
little of the Mussege or thick decoction of Fenigreeke, and so fashion them
and make them dry, and keep them clean, A Linament for Pleurisy.
you may put some of this into your waters for the eyes.


Sickness. How make you a Liniment to put away pain in the Pleurisy.


Health. TAke oil of Camomill, the fat of a Capon, ana.i. of fresh Butter
newly made..iii. and a little piece of new wax, so make your Liniment to
anoint the stomach.


Sickness. How make you a Frontale or a Foreheadcloth to quench heat in the
head, in the time of a Fever, and to cause sleep


Health. AFter the mind of Galen prepare a double cloth of Linen three
Fyngers broad, A fronta^^e for hedache.
and in length from one Ear* to the other Ear, put into this clothe as
follows. Take Red Roses or their Leaves, Lettyce leaves* Poppy leaves or the
seeds, and quilt it, and make this Frontall warm between two broad Plates or
Platters, with Rosewater and Uynegar* and then bind it to the Forehead. An
other for the same. Take water Lyllies, Uyolets, Mellilot, Lettice flowers,
white Poppy heads, ana. M. q. bruise all together, For sleep.
and put them into your clothe. If the head be cold, and have no warmenes, the^
make your Frontale thus. Take Sage, Rosemary, Camomill, Betony, Bryonie,
Melilote, Basil, Sauory, or such like Herbs bruised, and put into your
clothe: And in hot pains of the head, pour water of Roses and Uynegar
together, upon a hot Tyle stone, and receive the Uapour or Smoke into your
Mouth. Uapour to smell upon.
In cold causes pour Aqua vitae, and Sage water upon a burning Tyle or stone,
and receive ye smoke. Commonly Galen in.12. of his Therapeutice, did anoint
sick Folks heads with Oxyrhodinum, which is made of Oil of Roses..i. and
Uynegar..ij. mingled and shaken in a Uyal of glass, and cold, anoint ye
Forehead therewith.


Sickness. How prepare you a Gargarizme or washing Gurgle, for the Mouth and
Throat?


Health. A gargarizme to gurgull in the mouth and throat.
YOu shall do thus. Take the stilled waters of Roses, Planteyn, Uynegar, Honey,
Lettice, Strabury, Nightshade, water Lilly, and of Burnet, ana..i.
Diamoron..vi. the Juice of Raspes, of Barberyes. ana..vj.ss. syrup of
Poppy..ss. of Strauberies.iii of Uynegar..ss. myngle them well, and this is a
Gargarizme, to skowre the throat in all hot dyseases, and in the time of
Angina. And here follows an other for the same. Take Planten, Burnet, Strabury
leaves, Knotgrasse, ana. M.i. Sorrel, Sage, ana. M. red Roses. M.i ss. long
Pepper, Pellitory, ana..ss..ij. boiled in a Pottell of Water, till the half or
more be consumed, then strain it, and put to it Honey of Roses..i.ss. Oximell
Scilliticum..i. myngle them together, and then it is perfitly made. An other
very good, which has done mutch good, as Doctor Leonard Fuchsius reports.
Take Hiera Picra simplex..ss. Oximell Scilliticum..ij. the stylled waters of
Hysop, Betony, and Organie..i.ss. myngle them, and make your Gargarizme. A
gargarizme must be given warm to draw humors from ye head.
Mustard, Uynegar, Pepper and Honey myngled together, do make a good ready
Gargarizme. Provided that you mynister your Gargarizmes warm, to draw humors:
But when you stop the^, use cold things, taken cold in your mouth, as Vinegar,
fou^tayne water. etc.


Sickness. How make you Nasalia, or to stop blood in the Nose?


Health. WHhen the blood does abundantly flow out of yt Nose, it is good to
open the Liver vein in ye right arm, Nasalia.
to take the abou^dance away, and sometime small stringes or veins will break in
such cases moderat diate and cold things, are good to be used, and this
powder to be put into the Nose. Take the Kaies or woly knottes growyng upon
Sallowes, commonly called Palms, being dry, Bole Armonie fine, To stop blood
in the nose.
that will cleave to the tongue, and Dragons blood, ana..i. beaten into Powder,
and finely sifted, and the fine hair of a Hares belly. i.ss. cut or mynsed
most short like powder, put these together, and stuff them into the bloody
nostrell* or else dissolve them with the white of an Egg, and so draw them into
the Nose: The profit of neesing.
Often times the head is stopped, and the stomach so disquieted, that
sternutacions or neesyngs will help. And also the said sternutacions will
help Women to quycke deliverance, in the time of their travel. Then do thus.
Take Margerum, Nigella, Cloves, white Peper, Ginger, ana..ii. Castor, Condisi,
ana..i. make them in fine powder, and put them into ye nose. Or thus. Take
Nutmegges* Ireos roots, ana..i. Elleborus Albus, called neesyng powder
root..i. white Peper, Pellitorie. ss. Calamus..i..i. beat them in powder, and
keep it to use, as a mornyngs, and in child birthes. etc.


Sickness. Reumes, weakness of sight, dulnes of hearing, slownes of speech,
over mutch sleep, sometime trouble me with foulenes in my mouth what help
then to cleanse, or draw forth fleume?


Health. MAke a pretty lynnen bag of fine cloth, put therein Mustard Seed,
Apophlegm^tismi, to put in the mo^th to draw forth filth.
Hysoppe, Ginger, Peper, Pelletorie, Stauesagre, Mastike, Organ, ana..i.ss.
beaten together, put part of this into this bag, or else into your mouth,
without the bag, or else tempered with the juice of Beats and Honey, and so
make your mansill or bityng thing. It will draw fleume, cleanse the eyes,
comfort memory, and quench the salt fleume, that make the face high colored,
use it a mornyngs often times.


Sickness. How make you Pessis to mollify, to unbind, and to restrain, to be
put into the secret place of the urine of women?


Health. TRuly the making of them which do mollify is in this. Take Oesipi*
which is an oil sodden out of the wolle that is clypped or shorn from the
Necks or flanks of sheep, Oesypi is an foul Oil made of wool but very good
for Pessaries and other medicines.
Hearts tallow or the marth called Mary, Goose grease, Capons or Hens grease
ana..i ss, Flax or lynt seed, Fenegrekee in pouders, ana..ii. Melilot..i.
Masticke. i.ss. the yolks of Eggs, Oil of Roses, and the Oil of
Flowerdeluce, ana..i.ss. fresh Butter..iii. put to a piece of wax, melt them
together, and prepare woll rolled together in the form of a finger or such
like, dippe it in this liquor, A mollifying Pessary.
when it is styffe let it be used, I mean into the secret place of Conception,
retaynyng it in the place.iiii. or.v. hours with a threade in the end thereof,
How to use (...) Suppositor.
it may be made with a Sponge. To provoke terms menstrual. Take Mugwort
Sothernewood* Dyttan, Calamus odoratus, ana., ii. the Seed of Nigella..i, ss.
Bay beryes..ss. dry Rue..i. Sauen..ii. Myrthe, Styrax liquid, ana..i.ss.
Sagapine, Ladanu^, ana.. beaten in a Mortar with Honey, and roll it in the
Pessary, and apply it accordingly.

Sometime immoderate flux or terms passes so mutch and so painfully, Pessaris
to restrain.
that in such cases, Pessaries restrictiue be very wholesome, as example. Take
the powder of Hearts horn, Olibanum, ana..ii. Dragons blood, Balaustia, ana..i
ss. Damask Roses., ii Acatia, or juice of sower Plumbes dried, Hypocistidis,
Mastike, ana..i. Bole armeny..ii. Bistorta, Comfory, ana..i.ss. bruise and
stamp them well in a Mortar, put in the juice of Planten, and Oil of Roses,
as mutch as will suffice to roll in your woll and make your Pessarie.


Sickness. Against the foul stynke of a corrupt air, a fylthy house, and
coldness of the brain, what smoke, fume, or savor is then good?


Health. How to receive fume or vapor.
NOt only for a cold brain, but also against raw humors, and vomyting of
Blood. etc. If the Pacient have a few coals between the Legs, stoupyng
downward, with clothes cast loose about the naked body, as a mantell, Gown
etc. receiuyng the smoke, at the mouth, through some Trunk or hollow thing.
Take the wood of Aloes..ii, Gallia muschata..i. Sage, Margaru^, Rosemary, Maces
Bay leaves, ana. i stamped in a mortar into fine powder, put in fine Musk. G.
viii. and cast part of this or all this, by little and little on the coals, or
thus as follows.

Take fine Frankincense, Cinnamon, Cloves, Maces, the rynde of a Pome Citron.
ana..ss. the wood of Aloes, Myrthe, Mastike. Trochisces of Gallia Muschata..ii.
beat all in a mortar, and put in some Styrax liquide, and your mortar partly
warm, beat altogether and make your sweet Fume, puttyng in if you will Musk,
Amber greece. ana. G. iiii. Here is a good one. Take Ladanum..i. Frankincense,
Mastike* ana..i. Styrax Calamita..ii. Cloves, Cinamom, Nutmegges, ana..i. wood
of Aloes, Myrrh..ss. dead coals of Salow, Cyprus. Fur, or Genuper,.ii. beat
them all in a Mortar somewhat warm, put in a little Uenice Turpentyne, and
clean Rosewater, and work all together with your Pestil, and make your
parfume, and this shall suffyce: but when Women do suddenly fall sick with
swellynge of the Matrix called ye Mother then it is perilous to use sweet
parfumes, Perfumes for ye mother.
but then use to parfume with Galbanum Asa foetida, Castor, Feathers, the paring
of Horshoues. etc.


Sickness. How make you Sacculum or Scutum, the shilde or twilte for the
breast?


Health. THey be very comfortable for the breast and stomach, to stop
vomits, and be good for the Heart, Scutum.
Spleen, and Belly, and thus it is made. Take flowers of Rosemary, Lauender,
Camomill, Betonie, Roses, ana. M.ss. or Sage, Margarum, Mellilote, Myntes, ana.
M.ss* or Leaves of Seen* ii.ss. Stichados. iii. Cloves, Nutmegges, ana..ii. and
Maces..iii. stamped in a Mortar and twylted in a sylke or fine lynnen cloth,
made in the form of a Sheelde or a square Tre^cher. Another. Take flowers of
Buglosse, Roses, Balm..iij. Cloves, Maces, wood of Aloes, Cardamon,.ij.
Saffron..j. Galanga. Spycknarde, the Bone of Hearts heart, an^..j.ss. Musk,
Ambergreece. ana. G. x. beat in a Mortar, and with soft Cotton quilted and
applied to the breast. You may put in warm herbs, as Sage, Wormwood, Mynts,
Horehound, Sothernwood. etc. put in a Quilt, or Stomycher with the pouders of
Calamus, Cloves, and Comen, quilted and made very warm with Wine or Aqua vitae
between two Platters, and so applied to a weak feeble Stomach: This is an
Emplaster, if oil be put in,
and thus I end of Sacculum, or Quyltes.


Sickness. How is a Cerote made?


Health. THey be made of Wax, Oil and Pouders in a Quylt, in form of a Shoe
soole, or an Ox tongue, A Cerote and how to make it,
and are thus made. Take Cinnamon, Cloves, ana..i. Galingal, Maces. ana..ss.
sweet Calamus..i.ss. wood of Aloes, Gallia Moschata. ana..i. Flowers of
Pomgranettes, Mastike, Ladanum, ana..i. oils of Mastike, Roses, Myntes,
ana..i. with Wax..i. Terebintyne, beat your dry things in powder and put your
Wax to them, and so melt them, and so to keep your Cerote. You may make ye
same in Leather or Silk. You may for the Spleen put in Mellilot, Lintseede,
Fenegreeke, Capper barks, Calamus, Nutmegges, Wax, Terebintine, according to
Art, putting in Oil.


Sickness. How make you Insessus?


Health. FOr lack of a Bathe, these are good for the Belly, and raynes Take
Filipendula, Saxifrage, Mallows, Holihoke, Insessus.
water Cresses, ana. M.i. the seeds of Flax, Smalage, Fenegreek, sees all
together in sufficient Water to the third part, and so use it for the stone.
Another. Take Mugworte, Sage, Betony, Calamint, Organie, Peneroyall, Camomill,
Melilote, saynct John's grass, Sothernwood, ana. M.ss. the Roots of Yreos and
Smalage ana. i. sees your roots soft and your herbs: this is good for the
Matrix, Belly, for the Chollicke, swelling wind, Timpany, cold. etc. Another
against a blouddy flixe. Take Planteyn, Knotgrasse, the Ryndes of Pomgranets,
Shepards purse, Horsetayle like a water sprinkle, A goodly remedy for the flixe.
the flowers of Pomgranets, ana..iiij. sees all in rain water. Uynegar, or
Red wine to the third part, and apply it to the lower parts of the Belly.


Sickness. How make you Fomentum?


Health, THere be two Foments one moist, and the other, dry as Hippocrates says
lib ij. victu. acut. and now of a moist one. Take Mallows the Flowers,
Fomentes moist and dry.
or tops of Dyll, Camomill, Melilote, ana. M.ss. the seeds of Line, and
Fenegreeke, ana..ss. sodden in. l.ij. of Fountain water to the half, and so
you may draw it through a Searse or a Strayner, and with a Sponge warm, you
may wash the Belly, or any other grieved place.


Sickness. How make you Dropax to cleanse the head, and pull of scaules, and
filthy Glewe that Children are infected wythall?


Health. A Dropax for a scalde head.
DRopax will do many things to the body, it may be made to humect, and to dry,
to cleanse, to cool, and warm, but to your question to make a Dropax for an
unclean head, called the scaule, or glewe, or else crust. Take Pix or Pitche,
Wax, Colophonie. ana..iij. Bitumen..ss. Brimstone..iij. Peper, Pellitory.
ana..ij. Stauesagre. Where the he^rt is unquiet, prosperous labor does not go
foreward.
.j.ss. Euphorbium, Elleborus the white, ana..ss. beat your dried things into
powder, and melt them together, spread this upon a Leather warm laid on the
foul head, being first shaven for.xxiiij. hours and so quickly rent it of,
and thus I make an end of these kinds of Compou^des. And when I have more
quietness, with convenient leiser, I will say some thing of Compounded waters:
But it shall make no great matter if I give place to them, whom no man can
mende, that have written most plentifully, learnedly and compendiously, of the
natures of Precious waters, both Simple and Compounde: yet shall I remember
some good waters shortly, because time, and place so moves me in that case.


Sickness. MIne Eyes begin to be dim, my sight fails me: I would learn to
make a water, to keep them from utter blyndnesse. For when the sight is
decayed and gone, the Joys of this World are past, and nothing is left, but
misery and heaviness of mind, and continual musing.


Health. A goodly water for sore eyes.
A Merueylous water to conserve the Sight, I shall teach thee, which I have
proved my self, to have helped many one: and the great learned Man in waters,
called Euonimus, has written it, who in Distillations was equal to any, that
ever practiced the same, and it is thus made.

Three rych waters, Silver, Gold, and Balm.
Take the leaves of Rue, Mynte, red Roses, Sage, Maidenhayre (other leave out
Minte, and Sage, and for them put red Fenel, Ueruyne, Euphrage called
Eyebryght, Betony, Honey succle of the Mountain, and Endyue) of every one six
handfulles, let them be put into white Wine, for the space of.xxiiij. hours*
then let them be distilled in a Limbecke: the water that shall first run out,
is compared unto Silver, ye second unto Gold, the third unto Balm, and this
must be close kept in a glass: it is a water for all Dyseases of the Eyes,
that be curable, out of Aegidius, and Lullius, it is described Amongst the
waters, composed for diverse inward dyseases by V'lstadius.

An other water for the eyes, about the beginning of May* gather ^^^landine,
Ueruen, Rewe, Fenell, beat them severally, and take..iii. of (...) juice of
every one of them, then mix them, put to a little of the green branches of
Euphrage, called, Iye bright, or Roses..iii of Sugar Candy..iiii. of the best
Tucia, and as mutch of Dragons blood, when all th^se are beaten, thou shall
mix them together, and distille them in a Limbeck of glass the liquor that
runs forth, thou shall let it stand two or three days in a receiver, and
then use it: it is of great virtue, for the eyes that be da^ke* (...)
dim, red, or have the web in the eye. The water of the Uine, together with
Honey sublymated by the fire, cures the blyndnesse of the eyes sp^cyally. The
Monks in Mesuen that is the water of the vine (said they) which in every
Spryng time, when the Uines are cut, for certain days space without any
distillacion is pressed forth: this puts away pryckynges, and heat of the
eyes, and clarifyeth the sight, coming by a hot cause: if a Man put into both
corners of the eye, one drop of this water, it sharpeneth the sight, and
cures any disease of the eyes, within.v. days says Euonimus. etc. Read
after in the trymming waters, amongst them that be ordained to Dying of the
hair. Here is also a water for the eyes in Summer, to preserve the sight,
described by Ioannes Mainardus, in his Epistelles, vi.iiii. three parts of
Roses, the herbs of Fenell, and Rewe, of either one part, let them be well myx
together, and after three days, let a water be distilled, other in only vapor
of sethyng water, or in the Son, or in Balneo Mariae, as they call it, so
that a handful of the foresayed herbs, The manner of distil^ing the Water
fore^es
be put into the receiuyng vessel, that the drops may fall upon them, and
the mouth of the receiver and the nose of the upper vessel, must be diligently
joined together, and closed, that the vapors may not get out, but be kept very
close from air.

And hereafter follows an other water, of an excellent Virtue. Fill a still
full of the leaves of Agrimonye, Ueruen, Euphrage, Fenell, Rue, red Mintes, and
Louage, cut them. spryncle upon them a little white wine, and clear wine, and
distille them in a clay stillitorie, Goodlye waters for the eyes, which
excels in virtue.
this liquor represseth the swellyng of the eye lyddes, of a cold cause, it
dries up the bleare eyednesse, it stops the flowyng of tears, it clears
the sight, it breaks the blemishes, spots, corns, or pearls: if thou wylt
have it stronger to break spots or pearls, put unto it Gallitricum, and
Chickens weed, with red flowers. You may get a Water out of Fenell also for
the same causes, for a liquor gathered out of the roots and leaves of Fenell,
sodde in Water, with a Basen laid upon the water, while it yet sees, and kept
in a glass, and one drop put into the corner of the eye every day, morning and
euenyng, for the foresayed causes, this is proved to be very good. To break the
spot or Pearl, myxte with the foresaid waters, Mirrhe, and Aloes a pound and
put a drop of the liquore strayned, in either corner of the eye, early and
late.

A Water distilled of the flowers of white Thorn, and Willow, puts away
pryckyngs, heates, or rednes of the eyes, The water of white thorn and Willowe
for redness of eyes, coming of heat.
it stops tears coming of a hot cause, and breaks the spots, or
Pearls of the same cause. A Water of the Leaves (flowers) of Euphrage,
stops Tears, coming of a cold cause, and makes slender the Eye lyddes,
that swell of the same cause, Water of Euphrage called Eyebright, for swelling
in the eyes, coming of cold. Euphrage or Ophthalmica so named, because it is a
herb for Eyes Gordonius water for Eyes. Gordonius water for a Fistula.
and restores the same sight, that has any impediment. Euonimus does say,
that Euphrage does not heat, but is temperat, or else does cool moderately in
the first degree, and dries in the second.

An excellent water for the debility of the sight, described by Gordonius, take
Selandyne, Fenell, Rue, water of the Mountain, Euphrage, Ueruen, red Rose with
their Buds. ana. l.ss. Cloves, long Peper. ana..ij. when they are bruised
together, dystill them in a Limbecke of Glass, with a slow fire, and put of
it every day in the Eyes.

An other of the same man's, for a Fistula, which he is certain will heal it:
two pound of good white Wine, dystilled in the same vessel, Aqua vitae is
dystilled in: the waters of Rosemary and Sage. an^ l.v. Sugar l.ij. when they
are distilled, put again to them..j. of Sage, and as much of Rosemary, when
they are steeped together viij. days, thou shall strain it, and use it. A
canker in what part of the body so ever it be, the herb called Canker, which
is also called Doves foot, the Flowers of Quinces, the Flowers of Cerifolium,
Andreas Fornerius water for a Canker.
the Flowers, or Leaves of the Bryer, called Idea, which is like a sweet white
Rose, and a few white Roses, Honey, and white Wine, and the Alum which is
called Alum Glass, let all these be dystilled together.

A good Water dystilled of a Molewarpe, for all kind of Goutes, or Dropsies,
noli me tangere, Scalles of the head, Saucie face, and the Wolf. If you will
have a Water without dystilling, quickly to wash your Legs, or Feet, to
make your said water to smell well. Set a vessel of running or conduit water
on ye Fire, sees it well, and put into it the flowers of Lauendula, or
Lauender, and mutch rather of that, which is commonly called Spike, both
green, and dry Bays, Basell, Sage, Fenel. etc. and so wash at night: put
clean runnyng or Conduicte water, and white Wine into a vessel well stopped,
and set it in the Sun, putting in Laue^der, Spike, and Cloves, that they may
make sweet the said Water, and Wine with their smell, but yet if the Lauender
be green and moist, it will turn the Wine almost into Vinegar which if it
be dry, it does not so. The Lyquor shall be made the more smelling, if the
Flowers be dried in the Sun, in a Glass closed, and afterward white Wine to
be put into it. How to make sweet water without stilling good for to wash the
feet, or for Barbers.
If so be it, a man desire to have a sweet water forthwyth, by and by, let him
put a drop of Oil of Spyke unto a good deal of pure Well, or Conduite water,
and chafe it together, in a glass with a narrow mouth, although this be made
without dystillation, the same notwythstanding, being right dystilled in the
Sun, specially if certain other things be myxt with it as Musk, Ambre,
Ciuet, Caphura, or meaner things, as Styrax, and Stacte, Myrhe, or any other
Spyces, chiefly Cloves, or else things of less estymacion, as Roses, the
Barks, Flowers, or Leaves of Orynges, Lymons, Bay leaves, common sweet
Herbs, Rosemary, Margerum, Bazill. etc. it shall be made mutch the sweeter. But
if you will have a very pleasant water, take..ss. of good Musk beaten in two.
l. of Rose water, put in the belly of a Glass Still, and distill it, by little
and little, then put it in a Glass well stopped, with Ambergrice..i. it is a
Water merueylous sweet, and convenient for fine Persons, A pleasant sweet
water
that their clothes may be sprynkled there with: put..ss. of good Saffron, in.
l.ij. of Rosewater (for the space of one day) and dystyll it, this water is
wholesome to be mixed with Medicines: also for smell, and garnishing, put..ss. of
Cloves beaten, in a pound and a half of Rose water.24. hours, and distyll
it, dystill Campher..i. with a pound of Rose water, and use it in medicines,
for Noble persons. After the same manner is Rose water, made with Saunders, and
other spices (sweet smellyng) what so ever a man will, some distill al this in
pure Water, in steed of Rose water, three leaued herb, an herb very sweet
of savor, which they dystill for Perfumes and to make diverse other pretty sweet
Savors. The Monks of Mesuen, make a water of sweet savor, where with the
head, heart, and stomach are revived.

. Four handful of the flowers of Lauendula, Roses white, and red, The Monks
water for correction of the flesh, better than holy water, and more costly.
of either two handful, Rosemary, Cloves, new and fresh Ciperus, of every
one a handful, Minte, Sage. Time, Bayleaues, or Peneroyal of every one half a
handful..iiij. of Cloves, Galingal, Nucis Mosch, Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger,
Cinnamon, of Flowerdeluce, of every one..ss. six pounds of white Wine
(asmutch as shall suffyce) when they are brayde and beaten in a Mortar, let them
be put into a Glass, well closed, for the space of eight days, afterward use
them, as occasion shall serve: it is excellent to wash the hands, if you myxe
a little of it, with a great deal of pure water. A man may use it also
dystilled, and put in..i. of Musk. Epiphanius Empericus, writes an other of
the same man's, delectable, with a merueylous sweetness of savor: Ciuet,
Musk, of either..i. let it be tied in a fine lynnen cloth, and let it be set
to soake in. l.ij. of Rosewater, a few days in the Sun.

An other of the same Epiphanius, of a very sweet savor: Bazill, Mynt,
Marierum, Flowerdeluce, Hysop, Sauery, Sage, Melissa called Baulme, Lauender,
Rosemary, of every one half a handful, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegges, the
Pomecitron, of yellow color, three or four, let them be beaten, and set three
days in Rose water, then let them be dystilled with a slow fire: when the
destillacion is finished, put to..i. of Musk, and set i^ in the Sun: you may
add Ambergrice..ss.

An other of ye same Epiphanius, of most excellent savor. R. Three pou^ds of
Rosewater, Cloves, Cinnamon. Saunders. ana..vj. two handful of the Flowers of
Lauende^..vj. of Assa dulcis, Malmsey, Aqua vitae..ij. let it stand a month to
still in the Sun, well cloased in a Glass, sweet water for linen.
or upon the top of a Furneyce: then dystil it in Baln^o Mariae, and ad. i.ss.
of Musk to the dystillation, then let it stand ten days in the Sun, or
above the Furneyce, and so use it. It is a marvelous pleasant Lyquor in
savor, a water of a wondrous sweetness, for the perfuming the sheets of a
Bed, whereby the whole place, shall have a most pleasant sent: put into a
little Uyall of Glass.xviij. or.xx. Graynes of Musk, and Ciuet and a little
of Ambergrice, after filled full of Rosewater, set it over the fire* and when it
is hoate, take it away, then let it stand to cool, well closed, after you have
done let it stand two days, you may use it from thence foreward, it is as good
as though it were distilled: when thou wylt perfume thy Napkins, or other
linen, put it in a vessel with a wide mouth, and spread the clothes upon it
boiling, and that they may drink up the vapor and breath of it.

Agalam, or Agalugun, is the wood of Aloes.
An other manner of sweet water, is called the water of the casting glass: put
into some little vessel of Silver, a little Rosewater made with Musk, and a
little Ciuet, and Cloves, Agalam, Styrax calamita, when they are all pound
against a fire, mix them, and perfume any clothes with the vapor or smoke
thereof, it is a marvelous sweet savor, if thou will keep close the vessel
diligently, and when thou think good, put more Rose water unto it, that it
may be renewed.

An other. Thou shall put into four pounds of Rosewater, Assadulcis, somewhat
gross beaten, Styrax, and Cloves, Camphire, Agalam, of every sort. i. Musk,
Ciuet, of either of them G. xx. put these together in a glass shut with a
Parchement, pryckt through with ten or twelve small hoales, and let the vessel
boil four hours in a kettell, full of clean water, as though it were in
Balneo Mariae, after when it is cold, strain it through a fine linen cloth,
and keep it in a Glass, in the which Graynes.xii. of Musk shall be put, which
being moysted, and steeped with Water, thou shall stop the Glass, and set it
in the Sun.viii. days, so shall thou have a wonderful well smellyng water,
a sweet water, and a secret, whereof one part myxte with ten parts of pure
Water, makes the whole most sweet: Graynes.xx. or there about of Musk, as
the smell thereof pleases the more, or less, Nutmegges, Cloves, Galingall,
Spicknard, Graynes of Paradise, Mace, Cinamom, of every ana..i. all these
beaten in a Mortar, let them be put into a Glass, fyt to distille in, with
Rose Water l.i.ss. powered unto it, let it stand so, for the space of four or
five Days, afterward put to it thryse asmutch of Rose Water, and destille all
this in a Limbecke, set in a kettell full of water sethyng, as in Balnco
Mariae. thou shall keep the water gathered together, diligently stopped for
the same purpose aforesaid, that the former serves for.

An other excellent water, two pound of the water, of the flowers of Citri,
There be.ii. kinds of this Assa, one is called Assa foe. ^ida, or Devils
dunge, ye other is called Assa dulcis, which comm^th from Syria, and is also
named Syr^naicus liquor, or the juice of Lasar pitium.
one pound of the water of red Roses, of Mirtes. l.ss. of Musk Roses a good
quantity, and likewise of the flowers, of Cloves, ana..ss. of Assa dulcis..iii.
well beaten ana..i. of Stirax Calamita, and red Styrax, ana..ss. all these
stamped, and mixte with water, thou shall distille them in a Glasen Limbecke,
the head and the receyuer dilligently closed with clay* with a soft fire, or in
a Balneo Mariae, or in a kettell of sethyng water: a Water of most sweet
savor, with the which Oil is stilled also, the last water being mixte, with a
hundred times asmutch of pure Water, does savor with the sweetenes thereof, so
is this following of greater Virtue, health, and sweetenes,

Take a pound of Mirrhe chosen, pure, new and fat, beaten into small pieces,
half a pound of the juice of Roses, when they are myngled together in a
Limbecke, let them be distilled in ashes: where first thou shall separate the
water, with a slow fire: then make the Fire bigger, A water incomp^table* for
the singular goodness of the most excellent virtue thereof.
and separate the Oil: and at last deuyde the water from the Oil. It makes
the Face bright, it closes wounds effectually, as well old as new, the oil
is most precious, and does the same things that the water does, but mutch
sooner, as for example: it does that in a hour that the water is about in.
xxiiii. one ounce of this water distilled, mixed with a pottell of pure water, it
does the same.

A goodly Rose water made with Musk, which is required, and used also in other
composicions, put. G. xii. or more of Musk, and. G xvii. of Amber grice.


Sickness. THese waters be very pleasant and profitable, Of sleeping waters.
but waters to make a man sleep were comfortable, I pray you say somewhat of
them.


Health. IF you will cause one to sleep, then do thus as follows: Take..ii.
of Henbane..i. of the roots of Mandragora. To cause rest and sleep.
.vi. of Popie, Lettyce. Orpin, Housleke, ana..ii. the water Lilly one
handful, when they are beaten, let them be put in two pound of water of Popie,
with..i.ss. of the seed of Darnell for the space of two days, and let them be
stilled, and this is perfect.

An other causing sleep Take the seed of Darnell. l.i. of the seed of
Henbane. li, ii. of the seeds of Purslen..iii of the seed, or root of
Mandrag, as mutch of Alkakengi, when they axe beaten, power to them. l.i. of
the juice of Beans, as mutch of the roots, or leaves of Henbane. l.ss. of the
juice of the leaves of black Popye, minister..i. of this water, when it is
distilled, it is vehement, and of great virtue. A goodly water for the stone,
and it helps the palsy and falling sickness.


A water for the stone, made by Aegidius, because it breaks the Stone, R. the
seed of Pimpernell, Parsley, Smalage. Cokowprycke, Mustardseede, Burres,
Masticke, of every one like mutch, when they are well beaten let them be myxte
with the blood of a he Goat, and a little Vinegar poured to it, let them stand
a few days in a Uessell well closed and then at the last ^et them be well
stilled it is good for them that be troubled with the stone, what manner of
stone so ever it be, red, white, sharp or plain, if so be it the stone be
confyrmed, and gathered to some straight, let the pacyent drink of this water
eueryday, for so shall it be broken and brought into Sand: if so be scabbed
heads be washed once a day with this water, they shall be made hoale, and new
hair shall spring, and the Scabbes shall be cured within nine days (otherwise
any kind of Scabbes washed therewyth are made whole within three or four
days) if it be drunk fasting, it makes good Blood, and good color* more
than any other Medicine) marueilously it makes strong the sinews, and takes
away ye falling sickness, if it be drunk twyse a day, otherwise it is added:
it heals clean the Palsy, if it be not dead and radycated in the members.
Thus says Aegidius* and Lullus, with other learned Clerks, Also. R. Caudae
equinae, Pla^taine, red Roses, the grains of Alkakengi, the roots of holy
Oak, shaven or scraped Liquorice, of every one..i. Juniper Sebeste^, of either
of them..vi Bolearmoniake,.ss. Cummen seed, the great cold seeds cleansed, of
every one..iiii. the seeds of white Popie. vi..ss. of Quinces, or the thynnest
of Goats milk, l.vi* let them stand two days in the infusion, and after let
them be distilled, give the sick pacyent to drink,.iiii. warm, so long as
the disease continues Epiphanius Emper^cus.

An other water composed of Aegidius, and it is commended of Lullus, of waters,
R. Rue, Satyrion with the hands, and Satyrion with ye stones, Agrimonie,
Chelidome, Sugar, and the stone called Calaminaris all of one wayght, and beat
them in a Mortar, it must be distilled with a slow fire: this water excels
in virtues, no disease of the eyes is so dull or dim, or great, but it will
vanysh away, and give place to this medicine: being drunk, it dryueth away all
poysone, or taken with meats, for so it auoydeth the poysone by vomites, it
cures the Dropsy, it purges the stomach from all evil humors, Sacer ignis.
it quenches saint Anthonyes Fire in one day, if Flax dipte in it, be laid
upon the sore: it is good also against the fire of a black Melancholy, and
white apostume without the Fire, but if it appearered without, it shall in no
wise be convenient, to lay on a plaster. It also heals the Canker, if Aloes
be myx^e with it, and a little Towe or Flax dipte in it, and laid like a
plaster upon it twyse a day: this is a precyouse medicine, and never fails.


Sickness. THese be excellent waters. Be there any good waters against the
falling syckenes, and resolucion of the sinews and, Fevers? I pray you tell me
them.


Health. HEre after I will show thee goodly Waters, for the same purpose, as
follow. Take Hysope, Peneriall, Cloves, Cicory* ana..i. let them be beaten in a
Mortar, and distilled in Sage water. l.vi. afterward take the stone Tutia,
Persely, Rue, Setwall, Aloes, and the stone called Calaminaris, ana..i. and
Ualerian..vi. when they are beaten in a Mortar, sees them in the foresayed
water, till the third part be consumed, and the liquor strayned with a cloth,
thou shall keep in a Glass, diligently closed nine days, afterward let it be
given in drink, every day in the morning before day (by the space of ten days)
to the sick pacyent fasting, it is profitable against the falling sickness. If
he that takes it, continue fasting after it six hours. A goodly water for
fevers.
And truly it is a most effectual remedy, it heals all resolucions of the
sinews, and the members are strengthened thereby, if it be drunk with
Castorium: it is good against all Goutes, which have not taken Root yet in the
members, if it be drunk nine days together fasting, it puts away all manner
of agues* what matter so ever they come of, if it be drunk Nine days, every
morning early. This Water is also most profitable to wash Wounds, in which
the Synewes are cut. general.


An other of Aegidius, the nynth in number, otherwise they call it double: the
seed of Smalage, ye seed of white Popy, Ginger, Sugar, Another water of
Aegidius
Cloves ana. equal wayght, beaten in a Mortar, put to it water (that is
dystilled of Persely) and dystill it: this is the chiefest remeady for the
cough, and breast payned, if a man drink it cold in the morning fasting, Water
against the Palsy, and to help the Brain.
and in the evening as hot as he can: If it be drunk hot with Castorium, it
is good against the disease called Apoplexia: it heals also the members sick
of the Palsy, if so be the Palsy be not dead in the members: it brings
sleep and rest easily, it cherishes all the members, it dryueth away evil
humors, and strengthens the Head and the Brain.

An other amongst Aegidius waters: Gladiolus, Hysope, Sauine, Sothernewood, or
the seed of Sothernewood, leaving out Sauine, of every one like quantity, beat
them together, and let them stand certain days, A water to be used with
discretion.
then dystil it. This water is of great strength, it wythstandeth all Agues,
both hot and cold: it provoke Women's terms, if it be drunk thryse: but it
is hurtful to Women with child, it stancheth the bloody flixe, and other
flixes: It kills worms, being drunk fasting. It cures al ye grief, There
be so^e that use this water to purge.
which with Beuers stones heals the Palsy (if it be drunk daily very heat)
within three days: the same description is found in the Book of Lullus of
waters most excellent.

Here after follows a very good water. Take a Weather, that is all white, and
fat fed in a good pasture, and well lyking, cut his throat, receive his blood,
and stir it while it is fresh and new, a good time, with a stick of red
Iuneper, and ever in the stirryng cast away the lumpes, that are gathered of
the blood, then cast in the shauinges of the same Juniper, and the berries of
Juniper that be red, to the number of.xxv. and to this put a little, Agrimony,
Ru^, Ualerian, Scabious and Ueronica, commonly so called, Pimpernell, Cicory,
Peneroyall. ana. if so be it, Distill this blood, and keep it close.
the measures of the blood exceed three quarters, the^ put into it..iij. of
Triacle of Ieane: but if it be less, according to the portion of the blood,
thou shall make less the measure of the Triacle. They must all be prepared
ready at hand, that they may be put into the blood, while it is yet warm: when
they are all mixed, draw out a stilled liquor, which thou shall keep diligently
in a glass, and set it in the Sun eight days, for it will endure twenty
years, it is known by experience, that this liquore is excellent, and good
against the Pestilence, the impostumes of the head, the sides, or ribs, or
against the diseases of the Liver, and Lights, the inflacion of the Spleen,
corrupt blood, agues, swellings, tremblynges of the Heart, the dropsye, An
excellent liquor against the pestylence and many other diseases.
unnatural heates, ill humors, and chiefly against poysone, and the Pestilent
Ague. The sick paciente that is taken with any of the foresayed diseases,
shall drink a Sponefull, or four or five, and procure himself to sweat, and
shall be healed within his sick body.


Sickness. What are composed Waters, I would gladly learn them?


Health. THey are to be called composed waters, that are distilled of
medicines composed, and steeped in Wine, Aqua vitae, or other liquore: certain
composicions of spices and herbs, to restore the strength of the heart, and
the spirits, are mixte with waters of Capons, dressed by distillacions,
accordingly: also with burninge Waters, or called Quintessence of Wine, against
the Pestilence, and poisons, as we declared before, but also hot medicines
Electuaries, chiefly in the which Diacridium, and other vehement things
hurtful to the stomach, are received, mixte with the Liquores, specially with
burning water rectified, or with Wine (sometime also with Milk, and Wine, or
with Whaye: also in hot natures and dyseases, it should do well) and sometime
let stand in infusion, or soakynge, they are artificially distilled, What
composed waters be
that they may be given to drynk to them that are weak or feeble, or as they
call them daynty, or have their Stomachs abhorring against other medicines,
which Lullus also prayseth greatly, and certain Practicioners of Antiquity
have used it with praise, and commendacion.


Sickness I would learn to make Quintessence of Antimonie, if it would please
you to show me?


Health. QVintessence of Antimonie, is thus made: incorporate, and mingle the
powder of Antimonie, Antimonium is called Stib^^^, or a stone b^ight. and
shyning found among ^yluer: this side does ^^ense the Eyes.
most fynely beaten, with most sharp white Vinegar distilled, and let it stand
until the vinegar be turned into a very red couller, then pour this Vinegar
out, and keep it. And in a clean vessel, put other dystilled Vinegar, upon
the Antimonium, and set it over a little fire till the Vinegar be coulered,
this shall you change so often, till the Vinegar will be coulered no more, and
so mutch of the Vinegar as is coulered, thou shall distill it in a Limbecke in
Ashes: first the Vinegar it self will run out, after this, thou shall see a
matter issue forth of sundry coullers, and this is that Quintessence, which is
called of the Ph^losophers, the Philosophers Lead and of some called Uirgines
Milk (it differs not wythstanding from it) it is almost like blessed Oil in
color: Philosophers Lead.
put this in a Pelican to be circulated by the space of Forty days, it
dries up Wounds, and it is profitable for all Wounds, in steed of Balm,
for it cures all the said Wounds easily, A water that dries up Wounds and
heals them
and quickly: it is marvelous good for all Impostumes, and Quintessence is
extracted, and drawn out of white Lead, after the same manner, as out of
Antimonie, powringe distilled Vinegar upon it, that the Uynegar be over it
four fingers deep, afterward let it be digested in a Dunghill, as it is used
in Quintessence of Hearb^s, and Flowers, then let it be distilled and first
ye shall see the Uynegar it self ascend up, after that a Lyquore like unto
Oil, and also this is called Oil of Lead, or Quintessence of Lead, and it
has in it a certain sweetness* like as the Oil of Antimonie: it is good
against all burnings with ^yre, and hot water, as also against Itches, as
Ringwormes, and Chollerike bladders, but a man must note that the white Lead
ought first to be washed often with water of Roses, dryuing it through a
lynnen clothe, until none of the powder of the white Lead remain in it,
Quintessene is drawn out of many meats.
then when it is dried, reserve it to your uses. So does Bulbasus, and Joan of
saynct Amandus, upon the Antidotarie of Io. Mesue, will to be done: Of the
drawing forth of quintessence, out of diverse mettalles, as Gold, Silver, Lead,
Tynne, Uitrioll, or Coporas, Iron, Coper, Brymstone, red Orpeme^t, yellow
Ocker, Antimonie, and Marchasita Leaden, who so lists, let him read in
Lullus, in his book of Quintessence: the spirit of Quintessence, or Uitrioll
is commended of certain Men against the falling Sycknesse, and Apoplexia, or
the benumming of the Senses. The spirit of Gold, against ye dyseases of the
Liver, the spiryt of Birral, against the stone of ye Raynes, and Bladder.


Sickness. How make you Aqua vitae, after master Raimundus Lullus: which was a
man most excellent in Waters?


Health. He in his days, did make the Water of Life, Raymonde Lullius,
flourished, anno. 1322. he was a Spaniard.
called Aqua vitae of incomperable goodness. Mary he used to still his Waters,
both simple and compounded: many times to make them more heavenly or pure. But
to the matter, of making this Aqua vitae.

Take an herb called wild Mirte, like Butchers Brom, Asparagus, called
Sperage, Rapes, Persily, the Sea thystle called Eryngium, His water for the
stone.
Maiden hair, Grumill called Grana Solis. Cichory, Endive, and wild Carrets,
Fenill roots. ana. of like quantity, cut or brayed grossly, and still them with
your wine, upon a soft Fire. This Water will break the stone, and make mutch
Uryne.

Here follows an other. Take Nutmegges, the root called Doronike, which the
Apothicaries have, Setwall, Galangall, Mastike, long Peper, Another precious
water.
the bark of Pomecitron, or Mellon, Sage, Bazell, Margerum, Dill, Spicknard.
wood of Aloes, Cubebe, Cardamon called graynes of Paradise, Lauender,
Peniroyall, Mintes, sweet Calamus, Germander, Enulacampana, Rosemary,
Stichados, Squinance of each like quantity, Saffron..i. and the bone of a
Hearts heart grated, cut, and stamped: but beat your spyces grossly in a
Mortar. Put in Ambergrice, Musk. ana..ss. distill this in a common simple Aqua
vitae. made with strong ale, or Sackeleyes, and Anisseedes: not in a common
Still. but in a Serpentine: to tell the virtue of this Water, against cold,
Wind. Phlegm, Dropsy, and heaviness of Mind, coming of Melancholy. I cannot
well at this present, the excellent virtues thereof, are such, and also the
time were to long.


Sickness. How make you a Water that will kill the Canker, and heal the place,
whereas the said Canker has been?


Health. MAny good Men and Women within this Realm, have diverse, and sundry
Medicines for the Canker, and do help their Neighbors that be in Peril and
Danger, which be not only Poor, and Needy, having no Money to spend in
Chirurgi: But some do dwell where no Chirurgians be near at hand: in such
cases, as I have said, many good Gentlemen and Ladies, have done no small
pleasure, to poor people: as that excellent Knight, and worthy learned Man,
Sir Thomas Eliot, Sir Thomas Eliot. S^r Philip Parris. Sir Wylliam Gaiscoigne,
whose works be immortal. Sir Philip Parris of Cambridge Shyre, whose Cures
deserve praise. Sir William Gaiscoigne of York shyre. that helped many soar
Eyes: And the Lady Tailor of Huntingdon shyre, and the Lady Darrell of Kent,
had many precious Medicines, to comfort the sight, and to heal wounds
wythall, and were well seen in herbs.

The common wealth has great want of them, and of their Medicines: which if
they had come into my hands, they should not have bin written on the backside
of my book. Among al other there was a knight, a man of great worship, a Godly
hurtlesse gentleman, which is departed this Life: Sir Anthony Heueningham of
Heningham in Suffolk his medicine against the Canker.
his name is Sir Anthony Heueningham. This Gentleman learned a Water to kill a
Canker of his own Mother, which he used all his Life, to the great help of
many Men, Women, and Children: he had also a Salve, for sundry green Wounds.
But because I have not the copy thereof, I will make report, but only of ye
Water, which I am assured he used, and it is not mutch unlike a water for the
Canker, which Andreas Furnerius the Frenchman, did make of a great virtue, and
thus it follows.

Take doves foot, an herb so named, Arkangell, Iuy with the Berries, young
red Bryer tops, and leaves, white Roses, their leaves, and Buds, red Sage,
Selandyne, and Woodbynde, of each like quantity, cut or chopped, and put into
pure clean white Wine, and clarified Honey. Then break into it Alum glass,
and put in a little of the powder of Aloes Hepatica, and destill these together
softly in a Limbecke of Glass, or pure Tin, i^ not, then in a Limbecke,
wherein Aqua vitae is made. Keep this water close, it will not only kill the
Canker, if it be daily washed therewyth: but also two drops daily put into
the Eye, will sharp the sight, and break the pearl and spots, specially if
it be dropped in, with a little Fenell water, and close the Eye after.


Sickness MAny Men, Women, and Children, now a days, be grievously vexed with
a shameful disease, called the French Pockes, pains in their Joints, no
rest, palenesse of couller, falling of hair, baldness of Head and Bearde,
lamenesse of Limbs, Skabs, filthe. etc. in such cases what is to be done, I
pray you tell me, gentle Health, for this Sycknesse waxes common, but yet it
would feign be called, but only a Fever.


Health. A treatise of the Pockes.
MAny Men have written mutch of this Pockes, after sundry sorts, and diverse
ways, and have killed not a few with long Diets, but I will speak yt, which
I do know, have proved and seen, to have helped very many. Yet would I not,
that any should fyshe for this disease, or to be bold when he is bitten, to
think hereby to be helped: but rather eschew the cause of this infirmity, and
filthy, rotten, burning of Harlots. etc. As to fly from ye Pestylence, or from
a wild fire, for what is more to be abhorred, than a p^cky, fylthy, stynkinge
Carcass? But if through blind Ignorance, (...)
sudden chance etc. any have gotten it: then do thus to be delivered from it.

First, ye shall provide that the sick body, Three nota^ble thi^nges to be
osberued in this (...) drynk, and the Diet in the time of sickness.
have a close chamber out of all gross air, and clean warm garments, both
for the body, and Legs, and at rising, and going to Bed, a fire of Charcoales,
for wood is not wholesome for smoking, also they must not be troubled with any
thing to bring them out of patience, for that corrupts the blood, which must
be new altered: also the sick body must eat but little meat, and that kind
of meat as shall hereafter be prescribed, and at such time as shall be
appointed, and let the sick body use playing of some Instruments, or here
some playing, or tell merry tales, and have no company of Women, for that is a
most dangerous poison for the health of any person in that case.

Secondly, ye must prepare two Brass Pottes, or else Iron, one being iiij.
Gallons, the other.vj. Gallons, one for strong drynk, the other for small drink,
also ye must have close couers to them of brass or Iron, ye must also
prepare good earthen vessels with close couers to keep your drink in of both
sorts by them selves. Also ye must have a strayner of a Searce clothe, to
strain your drynk after it is decocte: Although the pockes be most unclean
yet to heal the same, requires clenlinesse asmutch as medicine.
Instruments to take out dead flesh, and to search a soar, and a spring to
cleanse any soar being deep with the same drynk. Also ye must have a wooden
vessel to bathe the sick body in, at such times as hereafter shall be
appoyncted. Also ye must prepare clean clothes, to dry the sick body after a
sweat, being warmed well first: other Instruments ye shall need none, but
only your wood raped small, or turned, and the Bark of the wood pounded in a
Mortar, and the drugges also small, and your Water which ye shall decoct, the
same must be of a Cundite, or running Brook, very clean without any kind of
filthe. Chalk water is good.

Thyrdly, for your strong drynk, How to prove good Guaicum.
ye must take your Pot of.iiij. Gallons and set him one a soft fire of coals,
with.iiij. Gallons of the fair running Water, then put into the same one
pound and a half of your wood small Raped, or Turned at the Turners, but when
you do buy your wood, see it be not old, and lack moisture, the trial is
best, take a little coal burning and lay it on the Block, before it be raped,
and if it be good it will boil up on every side of the coal, like Myrre, then
put thereto..j. or a little more of the bark of the same wood, made in small
powder, then take a quarter of a pound of Cummen seeds put whole into the
same, and one half quarter of an ounce of Radix, and Rubarb, and then stop
your Pot fast, and lay Paste about the Cover, and so fast, that no air come
out, Soft fire makes sweet Malte, and ye like does make good Guaicu^ drink.
then sees it on a soft fire, but ever keep it boiling, and let it boil at
the least.viij. hours, then set it by, and unstop it not until it be cold,
then take your Searce, and strain it into a fair Earthen Pot, and cover it
cloase: the sick body must drynk of this but one draught leuke warm in the
morning, and one other at night.

Fourthly, you must take your Pot of.vj. Gallons, Fourth rule.
and put in it.vj. Gallons of running water, and one pound of the wood raped,
and a quarter of Cummen seeds, and decockte it in all kind of thing, even as
the other* being close stopped, and when it is cold strain it into an earthen
vessel, or Uessels: and that must the party drink at meal, and at all other
times when he list to drink, and spare not but draw it by.

Fifth rule.
Fifthly, the sick body must be kept very warm, and not rise out of Bed
before.viii. of the Clock, and then eat a dosen or twenty Raisons of the
Sun, Note also, that F^lcrum is good to cleanse the Guaicum water with
and no bread, and about a leaven of the clock, let the sick Body eat a
little meat as may suffice nature, and what meat, it shall be hereafter
showed, then let the sick body walk some whiles in his Chamber, or read some
Book, or play on Instruments to keep him from sleeping, then at.vi. of the
clock, a dosen of Raisons of the Sun, and nothing else but his draught of
strong drink warmed at vi. a clock in the Morning, and at euenyng at eight.

Sixth rule
Sixthly, give to the Pacient to eat these meats following, Chicken Partrige*
Fesante, Hen, Capon, Rabette, Coni^, Ueale, Mutton, and none other, nor any
Salt, nor leauened bread, nor Rye bread, and very seldom tosted, but boiled in
water, and no broth, nor porrage, nor any kind of sauc^-if the sick body have
roste, let it be but every third meal, and no kind of Fish, Milk, or
fruictes, Raysons excepted.

Seventhly, once in.iii days, for the first.ix. days in the morning let the
sick body drink a good draught of ye strong drink something warm, Seventh rule
and then lay very many clothes on him till he sweat, for ye space of two
hours, then ease some of the clothes, and have warmed linen clothes, and
rub all the body dry or he rise if he have any sores that be deep, wash
the sore with the strong drink, and with a syring, and dippe a little cloth
in the strong drink, and lay it to the sore, whether it be sores or knobbes.

Eighthly after.ix. or.x days be past, once in three days let the sick body
be bathed on this sort. Eight rule
Set fair running water on the fire, and put thereto a great deal of ground
Iuie leaves, and red Sage and Fenell also, and by a good fire when the sick
body is going to Bed, put the Water and herbs into a vessel of wood, and let
the sick Body stand vpryght in it, by the fire, and take up the herbs and
rub the body of the sick Pacient downwards, and then dry him with warm
clothes, use this.iii. weeks, and by the grace of God the sick body shall be
made whole, what soever he be, then if the party be very weak after.ix. or.x.
of the first days, let him eat every day at.iiii. of the clock at after
noone, a new laid Egg poched in fair water, and as mutch new bread as will
suffice nature, and a little clean wine: read further in the place of Guaicum
for the Pox, whereas is showed greater secrets. And for this diat few men are
to be compared in worthiness and knowledge to Thomas Glandfield a cunning
Chirurgian of London. Thomas Glanfield.



Sickness. Now I pray you master Health make a brief rehearsal of the
Compoundes, and shortly of their names, and to what sickness they be aplied unto.


Health. THat I shall gladly, and first I will begin as follows: wherefore they
do serve, praying thee to be contented to read them, and mark the^ diligently:
and also of the common seeds, cold and hot, of ointments, etc

The Table of Compoundes.
AVrea Alexandrina. Mythridatum. Syrupus de Bizantijs. Trochisci diarhodon.
Pills of Agarike. etc.
Against Tercian Agues.
Aurea Alexandrina. Oxysaccharum simplex. Syrupus de acetosa simplex. Syrup of
tarte Pomgranets Syrupus de Bizantijs.
Against Quarten Agues.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diasent. Mythridatum Andromachi. Oxysaccharum. Vnguentum
aregon.
Against hot burning Agues.
Syrup of Violets Diaprunum not laxatiue. Decoctio communis. Electuarium
catholicum. Mel Violatum. Oxysaccharum. Syrupus de limonibus. Trochisci de
camphora. Vnguentum populeon.
Against agues cumming of diverse humors.
Diaphaenicon. Pilulae Agregatiuae. Pills of Rubarbe. Trochisci diarhodonis.
Against long agues of cold.
Diacurcuma. Diacorallium magistrale. Pills of Reubarbe. Syrupus de eupatorio.
Trochisci de Rubarbaro. Trochisci de absynthio.
The four great hot seeds.
Anisseede. Fenell seed. Cummen seed, and Ca. rowayes.
The four hot, and lesser seeds.
Ameum, Amomum, Smalage, Yellow Carrets.
The four great cold seeds.
Gourdes, Cucumers, Melons, Citrons.
The four cold and lesser seeds.
Endive, Chycory, Lettice, Purseline,
The four hot Ointments.
Vnguentum Martiaton, Altheae, Aragon, and Agrippae. Vnguentum Altheae.
The four cold Ointments.
Vnguentum album, Populeum, Resumptinum, Citrinum.
The five common opening roots.
Smalage. Fenell. Perseily. Sperage. Butchers Broume. Kneholme.
The five waters which do comfort the heart.
Endive, Succory, Scabiouse, Langdebeefe, Baulme.
The.viij. solutiue herbs.
Mallows, Mercury, Parietarie, Vyolets, Colewortes, Holioke, Acanthus,
Beetes.
Against Lienteria.
Aurea Alexandrina. Theriaca G^leni. Trochisci diacorallion. Trochisci diambre.
Trochisci de terra sigillata.
Against biting of venomous Beasts.
Mythridatum. Theriaca Galeni. Oleum de Scorpionibus.
Against evil liking of the body.
Diacurcuma. Diatragacantha frigida. Diacameron, Diasatyrion. Syrupus de
eupatorio. Oleum Sesaminum. Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
To aswage pain in any out ward part of the body coming of ache.
Emplastrum oxycroceum. Oil of Dill. Oil of Juniper. etc.
Against inward diseases.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina, Mythridatum.
Against burning, and scalding.
Electuarium palmae. Oil of Myrtes. Vnguentum rosatum Oil of Eggs. Oil of
water Lillies.
Against brooses.
Electuarium palmae. Vnguentum aureum. Vnguentum potabile.
Against pain in the spitting.
Emplastrum ceroneum. Lohoch de Pino.
Against belchyng of raw humors.
Diagalanga. Diatrion Pipereon. Diatragacantha calida. Lohoch sanum. Oximel
scilliticum. Syrup of Calamintes.
Against pain in the Back.
Pilulae foetidae maiores. Oleum de Cheirs. Oleum Scorpionis. Diacassia.
To draw forth broken bones.
Emplastrum oxicroceum. Emplastru^ co^tra rupturas and^
To purge the Bladder of Gravel.
Antidotum Asincritum. Benedicta. lax. Diacurcuma. Oximel diureticum.
To aswage pain in the Bladder.
Emplastrum de granis lauri* Mythridatum Galeni. Electuarium Dulcis. Syrup of
Iuiubes. Trochisci de Alchachengi. Oil of sweet Almondes. Oleum Cheiri.
Against exalceratio^s in the Bladder.
Oximel scilliticum. Trochisci de Alchachengi.
Against the Cho^^^ke.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexand^ina. Dt^ph^^^icon. T^^^^isci de Rosis.
Oil of Camomill. etc.
Medicines ^o be used after long and ^oat agues.
D^^rl^odon abbatis. Rosata nouella.
Agay^st the cold, and shaking in Agues.
M^lridatum Galeni. Syrup of sticados. T^^chi^ci de eupatorio. Oil of Dill.
Oil of Sothernwood.
To caus^ an appetite.
A^tidotum Asincritum. Ar^ma^^cum R^satum. Mina ^^^plex Conserve of Quinces.
S^rupus de ab^^nihio. Electuar^um consortatinum.
To comfort a cold Brain.
Electuarium de gem^^s. A^^m^ticum ^os^tum Conserve of Gladian. Ther^^ca
G^l^nt. Oil of M^ces.
To comfort a moist Brain
Conserve of Rosemary. Diambre. Diaprassion. Diatragacantha calida. Electuarium
ind^matoris. Pitulae alephanginae
To a^wag^ pain of the Breaste.
Decoctio pectoralis. Lohoch de Squilla. Oleum de che^rs. Vnguentum marciaton.
Sy^upus de Hyssopo. etc.
Against straightness of the Breast.
Confectio dulcis de moscho. Conserve of Maydenhayre. Diatragacantha calida.
Theriaca Galeni. Vnguentum Martiaton.
Against diseases of the Breast.
Diacameron. Dia^ragacantha fr^gida Syrup of Horehounde. Syrup of
Maydenhayre. Galens cerote ^^r ye stomach.
To cause boldness.
Triphera magna. Electuarium de gemmie.
Against g^^wing in the B^lly.
Antidotum Asincri^um. Mithridutum.
To keep the body strong.
Pilula luc^^ maiores. Ro^ata nouella. Syrupus ex ^nfusione rosarum. Theriac^
Galeni. Diasatyr^on.
Against spitting of blood.
Mithridatum Galeni. Antidotum Asincritum. Electua^ium Ind^um Maius. Emplast^^m
de granis Lauri. P^lulae qureae. Pilulae Foetida maiores. Pilulae sine quibus
esse nolo. Theriaca Galeni.
Against old Coughes of ^^mou^es.
Mythridatum. Pills of Agarike. Pilulae Bechitae. Loho h de Pino. Lohoch
sant^m. Syrup of Horehounde. Syrup of Mirtes. Syrup of Lysope.
Against (...) Cough.
Iu^ep of Violets. Syrup of Licuerice. Syrup of Violets. Syrup of Poppy
comp. Syrup of Iu^ubes.
Against the Cough of the L^n^es.
Antidotum Asin^ri^um. Diatragacantha frigida.
Against Coughes, which come of superfluous humors in ye stomach.
Aurea Alexandrina, Diamargaritum c^^idum. Diacam^ron. Diacalamintha. Dia^^eos.
Diapap^uer. Decoc^^o pectoralis. Lohoch (...). Lohoch de pulmone Vulpis. Syrup
of Calamintes.
Against (...) Crampe.
Mythridatum. Theriaca Galen^. Syrup o^ Sticados. (...) of Flowerdeluce.
Vnguetum (...). Vnguentum Aregon,
Against (...).
Mithridatum Andromach^. Theriaca Galen^. Vnguentum Aregon. Vnguentum
M^^^tat^m.
Against the (...).
Aster. Aurea Alexandrina. Diamargaritum calid^m. Diacameron. Dia^^odon
^bbatis. Diatragacan^ha fr^gid^. Mithridatum. Tria^andali. Lohoch de pulmone
Vulpis.
Against the Ca^k^^, ^ady part of the ^^dy.
Corfectio hamech.
Against all Aches, and dyseases of cold.
Oil of Bay. Oil of Spike. Oil of Cost. Oil of Cam^mill. Oil of
Flo^erdeli^^. Oil of Roses Oil of M^s^icke. Oil of Lillies. Vnguentum
Martiat^m mag^num. Vnguentum Aregon. Vnguent^m de Ali^ee.
Against (...) ^ut the Fu^dement, or ^^her places.
Oil of Myr^es. Pomatum.
To deliver Women of dead children.
Theriaca Galeni, etc.
To cause good cooller
Antidotum Asincritum. Electuarium de gemmis. Oleum de Costo. Trochis^i
Diarhodon. Hiera picra Galeni.
To purge Choler.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum rosatum. Conditum Cotoneorum. Confectio
Hamech. Diacurcuma. Conserve of Langdebeefe. Conserve of Borage. Conserve of
Maydenhayre. Conserve of Succory. Conserve of Sorell. Oxysaccharum simplex.
Electuarium de rosis. Electuarium de psillio. Pilulae sine qui^us esse nolo.
Pilulae de octo rebus.
For cold Complexions.
Diatragacantha frigida. Syrup of Endive. Trochisci de Rabarbaro. Syrupus de
acetositate citri. Syrupus de succo acetosae. Syrupus comp. de Fumiterra.
Syrupus acetosus comp.
To make good digestion.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum rosatum. Conditum cotoneorum. Diacuminum,
Diamber. Diacalamintha. Diatrion pipereon. Miua simplex. Pilulae ante cibum,
Oil of Mintes.
Against the Dropsy.
Diacameron. Diacurcuma. Emplastrum ceroneum. Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
Pilulae de Euphorbio. Theriaca Galeni. Trochisci de Eupatorio. Trochisci de
Rhabarbaro. Syrupus de eupatorio. Vnguentum Agrippae.
To clear the eye sight.
Diaprassium. Pilulae Cochiae rasis. Collirium album rasis. Hiera picra Galeni.
Pilulae sine quibus. Pilulae aureae. Pilulae de octo generibus mirobalanorum.
Against pain in the eyes.
Antidotum Asincritum. Mithridatum androm.
Against all manner of exulceracions.
Oil of Violets. Emplastrum de Cerusa. Theriaca Galeni. Trocisci de
alchachengi.
Against deafnes and pains of the Ears.
Mithridatum andromachi. Oil of sweet Almondes. Pilulae sine quibus esse
nolo.
Against the fauling evil.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina. Confectio dulcis de moscho. Syrup of
Sticados. Theriaca Galeni. Vnguentum Martiatum.
To purge phlegm.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacartami. Confectio Hamech Diatrion piperion. Conserve
of Rosemary. Conserve of Gladian. Conserve of Enulacampana Mel Rosatum. Pilulae
alephanginae. Pilulae faetidae maiores Pills of Euphorbe. Pilulae de
Sarcocolla.
To purge salt phlegm.
Syrupus comp. de Fumiterra.
To make a beutifull, and a fair face.
Oleum de tartare. Pomatum.
Against fluxes of the body.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diascoridion. Mithridatum andromachi. Mycleta. Miua
simplex. Oil of Roses. Syrupus de rosis siccis. Syrupus de agresta. Syrupus de
Acetositate. Syrup of Mintes.
Against the flux of meat undigested.
Mithridatum. Micleta. Oil of Mirtes. Syrup of Calamintes. Trochisci
Diacorallion.
Against the bloody flixe.
Diacodium Mesua. Mithridatum. Mycleta. Trochisci diacorallion.
To provoke ye me^struall terms.
Pilulae de Bdellio. Trochisci de terra Sigillata.
To stop the flux of a strong purgacion.
Electuarium confortatinu^ sto.
Against palenesse of the Face.
Hiera picra Galeni.
To cause new flesh.
Vnguentum Apostolicum.
To consume dead flesh.
Vnguentum Apostolicum. Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
Against old fistulayes.
Vnguentum Apostolicum. Vnguentum Aegyptiam.
Against the Gout of heat.
Electuarium de rosis. Pilulae Arthritica. Oil of wormwood. Oleum Lumbricorum.
Oleum Cherinum.
Against the Gout of cold.
Benedicta laxatiua. Electuarium indi Maioris. Mithridatum. Antidotum
Asincritum. Pilulae Fetidae maiores. O^le of Baye. Oil of Spike. Oil of
Flowerdelice. Oil of Mas^ike. Oil of Euphorbe. Vnguentum Martiaton. Vnguentum
Aregon.
Against the Gout in the feet only.
Antidotum Asincritum. Benedicta laxat. Mithridatum. Pilulae de quinque
generibus myr oba. Pilulae Faetidae maiores. Oleum Vulpinum. Vnguentum
martiaton.
Against gaulinges.
Emplastrum de Cerusa. O^le of Martes.
For Cliste^s.
Diacasia fis^ula pro Clist. Hi^ra picra Galen^
To comfort the heart.
Diaecorallium magistrate. Electuar^um de gemmis. Syrupus de acetosa. Theriaca
Galen^, Trochisci de Gallia moschata. Aromaticum rosa^um. Aromaticum
gariophillatum.
Conserve of Roses
Diambre. Diamargaritum calidum. Diarbodon a^ bati^.
To engender beete in the inward parts.
Aromaticum gariophillatum. Diacuminum. Dia^bre. Emplastrum stomachicum. Oil
of Rue.
Against ^remblinge of the heart.
Confectio de musco dulcis. Electuarium de gemmis Conserve of Borage. Conserve
of langdebiefe.
Against beat of the heart
Iulep of Roses. Iulep of Violets. Syrup of Violets. Syrup comp. of Endive.
Syrupus de infusione rosarum viridium. Sp^upus de succo acetosae.
Against horsenes.
Decoct^o pectoralis, Lohoc sanum. Oleum sesaminum. Syrup of Iuiubes.
Theriacum Galen^.
Against the Hickop.
Antidotum Asincritum Syrup of Mir^he.
Against falling of the Hair.
Oil of Baye Oil of C^ste.
Against ache in the hip.
Aurea Alexandrina. Pilulae fet^doe maiores. Pilulae d^ ^uinque generibus
miroballa. Oil of Bays. Oleum vulpinum. V^guentum mar^iaton. V^guentum
ar^g^num.
Against al manner of hardness
Mithridatum Oil of sweet Almondes. Oil of Baye. Oil of Mintes. Oil of
Holioke, Oleum Sesaminum. Oil of Flowerdelice. Oil of Mashke. Emplastrum
diachilon album. Emplastrum diachilon m^gnu^ Emplastrum de mucilaginibus
Emplastrum de meli^o^o Emplastrum de oxycroceum. Vnguentum apostolicum.
Vnguentum Marciaton.
To purge the head.
Pilulae aureae. Pilulae Cochiae.
Against old headache.
Antidotum asincritum. Pilulae Cachiae Raesis. Pilulae agregatiue.
Against headache of heat.
Electuarium de Rosis. Oil of Roses Oil of water Lillies. Oil of Poppie.
Vnguentum rosatum.
Against hedache of cold
Mithridatum. Aurea alexandrina. Oil of Dill. Oil of Spike. Oil of
Flowerdelice* Oleum de euphorbio. Vnguentum Martiato^
Against the Hemeroydes.
Mycleta. Pilulae de Bdellio.
To keep ye head from horenes.
Oil of Cost.
Against vermin and scurfe in the head
Oil of Baye. Oil of Lillies.
Against the yellow iaundice
Antidotum Asincritum. Diarhodon abbatis. Electuarium de r^bis. Syrupus de
Bizantinus. Theriaca galeni. Trochisci de Camphora. Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
Trochisci de eupatorio Triasandali.
Against Ilic^ passio.
Antidotum Asincritum. Theriaca galeni. Mithridatum Andromachi. Hiera picra.
Pilulae sine quibu^. Vnguentum martiaton.
Against inflamacions.
Antidotum As^ncritum. Cerotum stomachicum
Against hot impost^^es either in the stomach or liver
Carotum pro stomacho.
Against inwa^d impostumes.
Trochisci de rouburbar^. Trochisci de eupa^orio. Oleum violarum.
Against hot impostumes in the throat.
Diamoron (...).
To ripe impostumes.
Emplastrum diachilon magnu^ Emplastrum diachilon album. Oil of Flowerdelice.
Oil of Mastike.
Against incensibility
Mithridatum Theriaca galeni. etc.
Against inflamacions of Choler.
Conserve of Violets. Vnguentum rosatum.
Against pain of the liver,
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacurcuma. Pilulae aggregatiuae. Pilulae de euphorbio.
Trochisci de rubarbaro. Sirupe of Setrac
Against beat of the Liver.
Iulep of Roses. Iulep of violets. Electuarium catholicum. Mel violacum Sirupe
of Violets. Syrup comp. of Endive. Triasandali. Trochisci de spodio. Vnguentum
rosatum
Against coldness of the liver
Theriaca galeni. Diagalanga. Diarhodon abbatis, Trochisci de gallia moschata.
Trochisci de absinthio Trochisci de eupatorio. Emplastrum stomachicum. Oil of
Euphorbio. Syrupus de eupatorio. Syrupus de absinthio.
Against hardness of the liver.
Emplastrum diachilon album. Pilulae de euphorbio.
To make a man laxatiue.
Antidotum Asincritum* Hierapicr^ galeni. Conserve of violet^. Diacassia
fistula pro enematibus
Against danger of life
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacameron.
Against heat of the Lunges.
Diatragantha frigida. Diarodon abbatis Triasandali. Syrup of Violets. Syrup
of Endive. Syrup of comp. Endive. Syrupus de infusione rosarum. viridium.
Against coldness of the Lunges.
Confectio dulcis de Musco. Conserve of Maidenhaire. Theriaca Galeni. Tr^chisci
de absinthio,
Against dryues of the Lunges
Oil of sweet Almondes. Syrup of Liquorice.
Against the Leprie,
Confectio hamach. Theriaca galeni. Trochisci Theriaci Pilulae faetidae
maiores.
Against the Mesels
Theriaca galeni
Against madness.
Aurea Alexandrina Diasene.
Against the mother.
Antidotum Asincritum
To assuage pain of the Matrice.
Emplastrum de granis lauri. Oil of sweet Almondes. Trifera.
Against cold diseases
Antidotum Asincritum Diambre Electuarium de gemmis Oil of Lillies* Emplastrum
pro matrice. Emplastrum Ceroneum Oil of Flowerdelice. Oil of wormwood.
To cause mirth.
Diambre. Diamargar^tum calidum Diacameron* Diasene Electuarium de gemmis.
Conserve of Borage Syrup of L^ngdebief.
To purge melancholy.
Antidotum Asincritum. Alipta muschata* Confectio dulcis de musco. Diasene.
Mithridatum. Syrupus de epithi^o. Conserve of Roses. Conserve of Maidenhaire.
Conserve of Succorie Conserve of Langdebeef. Conserve of Rosemarie. Conserve of
Borage, Pilule sine quibus. Pilulae de lapide Lazuli, Pilulae aggregatiu^.
Pilulae lucis maioris. Trochisci de absinthio. Trochisci de eupatorio.
Against all diseases about the Midryffe.
Mithridatum Theriaca galeni. Pilulae Cochiae Rasis. Oil of Spike Oil of
Euphorbe
Against soarnes in ye mouth
Diamorou potio Mithridatum Cleo.
Against b^eeding at the nose.
Trochisci de terrae sigillata. Trochisci de Carabae.
Against stench at the nose
Oil of Flowerdelice.
Against writhing of the neck on the one side.
Confectio dulcis de moscho. Syrup of Sticados
Against obstructions.
Oil of bitter almondes Oil of Cost Oil of Dill, Oil of Camomill, Oil of
Flowerdelice. Oil of wormwood. Oleum de Chieri. Syrupus de radicionibus.
Syrup of Bizantes. Syrup comp. of Endive. Syrup of Maidenhayre. Syrup of
Ceterac. Trochisci de Rabarbaro. Trochisci de Eupatorio. Trochisci de
absynthio.
To cause good Odor and savor.
Electuarium de gemmis. Oil of Cost.
To comfort the principal parts.
Aromaticum rosatum. Aromaticum gariophillatum. Electuarium confortans
Stomachum. Diamber. Diamargaritum calidum. Miua simplex. Syrup comp. of
Fumiterre. Syrup of Buglosse. Electuarium indium maiu^. Conserve of Roses.
Syrup of Calamintes. Oil of Cost. Oil of Mastike. Oil of Quinces.
Against the dryness of the principal parts.
Oil of sweet Almondes
To mollify the pryncipall parts.
Conserve of Roses.
Against the Paulsie.
Antidotum Asincritum. Confectio dulcis de moscho. Mythridatum. Pilulae de
Euphorbio. Syrup of Sticados. Vnguentum Martiaton.
Against the Plurisie.
Diatragacantha frigida. Syrup of Violets. Iulep of Violets. Lohoc of Squilla.
Conserve of Maydenhayre. Oil of Violets. Syrup of Liquerice. Syrup of
Hysope. Syrup of Endive. Syrup of Iuiubes. Vnguentum de Althea.
To purge the wind pipe of gross humors.
Diaprassium. Theri^ca Galeni. Lohoch de Squilla. Lohoch sanum. Syrup of
Liquerice. Syrupus de acetosus comp.
Against the Pestilence or Poison.
Theriaca Galeni. Mithridatum. Puluis contra pestem. Syrupus de acetositate
citri. Syrupus ex acetosa. Syrupus ex infusione. Rosarum viridium. Oil of
Scorpions.
Against Pimples, or Wheales.
Oil of Myrtes.
Parfumes.
Confectio dulcis de moscho.
Against reumes.
Aurea Alexandrina. Antidotum Asincritum. Mithridatu^. Diaprassion. Syrup of
Sticados. Syrup simp. of Popy. Oil of Rue.
To purge the Raynes of gravel.
Antidotum Asincritum. Benedicta laxa. Oximel diureticum. Syrupus acetosus
comp. Syrup of Maydenhayre. Syrup of Cettrac.
Against pain in the Raynes
Aurea Alexandrina. Mythridatum. Diacameron. Diacurcuma. Electuarium indi
maioris. Oleum de euphorbio. Oleum de cheiri. Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
Against Ringwormes.
Confectio hamech. Oleum de Tartaro.
To comfort the stomach.
Theriaca Galeni. Diacorallium magistrale. Diamargaritum calidum. Diaprasium.
Diagalanga. Aromaticum Rosatum. Aromaticum garyophillatum. Trochisci de gallia
muschata. Trochisci de Alchachengi. Mythridatum. Miua simplex. Electuarium
confortatiuum stomachium. Electuarium de gemmis. Electuarium Indi Maioris.
Emplastrum stomachicum. Syrup of Mirtes. Syrup of sticados. Syrup of
Wormwood. Syrup of Langdebeefe. Syrup of Quinces. Syrup of dry Roses.
Conserve of Langdebeefe. Conserve of Enulacampana. Conditum Cotoncorum. Oil of
Cost.
To purge ye stomach of gross humors
Hiera picra Galeni. Pilulae Faetidae maiores. Pilulae lucis maiores. Pilulae
de Sarcocolla. Pilulae stomachiae. Pilulae agarico. Oximel simplex. Oximel
scilliticum. Emplastrum ceroneum. Theriaca Galeni. Syrup of Hysope. Syrup of
Maydenhayre. Syrup of Horehounde. Syrupus acetosus compo. Syrupus de
limonibus.
Against heat and burning of the stomach.
Trochisci de Spodio. Trochisci de camphora. Diarhodon abbatis. Triasandali.
Syrupus de succo acctosae. Iulep of Roses. Vnguentum rosatum.
Against coldness of the stomach.
Syrup of Mintes. Syrup of Calamintes. Oil of Wormwood. Vnguentum de
Altheae.
Against hardness of the stomach.
Pilulae de Euphorbio. Emplastrum Diachilon album
Against pain of the stomach.
Emplastrum de granis Lauri. Emplastrum ceroneum. Pilulae Faetidae maiores.
Pilulae Agregatiuae. Trisera.
Against Dyseases of the Spl^ne.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacurcuma. Electuarium catholicum. Pilulae de quinque
generibus myroba. Syrup of Calamintes. Syrupus de acetosa simplex. Oleum de
euphorbio.
Against hardness of ye spleen
Trochisci de absynthio. Trochisci de eupatorio. Emplastrum meliloti.
Emplastrum diachilon album. Emplastrum ceroneum. Vnguentum marciaton.
Against Sighing.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diamargar^tum Calidum.
To cause the spittie to avoid.
Antidotum Asincritum. Syrup of Pyne aples. Lohoch de Squilla.
To restore the Speech.
Diaireos.
To break the stone.
Aurea Alexandrina. Theriaca Galeni. Mythridatum. Oleum de Scorpione.
Against the Strangution.
Aurea Alexandrina.
Against sounding* and faynting of the heart.
Diamargaritum calidum. Diasene cum Manna. Aurea Alexandrina. Syrup of
Langdebeefe. Conserve of Borage.
To provoke sweat.
Oil of Dill, and other hot Oils.
To prohibit ouermutch sweating.
Rosata nouella. Oil of Quinces. Oil of Mirtes.
To cause a man to sleep.
Diapapauer. Syrup of Popie. Oil of flowers of Popie. Oil of Dill. Oil of
Nenuphar.
For Ch^ldren, which cannot keep, or do speak in their sleep
Trifera.
Against Strangurion.
Diamoron potio. etc. Venice Terebi^tine.
Against the Scabbes.
Confectio Hamech. Oil of Baye. Vngue^tum pro pueris scabiosis. Vnguentum
contra sca^i^^
To purge the instruments of the Senses^
Pilula Alephaginae. Pilulae Agregatiuae, Pilulae lucis maiores. Therica
Galeni.
Against the squinancy.
Mithridatum.
Against the stiffness of the inward Members.
Mithridatum Andromachi. Conserve of Rosemary.
To mollify and ripe al swellings
Diachilon paru^m. Emplastrum de granis Lauri. Emplastrum Diachilon album Oil
of Flowerdelice. Vnguentum Apostolicum. Vnguentum Agrippae.
To increase seed.
Oil of sweet Almondes Oleum Sesaminum.
Against the sleep or forgetful diseases.
Oleum de euphorbio.
Against deep diseases in the Synewes.
Syrup of Sticados. Oil of Quinces. Oil of Mastike. Vnguentum agrippae.
Against cold diseases of the Synewes.
Oil of Euphorbe. Oleum Lumbricorum. Oleum de cheru. Pills of Euphorbe.
Against shootinge of humors.
Emplastrum palmeum.
Against great, and cold soars.
Tela Gualterij. Emplastrum de cerusa. Emplastrum de minio. Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum.
To dry up soars and By^es.
Emplastru^ Desiccatiuu^ rubeu^. Vnguentum Apostolorum. etc.
To quench the thyrst.
Trochisci de camphora. Trochisci de Spodio. Rosata nouella. Syrupus de
infusione rosarum viridium. Syrup of Quinces. Syrup of white Popie. Syrupus
de acetositate citri. Mel violatum. Iulep of Roses. Conserve of Violets.
Against the fallinge sickness.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina, Confectio de moscho. Electuarium de
rosis. Electuarium de psilio.
Against the tooth ache
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina. Mithridatum. Diaprassium. Pilulae de
Hiera simplici.
Against roughness of the Tongue.
Diatragacantha frigida Diamoron potio. Syrup of Violets. Iulep of Violets.
Oleum sesaminum. Oil of sweet Almondes. Oil of Violets.
Against shortness of wind.
Antidotum Asincritum. Mythridatum. Confectio dulcis de moscho. Alipta
muschata. Diaireos. Diacameron. Syrup of Calamintes. Theriaca Galeni. Pills
of Agarike. Syrup of Horehounde. Syrup of Hysope. Syrupus de pino. Lohoch de
Squilla. Lohoch de papauere. etc.
To break wind.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum gariophillatum. Pilulae aureae. Diagalanga.
Diacurcuma. Electuarium indum maius. Syrupus de eupatorio Oil of sweet
Almondes.
To stop vomiting.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum gariophillatum. Miua simplex. Rosata nouella.
Syrup of Mintes. Syrup of Quinces. Oil of Mintes.
To cure the disposicion to vomiting, which is wha^ a man would vomit and
cannot.
Aromaticum gariophillatum. Miua simplex. Rosata nouella. Syrup of Mintes.
To provoke vr^ne.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina. Diacurcuma. Diacassia cum Manna.
Diasatyrion. Oximel diureticum. Vnguentum agrippae.
To provoke Venus.
Diasatyrion. etc.
To heat wounds.
Balsamum artificiale. Emplastrum palmeum. Vnguentum Apostolorum.
To scour and cleanse wounds.
Tela Gualterij. Vnguentu^ Apostolico^ Auicen^ Vnguentum Basilicum. Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum.
Aagaynst Worms in the Belly.
Puluis contra Lumbricos. Syrup of Limons. Oil of Wormwood. Hiera picra
Galeni. Mithridatum. etc. Vnguentum contra Lu^bricos.


And thus I have ended the notes of the Co^poundes, with Common seeds. etc.


Sickness. What be the names of the Compoundes, and in what leaves may I find
them, I pray you tell me?


Health. First I will begin at the letter A. etc. A.
ALypta Moscata. Fol. 1 Asincritum, a goodly Antidotarie, of singular virtue.
Ibidem Aromaticum Rosatum. Ibidem Aurea Alexandrina. 2 Aromaticum
gariophillatum. Ibidem Acatia. Ibidem Aurilj. Ibidem Aqua odorifera. 3
Apophlegmatismi, to draw fleame from the head. 40
B.
BEnedicta laxati. Fol. 3 Balsamum artificial. Ibidem
C.
COnfectio dulcis. Fol. Ibidem Confectio Hamech. Ibidem Cerotum stomachale.
Ibidem Confection for the Eyes. Ibidem Conserve of Buglosse. Ibidem Conserve of
Rosemary. 4 Conserve of Borage, and Buglosse. Ibidem Conserve of Roses. Ibidem
Conserve of Uiolets. Ibidem Conserve of Maydenhayre. Ibidem Conserve of Gladen.
Ibidem Conserve of Enulacampana. Ibidem Conserve of Succory. Ibidem Conserve of
Sorrel. Ibidem Conserve of Diagalanga. Ibidem Collyria, and sief. 38 Cerot,
how to make it. 37
D.
DIaciminum nicolai. Fol. 4. Diambra mesuae. 5 Diamargariton Calidum. Ibidem
Diamargariton frigidum. Ibidem Diathamaron, of D^tes. Ibidem Diarhodon Abbatis.
Ibidem Diacalamintha. Ibidem Diatrion pipereon. Ibidem Diaireos Salomonis.
Ibidem Diatragagantha Frigida. 6 Diacameron. Ibidem Diacodium. Ibidem
Diaprassium. Ibidem Diapapauer. Ibidem Diacurcuma. 7 Diasatyrion. Ibidem
Diaprunum. Ibidem Diaphaenicon. Ibidem Diacarthamum. Ibidem Diacorallium
magistrale. Ibidem Diacassia fistula. 8 Diasene. Ibidem Decoctio communis.
Ibidem Dropax. 37
E.
ELectuarium Catholicum. Ibidem Electuarium Rosatum. Ibidem Electuarium de
Psillio. Ibidem Electuarium indi maioris. 9 Electuarium stomachi. Ibidem
Electuarium de gemmis. Ibidem Emplastrum Diachilon album. Ibidem Emplastrum
diachilon magnum. Ibidem Emplastrum de mucilaginibus. Ibidem Emplastrum pro
stomacho. 10 Emplastrum de granis lauri. Ibidem Emplastrum meliloti. Ibidem
Emplastrum Caroneum. Ibidem Emplastrum oxicroceum. Ibidem Emplastrum de Ianua.
Ibidem Emplastrum contra rupturas. 11 Emplastrum de gratia dej. Ibidem
Emplastrum pro dolor matricis. Ibidem Emplastrum diuinum. Ibidem Emplastrum de
minio. Ibidem Emplastrum de Cerusa. Ibidem Emplastrum Palmeum. Ibidem
Emplastrum triapharmacum. Ibidem Epithema. 34 Emplastrum desiccatiuum rubrum.
Ibide^
F.
FRontall for the head. Fol. 35 Fomentum. 37
G.
GLis^ers. Fol. 38 Gargarisme. 35
H.
Hiera picra Galenj. Fol. 12
I,
IUlep of Uiolets. Ibidem Iulep of Roses. Ibidem Insessus, used for a stone. 37
L.
LOch de Pino. Ibidem Loch de Squilla. Ibidem Loch sanum. Ibidem Loch de
Caulibus. Ibidem Loch de pulmone vulpis. Ibidem Liniment. 35
M.
MIthridatum manardj. Fol. 15 Mithridatum, very noble against poison. 39
Myeleta. 13 Miua simplex aromatica. Ibidem Mel Rosarum. Ibidem Mel Violarum. 14
Mel Anthosatum. Ibidem Manus Christi. Ibidem
N.
Nasalia for the Nose. Fol. 35
O.
OXimel simplex. Fol. Ibidem Oximel diureticum. Ibidem Oximel Squilliticum.
Ibidem Oxisaccharum simplex. Ibidem Oxisaccharum compositum. Ibidem Oil of
sweet Almondes. Ibidem Oil of bitter Almondes. Ibidem Oil of Bay. 15 Oil of
Sesaminum. Ibidem Oil of Spike. Ibidem Oil of Cost. Ibidem Oil of Rue.
Ibidem Oil of Dill. Ibidem Oil of Camomill. Ibidem Oil of Myrtes. Ibidem
Oil of Flowerdelice. 16 Oil of Roses. Ibidem Oil of Uyolets. Ibidem Oil of
Quinces. Ibidem Oil of Masticke. Ibidem Oleum Gastorej. Ibidem Oleum de
Euphorbio. Ibidem Oleum vulpinum. 17 Oleum de Tartaro. Ibidem Oleum Scorpionum.
Ibidem Oil of garden Lillies. Ibidem Oleum de papauere. Ibidem Oleum
nimpheatum album. Ibidem Oleum Menthae. Ibidem Oil of Wormwood. Ibidem Oleum
bumbricorum. Ibidem Oleum Violaceum albu^, or Hearts ease. 18
P.
POmander. Fol. Ibidem Pou^er of Uiolets. Ibidem Puluis contra pestem. Ibidem
Puluis de bolo armenio. Ibidem Puluis contra Lumbricos. 19 Puluis Bezoardicus.
Ibidem Penidies. Ibidem Pignolatum. Ibidem Pilulae fine quibus esse nolo.
Ibidem Pilulae Aureae. Ibidem Pilulae Cochiae. Ibidem Pilulae de octo rebus.
Ibidem Pilulae de Mirobalans. 20 Pilulae Elephanginae. Ibidem Pilulae
Aggregatiue. Ibidem Pil^es of Rubarbe. Ibidem Pilulae de sarcocolla. Ibidem
Pilulae faetidae maiores. Ibide^ Pilulae de Euphorbio. Ibidem Pilulae lucis
maiores. Ibidem Pilulae lucis minoris. 2^ Pilulae de lapide Lazul^. Ibidem
Pilulae de Bdellio. Ibidem Pilulae de Hermodactylis. Ibidem Pilulae
Arthriticae. Ibidem Pilulae stomachiae. Ibidem Pilulae ante cibum. Ibidem
Pills of Agarike, or Agarici. Ibidem Pills of Fumiterre. Ibidem Pilulae
Communes. 22 Pilulae de Assaieret. Ibidem Pilulae Bichicae. Ibidem Pilulae
imperiales. Ibidem Pilulae de Hiera picra. Ibidem Pomatum. 33 Pessis. 36
Pockes, how to heal the^, with.viij. things considered. Fol. 42. and.43
R.
Rosata nouella. Fol. 23
S.
SYrupus de Acet^sitate citri. Ibidem Syrupus de Acetosa. Simpl. Ibidem Syrupus
de Agresta. labru^ea^, or unripe Grapes^ Ibidem Syrup of Calamints or of
Calamente* ib. Syrup de Menta. Ibidem Syrupus de Absinthio. 34 Syrup of
Fumitery. Ibidem Syrupus de Fumoterrae simplex. Ibidem Syrup of Liquerice.
Ibidem Syrup of Hysope. Ibidem Syrupus de Marrubio. Ibidem Syrupus de
Epithymo. 25 Syrupus de Eupatorio. Ibidem Syrup of Sticados. Ibidem Syrupus de
Violis, or Uiolets. Ibidem Syrup. de Papauers simp. or Poppy* Ibide^ Syrupus de
Papauere compositus. Ibidem Syrup of Myrtes comp. Ibidem Syrup of Myrtes
simp. 26 Syrup of Acetosus simplex, Ibidem Syrupus Acetosus compositus. Ibidem
Syrup. de succo Endiuiae, or Endive sim. ib* Syrup of Endive compositus Ibidem
Syrup of Suckery, or Cich^ri^. Ibidem Syrup of Quinces. Ibidem Syrup of
Nenuphar, or water Lillies. I^. Syrup of Barberies. 27 Syrup of tarte
Pomegra^ets. Ibidem Syrupus de Bizantijs. Ibidem Sirupus de infusione Rosarum
viridium, or greede Roses. Ibidem Syrupus de Rosis siccis, or dried Roses. i^.
Syrupus de succo Rosarum. Ibidem Syrupus de Iuiubis. Ibidem Syrup of
Maidenhayre comp. Ibidem Syrup of Maydenhayre simp. Ibidem Syrup of the same.
Ibidem Syrup of Mugworte. Ibidem Syrupus de Limonibus. 28 Syrupus de Cetrach.
Ibidem Syrup of Buglosse. Ibidem Syrup of the same. Ibidem Sapo Moschato.
Ibidem Sugar Roset. 34 Sacculum, or scutum. 36
T.
THeriaca Galenj. Fol. 2^ Trifera sarasenica. Ibidem Trochisci Diarhodon
abbatis. 29 Trochisci de Violis. Ibidem Trochisc de Squilla. Ibidem Trochisci
de Theriaci. Ibidem Trochisci diacorallion* Ibidem Trochisci de Camphora.
Ibidem Trochisci de Alchachengj. Ibidem Trochisci de Myrrha. Ibidem Trochisci
de Moscho. Ibidem Trochisci de Rubarbaro. Ibidem Trochisci de Spodio. Ibidem
Trochisci de Absinthio. Ibidem Trochisci de Eupatorio. Ibidem Trochisci de
terra sigillata. Ibidem Trochisci de Ambra. Ibidem Tela Galterij. Ibidem
V
VNguentum Apostolicum. 31 Vnguentum Rorarum. Ibidem Vnguentum basilicum maius.
Ibidem Vnguentum Aureum. Ibidem Vnguentum basilicum minus. Ibidem Vnguentum
populeon. Ibidem Vnguentum martiaton. Ibidem Vnguentum Aregon. Ibidem Vnguentum
Dialthea. 32 Vnguentum Agrippae. Ibidem Vnguentum Diapompholigos. Ibidem
Vnguentum de Enulacampana. Ibidem Vnguentum contra scabiem. Ibidem Vnguentum
pro pueris scabiosis. Ibidem Vnguentum desiccatiuum Rubrum. 33 Vnguentum contra
lumbricos. Ibidem Vnguentum Resumptiuum. Ibidem Vnguentum Album. Ibidem
Vnguentum Matritum. Ibidem Vnguentum Aegyptiacum. Ibidem Vnguentum Citrinum.
Ibidem Vnguentum Neapolitanum. Ibidem Another Vnguentum. etc. Ibidem Vnguentum
Galeni. 34 Vnguentum pro Combustione ignis, to heal white fire. Ibidem
U^pours, and Parfumes. 39
VV
WAter for soar Eyes. Fol. 37 Water for the Web. 38 Water of Furnerius for
Cankers. Ibide^ Water most sweet. Ibide^ Water to make sleep. 40 Water for
the Palsy. Ibide^ Waters composed. 41 Water of Quintessence. Ibidem Water of
life, called Aqua vitae. 42 Water to kill the Canker, by sir Anthony Heuenigham
Knight. Ibidem


And thus end the names of Compoundes.

The end of the Book of Compoundes, and here after follows the Book of the
use of certain Compoundes.


Sickness. NOw you have endded your Table, with ye names of compou^des There are
certain words, very hard for me to understand, as when you do name
Apophlegmatismus, Dropax, Liniment. etc. I know not what they do mean, by
their proper names: I pray you tell me the significations.


Health. WHen you come to Apophlegmatismus, it is a singular good medicine to
purge phlegm by vomit, or else to draw from ye head, ^uill and gross
humors, and is used sometime, as I have rehearsed in the proper place of
Apophlegmatismus, before spoken.

And by mixture understand, what sundry Confections, and Electuaries, be
mingled together, to be taken in the morning, or else three hours before
repaste of meat and drink, to purge choler. etc.

Confectura, is a medicine mingled of Simples, or some meat dygested: as cibus
confectus, meat digested. There are sundry confections, as Confectio Hamech.
etc.

Electu^rium is commonly known, made moist with Honey, Sugar, and pouders for
to cleanse humors, being taken in the morninge, in Bolo, that is in the same
mass, rolled with Sugar, or else in Potione, or drunk with waters, according to
the complexion: as to the chollerick least, and most to the Melancholy person*
by the r^ason of his earthly nature. And of Electuries be diverse, and of sundry
inventions, as Rasis made one for an Heathen king, whose name was Almansor. To
this king he writes mutch, concerning bodyly health, and to put away
pensiuenes, heaviness, and Melancholy, he made Elestuarium Laetificans Rasis.

Electuarium de succo Rosarum of Roses, Electuarium frigidum Cophonis of one
called Cophe. Read of this man, and many mo, in the work of Mesue.

Electuarium gemmarum of precious stones. etc. with many mo worthy Electuaries,
profitable for mankind: some warming, and some cooling. etc.

Tragea, are sundry pleasant pouders, mingled together, which are cast upon
delicate mea^es, or put in Wine against cold in the Stomach, or Collicke,
wholesome for the Melancholy, or Phlegmatic body, which is cold or wyndy.

Conserve is known, as of Prunes, Barberies. etc. and will conserve and keep
the strayned fruictes, wherein spices with Sugar, and sometime sweet waters
are sodden together, to make it both to last in it self, and pleasure mutch
the receiver, which shall eat thereof, Morning, and Evening. Also young
fruictes, as Nuttes, Pears. etc. and flowers may be conserved, preserved, and
condited in Syrupes. Keeping their form, and goodness, with mutch virtue.

Trifera sa^acenica against frensy, Melancholy, and coldness. etc. was inverted
of the Saracens, to be drunk in wine.

Esdra was made by Esdras ye holy man, when the people of Israel were in
captivity, in great mysery and affliction of mind: this was the bodyly remedy
for all the pains of the head, coming of cold.

Aurea Alexandria was made in Alexandria, and used for the singular virtue
against cold reumes, and to comfort the brain: like as gold excels al other
metals in riches, so does this al other in virtue.

Lohoch is a pleasant thing, as Lohoch Sanum, Lohoch de Pino. etc. This Lohoch
is to lick or melt under the tongue, against pains in the throat, and
Lunges, and is good to help the cough.

Syrup of Liquorice, Horehound. etc. are made Simple or compound, to be taken
a morninges and eueninges, some be hot and some be cold.

Rob is a certain thing made hard, and put into medecines: there is Dia rob,
very wholesome for the liver, and put into medecines for the mouth as in
gargarisme.

Decoction is a drink most wholesome to cleanse the body, or to restrain, or
else may be put in Clisters either to purge or stop according to* the
nature of the sickness. When ye will purge, take opening seeds, leaves Barks,
roots, etc. with Sugar, and sees them, then strain them through a clean
woollen cloth, add to Sugar: and let the pacient drink a morninges, two or
three days. And when you stop decocte Planten, Shepherdes purse, gum
Arabike. etc. strayn it and drink it morning and evening. Note also that
Syrupes and decoctions be best new, specially the decoction which will not last
long.

Iulep is not sodden so thick as a syrup, but is clear made with sondery
good waters and clean Sugar, and is wholesome for the Liver, as of ye waters of
Cicory, Endive or Syrupes and waters together. Infus^on, is when the
Apothecaryes do for twelve or xxiiii. hours, put purging medecines in Water,
as Rhabarbe, Agarike, Succo rosa^um etc. and then strain them forth to drink
and purge in the morning.

Trochisces are many, as of Cappers, Wormwood, Rhabarbe etc. and are dry like
small tablemen, used in medecines, beaten into powder and may be long kept.

Sufuf is a goodly Aromatike powder, made of spyces as Galanga. etc.

Sief is made for sore eyes, white and hard in the form of a little Sugar
lofe, but scant an ynch long, which must be steped in Rose Water, and women's
milk, to be applied to the eyes, to help them.

Collyrium is made of Sief, when it is soft, or dissolved for sore eyes.

Pills are of sundry kinds and natures, of great strength and virtue, to
expulse evil matter, and may be taken at evening morning, and Ante cibum:
according to their natures as I have written. But old Pills are dangerous new,
are good, how be it, perilous for very fat bodies. There are also Pills
restrayning, or stopping, as for flixes.

Suffimentum* is sundry pouders for women, cast upon coals, whose smoke does
subtly pass into the body, or matrix, and sometime for men.

Nasalia are wholesome things to be put into the nose, to comfort the brayn and
stop the bleeding at the nose

Frontasia are good to reconcile sleep, to be applied to the forehed, ye length
twelve inches.

Masticatorium, to champe upon, to draw forth phlegm from the head and to
cleanse the teeth.

Gargarismus, is to gargle in the mouth, not to swallow it down, to cleanse the
mouth, throat, and teeth, put in warm to.

Glyster is ministered beneath, and are of sundry kinds: relaxyng, bindyng and
restoryng, and must be ministered, neither to cold, for Wind, nor to hoate,
for excoriation or skaldyng, But temperate to cleanse and work his proper
effect. Clisters are good for the stone, and when one can take no Purgacion by
the mouth, Clisters are most best.

Athanasia is so named, because it is so excellent in goodness, against the
immoderate flux menstruall in women, it is called a medicine immortal: of
which I shall speak of more, in a particular Book by it self God willing.

Epithema, is used inwardly for the Liver, and also fine Wolle, or raw silk
quilted, and steeped in waters and pouders, accordyngly. Scarlet in Grain, is
wholesome for the same purpose.

Liniment is made to anoint, or make soft, having no wax therein.

Pess^s is made to be applied, into the secret place of a woman, to help the
euilles of the Matrix.

Sac^ulum is a bag or quylte, wherein Spytes cordial, with wholesome herbs
are put in, and made warm with wine, vinegar, or sweet Water, and so applied
to the stomachs of sick folks.

Cerot is made of Wax, Spyte, and Oil, spread upon leather, and applied to the
breast. etc. as Cerotum Galenj pro stomacho.

Insessus is sweet herbs sodden in sweet Water and wine, in which the
pacient must sit at even.

Suppositor, is to put under in at the Fundament, for to relaxe the Bellies of
weak bodies.

Fomentum is to wash the sore body with herbs, which must be mutch sodden,
and applied to the sore place. etc.

Dropax is good for skalde heads, to cleanse them: and for Women that would have
high foreheads, against Nature. For a Dropax will pull of the hair.

Emplastrum is commonly known, and is grossye made of herbs, Spices etc. and
warm to be applied to the sore, or payned place of the body.

Frication, is rubbing or chafyng of the body, with warm Clothes in the
morning.

Dentifricium, is made of things to cleanse the Teeth, and make them white: as
with dried Mallow roots etc.

With many more pretty and apt notes of Medicines, but these shall suffyce for
man's health: which the preparers of medycines, must wisely mark and observe,
with these xxi. notes following. i. Must first serve God, forsee the end, be
clenly, pity the poor. ii^ Must not be suborned for money, to hurt mankind.
iii^ His place of dwelling and shop to be clenly to please ye senses wtall iiii
His garden must be at hand, with plenty of herbs, seeds and roots v To sow,
set, plant, gather, preserve and keep them in due time. vi. To read
Dioscorides, to know ye natures of plants and herbs. etc. vii To invent
medecines to chose by color* taste, odor, figure etc. viii To have his
morters, stilles, pottes, filters, glasses, boxes clean and sweet, etc. ix.
To have Charcoles at hand, to make decoctions, syrupes. etc. x. To keep his
clean wares closse, and cast away the baggage, xi^ To have two places in his
shop, one most clean for the Phisik and a baser place, Thapoticarye.
for Chirurgie stuff. xii That he neither increase, nor diminish the
Phisicions bill, and keep it for his own discharge. xiii That he neither buy
nor sell rotten drugges, xiiii That he peruse often his wares, that they corrupt
not. xv That he put not in quid pro quo, without aduysement, xvi That he may
open well a vein for to help the pl^uresy. xvii. That he meddle only in his
vocacion. xviii. That he delight to reed Nicolaus Myrepsus, Valerius Cordus,
Johannes Placaton, the Lubik. etc. xix That he do remember his office. is only
to be ye Phisicia^s Co^ke. xx That he use true measure and weight. xxi To
remember his end, and the judgment of God: and thus I do comend him to god, i^
he be not covetous, or crafty seki^g his own lucre, before other men's health,
succor and comfort.



Sickness. I Assure you if the Apothicary do godly observe these plain rules,
he can not do amiss: but shall please almighty God, profit the common wealth
in his calling. Finally quiet his conscience, and live well. I pray you show
unto me a little of the wayghtes and measures, and so make an end of this part
which is of medicines.


Health. IF I should speak much of weight and m^^sure, that I could not well
do, without I should allege the learned man Georgius Agricola, de mensuris and
ponderibus, who makes the distinction of all the measures of this world, of
every age and people. Who I do wish that you do often times read and for this
present time let this suffice for weight, as fol^oweth, for this little book
passed be fore.

The whighte of A pound. li. An ounce. A dragme.. A scruple. A Grain. G
The weight of of each part, ana. A quarter, q. Half. ss. A handful. M.


Note also that the Apoticaryes, do deuyde a pound thus.
li..xii..i..viii..iii..i. G. xx.

Further there is a measure called Pugillum, or a little handful, noted thus.
Another note for wayghtes and measures.
P

And ever measure your Herbs by the handeful. M. your Flowers by the. P.

Your roots and seeds by weight.... etc, But sometime the roots are used in
number, as in decoction. etc.

The liquorice and pouders, by wayght, as the seeds.

Fruits are used in number, as Apples, Prunes, Mirobalans etc. not by wayght,
as.. li. but i.ii.iii iiii.v. etc.

Also when you do come to decoction, or seething of your things: Consider that
you first have pure clean vessels, as Iron or stone, avoid stinking brass, as
much as you may, and prepare white metal to make in your decoctions, with very
clean water: then you must have your roots clean scraped and sodden. Why the
roots first? Mary because they be harder, then any other thing in see thing
or decoction* Why roots are first sodde^ in* decoction. and whiflowers are
last put in decoction.
therefore they had need of much seething to make them tender, next after them
put in your seeds. And last of al your Flowers or Seen leaves, for because
they be tender, and will quickly pass away by smoke vapor and air: let it
sees neither upon a sharp quick fire, nor upon a slow, but upon a mean,
unless it require much have. But after the seething let it stand by, in some
convenient place: and then strain the same Decoction, through a clean white
Woollen, or Skarlet in grain cloth, and so reserve it to use of Medecin.

Suppositours must be made of Honye, sodden to a thicknes and tempered with a
stick, How to make Suppositers.
and when it is almost sodden, then put your Salt, and Hiera picra Simplex
when your Honye is almost thick, or else the Hiera will lose his strength, then
roll it with butter in the form of a spindle, smaller at one end, then at the
other in length, according to the body as a Finger, two fyngers in length.

Clisters you have the making of them before, but because trouble and time has
prevented me, Clisters.
I cold not doo^ so mutch in Clisters. etc. as by Gods grace. I do intend
hereafter. Therefore I commend thee to Nicholaus Myrepsus. V. Cordus. I.
Placatom, and also to one of this time of little fame because he has written
but a little book, but yet this work is excellent good for a Poticary, his
name is Petrus Gorias Bitriscensis. Note also, that you must have your Clister
pipe, and bladders in store, to minister the Clisters, neither very hot nor
cold, for fear of wynd, or scalding in the guts. Also I have said before,
your Clisters must be first of decoction with your roots, then seeds, last
Seen, then strayned, and so your Oils and Hiera picra etc. with a little
recoction, and so given a pint. etc. Even so there be Clisters restrayning and
stopping etc.

Syrupes some be Simple, that is made of one thing, puttyng there unto Sugar,
Syrupes, simple and co^pou^de,
or honey, and this Syrup is made of the juice of Herbs, or fruits as Borage
etc. Either the juice is stamped and strayned, and clarifyed or else the herb
is sodden in water, until the water be consumed to the third part, then
strain it, and put the decoction again into the Kettell, or Pan, and recocte
it again, putting in the Sugar, compounded with sundry Syrupes, as Grossery,
as Spyces, and Seeds, are decocted, and sodden together.

Iuleps must be sodden but lightly, made thin and clear, and are made of
Uyolets, Roses, or Syrupes, and Waters together.

Infusion must stand all the night together, as Agarike, Rubarbe, Seen etc. and
stilled water, and in the morning strongly pressed forth into a clean vessel,
to the use of potion, to purge.

A stone of Marble must be prepared, to cast Manus Christi, or Lozinges upon:
which Lozinges must be made of Sugar, put into the Pan with Rose or sweet water,
sodden to a thickness, and when it is so thick, that a drop thereof will be
clear, like Uenice Terebintyne, then put in your Cordial pouders, or Dias,
stirring it with a stick, cast it abroad upon your stone. Note also, that
your stone be either anointed, with Oil of Almondes, or else sifted over with
ye powder of Cinnamon, whereby you may take up your Table, to make your
Lozenges* The names and quantities of them, are before rehearsed in the
Compoundes.

Electuarium must be sodden thick, and kept cloase, as Electuarium de succo
Rosarum. etc. and..j. of any Electuary, is sufficient to be taken at once in
the morning, with distilled waters accordingly.

Pills..j. made in five, or seven Pills, is sufficient to purge the Body
withal. Pouders, Syrupes, and Waters must be always prepared for Pills, and
to make them new, beaten in a clean Mortar together, and kept close.

For moist, or liquid things shortly to besayd.

Amphora is.xlviij. Sextarius, and this Sextarius does contain a Pint and a
half, which is ounces.xxiiij. that is. l.ij. Romayne wayght.

Vrna is half of Amphora, which.xxiiij. Sextaries, here in England are two
gallons, and a half. And thus I do end of these medicines aforesaid, and
what faults be escaped, amends shall be made, God willing. Haec sunt vsitata
Medicamina quae in officinis Medicamentarijs vbique fere prostant, reliqua ad
praescriptum Medicorum parentur, quod non difficile est in communibus
exercitato.

Valeto.


Gulielmus Bullenus.
Ianuarij, anno salutis. 1562.
Hereafter follows the Book of the use of Sickmen, and wholesome medicine.
The Book of the use of sick men, and medicines.


Surfeyte, age, and sickness, are enemies all to health,
Medicines to mende the body, excel all worldly wealth:
Pisicke shall florishe, and in danger will give cure,
Till death unknit the lively knot, no longer we endure.
The Book of the use of sick men, and medicines.
Sickness. ALthough medicines, ^s composicions, be well made in all poyncts,
wanting no Simples, yea, and also the Simples are good and new, and the
Apothicary cunning: yet it oftentimes hapeneth that the same good medicines do
hinder me more, than my painful dolorous sickness: in whom is then the
fault? I pray you.


Health. The fruicte of rash ministracion of medicines.
IT should appear, neither in the medicine, nor in the Apothicary, but in the
indiscreet geeuer, or rash Physicion, which men, be the death oftentimes of
many, that put their trust in them, as evil Medicine is. I therefore shall
show thee, what is to be done, against such evil accidents, if they do
chance, how to remove them. And how thou shall behave thy self wisely, in
receiving pocions. etc. For in the time of sickness, sometime we loose, or
make the belly laxatiue, when it is stopped, even so we do restrain, stop and
bind the belly, when it does immoderately run with laxes. Sometime we do
mortify or kill evil humors, that rebel against Nature. And also we restore
to nature, when it is decayed things restoratiue, A good Kitchen, is a good
Apothicaryes shop.
as Cordials, Dias and Syrups according, with Kitchen physic: which Kitchen I
assure thee, is a good Poticaries shop. When we make euacuation with laxatiues,
then use we Scammonie, Rubarbe, Cassiafistula. etc. But when we restrain or
bind the body, we give Acatia and Opium. In restoring, repayring, or bynding
nature, then we minister ^n meats and drinks, and other convenient medicines,
Diarhodon, Triasandali, Diamargariton, etc. And there is an other kind of
cure, when the matter is not mature or ripe, crude and couched fast, which must
be displaced with decoctions, warm syrupes and medicines acordinge, which I
shall declare hereafter. But here I will speak some thing of Medicines
solutiue, or laxatyue: and then next of constric^iue, or bynding. Thyrdly, of
the manner of restoring, helping, or mending. Fourthly to digest, change and
alter. Four things considered attraction, dissoluing. etc.
Now concerning the first, which is medicines solutiue: we use them three manner
of ways. First by attraction or drawing. Secondly by dissolution or wasting.
Thirdly, by expulsing and dryuing forth. Then we do this diverse and sundry
ways, according to the diversity of the place where the matter is contained
within the body. Then we loose and relaxe, with Benedicta laxatiua, or
Catharico imperiali, or such like electuaries. We make attraction with Aloes,
and certain of the Opiattes. etc. We do expel with Scylla, washed in the
waters of Tamarindes, and such like: and as the matter is, so do we work, and
prepare pocions, according to the diversity of the place, where the evil
humor or matter lies hidden, which we intend to dispacthe, by Gods grace,
without whose furderaunce, nothing comes to good luck, and all our labor is
in vain, although we watch, rise, study, labor. etc. Therefore let the
mynister of the medicine diligently foresee the verity of the matter, so that
he may minister one or two pocions of medicines, according to the property and
place. As for example, if ye matter be in the stomach, liver, or places near
the same, one pocion shall suffice to euacuate and expulse the same: but if ye
evil matter do lie in places distant, and far from the stomach, as it
happens to them that have the gou^e, whose grief is in the Feet. We gieue
more medicines, Property and place, must be observed.
to dissolve, remove, and open the matter, which is so far of the stomach:
then we give the Juice of Polipodie, and Agarike, and the Pills called de
Serapino, or Pills de Lapide Armenio, descriptionis Mesuae, and such like.
Then secondly, we use to give medicines which have virtue, to alter, to draw
and attract the losed humors to the stomach, The virtue of bitter medicines
is great
and so dissolve the^ with Benedicta, Hieralogodion, and Hiera picra. etc. For
bitter things do penitrate and pearse sooner to the extreme parts, and do
purge more, then do any other med^cines. Thyrdly, we give an expulsive, and
expel the humors that be gathered and already drawn in the stomach with,
Psileum. etc.


Sickness. But I pray you, how do you use these medicines?


Health. IN manner following. Medicines to expel, we give one in ye morning, the
second at Noone, the third at Night: the cause may so require, Apocion mus^ be
gieuen at three sundry times, to remove and expulse matter from the stomach.

A Caveat. to beware.


the one at evening, another at midnight, the third in the morning. Take heed
also, that the humors be not to mutch dissolved* in the second mynistration:
but after the first pocion, the Pacient may sleep, because the pocion is more
weaker, when it is once drunk, than when it is taken two times, for being
drunk twice, then it is double in strength. Some men may not away with
medicines: well, to such we gieue but only a digestive, and an expulsive. And
to them that are not able to receive two, Men's natures must be observed, a
little medicine will work mutch of some men, and a strong medicine, will skan^
work, on some other man.
we give them but one, but that one in effect, must be as good as the three:
which must dissolve, attract, and expel, which way of purgacion is not
hurtful. For Physicians seldom times do give two, or three pocions, but it is
greater oversight: for if one pocion will purge, how mutch more will two or
three: for one strong pocion, h^th not that virtue, and efficacy that three
men's pocions have: although one strong pocion, and vehement medicine, do
quickly purge the nether parts of the Stomach, even so it may be so quick,
that it will penetrate to the extreme parts, as ye head, hands, and feet..
Also the virtue of the medicine, if it be weak in operacion, it does vanishe
away, through the passage of the unapt parts, whereby that it cannot reach to
the extreme members. And also, when we do intend to purge the extreme parts,
then we do give two preparatiues, to the intent that the third, may have the
^reer way, and more effectual passage. If we must needs give but one, then
(...) it be done by little, and little, and oftentimes, so yt the matter may be
purged, fair, and softly, and not rashely, nor sodaynely, as it chances in
many places, where the Pacient does receive such medicines, yt he goes
forty, or three score times to the stool. Requiem eternam, with a spade.
Such medicines once do cause the pacient, to have sunge for them, Requiem
eternam, dona eis domine, which is, O Lord, give them everlasting rest, for
sure we be, through such medicines, in this World, they shall never have
rest, nor health. For these swift, strong purgacions, do weaken ye body, dry
up the blood, consume nature bring conuulsion, or palsy, and finally retain
evil humors, and let the good humor out. Therefore* Hippocrates says, after
sudden euacuacion, or replecion, to hot, or to cold, be deceiptfull, and
utterly adversaries to Nature.


Sickness. I Had thought to have made no more to do, but when my belly had bin
costiue, or bound, to have taken any thing that had bin laxatiue, but now I
perceive by so doing, I should have done my self more hurt than good: For by
such actions and doings, I am brought into this case, Like as heat consumes,
eue^ so do Physic money.
but from henceforth, I will take better heed, and God aforne. For so help me
God and holli^ame, gossope Health, I got such a sickness in Flaunders, that by
ye space of two years, consumed my money among the Phisicions, that in ye
end, they had all my riches and gain, and I nothing but sickness and pain:
then like wise men, they counsayled me, to go home into my native Country
where, said they, the Air should be my chyefe Physician. Even so I did, but my
sickness is so inueterate and old, that ye Air was insufficient to be my help:
yet the country is very pleasant, ye know it very well, it is Suffolk,
whereas very few Phisicians do inhabit, of mine acquaintance, but only an old
Emperike, called Ihon Preston, some take him to be a great clarke, but I thinck
he is learned beyond the mark. For all men in that country, he is greatly
sought unto: for he plays our Lady of Walsingham, Ihon Presto^, called Ihon
of Ston^ham
giving as mutch health for a penny, as she did holiness: yet custom has
co^menced him amongst the common people, to be their doctor. I was this man's
pacient a great time, but yet I never heard him talk of Hippocrates, and
Galen, he troubles not his house with any of their books. What shall I say,
all the time that I was with him, he used to minister his purgacions by chance
medley, to his pacients, happy man by his ^ole, some speed well, but I do
remain sick still. And as I do perceive by these three rules, that the fault
was in abusing, misusing, and not duly ministryng of his medicines: how, and
in what manner therefore should I receive, or give my friend medicine, without
error accordingly, I beseech thee gentle Health tell me.


Health. When purging medicines are to be geeuen, first minister herbs and
drinks to provoke vryne.
WHen you will give any purgation, or medicine, diet your pacient first, by ye
space of a day or two, with meats or suppings, to provoke vryne: as the
^roathes of flesh and fish, boyl^d On^ons with fat Porke. Also give the
pacient two or three times poached Eggs, saused with a little Wine and Pepper,
or herbs mollifiing or softning the belly, as Arage, called Atriplex, Mallows
and Mercury. etc. For which cause says Hippocrates, when any may will purge
the body, he must first prepare ye matter to be flowing, that when the
purgacion does come, it may easily pass, and carry away all the evil humor,
Preparatiues must be first given. and then purgacion.
without grief or hurt. And this must be given to hard Complexions, which will
not easily give place to purgacion: for in case the medicine love not, it will
imprison, shut up, and close, both the humor and the purgacion, rather than
purge accordingly. Upon which occasion, says Galen, these Methodians, while as
they make light of medicines preparatiue, Methodici, be Physicions yt observe
certain rules by art.
they enclose the matter, and make no euacuation, therefore they cause not only
the sickness of the Lunges, but also of the Joints, as Hands and Feet.


Sickness. Now sir, for that you are very sensible, and talk in good order, I
pray you furthermore, if you be not weary of my poor company: show me how
that I may best prepare medicine for my self and others accordingly.


Health, FOr asmutch as I do lack many of my Companions, which be now a
days, The causes of sickness.
al on thy side, intised by idleness, surfeit, and their companion gluttony,
and now are they all with thee, I know them well by sight, but I keep very
little company with them. For if I so did, I should loose my name, and be
called no more Health, but miserable wretched Sickness, as Fever* Dropsy, palsy,
blind, lame, frantike, consumed, rupture, gouty, pocky. etc. Yet would God,
would God, if thou and they be not past cure: I wish you all on my side
again. For I confess, many of you have mutch wealth, but al you lack Health.
But to want both, if age approach, I promise thee it is the first hell, the
greatest extreme misery, and most wretched enemy to mankind, that can be
invented, how say thou, is it not so? Thou can not denay it. Well, yet it
is a manifest sign of health to seek it. Continue therein, and thou shall
find it: and for this thy honest demand, how medicines should be prepared
You shall prepare them in this manner, if you quicken your purgacion with
Scamonie quicken it.x. or.xv. days, How to prepare medicine
before it be given: so that the said Scamonie may be incorporated with the
spices. But note that the Scamonie be well rubbed between the hands, or
chafed in a mortar, with oil of Roses, or Uiolets, or syrup of Roses, well
wrought between the hands, puttinge there unto a little Masticke. For Masticke
has a property, that it will let, and not suffer Scamonie to cleave to the
foldes of the stomach, which oftentimes causes a bloody flixe, and
excoriation of the guts. But by this mixture, the malice of the medicine is
excluded, and will do no harm: but if any chance happen in any such case, it
will be soon helped. But there be many bloody villaynes, Scamonie is
perilous, except it be well prepared, and does kill many one.
which will give Medicines immediately, after they have put in Scamonie, before
it be well incorporated with spices. For the longer it is incorporated, so
mutch it will purge the more effectually and gently. Now if you have not this
medicines prepared, and of necessity it must be given, or ministered in such
case: let the Scamonie be rubbed or chafed, as is aforesaid, with oil and
Syrup of Roses, and a little clean Masticke, and thus being quickened, it may
be given after.ij. or.iij. days: you must also roast ye medicine, in this
manner following. Take a gray Costarde, or a Quince, cut it a sunder ouerthwarte
in the mids, pike out the Coare, then put in the powder of Scamonie, then put
it together again: when this is done, wrap it close in a weat linen clothe,
and cover it in the hot Emers of small coals and ashes. When it is well
roasted, the^ take it forth, and mingle it with a Medicine, and being thus
prepared, it may be given after two days. But take heed still, that it be not
finely poudered, for fear of cleaving to the Stomach, through which may come
a bloody flyxe, and excoriation of the guts: but it must be beaten grossly,
that it may tarry the longer, or more time in ye stomach. And why so? Mary,
then it shall dissolve the lurking humors, which be hidden privily, in the
extreme parts, as head, hands, and gouty feet. Lurkinge humors how to
find them and expulse them.
But if you either will receive, or give a pocion, then temper it with Rubarbe,
Mirobalans, or Agarike, and let it stand a day and a night, according as the
medicine shall require, wherewyth the matter shall be purged, at Morning,
sometime at Even, as I shall declare hereafter. If a man be strong, lusty, and
not weak, then he may take the substance in the pocion. If he be feeble,
tender, or weak, then to strain it, and drink the lyquor only: thus, or
after this manner, is to prepare medicines.


Sickness. How and in what manner, do you give solutiue medicines?


Health. SOlutiue medicines, be sometime given to the whole, and sometime to
the sick. Medicines so^iti^e. why they are given.
To the sick, to expulse syckenesse: to the whole to preserve them in health.
Then when thou myndest to mynister to thy self, or to any other, first
consider ye sycknes, and the matter whereof it grows, and the place infected.
When these things be well noted, then as the matter shall require, even so
minister accordingly, as is said before. But consider this, that the medicine
must not be offered, until such time, as the matter or humor be decocted,
riped and made soft, The chief sign of digestion.
whereupon says Hippocrates, we must purge digested matter, but not move
crude, raw matter. etc. The digestion of matter is known, by thickness of
Uryne, in case a thyn vryne passed before the said thycke Uryne by at^enuacion,
but is a thick Uryne, come before the thin, then it is a Fever. Wherefore know
first the distinction of the matter in this behalf. Now if it be undigested,
use incisiues, and things that provoke vryne: then after you have provoked
vryne with Herbs accordingly, It helps mutch to nature, to provoke Uryne.
then may you minister your medicine. But on the other side, when you will give
a Medicyne la^atyne, to the whole body. First, consider what humor does
abound, and the same is that, which causes the pain and sickness in the body:
and therefore purge this cause, That humor which does abound, purge the same
The cause of sickeneess.
and then the effect shall cease, by Gods grace. Now furthermore, if there be
two humors, equal abounding together, extremely in superfluity, then there
must be more Simples, put unto the composicion, according to the quality or
quantity of the humor, to purge the same. As when choler and blood do abound,
then purge with confectio Hamech. etc For if two humors be superfluous, and
then if you give to purge but one humor, Hippocrates. Purge that which should
be purged, or else meddle
the body will be molested, sick, and grieved: and for this cause Hippocrates
says. Si qualia oportet purgari purgentur, confert and been ferunt, si vero
non: contrarium: which is, if such things be purged, which ought to be purged,
is good and auaylable and men bare it well, if not, then it is clean contrary
and evil.


Sickness. What sign or manifest token, is then to be given, whereby a man
should perceive the humors by, I pray you say on?


Health. PArtly they may be known by certain things, what humors to abound,
How to know what humor does abound, by his proper token.
or ought to be purged or cle^sed, within ye bodies of Men. or Women. As
example* if any man be lean, or want his flesh, yea, or whiteshe of complexio^
or fleshy, and have salt spittle in his mouth, with bitterness of taste, in
such bodies salt phlegm does chiefly abound, and needs purgation: but they
which feel ye moisture, or spettle sweet in their mouths, and have plenty of
swelling veins appear in their faces, and also have noysomnes and abhorring
in their stomach, Of sweet phlegm.
with aptness to vomit, and vryne red, thyck, and oyley, this is a manifest
sign, of ye abundance of sweet phlegm. Further, if any man do feel tartnes,
or sowernes in his mouth, Tart phlegm.
with quick appetite, no thyrst or desire to drink in this case, there tarte
fleume greatly abou^deth, and does raygne, when all ye spettle seems like
vinegar. Sometime the mouth does feel no taste, and is unsavory, feeling
nothing but like Well water: neither has apetite or drines, desyring neither
meat nor drink: this is an unsavory phlegm, and needs purgacion. Signs
manifest declaryng what humors bear the greatest rule, in the bodies of Men
and women without which it is not possible to purge, according to art^ but
rather to kylle.
Nature has oftentimes rebellyng against her bitterness in the mouth, but no
saltnes, the vryne thyn, yellow or reddysh in color: this does declare that
red choler has the victory. Great strong bitter vomits, as bitter gaul in
the mouth, without vomites, and urine yellow or ruddish not very thin: these
signs do declare, there does reign in the Body, evil corrupted and infested
coler. But if it, be of less thynnesse, rednes, and bytternes: then it is
coler, vitelline or like yolks of Eggs. that does abound. Well, if the vryne
be yellow and thyn, having small residence in the bottom, and great bytternes
in the mouth, then Citrine color, is a Lord, and rules above nature,
therefore this and the rest* ought to be purged with medicines, made according
to the art, to put these cruel enemies away, which else will put the whole
body, with all the members, Signs to know when Melancholy does approach* after
whom comes the quartaine.
in peril of dissolucion and death Mark when slouthfulnes, dulnes, idleness,
wearines, and heaviness be greater, than they be accustome^ to be: the appetite
increased, and thirst diminished, and all the members, as though they had been
weary, after some paynfull labor, when these signs do appear, then
Melancholy must needs be purged with speed. If the veins be full, most
chyefely in the Face, also when as the pulses be very full, with plenty of
sweet spettle in the mouth with swellyng, and the blushyng in the face,
heaviness, painfulnes, and wearines in the shoulders, as it happens after
labor, or bearing some heavy burden, and the urine thick and red, in these men
Blood does plentifully abound, which may be helped, by the opening of the
vein Mediana or Cephalica, or applying of boxing glasses, with skarifying the
place first if either purging do seem to long, or else the opening of the
vein, is not don accordingly. etc. Electuariu^ of Succorosarum. etc. be good
to purge blood.


Sickness. HOw then do you purge phlegm, which is one of the four Humors. I
pray you tell me? For lack of medicine, convenient for the same: there be
many which be daily cast away, as it appears by the rules of Physic.


Health, TO speak of phlegm simply, it must be purged with these Medicines,
as with Benedicta laxatiuae, Catarico imperiali: decoction of Polipodie,
Agarike. Purgers of phlegm.
etc. But salt phlegm is purged with the holy bitter medicine, which the
Greeks call Hiera picra simplex, Theodoricon, Anacarde, Hyperisticon. etc.
Sweet phlegm must be purged with Hyeralogodion of Memphis: and the strongest
Hiera picra, and such like things, for purging sweet phlegm, as appears in
the compoundes of medicines.


Sickness. How do you purge burnt red Choler, which is hot and dry?


Health. TO purge such choler, is with Trifera Saracenica, Electuario frigido,
Oxyphoenicum, with the decoction of Mirobalans, Cassiafistula, The Manna of
Calabria is the best of the world, and falls down in the night, as dew
upon flowers and leaves.
Tamarindes, Uyolets, and Manna of Calabria. Choler infected, must be purged with
Anacardium, or Agni corais, which grows upon a tree in India, which tree,
gives fire of it self, and brings forth fruit like unto La^bes hearts, but
very small, having a bloody juice: of this Rasis makes a good co^fection, for
simple taken it is venomous. There is also an excellent Antidotu^, in the.217.
Cap. of Nicolaus Mirepsus, in his book of Antidotaries called Theodoreton, or
Gods gift, wherein Anacardus in brought is. etc. Which medicine does help the
head, Theodoraton a divine gift.
lunges, stomach, liver, spleen, gout* etc. And also purges Choler, so do
with Hiera picra simplex, Rubarbe, Diaprunes. etc But when Mela^choly, that
cold, dry, wretched Saturnus humor creeps in, with a lean, pale, or
swartysh color, which reigns upon solitarye, careful musyng Men: which
humor at length, breeds and brings forth a terryble Child, called the
Fever quarten, Melancholy the worst humor of nature he b^getteth a son
called the Quarten. Compounded humor may not be purged with a simple medicine,
for they are to weak.
the same if he be not corrected, and banished away, will be his fathers
death. When he appears, correct him thus, as with the strongest
Hieralogodion, with the decoction of Seen, Epithymum, Hamech. etc. But in case
the humor be compounded, then you must also use compounded medicine: or
medicine simple, does rather hurt, than help in sutth cases. And why so? Mary
being simple, it purges but one humor, and suffers ye other corrupted
humors to remain: and what is ye cause thynk you? Truly none other, but yt it
is to weak, and lacks strength and force, which ye compounded medicines. As
example. George Tomson of Kelshall in Suffolk, has a Fever tercian (well)
your good will is to help him, A^ example between a simple and a co^pound
medycine.
and you give him a simple medicine: but what does your simple medicine profit
him? Nothing at all. For he which has a tercian, must be purged of choler, and
in such a case, because phlegm is mixed with choler, your simple may rather
put forth phlegm, which is moist, and not move choler, The fire will get the
victory, if the Water be not equal, or have the masterie. Good intentes and
good acts, ^e two things.
which is hot and dry, yea, the very cause and worker of the rygour in this
tercian, and so when nature has moisture drawn away from her, which should
quench the heat, then to conclude, choler shall be come the more hoatter,
vehementer, and cruel to nature, through a simple medicine, foolyshly given of
a good intent,

When blood does abound, or breaks forth at the nose, commonly on the right
nosthrell, or spetting of blood. etc. then diminishe it, as I have said by
dyscreete openyng the vein, with a fine Lanset, and no flem with a bearde,
like to a blood Iron, that Smithes do let horse blood wythal. For they will
sometime cut a vein through both the sides, and cause a crampe. etc. Ignorant
Barbers, their fruictes.
Also in diminishyng of blood, let not the Chirurgian without counsel, or
upon ancient experience, take or open the said vein or veins. As example,
William Downaby of Iken has a grievous pain in his head with ache, he can
take no rest. etc. there is no remedy, but to let him blood: the common Barbar
does take his Lanset, and opens a vein, as ye blind man shoots at a
Crow, he takes the first that comes to hand, or appears greatest, perhaps
a Synewe, which may chance to let out ye spirits of life, and kill him: well,
in case this Barber, for the pains of ye head, intend to open Basilica. which
is vena interna, or axillaris, growyng through the arm hoale, and brings
both from the heart and Liver, which are his roots, and through ignorance, do
open a great sinew hard by it, which is like a vein: in which sinewe the
spirits of life do swiftly run up and down, mixte with the blood of life. What
has he done now? Mary slain one. And what is their refuge in such a case?
The sign, say they, was in ye place, and he would be needs letten blood. But
in case if ye Barbers cunning be better, and if he open Basilica without hurt,
what does this help ye head? Nothing, or else very little at all. But if you
will help W. Downabies head, open Cephalica, called vena externa, with a long
cut, to let out gross blood, and foul matter, and cut not deep, for fear
of apostumacion: this vein I say helps his head, to purge first with,.j.ss.
of ye pills of Hiera simplex, a day before is better. Now if his pains be in
his breast, or rightside, ye or pleurisy, then open the vein called Mediana,
the middle vein, whose parents be Basilica, and Cephalica: this Mediana or
Cardiaca must be opened somewhat overthwart, and so shall he bleed well, to
help the griefs aforesaid: but when the matrix, raynes, Bladder, or Yard, be
troubled with grief, stopping, Obseruacio^s in blood letting.
or swelling, and mutch pains, then in a vessel of warm Water, open vena
talie the Ankle vein, called Saphena: for this old creeping vulcans, or lame
sickness, called Sciatica, with pains in the Huccle bones, can never be better
helped, than to purge with Hiera, to anoint with Oil of the same, as appears
in the Compounds, and to open the foresaid Sciatica vein, which is one of the
middle, and toward the outsyde of ye foot. And thus to open veins in order,
is the best way: and when time of blood letting, is not convenient, the^ apply
boxes with scarification, even as the place, humor, and time do require, and
this shall suffice of purging humors, with blood letting.


Sickness. I Trust to observe these your sayings very well, dear friends
Health. But how should I know, when medicines have taken their effect, and
wrought accordingly, to thend^ of their force, and virtue?


Health. THus you shall know, first, there is no man, but does take medicine,
To know, when medicine have wrought their effect.
to put away some grief: and when the grief is past and the body quiet, and
no pain in the stomach, then the medicine have wrought his good effect. Then
you may give the broth of a Capon, Chicken, or Hen, sometime Almond milk, or
clean stewed broth, drink small Wine, of color yellow and clean, and use
moderacion in eating and drinking, unless there follow an ephemerall Ague. Now
the next day after purging, the pacient may go to the stophe, or bathe: so that
he go thither, taking no cold, or do no labor, by the space of three days,
and then to use moderate exercise, and to feed upon meat, that will engender
good humors. And thus to conclude, the body, or any that are sick before
time, shall now be converted into a new nature, through the help of Nature,
and medicine?


Sickness. What else I pray you, is to be observed in medicine?


Health. THree things are to be noted, Time, Humor, and Region: where
purgacion is to be ministered. First, as touching Time, Time, humor, regio^
are chiefly to be considered.
there be two dyuersityes: The one is the time of the year, and the other is
the time of the Day, and Night, in which every Humor has his being. For
according to the variation, and alteracion of the time of ye year, the manner
of the purgacion must be altered and changed. And Hippocrates says, we must
purge the upper parts of the body in Summer, and the nether or lower parts
in Winter. (for why?) The humors do follow the property of time. Purge upward
in Su^mer, and downward in Winter.
In Su^mer purge with Uomits, in Winter by the stool, and not without a good
consideration of ye time, age, and kind of disease, and habit of ye body. For
they, which have straight throats, may not be purged with, or by Uomit, for
fear the spirit and breath of life be stopped and strangled, and so through
choking, ye body be killed. Again, purge not old men, by the reason of the
coldness of their complexion. In Su^mer purge above, early in the morning. In
Winter purge beneath, late at night. In the Equinoctial time, prepare at even,
and the next morning after your preparatyue, purge by Electuarie. etc. In
extreme hot Regions, no purgacions: in extreme cold Regions, none also.
Neither in the days, which be not temperate, as to hot with the Sun, or to
cold with Frost. etc. nor in the Cauiculer days, except great need require.


Sickness. How must the day, and the night be considered, in purgacions?


Health. WHereas the time of the day and night, be in length.xxiiij. hours,
which is called the artificial day, and artificial night, which.xxiiij.
hours, The day natural, and the day artfiiciall
make but one natural day, divided into four times six for the four
complexions. For every Complexion has his government, and dominion six
hours. First the blood begins at nine at night, and continues until three
in the morning. And choler from three after midnighte, until nine before
noone. And so the other two humors: first melancholy, and phlegm, have each
of them six hours, wherein they do raygne, and govern the body. The four
co^plexions reigning every one by hours
Now if it be Su^mer, and then you be minded to purge choler by vomit, then
you must give the said vomit, a little before ye hour of the day. So that when
it has remained, and stayed it self a while in the stomach, it may work in
ye hours of choler, to purge the same. In ye like appoyncted hours, so purge
melancholy downward, in his hour and make euacuation of it. If thou will purge
phlegm, let the pacient rest a Gods name, by the space of three or four
hours in the night, and then wake, and take his pocion, or medicine, a little
before Midnight, and not sleep after it, until it be purged. Now if you will
purge blood, in the morning open a Ueyne, The aged, the very young, weak
folk, and women with child, may not be let blood.
except very old, or yongue, or people consumed, or women with child, with
such I dare not have to do. If you will purge humors, otherwise than thus,
that is observing the hours, yea, and the mansions, or course of the Moon:
you shall greatly err, and do more hurt than good.

Furdermore, consider the diversity of humors, if blood abound, he must be
letten forth by ye vein, Cephalica, or Mediana, etc. If Choler be to mutch
above nature, Matter in the veins must be put forth by blood letting and
(...) the belly by Clister, and in the breast by vomit.
then purge by vomit: but if choler be mixed with blood, then let blood as I
have said, unless the matter be contained in the nether parts of the Belly,
then purge by Clister or pocion. etc. If phlegm or melancholy be beneath, purge
downwardes unless it be about ye mouth, or entrance of the stomach, or ye upper
parts of ye body: mark and wisely consider the time, in all these things, for
that is the chiefest poynct of all. For every thing, said the wyseman, has his
proper time under heaven. etc. And regions by which here in this place, the
humors be considered: also the places of purging, the upper part, the nether
part, the nostrelles, roof of the mouth, pores of sweatyng, and veins of
bleedyng, etc.


Sickness. What say you then of place, in whom the matter is contained?


Health. THE place in deed, as I have said, Place where medicine should be
ministered conveniently joined with time.
must be considered in which a medicine shall be given: whether it be hot in
Summer, or to cold in Winter. If the day be to hoate, you may cast Vinegar,
Sallow branches, Uiolets, Water Lillies: and be in a low Uaulte, or from the
Sun, and temper the place, where you will purge. On the other part if the
place be to cold, make a fy^r of Charcoales, or a stoue, which is a fire
secret felt, but not seen. Close Windows from wind, in a pretty warm Chber,
wya^th good whole hangyngs or seelyng. The pacyent to have light warm clothes,
and slyppers, clean, and well lyned: sweet linen* as sheets, shurtes, and
Kerchiffes, a close chair, lyned softly with a back, having a clean round
basin, or vessel within the same, to receive the stools or purged matter. And
then to have soft Cotton or cloth, to make clean natures privy place, you know
my meaning. Forget no sweet perfumes by art, for nature will play the stinkyng
Beast, I tell you truly. Also in this place no noise, nor utter Monkish
silence, but be myndfull of some honest merry matter, or pleasant tale, or
things that will rejoice the spirits. etc. Cold does take, and is not taken.
And this place must be thus used, in the time of purgacion: but still I say,
beware that you take not cold, or rather cold take not you. For in such a
case, i^ he get the victory, then he will put you into a sheet, and send you
to the God of Qui Lazarum.


Sickness Well good sir after Qui Lazarum: Credo videre bona domini, The hope of
ye life to come*
in terra viuentium: And that do I believe, even to see the goodness of the
Lord God, in the land of the living, In Adam we have our fall.
where I shall receive all my body whole and sound, in as goodlye a form, as my
father Adam was in, before his most Lamentable fall: by whom I am thus
punished, Acab will kill Na^o^h, for his vineyard.
with Misery, care, heaviness, Labor, ingratitude of mine own flesh and
friends, syckenes, pains, soreness, and daily danger, to have my blood
spilt for mine own goods, prison, affliction of mind, When one descends
into himself, he shall behold fearful things
and sometime the perjured enemy does prevail, with fiery tongue of slander,
with a thousand crosses, which make me to stoop. And to despise the world,
which is trapped with Snares before mine eyes in each place, and then I crepe
within my self, whereas I do see mine own breast and conscience, written the
careful words of Job, Man's Life is both short and miserable
Chapter.xiiii. Homo natus mulieris, paucorum dierum est, and repletur
inquietudine. etc. Man says he that is borne of a woman, lives but few days,
and is full of misery: few days, and yet spent in trouble, Truly there is none
other purging place, or purgatory but this: In this life we have our
purgatory, and that we feel and perceive.
which Job has poincted here with his finger. The very manner, condition,
place, and turment, which is only Misery, divided into two kinds, the one is
the grievous affliction and Miserye, which is seen with Mortal eyes, as I
have said before, as penury, Prison, sickness. etc. The second misery is
not seen, but felt, as the inward agony, Two sundry kinds of miseries.
affliction of the spyrites: no inward consolacion, continual thought,
sometime wishyng that death might conquer Life, broken heart, and vexed
spirit, full of sundry inward affections, and alteracyons of mind, small rest
or quietness, sorrowful for the death of kindred, or fryendes, being changed
into bitter enemies, which is a great plague. Or goods lost, or acts done
insolently in times past: and most fearful of things to come, as doing hurt,
or suffryng harm by enemies, or turning with a sudden fall, from the
fortunate happy wheel, if it so chance, of riches, Sorrow for things past,
and fear of things to come.
health, worship, pleasure, the victory of the enemy, and pleasuryng the
friend, and hearts rest. etc into the pyt and dark lake of adversity:
suddenly deprived of these vain slippery things, and eftsoon lynked, fetred,
and entangled, wythall such evils, as the heart, and spirits, do utterly
deteste, fear, and abhor to think upon: besides the sleepyng passions of
the night, with careful troubles of the spyrites, and dreams most dreadful,
Prosperity is very slipperie.
of strange shapes, fearful syghtes, and pitiful appearyng of the dead
Parents, Friends, Brethren, and old acquaintance. And sometime the armed Enemy,
with frounyng face, gnashyng teeth, bloody hands, do mercylesse approach to kill
me, Horrible dremes in the Night,
the sleepyng naked man, embracing my delyght, eftsoon the flatterer does
please the ear, and pleasant things approach. And the flesh is soon moved,
through wicked lust, and in the twinkelyng of the eye, from dream to dream,
the spirits be so variable: that the Night to the careful Man, is the very
Image of Hell, and specially to them which fear not God: Dreams to admonish
men to fear God.
thus he punysheth them, as Job says, in the Night, to reform them. And by
such affliction of the night, in the time of sleep, which is brother to
death. In which time the almighty does school mankind, rebuke him, and suffer
the wicked Enemy to scourge him with strange visions. etc. Mankind may sone
thereby, undoubtedly behold and perceive the soul, The soul never sleeps.
Men do dream, according to their temperament or complexio^.
which is lively occupied, when as the gross senses of the body. be stopped,
and in a manner dead: neither seeing, hearing. etc. Now whether it be dream,
illusion, vision. etc. as some do say, or the effects, or works, of the four
complexions, as the cholerike man, to dream of Fire, fighting etc. The
flegmatike, to dream of water. etc. And so in the other two complexions, or as
Artemidorus in his book of dreams says, they do presage, divine, or show
before, what things do follow, or come after, good or bad. All these things
be great miseryes, and grievous afflictions of the soul, which I most humble
desire God, Wicked spirits, do molest our spirits.
to deliver us from: and comfort us with his holy spirit, against all such
evil spyrites, which do molest and vex our spirits: which are a thousand
times more grievous inwardlye, than the outward miseries of the body: as
poverty, prysonment, and extreme age. The troubles of the mind be greater
than the crosses of ye body.
etc. For look how mutch the soul is purer than the body* even so the joys,
and cares of the same, be more plentiful. And this occasion has moved me,
being a sick man, to wander from our former talk. And why? Only because you
spoke of Qui Lazarum, which I have heard song, in a lamentable tragedye
perhaps: but my song shall be, Beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur: Blessed be
the dead, which dye in the Lord: and happy are they, which lives in him also:
which is the chyefest sign of their election, and endless estate, in that
place, whereas no end shall be of perfyt felicitye, and life for ever: whereas
neither ennemy, sickness, wounds, prison, or poverty shall vex the immortal
bodies, which now be subject to al calamityes: Kings and Queens be subject
to the miseryes of this world and have no perfect felicity before their mortal
end and beginning of immortal life.
yea from the King and Queen* which of all be honored, obeyed, or flattered
unto the poorest bondsman, and his wife, with his wretched children, that be
shamefully despised, contemned and utterly rejected. But although no man
shall be perfectly happy before death, as the Philosopher says, yet the same
death shall be swallowed up in victory, which victory is Jesus Christ the
Conqueror, beginning and ending of all things, to whom be praise for ever
Amen.

Yet because I am a man of the creation of God, scourged with many in fyrmityes
in this world: by and through the same God also, many goodlye medecines be
prepared to help me, to relieve and comfort me, until such time as it shall
please God to call me to the end of my Pilgrimage. Therefore good master
health, bear with me, although I have spoken in my grievous passion, to ease my
mind: and now by your patience, whereas you have showed me immediately before,
Of the time of medecin.
in what place medecin should be given: Now I pray you show me what time
medecin should be ministered?


Health I Am sorry for thy double aff^iction both body and mind, thou have
told a lamentable tale: well, I will say thus much to thee, many hands make
light work. Bear these grefes quietlye, thou have many to help thee in this
world. For there is nothing under the sun, but vanity and affliction of
mind. Every living man has trouble, thus must needs be wisely suffered,
because it cannot be avoided: and wise men may not despair in aduersitye, for
comfort will come I warrante thee, be neither to effeminate or childish, when
trouble assaulteth thee, for then thou art clean gone. But arm thy self
wisely with magnanimity, forsee the end, hold up thy head, and synke not. Use
this world like a S^age, play thy part there on in thy vocation, for the time
honestly, serve God reverently despise not civil policy, Profit the common
wealth, keep good company, be not ungrateful to thy friend. Depart from thine
ennemy, and yet beware of thy friends, Speak gently, trust not them that
commonly use swearynge, slander, Eccle. v.
drunkenness, and be full of ielousy. Live of thine own, though it be but
poorly. Be not bond, if thou may stand at liberty. Go not to law with
Lawiers, for they will hinder thee. And beware of a flatterer, he will betray
thee. Be not variable in religion, observing time, and the manners of men: But
obaying God which does not change. There be three sundry men, A three stringed
whip.
which have done thee never good: The winker in his tale, the Laugher in his
rage, and the Fox colored, which will not stick for blood sheading, false
witness, or perjury* yet pray for them, and let go displeasure. Be angrye
and sin not. Let not the Son go down on thy wrath. Trust not to the
world, yet behold it, and thou shall se maruaylous things wrought therin^
Eccle. iiii.
Thou shall see much wrong done daily under the Son and behold the tears of
such as be oppressed, and there is no man to comfort them, or that will deliver
or defend them from the vyolence of the oppressors, but only God, therefore
follow the counsel of the wise man, for there is nothing better says he, for
a man, than to be joyful in his labor, for that is his portion. Eccle. iii.
And for as much as mankind, has labor, travel, heaviness, sorrow, and
disquietnes al his life, and yet shall leave al his labors to others, which
never saw them, is it not better then, for a man to eat and drink, and his
soul to be merye in his labor, and this is the gift of God says the wise
man. What thing is bent for mankind.
And thus to conclude if thou be troubled in mind, pray only to God, and ask
counsel of the wise: if thou be sick, seek the Physician. Honor him because
of necessity, God has created him. For of the highest comes medecin. and he
shall receive gifts of the king. The wisdom of the Physician, brings him to
great worship: in the syghte of the great men of this world he shall be
honorably taken. The Lord has created medecin of the earth, E^od. 15.1.
Regua^. 4.
and he that is wise, will not abhor it. Was not the bitter water wade sweet
with a Tree, that men might learn to know the virtue thereof? The Lord has
given men wisdom and understanding, that they might be honored in his
wondrous works: with such does he heal man, and takes away the pains, of
such do the Apothecaries make a confection, yet cannot a man perform al his
works. For of the lord comes prosperous wealth over all the earth. My son
despise not this in thy sickness, but pray unto the lord, and he shall make thee
whole, Leave of from syn, Eccle. 38.
and order thine hands aright. Cleanse thine heart from al wickedness: this is
the counsel of Jesus the son of Syrach, in his holy book. Good counsel in
the time of trouble.
Chap. xxxviii. And now shall I show unto thee, what time medecin shall be
given. Then do thus. Sometime medecin is given to sleapward, or before sleep:
and sometime before day, in the morning, to ye waking time. First in the time of
waking. then give Liquid, or moist medecines, and also easy: and specially
when we must purge light humors in the stomach, For as a moist liquid medecin
in Pocion is soon dissolved, even so she will spedely and quickly, do her duty,
and work her feate effectually in her place whereas she has power to convert
actiuely, and change things into her nature, Even so nature has power to
change meat and food unto her own proper virtue. Medecin does change and
meat is changed.
Therefore note this, that when such medecines be ministered: if the Pacient
should then sleep, at such time as the natural heat begins to increase,
then the said sleep lets the virtue and good operetion of the same
medecin: resolving the body into paynful sweat, and attractinge and drawinge
humors out of order, making the Paciente sicker.

Item in as much as Liquide and light humors, be soon dissolved, then it
follows, that the same humors do eftsoons come to the place of expulsion,
Therefore to conclude, if the said Pacient do sleep at that present, it might
then chance, that ye medecin would not convert, or change the humor, or
cast it* forth: but rather resolve humors, in the body, which would cause most
paynful peril, and noisome sickness and disease, Why purgations work not
naturally.
while as the putrifyed matter remains still in the body, not purged. But when
as the pacient has taken but a light supper, he may take pills, so that the
said pills be new, and the pacient not very fat, One may sleep after pills,
but yet beware of old dry pills.
for fat men and women have small guts, and pills may chance hurt them.
And when we purge hard matter, or humors in the extreme parts of the body,
we minister pills, But for as much as pills be hard of resolucion within
the body, one may sleep well upon them, before they be resolved. For sleep
brings inward warmnes: and warmnes* makes resolution, and furdereth the
workinge of Pills, which must take their effect in the extreme parts, as
head: hands, and the feet. And thus I say, pills may be given without hurt,
when the pacient goes to his natural rest and sleep. Provided, that in the
morning, when they begin to work, Pills may be made of al kinds of medecines.
then the said pacient must sleep no more at that time. And note that pills
may be confected, of al kinds of medecines, and there be pills given before
meat, for them which have evil digestion, called Pilule ante cibum.


Sickness. Sometime it* comes to pass, that in a manner unadvisedly, or
sodaynlye, the Physician does give a Purgation or Medecin, not considering the
complexion of his pacient, therein does he well or no I pray you?


Health. THE complexion would be known, but when there is no opportunity or
leisure to know the complexion, whether it be hot, cold, moist, or dry. In
this cause let us use a preventing medecin, or an Antidotarie, The observation
of complexions.
whereby we may both prepare ye way, and also know whether the matter be hard
or soft, to be removed with the same preuentyng medecin, either yea or no:
also in this case, let somthinge be ministered before, which may gently resolve
the humors, Benedicta laxatiua, stomachicum carthaticum, imperialae. Or else
let us give to the pacient some gentle pills, and decoction of Polipodie,
Agarice, and Hermodactiles, tempered white wine, putting thereunto purifyed and
clean honey, and then give it to the Pacient when it has stand* until it come
to a residence do the same with Polipodye, Esula, sodden in wine, putting in
a little Cinamome. For this does resolve and unbind phlegm, and Purges it
well, or else gather solutyue and losing Herbs: as Mercurye, Beats,
Mallows. etc. sees them in fat Porke, putting in a little Seen. And in
case this lose the said Sick Pacient, if he mark the quantitye of the
Euacuacion, or things purged, so he may be contented therewith.

If he feel more grief in the belly, or pain burninge, or noysomnesse: he
may then prepare a stronger, or one weaker, according to his humor, age or
time of the year, To give medecin in the fit of a Fever, is perilous.
or habit of the body. And in all medecines beware of this, that nothing be
taken in the fit, rigor, terror, or hour, when the pacient shall be vexed,
tossed, or tormented with quotidian, tertian, or quarteine. etc.


Sickness. FUrthermore, it comes to pass as is daily seen, that there be many
feeble stomachs and fearful eyes, Weak stomachs cannot a^ ^ay with st^ong
medecines.
that do not only abhor to se medecines. Some for their blacknes to behold,
as Cassiafistula, or bitterness in taste, as Hiera picra, or fulsom to smell, as
strong pills: yea, it no less greueth the^ to behold or see the vessel, in
which the pocion is kept in, than to drink the same pocion, or bitter
medecin, contained within the same. Such be the weak, feeble, nyce, stomachs
of many, God knows why, for nature has made them no stronger. For the feeble
stomach of a tender Gentlewoman may not be compared in force, to the
boisterous, rough greedy or strong stomach of the Carter. The sight or smell of
vile things, does him as small displeasure, as the sweet odours, and pleasant
aspectes, does hurt the delicious senses of the tenderlings, or carpet muses. I
say the barberous vplandish Ienking with torn hose, and clouted boots, foul
shurt, and thredbare bonet, long locks, and crumpled hands, and gryned,
scuruy countenance, with gan^lets made of Sorels hyde, armed with a piece of a
Motley mantel, bodly charging a long whipstocke, with croppe and laniarde,
against Rudde or blind Baiard: which traile and draw the laden Cart, and bend
their backs with continual burdens, Cow, sheep, and plough* be our Nurces.
rewarded with unpleasant food. This unseemly grome or Carter, driving his
cart, I say, yet is he a child, and feeder of the common wealth, with Cow,
sheep, and plow, in the Clotty fyeld following the share and Culter, after the
dreaming steps of the deep treadinge Ox: which treads on the foot of each
poor man in the country. These sillions which use no Spears* but Spades, and
fight their combats with flailes, in solitary Barnes, among the Sheaues,
s^ayinge the Mise into the Chafe, The life of the plain people in the country
when Snow and Frost makes Cow and Calfe to tremble in couart, and Swyne to
lurk in cotte, for fear of the Northren, sharp cuttyng wynd. Long black
nights, and short cold rayning days, uncovered naked trees, shrouded with
Snow, under whom lurk the hongry birds. At such time as the plain people do
spend, consume, and bring to nothing their substance among their laboring
hyndes, So^mers fruits, not with out Winters travel God wotte. If Saturn cast
forth then from his high cold Throne upon them, his malicious evil
unfortunate influence: when he with Syeth in Hand, and gray Hoary Locks, does
creep into the sixth House of the Heaven, Hali de iudicijs A^rorum pars octaua.
Cap. vij,
or falling angle. From whence he pours forth, says Haly among me^ great
infyrmities, melancholy, falling evil, madness, leprosy, quartens, and also
every sycknes yt comes of coldness and drines. etc. And dryueth the plain
people to their wits end, which lack prouydence, to forsee and prepare
medecin, fit for their defense, of whom God takes the only cure and
charge, from an higher place, Psalm. cxlvi^.
than whereas old Saturnus does dwell, upon the simple sort of mortal men: he
cares for the stranger, fatherles, and widow, and opneth his hand, and
fills every living wight with plentiousnes: Psalm. cxlv.
and is near unto them that does call upon him faithfully, and there is none
of his, that are fallen into any misery, but he sees their fall, whether it be
poverty, prisonment, exile, care, agonye, affliction, or vexacion of mind. etc.
Then with mercy and pittye he puts forth the hand of his providence, and
lifts them up, and helps them in the days of their carfulness, making
them pleasant. Giving them rest, and quiet sleapes, while as the ungodly, does
remove their neighbors land marks, Job. xxiiii.
And rob them of their cattle, and by extorcion keep them from their own, and
oppress the widow and fatherless, making them go naked, yet these people
prosper for the time, although they murder the simple, But at length the shadow
of death shall come upon them: and they shall go into horrible darkness. And
thus have I read in a lamentable book, of one, who had experience of miseryes
infinite. Sickness, and sorrows: yea, The end of (...) wicked men.
this Job was only sickness, whose servant I am: and what is the chief help,
or to whom shall I the sick, p^ore, feeble man resort? Even to him that my
master Job went unto Who was that, I pray you? Was it the Chirurgen,
Apoticary, or Physician? etc. No, no: It was the Almighty God, without whom
every artificer, both in Philosophy and Phisike, God the (...) Physician.
their works take none effect nor any good success, although they do excel in
knowledge, learning, judgment, and practice. Therefore I do say, dear friend
Health, with the Prophet David, in his Hymn, or Song: I do lift up mine
eyes unto the mountains, from whence comes help to me? My help comes
from ye lord god, which made heaven and earth: and here I do gather, Psalm.
if I be sore or sick, weak, or wounded, troubled, or vexed, although I lift
up mine eyes unto the mountains of this world, for the health of my body, as
to ye best Chirurgians or Phisicions, which as I have said, do excel in
knowledge and practice. This is nothing if my help come not from heaven, from
the fountain of Physic: even so, for the health and regiment of the soul,
when it is sick. The mountains of Saints, Angels, and men, can not
prevail, except the very salvation, atonement, health, praise, and quietness,
proceade only from God, which is very Salus, that is, health, or Sospes, the
health giver: and upon him I do only depend, which dwells in Heaven.


Health. IF he be on your side, who can be against you? Nothing in Heaven,
Earth, or Hell, is able to molest you: if you be under the shade of his Wings,
Roma. viij.
you are safe from all Storms. I do commend your Godly zeal, and
faithful affection to Almightye Godwarde: al be it, you seem unto me, to
wander in this your communication, from the path or line which was laid out
straight, between you and me, God does work by miracle, and means.
which was the regiment and health only of the body. And you do declare of the
miserye of the common people, and of the calamityes: and say when they fall
sick, they lack providence and help among themselves. but only God. Marye I
say also only God. But how? That God does always send health without
mean? No: For almightye God does work by miracle, and by mean: by miracle as
when he raised the dead, Cleansed the Lepre. etc. By mean, when with Claye he
opened the Eyes of the Blind: and with Spattle he caused the Deaf to hear,
yea, and commanded the Apostles to carye Oil with them, to heal the Sick.
Why do you then talk thus, leauyng out this word mean? Which is like unto
an hand, which works for every thing, both with out, and within the Body.
By which mean, the holy Spirit of God is perceived, as example. The Apostle.i.
Corin. xii. Chapter. The gift of the spirit is given to every Man, to edify
withal. To one is given through the Spirit the vtteraunce of Wisdom. To an
other the vtteraunce of knowledge, by the same spirit. To an other is given
Faith, by the same spirit. To an other the gifts of healynge, by the same
Spirit. etc. Lo here you see healing is the gift of Gods spirit, The holy
Ghost.
which is God the holy Ghost And although the gift of healynge, was
plentifullye showed and powered in, and upon the holy Apostles, which wrought
both with miracles and means: Yet it cannot be denayed, but diverse which had
no faith heavenly, or the gift of Faith, yet they had the gift of healyng. For
they be several gifts of God.

Infidelles have singular gifts of God.
Hippocrates* Galen. Auicen. etc. had not the gift of Faith, and were Infidels,
believed not in God, nor in his son Christ: yet God bestowed upon the^
excellent knowledge of Natural things, as appears by their learned Books,
which be Candels to give light to Physicians, to the worlds end, for the
incomparable learning and cunning which is written in them. Thus God has made
the very Infidels, means to help the Christians, which you may not denay.
Neither think the plain people to be so ignoraunte, but when they be sick,
they can send to the Physician, or Chirurge^ for help: as well as they will send
to the Mill, to have their Corn ground, Or to the Shoemaker for Shoes, to
defend them from goinge barefoote. What would you have the Carters (as you
term them) so miserable, or with out wit, or worse then the Dog: which can
lick his wound, and chose his vomittyng grass? That should appear by the
fruits of poor men, I mean their children. I pray you, be not mitours set
upon the headdes of Plowmennes sons? and do not the children oftentimes, of
obscure, skant yomen, and very abiectes, possess both rych houses and lands,
where sometime their parents would gladly have served in the Kitchen? etc. What
is ye cause? It should appear virtue auaunceth, and learning helps Exclame
not neither bewail these pore ones estates: Pore men be exalted through virtue.
for they can see day at a little hole, and live as merye, the old proverb
says, as white B^e in Hyue. I pray you pity them with measure, unless your
large lamentacion should give occasion, to nourishe Idleness, nor that men yet
should disdain the poor But who so stops his ear at the cry of the pore:
shall cry himself and not be heard of God. Math. xxv.
Nor also that pore people, should disdain, murmr, Psalm. cxlvii.
or speak evil against thexaltation, or advancement of them whom God has
plucked out of the dust, to be his ministers in the rule of this world. And as
for thoppressours, be pacient: for the same god that gives them preparatiues
with warninges, as the plague: will also give them a purgation, and expulse them
from him, except they do repent. For gather they never so much, beware the
third heir of an extorcioner, and oftentimes he does not enjoy his goods
himself. For Solomon says: Haer^ditas ad quam festinatur in principio, in
nouissimo benedictione carebit: Prouer. xx.
The heritage yt comes to hastily at the first, shall not be blessed at the
end. And in an other place, says he, who so hordeth up riches, Sudden gotten
substance remains not long.
with the disceiptfulnesse of his tongue: he is vain, and a Fool, and like
unto them that seek their own death, this is their end. Therefore, my brother
disquiet not thy mind, content thee in thine estate: keep thine own goods,
spend them to Gods glory, desire none other man's. L^^ no man be angry with an
other man's folly.
And when thou do see the wicked in great prosperity, disdain them not:
neither fret thy self, thou have nothing to do with them, but to make
accomptes for thine own self: and be not forgetful of the Prophets words
when he said: Noli emulare in malignantibus. etc. that is: Fret not thy self,
because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious against the evil doers, for
they shall be cut down like grass* and be withered even as the green herb.
Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good, that thou may dwell in the
Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Delight thou in god, and he shall ^^ue thee
thy hearts desire. He which loves God, shall have hearts rest.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him and he shall bring it to
pass. etc If thou art troubled in thy mind resort unto his holy word: and
ministers for the soul. And whereas thou art sick, Ecclesiast.
and sore in body dispyce not his ordinary means, but honor ye Physician,
because of infyrmity: the almighty has created him for yt purpose, yt through
the virtue of Physic, thy name may be changed from Sickness into Health. I
therefore will now cease, and give place unto the Divines, and Moral men, which
with tongue and pen can give good counsel, and heavenly Cordialles for the
sick, sore, afflicted spirit.

And now to the first part of your question conserninge Physic, which is the
race wherein we begun to run. Let us now come again into that plain
path, hold on still, and then we shall the sooner come to our ways end. And then
sit us down, and rest us quiet^y a Gods name: for rest is an Image of Heaven,
after labor. Your question was thus of them which do abhor the sight, or
smelling of medicin, being ready to vomit also, to behold the vessels,
wherein medecin was given: to that question you answered your self. The
cause was, the stomach does abhor those things that offend the senses, as
in seeing, smelling. etc. (But in deed our sense of smellyng is worse then any
other living beasts, as Aristotle says in his book of senses: Odoratum
peiorem habemus quam alia animalia. Further says he, Aristo. in libro de Sens.
man only does smell and take delight in the odours of flowers or sweet things:
Even so does his nature abhor stinking things But specially they which be
clean of Nature, or by accidents. And this is known by natural Philosophy,
and Physic: and whereas the Philosopher does leave there the Physician does
begin. Although there be many secret hidden desires within nature, known
only to the same, and hydden from ye Physician: Nature has many hidden
desires, unknown to the Physicians.
As example, some women being with child, desire Tar, yea, I have seen them
eat Soap, and hurt them not, with other vile things, that I will not name.
Without nature had led them, death would f^llow: yet Physic compteth them
deadly. These be the secret hidden things with in nature.) But now to the
question.

When nature is so weak and feeble, that it does lose and abhor, to see or
smell medecin: the best remedy is thus, that you give laxatiue Claret, made
after this manner.

Medecines for feeble stomachs to purge ge^tly
R. Clean Claret, or white li, x. of Polipodie, Honey, ana. li. ii. Agarik.ii
Cinnamon, Cloves, Spicknard, Ginger, Galingall, ana..i of Peper.iii. First make
it thus: temper the clarifyed Honey with wine and draw it through a Colander,
and stamp the Polipodie, and strongly strain it, and sees it to the third
part, and beat your spice into powder, and put them into abagge made of a piece
of a serce or bulter then put your tempered wine, Honey, and juice of Polipodie,
together, put in your bag with spice, and sees all in a closse vessel well
Tinned, and strain your bag oftentimes. And then receive this drink, and
give a draught to your weak, feeble, stomach, according to your strength. And
for Honey you may put in clean Sugar, and to your spices, you may put to
Seen..iii. And when you drink of this, you must drink clean cold water, or
runninge water after it. Now sir if you will restrain, or stop the body, when
it is to much laxatiue: or draws nature to vehemently. Then give hoate water
to drink, and this is both pleasant, and profitable to nature, although to
many it seem unpleasant. The^ take spices in pouders, according to the
property of the humor, or complex^on, which ought to be purged, puttyng the
water and the said spices with a little Sugar, into a closse vessel of glass
and sees it in a vessel of water. Provided, that the said vessel of Glass be
wrapped in Hay, or else stand in a plain stillitory, making a good fire under
the same, and then you may take it forth, after it be well and closse sodden,
and strayned. And either receive it your self, or else give it to others. But
if it be bitter, put in more sugar into the same, to please your stomach.
The more spice you do take* the more virtue it has for the melancholy, or
flegmatike.

Item you may do thus, take a mean quantitye of Elleborus albus, chopped
small with a cuttinge knife, sees it with Barley, with clean Water, into a
thickness. Then feed an Hen eight days, with the same Corn, and Elleborus,
and at eyghte Days end, kill the same Hen, and seethe it, and put in no
Salt but Croomes of Bread and Sugar, and drink this broth. Put in Manna if
you will, and eat the flesh of the same Hen, and it will purge the same,
without any molestation or hinderaunce to Nature, I assure you, and that I
have proved. Even so have a great number proved, Elleborus albus, the poyso^
thereof.
Ell borus albus, to their great hurt, and peril of death by vomittinnge,
yea, almost expyring among the Dog Leches, and murderers. But beware of them,
and then thou shall be called Health, and no more sickness, by Gods grace.


Sickness. IS there no consideration to be had, in the ages of Men, or Women?
may the medecin giver, give hand over head, to the tender Child, middle age,
and old men, all a like without hurt to them: I would fayn know, what to do
in this case. For in the country, the medecin that is given to a woman,
of.xxiii year old: is also given to a man of xlvi. year old.


Health. YEs surely, diversity of age must be considered, in the ministracion
of medecines laxatiue. For purging or relaxing medecines be given to sundry
sorts of ages: as to boys, Men, women and children must take medicines
according to their strength and age,
springaldes, Lusty young men, and to the aged. Even so to Womenkynde in their
degree of ages, every one of these has his or their proper purgation. As
Manna of Calabria to young things, and the same to old folks: or else some
gentle solutiue medecin, and to women with child, no laxatiue medecin, until
the v. month be past: and then put gentle ones, as Cassia, Manna, or the
syrup of Roses solutyue, Even so she may have some Seen of Alexandria, their
leaves sodden closse in broth of a Chicken, or Mutton within a covered, earthen
or Tinned pot. Also suppositours may be given to these foresaid folks, that
be excepted in purgacions. And furthermore, with discrecion, the aged may
receive a gentle Glister: because the said aged be grieved with corruption of
the raynes, bladder, and guts. For if children be purged much, because the
humor is light: they shall be in danger of their lives. And living, the said
purgations will make wretched. alter the complexion, and expulse the natural
moisture, whereupon they should increase and grow. As we see young children
having laxes, be wretched, leave, swelled bellyes, crampe, and conuultion. etc.
The aged also in such, shall lose moisture of blood, and fall into melancholy,
drynes, feebleness, lack of sleep, and consumption, through resoluyng of a
strong laxinge medecin. But yet to them which be not in extremes, either of
age or sickness: there be many gentle resolutions, or clensynges of humors, and
may be given without danger. As Reubarbe infused in Cichory water, or the
water of milk, and Mirobalans. But by the way of Parenthesis, let every
minister of medecin fear to give any thing that does, or will dry the body, or
bodies to much, of young or old men: yea, or in the middle age, specially of
choleric men. As example, I did know one, being then a young practicioner,
seven years past who did minister a Purgation wherein was Scammonye, unto a
right worshipful, and a famous Knight, Beware of drying medecines in Summer
for choleric persons.
called sir Robert Wingfeeld of Lethingham, which ^ft soones gave him twenty
stools. The cause was as I suppose now, this Scammony was not prepared
accordingly: and also the pacient Choleric, and then partly weak of nature,
before the receite of the said naughty purgation. Therefore look diligently to
all that I have said before: mark the time of the year, the age, quality, and
complexion of the pacient. The Region or dwelling place, the goodness, quantity,
and mixture of your medecin. etc. and then you shall do no harm, nor play the
ignorant murderer.

Now again to our matter, neither purge young children nor old men in the heat
of Summer, A cauiat for Summer.
and if you will needs do so, then you shall be commenced Doctor of Physic,
wearing William Summers hud for your labor, which will bring you to no small
estimation. So trimly to set the cart before the horse, and to play blind
Bayard yourselfe: therefore be warned, or you be reproved, or ashamed. For in
the heat of Summer, resolution of humors, is quickly made with purgation after
which, ensues euacuacion to much abundantly, to the utter hurt of nature.
Young* lus^y, or sickly persons, may be purged at any time: so the said purging
do agree to the time, and the complexions And they may take more of the
purgations, than the children or old people may, because of their strength. But
yet the spring time is best, and ye Dogs days worst to purgacion: but
sickness comes at al times, and must at al times be diligently watched for, as
a Thief that will steal away the most precious thing called life, which is
our best jewel through the venim of death. But yet death finisheth and makes
an end of every matter, and of every person good and badde. Before whose
battle be fought we live but vncertaynly: although we flatter our own selves.
For happiness is not common to every living creature: but life and death be
common to every living thing. As Aristotle says in the book of life and death
Vita and mors sunt communia omnibus animalibus, And life is but dwelling of the
soul and body together for a time. And in the mean season, clouted and
patched up, with meat, drink, cloth, sleep. And when life is in peril, then
help Physic, Physic, I pray you help: we be afraid to die godly because
we have lived wickedlye. I pray god this Caroll be not to common, yea, or
rather, there be many do so live, that they fear no punishmente or Hell,
after this life, do they never so wickedlye. Excluding God clean out of their
hearts, or rather God refusing them for their wickedness, There is a Psalm
wherein David lamenteth, the wretched estate of fools, saying Dixit insipiens
in cord suo, non est Deus. The folish man has said in heart, there is no God,
Would God that there were few of them. Oh Sickness, Sickness, although thou sekest
Health, and parhappes may obtain it: yet thou shall once change this life,
and see an other World, and also God, for no man can see him perfectly before
death, nor be saved, which in this life, believes not in him.


Sickness. YOur conclusion, although it did not belong to your Exordium, is yet
very Godly: I pray God grant us to be his, and to forsake sin Whereby we shall
so quiet our consciences, that when our arriual shall be into the next land: we
fear not our Passage, or journey from hence thither, for away we must. But
in the mean time the Image of death is to all Flesh so fearful, that Men
would be glad to (...) help and comfort Life, both manne and beast, do
undoubtedly fear death, nature has taught one beast to be in dread of an
other, the sheep to be afraid of the Wolf: the Dear of the Dog? Nature has
prepared that one creature dreadeth and fears an other.
the small birds of ye Hawk. And if they escape wounds curable, there be
medecines, yea nature has taught diverse beasts, and fowls to help
themselves, much more man should do the same. We therefore thank God for his
grace, that he has given us reason: which other living beasts have not,
which do excel us almost in all other things, joined to their natures. As the
Unicorne to have an horn, to withstand poison. The Lion void of dread. The
horse strong and swift. The sheep whose cast coat, makeh us aparel. The birds
to fly, whereas no man can clime the way. The fysh to swim, where as no man
dare follow them* etc. But only reason I say* What makes us else superiors to
beasts? Nothing Well take that away, and then we be the most vilest, and the
worst: and can least help our selves, of any other living things upon the
Earth: as appears by the folish, or mad people, or else young babes. They be
in shape and licknes, as we be. And why are they so miserable? Because reason
is not there, which should govern them, and this is a lamentable case, dear
Health, to see so goodlye Images, lacking their principal beauty and
government called reason. Like ships without their helmes, subject to every
hurt and storm: except the providence of almighty God, their only defense
watched the^. Else should they perish suddenly, in the moving of an hand, as God
does know: And because God has given reason, by which arts are perceived, and
good things, from the bad, ye sick from the whole, and foolishnes from
wisdom. Else, how should thou have showed me reasonably, the natures of
medecines, complexions, age, time, place, quality, and quantity, etc. And
therefore to the matter, in my last question I demanded of the age of men and
women, to whom medecin should be ministered, I have in that case received
mine answer, for which I give you hearty thanks, for your curtesye, and great
gentleness: specially for your reverent and godly zeal, wherein you do neither
smell of the Papists, which are the mother of al disobedience to Princes, and
the spring of errors: nor of them, which be of no religion. But some do say,
it is better to be of one evil religion then of none at all. Now sir I pray
you, after our diversity of ages, what do you say to the varietye of
complexion, in giving purging medecin?


Health ALL is in vain, dear friend, if we do forget the temperament, or
complexions of men, or women. You therefore do very well in calling them to
remembrance: for one complexion, can not bare so much as an other in purging.
No more then a little weak boy, or young Ladde can bear as heavy a burden,
as a great lubber which is sturdy and strong to labor. We therefore give more
a purging medecin, to the flegmatike body than to the choleric, and yet more
to the melancholy, then to the flegmatike. Why so? Because melancholy is an
harder humor, then the phlegm is: and humidity, or moisture, more abounds in
the phlegm, then in the melancholy, Purge phlegm mo^e than chol^r* and
melancholy more the^ ^^^gme.
As example. Therefore when you will give Scammonye, to any choleric person,
give him a penny weight, to the flegmatike, two P^nye weight: but to the
melancholy, give three penny weight, For a cholerik man must have but little
given him. The cause is, the said choler is hoate and dry: and if he should
take as much Scammony, as the melancholy, it would inflame him, and rather
consume the pure natural humiditye, then purge the noisome fylthy humor,
which is the cause of the sickness. For the slender man, Choleris sone^drye*
ther^ore purge but little (...) the fleshy body has much moisture, the^fore
purge more. Of the quantity o^ matter to be purged.
may bide worst a quick purgation: as on the other part, the more fleshy, I
mean flesh, and not gross fatnes, the more he may abide a good strong
euacuacion, or strong medecin, by the reason they have the more moisture and
humidity than the said choleric have.

Furthermore, as concerning matter to be purged, sometime it is much and at
other times, it is scarce, or of little quantity. Therefore the medecin. must
be given accordingly sometime much, and sometime little, small matter is
dispatched with small medecin, Except it be wrapped, compacted, and thrust
together: and then a preparatiue must be given, and after purged. But whereas
much matter is, there it does require a greter medecin, notwtstanding, Much
humor must be purged by little and little, and not at once.
it ought not to be euacuated al at once, but by little and little, and by times
if so be it be in the extreme parts of the Body, as the head, hands and
feet, be the extreme parts.

And in this case. we have ye noble famous prince of phisicions, for a witness
how this matter should be handled, in the best manner saying: Nam secundum
multum est repent euacuare, sieve replere, fallax est, and omni^o inimicum
naturae. That is to say, to make a large or a quick euacuation. or purging:
Replexion, or fylling, is a disceitful thing and an utter ennemy to nature.
Therefore beware of extremity in all things, and use the mean and best way, a
gods name, what else have you to say?


Sickness. I Have almost forgotten, how to receive Moiste, or hard Medecines: it
would pl^ase me very much, and not displease you a little yet again to put
me in remembrance. For Sickness God knows, is forgetful Ferendum est
imbecilitas hominis. The weakness or feebleness of man is to be born withal.
Good sir should they be given hot, or cold What say you to the matter?


Health. TO the healthful, liquide or moist medecines, be given cold: and to
the sick persons, Cold medecines to the whole, but warm to the weak must be
given.
they should be given warm, because the virtue of the medecin shall in them
lose, deuyde and expulse matter, when the said medecin stands in the
stomach or guts: which in the whole bodies, the pocion or medecin will take
his effect in good part, and this must be done at Morning. The hard medecin,
as I have said at Evening moist, as pills: l^zi^gs after midnight. Pouders at
none in broth, clari^ied posse^ ale at eueninge. And why be pills given at
Night? Because a man may Sleep well after them. What does Sleep then
prevail? Because sleep makes the Body warm within, and Pills be very
hard: and therefore they must be resolved with warmness. To what manner of
men. To them, which have the rich men's sickness. What is that? Forsothe the
gout, which many gentlemen be tormented wythall: as example. Sir Rychard
Fulmerston knight, Barthram Anderson Esquyre. etc. The Gout loue^h rich men,
but is afraid of poor (...).
For the Gout is sore afraid to dwell among poor men: for they keep him so
hardly, and punysh him with cold, and labor. etc. But the bitterest pills of
all in ward medicines, do fardest pearce to the hands and feet, to purge and
heal them. And in the feet the Gout is placed: therefore pills be good for
the Feet. Who can denay it, which I have spoken?


Sickness. AFter purgations, oftentimes it happens, that the Pacient falls
into a Fever, called Ephemera febris, or a light Ague: which may do more hurt
to nature, if it be not helped quickly. What is the cause I pray you tell me?


Health. TRuly, there do oftentimes chance, such evil accidents after
purgations, through sundry causes. Of overmuch purging the body, the reamedy to
help the same.
As sometime by to mutch euacuacion, clensing, or purging. Whereupon the
Spirits cause unnatural heat, and thereof insueth an unnatural flaming or
heat called an Ephemeral, and likewise it chances by ouermutch eatinge or
drinking, as of Wine. etc. and also by cold or by attraction of over many
humors to the stomach, or the lack of the quantity of medicine, which has
no virtue or strength to be purged, but remains still in the stomach, and
thereby does continue putrifed, hurting the body and making a fever: if this do
chance, then put the Pacient into a Bath, if he be able. And let there be
made a good fire, or hot house, for this Pacient, and anoint him before and
behind with Vnguentum dialthea, or else with Vnguentum Martiaton and bring him
close with clothes, from the balne or Bathe to his Bed, and keep him from
sleep eight hours: and so shall he be dispatched clean, and made whole,
being purged again* to cleanse the inward parts, as the stomach. etc. But if
ye Pacient be to weak to come to the Bathe: refresh him in his Bed, with
wholesome suppings. Keep him warm, in a sweet chamber, and then give him an
easy laxatiue, of drawn Cassiafistula..j. with water of Borage..iij. or else
with sweet Calabria Manna..ss. And often it chances, that Men are dry after
purging, then give them small Ale clean brued, or P^isane, or else clean cold
water, Gum Arabicke, and Dragantum be sodden. And to gargarisme these
things in his mouth and Throat: and to put Prune stones in cold water, and
chafe them with the Tongue up and down in his Mouth, and so renew them
still. And keep the mouth, Teeth, and tongue clean with washing, clensing, To
cool the mouth.
and scraping: and this shall comfort the sick Man. Which else shall be
corrupted, defiled, and so anoyed, that it shall be as paynfull to himself, as
hugely, and noisome to the beholders of the said sick Man or Pacient.


Sickness. WEll, then I do perceive, that this should suffice to help them,
which be not well purged before: and also to cool them, in their great
thyrst and dryness.


Health. NO not so: it is not sufficient to quench. For, first you must
understand, the occasion of this thyrst: first that it cu^meth of hot choler
not purged, of which I speak not. But when the body is well purged of dry,
yea, or of moist humors, then lackinge moystnes, it must needs follow,
dryness will eftsoons ensue. Then we give water, where in the four cold
seeds, gum Arabike, gum Dragagantum, and cru^mes of bread have bin sodden:
drawn through a strayner, this is given blood warm. Now sir, there is a
dryness, as I have said, which when it comes, declares the body is well
purged, as some men suppose. But therein I take, that they do mistake the
words of Hippocrates: Quicunque in pharmacijs purgantur, Hippocrates.
non fitiunt: non quiescu^t, donec sitiunt: non enim semper bonam purgationem
significat: that is: Who so ever be purged, and thyrst not, the pacie^t takes
no rest, until they do thyrst: this does not always signify, the purging to be
good. Take this for an example. One called Beumayne* has a pletorike body that
is a body full, or replenished with gross humors, aboundauntly compact together
this gross body must be purged: well, he takes a purgacion by Electuarie,
Example.
it works upon Beuman. Now if he feel himself very dry, with a great thyrst,
desiring to drynk after five, six, or seven stools: what is this, a sign
good, or bad? No it is an evil sign, and is proved thus: cholerike or dry
humors be attract, and drawn up into ye stomach, and therefore they are not
expulsed. Whereof there ryseth a hot and a dry phlegm, smoke, or vapor, into
the throat, and spyritual parts: causing the thyrst a foresaid. How to know
whether Choler be purged, or no.
What reamedy for this gross body, then I pray you? None other, but with
speed to give him an other laxatiue medicide, to purge the said choler, and
dry matter, and then the thyrst will soon, or quickly cease. And so in the end,
he shall be better purged of ye grosnes of humors, perhaps than cleansed from ye
corruption of evil conditions. For a bodily medicine ca^ smally preuayl, or
take any effect, in ye Regiment of the Mind or Soul. Also, if such a gross
body as I have named, which is called Pletorike, do wax dry or thrifty,
after.xij.xvj. yea or.xx. stools: the^ is not haot Choler alone in the
stomach, but in all the members of the body. Purge him still with gentle
Electuaries, by little and little, until he feel moisture in his Throat,
and that mutch. And to conclude, whosoever being gross, and very dry, before
his Purgation, is sick of the Fever quotidian, or tercian: the same must be
purged, in the same manner, as I have said before^ What harm Wine does in a
fever, or after purging.
But the lean cholerike man, is soon purged, and when he is dry: let him take
his reamedy, as is a foresaid, a Gods name. It happens also oftentimes, that
the pacient cannot away with cold Water: yea and unknown to the Physician,
the said Pacient drynketh Wine, to his great danger, hurt, and peril: for
thereof follows hot inflamacion, and torment with pains in the belly. If
this do happen, then with speed provoke Uomit, with drynking warm water, and
Sallet oil, thrusting a Fether into the Throat, or a Finger as far as it
may go, and so Uomit. This helps, but do it speedely, my good friend, for
sundry causes, to avoid such danger, as else would follow.


Sickness ONe question I will ask you, because, cause moves me so to do. I
have taken oftentimes Purgacions, and as the Physicion has said, they were
excellent good, well compounded, new, the quantity, place, and time
convenient, to receive them. But to conclude, they would not work
accordingly. What is to be said therein, I pray you tell me?


Health. Does cause, cause you to move this question to me? Certain causes
which le^ medicine to work.
I will show you three sundry causes, which let the medicine to make
euacuation, or woorkyng. The first cause may be, by the reason the purgation is
to weakly made: else the dosse or quantity is to little, which remains to the
hurt of the body unpurged. The second cause may be, that the body is to mutch
cold, and subject to melancholy, as me thyncke youres is. The third cause is,
the resol^cion or wasting of humors, does extinguishe or quench the virtue of
ye laxatiue medicine: Example o^ Wax and Fyr^
as it happens sometime in the Phlegmatike bodies In whom, when soever the
phleume begins to dissolve, eftsoons and by and by it quenches, even as
Wax will sometime quench a burninge Charcoale, when it is melted upon it. And
because gross humors are resolved, and cannot be expulsed: then there
follows an importable dolor, Signs of death through purging the body.
and a mighty torment about the stomach, and intrailes. And in ye end, such
solucio^, or none other, but a manifest sign, or peril of death to follow.


Sickness. MAry, this is a poynct next the worst, and an extreme case: it is
high time for a man to be wise, and to look diligently to his Pacient, now, or
else never. God help, what reamedy?


Health. THE best reamedy is this, when such peril approaches, with the
strength of Men's hands, When the Pacient is in peril ye reamedy to help him.
take up the Pacient warmely with clothes folded about him, not hard,
boisterous, or co^berous about ye said pacient. But dilligent, quick, easy, and
trim: and bring him into a hot Stophe, or Bathe. Or having none such, the^
prepare a very good fire, as they term it, made of Charcoale, if you may: and
then anoint his back bone, with the Oils of Camomill. Capers, and Roses. And
then anoynte the Belly, breast, and Sides with ye same: then put a warm Tyle
stone, in a double linen clothe, and apply it very warm to the Belly.
Wherefore is this done? To the end that the natural heat may be made strong:
and also that thereby, the medicine may be excited, stirred, or moved to
expulse, A Clister t^ molify the belly in the tim^ of danger.
and do his feate. Now if this move him not to go to the stool, then give him
a moli^ying Clister, made with Mallows, Mercury, Polipodie, Agarike, brayed
and sodden in water strayned, and mingle ye decoction with oil of Olyue. and
put in a little Hiera picra simplex thereunto. But if Euphorbium be in
medicines, as in a Clister, it will excoriate the skin of the Guts, and cause
a bloody flux to run forth: it is also helped this way, as to drink Oil,
and warm water, or else the far broth of Porke a Ladlefull, wherein.xii. of
Alzarabaca leaves, the juice of them be strayned* and drink this, it will
provoke vomites, A good note to be observed when nature is weak.
rather to help, than hinder the body. If the pacient feel no dolor
abundantly in the Guts, then purge not mutch, unless mutch purging, wherein
Scamonie is, do cleave to the stomach. But if such things chance, give the
Pacyent to drink, water of Mirrhe. It is often times seen, In Ellebor^s you
shall know how to correct the same, folio. 19. Simplici. He means Elleborus
albus.
that when medicine begins to work within the body, in the way of purging:
then Nature is so weak, that it cannot take his effect, as it should do
accordingly: and by the means thereof the said medicine remains, chokyng the
stomach, and neither comes upward, neither downward. What is then the best
remedy to be used: None other,.ss.
but to follow Hippocrates, which says: Elleborus mouit corpus* etc. Elleborus
moves the body. Therefore: let the body ^e moved therewyth, in drink half a
dragme, which is corrected in a Raddish root: and so vomit will follow, but
walk still in the close house, and take no wind. And so ye Medicine shall be
dispersed, and vanysh through vomites and sweat, in vehement mouyng of the
body. Now if he can not walk, let him sit, but sleep not: and then after
three hours, give him Oxicatarticum imperiale, saccarum violaceum. etc.


Sickness. Extremes be perilous things.
LIke as some men, in them medicine will skant work: in other Men, medicine
does so mutch work, that it will not cease, until it have (almost, yea, or
altogether) slain the body: what help for them then?


Health. THere be two ways, Death, or Life. If the body be dead, Death is
the end of Life.
there is no remedy* no medicine, no counsel, nor comfort, to call it again.
But patience, and farewell, well, we shall all follow in the end of our lives,
when we have run our race. Therefore, bury him that is dead, let him rest in
peace, and cease from sorrow. But unto the living that is in hope of cure, The
causes why medicine work immoderately.
if his medicine be to violent, cruel, and dangerous, causing flixes:
consider the fault is in the Physician, which has given to sharp a purgacion,
or in the unwise Pacient, which will not keep the house with a cloase stool,
but sytteth in the Wind abroad in the Air, Yard, or Garden. etc. Or else in
the vndiscretion of the Apothicarye puttyng in to mutch Scamony, or this may be
the cause: the aptnes of humors prepared to expulsion, as it chances often
to Children that have repletion with hoate humors. And after purgacion,
excoriation or scaldyng of the Guts does follow, which is no small danger
to nature. Therefore to withstand this, we stop the flixe with Planten Water,
or water wherein Planten, Bursa pastoris, and Comphorie are sodden, with
Bolearmony, Gum Arabic, and tower plumbes etc^ or we minister Almond milk
with Rice, etc. or Clisters stopping, as appears in the compounded Medicines,
here before: also comfort the pacyent with Diacodion, syrup of Myrttels, or of
Quinces with warm anointing the pacients belly and his back against the warm
fire, A plaster for the flixe.
with clean clarifyed Honey. Now you shall perceive a bloody flixe by the pain
in the belly, and pouring forth blood, and scrapyng like Leather. Well do as I
have said before, and apply a plaster of Barley bread crommed into strong
Uineger, and apply it to the Belly: Tenasmus what it is, and how to h^lpe it.
and give him to drink the foresayed Sirupes or Planten Water, wherein the
flowers of Pomgranets or Mulberies have been sodden in. etc. And give him
Diacodion, every night to bedward, and in the night also. Mary there is a
perilous gryefe in the Belly called Tenasmus, having a will or desire to go to
the stool, and yet cannot void or purge any thing at all: this comes of
the acuitie or sharpnes of the medicine or else of the ouersyght of the Pacient:
let the Pacient therefore, sit over Apozemate or Decoction of Pomegranet
Flowers, barks, or rindes of Pomegranets, Knotgrasse, Roses, Coriander, Peache
leaves, Planten, Oak leaves, or the water wherein Mulberies have been sodden,
Acatia, and Hipoquistis, and Quinces, beaten together and sodden, and the
pacient to sit warm and close therein, and to drink Diacodion, puttyng in a
little powder of Saffron, to comfort the heart.


Sickness. YOu say this is a good remedy for the flixe. It often times
chances, that a man after such torments in the belly can not be without
mutch noysomnes in the stomach: and when the stomach is anoyed, how is it
helped, or with what Medicine?


Health. LIke as ye earth is the mother and nourish of every living thing, and
feeds all creatures good and bad: The Earth is mother of every living thing.
so is ye stomach the storehouse or Kitchen, which does nourish both the
members and every part of the Body, noble and unnoble: as the heart which is
the king within the body, and to all the subject members in order, the place
from whence they all be fed is only the stomach, which must be kept clean,
as a pure Uessell, and must not be offended, grieved or anoyed, but nourished,
fortifyed and pleased: now if it have lost appetite through lothsomnesse, How
to quicken the stomach.
anoint the same with oil of Maces or of Wormwood, and apply Galen his proper
Plaster to the stomach, and drink the tart sirupe of Pomgranets, or with sower
Grapes with gross Peper therein, and give the pacient in his sauce the juice of
Mints, and of Parsely, put in Ginger and Sugar: when he has eaten his meat,
give the said pacient sirupe of Roses and Diarodon, and this shall help his
stomach with moderate drinking. And keeping ye body from sweating heat* and
quaking cold, use tempera^ce only, Extreme heat and cold be evil.
for ye mean diet is best of al. And who so does use it, shall never fall into
ye snares of surfits or sickness.


Sickness. THe chief thing that I had thought to have demanded, and the very
mark, that I would have thee to sh^te at, is to tell me some thing of dieting
my self with meat and drink, in Health and Sickness.


Health, THere is to be considered, in eating, and drynking, the time of
hunger, A consideracion in eating and drinkinge to be had and of the variety
of meats.
and custom of the place of eating, and drynkinge, whether it be cold or hot.
Also the time of ye year, whether it be Winter, or Summer: also the age or
complexion of ye eater, and whether he be whole, or sick: also the things
which be eaten, whether they be Fyshe, or Flesh, Fruicts, or Herbs. Note also
the Complexions, and temperamentes of the said meats, hot, or cold, dry, or
moist, and most chiefly mark the quantity, and so forth. And like as Lamps
do consume the Oil, which is put unto them, for the preservation of the
light, althought it cannot continue for ever: So is the natural heat, which
is within us, preserved by humidity, and moystnes of blood and phlegm, whose
chief engender, be good meats and drynkes. A cause why the Soul departs
from the bod.
As Auicen says, de ethica. When natural heat is quenched in the body, then
of necessity, the soul must depart from the Body. For the workman cannot
work, when his Instruments are gone: so the spyrites of life can have no
exercise in the body, when there is no Natural heat to work upon. Without
meat says Galen, it is not possible for a man to live either whole, or sick:
and thus to conclude, no vital thing lives without refection, and
sustenaunce. Whether it be animal, reasonable as man, or animal, as brute
Beasts, without reason, as Tree, Gum, Metal, Stone, Herb, or any vital thing
insensibly. All these things be nourished with the influence, or substance of
the four Elements.


Sickness. Truly thou know well my Complexion, and disorder of my diet,
what reamedy for me, that have lived without order of Diet?


Health. I Know it well, thou art phlegmatike: and therefore it is long, To
eat both fish and flesh together hurts the flegmaticke.
or thy meat be digested. When thou do eat fyshe and flesh together, it
does corrupt in thy stomach, and styncke: even so does hard Cheese, and cold
fruicts. And old poudred meats, and raw herbs, engender evil humors: so
that diversity of quantity, and quantity of diverse meats, do bring mutch pain
to ye stomach, and engender many diseases, as thou may read in the first
book of Galen: Galen. Hippocrates.
de Iuuamentis membrorum. cap. iiij. And the Prince himself says, in. iij.
pri. doc. ij. cap. vij. saying nothing is more hurtful, than diverse meats, to
be joined together. For while as the last is received, the first begins to
digest. And when the table is garnished with diverse meats some roasted, some
fried, and baked, some warm, some cold, some Fyshe, some flesh, To feed of
diverse sorts of me^es corrupts the body.
with sundry fruicts, and Sallets of diverse herbs, to please thine Eye:
Remember with thy self, that the sight of the^ all, is better than the feeding
of them all. Consider with thy self, thou art a Man and no beast, therefore be
temperate in thy feeding, and remember the wise words of Solomon: Eccle. 37.
be not greedy in every eating, and be not hasty upon all meats. For excess
of meats, brings Sickness, and Glottony comes at the last, in to an
unmeasurable heat. Through surfeit has many one perished, Good d^e^ prolongeth
Life.
but he that dyeteth himself temperately, prolongeth his life. Therefore
gross Fyshe, Lambs flesh, and the Inwardes of beasts, raw herbs, Pigs
brains, and all slimy meats, be evil for thee: but late suppers be worst of
all, specially if they be long, for they cause paynfull Nights to follow. But
Galen says in his book Di euchimia, the meats which be without all blame,
be those which be between subtle, and gross. Good bread of clean wheat,
flesh of Capons, or Hens, Fesantes, What kinds of meats does cause good
blood.
and Partriches, Pigeons, and Turtell Doves, Black birds, and small field
birds, roasted Ueale, and Mutton: These do engender good blood, says Galen.
Note also, that any other meat, that thou do eat at supper, although it
seem repugnaunt to a phlegmatic stomach, if thou sleep well after it, and
feel no pain* thou may use as a meat necessary. And when thou can not
sleep well, if the defaulte came through meat: A good rule to be observed
mark that meat or drink, although it seem pleasant, refuse it as an
Enemy. And where as thou have used evil diet, as accustom in abusing time,
quantity, and quality: by little and little bring thy self into good order,
and to time, both for thy Breakfastes, Dynner, and Supper. Provide always, to
eat good things: but not many things. For like as repletion, or abundance of
meat, is an enemy unto the Body, and Soul, and brings sudden death: even so
is emptiness, a shortner of time, a weaker of the Brain, a hinderer of
Memory, an increaser of Wind, Choler, and Melancholy. And oftentimes to many,
brings sudden death also, except Nature have some thing to work upon, as
I did tell thee before-vse some light things at breakefast of perfet
Digestion. What hurt comes of an empty Stomach when ye go to bed.
Within four hours after receive thou thy dinner, observing the good order of
Diet, drynking Wine, or Beer oftentimes, and little attonce, eschuinge great
draughts of drink, which be used among beasts, and myngle thy meat with
myrthe, which is ever the best dishe at the Boarde, and be thankful to God.
And so leave with an appetite, passing the time wisely beetweene dinner, and
supper, with exercise, labor, study, or pastime, An order of dieting.
unto ye end of.vj. hours, and then begin thy supper: provided that if it be
shorter than thy dinner, eating thy meat by little and little: for greedy
eating is hurtful to nature, as Galen says in his Dietary. Note also, Galen.
die.
that thou must eat more meat in Winter, than in Summer, because thy natural
heat is closed within thy body in Winter, but universally spread in Su^mer.
Also cholerike men may as lightly digest Beef, Baken, Uenison. etc. The
Choleric.
With asmutch speed, and little hurt, as the flegmatike man may eat, Rabet,
Chicken, and Partrige. etc. But the Melancholy man, The Melancholye
through the coldenesse of the Stomach, has not the strength in ye Stomach,
as he has promptness in will: to eat things warm, and moist, is good for
him. The sanguine man, is not so swift in his digestion, as the hot choleric
man is. The Sanguine.
But notwithstanding, he has good disgestion, through the humidity, and
warmenesse of blood, and coueteth to eat sweet things, which greatly augment
the blood: Therefore sharp Sauces, made with Vinegar, Onions, and Barberies.
Purslen, Sorell, be wholesome: small Fishes that feed upon ye stones, in fair
running waters, Cucumbers, and pure French wine, partly delayed with water, be
good for ye Sanguine Men to keep them from mutch increase of flesh.


Sickness. THou have showed unto me a discreate, and wholesome Order of Diet
perticulerly to my self, and partly to other Complexions, but what rule or
pretty government is there for sick Folks, that be suddenly vexed or other
ways?


Health. An order for ye dieting of such as be sick of sharp Fevers.
THey that be suddenly vexed with sharp sicknesses, must have thin Dyets, with
water Gruell, thin Mutton, or Chickens, Potage without any fat or thickness,
Uyolet leaves, Endyue leaves, and such like cooling herbs, and let their
drink be made of Ptisantes. Thus do to them, that have hot sharp
sicknesses, occasioned of choler. And also cold syrupes of Endive, Uyolets,
Sugar, water and Uynegar, sodden together be very wholesome. But if sicknesses be
long of continuance, their diet must be the thicker, and their meats made
stronger, Short sickness, thin broathe: long sickness, thick broathe.
specially if their dyseases be cold, with the flesh of Cocks, Capons,
temperate Wine stewed Broathes, with wholesome herbs, as Buglose, Borage,
Bazill, Parsely, and Fenell roots, with some Maces, Dates, Damask prunes,
Raysons of ye Sun, and such like. Syrupes of Isope, Of Syrupes and drynkes.
and Citrones: provided, that they neither take meat, nor medicine, immediately
before, or soon after their syts, posset Ale with clarified herbs accepted,
which they may take for their comfort, according to ye estate of their Disease.
Such as be sick, must have Meat contrary to their Complexion. For they that
be cold, must have hot meat, and medicines. And they that be dry, must have
moist things. But they that be hot, must have cold things* for th'ardent
heat of the Fire, is quenched with moystnes of the water, and so the quantity
of one Element overcomes the quality of an other. And in deed, Physic
says, the bodies that be hot, must be fed with things like themselves, as
they that be hot with hot things to preserve their heat, and such like. But
when they do exceed in heat, cold, moist or dry: then let the qualities of
moystnes, be tempred with drynes, and the coldness, with warmenesse. For like
as man delights in things of like, As the complexion is, so man requires his
food, in the time of health things like to his nature but in sickness the
contrary.
as the Cholerike man, in choleric things: even so do Beasts, and
Fruictes, as the Coloquintida, which is bitter, delights in bitter ground.
Hot spices delight to grow in hot ground, and every fruict, and herb, does
delight in the thing that is like it self: beware of distemperaunce, surfets,
or repletion, rear suppers, and drunkenness, make thy Belly no shambles, or
Kitchen.


Sickness. But if a man feel great grief after meats, or drinks, what way is
there then, for to help him?


Health. Use walking up and down, and perhaps, that will Digest, as Auicen
says: And Rasis says, Auicen the iii. doctrine, the vii. chapter. Moderate
walk after meat, profit lj.

Galen in.vi. de accidenti and morbo. Capitu i. Auicen in.13. Theo. iii. trac.
iii. Capit.


to walk an hundred Paces after meat, is wholesome. For it comfort
digestion, provoke vryne, and gieueth one power and strength of stomach, to
eat his supper. But the counsel of Galen must here be observed, which
says: there is no meat, but it will corrupt, or styncke, if the body be cast
into a sudden heat, by strong travel soon after meat, which corrupcion of
digestion, is the mother of all diseases, and the beginner of all infirmities,
as Auicen reports. And if you see, this will not help to digest your
ingorged full stomach, then provoke your self to sleep, lying upon your
Right side, leaning toward your Breast and Belly, laying your warm hand upon
your Breast, as Auerhois says: the power of digestion is made strong, when a
man sleapeth. For natural heat, that is drawn inwardly with warmenesse, or
heat, has power to digest: but if sleep ease you not, provoke vomit, or fast
it out: and this is the counsel of many learned Men. For it is no marvel,
although many meats corrupt one man, Auicen in secundo doc. capitu. 6.
which be of sundry workings in the Stomach, Liver, and Ueynes, for the
qualities do hinder Nature, asmutch as the superfluous quantityes. And take
heed these signs, and evil Tokens, be not found in you. The pains of all
your Members, with Idleness, and weariness to go, or move your body:
Sudden great Blushinges, or redness in your Face, Ueynes swelled and puffed
up, red Uryne, and gross Skin, extended or stretched out with fullness, like a
blown Bladder, and Pulses full, small desire to meat, ill rest, and gryefe in
sleep, seeming in the sleep to bear some intolerable burden, or dreaming to
be speachlesse: Dangerous tokens.
these be the evil and dangerous tokens of replecion. And of this I gieue you
warning, for it has slain as many by abundance: as hunger has killed
through scarcity. Therefore forget not vomites, whereof I do intend to speak
shortly hereafter: how to vomit by medicine accordingly.


Sickness I Have heard thee say, that wholesome Air, Of air*
is a great comfort to Man's Nature: but corrupt Air, does mutch harm. I shall
require you therefore, to tell me of the good, and the bad Air, that I may
learn to use ye good, and refuse the bad.


Health. GALEN in lib. de Sectis, says: A wise Physician ought to know the
Natures of men, of waters, of air, of regions, Phisicions ought to have a
perfet knowledge of the nature of places, and air.
and dwellings, generally. Particularly, to thy self being a natural
Englysheman, of birth and education. This Land is very temperate, howbeit, our
dwellings in this land be variable, as Fennes, Marryshes, Woods, Heathes
Ualleyes, Playnes, Rocky places, and near the Sea side. But ye said Galen,
Note which is the most wholesome air, to dwell in.
geeueth counsel in his Regement of health, saying, a good air, which is pure
and wholesome, is that, which is not troubled in standing water Pooles. Therefore
Marrysh grounds, and places where Hemp, and Flax are rotten, What airs
corrupt the blood.
and dead Cartons be cast, or multitudes of people dwelling together, or houses
environed with standing waters, where into Priuies or sinkes have issues, or
wallowyng of Swyne, or carrion unburied, or foul houses, or such like places,
be dangerous, and corrupt the blood, which is worse than corruptions of meat.
For Hippocrates says, that all places of concauities, Corrupt airs bring
sundry diseases.
as Sellers, Ualtes, hoales of Mineralles, where mettales be dygged, or
houses, or Walls joined together, whereas the Sun with reflection beats in
with sooden heat, whose absence brings cold: These airs are distempered:
but pleasant clear airs, sweet Gardens, goodly hills, in days temperate,
when one may see far of: these be good. There be certain stars called also
infortunates in their exaltacion, whose influence brings corruption to
creatures, rot, and pestilence, to men and beasts, poysonyng waters, and
killing of Fish, blastyng of Fruicte in Trees, and Corn in the Fields,
infectyng men with diverse diseases, Fevers, Paulsies, Dropsies, Frensies,
Falling syckenes, and Leprosies. Against the said influences, Fervent prayer
unto God does mitigate his wrath.
all Chrystian men must pray to God to be their defense, for they be Gods
Instruments, to punysh the Earth. Example, we have of mortal Pestylence,
horrible Fevers, and Sweatyng syckenes, and of late a general Fever, that this
Land is often plagued wythall. Then make a Fire in every Chimnay within thy
house, and burn sweet Perfumes, to purge this foul air. Sweet air to be
made in the time of sickness, with perfumes: What situacion is best for a house.
And now in conclusion to answer thy question, for ye health of dwelling,
Auicen says, to dwell upon Hills is cold: and in Ualleys, comprysed within
Hills, is hoate. Upon a Hills side, against the North, is cold and dry.
Toward the West, gross, moist: very subtle toward the East: and clear and
warm, toward the South. And Rasis says: in his first book Afforie. A man
dwelling near the Sea side, or great Waters, can not live long, nor can not be
without weakness of members or blyndnesse, but the best buildyng of an house
is upon a dry Ground, and a hill toward the West side, Pleasant people,
their air.
and south west doors, and Wyndowes open toward the East, and Northeast,
having near unto the said house, sweet Sprynges of running waters, coming
from stony or chalkye Ground, which is both pleasant and profitable to the
house. For Hyppocrates says in his book of air, Airs are to be observed* in
sickenesses as in health.
and Water, the second chapter: Cities and Towns, placed toward the East, be
more surer, than the Towns builded toward the North, for temperate air, or
Wind, and their sickenesses be less. And in the said book Hippocrates
greatly comme^deth pleasant Rivers, running toward the risyng of the Sun:
the dwellers in such places (says he) be fair and well favored, smothe
skynned, clear and sharp voices, and this shall suffyce, what and where good
and pleasant dwelling is. Note also, that thou must observe air, as thou
do meat: cold sickenesses, warm air: dry syckenesses, moist air. And
so in the contraryes to them that be sick, and they that be whole. air of
like qualitye, is most wholesome. They that have long syckenesses, change of
airs is a great help, both in Fevers, Dropsies, Falling syckenes, and Reumes.
Read Hippocrates in his book of air.


Sickness. I Have found very mutch disquyetnes in my body, when my servant and
laboring Family have felt ease, and yet we are pertakers of one air, and my
toode is fine, and theirs gross.


Health THe cause why thy laboryng Servant, in the Fyeld at Plough, Pastures,
or Wood, have such good health, is exercise and labor: Moderate exercise is
a sufferaine thing.
and disquietnes, comes partly of idleness, and lack of travel, which
moderately used, is a thing most sufferain to nature. Read of exercise in the
book of household, written by Xenophon: wherein he shows, ye Princes would
labor, plant. etc.


Sickness. I pray thee tell me some thing of exercise?


Health. THE well learned man Fulgentius says: that exercise is a Fyle, and
chafer of the heat natural, which chaseth away Sleep, Fulgen, in lib. 2.
and consumes superfluous humors, wastyng the Natural virtues, redeming of
time, enemy unto Idleness, due unto young Men, joy unto old Men, and to say
the truth, he which does abstain from Exercise, shall lack the joys of
Health, and quietness, both of body and mind. And Galen says, in his
Regement of Health, if we will keep perfect Health, we must begin with
labors, and moderate Travel, and then to our meat and drink, and so forth
to our sleep: and this is the cause why Faukeners, Shouters, Hunters,
Runners, What profit comes by exercise.
Tenisplayers, Plowmen, and Gardeners, and lyfters of wayghtes. etc. have so
good digestion and strength of Body. Who be stronger armed men tha^ Smythes?
Why so? Because of the exercise of their arms: stronger bodied then
Carpenters, whyth lift great Blocks, and Masons, which bear great stones, not
only in their youth, but such men will take marvelous trauayles in age, which
to idell people, seem very paynfull, but unto them selves that Travel, no
pain, but pleasure, because of custom. These people can digest gross meats,
eating them with mutch pleasure, Use makes labor ca^^*
and sleeping soundly after them upon hard Beds: where as the idle Multitudes
in Cities, and in Noble men's Houses, in great numbers for lack of exercise,
do loathe Meats of light digestion, and dainty Dyshes: Mary in deed they may
be very profitable to Phisicions. But if Travel be one of the best preseruers
of health, Aph^.
then is idleness the destroyer of Life as Auerrhois says: and Hippocrates
says, every contrary is removed, and helped by his contrary, as Health
helps Syckenes* ^xercyse puts away idleness. etc, But every light moving,
or sort walkyng, Idleness the mo^her of all mischief.
may not be called an exercise, as Galen says: therefore Tennis, Daunsyng,
Runnyng, Wrastlyng. Ridyng upon great Horses, were ordained as well for the
state of men's health, as for pleasure: whereas they are now converted in many
places, rather to the hurt of many, than the profit of few. Exercise does
occupy every part of the Body, quycken the Spirits. purge the excreamentes
both by the raynes, and Guts, therefore it must be used before meat. For if
strong exercise be used immedyately after meat, it conueieth corruption to
each part of the body, Exercise before m^ate*
because that meat is not digested. But when thou see thy water after meat,
appear somewhat citrine, or yellow: Li^le travel for the sick.
then may thou begin exercise, for digestion is then well: but sick folks,
lean persons, young Children, Women with Child, may not mutch travel. To
conclude: the exercise of Dyce, Cards, fighting, drinkyng, A sign of
digestion.
footebaule, and castyng of the stone, with lusts immoderately used, and such
like, may be called exercyses of fools, rather than of wysemen. I might have
spoken mutch of exercise of hand labor: and of the noble profession, or worthy
estate of a true soldier, but this shall suffice.


Sickness. THere are many idle people in Cities, and in noble houses, do think
the chyefe felicity only, The practice of idle people.
to be from bed to belly, and then from belly or board, to Bed again: none
other lives they will use, than Cards, Dice, or pratlyng title tatle excepted.
Spendyng their times in sleepyng, eating, and laughing: and somewhat else to
small effect. Now for asmutch as they neither can, or will travail, what say
you to the matter.


Health. Idleness brings mischief to the body and soul, and poverty. Gene.
xix.
MAry this kind of life, would make of a noble, or worshipful person, a
deformed monstrous man: with a life short and painful: and eftsoon change a
yoman into ye miserable estate of a beggar. For Idleness and plenty of victuals,
are fyt for such citezens, as were in Sodoma and Gomorha which peryshed in
their lust, idleness and fatness. And although perhaps, there be a great
Number, whyth say in their hearts, The Heathen are better tha^ many Christians.
Non est deus: and look for no life to come. Yet because they have the shapes
of men, not forcyng for the immortality of the soul (for which damnation is
due) yet let them not appear, worse than brute beasts, An example of brute
beasts.
in this poyncte. Or the Heathen infydell, which Heathen are both comely,
clean, worldly wise, valiant, neat and fine, and also have goodly (although
not godly providence to preserve bodily health. For it is reason, they should
so do, seeing they are careless for the soul: but the idle Chrystian, cares
little for both, the belly excepted. Well fare the Heathen, in this honest
manly poinct to preserve nature.

The fat Ox, or ugly brauned Bore, although they can not come out from their
frankes or staules, lackyng Liberty: yet nature has taught them, a trim
wholesome exercise, called fricacion, or rubbing of them selves: chafing forth
by the poares evil humors, Of frication the virtue thereof.
wherein they do find pleasure and health. There is no kind of beast, that
might be long without filthy itch, sores, or skabbes, without they use
fricacion, coming. etc. Fricacion is one of the euacuacions, yea, or
clensynges of Mankind, as all learned affirm: that Mankind should rise in
the Morning, and have his Apparel warm, stretching forth his hands and
legs, preparing the body to the stool, and then begin with a fine Comb to
kembe the hair up and down: the^ with a course warm cloth, to chafe or rub
the head, Neck, Breast, arm hoales, belly, thyghes. etc. and this is good to
open the poares. Further, if any have the Crampe, or is full of Melancholy, or
heaviness of Mind, or else fallen into a sudden cold, through watchyng in a
cold house, or fyeld, When to use rubbing or frication, and wherefore.
or else have a moist reume. etc. What is better than frication, or chafing
with warm clothes? This is ye very best way, but it must be done a mornings,
before meats: but at night it is not good. For then it opens the poares of
the body, and is an enemy to sleep, and quiet rest, and lets sorth natural
virtue, which should nourysh sleep. Now, as concerning the diversity of
frication, or rubbyng, note three things. The first is, Three things to be
observed in Frication.
hard fricacion does open the poares, let forth smoke, and bind the body. Soft
frication does mollify, and relaxe the body, as it is written, Dura frixione
ligatur, molli vero soluitur. But the third which neither is soft, nor hard,
but mean does neither diminysh, nor increase, but indifferently warmeth.
Neither are the spirits or smoke of the natural heat, thereby letten forth
by the poares of the skyn: And all men that use to be trymmed, washed, It is
not good to be trimmed of ye Barber at night, but in the morning.
or rubbed at ye Barbours at euenyng, do err from the regiment of health, but
in the morning it is very good and comfortable, and augmenteth natural heat,
and strength, expulsing sluggyshnes and sleep. So that the body lift some
wayghtye thing from the Ground or else draw a Bow, according to his strength.
Furthermore understand, that all dry and whole bodies, may use fricacion, with
warm and moist oils: And all moist and cold bodies, to use the contrary.
There are also joined to fricacion, two other exercyses: Gestacion the profit
thereof
the one is called Gestacion, that is to be carried of an other thing, without
any travail of the body it self, and as easy cockyng in a Cradell, to be
car^ed up and down in a chair: either in fair Weather, to be rowed up and
down in a tylted Boat or Barge, and this is very good for weak people, which
have had long agues. etc. The second part of this exercise, is Equitacion,
Equitacion is very wholesome.
which may be moderately used of sick men and Women, that be weak through
Fevers, or Timpanye. And that must be used, upon a soft easy going horse, in a
plain pleasant fyelde, in the clear air, upon the fair days. These
exercyses do not only reconcyle sleep, but augment and make strong the
natural virtues. And thus I end of Fricacion, Equitacion, and Gestation: of
this you may read lib. iiij. capi. vi. Aetius. Cornelius Celsus lib. iiij.
capi. xix. who also writes profitably, and plentifully of the same no less
pleasant than good, to man's nature: sudden exercise after meat, makes the
blood foul, corrupts digestion, lets forth natural heat, When to
travel, or play.
makes the stomach cold, brings skabbes: as Hippocrates affyrmeth. Si
impurgatus laboraucrit, vlcera erumpent, therefore in the morning, and two
hours after meat, exercise is best.


Sickness. THis is well, I assure you. But yet I have seen, strong Uomittes
have chanced to men, after their meats. Exercise or Fricacion. etc. what is
the cause thereof?


Health. FIrst, weak stomachs in sick people, or women with child, The
cause of vomit, and when it helps, and when it hurts.
they will quickly vomit, as, we see by custom: also Replecio^ through
meats, or strong drynkes, bring Uomyttes. Notwithstanding vomyte is a goodly
euacuacion, for those persons, which be molested and grieved in their breasts
or stomachs, or them, which be vexed with phlegm, or choler, What persons may
best vomit.
with such like foul humors, which grieve the stomach. And specially to
people, which have short Necks, great breasts, and wide Mouths: For all
these may easily vomitte without hurt. Also they, which have narrow breast, and
long small Necks, may not well vomit, without hurt, or peril of
deaffenesse, and stranglyng: howbeit Hippocrates, the Prince of Phisicions
says, who so has a vomit, without coaction or medicine, Who may worst vomit.
it heals them, which have had a long flixe or laxe. The same Hippocrates
says, who so ever vomiteth black choler upward, without a medicine given,
Uomit helps the flixe.
it is a token of death. Uomittes be also perilous to them that be in
consumption, or weak of nature. The best time of vomits is in Summer, as
Hippocrates affirms.iiij. Aphoris. Aestate quidem superioris magis ventr.
Hyeme autem inferioris medicamentis purgare conuenit. It is more conuenyent,
When to vomit.
for to purge the body downward in Winter, but upward in Summer: specially in
Harvest time. Howbeit, Cornelius Celsus affirms, that no vomit in Winter, is
better than Summer: by the reason the stomach is full of crude, raw fleume.
Galen de lib. primo ratio victus, counsayleth to vomit two times in the Month
saying it is good, that is to say, every,.xv. days. But note this, that you
vomit two days together, for that which is left the first day, shall be cleansed
by vomit the second, But in some vomites, How to provoke vomit, and how to stay
it.
veins are broken through great straynyng of the body: and like as to procure
a vomit, we do minister Oximell Squilliticum, warm Water and Honey, and
sometime Oil, or the leaves of Azarabaccha. etc. Even so we minister when an
evil accydent comes of ouermutch vomit, to the sick body Minte water with
the powder of Mumie, Sage, Mirobalans, Chepoli, the powder of Mastike. And give
to drink Diacodion, small Wine with tosted bread: and thus I do end with
vomittes, which are good before meat, but better after the same two hours: as
affirm diverse men, of great experience.


Sickness. After strong vomits, there chances often times the Hickop, or
yexing, what help for that?


Health. THat is very perilous, I assure you: for after strong purgacions or
vomittes, An hickop after a vomit is perilous.
says Hippocrates, if either conuulsion, or the Hickoppe, called yexing do
come, it is peryllous, and mutch to be feared. Further says he, in his
Aphorism. Conuulsio a veratro lethalis est. A conuulsion, says he, after one
has drunk Elleborus albus is deadly, by the reason that the strength of this
Uenemous Herb, does draw from the Sinews moystnes, To help the Hickope.
and contracteth them with a sudden emptines, and drines that scant help may
be had, but rather deadly Peril follows, or even as if they were aged, paste
Nature, and ready prepared to the place of silence, or the Grave. Yet
notwythstandyng do thus, and refuse not this mean, which has great Virtue..
Meal of Fenegreeke, of Fleaworte, of clean Barley, ana..iiij. and the Oils of
Uyolets, water Lillies, and red Roses, ana..j.ss. Honey..j. mingle all, and
temper them in a mortar: A goobly way to help hickop, coming after vomit.
then sees Mallows, and Uiolets together, ana. M.j. put them into a Mortar*
beat them well, and make two emplasters, applying under the breasts and arm
hoales, meeting toward the Raynes of the back. And gieue the Pacient Goats
milk or Woman's milk with Sugar: and wash his head with warm Wine, wherein
is sodden Roses, Uiolets, Mallows, Barley, and five finger. And then warm
anoint the head with ye Oils of Roses, water Lillies, and Hens grease, and
then make a Bathe for the Pacient to sit in, of Uyolets, Roses, Henbane,
Mallows, Poppy, Lettyce, and water Lillies: and thus I do end of the yexing,
A mean is best.
which is an evil accident, following vomit of two extremes, that is of
repletion and emptiness: a mean is left therefore in every thing. For
extremes you see, are hurtful, both in matters politic, and Physic. etc.


Sickness. There is an euacuation called Sternutacion, or neesing: what does ye
profit?


Health. HIPPOCRATES, of neesing says thus, Sternutamentum fit ex capite,
Cerebro califacto, aut humectata capitis part inani: Aer enim intro contentus
extra erumpit, sonat autem quoniam per angustiam exit: Aphor. 52. That is,
neesing that comes from the head, Of neesinge, the profitte thereof.
is made either of the Brain, which is hot, or else the empty or void place
of the head, being very moist. For the air contained therein, breaks forth,
through a small narrow way: and so comes the sound or noise forth. This is
wholesome, yt the strength of nature forces forth wind, specially once or twyse
in the morning, putting away belching: but more is not good, and who so cannot
neese, it is a sign of weakness, sickness, Neesing does help Women in their
travel
coldness, and age. And to neese after meat, is not wholesome, but when a
Woman labors with Child, or has the Mother, then Neesing is wholesome, and
healthful, and will soon help them: but sometime through strong neesing,
bleeding does quickly ensue, by the breaking of some Ueyn^ Then apply the
Nasalia, and frontarij, as I have written before, in the end* of the
Compoundes.


Sickness. Then what say you of bleeding, what profit or peril is in it?


Health. I Have spoken thereof sufficiently before: thereefore, I say,
remember, that to be letten blood in the Spring time, When it is good to bleed^
is ye best season, as Galen affyrmeth, in libro de Flobothomia, and through ye
same, these euilles are helped. Replecion, Pleurisy, hot Tercians, Frenses,
Pestilence, stoppinge of the terms etc. All the Orgaynes of the Senses are
cleansed thereby. And finallye, the Body is of a weak body, made strong to
the^, Who must no^ bleed.
which are in lusty years. But provide, that neither people in consumpcion,
old folks, Women with child, or yongue children, be letten blood. And no man
to be lette^ blood, after ye good blood appears in bleedyng, for fear of
Crampe, Palsy, or dropsy. Nor none to sleep, after they are letten blood 8.
hours. Tucke and Rapier.
Read Galen vt supra, and Rasis lib. 4. ad Almanso. There is a new kind of
Instruments to let blood withal, which bring the blood letter sometime to the
Gallows, because he stryketh to deep. These Instruments are called, the
ruffins Tucke, and long foining Rapier: weapons more malicious, than manly.


Health. Will boxing do any pleasure?


Health. Boxing is good for a Lubber.
YEa forsooth, very mutch: As example, if you have any sausie low^, or loitryng
lubber within your house, that is either to busy of his hand, or tongue. and
can do nothing* but play one of the parts, of the.24. orders of knaves, There
is no pretier medicine for this, nor sooner prepared, than boxing is.iii.
or.iiii. times well set on, a span long on both the cheeks. And although
perhaps, this will not alter his lubberly condicio^s, yet I assure you, it will
for a time, change his knauysh complexion, and help him of the green
syckenes: and every man may practice this, as occasion shall serve him in his
family, to reform them.

Boxing does draw forth evil humor. etc.
But for the Boxing, whereof Galen speaks, calling it Boxing, Cupping, with
Cucurbitula. etc. Says he, Boxing does help swellyng, and lets forth
wind, stops the terms immoderate, and the bloody flixe, and helps
appetite. And when a Woman does swound, it is good to revive the spirits
again. There are two kinds of the ventosas, or Boxinges, the gentlest is
without scarification: Boxyng do stop the terms, when they do abou^d
the other is to draw forth water, and assuage hard swellyng, and cleanses
Melancholy, specially in weak Bodies. And it will remove humors from place to
place, as from the head to the Neck, from the Neck to the shoulders. etc. And
what stops the terms sooner, as Hippocrates Apho, Si mulieri menstrua
sistere volueris, Cucurbitulam qua^ maximam sub mammis defige. If thou will
stop the terms of a Woman, then put a great ventose under, or upon her
breasts, for the vain, which is in the matrix, comes from the breasts.


Sickness. Does sweating profit any thing at all, to mankind?


Health. SWeating is no less pleasant to Nature, than profitable to a common
Wealth: Of sweates profitable, and unprofitable, to a common Wealth,
and sometime sweating is unprofitable. As example. If any artificer, or
Husband man, have any servant that is so diligent, that he can sweat at his
labor, and not at his meat, this is a good sweat: But if his man do eat
until he sweat, and labor without heat, this fellow, if you give him not an
expulsive, out at your Haule door, An expulsive for an idle Loute.
undoubtedly he will else shortly vomitte you, into the backehouse Ditch, with a
threde bare Cap. Therefore, take heed to such sweaters, and idle eaters,
except you be Abunde Dives, and yet let all men both poor and Rich:
Gene..iii.
remember what Almighty GOD said unto Adam: Manducabis herbam agri, in sudore
vultus tui vesceris pane, donec reuerteris in humum. Thou shall eat the Herb
of the field, in the sweat of thy face, thou shall eat Bread, until thou be
returned back again into the Earth or Ground. And in an other place it is
written: they which will not labor shall not eat. And also there is a promise
of God* by the mouth of the holy Prophet, which affirms saying: Nam labor
manuum tuarum manducabis, beatus eris, and optime habebis: that is. For of thy
labor of thy Hands, thou shall eat, thou shall be blessed, and have the best
things: as prosperity, and the fruicts of the earth. etc. Lo, here you see,
here is no hunger, beggyng, idleness, loitring pickyng, slavery, disyng,
whoryng, theeuyng, prysonyng for the same, A good reward, for a diligent labor,
or Tiburnyng, appointed not to laborers, but to loyterers. Here you have the
promise of God for the same: that they which will honestly labor and sweat,
shall be in good health to eat. As we daily see the honest laboring husband
men, and their family do travel, toil, and sweat: they have therefore Gods
blessing, good health and long Life. The Carter does daily help the Courtier.
For if the husband man and Carter did not sweat each other day, the Courtier
and Citizen would cry well away. Now sir to Phisical sweat, whereof I will
shortly conclude, which are two kinds: the first of them is natural, as when
men do voluntarily sweat, without force of medicine, as hot drink, or hot
House. or stoue: these will easily open the poares, and dissolve gross
humors, Of two kinds of sweates, natural, and artificial.
cleanse the blood, comfort the spirits, put away cold, consume crude humors,
amend the sinews, put away ache or numnes, Fevers, dropsy, and the
Pestilence: Sweat helps all these. And if one be sick in his sweat, he
ought not to sleep: and this is a token, that he shall do well in sweatyng, if
he sweat in all places, and by little and little feel the pains aswage, then it
is a sign that health will follow. But if he sweat, in one or two places only,
and find more grief, it is an evil token,

The artificial sweat, is made in stoues, bathes, or bladders, Pox is
cleansed by sweat.
with hoate water, hot stones, put in clothes, and applied to the body lying
in Bed. Or else with moist bathes of herbs, or perfumes with Masticke, Stirar
Oil. etc. Which have virtue to cleanse skabbes, itche* Pox. I say the Pore, as
by experience we see, there is no better remedy than sweating, and the drynking
of Gu^icum, vsyng it in due time and order. Provided always, to sweat at
euenyng is better than in the morning: as Physic affyrmeth, and reason
proves. For when the Body has nourishment within, the spyrites shall not be
utterly drawn forth to the extreme parts, Who ought to sweat, and who not.
through the outward heat. Further, let lean dry folks, or feeble persons,
use little to sweat: for it will hurt them mutch, but fat folks may sweat
well, it helps them mutch* howbeit, sweat is not good for the eyes, because
it dries to mutch: lean Bodies therefore ought to be anointed with Oil,
after they have sweat, Sweat is ever good in sharp agues, What sweat is
good.
in the days of the Crises, or Judgment of sickness, says Hippocrates in his
Prognostico: but the contrary, Sudores optimi sunt, in omnibus acutis morbis,
qui in diebus iudicatorijs. etc. Read here after, in the signs of death, of
sweatyng.


Sickness. What say you of abstinence, or fasting, is it very profitable for the
body?


Health. The great goodness of fasting, both for the soul and the body.
YEa truly, and also for the soul: as it is written by the Prophet: In
ieiunio humiliaui animam meam: In fasting, says he, have I humbled and brought
low my soul. Fasting is a singular Instrument to correct the flesh, and make
it obedient, and servant to the spirit, if it be joined with faith otherwise
it is vain, concerning perfect religion. But nevertheless, profitable in
Physic, is abstinence for the body. For take this for example: If one have
taken a surfete, with repletion or fulness, or else dronkennes, nothing is better
to bring the body into good quiet order, The rich use gluttony, and poor
penury.
than abstinence, which will consume matter superfluous and hurtful, But yet
not of it self, but by a certain way or mean: for it it is not quickly
restored, which with long abstinence has been wasted. Fasting is not utterly
to refuse meat, but to eat that which preserves Life only: Oh that
moderacion were used in a common wealth, then would not the rich die in
gluttony, and abundance, nor the poor perysh for lack of bread. Extremes
are evil to mutch fasting, or to mutch hunger. Galen affirms, that people
which have narrow veins have but little blood, and such may not suffer long
hunger, but shall fall into sickness. But they which have great veins, have
plenty of blood, and may fast without hurt. So may all such, as have mutch
raw crude matter, Choleric people must not fast mutch
which is helped through fasting. Abstinence is hurtful to Chollerike, and
Melancholic Persons, or them which are sick and weak, or to young
children: so every one must be considered in order accordingly.


Sickness. WHen I have been weary and sore vered both in mind, and body, no
thing has don me so mutch pleasure. as sleep has don, and rest in the night
time: what say you to sleep?


Health. Sleep is brother unto death, saving the one does not awake again,
and the other does recover the senses: and of necessity, all Creatures that
wake, or watch, must sleep and rest. For the holy Prophet says, in the book
of Psalms, or Hymns to almighty God: Ego iacui and do^miui atque euigilaui,
The virtue or benefit of sleep, or rest Psalm. 3.
quoniam dominus me suffulcit. I laid me down (says he) and slept, and also
waked again: for the Lord did only comfort me, Truly that God, that made us
also, made our actions and doyngs as labor, rest, eating, drinkyng, sleepyng,
and wakyng, without which we cannot live. Aristotle says, all living things
have sleep, as swymming, flying, and going creatures. Further he says.
sleep is like the falling evil, by the reason all the senses are depryued:
for sleep is the ligament of the senses, No man or beast, can live without
rest.
and wakyng does unbind them, and sleep is given to each living creature, for
their health. And further, Aristotle shows the cause of sleep, saying:
Somnus causatur ex vapore cibi, qui vadit ad cerebrum. Arist. de some.
etc. Sleep is caused of the smoke or vapor of the meat, going into the
brain: which comes back again cold, and makes sleep. Therefore Men after
Meals, are soon given to Sleep, as we do see by experience: and without
sleep, wise men should be changed into idiote fools. Note this, that all
sleeps do not make thyn, dissolve, or warm always. but such sleeps only
as follow either labor, great exercise, or honger. And further, when man is
sleepyng, the natural heat is drawn inward, which when the said sleep
fyndeth no nouryshment or thing to feed upon: then like a Lion, it does
forthwyth consume, How the stomach must be prepared toward sleep.
and wast the best Humor, or one of the radical virtues, and in conclusion,
does dry up the blood and make the body lean: therefore, let all lean folks,
or them which have been abundantly purged, or else letten blood, beware of very
mutch sleep, sleep after sweat, labor, as running, tenice, mutch daunsyng,
which do open all the poares, and let forth all the evil vapors, between the
skyn and the flesh. Which sleep does revoke, retract, and draw back again,
When sleep is perilous.
through the inward heat, wastyng the same moisture, and if one have flegmon
in his Guts, that is to say, apostumacion of Choler and Blood, nothing is
more perilous than sleep. by the reason, that the burning and heat
increases, which will augment the dolor: even so in our English sweat, and
the Pestilent sleep, it is to be forborne, and also before blood lettyng, and
after during twelve hours, Drunkards what they do.
or else the poison will approach to the heart Or when the fyt of an Ague does
begin, or in drynking any Uenime. etc. For in such cases, it will make either
rigor, or horror, leauyng the outward parts cold, drawyng through unnatural
heat, the venyme to the nutrimentall parts, or else to the parts vital: The
cause why a drunkard dies suddenly.
and so this way sleep is not good, but rather hurts. Even so it hurts the
drunkards, bench-whislers, that will quasse until they are stark staryng mad,
like March Hares, Flemmyng like Scinkars, braynelesse like infernal Furies,
Drinkyng, braulyng, tossyng of the Pitchar, staryng, pissyng, and saving your
reverence, beastly spuing until midnight: these fellows abuse the time of
sleep, and in such case if they should sleep, perhaps apoplexia, Luke.xx.ii.
and sudden death would follow, as Hippocrates affyrmeth Aphoris. vij. Si
ebrius quispiam repent obmutuerit, conuulsus moritur, nisi febre corripiatur,
aut vbi ad horam peruenerit qua crapulae soluuntur, vocem recuperet. That is
(if a drunkard do suddenly lose his speech, and become dumb: he shall die of a
conuulsion, except he be taken of an Ague, or else receive again his Speech,
at the same hour, when the surfyte is dygested. He herein speaks reasonable:
for drunkenness flies into the brayn, and so distilleth into the sinews, which
brings conuulsion, and after conuulsion insueth Death, through the Crude,
Cold moystnesse. Except the Heat of a Fever do concocte, and waste it. etc.
Therefore, let Men take heed of drunkenness to bedward, for fear of sudden
Death: although the Flemysh Nation, use this horrible custom, in their
unnatural watchyng all the Night. But remember his words, which have made us
all, and know what diet is best for us, even Jesus Christ himself saying:
Cauete autem vobis, nequando graue^tur corda vestra, crapula, and ebriete. etc.
And a wise Man says: Omne nimium naturae inimicum, all Extreamyties are
Enemies to Nature. So is to mutch Labor, meat, sleep, Watch: or to little is
evil also: a mean therefore is good, and the best of all. And a due time,
place, manner, and order of sleep. The night is the best time: the day is
evil, to sleep in the Fyeld is perilous. Of good and bad sleep.
But upon, or in the Bed, lying first upon the right side, until you make
Water: then upon the left side is good. But to lie upon the back, with a
gapyng mouth, is dangerous: and many thereby are found stark dead in their
sleep, through apoplexia, and obstruction of the sinews, of the places
vital, animal, and nutrimentall. And all such as feel intolerable pains in
their breasts in the Night, which grown, and can not draw their breath:
Fools be afraid of the Mare in their sleep.
the very cause is, lying or sleeping on their back, and not through the Mare,
or night spirit, as they term it, after the Judgment of supersticious
Hypocrites, Infidelles, with charms coniuryngs, and relickes hangyng about the
Neck, to fray the Mare, the fool I should say. Let such people, both keep
good diate, clean lodging, lie in order, as I have said, and specially commend
both their sleepyng and wakyng to Jesus Christ, that they may live honestly,
go to bed merrily, sleep quietly, and rise early. How to auoi^e evil dreams.
To serve GOD devoutly, and do their business in their vocation diligently: to
help them selves and their neighbors charitably, and not to be careful for
any dream in the Night. But wisely consider this, if they do dream of Fire,
to take it for no evil presage of strife etc. But rather that fire does
signify, that yellow hoate Choler does abound, and would be purged by good
pocio^s, Diasene, or the Sirupe of Rhabarbe. And to beware of a Tertian Ague.
And when they dream of Clouds: darkness, What dreams do signify.
or to lie in dark dungeons. etc. Remember it is Melancholy, that vexes the
body and spirits in the sleep: and would be purged with Hamech, Pills de
lapide Lazuli. etc. If dreams be of cold, Snow, Ise, water, then phlegm would
be diminyshed with pocions according. and Pills de Agarico. etc. Some in the
Night seem in their sleeps* as though a great block were pressyng down
their Legs: this is the resolucion of the Sinews, or the abundance, which
would be letten forth, by the Medyan vein. And to use bathyng to Bedward in
warm water, with sweet herbs: and to dry their Legs, Hippocrates upon
sleeps.
and so go warm to bed is excellent. And thus I do end of sleepyng and
waking, of which says Hippocrates Aphor. Vehemens vigilia, tum cibi tum
potionis cruditatem efficit That is, vehement watchyng does bring cruditie, and
rawnes, both to meat and drink in the stomach: Mutch watch causes raw
humors in the stomach.
Moderate watch is good for studients to make them learned, for apprentices to
give them knowledge in their faculty, to the man of war, or Watchman, to
prevent the enemy; to the fat body, to diminish grosenes: But watching at Dice,
Cards. etc. Make many watch men in lanes ends, for their purses: To whom
watch is good.
such watches I say make many miserable wretches, whose rewards we see daily,
to be dangerous and shameful in the end.


Sickness. Thafflictions of the mind are hard to be helped.
THere is one thing, which has troubled me very long, it is a sickness, that
hitherunto I could find no Physician so cunning, wise, or learned, that ever
was able to help the same. Neither did I ever see, or taste of that medicine,
that had virtue to relieve me in that poinct. Furthermore, the change of
air, were it never so sweet or pleasant, with the sightes of fair fields,
Gardens, hills, woods, and valleis, ^ouered with all colored kynds of
sweet smellyng plants, herbs, or flowers, could never help this syckenes.
Pleasure is noisome to the disquiet heart.
The daily beholding of Iewelles of stone, Gold, rich apparel, fair
buildyngs: yea, manly feats of Arms, with triumphaunt syghtes, did me never a
pinsworth of pleasure. But when the time was past, my syckenes doubly assaulted
me again.

The Sacred heavenly Musis or Heliconiades, the daughters of Jupiter, whom I
have known: those.ix. celestial damsels, which did wash them in the Well
with silver streams, where as the swift flying Horse called Pegasus pierced
with hard houe, the frosen hard diamond flinte, as Poets affirm. These.ix.
Ladies called the Nymphs, The ix. heavenly Ladies can smally comfort some
careful heart when it is in care.
have infinyte Uertues to please the ear wythall in Music, yet have they not
pleased me: as example. The first called Calliope has a voice most heavenly in
pleasure, to move the affections wythall. The.ii. named Clio, a mat^on of grace
to all damsels, for womanly behauior: yet with a glorious comely Gesture,
mouyng her beholders, inwardly to sigh. or break their sleeps in the night.
Such grace she has, to wound the hearts of lusty youth, and make the aged
despair, which are past hope* to renew their age again. The.iii. is the
amorous Lady Erato, with her sweet songs of Lovers delyght: whose tunes are
of such heavenly virtue, equal to the Angels: which have such force, that
they will banysh all Lovers weepyng looks, yea, care, and loving spyght, and
make each amorous subject, or Prisoner, free to them selves, The Sacred gift,
that the ix^ heavenly Musis have and can give to others, to comfort them in
trouble.
without mistruste, casting from them their cold Willow crowns of mournyng:
and foorthwyth, this tune will cause them to renew them selves, in that
victorious diadem of warm Laurel, against all cold passions. And gieue them
their delyghts, through this her sweet pitiful song. The fowerth will cast a
sweet water on the face of every slothful Lover, and quickly wake them, out of
their flatteryng or fearful dreams, and show them gladness, and all
pleasant green things, to forget their folly, or pleasant purgatory, her
name is Thalia. Then follows dame Melpomine with her songs, separating of
Mars from Venus. Prophesying of War, and fearful Tragadies, she is the.v.
The sixte named Terpsicore pacifying War, and noise of bloody Trumpet,
reconciling all again, with heavenly Harp, and Musical Instruments of cords
by her: under the sweet arbor, sits her sister Euterpe, with instruments
of Wind, agreeing with her sister in true Musical concord or unity, she is
the seventh. The eight is Polibymnia, with a memory passing all creatures, this
Musis drive Music into numbers, by whose knowledge, the velocitie or swyftnes
of the soul is perceived. The.ix. and last is Urania, through who her sacred
song, month each living man to be heavenly minded, religious, and to give
them selves to a blessed life. Her songs be lamentable, pitiful, drawing the
hearts from earthly vanities, desiryng a change into a happier Land, The names
of the nine Muses, wych their gifts
above the bright shyning stars. These Musis, I say, dear Health, have
helped me before these days: but now can not at all forall their pleasant
pipyng. For their delyghtes to me be rather loathsome, and vex my Mind: saving
the last Muse, called Urania, which moves me, for else none. For they are but
plain vanity.


Health. WHat sickness is this, that neither Physic, nor all these delights,
can give cure unto? it is a merueilous disease, be like it should appear,
that it is no sycknes of the body, but rather the passions or perturbations of
the mind.


Sickness. You have spoken the truth, it is even so: but I take it to be no new
sickness, All the works under the Sun, are nothing but vanity* and
affliction to the mind.
among foolysh Men^ For the wysest man himself, complayneth thereof, saying:
Ecclesiastes cap. j. Prospexi enim omnia opera quae sunt Caelo, and ecce omnia
sunt inanitas, and animi molestia. etc Truly I did behold all things, that
are wrought under the Sun: and behold they are all but vanity, and vexation
of the mind. etc. And so this affliction of the mind, The perturbation, or
sudden mocion of the mind, must be well observed.
is the greatest gryef, that I have with my perturbacions. But in a manner, I do
not understand each of their causes, they are so variable, paynefull, and
endless. For my delyght and pleasure is gone, and brought in bondage to them
through long trouble.


Health* THey are called perturbacions of the Mind, after. M. Cicero: but
Galen terms them Pathemata vel affectus animi, Of the sudden alteracion of
the mind, from joy to care.
that is the affections,, or sodayn mocions of the mind, changed or altered
through some cause, from the right way of reason into some passion; and these
mocions of the spirits, must be as well considered, Of fear what it is.
and diligently observed of the Physician, in the time of sickness, as any other
common known Syckenes.

For these perturbacions, or paynefull affections of the spirits, do change
the estate of the body, marueilously and suddenly. As we within few days
past, Examples of sudden fear.
have seen a person beautyfull, well favored, pleasant. etc. but now we
skant know him: Jesus, say we, how this man is altered, and clean changed,
within these five days, as though it had never been he? etc. Gods vengeance.
Regum. i.
This is our talk, of the sudden alteracions of our aquaintances: we
therefore must resort unto certain reasons, in such cases. As example. Fear
is after some evil tidyngs, or doubt of mischief, as loss, prysonment, or
that death will quickly ensue. Then these things will follow: The spirits and
blood are all drawn inward, and then all the outward. members are pale and
cold, with tremblyng and faintness of speech. By the reason that all the
virtues, both Anymall and Natural, are made feeble, and sodaynely weak:
through which often times it have been seen, that sudden fear, has brought
sudden Death: as example: Ely the high Priest, over the People of GOD, in the
Day of the great battle, when the Philistines prevailed against Israel: as
he satte upon a Stool, lokyng toward the way, his heart feared him, for the
ark of GOD: in the mean time, there ran a Man hastily unto him, with a
lamentable look, in mournyng Clothes, declaryng unto him, first how that
Israel was fled and slain. Secondly, that his two Sons, Ophni, and Phinehes
were slain. Thyrdly, that the vncircumcysed had taken the Ark of GOD: at
which tidinges, such sudden fear came to his heart, that forthwith he fell
down backward and brake his neck. And this same evil tidings, slew with
sudden care, his daughter in law, the wife of Phinihes, saying in her death,
the glory is gone from Israel. Evil parents, and evil Children.
This was Elies plague, for sufferyng his Children to live wickedly. For where
as God is not feared, at length he will sodaynely fear them. Fear I do say,
is a marvelous monster, an Infernal Image, and a terrible vision to the
soul: for fear is not for things past, but only for things to come* and to
take things in the worst part, Was not Jesus Christ our God and savior
afraid, what time as he set before his eyes, the Pains and sharpenes of
death, Dolor afficitur anima mea vsque ad mortem, My soul, Fear is like a
monster of Hell.
said he, is made heavy even unto the death? yea his fear was such, that for
agony, his drops of sweat, were like unto blood. This was a great fear,
even in Christ: but yet it made him not give over, foreseeing the sealyng of
our election by his death. But the fear, which takes mortal men, makes them
cowardly often times. Through it Peter did swear, he was none of Christ's
company: and that he knew him not at all. Fear made David to counterfayt, and
go like a mad man, Fear in Christ.
for to avoid Saul which persecuted him. Fear made Athanasius, the Bishop of
Alexandria, to hide himself six years in a Cave, from the cruelty of the
Arrians, Fear in S. Peter. Fear in David.
It causes the Chrystians to flee, in the time of persecution: And sometime
the Christian through it, is forced to play the Idolater. As example. When the
Tyrant Diocletianus The Emperor, in his cruel murderyng of the Chrystians,
did command every one to be slain, that would not Honor, Athanasius fear.
and offer to his Idols: Marcellus the Bishop, as Eusebius affyrmeth, in a
great fear, did Sacrifice to the Devil: Lo here does fear try religion.
Sometime fear will creep so far into the conscience, Fear of the Christians.
Fear makes men offer to Idolles.
that it lets in despair. As example of Judas, which is a good president to
all traitors: and many tyrauntes through it, have slain them selves: fear
often times, is very intolerable. For there is no touch stone, can better
declare, the diversity of metals, than fear will bewray the worthy, or
unworthy Manhood of Men. As example. There was a lusty blood, Example of
Marcellus.
or a pleasant brave young royster at Athenes, whose name was Aristogiton, as
the Historiographer affyrmeth: which commonly would talk and brag, what good
service if need were that he could do to Mars. All his talk was of UUarre,
how to deuyse Weapons of invasion, to destroy the Enemy: Fear brings
desperacion, example. of Judas.
to train forth Men, to give the Onsette, with all lusty courage. And upon a
time, the Athenians prepared a mighty strong Army against their Ennemies, and
among all others, they had this Aristogiton in no small price: supposing him
to be in deed, as he was in word. And calling him forth to take a charge
when he hard, an act to be done in deed: Oh GOD, To prove a coward by
example of a Greek which was a great bragger.
how his Heart was in his Hose, for fear he trembled, and quaked like an
Aspen Leaf, as though he had begone the fytte of a Tercian Ague. He could not
tell what shyft to make, or whether to go to hyde himself: but at length Dame
shame, whispered him in the ear, and badde him wrappe one of his legs with
roulers and Cloutes, as though he were lame: and so he did, and with pale Face,
and staff in hand, he came haltyng and creepyng forth, like a sheepysh
Loute, lamentyng his case, that such evil had chaunsed him. But his heart was
with the^ all, said he, yet durst he not travel, until his Leg was whole.
But when the people did see him daunse so lively, like a Lubber in a Net. Lord
how they laughed this Carpet squyre to skorne. I pray GOD, the like fear be
not found, among a great number of our People, that can Royst, Crake, Braule,
Swear, and Brag, in ye time of peace: quarelling with quiet people, and lift
up looks, frouning like Tigers. And when the Queens majesty shall have need
to wythstande the Enemy, or suppress the Rebel: that then they become not
like unto Aristogiton, with soar Legs, Agues, broken Arms, tre^bling,
lamentable Looks, as bold as Geese, or Lions of Coteswolde Heath. Sending
their water to the Physician, to cloak their knavery, for lack of Manhood:
or ^ls with Vnguentum aurum, can anoint their Capitaynes hand, to blot them out
of their muster Book, A shift for fresh water soldiers.
which is a good Medicine. For fear in such case, there is not the like
receypt, in all Bucklersbury, I assure you: many more things could I speak of
fear, but my matter is of Physic. But this Cordial shall suffyce, for a
Cowarde.

Now follows anger, which does increase, inflame, and set their Bodies upon a
fire, with a sudden burning heat: Clean contrary to fear. For fear draws
the heat and blood inwardly, What the passion of anger is
with feeble pulse, but anger does cast it to the utter parts with swyft Pulse
as Galen affyrmeth, lib. ij. de tuenda sanitate. Counsaylinge every one, that
will preserve natural health, that they use such exercise, as may keep
warmenes temperately, neither to mutch cold nor heat abounding. And although
exercise commonly brings warmenes, G^l. de. Sani. ^uen.
yet to the Idle bodies, when they have no natural heat, their bodies are
made warm, by any other thing, as Oil, bathing in warm water, or going into
ye Stoue. etc. But such heates are artificial, Of heat artificial, and
natural.
to move the heat natural* but they are all without, and not moved of the
principal inward heat. But anger or perturbation, is moved of natural
heat, it needs no mean to help it: as we feel by our selves in cold
weather, let our Enemy sodaynely appear before us, Of choleric heat.
or if we hear our selves shamefully rebuked, we need no fire, to kindle the
flame of our choler, forthwyth we are in the house top, the holiest of us all.
For heat above nature, will quickly enclose the heart, and with swiftnes go
further, seeking vengeance. Unto this evil be Cholerik men most bent, which
must use often to correct Choler: or else to observe an order which a worthy
Philosopher, A lesson against anger.
taught a hasty Prince, yt he should before he did any thing, moved by quick
and sudden affection, first, say over the Alphabet, or the number of letters:
this Heathen rule, against anger or rashenes, will not hurt the Chrystians. It
declares great pride and anger, to be sodaynely moved. As example. At every
light wind, weak trees will move, and tremble with their branches, from
ground to the top of the same: which with great storm and wind, will skant
move the great strong tree. Providence and patience, make men strong, and
cause them to get the victory of themselves: and to be able to wythstand
anger, which is a common passion of cruel Beasts, Tyrauntes, and Fools.
Examples of wrath in Nero.
It should seem by Domitius Nero, that he was an angry wretch, to murder his
Mother, to poison his Scholemayster, and finally to stick himself. In his
manners at the board, he was sone inflamed with anger: yt upon a time hearing
but the french nation named, A wrathful wretch in battayl.
forthwith he brake two most costly drinking vessels, of an incomparable value,
they were so rich and beautiful: he cast down all the meat from the board,
falling out with all the Discombentes without, any other cause (a very
temperat man I assure you). When Ecelinus the Tyrant, in battle had received
a wou^d forthwith he cast his weapon away, and roared like a mad beast, and in
his cruel anger, rent his skin from his own flesh, which, when his enemies
espied, they so laughed, that in a great rage and anger, he slew himself, (a
very meek person). Oh what victory had he upon his enemies, thus to handle
himself.

Alexander the great sittyng in a dronken Banquet, A wrathful part of Alexander
in killinge of Clitus.
unseemly for a Prince being admonished reuerentlye of a noble wise man called
Clitus his own nourishes son, to live like a Prince in virtue, rejoicing
therein, more tha^ in victory. etc. the ungrateful Prince at his banquet, with
his own hands, struck him through the body, letting forth the spirits of
life from Clitus, yt would not flatter a folish prince. For an open rebel is
not so hurtful, as a secret flatterer to a Prince, for they are like Cankers,
most hurtful to them. What anger had Cain against Abel, and Herod, in killing
the hurtlesse children, that never offended him?

The Popes, The Popes* Law.
which are so charitable (as you know to the living christians) that they will
send them in burnt sacrifice to heaven: among them some have torn one another
with vyolence, out of their graves, rending out of their pontifical apparel,
cutting of their fyngers, and burying them among the common harlottes, yea
drawing them forth again, and heading them a fyt Sepulture for such saints.
Read Platina in the lives of Steven the sixth, Sergius and Formosus.

Bubulam an excellent Paynter, Hypponax the Poet made such sharp verses against
a Paynter, that he caused him to hang him self in his rage. Saul killd
himself*
did so liuelye set forth the monstrous Image of a deformed Poet called
Hypponax, that the beholders had great pastime, and laughed thereat. But in the
mean time, the Poet wrote such nipping, sharp, taunting Uerses, against this
Painter: that in a sudden rage, he ran in to his house, and hanged himself.
And to conclude, Saul was in such a rage, that he destroyed the Sacred high
Priest and the Levites, with the people in the city of Nob, for receiving of
David, the elected of God. And this shall suffice to warn you from the passion
of anger by these examples.

Then there is an other perturbation of mind, called sorrow or care, which is
the greatest passion of spirits: because it is some folks torment. Again in
an other, it makes short work. For care does wound and smite ye heart with a
deep stroke, and draws it together as a purse, The cause of sorrow and care
which be maruaylous plagues.
suffryng nothing to be carried thither, to comfort the same again. And so
the generation of the spirits are let, and the vital parts by little and
little do wither and wast away, and in this point sorrow does differ from
fear: sorrow receives his mischief at length, and fear at once. But in
color pale, in pulse feeble, in countenance heavy, in stomach weak, they
are like: but yet care is for things past. As example, some for love have
slain them selves, as Cleopatra, The differenc be^wene so^ow and care
a Queen of Egypt, after she had spent her pleasant years in love, mingled
with lust, when her husband M. Anthony was dead, she fell into such sorrow and
care, that in the end, she caused her self to be enclosed in a tomb, suffryng
two Serpents to suck at her breasts, until she had finished her miserable
life with lamentacion: Cleopatras death.
for all her riches and pompes cold not heal her sorrowful sickness, but death
was only her refuge, so great was her care But Josephus handles her death
otherwise.

Into what lamentable case fell Queen Dido of Carthage, which, was ye daughter
of Belus the king of Tire, Didos death.
which carefully finished her life in fire, for the loss and love of Eneas, as
the Poet fayneth? Leander, a worthy young man, was wonderfully ravished for the
love of a fair maiden called Erus, which dwelled in an Island in the sea
Hellesponte. The story of Lea^der, Which dyed for love of Erus
And this Leander in a Town called Abidus, the sea passing between them both:
which Water and salt stream cold not quench his love that he bare unto Erus,
his affection was so great, that every night he would swim over this flood,
unto his dear Erus unto a place called Sestos, whereas she dwelte, supposyng
his pain to be heavenly pleasure. He used this so long, that in the end
Neptune frowned, and commanded Aeolus to raise up a storm and tempest against
Leander, in which he carefully finished his life. In the morning Erus looked
over the walls, The death of Leander and Erus for love.
beholding the dead body tossed among the rocks: therewith she was suddenly
wounded, with sorrow and care, and with a pitiful cry, cast her self from an
high Toure into the sea whereas she finished her life, for the love of Leander.

The wife unto Duke Proteselaus, did continuallye weep for the death of her
husband, A noble woman wept to death, for the death of her husband.
until she dyed. Such love of late in this realm, has been enclosed in the
heart of a certain worthy lady, that for the absence of her living husband,
has ended her life with care, so that after the number of many Salt tears,
the Salt water was her last drink, and death her refuge. This affection called
love, brings more sorrow with it, then either prisonment, Love is a
conqueror.
poverty, or sickness: as we may read and see by experience, into what
servitude and bondage it brings people. And does degenerate many, in a manner
out of kind, making the^ more effemin at tha^ womon: changing Mars into Uenus
It alters complexions, manners and conditions, and makes of free men slaves,
of wise men fools, of rychmen beggars, it brings man^ sicknesses, yea,
incurable, through long sorrow and care. Sometime it does depryue the wits and
senses reasonable, and makes Men more madder then Dogs, crueller then
Wolfes, more shameless then Apes, re^ting their clothes, waking in their beds,
fasting at their bordes, as wise as Geese, yea, and finally, what a great
number do kill themselves, by strangling, sticking, and drouning: when they
cannot obtain their purpose, and incurable suit? Thus they be rewarded that
fall into such doloure and care in this folish affection of mind called love.
The fruits of Love.
And if they might obtayn their purpose in their foolish fyshyng in the flood
of fantasy: what should they then get? perhaps nothing but a Serpent, which
would always sting them, or else a weate Ele by the tail, which would quickly
deceive them.

There is an other affection of the mind, very perilous, dangerous, and
incurable, which is cousin G^rmain unto frenzy, which is called Jealousy: or a
greedy foolysh affection of the mind, never quieted, Jealousy is cousin
Germain to Frenzy, mark the fruicts thereof.
but ever tourme^tyng it self, burning in a continual fire. This inward
spiritual Uengeaunce, does make domestical debate between man and Wife: and
tourneth their house of liberty, into a miserable prysone. Double bondage to
each other, with quarelyng in presence, mistrusting in absence, fearyng them of
their own house, doubtyng the stranger, yea, and men often times mistrustyng
their own Children, not to be of their own Generation, when they have no
argument to the contrary, but deuilish ielousy. Jealousy often times breaks
chastitye, amongst them that do profess Godly Matrimony: and causes the
one part to desire liberty, The hell of Jealousy.
to be out of the fire of that loving Ielous Purgatory. For some there be that
do say, there is no more torment in hell, among the infernal Furies, than there
is here in this world amongst Ielous women, which never had good opinion of
their husbands: and some men also of their wives, although they were locked up
in a closset, they having the keie, and sealyng the door, yet they think they
are beguiled. Yea, some be so friendly, that they be Ielous of other men's
wives: what spirit Jealousy is.
and some women following that example, do the like to other Women's: husbands.
Here is marvelous kyndnesse, thus to crucify them selves to the fire of
folly: but the effect thereof, works mischief to them selves, and others. As
it is written of one Phanus, which loved his wife with such Jealousy, that he
would never suffer her to go out of the doors: How a Ielous fool beguiled
himself
he also provided, that none came in at his gates, or doors, but a great noise
was made through crackyng and tinglyng of Belles which hanged at them, at which
sound with all speed, he would run to see who came in. He so long used this
order of watchyng at the Gate, that in the mean time his devout wife gave him
a Barnards blow, lettyng in her companion, when it was dark, by a broken place
in the roffe of the house. Which, when it was perceived by the next Neighbors:
Lord how they commended Phanus, Jealousy causes adultery
for so diligent and witty keepyng of his Gates. Here you do see, that
Ielousye brings adultery, yea, and sometime it causes murder: as Helena
after the death of Menelaus, fled for succor unto Poliso, wife to Clipolemus
ye king of Rhoedes, son unto Hercules, which burnt with such Jealousy
toward her husband, that she commanded her to be hanged upon a tree.

Procris, daily burning with Jealousy of her husband Cephalus, which was taken
in love with an other woman, did daily pursue him, from place to place, through
fields and Wooddes, etc. And upon a time, when Cephalus went forth, with his
Darte in his Hand, into the Forest, to seek his pray: his Ielous Wife pursued
him, and closely shrouded her self in couerte, among the Brakes, to behold
what her Husband did. But as she moved her self, the covert did shake,
wherein she was hydden: her husband perceyuyng that, supposyng that she had
been a Wild Beast, foorthwyth cast his Darte, Procris did seek her own death
through Jealousy.
and unawares s^ue his Ielous wife. Well rid of an evil sore: O how craftily
she did beguile him.

O what Jealousy was between Antiopa, and Licus her husband, the King of
Egypt, The Jealousy of Antiopa.
and what a cruel Murder came thereof, I need not to fetch no more Examples
from old, of the forgotten World, and time past. For this Evil is to common,
as we do see by dailye experyence, and a Merueylous plague, both pryuate and
public: the effects thereof are nothing but miserable vexacion, Dolor, Care,
Agony, and despair. And this is to conclude, there is no remedy, but
pacyence perfo^ce: for the old Proverb is, that Heresy, Frensye, and
Jealousy, be so bred by the Bone, that they will never out of the flesh,
therefore use no Physic for it.

There is also an other evil, joined to conditions of wicked Men, which is
none of the passions of the Mind, nor yet an infirmitye of Nature: but rather
to be numbered among the sins Mortal, which is an evil most intolerable,
and most odious of all unto a good Nature, which is called Ingratitude,
churlishnes, or unkindness. I count it not only ingratitude, Ingr^titude
(...) es (...) Churlishnes.
to be unthankful to them, of whom we have received benefits, but also to
do harm to them, by whom we be preferred. As example There was no greater
dignitye, next unto Christ, than to b^e one of his Apostelles, as Judas was
Also none could be more trusted than he, which kept the Purse as he did.
Christ gave him power to do Miracles, equally with the twelve. He suffered him
to sy^ at his board, and feed with him in his own Dish: ^here could be no
greater kyndnesse than this, a Mortal man, to sit with Gods only Son. Luke
xxii. Math. ^xvi. The (...) of Judas that most ^^grateful villayne, his example
to a^l ^hu^l^s
But this Uillayne, vngratiously and ingratefully respectyng none of these
Benefittes, but like a traiterous ^horle, sought his Masters Blood, betraying
him to the shameful death of the cross. This Ingratitude of Judas, is a
goodly president, unto all Traitors against Princes, by whom they have
received Benefits: and many servants, which have been brought up from rascal
and Beggars states, and through their masters, have been preferred into the
calling of estimacion, Wealth, and Worship, which afterward have sucked the
blood of them which gave them first their suck, and nourishment in their
adversity. O what a monster, and a deformed infernal Serpent is this
ingratitude, it is the mother of treason bred in ^ell, enemy to liberality and
gentleness, and is of the right line of Wrath and envy, spronge of a deuelysh
petigree, worse than wild beasts. Which, when they are made ^ame, and receive
any Benefit of their keepers* Gratitude of (...) ^^^stes.
they will not rent and tear them: but phaune upon them, waggyng their
tails, and run about and leap for joy. As by example, we may see of Horses,
^oth god and Nature do abhor ingratefulnes.
Dogs, Bears and Apes, which will rejoice in the sight of their Masters*
and many times, put their Life in venture for them. Although I might bring
forth many notable Examples to prove this, it need not, it is so manifest. The
Scriptures of GOD ^ry out against it, the Law of Nature does utterly reject
it. There is no man worthy to be called a Gentleman, although he can auaunce
him self of a petigree infinite, and boast never so mutche of his birth, and
is a Gentleman borne in deed. If he be infected with ingratitude, To know a
very Gentleman.
he is degenerated from his right kind: and is become a counterfeit gentleman,
and a natural churl, of the right line of Nabel the ca^le, which abused the
gentleness of David, whose wrath was quenched through the beauty, lamentacion,
and liberality of Abigael his wife. The shamfull ingratitude of Theseus the son
of Ageus. king of Athe^s


Who can forget or remember without tears, the Traitorous ingratitude of
Theseus, the Son of Ageus, the king of Athenes, which was a lustye,
beautiful and valiante knighte: wantinge no gift nor grace, that nature might
do unto him He excelled all men in his days, in manlye acts, saving Hercules:
he sleu a terrible cruel Bull in Attica in his young years. And when he was
xxiiii, years old, by lotte, and desteny of the people of Athenes, he was
appointed and condemned, to be cast unto a horrible Monster, in the Labyrinth
of Creete: The Monster of the Labyrinth.
which monster had devoured many thousands before, his food was only the
flesh of Mankind, he cried and roared out for his pray. This guiltless
knighte was enclosed in a dungeon hard by, voy^e of all com^orte, bewaylinge
his fatal desteny: thus to be cut of in his youthful days, being a kings
son. The great grief and lamentacion of Thes^us when he was in prison,
Now void of all friendship, helpless, having no su^coure, crying out
against the Gods: Cursing the day of his birth, that he received his life
within the body of his mother being a noble Queen, should eftsoon now be
buried within the infernal bowels of this horrible monster: void of all mercy
deadly to behold with venomous Teeth, and flaming eyes, pouring forth poison at
his Mouth, with most noisome air and stynke, and his infernal kenel. Thus
death approached near unto Theseus: which grieved him nothing so much: as to
remember the pleasant life which he sometime had, acompanying ye amorous
ladies, which were full of al courtly courtesye, and the worthy knights, among
whom he always achieved ever the victory: yea his Music was turned into
mourninge, and his liberty that sometime he had in the sweet Woods and Fields.
Was now changed into a little dark Dungeon, for there is no greater
adversity, then in miserye to remember prosperitye. The noble pitiful Lady
Ariadne* did comfort the miserable Theseus. and set him at liberty.
But Lady fortune smiled upon Theseus, and opened the Ear of king Minos
Daughter, called the Lady Ariadne, and her sister Phedra: which so pittyed
Thesius, that with all speed priuilye sent for the Porter of the Dungeon, not
far distaunte from the Labyrinth, whom with fair words, they entreated to
open the Prison Door and so entered in, beholding this lamentable knight: who
most humbly kneled down to Ariadne, commending himself to be her Graces
bond and thrall, during his life. To this end, that if it would please her
Honor, to invent some spedye way to deliver him from this deadlye Monster.
Ariadne then cast her pitiful Eyes upon this lamentable Theseus being
secretlye wounded with the worthynesse of his Person. Pittyinge his miserable
estate, saying: it was more fitter that she should serve him as a Wife than
he hyrs as a thral being a kings son. And they concluded of the enterprise
how to kill the Monster: and afterward, she, her sister, and the Porter, al to
be embarked in a barge for Theseus sake, and to fly her fathers land for
fear of death. With all speed she prepared balls of wax and hair, that
Theseus might cast into the Monsters mouth, Ariadne fled a way for Theseus
sake, forsaking her fathers land.
to keep him occupied, until with sharp weapon he might kill his grie^ly
course, or bring his monstrous carcass to the ground, which came to pass
with all speed accordingly, within the secret cave, or Labyrinth: from whence
Theseus came, by the guiding of a Clue of threde delivered him by the hand of
the Lady Ariadne, and so came secretly forth from the cave, and these iiii.
with all speed passed away* in the night time to a country called Enupie,
whereas they were rychlye embarked, having wynd and weather toward their
journey, The crafty t^easan of false* Theseus
until at length they came unto an Island in the midst of ye raging seas,
whereas no man did inhabit, but wyld beasts only There he arrived with his
wife and sister, the Por^er and Mariners, which after their long travel upon
the Sea, were suddenly beguyled with sweet sleapes upon the land. After the
which awaked Theseus and secretly commanded his Mariners to way their Ankers,
and spread their sails without the sound of whistel or other noise* for f^are
of waking Ariadne, whom he left sleaping sou^dly, among the sweet flowers whom
a little before he had embraced with folding arms. And secretly taking Phedra
by the hand traitorously he took his leave with silence aborde they went, and
away they sailed. At the length Ariadne awaked, putting her hand aside,
feeling her couch al could where Theseus lay: up she start with a tremblyng heart,
lamentable look, and deadly cry running to the rocks of the sea. When the
ship was almost out of sight, she did hold up her hands to the heavens, and
cried out, bewayling her miserable estate, thus to be left alone without any
cause, forsaking her own fathers land, for the love of Theseus, which had
forsaken her for her sister. Then called she to remembrance, how he was by her
delivered from a Monstrous beast and he had left her in a Solitarye
Island, imprisoned with in the Sea, to live among the Wild Beasts, most
ingratefullye forsakynge her.

Then Ariadne rent from her, her womanly apparel, making a weffe thereof upon
the end of a pole, standing upon the top of a Rock, crying out Return,
return, Theseus again, my dear Theseus, take pity upon me* who love thee
most. The death of Ariadne.
And when she was past all hope, she kneled down and did kiss his fotesteppes,
cursyng her sleep, lying her down in ye bed where Theseus lay bewailing her
fatal desteny. That he should prefer the beauty of her sister, before her
virtues, and finally forgetting her benefytes. This lamentable story she did
write in barks of trees: but some do affirm, her tongue was cut forth, and
how she wrought her misery in a cloth, and thus finished her woeful life.

Ovid does tell this lamentable story at large, describing vice and ingratitude
which among al other evils, is most intolerable, and the greatest grief to
them, Ingratitude has killed many a man.
yt be of good natures. And nothing sooner does wound the heart, as when the
child shall show ingratitude to the father, the wife to ye husband, the friend
turn to an ennemy. These be such griefs, that it passes my pore pen to
descrybe what pains they bring to the heart of a gentle minded man. Thus do I
end of Ingratitude or churlishnes, which has ended many.

There is a passion of the mind* called a sudden Joy, Of sudden joy
which is of such force, that the heart casts from her the vital blood, that
oftentimes it comes to pass, that for lack of strength and lively power in
the heart, the body is killed before the heart do call back again the warm
spirits, or blood of life, as we may read by example.

There was a noble matrone of Rome, which when a false messenger told her
that her son was slain in battle: Example of sudden joy.
she past the time of mourning according unto nature. But upon a day, her
son yet being alive, came unto her, whose presence moved her spirits to such
sudden joy, that in his arms she fell down dead, and never revived again,
Valerius Maximus Capite de morte non vulg. says of a noble consul of the
Romans called M. Iuuentius Thal. as he was in a Temple doing worship, and
offering to his gods, in the I Will called Corsica: letters were sent him from the
whole Senate, which he brake up, and read them. Iuuentius the Consul dyed
suddenly for joy.
And was smitten with such sodayn joy, passing all measure: that or he had
finished the readyng, he fell down dead, in the presence of all the people,
before the Sacrifice in the Temple.

Who can forget the noble old learned Diagoras Rhodius, when in his presence,
his three valiant Sons, Diagoras Rhodius did expyre the breath of life for
sodayn joy
prevailed in the victory of worthy knighthoode, above all other men, and were
crowned with the Garlands of honor, with the praise of all the multitude, at
the hill Olympus? These noble young men came, and cast their crowns with
flowers upon their Fathers head: who for sudden joy, gave up the Soul, and
dyed in their arms. This was a sweet pleasant death. of noble Diagoras.
Read this storye, Cicero lib. i Questi. Tuscul. which says, A pleasant death.
Diagoras had but two sons. But A Gellius says he had three sons.

Some do dye with extreme laughing, as did the Poet Philemon, says
(Valerius Maximus) when he satte at Dynner, Philemon the Poet dyed laughing at
a^ Ass.
when an Ass came stalkyng to the Table, and with his sweet face, stretched
forth his Neck, wagging his ears. The Poet beholding his ancient
Countenance, and his sad comely grace: began to smyle at this loutish beast,
or foolysh Ass. But when the Ass, lycked a Fygge from the Table, he did eat
it so manerly, wrything, and moving with his Lips: that the Poet thereat so
conceited, was smitten into an incessable laughing, until death did end his
pastime. Again there be, which have bin smitten with such inward joy, that they
have suddenly dyed thereof, when they have done a mischief, in bloudshedyng,
vengeance, or cruel murder, Some do rejoice so much in vengeance, that they
have dyed for gladness.
as many Tyraunts have, Example of the Tiraunts Sophocles, and Dionisius, as
affirms Plinius secundus lib vij. cap. liij. In which chapter, you may read
of many sudden deaths, most fearful to be heard. Thus many for gladness of the
destruction of their enemies, have quickly died: a just reward, torid the world
of Tiraunts, which have died in so hellish, and envious infernal zeal,
rejoicing in taking vengeance.

Also there is an other passion very fearful to mankind. As when lusty wealthy
people, Some do kill themselves when they have spoiled their goods. and fallen
into det: or else become murderers and traitors.
have spent, spoiled, and Prodigally consumed their goods: then look they
behynd them, and call to remembrance their pleasant days, their honor,
riches and great possessions. And when their old freindes forsake them, when
wealth does fly them, and miserye take hold of them, then eftsoon for lack
of magnanimity, despair does embrace the^ As by example, it did to M. Otho, a
noble young man which prodigally consumed among the lusty gentlemen and Ladies
of the Romans, an infinite substance, and when he had run beyond his race,
he thought there was no way to be his relief, but to kill his master the
emperor Galba, and through his riches to pay his debtes. But when he missed
his purpose of riches, although he was Emperor, he became like unto a noble
Ship, whose Mariners had cast out all the ballis, overwhelmed the bark of
their sauegard among the fearful streams and rough rocks: The death of Otho
for care.
In such case was Otho, who to redeem honor and liberty, sought to kill his
master Galba the Emperor, which he so did, and was Emperor for few Days.
But to conclude in fine for lack of wealh, to furnish his pomp and grace, to
guide himself in mean, with sharp dagger he persed his careful heart and let
forth the spirits of life. Look further in Sueton of his life. This Man lacked
the worthy magnanimity, The wisdom of Deonisethe tyrant in adversity.
of some worthy kings, when they were expulsed and banished from their Lands,
and honors, as Dionisius the tyrant, who being a king and for his great
cruelty and sheadynge of the giltles blood, was deposed from his croune and
honor, and banished like a vacabond from his lands and people. What, did he
cry out, weep, or despair like a beast, and hang himself? No forsooth not at
al. What then? Mary with a lusty manly courage he defied the spighte of
Fortune, and forth he went to Athens, The king of Boem, what he did in the
time of poverty.
whereas he became a pore Scholemayster, teaching young children goodlye letters
both in the Greek and Latin, and lived quietly. Read Tully of him. Suado^opus
the king of Bohem, when his land and cities were subdued through Arnophus the
Emperor: he killed not himself, but did change his princely apparel and put
on the habit of an Hermit, and accompanied with two solitary men, went into
a wilderness, whereas he continued still until his death: quyetlye seruinge
God, imbracinge the Cross of Pouertye, as a pleasure to be rydde from a
wicked world.

Ualerius of whom Eutropius writes, being a noble Emperor, making War
against Mesopotamia: Ualerius the Emperors misery to Sopores the Persian king.
he was ouecome by Sopores the king of Persia, and every time the said
Sopores did take his Horse, Ualerius did lie down prostrate, and was his
footstool, all his life: yet would he not kill himself for care, as many
miserable Men have done, when they have spent their time most prodigallye
consuming their lands treasure, and riches, with dishonor in abhominacion,
wasting their wealth vaingloriouslye, foolishly, and most beastlye amongst a
great Number of Parasites, Baudes, Curtisaines, knaves, and common Whores. In
fine* when they have gotten the hatred of good People, which most do abhor
wickedness, then they run unto their own conscience, which most does fear
them. Then for lack of grace and magnanimity, The end of men in desperacion.
they fly into the dungeon of desperacion, led thither, through fear and
shame, not foreseeing their present pain, and endless Torments in the Life
to come. Forthwith in a maze they drown, hang, stick, poysone, and burn
them selves, and break their own Necks, as did Nero the Emperor, who slew
himself, with his own Knife, when he was.xxxii. year old. Read Pontanus de
stellis, lib. xxxv. and Eutropius of his death.

Did not Sardanapalus, the last Emperor of the Assirians, The end of
Sardanapalus.
which was more effeminate than a Woman, and more Lecherous than a Beast, with
all his Pomp, willingly burn himself in Fire? Of his Death read Sabellicus.
Deoclesian, the persecutour of Christ's Church, did poison himself. Judas the
traitor hanged himself. Brutus, Deoclesian slew himself. The death of Judas.

The death of Brutus.


which was one of them that gave Caesar the.xxiiii. deadly Wounds, whereof he
dyed in the Senate, when as he was slain by Treason: in the end killed
himself in despair, with his own Sweard, and his wife Porcia hearing
thereof, strangled her self with eating of coals. Read thereof in Plutarcus.
Some do kill themselves for shame, as Lucretia did, which was violated by
Tarquine the proud, the last king of the Romans. Other some, Lucretius.
rather than they would make their Bodies unchaste, and beguyle their husbands:
have slain them selves, as did Saphronia a Noble Woman of Rome, to be rid from
the temptacion of Decius a Prince of the Romans. But few women now a days,
Saphronia
will take the matter so unkindly, or put them selves in such Danger, I
warrant you. Of this Woman read in Eusebius. Other many have had such Torment
of conscience, or else such weakness of the spirits, Sergeant Hayles of Kente
that have drowned them selves: as did Sergeant Hailes of Kent, which was a well
learned Gentleman in the Laws of this Realm, and finally, was overthrown in
the Battle of Antichryst. Many Examples of Desperacion, I could bring in, of
the most fearful Deaths of Men and Women, as well in this our age* as from
old. But these shall suffyce for our Examples, what evils do come through
these Passions of the Mind, and perturbacions of the spirits, which bring
men to despair, and then to Death, and finallye to dampnacion.

For they which kill them selves, do lose their hope in GOD, because that they
sin against their own Souls, and dye in Murder: To die in desperacion, is
to renounce salvation.
for it is written. Thou shall not kill. And God does abhor the Blood
thurstie, and no man ought for to dye, but by the judgment of the Law of
Nature: that is, when he can no longer live: being prevented by sickness,
Age, or else valyauntly to dye in the defense of his Country, the gates of
Heaven be not shut against, such no nor against them which be hanged, and
suffer condempnacion for their Offenses, by the Laws of Men, if they do dye
in the Chrystian Faith, and not like to desperate Ruffians. But who so kylleth
himself, there is no hope left, but the Gates of Hell shall receive him:
because he lacks faith in the time of trouble, and pacyence in adversity. As
Saul did which slew himself. But Ezekias, when he heard tell he should dye,
and the day of death appointed him: Example of Saul, which died in desperacion.
he dispayred not, but humbly made his prayers unto God, which prolonged his
days. And seeing that God has put the soul within the Body, of reason it is
he, that must let it forth again. For what servant is he that dare take his
masters treasures from his Chest: without he have his key or other his lawful
warrant? what soldier dare be so bold to go out of raye, before the
captain command him? And who dare kill himself before it please almighty
God to take him? Example against desperacion.
None but they which will refuse to dye honestly, who in their lives, have
neither been faithful, nor fruitful, pacient, nor pitiful. Or have been
subject to any singular heavenly virtue, Job, The patience o^ Job. Cha.
i.ii.iii

And his wives wickedness.


in all his troubles, when his goods and Chattel were destroyed, and his own
natural children slain, his body sore deformed, yea and for agony did curse
the day of his nativity: yet finally, his greatest plague was, the ingratitude
and malice of his own wife, who most wickedlye gave him counsel to curse
God, despair, and dye: For all this he killed not himself, but patiently
reserved his plagues saying. The Lord has given me, and he has taken away,
his will be done. And in the end, you may read what consolacion he received at
the hands of almighty God: and unto this mark let all Christian men fly.
Like as in Adam we be al dead, so in Christ we do all live. i. Cor. xv.
Furthermore we have no plagues that fall upon us. what trouble soever it be,
either of the body or the soul: but Adame was the cause, whose children we be,
Adam began our plagues.
whose plagues we suffer: as misery of mind, bondage, sickness, poverty. etc.
Even so on the other side, there is no conselation, or quietness of mind,
patience, joy, or long suffering, or any other gifts of nature, or Grace: And
finally life everlasting, but al do spring through Christ, who is the
beginning, the end, and the reward of al good things. And for as much as we
be all embraced with miseryes, Christ gives all comfort.
and infinite aflictions, and daily cares moving us to be weary of this world,
and that we have no dwelling place of continuance here on earth: Let us humbly
obey the commandments of God, which are for our own profits, that is to
say, to hope, trust, and look for help at his hand, as the Woman of Canane
did, which came to Christ in the time of her trouble, hoping in him, neither
killing her self neither her daughter. Who must help us in the time of trouble.
The fruits of her faith and hope, was quietness of conscience, and health of
Body. And why so? Because she came to Christ in the time of her trouble, for
not only by her, but by all the holy Scriptures, we be taught to go to christ
in the time of trouble. For there is a promise made, call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee, help, and deliver thee. Also there is another
promise of God, saying: if we dye with Christ, we shall live with him. If we be
pacient, we shall also rain with him for ever. Now this we see to die with
Christ, is not to despair, or to be more impacient then wyld beasts, which
in most of their rages will not kill them selves. The best regiment of life.
But to conclude, for all infirmityes of the Body, let us seek the comfort of
Gods means, which is the Physician: and for the griefs of Mind, embrace the
heavenly Physic, contained in Gods word, which is the pryncipall
Regiment. And further for a mean between them both, that each of us do walk
in such calling in this life: that we may be necessary members, one unto an
other, in the common wealth, to profit each other, and hurt no body. To
travail for the fruits of the earth, or any other riches, gotten by honest
policy, and after to spend them accordingly. By providing for our selves
against the time of adversity. To obey rulers, and pity the pore, to do as we
would be done unto. To despise a wicked life, and fear no kind of trouble,
that it shall please god to lay upon us. This is the sum of Christen
religion, of a honest life, and of a happy end.


Sickness. THese perturbations of the mind, are wondrous fearful, God
deliverer us al from such infernal plagues, from henceforth. Now I thank you,
that you have showed me them, even as I have felt the^ Further by good examples.
you have well persuaded me, and finallye with good consolation, you have healed
my wounds of careful miserye. But when al our Phisical remedies will not help,
good master Health, I pray you seeing that death is ye end of our mortal race,
and ^inisher of life, teach me the signs and tokens, of yt most Monstrous
fearful Death, and how I might know them. Whereby I might not vaynly trust in
this life: which is but lent for a time.


Health. AFter the day, follows the night, and after life, approaches most
fearful death: the end of all things, and these have their tokens and signs
before them. As when the day passes away, it is manifest to every creature:
The cause of the night.
the Son withdraws his excellent Light drawing home his beams from us.
Hiding himself, or through his swifte course in his circle. The dark
immovable earth does take from our eyes the benefits of his bryghtnes: and
eftsoon it is called no more day, but night and the time of silence or
darkness. Even so, when the spirits of life, have worn their vessels, or
instruments: or when the gross humor of Melancholy, or earthly complexion.
with extreme cold, have convinced, quenched, and with force overcome the warm
moystnesse, and Uitall lively Well spryng of the blood, the fountain of Life.
Then the body and soul wax weary of each other, or when they fall to
division, or begin to be at debate within them selves, then they never sease,
until they do come to utter dissolucion. For things with them selves, being
at debate, shall quyckly be desolued, whether it be a publyke wealth, or a
private Body. And all for the want of Unitye. As example. When there is good
agreement, Whath mischief does chance to the whole body for want of unity.
that is perfect temperament, in the four Complexions: then the Body,
stands in good case. But when one Humor does greatly abound his three
Fellows, gettyng the Uictorie, then for lack of Unitye, or agreement among
them selves: the whole Body is in danger to give place to one and yield to
death As example If choler get the pre-eminence, then he will put his three
fellows to the walls: he brings in against himself, and then also Iaundice,
Tercians, red Leprie, Frensye, headache, Pleuresye. etc. When phlegm gets the
rule, then dropsy with a swollen bellye, Face and Legs. etc. does give the
onset against nature. Even so in the cold melancholy, Consu^ption, quarten etc.
when it bears the rule. All these have their proper tokens and signs going
before them and their effects are death, when they do extreamlye rule,
unless they through the wisdom of the learned be helped. But if they do
meanly abound, it is not mutch amiss: as if choler do somewhat exceed in
drynes and heat, then the coldness and moister of Phlegm, will pacifye her, and
bring her again to her good estate. When the complexions do want unity, then
the body cannot long continue alive.
If Melancholy through coldness, and dryness do harm, the blood with his
warmenes and moystnesse: will reduce, and call her back from killing the body,
and thus one neighbor will naturally help another And when they will not
accord, or gree in unity, than purgations. etc. are prepared to help the
weaker, and expulse the usurper within the common wealth of the body which is
the mansion of the Soul. or spirits of life after the Philosopher. And as for
the most principal humor, or blood in Sanguine persons, when it begins to
corrupt, or the body at point of danger, these signs will come together.
Signs of sickness of Blood.
Slownesse. Idleness. Dullness. Yauning or gaping. Stretching forth the arms
and legs. No delight or pleasure. Sweet Spattel mingled with bitterness.
Much heavy sleep, with dreams of red color, or bearyng burdens great and
heavy. Perturbacion of the senses. Red gross urine stinking. Little appetite
or none to meat. Red face with much sweat, Of these signs come stinking
fevers. Pestilence, Squinaunce, bloody flixe, etc.
Signs of ye sickness of choler.
Yellow color in the skin. Bitterness in the mouth. Pricking in the mouth of
the stomach* Heat above nature. Lothsomnesse to meat. Lamentacion or great
grief of mind. Dryness coveting drink of sundry kinds. Uomittes of yellow
and green.
Signs of the sickness of choler
Small or no sleep, but fearful fyery dreams of strife. etc Yellowe vryne,
little residence, and much yellow foam. Of these signs come Iaundice,
Tercians, Pleurisies, madness. Collickes etc.
The signs of sicknesses of melancholy.
Pale color in the face. Sowernes in the mouth. Belching of wynd. Little
sleep, yet horrible and infernal dreams. Much thought, pensieuenes, and care.
A desperate mind. More leaner, then before in the body. Straightnes in the
stomach. Eluishnes, of countenance, and taunting in words. Coldness,
starting, and fearful. White, thin vryne. Of these come Quartens, Morphew,
Leprie, Ca^ker, madness, hardness of the Spleen. etc.
The signs of the sickness of Phlegm.
Sluggishnes, and dulnes of memory. Forgetfulness. Much spittyng. Much sleep.
Pains in the head, specially in the hinder part. Swelling in the face and
cheeks. Evil digestion. White dropsy like in color. Patience with
doltishnes, lacking lively quicknes. Dreaming or going naked, drowning or of
Snow Of these come Quotidians, Dropsyes, Palseye, falling sickness. etc.


And to help all these, there are singular good medicines: both in the Simples,
and chiefly in the compoundes. But yet brother Sickness note Hippocra^es. the
well and chief tree, from whence the good order of Physic first did spring,
which is a general text. Upon whose words. C. Galen. etc. does comment and
write at large, his great works. He wrote one small work also called ye
Aphorisms, wherein is great knowledge. But to our purpose For this place of
signs dedly mark what he says in some of those Apho and Praeno.

Whosoever being an healthful body, is suddenly payned, and quickly after has
lost his voice, and starteth withal: he shall dye within seven days, Quicu^que
saui dolor capitis repent. etc. Apho Hyppo.
next following after. It is not only through the inflamacion of the Spirits
but also by the universal matter, drawn into the brayn, from the stomach. etc

If one be amassed, and fall into idle talk of ye prick into the head, it is
deadly.

A c^nuulsion, shrinking, or cramp in the senewes, after a purgacion, Ex
capitis ^ctu etc. Aphori. vj. Conuulsio a. veratro lethal^a est Aphor.
is very perilous or deadly.

A conuulsion after the taking of Elleborus, deadly.

A conuulsion after a wound, is deadly.

Considera^e vero con^enit etiam oculoru^ praeno. Hipp. Capi. 4.
Who so is dreadful or heavy in a Frenzy, the sign is deadly.

It behooves the Physician, to consider the eyes of his Pacient, when he
sleeps: if there appear any white thing between the eye liddes. If he have
had no laxe, nor received any pocion to purge before: it is a sign very
terrible, and present death.

To be deaf in a long Fever, if the body be weak: it is a token of death.

It is an evil sign, when one has a crampe, in bleedyng at his Nose. or else
sowneth wythall.

A stoppyng in the throat, or suffocacion falling to one which has a fever.
and a swellyng in the throat, is a perilous deadly token.

Who so in an Agewe, can neither turn his Neck, nor swallow his own
spattle, death is at hand.

If a ^runkard do suddenly lose his speech, he shall suddenly dye of a Crampe,
Si obrius. quispiam repen^e obmutuerit. Aphor pars.ii.vii.
or conuulsion: unless he fall into an Agew, or else receive power to speak
again, when he has digested the surfet^e.

They which be swelled in the back, before they come to the age of.xii.
years: if it chance of the shortness of breath, or else a very strong cough,
shall sone dye.

A voluntary laxe, coming after apleurisie, or the sickness of the lunges, is
a deadly token.

Mulieri grauidae si mammae. etc. Apho. pars. 3.^ Inquibus mor. men^e. etc.
pho. pars. 31.
Who so in the empty place in the stomach, has foul rotten matter, or else the
dropsy: if they be either so cut, or burned, whereby all the Water runs
forth, surely it is present death.

Who so has his spattle stinking, when it is burnt upon the coals, and also
if his hair do easily fall from his head, it is a sign of death.

A laxe or great cough, with spittyng filthy matter, is deadly,

Who so often times are weakened, and lose their strength without some many^^st
cause shall have sudden death.

Quibus hepa^ aqua plenu Apho. pars ^.8

Quibus in febribus morbus regius and Apho pars. ^.35.


When a woman's breasts do deminish, being with Child: it signifies the Child
is dead.

To be discontent in the time of sickness, when things are given in medicine,
it is an evil token, for the contrary is good.

In every sickness, if Melancholy or black choler, be either purged upward,
or downward without medycine, it is both perilous, and deadly.

Who so ever be Splenetike, and have a bloody flixe, if it long continue:
then they fall to the dropsy, or else their food, shall pass through their
guts, not digested: this is a deadly sign.

Who so ever have their liver repleted, or filled full with Water: and if the
same water break downward to the belly, it is present death.

Who so in h^ate Fevers, is taken with the yellow Iaundice, in the seventh
ix.xi. or the.xiii. day, it is good: so that his right side wax not hard: but
if these days want, and the side wax hard, it is deadly.

A wound in the brain, heart, diaphragma, or midriffe, small Guts, stomach and
liver, is ever death.

If the yellow Iaundice come before the vii. day, it is perilous.

In laxes, black stools are evil: except purgacions cause them. To have any
Melancholy stool, in the beginning of any sickness: it is a sign deadly.

So is a bloody flixe, beginning with a Melancholy sickness, little pieces of
flesh, appearing in a bloody flixe is present death.

If a Woman with Child be suddenly taken with any grievous sickness, it is a
present death.

It is perilous for a Woman with Child, to have a great laxe.

A Woman with Child, if she be lette^ blood, it kyll^th her child: Muliere^
v^er^ gerent^m* etc. Apho pars. 3
the nearer the birth, the greater perilll.

A woman having a Crampe or conuulsion in the temperate time of her terms, is
perilous.

He which has an ague, being taken with a conuulsion is in Danger: who so
has a conuulsion before his fever, is in no such peril.

Fevers, which do not give over the third day* are perilous. Of Fevers


In a long agewe, if the outward members are very cold, and the inward parts
hot and dry: death is at hand.

In a long fever, when the Lips, Nose, or mouth be drawn a wrie or
disgrased: so that the pacyent can neither see or hear, and is in weakness,
death at hand.

If any having an Agewe, sweat in these days, it is good, if not, it is
perilous.ii.v.vii.ix* xi, xiiii.xvii.xxi*xxvii xxxiiii. Of Sweat^


Who so has the Pestilence, and bleedeth not before twelve Hours, or sleeps
eight hours after bleeding: death is at hand.

Cold sweat with a sharp Fever, signifies death. The signs of death by the
face*


If the face of a sick man be changed from the healthful estate, with a
sharp nose, hollow eyes, writhen Temples, cold Ears, contract^d in the
extreme parts, like aleafe when it is dry, hard s^in in the foreh^ade, and
dr^, pale faced, little or no sleep, bityng or tremblyng of the Lips. etc.
Th^se are signs of death* says Hippocra. in libro primo praeno. capit. iij.
beginning at Conside^are por^o hoc modo co^uenitin morbis acutis. etc* The
signs of death by the eyes.


If the pacyent can not abide the light of Sun, sire, or Candle, but fly the
same, or weep inuoluntarily, without cause, or make one eye appear less^r
than the other or goggle with them, lookyng murch a squynte, except the eyes
were so in health, or else have the whytes turned into bloudye red, or have
darcke or black small veins in them with unstableness, and concaue holownes,
or open in the sleep with the neither Lip hangyng down, and the upper Lyppe
drawn up. etc. Surely death is at hand, Hippo. prono.

Feel also the Pacient when he lies in his Bed, his arms, sides, Neck, The
signs of death by lying in the ^ed
breast, and Legs, whyther the parts be payned or flexible, or have lost
their strength and are styffe, if he lie upward: except it were his old
custom, and shrynke to the beds ^eete with casting abroad the hands and
^eete, sleepyng with a wyde^open mouth, and covet to lie naked, death, death,
and the grave are at hand Hipp^cra. prono.

If the Pacyent lie in his syckenesse, upon his belly, except custom move it,
and so do sleep: it signifies a great syckenesse in the Breast, or belly. Or
else to be mad, and lose his wits, through the malignitie of the sp^rites* and
to sit upon their buttockes in their sickness, Signs of death by the teeth.
of a sharp sickness, it signifies the peril of death, or great inflamacion
in ye lunges. As Hippocrates says in the Prae. Capi. vij. at in ventrem
decumbere. etc.

To gnash or grind the teeth in Fevers, is either a great vexacion of the
mind, Signs deadly by wounds.
or madness at hand, or else death: For it is an affection of the Sinews
Notwithstanding young children, tormented with Worms are not in this peril
always, when they do gnash the Teeth.

In a stroke of a deep wound* when conuulsion follows: and no matter, or
corruption comes to the wound so^e after, if the body be pale and swarte in
color, Signs deadly by the hands.
and dry with weakness of digestion, death approaches. And this affyrmeth
Hippocra. de signis ex vlcere. Cap. viii.

Who so in a sharp Fever, sickness of the Lunges, frenzy, or pains of the
head, does wrythe the hand to his Nose or face, as though he would kill Flees
or Flies, Signs deadly by ^he breath.
or k^yt a knotte, or brush his clothes, or else pull up Rushes this is a
present sign of death, says Hippocra. lib. primo. prae Capi. ix. de gestaculo
manuum.

Shortness of breath, and of little force, does signify great dolor
inflamacion and madness, Signs deadly by sweat.
comes of great breathyng, like a Bull, or a wild beast. Cold breath, with
the coldness of the nose and mouth, Death draws near, with fare well vain
World, with flesh, and blood: Read Hippocrates prae. vbi inquit, spiritus
densus dolorem significat. etc.

Signs deadly by swelli^g.
Sweates are best in sharp Fevers, in the days of their decrees, or judgments:
but the contrary are perilous. As when sweat is cold, specially in a sharp
fever, death approaches: for cold sweat, comes from gross matter, without
the spirits of lively warmnes. But i^ it be but a mean leuke warm sweat,
Signs deadly by spattle.
called a faynte sweat: then it does signify a long sickness.

If the breast be swelled with throbbyng, beating, or trouble in the breast, or
the upper part of the same: and therewith unstable, fearful eyes utter
madness, or death do approach. But bleedyng at the nose will help it,
specially in young persons: but hardness in those parts, dolor, and
swellyng, is death.

Spattle when one spyttes, being white, light, and sweetish, not varyable in
color, and also very easy drawn forth* is good: but if it be sweatye filth
with matter, or black and stinkyng, with yelownes* greenenesse, or blacknes.
etc. Filth which is called pus a putredine, there is peril of death, And that
which is good, is of the benefit of the blood: and goodness of digestion, and
the goodness of phlegm and blood.

It is perilous, not to neese, in the time of sickness: but so neese
vehemently, is perilous also.

Water, as Dropsy between the skyn, and the flesh, coming of a sharp Fever
is ever perilous and evil in this case: when the nails appear dark and
pale, and the privy members and stones do swell, it is a great token of death.
Read of this, Hippocrates in libro secundo praeno. De aqua inter cutem.

Who so does wake long, and can not sleep, eather a great sickness does
approach, or else madness, through an inflamatio^. Who so breaks his sleap o^
his common custom, and falls into much waking in the night, this is an evil
sign, and goes before a perilous evil.

In all sicknesses hardness of the beallye, or costifnesse, vile stink, black
stools, or bloody flixes, are very perilous, but breaking of wind downward,
at the stool is good*

To vomit white phlegm, not very gross or yellow, is good, but muddye dark or
black, it is perilous. But to vomit sondrye colors of each sort it is most
perilous and deadly.

To be unnatural dry, with a Fever hedach, shortness of breath, much sweet
spattle, high colored, great veins, prickinge in the side, it is ye signs of
ye perilous pleuresy, and death except digestio^ and blood letting. Of blood
letting I have spoken in place, and thus I do end because time is so passed or
else I would have spoken more of the Crises, or judgment, and of pulse, and
vryne with a regiment against the sweat and the fearful plague called
Pestilence: which I pr^y God deliver us from. I pray thee take all my talk in
good part: and thus I commend thee to the living god, that has made both
heaven and earth, to help and preserve thee with his healthful medicines, and
good defense against all sickness, soreness, and wounds, contained within my
little Bulwark.


Sickness. I Most heartily thank thee, gentle Health, God bringit so to pass:
and grant us after this life, a blessed estate everlasting whereas is no
misery and wretchedness. But happiness and perpetual blessedness, with Christ our
God. Amen.


The end of the Dialogue, between Health and Sickness: By william Bulleyn,
Marcij Anno salutis. 1562.
Though our gifts be never so small,
Yet let us give thanks to God for all.
And who of talentes has great store,
Their accomptes to god shall be the more.
VV.B.
An Index of the book
A
A Good Richen, is a good Apothicaries shop 1 A pocion must be given at three
sondrye times, to remour and expulse matter from the stomach 2 A caue^t to
beware Idem An example between a Simple and a compounde medicine. 4 Achab did
kill Naboth for his vineyarde. 6 A cauiat for Summer. 11 A Clister to mollify
the belly in the time of danger. 14 A good note to be observed, when nature is
weak. Idem A plaster for the flixe. 15 A consideracion in Eating and
Drinkinge to be had, and of the variety of meats Idem. A cause why the soul
departs from the Body. Idem A good rule to be observed. 16 An orore for the
dyeting of such as be sick of sharp ^euers. Idem As the complexion is* so
man requires his food in the time of health, things like to his nature, but
in sickness the cont^^rye. Idem Aires are to be observed in sicknesses, as in
health. 17 A sign of digestion. 18 An example of Brute beasts Idem An Hickop
after a Uomitte is perilous. Idem A goodly way to help the Hickop, after a
vomitte. 20 An expulsive for an Idle loute. Idem A good reward for diligent
labor. Idem All the works under the Son, are nothing but vanitye, and
afflic^ion to the mind. 23 Athanasius fear. 24 A shift for fresh water
Soldiers. Idem A lesson against anger Idem A wrathful wretch in battle. 25 A
wrathful part of Alexander, in killing of Clitus Idem A noble woman wept to
death, for the death of her husband. Idem Ar^^on^ fled away for Theseus sake,
forsaking her fathers land. 27 A pleasant death. 27 Adam began our plagues.
29
B
BEware of drying medicines in Somme^ for Cho^ericke persons. 11 Boxing is
good for a Ludber. 20 Boxinge does draw forth evil humors. Idem. Boxing does
stop the terms, when they do abound^. Idem Both God and nature abhor
ingratefulnes 26
C
Compounded humors may not be purged with Simple medecines for they are ^o
weak. 4 Cow, Sheep, and Plowe, be our nurses. 8. Cold does take, and is not
taken. 6 Choler is sone dry, therefore purge but little, but the fleshly body
has much moisture, therefore purge the more. 1^ Cold medecins to the whole, but
warm to the sick must be given. Idem Certain causes which let medicine to
work 14 Corrupt airs bring sundry diseases. 17 Choleric persons most not
fast much. 21 Christ gives al comfort. 29 Cleopatras death. 25
D
Dreams do admonish men to fear God 6. Death is the end of life. 14
Drunkar^es what the do. 22 Didos death. 25 Diag^ras Rhodius did expire the
breath of life for sodayn joy. 28 Deoclesian slew himself. 29
E
Elleborus albus, the poison thereof 10 Example of wax and fire. 14 Extremes be
perilous things. Idem Extreme heat and cold be evil. 15 Exercise before
meat. 17 Equitacion is very wholesome. 19 Examples of sodayn fear. 23 Evil
parents, and evil children. 24 Example of Marcellus. Idem Examples of wrath in
Nero. Idem Examples of sodayn joy. 27 Example of Saul, which dyed in
desperacion. 29 Example against desperacion. Idem
F.
Four things considered, attraction dissoluing. 1 Fervent prayer unto God,
does mittigate his wrath 17 Fear is like a monster of hell. 24 Fear in Christ.
Idem Fear in saint Peter. Idem Fear of the Christians. Idem Fear makes men
offer to Idolles. Idem Fools be afraid of the Mare in their sleep 22. Fear
brings desperacion, example of Judas. 24
G
Good counsel in the time of trouble. 7 God the very Physician 9 God does
work by Mitacle, and means. Idem. Gods vengeance. 23 Good intententes, and
good acts be two things. 4 Gratitude of domme beasts. 26
H.
How to prepare medicine 3 How to know what humor do abound by his proper
token. Idem He which loves God shall have hearts rest. 10. How to know whether
Choler be purges, or no. How to quicken the stomach 15 How to provoke vomit,
and how to stair it. 16. How the stomach must be prepared toward sleep. 22
How to avoid evil dreams Idem Hippocrates upon sleapes. Idem How a ielous
fool beguyled himself. 26
I
John Preston, called John of stonham. 2 It helps much to Nature, to provoke
vryne. 3 Ignorant Barboures, their fruits. 4 In Adam we have our fall. 6
Infidelles have singular gifts of God. 9 In Elleborus you shall know how to
correct the same. 14 Idleness the mother of mischief. 18 Idleness brings
mischief to the body and soul, and poverty. Idem It is not good to be trimmed
of ye Harbor at night, but in the morning* 19 In this life we have our
purgatory, and yt we feel and perceive. 6 Ielousy is cousin germain to frensy,
mark the fruits thereof 26 Ielousy causes adultery Idem Ingratitude or
unkindness, called churlishnes. Idem Ingratitude has killed many a Man. 27.
Inuencius the Consul, dyed sodaynlye for joy Idem
K
Kings and Queen's be subject to the miseryes of this World, and have no
perfect felicitye, before their mortal end. and beginning of immortal life.
7
L
Like as Heat consumes Snow, even so does Physic money 2. Lurking humors
how to find them and expulse them. 3 Let no man be angry with an other man's
folly. 10 Little travel for the sick. 18 Love is a conqueror. 5 Love makes
beastly fools. Idem Lucretius. 29
M.
Men's natures must be observed, a little medecin will work much of some men,
and a strong medecin will seante work on some other men. 2 Methodici be
Phisicians, that observe certain rules by art. Idem Medicines solutiue, why
they are given Idem. Melancholy the worst humor of Nature begatte a son
called the Quarten. 4. Matter in the Ueines must be let out by blood letting,
and in the Belly, by clister, in the Breast by vomit. 5 Man's life is both
short and miserable. 6 Medecin does change, and meat is changed. 7
Medecines for feeble stomachs to purge gently. 10 Men, Women* and Children,
must take medecines, according to their strength and age 11 Much humor must
be purged by little and little and not at once. 12 Much watch causes raw
humors in the stomach. 22 Moderate walk after Meat, profits. 17 Modera^e
exercise is a suffrayn thing. 18 Men do dream according to their temperament
or complexion. 6
N
Nature has many hidden desires, unknown to the Physician* 10 Nature has
prepared that one creature dreadeth and fears an other 12 Note which is the
most wholesome air to dwell in. 17 Neesyng does help women in their travel*
20. No man or beast, can live without Sleep. 21
O
Of sweet fleume. ^ Obseruacions in blood letting. ^ Of the time of medecin.
7 One may sleep after Pills, but yet beware of old pills. 8 Of the quantitye
of matter to be purged. 12. Of overmuch purging the body, the remedy to help
the same. 13 Of Syrupes and drinks. 15 Of fricacion the virtue thereof. 18 Of
neesing the profit thereof. 20 Of sweates profitable and unprofitable to a
common wealth. Idem Of two kinds of sweates, natural, and artificial. 21 Of
good and bad sleep. 22 Of the sodayn alteracion of the mind, from joy to care.
23 Of fear what it is. Idem Of heat artificial and natural. 24 Of Choleric
heat. Idem Of sodayn joy. 28
P.
Propertye and place must be observed. 2 Preparatiue must be first given, and
then Purgacion. Idem Purge that which should be purged, or else medel not.
Purgers of Phlegm. 4 Purge upward in Summer, and downward in Winter. 5 Place
where medicine should be ministered conveniently joined with time. 6 Prospe^ity
is very slippery. Idem Pills may be made of all kind of medycines. 8 Poor
men be exalted through virtue, 9 Purge phlegm more than choler, and Melancholy
more than phlegm 12 Phisicions ought to have a perfect knowledge of the nature
of places and air* 17 Pleasant people they are. Idem Pox is cleansed by
sweat. 21 Pleasure is noisome to the disquiet heart. 23 Procris did seek her
own death, through jealousy. 26
S
Scamonie is perilous, except it be well prepared, and kills many. 3 Signs
manifest, declaryng what humors bear the greatest rule in the Bodies of men
and women, without which i^ is not possible to purge according to art, but
rather to kill. 4 Signs to know when Melancholye approaches, after whom
comes the quarten. Idem Sorrow is for things past, and fear is for things
to come. 6 Sudden gotten substance remains not long^. 10 Signs of death,
through purging of the body. 14 Short sickness, thin broth: long sickness
thick broth. 6 Sweet air to be made in the time of sickness with perfumes. 17
Signs of death by the teeth. 32 Signs deadly by wounds. Idem Signs deadly by
the hands. Idem Signs deadly by the breath. Idem Signs deadly by sweat. Idem
Signs deadly by swelling. Idem Signs deadly by spattle. Idem
T
The fruict of rash ministracion of Medycines. 1 The virtue of bitter medicines
is great. 2 The cause of sicknesses. Idem The chief sign of digestion. 3
That humor which do abound purge the same. Idem The Manna of Calabria is the
best in the world, and falls in the Night as dew upon flowers and leaves. 4
The fire will get the victory* if the Water be not equal, or have the
maisterie. ibi. To know when medicines has wroughte their effect. 5 The
humors regions, are chiefly to be considered. Idem The day natural, and the
Day artificial. Idem The four complexions reigning every one six hours.
Idem The aged, the very young weak folk, and Women with child, may not be
let blood. Idem The hope of the life to come. 6 The soul never sleeps. Idem
The troubles of the mind, be greater than the crosses of the body. Idem The
obseruacion of complexions. 8 To give medicine in the fit of a Fever is
perilous. Ide^ The life of the plain People in the Country. Idem The end of
wicked men. 9 The Gout loves rych men, but is afraied of poor folks. 13 To
cool the mouth. Ide^ The causes why medicines work immo. 14 Tenasmus what it
is, and how to help it. 15 The earth is mother of every liui^g thing. id To
feed of diverse sorts of meats corrupts the body. Ide^ To eat both fish
and flesh together, hurts the flegmatike body. Idem The melancholy. 16 The
Sanguine. Idem The practice of Idle people, 18 The Heathen ar better, tha^ many
christians. 1 Three things to be observed in fricacio^s. 19 The cause of vomit
and when it helps, and when it hurts. Idem To help (...) Hickop. Idem
Tucke, and Raper. 20 The Carter does daily help the courtier, id The great
goodness of fasting, both for the soul and body. 21 The rich use gluttony, and
the pore penury, id The virtue or benefit of sleep or rest. ide^ The cause
why a dru^kard do di^ suddenly. 22 To whom watch is good. Ibidem The
afflictions of the mind, is hard to be helped. Idem The ix. heavenly Muses,
can smally co^forre some careful heart, when it is in care. 23 The sacred gift
that the nine heavenly Muses have, and can give to others when they be in
trouble. Idem The names of the nine Muses, with their gifts. Ibidem The
perturbacion or sodayn mocion of the mind, must be well observed. Ibidem The
jealousy of Antiopa. 26 The treason of Judas, that most ungrateful villain,
his example to al churles* ide^ To know a very Gentleman. 27 The sh^mefull
ingratitude of Theseus, the son of Ageus, the king of Athenes. ide^ The
Monster of the Labyrinthe* Ibidem The great grief and lamen^acion of Theseus,
when he was in prison. Ibidem. The noble pitiful Lady Ariadne, did comfort the
miserable Theseus, and set him at liberty. Ibide^. The crafty treason of false
Theseus Idem The death of Ariadne. Ibidem The death of Otho for care. 28 The
Wisdom of Dionise the tyrant, in adversity. Ibidem The king of Bohem, what
he did in the time of poverty. Idem The end of men in desperacion. 29 The end
of Sardanapalus. Ibidem The death of Judas. 30 The death of Brutus. Ibidem To
dye in desperacion, is to renounce salvation. Idem The patience of Io^. Idem
The best regiment of life. Idem The cause of the Night. Idem The signs of
death by the face. 32 The signs of death by the eyes. Idem The signs of death
by lying in the bed. ide^ The signs of a pleurisy. 33
V
Use makes the labor easy. 18 Uomit helps the flixe. 19
VV
When purging medicines are given, first minister herbs and drink to prouo^e
Urine. 2 When one discendeth into himself, he shall behold fearful things. 6
Wicked spirits, do molest our spirits. ^ What thing is best for mankind. ^
Why purgacion works not naturally. 8 We^ke stomachs, can not away with
strong medicines. Ibidem What harm wind does in a Fever, or after purging.
13 When the pacient is in peril, the remedy to help him. 14* What k^ndes of
meats do cause good blood. 16 What hurt comes of an empty stomach when ye
go to bed. Idem UUhat airs corrupts the blood. 17 UUhat situacion is best
for a house* Idem UUhat profit comes by exercise. 18 UUhen to use rubbing, or
frication, and wherefore. 19 UUhen to travail or play. Idem UUhat persons may
best vomit. Idem UUho may worst ^omit. Idem When to vomit. Idem When it is good
to bleed. 20 UUho must not bleed. Idem UUho ought to swear, and who not. 21
UUhen sweat is not good. Idem UUhen sl^epe is perilous. 22 UUhat dreams do
signify. Idem UUhat spirit gelousie is. 26 Who must help us in ye time of
trouble. 2^ UUhat mischief does chance to the whole body, for want of unity.
30
FINIS.

