THE WHOLE BOOK OF JOB PARAPHRASED, OR, Made easy for any to understand.

By GEORGE ABBOTT.

JAMES 5. 11.

You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord,
that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his
shop at the entrance into Popes-head-Alley, out of Lumbard-street, 1640.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED Father in Law, William Purefey of Calldecoate in
Warwkickshire, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
THat I am yours, both you deserve it, and I publish it, and therefore for what
is mine, whilst I have you for my Father, my thoughts shall not rove to seek
any other Patron, next under God, who, if he have made me an Instrument of
any good upon so good a subject, I wish he may have the glory, and I the
prayers of all that taste it.

Sir, I have heard you with serious desires, sometimes wish, that some would
undertake the rendering of the Bible throughout, in an easy Paraphrase, after
this manner. And might your wishes have effect, doubtless, it would prove a
useful work, and serviceable to God, and to his Church; yea, (if my judgment
fail me not) in the next place to the translation of the Scripture into our
mother tongue; whereunto the Lord stir up the hearts of those whom he has
designed for so happy an employment as is the holding forth of so great light,
and facilitating of Scripture studies, to the filling of the Hab. 2. 14.
earth with knowledge, as waters cover the Sea.

Your ever obliged Son in Law, GEORGE ABBOTT.

TO THE READER.
THis Book of Job in respect of the dialect of those times, being of quaint
expressions, must needs be explained by other and more familiar language: and
being also difficult in the coherence (which is very material) many texts or
verses besides their proper senses must therefore in their explications carry
their dependant, and coherent meanings in them, else they cannot be fully
rendered, nor the discourse by its right joints and ligaments continued, and
knit together; but must needs be imperfect, blind, and lame, which I have
labored the cure of, by perspicuity of phrase and dependence.

A Paraphrase (and not a commentary) is the thing that I endeavor, which is a
bare rendering of the sense plain and easy, the better to enable the Reader to
be a commentator to himself. And if any place seem to bear another meaning
then I have given it, know, that there goes more to the true stating of a text
then an overly view or a present consideration of the sense it seems to hold
forth in the letter of it: some places require much peasing, and many candles
to be lighted at once in the mind of the expositour to give their true
intended meaning, else he may err in been divisis ad male conjuncta, and
cause a falling out of the text either with its coherence and scope, or else of
one text with another.

The story is well known to be as principal a pillar to support a Christian in
strong trials, by pattern and precept of faith and patience, as any the whole
Bible affoords, and so I trust it may prove being well understood and applied
to all such as read it with an heart to use it. Besides which there is
excellent matter for other graces to work upon, God being upon the occasion of
their dispute admirably set forth with powerful and spiritual elegancy, and
man abased in like manner, which to a considerate humble-hearted Reader will
administer sweet occasions of reducing his graces suitable to such subjects, by
the assistance of the spirit, into fresh acts and lively motions; the way to
evidence his truth, and to further their growth.

And, which I also desire the Reader to take prime notice of, he shall further
see for his learning the strong consolation and undaunted courage that
singleness and sincerity of heart (which in a word is, The animating and
giving life to our dead works by doing them in conscience to God through faith
and love) brings with it, even to the facing of God in an holy boldness
(though through temptation Job exceeded) by the faith of his Gospel, when he
pleads against us his greatest severity, and highest Majesty, and to the
outfacing of all besides God, men or devils.

Other flowers there are which a spiritual quick sensed Reader, will not lose
the savor of, as he spends his time in this garden of God, whereto his spirit
will guide him better then I can point him, and to which end I shall pray with
the Cant. 3. 16.
spouse for the spouse. Awake o Northwind, and come thou South, blow upon my
Garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth.

Thine to his Talent in the service of Christ, GEORGE ABBOTT.

THE ARGUMENT.
GOD, for whose pleasure all things Rev. 4. 11.
are, and were created, having made Job fit for use, resolves to employ him,
and having first tried him in a calm sea of prosperity, and not finding him to
leake, at last launcheth him into the deep, and ingageth him in a long and
dangerous voyage of adversity, where he must undergo many a fight and storm,
to prove God a Master Builder.

Hereupon, because Satan knew not Gods design, God himself hints it to him by
commending Job, which his malice not abiding to hear, and desiring to
contradict, presently becomes a suitor, to God, to have the winnowing of him,
which God for many reasons grants to him: Partly, in respect to show him that
he is the only discerner of the heart: Partly, in heb. 4. 12.
respect of the error of those times wherein it was generally received, that
God afflicted not in sovereignty, but only for, and according to the
proportion of sin: Partly, in respect of Job, for his after-honour and
preferment: And lastly, in respect of aftertimes, to leave upon record a
pattern of patience, and a seal of Gods power and faithfulness in upholding
the righteous, and in delivering them out of all their troubles.

Satan having received his commission to work he goes, and discharges all
his Ordinance at once upon Job, thinking through force and policy, to wring
some discontented blasphemy from him, and so to disprove God, but Job abid the
shocke, and uttered not a misbeseeming word, till at last his sores began to
smart, and therewith also the light of Gods countenance through the thick
cloud of those many afflictions began to shine dim upon his spirit, and then
he opened his mouth, not as Satan hoped, to blaspheme, but to ease his
forrwfull soul, with breathing forth a doleful wish or two; as that either he
had never seen life, or might now see death.

Which impatiency of Jobs, his friends standing by, took fire at, and
thereupon they being ignorantly prejudiced of God, that he afflicted not but
in proportionable punishment to sin committed, and consequently were
opinionated of Job, that for all his fair show, he must needs be but a
hollowhearted hypocrite; they with vehement importunity, pressed these sore
upon him as infallible maxims, thereby to have disarmed him both of his sword
of faith, and shield of sincerity, but Job, though conscious to his own
infirmities which he ingenuously confesses, yet was also privy to his own
uprightness, which he as manfully maintains against all his opposites, and
the more they labored to loose his hold on God, the faster he clung unto him,
yea, though God himself seemed to take their part, by suffering Satan afresh
to face him with his forepast sins accompanied with present terrors, and
himself too utterly benighted his soul with an absolute sunset of all
present sight and sense of immediate favor: yet in this great desertion God
gave him underhand for his secret support, a little chinke of light whereby he
was able to see, and sustainingly to remind himself of Gods former favors
(though he felt none present) which made him able to lean upon his God, yea,
and which enlightened him clearly to see also his own sincerity, though it
were sore shot at by his friends, which did drive him to appeal from man to
God (the only Judge of secret things) with whom he desired to plead his cause
(with some exceedings) in that behalf, provided he would substitute one that
was his equal in his stead.

Which Elihu hearing, when his time came to speak accordingly addressed
himself unto him in Gods behalf, wisely, both justifying Job against his
friends, and cond^mning their ungrounded opinion in judgeing him an hypocrite,
because of his great afflictions; and also justifying God against Job, who,
through his friends unadvised spurring him on, had overreached. Wherefore Elihu
shows Job his fault which God struck at by his affliction, to wit, pride,
whereof he convinces him by his saufie capitulating with God, who both in
right of prerogative, over his creature, yea and in justice for his sin,
(though not for his hypocrisy) might justify all he did against him, and was
by no means to be disputed withal touching any thing he did, because of his
excelling power, unsearehable wisdom, and undeniable justice.

Which Elihu having spoken, God himself secondeth him with a large expression
of his own transcendent greatness in wisdom and power beyond Jobs capacity,
consequently showing him his presumption and solly, and his own
unquestionablenesse in all his works, however they appear to humane reason.

Which, when Job understood from God himself, his mouth was stopped, saving in
abasing himself and confessing of his fault, which was no sooner done, but God
shakes hands with Job, Brings forth his righteousness Psalm. 37, 6.
as the light, and his judgment as the noonday, in the sight of all his
accusers; prefers him to be Mediator for his friends, and finally makes
him a large amends, even double to all he lost.

Errata.
Chapter 1. Verse 2. godly, read goodly.

Chapter 5 verse 21. reproach, read approach.

Chap. 8. verse 7 (in the Text) shall, read should,

Verse 20. rejected, read reject,

Chap. 9. verse 19. my body, read any body,

Verse 24 it is not apparent, read is it not apparent,

Chap. 10. verse 1. affection, read affections,

Chap. 11. verse 15. in safe condition, read in a safe condition,

Chap. 12. verse 14. as rhat, read so as thar,

Chap. 14. verse 7, 8, 9. his vegetative life, read its vegetative life,

Verse 11. evaporate, read evaporates,

Verse 12. (in the Text) moret, hey, read more they,

Verse 15. one whom, read on whom,

Chap. 15. verse 18. (in the Text) there is (me) too much,

Chap. 18. verse 4. (in the Text) he removed, read be removed,

Chap. 19. verse 28. injurious occasions, read injurious accusations,

Chap. ^0. v. 23. whom he least looks for it, read when he least looks for
it.

Chap 24. verse 16. vexatious, read vexatious,

Chap. 29. verse 17. could I, read would I.

THE BOOK OF JOB PARAPHRASED.
CHAP. I.
1 THere was a man whose 1. There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was
Job, and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and
eschewed evil.
Story the Lord would have recorded for example, and believed for a truth; and
therefore for further confirmation, know, that for the Country where he lived,
it was the land of Uz, lying upon the borders of the Caldeans, Sabeans and
Cananites; and for his name, it was Job, who was of the Posterity of Abraham by
Keturah. This man was faithful, believing in the promised Messiah, and sincere
in heart, devoting himself to serve and please the Lord always, in all
things, and he walked accordingly in his life and conversation, for fearing to
offend him, he was therefore diligent, with care and circumspection to avoid
all sin, and the occasions thereof in the time and place when and where he
lived.

2. Upon which holy Man, God bestowed 2. And there was born unto him seven
Sons and three Daughters.
a liberal portion of temporal blessings; and the better to illustrate the
exemplarinesse of his virtue and patience, (when by the hand of God he was
quite stripped naked of them all) know more particularly what they were. And
first, he was the father of many godly children, in number seven sons and
three daughters.

3. Secondly, he abounded in wealth, 3. His substance also was seven thousand
Sheep, and three thousand Camells, and five hundred yoke of Oxen, and five
hundred she-Asses, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest
of all the men of the East.
having no less than seven thousand Sheep, three thousand Camells, five
hundred yoke of Oxen, five hundred she-Asses, and answerably enriched with
servants, and all other accommodations; So that indeed there was none in all
those Eastern parts where he lived that went beyond him, or that was equal
to him in temporal felicity.

4. And further, to add to his happiness, 4. And his Sons went and feasted in
their houses, every one his day, and sent and called for their three sisters,
to eat and to drink with them.
and to sweeten these blessings to him the more, he saw the happy fruit of his
virtuous care in educating his children by their mutual love, so unanimously
expressed in their orderly intercourse of friendly feasting and welcomming each
one all the rest of his brethren at his own house, being also ever mindful to
invite their three sisters, that so their number and amity might be complete.

5. And though this thing pleased 5. And it was so, when the days of their
feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early
in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them
all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in
their hearts. Thus did Job continually.
Job, yet such was his religious care, that when their turns of feasting were
expired, he summoned them all jointly, and made them solemnly to examine and
prepare themselves, and then rising up early in the morning, he being Father,
and chief of the family, offered for every one of his children a burnt
offering for (fearing God, and knowing the corruption of nature, and the
temptation of such occasions) he thought with himself; It may be, that my
children in these their feastings, have fallen into some sins incident to
such actions, and through overmuch sensual liberty, may, perhaps, have
forgotten their duty, and overseene themselves toward God, not bearing him
that awfulnesse, nor rendering him the thankfulness due unto him. And this was
Jobs constant custom, which he never failed to perform so often as their course
of feasting gave him occasion.

6. Now, to come to the Story it 6. Now there was a day, when the sons of God
came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them.
self, I must lead you into it by a borrowed allusion from the Kings and
Princes of this world, for the help of our humane understandings. There was a
time when God summoned his ministering Spirits, the holy Angels to appear
before him, who with a filial readiness presenting themselves to give their
account, and to receive his commands for the service of his Church, Satan by
the will of God came also among them to render his account, and to receive his
charge, as also of his own will to epsy advantages.

7. And yet further, to speak after 7. And the Lord said unto Satan: Whence
come thou? Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, from going to and fro in
the earth, and from walking up and down in it.
the manner of men, for the better instructing us according to our capacities;
God seeing Satan there among them, enters into speech with him, thereby to
administer an occasion to manifest Jobs uprightnes, and to bring to pass his
purpose concerning him. And in the first place he asks him whence he came,
and from what doing, to give us to understand the Devils solicitousnesse from
his own reply; who answered, I come from off the earth, from my continual
imploiment of soliciting my cause and kingdom up and down every where among
men by watching and taking the fittest opportunities to tempt and entrap them.

8. Why then, says God, sure thou 8. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect
and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil?
can not choose but have taken special notice of Job the Uzzite, to be my
servant in an extraordinary manner, so as there is not the like to him upon the
whole earth for a faithful and upright-hearted man, that truly reverenceth
and fears me, and is careful to do nothing that shall offend me.

9. It Is true, says Satan, I know him 9. Then Satan answered the Lord, and
said, Does Job fear God for naught?
well, and that he makes a fair show of honoring and serving thee, and no
wonder, seeing he has thriven so well by thee; but thou art mistaken in his
uprightness: for it is not with a filial but a mercenary fear that he
regards thee, the better to compass his own ends.

10. For thou know, and so does 10. Have not thou made an hedge about him,
and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? thou have
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land.
he too, full well, how thou have hitherto encompassed him and all that is his,
with thy protection, so that neither I, nor any could do him any hurt whereby
to try him, and thus thou continuest to do still, neither is he ignorant how
it is thou that prosperest him, and make him thrive in every thing he does,
and have so wonderously enriched him above all that are near him, and
therefore no marvel if for such extraordinary favors he (in this time of his
prosperity and and plenty) seem to do thee extraordinary service, and to
bear thee great good will.

11. But as hitherto thou have employed 11. But put forth thine hand now, and
touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face.
thy power to preserve him and to bless him with such abundance, so now, do
but show it in taking away that which thou have given him, and then he will
quickly appear another manner of man than thou take him to be; for, in stead
of honoring and reverencing thee in fear, thou shall find, that he will cast
off all respect, and not stick to blaspheme thee to thy face.

12 Well (says God) that thou may 12. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold,
all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself put not forth thine
hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.
see that I am the searcher of hearts, and have said nothing of my servant Job,
but what I know to be true, take thy course, try him as thou have desired, thou
have free leave to do whatsoever thou will with all that is his, only I will
restrain thee from harming his own person. Whereupon Satan hasted to put in
execution what God permitted him with the first opportunity.

13. And therefore watched his time 13. And there was a day when his Sons and
his Daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.
when as Jobs children, according to their foresaid custom of love feasts,
were met together in their eldest brothers house, upon which opportunity he
purposed to plant his maine battery for the gaining of his conquest, and
therefore reserved it until the last, making way thereto, by a methodicall
discharge of lesser ordinance.

14. The first whereof is a messenger 14. And there came a messenger unto Job,
and said, The Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding beside them.
in all haste, bringing Job the sad news of the loss of all his five hundred
yoke of Oxen at once, with the hopes of all the next years profits of their
labors, and also of all his Asses.

15. By a violent surprisall of the 15. And the Sabeans fell upon them, and
took them away, yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword,
and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
Sabeans, who came and carried them quite away; and to make the matter worse to
pitifull-hearted Job, he tells him they had also slain all his servants that
were at work with them, save himself, and his escape was ordained,
doubtless, only to the end he might bring him those heavy tidings of
discomfort.

16. Secondly, to set home the sorrow 16. While he was yet speaking, there came
also another, and said, The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and has burnd up
the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them, and I only am escaped alone
to tell thee.
of this message upon Jobs heart, so soon as ever he had heard it, before he
could bethink himself, another in like have bespeaks him with worse news,
and said, There fell fire from heaven, no doubt, by the immediate hand of God,
and has most strangely and suddenly burnd up and utterly consumed all thy
seven thousand sheep at once, and has devoured also thy very servants that
tended them: Only I am escaped to the end, it seems, that I should bring thee
this evil news.

17. Lest he should have any thing 17. While he was yet speaking, there came
also another, and said The Caldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the
Camells, and have carried them away, yea and slain the servants with the edge
of the sword, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
left to sustain him in hope, and to ease his grief; Satan dispatcheth a
third messenger, contriving him to arive in the very nicke of opportunity for
the enforcing of Jobs misery, and provoking him thereby to impatiency against
God, by telling him all in haste; by that time he had well heard out the
other. How that the Caldeans came with no less than three bands of men, and
fell furiously upon the Camells, and the men that kept them; so that they have
driven away the Camells, and killed all the servants to boot, saving my self,
who, it seems, had my life given me by a special providence, to bring thee
the news.

18. And just as he had finished his 18. While he was yet speaking, there came
also another and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking
wine in their eldest brothers house.
tale, comes there yet another messenger, by whom Satan was confident, (having
thus contrived and managed his foregoing temptations) to work his will upon
Job. And he tells him, That his sons and his daughters fearing nothing, were
feasting and making merry, in their eldest brothers house.

19. And unexpectedly, npon a sudden, 19. And behold, there came a great wind
from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon
the young men, and they are dead, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
there blew a mighty wind fromward the wilderness, and in a moment overthrew
all the house upon the young men thy sons, and they are every one slain, only I
have escaped, I know not how, but it seems miraculously, to bring thee these
woeful tidings.

20. Whereat Job, who had abid and 20. Then Job arose and rent his mantle, and
shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,
sat out all the rest, now arose, and in the grief, but not impatiency of his
heart, he rent his garment, and in token of sorrow, after the custom of those
countries he shaved his head, and after that he prostrated himself upon the
ground in reverence to the Majesty of God, and in stead of repining, humbly
worshipped the Lord,

21. Saying, I brought none of all 21. And said, naked came I out of my mothers
womb, and naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
these I have lost, into the world with me, but came as naked into it, as other
men, and so whenever my time had come must have gone out of it: It is only
the Lord, that of his free goodness and bounty, has both given and hitherto
sustained all these to me, and so it is the same Lord, that according to his
good pleasure, has taken them from me, for they were his; so far be it from
me therefore to repine thereat as that I adore and magnify his name therefore,
acknowleding him to be both just and good in all his ways.

22. Now therefore, in all that passed 22. In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly.
hitherto, in despite of Satan, Job sinned not, nor for all these sufferings
and temptations could Satan prevail with him so far to forget himself
toward God, as to utter a misbelieving word against him.

CHAP. II.
1. Again, in like manner, as aforesaid, 1. Again, there was a day when the
sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also
among them to present himself before the Lord.
there was another time, wen as God summoned his ministering Spirits the Angels
before him, who, (as at the first time) presented themselves to the Lord, and
so did Satan also.

2. Of whom the Lord asked the 2. And the Lord said unto Satan; From whence
come thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and said, from going to and fro in
the earth, and from walking up and down in it.
same question; Whence he came, etc. thereby to give a further occasion, more
fully to convince Satan of Jobs integrity, and to perfect his own purpose
concerning him. To whom Satan returned the same answer; That he came from
going to and fro upon the earth, to find advantages to tempt men.

3. Why then says the Lord, thou 3. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect
and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil? and still he
holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him to destroy him
without cause.
can not but have taken special notice of my servant Job, what manner of man
he is, who besides all that I told thee of him touching his faith and honesty,
which in despite of thee he has made good to the utmost, thou see still to
continue in his uprightheartednesse and humble obedience toward me, although
thou prevailed with me, thus seemingly to declare my self against him (and
that in such a manner, as none but such an one as I have told thee he is,
could possibly have borne it as he has done) by laying such heavy afflictions
upon him, and that without any provocation, or cause on his part procuring it.

4. It Is true, says Satan, I cannot deny 4. And Satan answered the Lord, and
said, skin for skin, yea, all that a man has will he give for his life.
it but he has held out well, and I have got no ground of him hitherto, but
yet for all that, the reason is not as thou say, from his uprightness, but
from the nature of his sufferings, and his own selfe-respect; for hitherto
thou have only tried him with foreign afflictions, and have made him to suffer
only in the sufferings of others, but have not touched him at all in his own
person, and thou know it is natural to every man nothing so much to lay to
heart, or be moved with relative, as with personal afflictions, as is seen by
common experience; for who will not, if he may be his own chooser, rather
suffer in any other, though never so near unto him than in himself, and
think it a good bargain to lose all he has to save his life?

5 And that thou may see that this 5. But put forth thine hand now, and touch
his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.
is true, let me prevail with thee once more, to try him a little further
with this kind of trial which I have spoken of, lay but thine afflicting hand
upon his own person, by some bodily pressure, and then tell me whether he
retain his uprightness, nay, then see if my words prove not true, that he
will cast off all respect of thee, and blaspheme thee to thy face.

6. Well says God, seeing thou art 6. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold,
he is in thine hand, but save his life.
not yet convinced, go on, I grant thee thy desire, do thy worst to his
person also: but as before I restrained thee from harming his body, so do I
now forbid thee to take away his life.

7. Satan glad he had sped so well, 7. So went Satan forth from the presence
of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boyles from the sole of his foot, unto
his crown.
quickly left co^muning with God, and went streightway while the anguish of
Jobs other afflictions were fresh upon him, to put his commission in execution,
for the trying of him by bodily pressures, which he fulfilled to the
uttermost, by overrunning him in every part from head to foot with a painful
disease, strangely breaking out all over his body in grievous and noisome
boyles.

8. In so much that every one lothed 8. And he took him a potsheard to scrape
himself withal; and he sat down among the ashes.
him, nor would any endure to lend him their helping hand, wherefore being
destitute of all other means, he himself was forced, (being driven to that
poverty, and enduring that misery) to take for want of better, a piece of a
broken pot, from off the dunghill, and there (as unfit for any other place) to
sit down, and scrape the abundant filth from off his body.

9. Satan seeing all these temptations 9. Then said his wife unto him, Do
thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God, and die.
would not make Job blaspheme, puts him at last directly upon the very point it
self, by the desperate counsel and provoking suggestion of his bosome-friend,
his wife, who in stead of administering conjugall help to him, by the Devils
instigation, she takes the opportunity of this his deep dejection to spur him
on to a further evil, under the plausible pretense of remedy, by tempting him
no longer to fear and adhere to such a God in dependence and reverence, nor
any longer to bear his afflicting hand with patience, that had thus
unmercifully and without cause tormented him, but being that he sped no better
by his integrity, rather to spite God, as God had spited him, by easting off
his fruitless faith and patience, and turning it into blasphemy; for so should
he get more from God by provoking him therewith to destroy him out and out,
than he had done by blessing him, which all this while had gained him no good,
but procured God to sustain him alive under insupportable miseries, and so was
like to do still.

10. But herein also Satan came short 10 But he said unto her, Thou speak
as one of the foolish women speaks; What? shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin, with his
lips.
of his hopes, as we see by Jobs smart reproof, together with his faithful
and humble answer: For, says he to his wife, How dare thou utter these
words, that have been brought up in the knowledge of God; it were a speech
fitter to have come out of the mouth of one of those ignorant heathenish women
that have no knowledge of the true God, than from thee, who have been
otherways instructed, and ought to know, that all the good that we, or any
enjoy, is of his free gift, without our procuring, or deserving; and how comes
it to pass then, that thou art so far devoid of godliness and reason, as
not to know it is but equity in God, when his good pleasure is, to take that
from us, which of his only good pleasure he freely gave unto us; In all which
trial of Job, though in spirit he was sore troubled, yet could not Satan get
one misbeseeming word from him against God.

11 Now when Eliphas the Temanite, 11. Now, when Jobs three friends heard of
all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place:
Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for
they had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him, and to
comfort him.
and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, which were all godly men,
and the three special friends of Job, had heard of all Jobs miseries, they
came all of them together, by joint appointment from the places where they
lived, with intent to testify themselves his true and faithful friends in a
voluntary sympathising his afflictions, and so to mitigate his sorrows by
their friendly condolings, and to support his spirit by their godly advise.

12. But as they drew toward the 12. And when they lift up their eyes a far
of, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, and wept, and they rent every
one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.
end of their journey, they cast their eyes toward Jobs house, and of a sudden
seeing him in his own person in that manner and estate to sit upon the
dunghill, and his distress to go so far beyond report and their own
imaginations of him, they through amazement could not believe their own eyes
for a while that it was he, whom before they had never seen but in a
splendidous fashion, but by beholding him, being at length assured that
pitiful spectacle wa their very friend Job, they could not but through
amazement and affectionate sympathy, break out into a transported manifestation
of their abundant sorrow both in words and tears, and deforming themselves with
rending their mouths, and sprinkling dust upon their heads in token of their
humbling themselves before God at the sight of his judgments.

13. Thus all of them having at the 13. So they sat down with him upon the
ground, seven days, and seven nights, and none spoke a word unto him; for they
saw that his grief was very great.
first sight of him their hearts stricken with the awful fear of God, as also
in pity of him whom they beheld in such misery, when they came to him, sat
them down by him in that very place, upon the ground, eying and considering
him with such astonishment, as that they spent the most part of seven days and
seven nights in that very place with him, without giving almost any regard to
their ordinary rest and sustenance. And all that while they kept silence,
because they thought him incapable of discourse, by reason of his extreme pain
and grief.

CHAP. III.
1. AFter this long time spent in 1. After this opened Job his mouth and cursed
his day.
silence wherein Job had hoped to have heard a word of comfort from his
companions, but perceiving none, and therefore seeing every thing helping on
his misery and empty of relief, he himself at last, to give his heart some
ease, gave liberty to his lips to vent his grief, but still retaining the
fear of God, he brake not out in an enraged manner, immediately against the
Lord himself, as Satan hoped, but discharged his passions upon his own
original, and through the weakness of the flesh to stand it out any longer,
his infirmities so far prevailed, as that he fell foul upon the day of his
birth and cursed it.

2. In this manner: 2. And Job spoke and said,


3. O that I might have my will upon 3. Let the day perish wherein I was borne,
and the night in which it was said, There is a man-child conceived.
my birthday, and the night belonging to it, which gave original to all these
miseries, that they might henceforth be utterly rejected of God and
unserviceable to man, so that not a minute thereof may ever be useful or
comfortable any more.

4. O that it may be branded with 4. Let that day be darkness, let not God
regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it.
unpleasing darkness, and may never be favored of God with vouchsafing the
dew of heaven and such like blessings on it as on other days, yea, let the
Sun break off his course, and make a stand at that day, not daining to
afford it the honor of his light.

5. But in stead thereof let its beauty 5. Let darkness and the shadow of
death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it, let the blackenesse of the day
terrify it.
be turned into a black darkness, even such an one as may resemble the very
grave it self, and let there be no intermission, but let a thick and gloomy
cloud uncomfortably over-shadow it from end to end; let it be so eclipsed with
darkness, as may represent such a dismal blackness that may not only beget
discomfort, but the very terror of a final and immediate dissolution of all
things.

6. As for the night belonging to 6. As for that night, let darkness seize
upon it, let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into
the number of the months.
this day, which nature it self has appointed to be dark, let darkness her
self henceforth, make it her habitation; yea, let nature quite disclaim it
and utterly abandon it for having any place in the computation of time, either
by Sun or Moon.

7. Yet further, let that night bring 7. Lo, let that night be solitary, let no
joyful voice come therein.
forth nothing but mourning and disconsolation, let there be no pleasing
stillness therein as in other nights to invite the melody of music.

8. Let those mourning women, 8. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are
ready to raise up their mourning.
which for hire are wont at funerals with doleful execrations, to lament the
day of their benefactors death, always remember this for one, yea, with their
joint forces and bitterest exclamations let them curse it.

9. Let it not be blessed with the 9. Let the stars of the twilight thereof be
dark, let it look for light, but have none, neither let it see the dawning of
the day.
common blessings of other nights, let it neither (according to the course of
nature) partake of the light of the stars in the beginning, but in stead
thereof be overtaken with an unwonted and unexpected darkness, neither let it
be so happy, as to give occasion (which else of course it should do) to the
next days dawning.

10. These curses I lay upon that 10. Because it shut not up the doors of my
mothers womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.
day and night wherein first I came into the world, and not without cause, for
that was the time which made me capable of all these calamities, and gave
beginning to this my miserable being, which it might have prevented by
hindering me to have been borne.

11. O therefore that I had been 11. Why died I not from the womb? why did I
not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?
borne dead, or else that I had received my ending together with my beginning,
and had left the world by death, so soon as I came into it with life.

12. Or that the Midwife had not 12. Why did the knees prevent me? or why the
the breasts that I should suck?
been so careful of me, but had exposed me to my fatal helplesnesse in the
moment of my birth, or that my Nurse had after let me famish.

13. Then should I not now need to 13. For now should I have lien still, and
been quiet, I should have slept; then had I been at rest.
have complained thus, but in stead thereof have lien unmolested in the grave,
and been quiet from these troubles; I should then have slept without sense of
any these pains, and been at rest from them.

14. And (in stead of this miserable 14. With Kings and Counselors of the
earth, which built desolate places for themselves.
state) then had I been equal in condition with the most renowned of the
world for power and policy, who ambitiously people and edify the waste and
uninhabited countries of the world, for the enlargement of their dominions, and
spreading of their fame.

15. Or be they otherways famous for 15. Or with Princes that had gold, who
filled their houses with silver.
riches, though they abounded in never so great wealth, yet then had neither
these nor those gone beyond me.

16. Or (which is all one to me, so 16. Or as an hidden untimely birth I had
not been; as infants which never saw light.
I had never known these calamities) I should have been as those that never
were known to be, nor never knew themselves to have a being.

17. Then had I been in an estate 17. There the wicked cease from troubling:
and there the weary be at rest.
capable of no earthly molestation; for there the wicked neither by power nor
policy can do any harm, and those that either by their travells or troubles
are weary of this life, do there enjoy a perpetual freedom and rest from
both.

18. There the poor slaves enjoy 18. There the prisoners rest together, they
hear not the voice of the oppressor.
their freedom, and are from under the command of their merciless taskmasters.

19. There cannot be but freedom, 19. The small and great are there, and the
servant is free from his Master.
because there is an equal parity. The great is as the small, and the servant
is as his Master, no better and worse.

20. Seeing then that death affords 20. Wherefore is light given to him that is
in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul?
remedy for all miseries, why is it denied to me, and why in stead thereof do
mine eyes still enjoy the light of the Sun, or why is my life any longer
continued, seeing, that though these are desirable and commodious to others,
yet because of my misery, I account not of them but as burdensome evils?

21. I take no felicity in them, but 21. Which long for death, but it comes
not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures?
do infinitely prefer death before them; It is strange then I cannot have my
desire to exchange light for darkness, and life for death, which how ever* it
be a thing odious to other men, yet do I desire and prize it above all the
riches that the bowels of the whole earth can afford.

22. Wherefore then is it denied 22. Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad
when they can find the graves.
me that am so far from fearing or refusing it, that I should exceedingly
rejoice, and be glad at my very heart (and no doubt, so would all men in my
case) if my hour were now to die?

23. Why does God continue to bestow 23. Why is light given to a man whose way
is hid, and whom God has hedged in?
light and life on me, whom he regards not, and whom he has made unavoidably
miserable?

24. For alas, my extremity is such, 24. For my sighing comes before I eat,
and my rorings are poured out like the waters.
that I cannot enjoy one moment of ease, in so much as that my spirits are so
exhausted with continual grief, that I can relish no meat, nor have any
strength to digest it: And as is my grief, such are my complaints, vehement
and incessant, which things must needs end me.

25. And blame me not for thus 25. For the thing which I greatly feared, is
come upon me, and that which I was afraid of, is come unto me.
complaining: For though I have ever greatly feared to provoke the Lords
displeasure, and have therefore carefully eschewed all manner of evil that
might procure it, yet for all that you see in has befallen me.

26. Yea, though all my life long 26. I was not in safety, neither had I rest,
neither was I quiet: yet trouble came.
when I was at my best, I reposed no great confidence, nor put no extraordinary
content in my prosperity, so as to cause me any whit to abate my fear of God,
yet I speed never the better for this my moderation of mind and care to please
him, but see notwithstanding what misery comes upon me.

CHAP. IV.
1. Jobs three friends that came to 1. Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said,
comfort him, having all this while diligently attended to his passionate
discourse; Eliphaz the Temanite, having his spirit stirred therewith, at length
attempts to address himself to Job, seeing that he himself had broken the
silence, and had administered such an unexpected occasion of reproof: And said,

2. We have purposely forborne all 2. If we assay to commune with thee, will thou be grieved? But who can withhold himself from speaking?
this while, therefore, now at last, let it not grieve thee to hear us speak.
But how ever thou take it at our hands, there are none of us that hears
thee, that either can or may with a good conscience forbear to reply to this
thy sinful unbeseeming discourse.

3. Therefore consider with thy self 3. Behold, thou have instructed many, and
thou have strengthened the weak hands.
how unworthy of thee is this thy passionate exclamation (now that it pleases
God to lay his afflicting hand upon thee) and how devoid of all religious
integrity: For that always heretofore thou have been a forward instructor of
others how to bear afflictions, and by thy counsel thou have strengthened
them to a patient enduring their distresses.

4. In so much that by thy comfortable 4. Thy words have upholden him that was
falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble knees.
speeches, very many feeble ones have been encouraged and upheld from
fainting, and with faith and patience have been enabled to go through-stitch
with their calamities.

5. But now that the same lot is fallen 5. But now it is come upon thee, and
thou faintest, it touches thee, and thou art troubled.
to thee, and that thou should make good thy words with thy actions, thou now
contrary to all men's expectations, and to the scandal of thy profession, in
stead of honoring religion by manifesting thy faith and patience under the
hand of God, most shamefully degenerates into a faithless pusillanimity, and
unbeseeming impatiency, contradicting by thine own practice (in expressing
such extreme trouble at the first touch of these calamities) all that ever thou
have heretofore advised to others.

6. But see now I pray thee by this, 6. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence;
and the uprightnes of thy ways, thy hope?
that which (it appears) has hitherto been hid from thine eyes, I mean, the
deceit of thine own heart touching those graces which till now thou thoughtest
to have been sincerely in thee, and eftsoons made thy brags of, Thou may
now plainly see by this alteration which affliction has wrought in thee, what
was thy fear, thy faith, thy uprightness and thy hope heretofore in the time
of thy prosperity; for had thy graces been any other than counterfeit
pretenses, and thy ways been any other than sinister practices, not aiming
(...) and directly at God, but indirectly at thy self and thine own advantage
they would never have suffered thee thus to have forgot thy self, and broken
out into their contrary vices against God, neither certainly (...) God have
laid this great punishment upon thee.

7. For, where ever can thou call 7. Remember, I pray thee, who ever
perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off?
to mind so much as any one that being truly such as thou salsely mistakest
thy self to be, was ever plagued with the destroying hand of God as thou art;
or in the whole world, where can thou reckon one that ever thou knewst
sincerely righteous, that ever God showed such formidable wrath upon?

8. But on the contrary, I have continually 8. Even as I have seen, they that
plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same.
observed in sundry examples, how that it has ever been Gods way of
proceeding, only to bring evil sufferings upon such as either do or purpose
evil, which we have reason the rather to believe to be true, because this is
so agreeable to justice, for men to reap as they sow, that is, for God to
bring the evil they purposed to others, upon their own heads, which
otherways it were not.

9. And such men indeed, I have 9. By the blast of God they perish, and by the
breath of his nostrills are they consumed.
commonly seen (with the manifestation of a most evident wrath from God) to be
like thee, all of a sudden strangely ruined, and quite brought to naught in a
moment.

10. For be men never so potent and 10. The roaring of the Lion, and the voice
of the fierc^ Lion, and the teeth of the young Lions are broken.
able to do mischief, or be they never so well furnished with will and power
thereunto; yet God, who sees men's hearts a far off, can, and does ordinarily,
in the midst of their carreere, disable and intercept them, which no doubt, but
God foresaw in thee and thy children, though thou see it not in thy self.

11. And therefore to show his exceeding 11. The old Lion perishes for lack
of prey, and the stout Lions whelps are scattered abroad.
great power, in preventing the great evil which he foresaw, was toward, by
the power which thou had got into thine hand to work it, and withal, to
intimate a reason of his action, has he thus wonderfully disappointed thee by
an utter disablement both in thy self and thy posterity, bringing upon thee
the same evil which doubtless, else thou would have brought upon another.

12. And that thou may be the better 12. Now a thing was secretly brought to
me, and mine ear received a little thereof.
persuaded, of the truth of that which I have said concerning thee; Know that
for certain (after the manner of revealing heavenly messages to our humane
capacities, which understand them but in part) I lately had a revelation thence
to this very purpose, which I have spoken of to thee, and that upon this very
occasion of thy affliction.

13. For when that I had heard what 13. In thoughts from the visions of the
night, when deep sleep falls on men.
had befalne thee, and the manner of it; One night seriously thinking of thee,
and pondering thy case, as I lay awake in the dead time of the night, when
other men were asleep, and disputing within my self, how the innocence of thy
life, and these punishments could in justice stand together;

14. Of a sudden an extreme fear 14. Fear came upon me, and trembling, which
made all my bones to shake.
seized upon me, in so much that it made me exceedingly to tremble, and my
very bones to lose their strength, and to shake as if they had been all over
me out of joint, and while I marvelled what should be the reason of it, I
straight way perceived it was to prepare my mind with reverence, and better
discerning to entertain the vision that immediately ensued.

15. For presently there appeared 15. Then a spirit passed before my face, the
hair of my flesh stood up.
a spirit before me, the sight whereof made my very hair to stand an end.

16. And though it stood still before 16. It stood still, but I could not
discern the form thereof: an image was before mine eyes, there was silence,
and I heard a voice, saying.
my face, yet could I not distinctly comprehend in my mind the form thereof,
only this I can say for certain, that I saw an image before mine eyes; And
whilst I was in this amazement, silently waiting the issue, at last it spoke
to me, and said these very words concerning thee, of whom I was even then
thinking.

17. Why do thou thus wonder at 17. Shall mortal man be more just than God?
shall a man be more pure than his maker?
Gods proceedings toward Job, and secretly in thine heart question his
Justice, because of Jobs innocent life? can thou with any reason or equity
conceive mortal man to be righteous; and the eternal God to be unrighteous,
or the creature to be pure and innocent, and yet his Creator to be culpable and
blame worthy in what he shall do?

18. Alas, how art thou deceived, 18. Behold, he put no trust in his servants;
and his Angels he charged with folly.
as thou may easily see, if thou do but consider, that those glorious
Angels, which are now his special domesticke sevants in heaven, stand not in
that estate by their own power and worth, but by the mere support and firm
decree of God, which in grace he passed upon them, knowing that else they
would have fallen as well as other their fellows did, who though they were
Angels, and so the best of all his creatures far surpassing man, yet he
found fault enough in them to condemn them everlastingly.

19. If this be so of the Angels which 19. How much less on them that dwell in
houses of clay whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the
moth?
are in their natures such excellent spiritual and immortal creatures, so far
exceeding man, and which were so near to God in heavenly mansions; How much
more then is man, what ever he think of himself, sinful before God, and
unfit to be justified against God, being nothing else but infirmity and sin,
and justly liable to confusion, who comes so far short of Angelical
perfection: For his soul whereby he comes the nearest them, that dwells far
from God, officiating here below on earth in a body composed of nothing but
corruptible clay, and then in respect of his nature, he has no better a
foundation to trust to than the dust whereof he is made, and who by reason of
sin is so subjected to mortality, as that through inward diseases and outward
casualties he is become as frail and transitory as the weakest creature
living.

20. His whole life is nothing but a 20. They are destroyed from morning to
ening: they perish for ever without any regarding it.
lingering death, the one shortening, the other hastening every moment, and his
departure hence, though it be everlasting, and never to return again, yet it
is so ordinary, that therefore it is made no matter of, but accounted as a
thing of course even among men themselves.

21. And what are they when they 21. Does not their excellency which is in them
go away? they die, even without wisdom.
are dead? Why they turn to clay from whence they were taken; for then their
soul quite leaves them wherein all their excellency consisted, and they die
even as brute creatures without any power or skill to help themselves and
hinder it.

CHAP. V.
1. SO that as I said before, bring 1. Call now, if there be any that will
answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn?
forth the man if thou can that ever did or could say of himself, that God
punished him being righteous, see if among all the holy worthies of former
times, there was ever any such president, that God plagued the innocent?

2. Nay, from the difference of thy 2. For wrath kills the foolish man, and
envy slays the silly one.
carriage to them that are godly righteous, it is evident that thou have but
flattered thy self all this while, and what ever thou have thought of thy
self, thou art but a wicked man, and have not the knowledge of God in thee as
appears plainly, now it comes to trial: For did thou know him aright,
thou would never have suffered thy pettish frowardness so to have
transported thee against God to the aggravating thine own ruin, nor thine
envious quarrellings (through thy conceited righteousness above others, and
the opinion therefore of thine undue sufferings) so to have increased thy
torment, and robbed thee of that comfort and content thou might have taken
in God, in the midst of all thy misery through an humble patience.

3. No, but as I know thou can not 3. I have seen the foolish taking root:
but suddenly I cursed his habitation.
instance any that ever were punished but for sin, or that perished being
innocent: So on the contrary, I can assure thee, that I have observed diverse
who like thee have made a fair show, and withal have exceedingly prospered in
all outward felicity, but I have withal quickly seen an end of it; for God
has made them manifest and with evident judgments most remarkeably accursed
them and theirs.

4. For he has brought unavoidable 4. His children are far from safety, and
they are crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them.
ruin upon their posterity, and that in such an exemplary manner, as that he
has exposed them openly to the condemning censure of all men without pity or
part-taking of any.

5. And just as he has done to thee, 5. Whose harvest the hungry eats up,
and takes it even out of the thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their
substance.
so has he raised up against them a rout of needy wretches, that have
dispoiled them of the very bread wherewith they should subsist, violently
taking away the very uttermost ear of corn, and has brought it so to pass
upon them; that thieves have even swept away all that ever they have had.

6. It is not the creature, nor natural 6. Although affliction comes not
forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground.
causes here below, that of themselves bring forth these afflictions, which men
suffer.

7. And yet there is no property 7. Yet man is borne unto trouble, as the
sparks fly upward.
more natural to his subject, than trouble is to men. The very sparks of fire
ascend not more ordinarily than men suffer afflictions; which then must needs
be inflicted from above by the divine hand of supreme and infinite justice
because of sin.

8. Therefore were thy cause mine, 8. I would seek unto God, and unto God
would I commit my cause.
I would not in the vain opinion of mine own innocence afflict my self by
exclaiming on my birthday, or complaining on the creature as the cause of my
calamities; but I would humble my self, and confess my sins, and go directly
to God, seeing him the author, and seeking to him for redress of these
punishments, committing my self wholly and only to his mercy.

9. And the rather because thy sufferings 9. Which does great things and
unsearchable, mavelous things without number.
are extraordinary, and thou can not find the reason of them, be persuaded
to think them to be of God, and therefore humble thy self, and seek unto
him; And then think not thy case remediless, or that it is beyond the power
of God to relieve thee: for who knows, but God may have brought thee into this
estate of purpose, upon thy humiliation to glorify his power and goodness in
thy restoration? For it is ordinary with God to do extraordinary things, and
such as are beyond our imagination.

10. Have we not daily experience 10. Who gives rain upon the earth, and
sends waters upon the fields.
of it in this very kind, as when the earth wants rain, and the fields are
scorched with drought, how does he in such a strait, and forlorn hope, send
seasonable showers and plenty of them?

11 To supply those that in their 11. To set up on high those that be low, that
those which mourn may be exalted to safety.
want and necessity humbly depend on him, and to cheer up those which mourn
under the sense of Gods just displeasure, with an assured hope of plenty.

12. Whereas also on the contrary, 12. He disappointeth the devices of the
crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
how do we see him defeat by his powerful wisdom, the subtle devices of
those that in their own conceit are able to support themselves; so that what
they enterprise, they fail to effect.

13. And every foot he intraps the 13. He takes the wise in their own
craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.
wise of this world in their own gins, and the proud politicians he brings to
ruin by their own counsels.

14. In the midst of all their hopes 14. They meet with darkness in the day
time, and grope in the nooneday as in the night.
he frustrates their designs, and makes their wisdom fail them, sending
them events cross to what they confidently promised themselves, leaving them
utterly to seek of their expectation.

15 But he that humbles himself, 15. But he saves the poor from the sword,
from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty.
and seeks to the Lord, he as powerfully preserves him, as he defeates them,
both from the bloody sword, malicious mouth, and destroying hand of the wicked,
be they never so mighty.

16. So that then it is certain, that 16. So the poor has hope, and iniquity
stopeth her mouth.
the humble man, and he that seeks to the Lord with repentance and
selfeabasing, be his case never so desperate, may ask and wait in hope, but
the proud presumptuous-spoken man disables himself for getting any good from
God.

17. Behold then, how ever thou 17. Behold, happy is the man whom God
corrects: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty.
think, and notwithstanding thy impatient outrage, yet for certain it is a
happiness to a man (that takes this way) to be corrected of the Lord, therefore
let not thy pride make thee swell against God, nor bear not thy self so high
in thine own imaginary justification, but rather improve this goodness of the
Lord to thee by making it a means to bring thee to repentance, and to humble
thee before him in the acknowledgement of thy faults.

18. Who in so doing as he has 18. For he makes sore, and binds up: he
wounds, and his hands make whole.
plagued thee for thy pride, so will he upon thy humiliation take away thy
smart, and turn all thy woe into weal.

19. Be thy troubles multiplied to 19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles:
yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee.
never so great a number, if thou humblest thy self under his hand, he shall
deliver thee from them all, and thou shall be sure of a happy issue, though for
present they increase upon thee.

20. For take but this course, and then 20. In famine he shall redeem thee from
death: and in war, from the power of the sword.
in the greatest mortality of famine, though thou were at deaths door, yet
shall he deliver thee, and in all devouring war where thousands presuming of
their own strength and courage are slain, yet by an humble dependence upon
God shall thou be preserved.

21. Yea, it shall shield thee from 21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of
the tongue, neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes.
every evil, even from the very reports of slanderous and backbiting tongues,
to which all men are obnoxious: neither shall thou fear at the reproach of the
greatest destruction, when every man else shall tremble.

22. But in stead thereof through 22. At destruction and famine thou shall
laugh, neither shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
tranquillity of mind, and security in God, thou shall set at naught the
things which are most terrible to other men, to wit, the sword and famine,
neither shall thou fear the power of any creature under heaven to do thee
harm.

23. For hereby thou art reconciled 23. For thou shall be in league with the
stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
to God, and art at one with him, and if so, who dare be against thee, or what
can hurt thee? Nay, the most senseless and unreasonable creatures, whose
benefit and obedience sin has lost our right to, and turned into rebellion,
shall then be so far from working thee evil, as that they shall become Gods
instruments, and join together for thy use and service.

24. And moreover, hereby thou 24. And thou shall know that thy tabernacle
shall be in peace, and thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin.
shall find a wonderful change; for by taking this course, thou shall
assuredly have peace, and be wholly restored to thy former condition, thine
own eyes shall see it; and further, thou shall have this benefit which above
all is most to be set by, thou shall then cease to sin, and no more forget thy
self toward God as before.

25. And withal, thou shall live to 25. Thou shall know also that thy seed
shall be great, and thine offspring as the grass of the earth.
see thy children which now God has taken from thee, restored to thee in a
far greater number.

26. And also in so doing thou shall 26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full
age, like as a shocke of corn comes in in his season.
prevent the Lord, and not provoke him thus to cut thee off in anger; but for
all this shall live to be crowned with a hoary head, and shall go down into
thy grave in a complete age, like as a shock of corn is inned into the barn
in its due ripeness.

27. Be sure that this is the only 27. Lo this, we have searched it, so it
is; hear it, and know thou it for thy good.
way; for it has ever been found so by all, and can be denied of none, give
heed to it therefore, and make use of it for thy good, to order and steer thy
course by, if ever thou would land safe out of the troublesome sea of these
thy miseries.

CHAP. VI.
1. ELiphaz having thus ended his 1. But Job answered, and said,
speech to Job, partly consisting of reproof, and partly of advice; Job
replies as follows:

2. Thou blamest me for bewailing 2. Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed,
and my calamity laid in the balances together!
my self, when as woe is me, my griefs are an insupportable burden, as thou
would soon perceive, did thou but feel the weight of them all together
as I do.

3. Being for number and weight 3. For now it would be heavier than the sand of
the sea, therefore my words are swallowed up.
like the very sand of the sea, do thou blame me then for bewailing, seeing
my affliction is so exceeding great that I want words to complain enough?

4. For the grievous pains which I 4. For the arrows of the Almighty are
within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit: the terrors of God do
set themselves in array against me.
endure are as so many poisoned arrows shot into me, and that by the Almighty
hand of God himself, which have diffused their venom into all the parts of my
body and soul, and have even spent and wasted my spirits and strength with
their intolerable grief; for all the terrible afflictions and affrightments of
God, have jointly in flesh and spirit combined and set themselves in battle
array against me.

5. Is it not natural for every thing wild or tame to lament it self in case
of necessity and why then will not you 5. Does the wild Ass bray when he has
grass? or loweth the Ox over his fodder?
allow me that liberty, but condemn me for that which is naturally common to
all creatures, especially in this my extreme misery?

6. And does not sense and experience teach you your selves, that no unsavory
thing can be relished without 6. Can that which is unsavory be eaten without
salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
some seasoning, neither can a man force his appetite to think that to be
tastefull which is not so.

7. And is not this my case? for those very things, which heretofore my soul
durst not so much as think upon; 7. The things that my soul refused to touch,
are as my sorrowful meat.
is it not now forced (with what sorrow and grief you may imagine) continually
to feed upon them? And will you then be so unnatural and unreasonable as to
force me unsensibly to swallow down these afflictions which are so painful,
and not give me the liberty to season my unsavory torments with a little
needful lamentation?

8. But seeing you will not grant me liberty, I must be forced to take it; for
seeing I can have no other relief, I 8. O that I might have my request! and
that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
must speak my mind. O therefore that I might have my request, and that the
Lord would grant me the thing that I long for.

9. Even this, That it would please 9. Even that it would please God to destroy
me, that he would let loose his hand and cut me off.
him to destroy me at once, that he would no longer restrain his hand from
making an end of me, but that he would graciously dispatch me out of these
torments.

10. If I could but gain this at his 10. Then should I yet have comfort, yea,
I would harden my self in sorrow; let him not spare, for I have not concealed
the words of the Holy one.
hands, to hope to be dispatched by these tortures, that I might come to be
judged of God, and not of men, then would I even joy in them, and be so far
from being discouraged, as that they should animate me in hope of mine end by
them; neither would I entreat the Lord to spare me, but would think them, the
worse the better; for I fear not to appear before God, because I know my
conscience acquits me as having been faithful in the sincere delivery of his
truth to all that I have spoken to, how ever you may judge of it.

11. Do you blame me for desiring 11. What is my strength, that I should hope?
and what is mine end, that I should prolong my life?
to be dissolved, when as alas, what is my strength, compared with these
insupportable miseries, that I should think my self able to hold out under
them, or hope for long life? and what evil can there be in mine end, that I
should desire to prolong my life?

12. Sure you take me not to be 12. Is my strength the strength of stones? or
is my flesh of brass?
made of flesh, or if so, yet not to be sensible that think me able to bear
these burdens without bemoning my self.

13. Me thinks you should think 13. Is not my help in me? and is wisdom
driven quite from me?
me best able to judge of mine own estate, and best to know my remedy, except
you think me deprived of mine understanding.

14. It is the Lords will and commandment; 14. To him that is afflicted, pity
should be showed from his friend; but he forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
that to him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend; but
thou, whom I have always taken for my friend, have forsaken the fear of the
Lord, and have falsified thy duty to me herein, whilst that thus in stead of
comforting me, thou condemnest me.

15. You whom I esteemed as my 15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a
brook, and as the stream of brooks they pass away.
brethren, have approved your selves but hollow in friendship to me; for
because I have always taken you for my friends, and have found you heretofore
in my prosperity to stand me in stead, I was in hope to have had supply of
comfort from you in this my need; and now you fail me, even like so many
land-floods, which when a man has use of water afford none.

16. For though in the winter season, 16. Which are blackish by reason of the
ice, and wherein the snow is hid.
when waters abound, they make show to befriend us, and by their ice seem to
be our storehouses of preserving snow and water against the scorching time of
summer.

17. Yet when summer comes, they 17. What time they wax warm, they vanish:
when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.
themselves grow sensible of the heat, and in stead of yielding the refreshing
they promised, as the heat of the Sun increases, so they waste away by
degrees, till at last, then, when there is most need they vanish quite away as
if they had never been.

18. They either find new ways to 18. The paths of their way are turned
aside; they go to nothing and perish.
bestow themselves, not keeping their wonted course, but are drunk up of the
earth, or else are utterly exhausted and dried up of the Sun.

19. This the Caravan or company 19. The troops of Tema looked, the companies
of Sheba waited for them.
of Merchants that trade unto Tema, and also those which traffic unto Sheba,
have experience of, as they travel through the hot desert countries of Arabia;
for whereas in the winter time they have seen and traveled over frozen
waters, they conceived hope to find refreshing from them as they come that way
in Summer.

20. But when as in Summer they 20. They were confounded because they had
hoped; they came thither, and were ashamed.
had traveled far in confidence of them, and approaching thither, where they
hope to have them, they find themselves miserably disappointed, and in so much
the worse case, because they trusted in them, and then they are angry and
ashamed at themselves for their own credulity and improvidence to rely upon
them.

21. Such like are you to me; for 21. For now ye are nothing; ye see my
casting down, and are afraid.
whereas I put my confidence in you, because of your former seemingnesse, now
that I have use of you, you stand me in no stead, but have utterly deceived my
hopes of kindness and consolation from you, and because you perceive the Sun
of affliction to be risen upon me, and fear, if you should show your selves
the same to me as heretofore, I might prove a burden to you; therefore you
turn strangers to me.

22. Me thinks you might afford 22. Did I say, Bring unto me? or give a
reward for me of your substance?
me a few comfortable words, seeing that I neither am, nor desire to be any
otherways beholden to you; I am sure I have given you no such cause to fear
me, as should move you to assume this distance; for though indeed I be in want,
yet I have begged nothing of you to cause you to be thus weary of me.

23. Neither have I been troublesome 23. Or deliver me from the enemies hand?
or redeem me from the hand of the mighty.
or chargeable to you in all my sufferings, either for rescue or ransom of me,
or any thing that is mine out of the enemies or oppressors hands.

24. I wonder wherein I should deserve 24. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue:
and cause me to understand wherein I have erred.
so ill of you, I would be loath to excuse my self in any thing wherein I
justly deserve to be blamed; therefore if you will undertake to show me my
error, I will be willing to learn, and ready to hear, so that you can justly
demonstrate to me wherein I am faulty.

25. For grave, modest, and just reproof 25. How forcible are right words! but
what does your arguing reprove?
carries authority with it, and shall ever prevail with me; but how
unconsonant to a right reprehension has your discourse been, being composed
of nothing but untrue arguments, issuing from inconsiderate misprision?

26. And do you imagine that that 26. Do ye imagine to reprove words, and
the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?
which I have said, either concerning my self or my misery, is but so many
idle and hasty words, and do you reprove me thereafter, or think you they
are merely the fruits of a brainesicke head, begotten by my desperate fortune,
and so value them as wind?

27. Truly in so doing you are both 27. Yea, ye overwhelme the fatherless,
and you dig a pit for your friend.
most uncharitable, and not unlike them that oppress the fatherless by adding
misery to misery in your unjust condemning me for my speeches and necessary
complaints, and most unrighteous, even as they that betray the trust of a
friend to his utter undoing, in going about to overthrow my only support by
disputing against my uprightness.

28. Now therefore be better advised, 28. Now therefore be content, look upon
me, for it is evident unto you, if I lie.
and be no more so rash to condemn me, but consider me well, both what I am,
and what I have said, and you will easily be satisfied, that I speak the truth
in sobriety and knowledge of my self.

29. Bethink your selves I pray you 29. Return, I pray you, let it not be
iniquity; yea, return again, my righteousness is in it.
of the cruel wrong you have offered me, I wish it for your own good, lest it
prove your sin, and procure your punishment; yea, I advise you again to
charge me no more so unjustly, but consider that you lay my very righteousness
at stake (which is my only prop in this my misery) than which you cannot do
me a greater injury.

30. When thus you charge me 30. Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my
taste discern perverse things?
with sinful speeches, as if I had no conscience nor fear of God to awe me
from uttering perverse, unjustifiable things in my own behalf.

CHAP. VII.
1. FOr I do but ask you this 1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon
earth? are not his days also like the days of an hireling?
question; Is not death appointed by God to every man, and whilst he lives
here, does not he spinne out his life in toil and trouble like a hireling?

2. Now then, as it is natural for a 2. As a servant earnestly desires the
shadow, and as an hireling looks for the reward of his work.
servant (nor can you blame him for it) being toiled out with the labor and
heat of the day to desire earnestly the approach of the night to give him ease
and refreshing, and as it is common with every poor laboring man to long for
the end of his work, that he may receive his reward and freedom from his
toil.

3. Even so is the case with me, and 3. So am I made to possess months of
vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.
worse; for whereas their toil is measured by the day, my misery is incessant,
measured by whole months, and that without so much as the intermission of
nights.

4. For night and day are alike toilsome 4. When I lie down, I say, when shall
I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the
dawning of the day.
to me, in so much that I can take no rest, nor find no ease, but so soon as
ever I dispose my self to sleep, my easelesse mind presently grows weary and
restless, longing for day that the night were over, which is full of nothing
but disquiet and continual tossings to and fro quite throughout.

5. And you your selves cannot but 5. My flesh is clothed with worms and clods
of dust, my skin is broken, and become loathsome.
see in what miserable estate I am, beyond all compare; for it is apparent how
that my body, even now, whilst I am alive, is overrunne with worms, and as
with a garment am I covered over with scabbie clods of dirt and dust congealed
in ulcerous matter which issues from my sores, which together with my skin is
chopped and broken (as the earth in drought) in most loathsome and formidable
manner.

6. Why then should not I desire an 6. My days are swifter than a weavers
shuttle, and are spent without hope.
end, seeing my miseries crave it, and every thing tends toward it; for you
see evidently how all my former days of prosperity are in a moment quite
dispatched, and those that remain, you see them also waste without all hope of
ever being better.

7. Consider therefore these two 7. O remember that my life is wind: mine eye
shall no more see good.
things: to wit, The extraordinary end that my former days have received, how
like a puff of wind they are suddenly blown over, and that withal I am never
like to see more good in this life.

8. He that has seen me in my 8. The eye of him that has seen me shall
see me no more: thine eyes are upon me, and I am not.
prosperity, shall never see me so again, thou thy self see how
irreparable my state is; so that I have reason to expect and look for no other
than an absolute conclusion.

9. For as the cloud is consumed by 9. As the cloud is consumed, and vanishes
away: so he that goes down to the grave, shall come up no more.
degrees till it vanish quite away, so he that is going by degrees toward his
grave, as I am, must needs look for no recovery but necessarily expect a
final determination.

10. Which shall certainly conclude 10. He shall return no more to his house,
neither shall his place know him any more.
him never to enjoy any part of his former condition again.

11. Seeing therefore that death by 11. Therefore I will not refrain my mouth,
I will speak in the anguish of my spirit, I will complain in the bitterness
of my soul.
Gods appointment must certainly be the end of these, I will not spare to
press him to hasten it, but will lay my misery open to the uttermost, and by
all the arguments I can use, will seek to obtain it speedily.

12. Am I of so robustuous and untamable 12. Am I a Sea, or a Whale, that thou
set a watch over me?
a disposition, that thou must needs hold me in with such sharp and mighty
afflictions?

13. In so much that when I dispose 13. When, I say, my bed shall comfort me,
my couch shall ease my complaint:
my self to sleep in hope to find some ease, and to gain some small
intermission of my torment:

14. Even then thou disappointst my 14. Then thou scarest me with dreams, and
terrifiest me through visions.
hope, interrupting my sleep with frightfull dreams and visions, letting me
take no rest.

15. So that if I might be mine own 15. So that my soul chooses strangling,
and death rather than my life.
carver, I would choose the very worst of deaths, so that I might but be sure
to die rather than to live any longer in these intolerable pressures.

16. Which makes life (how pleasing 16. I loath it, I would not live always:
let me alone, for my days are vanity.
soever to others) to be most irksome to me, in so much as though other men
could be content to live always, yet am I of a quite differing mind, wishing
rather not to live at all: and therefore I pray thee, O Lord, prolong not my
life, but give way to my miseries to make an end of me, seeing that all the
remainder of my life must needs be empty of content and full of vexation.

17. Lord what is man? is he any 17. What is man, that thou should magnify
him? and that thou should set thine heart upon him?
better than a thing of naught, which thou thus seem to esteem and make
such account of?

18. Exercising a continual providence 18. And that thou should visit him
every morning, and try him every moment.
over him for his daily preservation, not suffering him rather to turn to
dust, as else he would, and exercising him under long and lingering
afflictions, not dispatching him at once, as if thou would, thou could?

19. How long will thou hold on 19. How long will thou not depart from me, nor
let me alone till I swallow down my spittle.
this extremity, affording me no release, not so much as a breathing while, or
whilst I might swallow my spittle?

20. Would thou by these tortures 20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto
thee, O thou Preserver of men? why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that I am a burden to my self?
rack the confession of my sins out of me? I confess Lord, I am a sinner,
but alas, what recompense can I make thy justice by my suffering? it is not in
me to expiate my own sin; it is thy mercy only must save and acquit me, for
thou art the one Savior, why then do thou, as it were, try thy skill and
power upon me in my exquisite torments, so that I am become a very burden to
my self.

21. And do not rather according 21 And why do thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust,
and thou shall seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.
to thy gracious nature give some comfortable and refreshing testimonies of the
pardon of my transgressions, and the doing away of mine iniquities, that so I
may praise thee before the Sun of my life be quite set, and I lie down in
the grave; for now I shall die, and then when thou look to receive thy
morning sacrifice of praise, as aforetime, I shall not be found to give it thee.

CHAP. VIII.
1. BIldad the Shuhite another of 1. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
Jobs friends, having all this while given ear to the reply which he made to
Eliphaz, at last interposed himself, and said:

2. How long will thou persevere 2. How long will thou speak these things? and
how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?
to take such liberty of language toward God, and by thy violent passions, and
storming speeches bring upon thy self fierce destruction.

3. Will thou make God to be unrighteous 3. Does God pervert judgments? or
does the Almighty pervert Justice?
in judgment, and the Almighty to go against the rules of justice, by
conceiving him to inflict punishment and not for sin?

4. Take heed what thou do, and 4. If thy children have sinned against him,
and he have cast them away for their transgression:
be not stubborn; but confess the Lord to be just, although (thy children
having sinned against him) he has suddenly and in his fierce displeasure,
even utterly thus cut them off for their transgression.

5. And make timely use of it for 5. If thou would seek unto God betimes,
and make thy supplication to the Almighty.
thy self; let it move thee before it be too late, whilst God in mercy gives
thee time, to lay aside thy stubbornness, and to repair unto him in humble
confession, and with supplication of his pardon for thy own sin.

6. And doubt not, but if thou do 6. If thou were pure and upright, surely
now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness
prosperous.
now turn unto the Lord in sincerity by repentance, not justifying thy self,
but confessing thy sins unfeignedly, without hypocrisy, which has brought
this punishment upon thee from the Lord, he would not any longer thus forget
thee, but would certainly remember thee in mercy, and make thee and all that
belongs unto thee prosperous and blessed.

7. And though thou art now but 7. Though thy beginning was small, yet thy
latter end shall greatly increase.
poor and miserable, yet then should thou see the power of the Lord bringing
to pass a wonderful alteration in thy behalf, by making thee both rich and
happy.

8. And that thou may be the better 8. For enquire, I pray thee, of the
former age, and prepare thy self to search of their fathers.
persuaded to believe me, and to take this course: consider and call to mind
all the former ages of our longlived forefathers from the beginning of the
world.

9. For we desire not to oversway 9. (For we are but of yesterday, and know
nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow)
thy faith by our own testimony, who in comparison of our fathers are of no
experience nor knowledge by reason of the shortness of our lives now, to what
theirs was then.

10. And therefore I gladly put thee over 10. Shall not they teach thee, and
tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?
to the testimonies of former times, whereat thou can not, except for
partiality, and they will all teach and tell thee, and bona fide confirm unto
thee, the very same which I have said, How that God never punished any but for
their sin, nor rejected a penitent person

11. And look how ordinary a thing 11. Can the rush grow without mire? can the
flag g^ow without water?
it is for a mis-rooted rush that quickly springs up out of a little moisture,
but not much mire, or the flag that grows without the river in some little
quantity of water.

12. Even then, when it flourishes 12. Whilst it is yet in his greenness,
and not cut down, it withers before any other herb.
most and promises best unexpectedly to wither and die (the moisture which
should feed it, being exhaled and dried up) without any hand cutting it down
before other herbs of less show but better rooting.

13. So usual a thing it is with God 13. So are the paths of all that forget
God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish.
to overthrow the prosperous estate of all such as walk not humbly, nor
thankfully before him, and to cause the ungrounded hopes of the hypocrite
strangely by his immediate hand to perish, because he was not rooted on God.

14. The foundation which he has 14. Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose
trust shall be a spiders web.
laid to himself to hope and trust in, being rotten and unsound, shall fail
him, God shall violently destroy it, and suddenly sweep it quite away by his
just judgment.

15. He shall repose great confidence 15. He shall lean up on his house, but
it sha not stand; he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure.
in the felicity of himself, and his posterity, but it shall vanish, he shall
promise himself a perpetuity of it, but it shall quickly have an end.

16. Like a tree in summer he makes 16. He is green before the Sun, and his
branch shoots forth in his garden.
a fair show whilst the sun of prosperity shines upon him; and grows
luxuriantly eminent in the place where he lives, whilst he remains rooted in
prosperity and pleasure.

17. Possessing himself amply and 17. His roots are wrapped about the heap,
and sees the place of stones.
securely of all earthly happiness, lengthening his teather to the very
uttermost bounds thereof; like a flourishing tree, whose roots are deeply
entrenched, and strongly incorporated into the ground, and which spread
themselves so far as ever there is any earth to receive and nourish them.

18. But for all that, when the time 18. If he destroy him from his place, then
it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee.
comes that God will destroy and root him out, the very place where he thus
grew shall spew him out, and by any remaining symptom shall not so much as be
acknown that ever he was there.

19. This is the upshot of an hypocrites 19. Behold, this is the joy of his way
and out of the earth shall others grow.
happiness, and this is his portion at last, that both he and all that was his
shall come to ruin, whereas others by the blessing of God shall grow great out
of a little.

20. For the case is otherways with 20. Behold, God will not cast away a
perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers.
the humble and upright man. God will not rejected him, nor leave him
succourlesse, no more then he will have pity upon the proud presumptuous
hypocrite.

21. But will be sure to remedy thy 21. Till he fill thy mouth with laughing,
and thy lips with rejoicing.
afflictions, and not to leave thee till he have advanced thee from this lowest
step of misery, to the highest step of consolation, if thou will but take this
way of humbling thy self in confession and supplication before him.

22. Then shall all thine enemies (who 22. They that hate thee shall be
clothed with shame, and the dwelling place of the wicked, shall come to naught.
now are risen by thy downfall) be as thou art, stripped naked of all their
glory; and thou thy self restored, and this thy becoming righteous shall make
the Lord punish their wickedness committed against thee with the same
desolation that now he has brought upon thee, even with the ruin of them and
theirs.

CHAP. IX.
1. THen Job answered Bildad also, 1. Then Job answered and said;
and said;

2. You have misunderstood 2. I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be
just with God?
me, if you have thought me proudly to contend with God, or that I had meant
to justify my self before him, by what I have said, as if I took my self to
be without sin in his sight, whereby to have deserved these plagues; for I
both know and yield it to be true which you say, that Gods afflictions imports
us to be sinners, but would you not have a man know himself to be righteous,
except he know himself to be without sin? this were utterly to overthrow the
consolation of the godly; for how is it possible for any man in such a way to
appear just before God?

3. Who, if any should be so foolish 3. If he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a thousand.
as to think so of himself, is able quickly to stop his mouth, by objecting
infinite sins and failings against him, one whereof he is not able to answer.

4. And as he is thus transcendently 4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength; who has hardened himself against him, and has prospered?
holy and righteous, so he is able to judge otherways of us, and of our
actions than we can: and besides all this, his greatness and might also, as
well as his wisdom and holiness is infinitely beyond us; All this I know, and
therefore I am not ignorant, how that no man can put himself into the lists to
justify himself, and contest against God, but he shall come off with sin
and shame.

5. Seeing how far the Lord in 5. Which removes the mountains, and they
know not; which overturneth them in his anger.
his hidden wisdom, and secret ways of proceeding transcends us, oft-times
manifesting his anger, even upon unsensible things; as in over-throwing the
mountains without rendering a reason.

6. And by mighty earthquakes, dislocating 6. Which shakes the earth out of
her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.
the globe of the whole earth, staggering the very center it self, whereon it
is established.

7. Commanding also the Sun contrary 7. Which commands the Sun, and it
rises not; and seals up the stars.
to his course to stand still, and it obeys, and dares not do its office to
the day, neither the stars to the night when he forbids.

8. Nor am I ignorant of the manifestation 8. Which alone spreads out the
heavens, and treads upon the waves of the Sea.
of his mighty power in his glorious works, in that he alone spreads forth
the spacious Canopie of the heavens, and commands the furious Seas.

9. And framed the glorious constellations 9. Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and
Pleiades, and the chambers of the South.
in the heavens to their ends and purposes, appointing the more remarkable
ones, to order and distinguish the four grand seasons of the year by their
appearance; as Arcturus the Autumn, Orion the Winter, Pleiades (or the seven
stars) the Spring, and those more remote Southern stars, Midsommer; for so they
take their turns.

10. And is infinite in works, and 10. Which does great things past finding
out, yea, and wonders without number.
wonders beyond any man's capacity.

11. And therefore I know my self 11. Lo, he goes by me and I see him not:
he passes on also, but I perceive him not.
and my reason and understanding to be as unable to judge of his works and
ways, though they be both reasonable and just, as my bodily eyes are to see
him which is invisible, though near unto me, and conversant about me.

12. And also I know that there can 12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder
him? who will say unto him, what do thou?
be no man, either so powerful to withold what he is minded to take from
him, nor yet so righteous to question him for it, seem it never so strange.

13. And I know too, that he purposely 13. If God will not withdraw his anger,
the proud helpers do stoop under him.
continues his anger upon proud contenders and disputers, till he have
convinced them, of their insufficiency, and compelled them to stoop to him.

14. And seeing I both know, and acknowledge 14. How much less shall I answer
him, and choose out my words to reason with him?
all this, to wit, Gods righteousness, wisdom and power to be thus
transcendent to man's, I would have you know, that I am far from contending
against God, or justifying my self before him.

15. Whom, I know so well, that 15. Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I
not answer, but I would make supplication to my Judge.
there is not that thing, be it never so righteous in my conceit, wherein I
would dare to justify my self before him: but in stead thereof, I would
humble my self, and supplicate his grace, knowing God to be my Judge, whose
eyes are so far brighter and purer than mine.

16. And though I should have bin 16. If I had called, and he had answered me;
yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.
so foole-hardy, to have challenged God to discuss my righteousness, and he
had done it; yet have I small cause to believe he found me righteous.

17. For his hand is as heavy upon 17. For he breaks me with a tempest, and
multiplieth my wounds without cause.
me now, as ever, continuing the same tempestuous storms against me still,
without any mitigation, or so much as she wing me a reason why he thus
multiplies miseries upon my head, and is so extreme against me.

18. Not giving me so much as any 18. He will not suffer me to take my
breath, but fills me with bitterness.
the least respite or intermission, but incessantly pursuing me with calamities.

19. So that I have little reason to contest against his power, that know 19.
If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong; and if of judgment, who shall set
me a time to plead?
it better than my body, or to answer the suit against him whom I know so well
to exceed in justice and judgment; for the making good whereof, I am sure
there is none will be my surety.

20. If I should undertake to justify 20. If I justify my self, mine own
mouth shall condemn me: if I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.
my self, God in interrogating me upon particulars would make mine own mouth
condemn and witness against me, and for him; if I should stand upon my
perfection with him, he would show such cause to the contrary, that he would
make me with mine own lips, pronounce my self faulty, and a fool for mine
undertaking.

21. Yea, if I were so blind as to see 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I
not know my soul: I would despise my life.
nothing blameworthy by my self, yet knowing God as I do, I would not
believe mine own heart, nor know mine own soul upon terms of innocence,
but would attribute it to mine ignorance, and in the matter of justification
would utterly disclaim the innocence of my life and conversation. 22. This is
one thing, therefore I said it; he destroys the perfect and the wicked.


22. But notwithstanding, yet is the point true which I have maintained, to
wit, That God in his outward proceedings and dispensations, makes no
difference many times, but scourges and takes away both the upright and the
wicked alike: and therefore do I still affirm, that because of mine
afflictions, you have no just cause to judge and condemn me for an hypocrite,
or wicked person. 23. If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial
of the innocent.


23. In regard that daily experience contradicts your rule (wherewith you
ignorantly limit and measure Gods proceedings) palpably evidencing, That God
exempts not the upright from afflictions, no, not from his suddenest and most
remarkable judgments, but that in these outward things all comes alike to all:
God scorning the allegation of innocence, or the justification and plea of the
most upright man breathing, in the way of exemption or prevention of these his
just and wise dispensations when he pleases to inflict them.

24. As also it is not apparent how 24. The earth is given into the hand of the
wicked: he covers the faces of the Judges thereof; if not, where, and who is
he?
the honor and pleasure of the world is transferred upon the worser sort of
men, that are wicked, and abuse it, when in the mean time, those that to us
seem deservedly to be respected and honored for their wisdom and
uprightness are despised and disgraced, and pray you, how, or by whom comes it
to pass, but by Gods all-disposing hand? so that you must either grant what I
say, or deny common experience and Gods providence.

25. 26. And may not I my self pass 25. Now my days are swifter than a post:
they fly away, they see no good.
as a lively pattern of Gods proceeding in this kind; For what avails my
uprightness in this day of my visitation? 26. They are passed away as the
swift ships: as the Eagle that hastes to the prey.
has not God (who in all the former part of my life, made me honorable among
men, notwithstanding it) now laid all mine honor in the dust, even in a
moment, and given the wicked leave to trample on me? 27. If I say, I will
forget my complaint, I will leave off my heaviness, and comfort my self:


27. And has he not so bitterly afflicted me, that if I go but about to
seek a little ease or comfort.

28. The sense and weight of mine 28. I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know
that thou will not hold me innocent.
accumulated sorrows, straightway affright me, and tell me it is in vain,
assuring me, that the Lord, according to his high and just prerogative, has
chosen me out to be the example of this age to show forth his transcendent
righteousness upon, notwithstanding my uprightness.

29. And truly, Lord, if thou be 29. If I be wicked, why then labor I in
vain?
pleased to go this way to work with me, to set thy self in the rigor of
thy Justice to find out my sins, and so to judge me according to my
wickedness: In vain then I confess, Lord, do I seek to comfort my self;
for in thy sight no flesh can be justified and acquit.

30. For though I could prove mine 30. If I wash my self with snow-water, and
make my hands never so clean;
innocence never so, and that I were in mine own account and the worlds
blameless;

31. Yet art thou able so to lay me 31. Yet shall thou plunge me into the
ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.
open, if in thy righteous severity thou will judge me, as that I shall
appear monstrously filthy to my self and all the world, yea, mine own very
righteousness wherein I cloth my self, shall renounce and abhor both it
self and me. 32. For he is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, and
we should come together in judgment.


32. For alas, he being God, judges me with another manner of judgment than
I can judge my self, or then one man can judge another, he sees further, and
knows more by me, than I am able to do by my self being but man, and
therefore it were a very vain thing in me to offer to wage Law with God in
mine own justification.

33. Neither if I had such a mind, 33. Neither is there any daies-man betwixt
us, that might lay his hand upon us both.
could I be ever the better; for where is there any fit to be umpire between
us, his way of judging and accusing far transcending both Angels and men?

34. But if the Lord would deal so 34. Let him take his rod away from me, and
let not his fear terrify me.
graciously with me, as not to proceed against me in the rigor and perfection
of his judgment and justice whereat I tremble, and against which I am able to
plead nothing for my self; and dispute mine uprightness with me in your stead
as man:

35. Then I durst plead for my self, 35. Then would I speak, and not fear
him; but it is not so with me.
and could soon make it appear, that I am innocent, and no hypocrite, as you
would force upon me; but since the Lord is pleased not to go that way to work,
but that he is determined to set himself as God against me, my mouth must
needs be stopped.

CHAP. X.
1. MY anguish drives me to those 1. My soul is weary of my life, I will leave
my complaint upon my self, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul
extremities, that it makes me weary of my life. And seeing that hitherto I
have acknowledged my guiltiness in hope to have found ease thereby, and yet
notwithstanding my grief remains unasswaged: Now therefore I am determined to
accuse my self no longer before Gods secret Justice, but to seek mine own
ease by giving vent to mine affection.

2. And therefore I will take the 2. I will say unto God, Do not condemn me;
show me wherefore thou contendest with me?
boldness to enter more familiar parley with God, and to entreat of him, That
he will either cease to proceed against me as a guilty person, being
innocent, or else that he will show me the cause of this his quarrel with me.

3. As first whether he deals thus 3. Is it good unto thee, that thou
should oppress; that thou should despise the work of thine hands; and
shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
with me, because it is either profit or pleasure to him to oppress me,
which I cannot think it is, for it cannot be that God should be a gainer, or
should take delight to oppress, or to reject and despise his own workmanship,
as I am, especially when as thereby he shall fulfill the desires, and confirm
the unjust surmises of the wicked.

4. Or secondly, Whether is it that 4. Have thou eyes of flesh? or see thou
as man sees?
he needs to do by me as earthly judges do by malefactors, that is,
torture me, to discover the truth, whether I be sincere or no; neither is this
likely; for he has all-seeing eyes, and therefore need not helps to make
discoveries.

5. 6. Neither thirdly is it because he 5. Are thy days as the days of man?
are thy years as man's days?
is mortal and short-lived like man, That he thus heapeth these punishments
6. That thou inquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?
upon me in this sudden and severe manner, as if else he should not have time
enough to try me, and to revenge himself upon me, for the iniquity and sin
which thereby he should discover, for he is everlasting.

7. It is not because thou know me 7. Thou know that I am not wicked, and
there is none that can deliver out of thine hand.
not, and therefore would find me out, that thou thus handlest me; for I know
thou know me well enough, that I am upright. Neither is it for want of
power to make me forthcoming; but of thine own just prerogative: for were I
not approved in thy sight, yet thou have no need to hold me thus fast in
fetters; for thou know it is impossible for me by any means to escape thy
hands, either by flight or rescue.

8. For I am no stranger to thee, but 8. Thine hands have made me, and
fashioned me together round about; yet thou do destroy me.
thine own very workmanship, even every part and portion of me from top to toe
is both created and framed by thee, and none but thee. And yet (strange to
consider) for all these reasons to the contrary, thou thus destroyest me.

9. But I beseech thee remember 9. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have
made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into dust again?
that as I am the work of thine hands; so again, of what matter thou have
made me; how that originally I am but clay, and what honor and event can
thou expect to follow upon thy fighting against such a worm with these thy
omnipotent weapons, but to turn dust into dust?

10. And as in Adam I am but clay, 10. Have thou not powered me out as milk,
and cruddled me like cheese?
so alas, thou know, how in my self I am framed by thee, of a weak and
imperfect substance, to wit, the liquid seed of mine immediate parents.

11. From whence, indeed, by thy 11. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh,
and have fenced me with bones and sinews.
wisdom and power thou have made to proceed skin and flesh as clothing to
every part of my body, and an orderly juncture of bones and sinews.

12. In which fabric of my body 12. Thou have granted me life and favor, and
thy visitation has preserved my spirit.
thus composed in the womb, thou have further magnified thy self by adding a
reasonable soul thereunto, with all requisite and favorable accommodations for
my life and well-being, which very life and soul, as thou only gave it, so
also have thou alone hitherto preserved it by thy providence and good grace;
for it long ere this had been inanimated, had not thou kept it alive, by thy
careful preservation, sweet influences, and often visitations of my spirit
which thou have made me sensible of.

13. And therefore I know, that however 13. And these things have thou hid in
thine heart: I know that this is with thee.
thou seem outwardly to deal with me, yet thou art secretly mindful of
this fabric, which thou have thus built, and that this my spirit is
especially precious with thee.

14. Or in the fourth place, is it as 14. If I sin, then thou markest me;
and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity.
they affirm? am I hypocritically sinful, and therefore do thou punish me?
Indeed if I be such an one, then I know it is true, thou will be sure to mark
me and not to let me escape unpunished.

15. If thou should know this 15. If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be
righteous, yet will I not lift up my head: I am full of confusion, therefore
see thou mine affliction.
wickedness by me, then woe unto me; and though in this sense I know my self
to be righteous, yet will I not justify my self before thee, because I know
my sins otherways to have deserved thine indignation. And now that I have
thus vented my self by expostulating with thee, I am but the further plunged
into confusion, not being able to satisfy my self, or to give my mind any
ease; so that I see this is not the way neither, but when all is done, I must
petition thy supremacy, and entreat thee with pity to behold my misery.

16. For it grows insupportable, 16. For it increases: thou huntest me as' a
fircce Lion: and again, thou show thy self mavelous upon me.
thy pursuit of me being so Lion-like extremely fierce and violent: and as if
no one torment could be sufficient for thee to plague me with, thou assaultst
me again and again, in a mavelous manner to express thy wrath upon me.

17. Thou show wondrous enmity 17. Thou renewest thy witnesses againd me,
and increasest thine indignation upon me; changes and war are against me.
against me, by charging so thick upon me with such succession of
afflictions; and store of troubles by thine appointment execute thy severe
indignation upon me: yea, even all variety of evils both severally in their
turns, and jointly in one set-battle, do make war against me.

18. If thou have conceived such displeasure 18. Wherefore then have thou
brought me forth out of the womb: Oh that I had given up the Ghost, and no
eye had seen me!
against me, why did thou not rather in thy foreknowledge, decree it, that
I should never have been borne to cause thine anger, or else have died so
soon as I had bin born? O that I had been so happy never to have known, or
been known of any!

19. The very imagination whereof 19. I should have been, as though I had not
been, I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.
delights me in this mine extremity, to think what happiness it would have
been to me, either not to have been at all, or to have been in such a way,
as that my being had been equivalent to no being, considering that as the womb
delivered me, so the grave should have received me.

20. But seeing thou have ordered it 20. Are not my days few? cease then, and
let me alone, that I may take comfort a little.
otherways, and that thou have ordained me to live, yet consider that my life
is but short, in which time slack thy hand, and allow me some little ease and
comfort.

21. 22. And cause me not to die 21. Before I go whence I shall not return,
even to the land of darkness, and the shadow of death;
whilst I live, nor to be in darkness whilst I enjoy light, seeing ere long
I shall sustain thine indignation in the grave (by the concluding punishment
22. A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death,
without any order, and where the light is as darkness.
of death) certainly never to return again to life, nor to enjoy this light;
where I expect no better than confusion, and an absolute deprivation of the
comforts both of life and light; for there I am sure is no vicissitude or order
of time between night and day, but all the comfortable days of life and
prosperity shall certainly be turned into uncomfortable lasting darkness,
then which it can afford no other.

CHAP. XI.
1. THen Zophar the Naamathite, 1. Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and
said,
another of Jobs friends, having been attentive to all that he had said, in
reply to his two former companions, rejoines upon him with another like vexing
discourse, thus:

2. Should we suffer him thus to proceed, 2. Should not the multitude of words
be answered? and should a man full of talk be justified?
and not answer him, but let him think to carry the cause of his own
justification by his much speaking, and in the mean time, we through silence
become guilty of his sin by a tacit consent?

3. Should we swallow such an unsufferable 3. Should thy lies make men hold
their peaces? and when thou mockest, should no man make thee ashamed?
untruth and not reply, and would thou thus carry it against God and man, and
not be made to see thine error?

4. In maintaining such a blasphemous 4. For thou have said, My doctrine is
pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.
opinion for true doctrine; That God destroys the righteous, and that thou
whom God has so branded for a wicked person, yet dares to affirm thy self
not to be wicked?

5. But I could wish that God would 5. But oh that God would speak and open
his lips against thee!
vouchsafe to answer thee in stead of us by his way of conviction, that so thou
might be made to believe by sense, what now thou will not by reason. 6. And
that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that
which is! know therefore, that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity
deserves.


6. And that he would but make thee to know what he in his wisdom knows by
thee, then should thou soon be confuted and put to shame, and the vain
imaginations of thine own righteousness would quite vanish, because then thy
conscience would show thee how that thy sins are infinite more then thou
imaginest, so that though now thou complainest of hard dealing, thou would
then see that God in justice might deservedly for thy sins inflict double
upon thee to that thou now suffer. 7. Can thou by searching find out God?
can thou find out the All-mighty unto perfection?


7. Thou have been foole-hardy to speak thy mind over-freely concerning Gods
dealing with thee, and by presumptuous reasonings thou have thought to plum his
depth, and either thou will see such cause as thou in thy weak capacity shall
think reasonable for his thus afflicting thee, or else thou will dare to
quarrel him; but now vain man, what art thou the better? have thou so little
reason as to think that thou art able to see so into thy self as God, and so
equal him in wisdom, and fathom his perfection?

8. 9. Will thou offer to give bounds 8. It is as high as heaven, what can
thou do? deeper than hell, what can thou know?
to, and comprehend within thy weak reason the unsearchable wisdom of Gods
incomprehensible Judgment 9. The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and
broader than the sea.
and Justice which is of as large and larger extent than heaven and hell, sea
and land?

10. If he change his course or way 10. If he cut off, and shut up, or gather
together, then who can hinder him?
of proceedings toward men, either to deliver them into the hands of enemies,
or if he will protect and save them, who can control or hinder him; for he
does invincibly whatsoever he will.

11. For he has both reason and 11. For he knows vain men; he sees
wickedness also; will he not then consider it?
justice on his side for what he does to man, who although by searching he
cannot attain to know the perfection of the wisdom and righteousness of God;
yet does God easily know him what ever he thinks of himself; how that his best
perfection is but vanity: neither (if we were able to judge aright) have we
reason to think that he punishes or afflicts causlessely; for though our
selfe-flattery mis-take, yet he sees wickedness to deserve it. And think we
then that he should do well to let us go on in our error, and should not
rather take notice of it to punish us for it, and to rectify our judgment in
it?

12. For man would have some understanding, 12. For vain man would be wise,
though man be borne like a wild Asses colt.
pragmatically to discern and expostulate the ways of God by his weak and
shallow reason, though he be as far short of conceiving and comprehending
them, as the brutishest creature living is to conceive and apprehend rational
matters.

13. 14. Therefore be persuaded to 13. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch
out thine hands toward him;
lay down the wasters, to give over reasoning the matter, and to begin now
at last to change thy course, and 14. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it
far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles.
in sincerity and humility of heart to submit thy self, confessing thy sins,
and putting them away by repentance.

15. For then may thou with good 15. For then shall thou lift up thy face
without spot, yea, thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear.
hope and confidence draw near to God without any check of conscience, and be
established in safe condition, and shall need to fear neither the continuance
nor the return of these thy troubles upon thee.

16. For in so doing thou shall be 16. Because thou shall forget thy misery,
and remember it as waters that pass away.
restored, and made to remember thy griefs as past, and no longer to feel
them as present.

17. And so shall the rest of thy life 17. And thine age shall be clearer than
the noonday; thou shall shine forth, thou shall be as the morning.
which thou give for lost, be the very prime part of thy time for glory, and
thou shall shine again in reputation and honor, and shall appear in the eyes
of all men as the Sun rising after the departure of a cloudy and dark night.

18. And though heretofore for all 18. And thou shall be secure, because there
is hope, yea, thou shall dig about thee, and thou shall take thy rest in safety.
thy potencie thou have been despoiled of all, yet (hereby) for hereafter thou
shall enjoy both thee and thine in security; for because then thou shall have
God for thy God to rest thy hope upon, who shall so encompasse thee with his
safe protection, as if thou do but dig a place to pitch thy tent in, thou
shall enjoy thy self safelier therein (than otherways thou would do in a
walled City.)

19. Nor shall thou need to secure 19. Also thou shall lie down, and none
shall make thee afraid, yea, many shall make suit unto thee.
thy self by watch and ward, because then thou shall have no cause to fear,
for thy very enemies shall make suit for thy favor and protection.

20. But if thou perseverest in thy 20. But the eyes of the wicked shall fail,
and they shall not escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the
ghost.
wicked way, long may thou look for better before thou find it; for God
will never ease thee, till he have humbled thee: And therefore, if thou thus
continuest, thy hope shall be utterly forlorn, and at an end for any good ever
to befall thee.

CHAP. XII.
1. ANd Job answered and said; 1. And Job answered, and said;


2. In the blind confidence 2. No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom
shall die with you.
of your own wisdom you take upon you to condemn me as ignorant, and to
censure that which I have said, to be but as the babbling of a fool, as if
none were wise besides your selves.

3. But notwithstanding that you 3. But I have understanding as well as you, I
am not inferior to you: yea, who knows not such things as these?
thus slight me, yet am I sure that God has given me grace to know and
understand the truth better than you that are so overweening, and, that you
have said nothing hitherto, but what are common things, and which I know as
well as you.

4. But it is befalne me as it is common 4. I am as one mocked of his
neighbor, who calls upon God, and he answers him: the just upright man is
laughed to scorn.
in the world: That he that is poor and in misery, in stead of being
comforted, is contemned of his nearest friends, so that the things which I
speak are set light by and scorned, and which is worst of all, because of Gods
indulgencie to your particulars for present, you are puffed up in your own
opinions, and stick not also to trample upon, and scoff at my very innocence.

5. In so much as now, because I am 5. He that is ready to slip with his feet,
is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease.
fallen into misery, and am near unto mine end, I must be rejected, as if I
were a thing offensive and useless, like a candle which is almost consumed to
the snuff, though formerly shining and giving light to others, having now all
the light of my former understanding quite extinguished, and mine innocence
condemned for hypocrisy, and I scorned as refuse, and judged as a castaway in
the opinion of these men, and that for no other reason, but because they are in
prosperity, and I in adversity.

6. Whereas, alas, their maxim is 6. The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and
they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God brings abundantly.
utterly false; for prosperity is no sign of honesty (and consequently
adversity no sign of hypocrisy) as we may see by daily experience; for who
abound more in external felicity than those whom we see to be notoriously
wicked?

7. 8. It is strange you should be ignorant 7. But ask now the beasts and they
shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee.
of this common truth, which all the creatures are able to demonstrate; for do
not you see the earth and all the things that are in it given 8. Or speak to
the earth, and it shall teach thee; and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto
thee.
for the most part into the hands of the wicked, what large possessions and
sumptuous fare they enjoy?

9. And who, I pray, under wilful 9. Who knows not in all these, that the
hand of the Lord has wrought this?
ignorance, can be said, not to know that it is God who orders it thus?

10. For, is it not he that disposes 10. In whose hand is the soul of every
living thing, and the breath of all mankind.
of every creature, both small and great, better and worse, man or beast?

11. Oh that then you would not be 11. Does not the ear try words, and the
mouth taste his meat?
so rash to speak, but would let your ears do their office, and would ponder
what I say! then you could not but conceive that I speak with understanding,
and that this doctrine of Gods administration of things in this way which I
have said, is an undoubted truth.

12. Especially, seeing you are men 12. With the ancient is wisdom, and in
length of days understanding.
of great years, and therefore cannot but have attained to much understanding
by observation and frequent experience, and therefore must needs know.

13. That God is often times wonderfully 13. With him is wisdom and strength,
he has counsel and understanding.
transcendent in his wisdom and power wherewith he orders and disposes
things; and how that he brings to pass his ends and purposes in an unknown
and incomprehensible way.

14. As may appear by these following 14. Behold, he breaks down, and it
cannot be built again: he shuts up a man, and there can be no opening.
instances (whereby you shall see that I both know, and acknowledge the
unsearchable wisdom and wonderful ways of God as well as you, in all which
he is righteous, (though we know not the reason of them:) For behold, he brings
some men, and some things to their utter destruction: for, as that all the wit
and power of man cannot repair them, oft-times so disabling a man, that all
the helps in the world cannot relieve him.

15. Again, we see how various 15. Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and
they dry up: also he sends them out, and they overturne the earth.
and wonderful he is in rain and drought, how by this he often famisheth
the earth, and by that he gluts and overwhelmeth it.

16. So that both I and all the world 16. With him is strength and wisdom:
the deceived and the deceiver are his.
must needs acknowledge, what has been said, not only of the wonderful
power, but also of the unsearchable wisdom of God, if we do but consider
these effects aforesaid: But much more if we well weigh those which follow,
which are more strange to reason than any thing that has been alleged; and
yet I know they are of God too; For it is of his Almighty and wise disposing,
even that such a man is a deceiver, and such an one is deceived.

17. And that all the eminent and 17. He leads counselors away spoiled, and
makes the judges fools.
wonderful changes which we see in the world do come to pass: It is of him,
that those men, who have been advanced for their wisdom, and are the
bull-warks of a state to keep out foreign enemies, are themselves ofttimes
made a prey; and also that those learned Judges, who by administering right, and
maintaining peace, keep the Commonwealth from civil dissension and ruin, do
themselves (when pleases him) become fools, and lose their labor.

18. And that those mighty Monarchs, 18. He loses the bond of Kings, and
girdeth their loins with a girdle.
whose regiment extends far and near, and had much people in subjection,
have those bonds loosed wherein they held others, and they themselves become
tributary.

19. And so also national princes, 19. He leads Princes away spoiled, and
overthrows the mighty.
he oft-times causes them to be overcome and disthroned, thus does he drive
the mighty men of the earth into exigents and distresses by his disposing
power, notwithstanding their confidence in their strength.

20. Or if they trust in their wisdom 20. He removes away the speech of the
trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged.
and abundance of Counselors it is all one; for when he pleases, he removes
faithful Counselors, sending flatterers in stead of friends, and infatuates
the aged men that are men of experience on whom they build.

21. Nor can the Majesty of their 21. He powers contempt upon Princes, and
weakneth the strength of the mighty.
place secure them; for God when he is pleased to bring his purpose to pass,
often makes them notwithstanding their dignities to be despised both at home
and abroad. And thus he lays all their confidences whatsoever in the dust.

22. Nor do I think that he does 22. He discovers the deep things out of
darkness, and brings out to light the shadow of death.
these things to exercise a tyrannical power over his creatures, but that he
has just reason for what he does, though we know it not, which sometimes also
he is pleased to discover; for many times we see what hellish secrets he
brings to light, which when we know, we cannot but conclude his righteous
judgments.

23. And as thus he manifests 23. He increases the nations, and destroys
them: he enlarges the nations, and straitneth them again.
his righteous (though transcendent) power and wisdom upon Princes; so also
upon people: for how have we known him to increase nations, and anon to ruin
them, and to enlarge their reputation and authority, and straightway to
diminish it?

24. And lastly, who is it but he that 24. He takes away the heart of the
chief of the people of the earth, and causes them to wander in a wilderness,
where there is no way.
does dispose the greatest part of the people of the world to have no right
understanding, but to waste their lives in error?

25. Not vouchsafing to reveal to 25. They grope in the dark without light,
and he makes them to stagger like a drunken man.
them the light of truth, but suffering them to go from error to error.

CHAP. XIII.
1. SO that you may see I am not a 1. Lo, mine eye has seen all this, mine
ear has heard and understood it.
stranger to the power and wisdom of God, in his wonderful ordering and
disposing of things, but have taken diligent notice of it in the whole course
of my life.

2. And therefore am not to be condemned 2. What ye know, the same do I know
also, I am not inferior unto you.
as one that is ignorant of God by you, that can say no more of him than what I
both know and believe, nor to be thought to have spoken what I have said all
this while touching Gods dealing with me, out of an ignorant presumption, but
out of a faithful knowledge both of God and my self.

3. In so much as I desire to confer 3. Surely I would speak to the
Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.
with God in stead of you; for because I know him to be perfectly wise and able
to judge aright of things, which I find you are not.

4. For through your ignorance, 4. But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all
Phyficians of no value.
you create false maxims to judge me by, and so like unskilful Physicians you
administer mistaken physique.

5. O therefore that I could but entreat 5. O that you would altogether hold
your peace, and it should be your wisdom!
you to be your own friends and mine, so far as to keep silence, wherein
you should show more wisdom by far, than in what you have said.

6. And have patience to hear what 6. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to
the pleadings of my lips.
I shall say for my self against your allegations, and for your instruction.

7. Know therefore, that whereas you 7. Will you speak wickedly for God? and
talk deceitfully for him?
judge me to sin against God, in that which I speak for my self, the
offense is on your part; sor how think you? Is it not a sin with unjust
arguments to patronize Gods justice, and as if he stood in need of your lies,
to plead his cause with forged untruths?

8. Think you to please God by 8. Will ye accept his person? will ye contend
for God?
showing him any unjust favor in the maintenance of his cause against me, or,
as if he were too weak to do it himself; therefore do you think to do
him a pleasure in taking upon you to frame arguments for him?

9. Be well advised, Do you think 9. Is it good that he should search you
out? or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him?
that this kind of dealing will hold water with God, and will you venture him
to find out your colloguing, and by-respects? think you by flattery and
part-taking to deceive and curry favor with God, as with man?

10. How ever you may think you 10. He will surely reprove you, if you do
secretly accept persons.
do him acceptable service in these your unjust gratifications, yet assuredly
he will show that he abhors such dealings, and that he will be maintained
by his own righteousness without borrowing men's leasings: Nay, and though you
do it with never so plausible reasons in the eyes of men, yet you shall find
that he that knows the heart, and hates all accepting of persons, if he
spy unjust partiality there, though never so secret, he will certainly punish
you for it.

11. Shall not the majesty and excellency 11. Shall not his excellency make you
afraid? and his dread fall upon you?
of God make you afraid to have such base thoughts of him? and his dreadful
greatness affright you out of such low conceits?

12. What? are such frail creatures 12. Your remembrances are like unto ashes,
your bodies to bodies of clay.
as you able to advantage God? who shall your selves be utterly extinct and
forgotten as a thing of naught, and whose bodies shall be turned to earth.

13. Pray, vouchsafe me the favor 13. Hold your peace, let me alone, that I
may speak, and let come on me what will.
to hold your peace, and let me speak my mind without interruption, and at my
peril be it, take you no thought.

14. Seeing you have so grossly erred 14. Wherefore do I take my flesh in my
teeth, and put my life in mine hand?
in what you have said, both concerning God and my self, and that for certain
it is Gods way to exercise the righteous under afflictions; wherefore then
should I be so foolish thus to torment my self, and cast away my confidence,
for any thing that you say, 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him:
but I will maintain mine own ways before him.
or that I suffer?

15. No, I will never do it, in so much, as if God should proceed, not only
to lay upon me the extremity of affliction, but should also thereby bring me to
deaths door, yet I would continue to rely upon his mercy, and withal, I
would defend mine honest sincerity before him to the last.

16. For I am sure, notwithstanding 16. He also shall be my salvation: for an
hypocrite shall not come before him.
my extreme affliction, the Lord both is, and will be my salvation, pardoning
my sin, and accepting my person; in confidence whereof, I dare put my self
into the presence of God, which no hypocrite dare do.

17. Therefore, do not rashly censure 17. Hear diligently my speech, and my
declaration with your ears.
me, but give good heed to that which I speak, and to the profession of my
faith which I make.

18. For though you through ignorance 18. Behold now, I have ordered my cause,
I know that I shall be justified.
and prejudice know not how to judge of me, yet be sure I have examined my
self, and maturely considered mine own case, my faith and good conscience; and
therefore whatsoever you think, I know upon good grounds, that for all mine
affliction, God does not punish me for my sins, but that still he accounts
me innocent and righteous.

19. Whereof I am so confident, as 19. Who is he that will plead with me? for
now if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost.
that I dare encounter any upon this point; and indeed, you have so tormented
me by your reasonings, as that if I have not liberty granted me to justify
mine own innocence, my heart will burst within me.

20. And if it shall please the Lord 20. Only do not two things unto me: then
will I not hide my self from thee.
himself to argue this case with me, I will but desire two conditions of him,
and then I will not fear even to appear before him.

21. One is, that he would take off 21. Withdraw thine hand far from me: and
let not thy dread make me afraid.
from me this heavy hand of his present affliction which overwhelmeth me with
the violence of it, till my matter be heard: the other is, that he would give
me courage to bear out this my humble contestation, so as I may not be
confounded with the terror of his dreadful greatness so far surpassing me.

22. Then oppose thou, and I will 22. Then call thou, and I will answer; or let
me speak, and answer thou me.
answer, or let me speak, and answer thou me.

23. Therefore I humbly ask of 23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? make
me to know my transgression and my sin.
thee, is it for any such greatness and multitude of iniquities and sins (as
these men would bear me in hand) that thou thus afflictest me? Then I beseech
thee, make me to know that great transgression and sin that has so enraged
thee against me; for I am not conscious to my self of any such, nor can I make
it sink into my mind, that thou thus afflictest me upon any such ground.

24. And if not, then wherefore do 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
hold me for thine enemy?
thou thus terribly frown upon me, so as to give the world cause to think
thou hate me? Alas, am I fit to be esteemed an enemy worthy thy contesting
with?

25. Or do thou think it will be 25. Will thou break a leaf driven to and
fro? and will thou pursue the dry stubble?
any glory to thee to try thy strength, and to fight hand to hand with me, who
am a weak and feeble creature, not able to stand against thee, no more than a
leaf before the wind, or stubble before the fire?

26. For thou arrestest me with manifold 26. For thou writest bitter things
against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth.
and bitter plagues, and seem as if thou could not be severe enough
against me, and make me oft-times to remember my former sins of old with
fresh fear, as if they were unpardoned, and as if thou did lay the
punishment of them all on me now at once.

27. For thou proceedest with all 27. Thou put my feet also in the stocks,
and look narrowly unto all my paths; thou set a print upon the heels of
my feet.
severity against me, as against a grand malefactor, laying me fast in
afflictions, as in stocks, so that I can move no way to find ease, and have
set, as it were, a watch over me, surrounding me with plagues, lest any way I
should get liberty, and followest me with continual pursuit as a prisoner
that is dogged at heels by his keeper from place to place lest he should escape.

28. And now, alas, what glory will 28. And he as a rotten thing consumes, as
a garment that is motheaten.
all this be to thee at last, seeing I a man am not able to stand against thee,
but rot and consume away under thy plagues, which wastes me as a moth wastes
a garment?

CHAP. XIV.
1. THou know also, that if thou 1. Man that is borne of a woman, is of few
days, and full of trouble.
did not use extraordinary means against me, yet by my very nature and kind
coming of mortal parents, I like other men, should in a short time, consume
and die; and this life, as short as it is, is also of it self full of troubles.

2. We, thou know, bring mortality 2. He comes forth like a flower, and is
cut down: he flees also as a shadow, and continues not.
and transitorinesse into the world with us, and that little temporal felicity
which we enjoy, is quickly at an end; for as the flowers, so we have no more
than a spring and a fall; or as the shadow of a dial, our lives are
continually hasting to their period, and never make stop.

3. And do thou set thy self strictly 3. And do thou open thine eyes upon
such an one, and bring me into judgment with thee?
to view the imperfections of such a creature, and to question me in the
rigor of thy righteous judgment?

4. Why, thou know, if thou proceed 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean? not one.
in that way, I must needs be cast, that am even borne a sinner, as every man
else is; for must not a corrupt tree needs bring forth corrupt fruit?

5. But seeing that as we are sinners 5. Seeing his days are determined, the
number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he
cannot pass.
by nature, so by sin we are mortal, and that thou have determined death as
a condign punishment unto man (and so to me) so that he must certainly
undergo it at the time appointed by thee, nor is he able to lengthen his life
a minute further than thy decree.

6. O then in mercy let that suffice 6. Turn from him that he may rest, till
he shall accomplish, as an hireling, his day.
thee, and make not his whole life a death, but take thy heavy hand off him,
that he may be able to fulfill his appointed time in thy service here, which
is but short.

7. 8. 9. For what will it avail thee 7. For there is hope of a tree, if it be
cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will
not cease.
to destroy man, seeing it is not with him, as it is with other of thy
creatures? for let a tree be felled and though the root thereof lie in the
earth (as a dead man does in the grave,) yet there is a 8. Though the root
thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground:
great deal of difference; for there is hope to him that owneth it that it
will spring again, and be profitable to 9. Yet, through the sent of water it
will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.
him, by reason of some sap and moisture that it will draw out of the earth,
whence it has his vegetative life and being.

10. But it is quite otherways with 10. But man dies, and wastes away: yea,
man gives up the ghost, and where is he?
man; for, when he dies, the earth, nor nothing else, can contribute any
thing to him to make him live again, or in the least measure be serviceable to
his owner here; but on the contrary, he consumes to dust, and becomes
utterly useless: for, when man once gives up the ghost, there is no further
hope of him.

11. For, as the waters which after 11. As the waters fail from the sea, and
the flood decays and dries up:
some exundation of the Sea, or some great river are separated and left (upon
the refluxe thereof) behind the rest upon the land, which cannot return nor
continue, but therefore utterly dries up and evaporate:

12. So man, having once given up 12. So man lies down, and rises not, till
the heavens be no moret, hey shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.
the ghost, is quite separated from the source of life, never to be united, nor
to live again, till the day of the utter dissolution of all things.

13. O, that this were my lot, and 13. O that thou would hide me in the
grave, that thou would keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou
would appoint me a set time, and remember me.
that thou would grant me the grave for my portion, so to escape the
horrors that are upon me, and that (so doing) thou would set down even
what time thou please to raise me out again, so that thou would but be
sure at last to remember me.

14. Then should I think my self 14. If a man die, shall he live again? all
the days of mine appointed time will I wait, till my change come.
happy, because, if I be once dead, I know I shall no more return to these
miseries, upon which condition, I would be glad to wait with patience what
time soever thou should allot me to lie in the grave, in assurance of a
happy change to follow.

15. For though thou afflictest me 15. Thou shall call, and I will answer
thee: thou will have a desire to the work of thine hands.
in this life, yet am I sure in the resurrection to feel thy mercies; so as
that when thou call, I shall not need to fear (as the hypocrites will) to
show my face; for I know that thou thy self, for the love thou bear me of
thy goodness, who am thy creature, and one whom thou have shown favor, and
reprinted thine Image: wilt long after the consummation of my happiness.

16. And indeed, seeing such happiness 16. For now thou numberest my steps:
do thou not watch over my sins?
would certainly ensue, who can blame me to desire my dissolution, to be rid of
this woeful pressure that lies upon me? For now thou persecutest me with thy
utmost severity, seeming to take most strict notice of every byway that ever I
have trod, and as if thou did watch over my sins, that not one of them
should escape unpunished.

17. Thou have, as it were, sealed 17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag,
and thou sowest up mine iniquity.
up and made sure work with all my sins that ever I committed, to have them
now forth-comming for the increase of my punishment.

18. And now, Lord, if the strong 18. And surely the mountain falling comes
to naught: and the rock is removed out of his place.
mountains and hard rocks are not able to stand when thou thunderest with thy
power upon them, but that they come to naught, and remove out of their place:

19. And if the very stones be worn, 19. The waters wear the stones: thou
washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth, and thou
destroyest the hope of man.
and do waste with the falling of waters upon them, and that the things that
are rooted in the earth cannot resist a deluge, but are washed away therewith,
what hope then has weak man (such an one as I am) who is neither rock nor
mountain, stone nor tree, to be able to stand under such an insupportable
power, and overwhelming inundation as this of mine?

20. No, it is impossible for him to 20. Thou prevailest for ever against him,
and he passes: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
sustain himself when thine hand is upon him to destroy him: thou can not
be prevented, but he shall certainly, fade away, he himself, and all that
behold him shall see him consume by the change that thine afflicting hand
works in his temperament and feature, till at last he waste away to nothing.

21. Yea, by reason of his dolor, 21. His sons come to honor, and he
knows it not, and they are brought low, but he perceives it not of them.
even whilst he yet lives thou can make him to be as good as dead, so as
that he can regard no earthly thing how nearly soever it concern him; as for
instance, be his children advanced, or be they cast into adversity, shall
neither joy nor sorrow in it.

22. But be altogether taken up 22. But his flesh upon him shall have pain,
and his soul within him shall mourn.
with the thoughts and sense of his own misery, because of the outward pain,
which thou laiest upon his body, and the inward trouble which thou inflictest
upon his mind at once.

CHAP. XV.
1. THen Eliphaz the Themanite 1. Then answered Eliphaz the Themanite, and said,
being further confirmed in his ill conceit of Job, by his discourse, thus the
second time replies upon him.

2. Is it the property of a wise man, 2. Should a wise man utter vain
knowledge, and fill his belly with the East Wind?
such an one as thou would be thought to be, under a pretense of much
knowledge thus to abound in vain discourse, and satisfy himself with feeding
upon, not only unprofitable and airy, but hurtful reasonings; blasting
thereby all hopes of better to himself?

3. Or if thou were wise, as thou 3. Should he reason with unprofitable talk?
or with speeches wherein he can do no good?
say, why then have thou pleaded for thy self all this while with so much
empty and fruitless talk, no whit serving to thine advantage, but contrarily
making against thee, both in respect of thine uprightness which thou talkest
of, and the ease which we wish thee?

4. For thy discourse has been 4. Yea, thou castest off fear, and
restrainest prayer before God.
most presumptuous and arrogant, savouring of nothing but folly and hypocrisy,
in all this time neither humbling thy self under the hand of God, nor calling
upon him for grace and mercy, which is the only upright, wise, and safe way.

5. But in stead thereof have made 5. For thy mouth utters thine iniquity,
and thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.
thy mouth the trumpet of thine own evil heart, rather choosing deceitfully
to make good an evil cause, than to confess thy sin.

6. So that thou have no cause to 6. Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not
I: yea, thine own lips testify against thee.
think hardly of me and my fellows, as if we did unjustly condemn thee, for
thine own mouth is evidence enough against thee.

7. Art thou the only man of experience 7. Art thou the first man that was
borne? or wast thou made before the hills?
or knowledge, beyond all that now is, or that ever was?

8. Has God made thee of his privy 8. Have thou heard the secret of God? and
do thou restrain wisdom to thy self?
council, and told thee more than he has revealed to others, and do thou
think all the world fools beside thy self?

9. What know thou that we 9. What know thou that we know not? What
understandst thou, which is not in us?
know not? What understandest thou more than we?

10. Nay, me thinks modesty and 10. With us are both the gray headed, and very
aged men, much elder than thy father.
reason should persuade thee, that we are abler to instruct thee, than thou
us, we being more for number, and having the advantage of experience and
observation (which makes wise men) by reason of our years, which are so far
beyond thine, that thy father was younger than some of us.

11. And wherein can thou say 11. Are the consolations of God small with
thee? Is there any secret thing with thee?
that we have erred; for have we not showed thee the true way to be happy and
freed from these miseries? and do thou set so light by our advise, which
tends to so good an end as to reconcile thee with God? Do thou know any
better way to compass thy happiness than this which we have told thee? If
thou do, it is such an one as neither we nor our fathers never knew nor
heard of.

12. If not, why do thou give thine 12. Why does thine heart carry thee away?
and what do thine eyes wink at?
heart such liberty to rove out of the right way, and pervesly shut thine eyes
against the truth, scornfully rejecting it?

13. For thou in stead of humbling 13. That thou turnest thy spirit against
God, and let such words go out of thy mouth?
thy self under the punishment of thy sin, suffer thy self with an
incensed mind to contest against God, and to speak such proud impenitent
speeches, justifying thine own righteousness, and maintaining (contrary to
truth and equity) that these punishments are not laid upon thee for thy sins.

14. Whereas the perfectest man 14. What is man, that he should be clean? and
he that is borne of a woman, that he should be righteous?
living is unclean before God, and justly liable to his wrath; for there
neither is, nor ever was, or can be, any that can justly affirm that of
himself which thou arrogatest, to wit, that he is righteous in the sight of
God.

15. Why man, his excellentest creatures, 15. Behold, he puts no trust in
his Saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight.
the glorified Angels, which indeed are, and ever shall be, Saints in heaven,
yet they stand not in that holy and happy estate, by their own power and
sufficiency, but by the mere decree of God, which in grace he past upon them,
knowing, that else they would have sinned, as other their fellows did, which,
though they were Angels, which of all his creatures are the best and
perfectest, and dwelt in heaven, which of all places is the best and holiest;
yet even in them, and there, his holy and pure eyes found uncleanness.

16. How much more then must 16. How much more abominable and filthy is man,
which drinks iniquity like water?
man that dwells here on earth, needs be exceeding sinful and unclean in his
sight, who does as familiarly sin, as eat and drink, and to whom it is
naturally as pleasing as water is to one athirst.

17. Thou have had leave to speak 17. I will show thee, hear me: and that
which I have seen I will declare.
thy mind, and now give me the like liberty, and the like ear, and I will
show thee no fable, but a known truth; which both I have learned out of mine
own experience;

18. And which has not been mine 18. Which wise men have told me from their
fathers, and have not hid it?
observation only, but has received confirmation from wise men of former
times, who have carefully taught it as a doctrinall truth from the tradition of
their forefathers also; and have not concealed it from us their successors, as
is well enough known.

19. I say, from their fathers, the first 19. Unto whom alone the earth was
given, and no stranger passed among them.
heads of the world, who in those days of prime antiquity were free from the
injuries and molestations of forrainers and enemies (which we are too apt to
make the sole or principal cause of our suffering) people being then few and
rare in the earth, and known to one another.

20. Even this, the wicked man's portion 20. The wicked man travelleth with
pain all his days, and the number of years is hidden to the oppressor.
in this life, which is; That God is wont to lay upon him lasting pains, and
(weary of his life) to make him waste his days in discomfort, and that the
oppressors gain is to get the cutting short the thread of his own life in
judgment.

21. And a terrifying conscience 21. A dreadful sound is in his ears; in
prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.
shall sill him with distracting fears; together with an unexpected ruin in
the midst of all his wealth and worldly glory.

22. And then, when God has cast 22. He believes not that he shall return
out of darkness, and he is waited for of the sword.
him into affliction, to be without all hope of better, his heart telling him
that God will never take his hand off again, but that in stead of being
delivered from this, a further evil, even utter destruction waits upon him.

23. When the Lord has made him 23. He wandereth abroad for bread, saying.
Where is it? ke knows that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
taste adversity, and thereby ruined his comfortable subsistence in the
creature, then shall he through want of acqua intance with God and faith in
him, in a wrong way impatiently, indirectly, and fruitlessely seek to relieve
and help himself; his affrighted conscience and distrustful heart (quite
banishing all hope of better) mis-doubting every day to be his doomes-day.

24. He shall live in continual fear 24. Trouble and anguish shall make him
afraid; they shall prevail against him, as a King ready to the battle.
by reason of his inward and outward trouble and grief, which he shall not be
able to avoid nor resist, but shall be brought under their extreme pressure,
because of the vehement fury and irresistible power wherewith on all hands they
shall assault him.

25. And there is reason for it, why 25. For he stretches out his hand against
God, and strengthens himself against the Allmighty.
God should thus proceed against him, because he behaves himself as a proud
enemy toward God, not walking humbly before him; but disobediently and
presumptuously through an overweening opinion, sticks not to cast away all
fear, and arrogantly to make head against even the Almighty Lord of heaven and
earth, forgetting him to be such an one, through the haughty and presumptuous
imaginations of his heart.

26. Daring with a full forehead 26. He runs upon him, even on his neck,
upon the thick bosses of his bucklers:
and strange kind of arrogance to encounter God, even upon the points of his
justice and righteous judgments, wherein he is the ablest to give us the
shocke, and which is the dangerousest for us to oppose or question.

27. And the cause of this his swelling 27. Because he covers his face with
his fatness, and makes collops of fat on his flanckes
pride against God, is his abounding in the creature, and his voluptuous usage
of it.

28. Together with his large signiories 28. And he dwells in desolate cities,
and in houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.
and ample possessions, made up out of the ruins of other men's livelihoods and
habitations, which they have been forced to relinquish and leave desolate
through his oppressions.

29. Yet for all this confident preparation, 29. He shall not be rich, neither
shall his substance continue; neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof
upon the earth.
he shall come short of his aim; for he shall neither attain that hight of
riches which he strives for, or the stability of an happy estate which he
promises himself by them, neither shall he perpetuate his name with that
renown and pre-eminence, that he makes confident of to himself and his
posterity thereby.

30. But in steed thereof, he shall 30. He shall not depart out of darkness,
the flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he
go away.
be cast into calamitous poverty and reproach under which he shall irrecoverably
lie, all his flourishing state shall wither, and his large posterity be utterly
consumed through the indignation of the Lord, and when he has lived to taste
and see this, then at last God shall breath forth his final displeasure upon
him, and so shall he quite perish, who but ere-while promised to himself
certain felicity.

31. Let not the man then that has 31. Let not him that is deceived, trust in
vanity: for vanity shall be his recompense.
already miscarried by his foolish pride, still take that way, and be vainly
blinded by it, for he shall still receive the same reward, vanity and misery
shall be his recompense.

32. In his own life he shall see 32. It shall be accomplished before his
time, and his branch shall not be green.
his pride have a fall, his eyes shall behold his present happiness and future
confidence come to naught. 33. He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine,
and shall cast off his flower as the Olive.


33. He shall live to see the untimely death of his children, and the utter
loss of his after expectation.

34. For it is certain that God will 34. For the congregation of hypocrites
shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the tabernacles of briberie.
unnest and ruinate the hypocritestocke and family, and the fire of his wrath
shall consume what they have built up by secret fraud and injustice.

35. So that in the end all their mischievous 35. They conceive mischief, and
bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares deceit.
devises prove vain and ineffectuall, and all their painful travel to
compass ambitious designs, is but lost labor, and shall end in selfedeceit.

CHAP. XVI.
1. JOb having with much longsuffering 1. Then Job answered, and said,
heard out Eliphaz, at last thus makes answer:

2. Since you began to speak, I have 2. I have heard many such things:
miserable comforters are ye all.
heard much from you severally, but all to the same purpose, which stands me in
no stead, and therefore I must conclude you all alike vain reasoners and
miserable comforters, not (as becomes friends) endeavoring to mitigate, but
to increase my grief.

3. Have thou done thy idle talk, 3. Shall vain words have an end? or what
emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?
which has been all this while to no purpose? and now, I pray thee, what
moved thee to let fly the second time against me this uncharitable and
impudent reply? Know thou me to be the man thou speak of?

4. I could suppose all these things 4. I also could speak as you do: if your
soul were in my souls stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake
mine head at you.
of you, as you do of me, and urge them against you, and sit as judge upon
you: if you were under affliction as I am, I could then show you how good it is
to endeavor the vexation of a grieved spirit, by multiplying uncharitable and
discomforting words against you, and could act your part upon you with showing
the like jealous and surmising behavior toward you, and how do you think it
would please?

5. But I know my duty, and how I 5. But I would strengthen you with my mouth:
and the moving of my lips should assuage your grief.
ought to behave my self to those that are in my case better than so, and
therefore my care and study should be to uphold and strengthen you in your
pressures, with faithful and consolatory speeches, and all my talk should
tend to administer ease, and not to add to your afflicted minds.

6. It is wont to be the way for men 6. Though I speak, my grief is not
assuaged: and though I forbear, what am I eased?
in misery, to find relief in the company of their friends, by complaining
themselves, and laying open their griefs unto them, but it is not so with me;
but whether I speak or hold my peace, it is all one; I have them all against
me that should be for me, inventing matter to afflict me further, instead of
endeavoring to comfort me.

7. But now I see the hand of God, 7. But now he has made me weary, thou
have made desolate all my company.
as in the rest, so likewise in this estranging my friends from me, thereby
making me on all hands miserable, and my life wearisome; sor thou have brought
my whole family to ruin and desolation.

8. Yea, thou have every way so filled 8. And thou have filled me with
wrinckles, which is a witness against me: and my leanness rising up in me,
bears witness to my face.
and affected my heart with sorrow, as that it woefully appears upon my body by
its macerated and wasted state, having no smooth part in it, but every where
deformed with careful wrinckles, which together with my extreme leanness (my
flesh through my grievous anguish being fallen from my bones, which rise up in a
ghostly manner) do all of them witness thy mind against me.

9. Thou have exposed me to the 9. He teareth me in his wrath, who hates
me; he gnasheth upon me with his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon
me.
malice of mine enemy, so that he that hated me has had liberty to execute and
act his uttermost spite upon me, and bitterly in a disdainful and insulting
manner to affront me.

10. They have every way that can 10. They have gaped upon me with their
mouth, they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully, they have gathered
themselves together against me.
be thought or named, vilified and reproached me, yea, they have wrought me all
the mischief, that with all their combined counsels and power they could
contrive and bring to pass.

11. Thus it has pleased the Lord 11. God has delivered me to the ungodly,
and turned me over into the hands of the wicked.
to deal with me, even to expose me unto the malice and injury of the
ungodly Caldeans and Sabeans, and to resign me up to be disposed of at the
wills of those wicked men, giving them leave to execute their full power upon
me, in my whole estate.

12. I was in a happy condition, but 12. I was at ease, but he has broken me
asunder: he has also taken me by the neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set
me up for his mark.
he was pleased not to let me stay therein, but has violently snatched me out
of it, and has parted me and it never to be pieced again, yea, he has left
nothing undone, that may magnify the greatness of his power and manifest the
fierceness of his severity upon me; for by the one he has utterly disjoynted
all my happiness, never to be set together; and by the other, he has openly
in the eye of the world, set me as a mark to shoot all his deadly arrows at.

13. He has made every one against 13. His archers compass me round about, he
cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare; he pours out my gall upon the
ground.
me, my wife and my friends, as well as mine enemies discharge upon me, and
with such bodily smart does he himself torment me, as if my back were
chining, and my very reins were cleaving in two; nor does he abate one jot of
mine extremity, for all it is so great, but as if he could not be too cruel,
against me, he cuts my gall in pieces, such torture do I sustain within and
without.

14. He makes no spare of me any 14. He breaks me with breach upon breach,
he runs upon me like a Giant.
way, but heapeth plague upon plague upon me, laying me open every way to
ruin and desolation, in his most mighty power and fury he assaulteth me.

15. I have deeply humbled my 15. I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin, and
defiled my horn in the dust.
self before him, having made sackecloth mine immediate clothing next my very
skin, and in token of my selfeabasing I have covered my head with dust and
ashes, which but of late was exalted.

16. My face can testify how I have 16. My face is foul with weeping, and on
my eyelids is the shadow of death:
wept unto him, and my sorrow may be evidently seen upon mine eyes and
eyelids, which with extremity of grief, and multitude of tears are now (as
when I am dead they shall be) even wasted away, and sunk into my head.

17. Not that he has thus plagued 17. Not for any injustice in mine hands:
also my prayer is pure.
me, or I thus humbled my self, for any allowed or dissembled unrighteousness
toward men, known either to him or me; for mine actions have been just and
innocent; no, nor for any such like impiety toward him; for in the uprightness
of mine heart have I worshipped and served him.

18. And therefore I desire not to 18. O earth, cover not thou my blood, and
let my cry have no place.
die as the brute beasts do, for the earth to receive me, never to depart
with me again, as hypocrites desire to do, through selfe-guiltinesse, but I
long after my resurrection, that I may appear before God, that so, though not
here, yet there mine innocence may appear, according to my hope and desire,
which I hope shall not be frustrate:

19. For be it known to you, that I 19. Also now, behold, my witness is in
heaven, and my record is on high.
am well assured, that God who is in heaven knows my uprightness, and that
there I am witnessed for, and not against.

20. Though here on earth I have 20. My friends scorn me: but mine eye pours
out tears unto God.
none to take my part; for even those which are my friends, and should know me
to speak for me, do with scornful rebukes censure me for an hypocrite, but
I know whom I have to appeal unto in this case; even to God who judges
righteously, which accordingly* put in practice; for I pour out tears unto
him, who I hope will right my wrong, and clear mine innocence.

21. How happy were it for me, if 21. O that one might plead for a man with
God, as a man pleads for his neighbor!
I might exchange my argumentation from man to God, and might expostulate
familiarly with him, touching mine innocence, who is able to judge a right, and
at whose hands I should be sure of just and impartial dealing.

22. But my hope and happiness 22. When a few years are come, then I shall
go the way whence I shall not return.
is, that after I have borne these vexations the while God has appointed me,
I shall then be eternally freed from them, by death.

CHAP. XVII.
1. NOr can I be far from it; for 1. My breath is corrupt, my days are
extinct, the graves are ready for me.
my breath which maintains my life, begins to be mortally tainted with mine
inward diseases, portending death at hand, and my days to be at a period, I am
every way ready and fit for the grave.

2. And yet for all this (would not 2. Are there not mockers with me? and does
not mine eye continue in their provocation?
one think it strange?) these men that pretend to come to comfort me, will yet
administer none to me in this pitiful state, but utterly defeat my hopes from
one to another; for am not I forced to endure their endless lying
provocations, and false accusations, wherewith they continue to vex me to my
face, not withstanding all that I have said to the contrary?

3. But seeing I can have no better 3. Lay down now, put me in a (...) with
thee; who is he that will strike hands with me?
from them, I humbly turn to thee, O Lord, praying thee to deposit a pawn,
and give me some assurance, that without being judged by thy perfect
righteousness, and dealt withal after thy transcendent greatness; I may
argue my uprightness with thee, and then let who will undertake for thee, and
enter the lists in thy behalf against me.

4. For thou have blinded them that 4. For thou have hid their heart from
understanding: therefore shall thou not exalt them.
they have no understanding to speak right things to me, either concerning my
self or thee; and therefore shall they lose the reward they should have
received from thee, had they righteously behaved themselves toward me, and in
stead thereof receive condign punishment.

5. They preach a strange and ignorant 5. He that speaks flattery to his
friends, even the eyes of his children shall fail.
kind of doctrine, that because thou afflictest me, therefore I must needs
be, and certainly am an hypocrite: and that prosperity is a sign of a
righteous man, which is a dangerous untruth to be broached, knowing the curse
that belongs to them that with flattering deceit shall dare to bolster men up
through erroneous principles in a false opinion of themselves, and their
mistaken happiness; how that their children shall be so served, to wit,
deceived and seduced in like manner, and shall perish for want of discerning.

6. And I am not only miscensured 6. He has made me also a byword of the
people, and aforetime I was as a tabret.
by these men, but (because of thine unwonted dealings with me) it is also upon
this same foolish principle, every man else his report and opinion, that I am
an hypocrite, though heretofore in the time of my prosperity, report gave a
pleasant sound of me to all men's ears.

7. So that thou have every way consumed 7. Mine eye also is dim by reason of
sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow.
me, my good name is quite blasted, and my body also is wasted; for mine eyes
have almost quite lost their sight by reason of mine excessive sorrowing, and
all my members are so meagerd, that they are become a very skeleton, and have
so lost their substance, that they are, as it were, the shadow of themselves.

8. When all things are thus against 8. Upright men shall be astonished at this,
and the innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite.
me, and that I have nothing but mine uprightness for me, mine example shall
make others admire the virtue and powerful support of a good conscience: So
that I shall make thee upright, to be in love with his uprightness, for the
extraordinary supporting strength and courage which it enables a man withal,
and he that is truly innocent shall learn of me, not to be baffled out of
his sincerity, but to maintain and take comfort in his integrity of heart,
against all his false accusers.

9. Yea, the upright-hearted righteous 9. The righteous also shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.
man shall learn with an undaunted confidence, to put himself into the
presence of God, and not to be disheartened from it, nay, the more he that is
pure of heart receives opposition, the more he shall gather strength to oppose
his adversaries and comfort and confirm himself, by me and mine example.

10. So that you see you lose your 10. But as for you all, do you return, and
come now; for I cannot find one wise man among you.
labor by going about to stagger me in mine uprightness, even all of you,
for any thing you have, or can say, therefore I would wish you all to spare the
pains and travel you take in a wrong way, and to change your minds, and close
with me; for in the opinion you hold so stiffely and unanimously (that God
would not afflict me thus, were I not an hypocrite, and that because of mine
afflictions I am forsaken and hated of him) you are utterly in an error, and
show your selves ignorant of the ways of God.

11. I have not much more to speak 11. My days are past, my purposes are
broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.
to you, therefore be warned; for you see how my days draw to an end, besides
that what I would say to you, my pain interrupts me that I cannot speak it, the
thoughts of my heart being through my distempers, full of distractions and
disorder,

12. Filling me with confusion, being 12. They change the night into day: the
light is short, because of darkness.
never at rest, but always working, and ever in motion upon and about my
miseries, as well night as day, so that I can have no quiet, and day as night,
so that I can have no comfort; no time for them.

13. And touching the restoration 13. If I wait, the grave is mine house: I
have made my bed in the darkness.
you promise me; for my part, I believe no such thing, I make account of no
other receptacle, than the grave, nor ever to find rest but by death.

14. Nor ever to enjoy any other 14. I have said to corruption, thou art my
father: to the worm, thou art my mother, and my sister.
friend or kindred, then what they yield me, that is, corruption and worms.

15. And if you ask me then where 15. And where is now my hope? as for my
hope, who shall see it?
my hope is? (because you say an hypocrite is hopeless) why, I confess it is
in nothing this life yields; for I verily believe that neither I, nor any
living man shall ever see me have good day again in this world.

16. But they that will see wherein 16. They shall go down to the bars of the
pit, when our rest together is in the grave.
my hope consists, must pass through the gates of death to behold it, and lie
down in the grave with me, and then it shall appear.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. JOB having the second time given 1. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and
said,
Eliphaz his answer, Bildad the Shuhite also takes his turn to give his
second onset upon Job, and therefore when Job had made an end, he begins
thus:

2. How long will it be before thou 2. How long will it be ere thou make an end
of thy words? mark, and afterward we will speak.
yield to the truth, and cease thy vain contradicting? Give good heed now,
that we may no more speak in vain to thee, as it seems through thy
heedlesnesse and want of due consideration we have done hitherto.

3. Why do thou set so light by us, 3. Wherefore are we counted as beasts,
and reputed vile in your sight?
as if we had no understanding, nor our counsel were nothing worth, or why is
our talk so distastefull, seeing we tell thee the truth?

4. It is not we, but thy self, who 4. He teareth himself in his anger:
shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock he removed out of his
place?
is thine own tormentor, through thy proud impatiencie; would thou have us
belie Gods administration to thee? or would thou have him to alter it for
thee? thou may sooner expect him to overturn the whole world for thy sake,
and put every thing out of that order he has decreed and made it in, than
cease to be just in punishing the wicked.

5. So that though thou frettest never 5. Yea, the light of the wicked shall be
put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine.
so much at it, yet for certain, this is, must be, and ever was, an infallible
Principle. That the wicked man's glory shall (by Gods just judgment for his
sins) be quite extinguished, shine he never so bright, and with the waters of
affliction God will quench his ambitious preparations and designs that he
shall not be eminent.

6. But contrariwise, the honor of 6. The light shall be dark in his
tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out with him.
his house shall be brought low, yea, the glory he has raised shall expire
even in and with himself.

7. Go he never so confidently on 7. The steps of his strength shall be
straightened, and his own counsel shall cast him down.
he shall be withstood, and his wisdom wherein he reposeth so much trust,
shall ruin him at last.

8. For his own ways which he 8. For he is cast into a net by his own
feet, and he walks upon a snare.
chooses to walk, and takes to be freest from danger, shall most certainly
bring him to ruin, and every step he takes in those paths of wickedness and
worldly wisdom, shall one day assuredly prove a further intrapping to him,
though for a while he perceives nor fears it not.

9. Till that at the last he see and 9. The grin shall take him by the heel,
and the robber shall prevail against him.
feel himself unavoidably caught, which also shall then befall him when he
least heeded or suspected it, and when he is most confident in his own
strength, safety and riches; God will set some body a work that maugre all his
power shall disable and impoverish him.

10. God in his secret purpose, means 10. The snare is laid for him in the
ground, and a trap for him in the way.
to entrap him at last, yea, even in the very way which he puts most
confidence in, and chooses to walk in for his security.

11. God shall so distress and fill 11. Terrors shall make him afraid on every
fide, and shall drive him to his feet.
his mind with fears, as that he shall not have the least chinke of hope left
to see any comfort through; but give all for lost, and be driven utterly to
abandon his former confidence as vain.

12. Be he never so strong in his 12. His strength shall be hunger-bitten, and
destruction shall be ready at his side.
own opinion, God will weaken it, and so burden him that he shall be glad to
seek strength to bear his own burden, when he thought himself strong
enough to burden others: he shall see a strange alteration, even destruction
and ruin which he put far from him in his own opinion, notwithstanding
suddenly to surprise him.

13. It shall seize upon him as well 13. It shall devour the strength of his
skin: even the first borne of death shall devour his strength.
in body as estate, perishing his very bones which support his skin; yea,
even all the extremest miseries and deadliest torments that are, shall
violently seize upon him to pull down his pride, and ruin all his strong holds.

14. He shall see the fruitlesnesse of 14. His confidence shall be rooted out
of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the King of terrors.
carnal confidence, how that all his outward hopes shall be turned upside
down, and nothing shall be left for him to lay hold upon. Yea, destruction
shall pursue him to utter ruin, not only of all that is his, but also of
himself too; for it shall never leave him til it have brought him through a
multitude of horrors to that which is worst of all, even to death it self.

15. Destruction shall put him quite 15. It shall dwell in his tabernacle,
because it is none of his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
out of all, and shall take possession of all which he has so unjustly come
by; nothing of all he has shall escape the consuming fire of the Lords
indignation.

16. God will make a clean riddance 16. His roots shall be dried up beneath,
and above shall his branch be cut off.
of him, and all his whole house; he will quite cut him off, root and branch,
father and son, even he and all his posterity, from off the face of the earth.

17. And let him have been of never 17. His remembrance shall perish from the
earth, and he shall have no name in the street.
so great note, yet as he, so his memory and reputation shall perish with him,
and he shall be quite forgotten, and had in no esteem, even in that very
place where he once lived in so much glory.

18. He shall first have all things 18. He shall be driven from light into
darkness, and chased out of the world.
clouded upon him, his glory and prosperity shall become ignominy and
adversity, and they shall make him weary of his life, never ceasing to vex him,
and to increase upon him, till they have hunted him to death.

19. There shall none of his offspring 19. He shall neither have son nor
nephew among his people, nor any remaining in his dwellings.
remain to uphold his house or name, and the place of his abode shall become
quite desolate.

20. God shall make him notorious 20. They that come after him shall be
astonished at his day, as they that went before were affrighted.
to all; for the very report of what fearful things befell him, when God
executed his severe judgments upon him in the day of his visitation, shall
beget amazement in men of after ages when they hear of it, though they never
saw it, even as it did in them who were eyewitnesses of the vengeance which
was inflicted on him.

21. Be not thou so wilful to oppose 21. Surely such are the dwellings of the
wicked, and this is the place of him that knows not God.
a known and undeniable truth; for as sure as God is just, so sure it is, That
these things do befall the wicked man, and only him in his family and
habitation. And such as this which I have said has ever been known and
observed to be the lot and portion only of him that is an hypocrite and fears
not God aright in the place where he lives.

CHAP. XIX.
1. TO this speech of Bildads Job 1. Then Job answered, and said.
made answer, and said:

2. How long will you persevere 2. How long will you vex my soul, and break
me in pieces with words?
thus impiously and uncharitably to endeavor my vexation, and to torment me as
upon a rack, with multiplying unjust and uncomfortable language against me?

3. You have I know not how often 3. These ten times have ye reproached me:
you are not ashamed that you make your selves strange to me.
unjustly upbraided me, and which is strange, you that are mine old
acquaintance, and which make show to be my friends, never blush to consider in
what an unfriendly and strange manner you behave your selves toward me, as if
you neither bare any love to me, nor had any knowledge of me.

4. But be it granted that I and my 4. And be it indeed* that I have erred,
mine error remains with my self.
ways have been too-blame, yet you have not at all convinced me of any
error, that I might know what to amend, in all this time and talk, and till
you can do that (which I know you can never do) all that you say is but mere
surmises, and serves me to no use, but that still I am the same I was, never
better.

5. But if your flourishing estate do 5. If indeed you will magnify your
selves against me, and plead against me my reproach:
make you value your selves above me, and that you will needs insultingly
reproach me with mine afflictions:

6. Then know and consider, that it 6. Know now, that God has overthrown me,
and has compassed me with his net.
is God that has thus cast me down, and if I be caught, it is he that has
ensnared me with that you call his net, who can for all your high conceits (as
justly when he pleases) do as much for you.

7. O that the Lord would hearken 7. Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not
heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.
to mine outcry, which I am forced to make, by reason of the unjust calumnies
that these men lay on me, but he is pleased not to grant me audience, yea,
though mine injuries compel me to make earnest and vehement prayer, yet can I
find no relief, nor have any right done me on these my false accusers.

8. He has every way hedged me 8. He has senced up my way, that I cannot
pass, and he has set darkness in my paths.
out of happiness and content, so that though I seek it never so, I cannot
find it, yea, he has so eclipsed me, that I cannot see which way to take to
administer the least comfort to my self.

9. The good report and esteem 9. He has stripped me of my glory, and taken
the crown. from my head.
wherewith once I was dignified, he has quite stripped me of, in the hearts of
all men, and turned it into disgrace.

10. He has indeed, every way, and 10. He has destroyed me on every side, and
I am gone: and mine hope has he removed like a tree.
in every thing, destroyed mine hope and happiness, and I am quite out at all;
yea, there is no more hope of me for hereafter, than of a tree that is plucked
up by the roots.

11. He has mightily opposed 11. He has also kindled his wrath against me,
and he counts me unto him, as one of his enemies.
himself against me, and seems to account no better of me, than an utter
enemy that he means to pursue to death.

12. He has mustered his forces together 12. His troops come together, and
raise up their way against me, and encamp round about my tabernacle.
against me, even a whole army of plagues, which have blocked me up, and shut
me out of all hope, and have besieged me so straightly, that I can no way in
all the world find relief.

13. He has not left me a friend to 13 He has put my brethren far from
me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me.
help or comsort me, but those which were as near and dear to me as
brethren, and which should have been so to me, he has quite turned their
hearts from me; my very bosome-friends and acquaintance will not now own me
for any friend of theirs, but behave themselves as strangers toward me.

14. Those of mine own blood and 14. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar
friends have forgotten me.
kindred (from whom I expected other) have refused to do the offices of of
love and kindness to me in this my misery, and those that daily frequented me,
and were intimately acquainted with me, make now as if they never knew me.

15. Those that should owe me special 15. They that dwell in mine house, and
my maids, count me for a stranger; I am an aliant in their sight.
respect, who have lived under me in mine own house, yea, and my maids which
by their sex should be of a more tender and pitiful disposition, and more
dutiful carriage notwithstanding all decorums and obligations to the contrary,
show me no respect, but now by reason of this condition which they see me in,
they cast me off, as if they never had had any relation to me.

16. I called my servant as I was 16. I called my servant, and he gave me no
answer, I entreated him with my mouth.
wont to do, and in a regardlesse manner he turned his back upon me, yea, I
entreated him with this same mouth, that was wont to command him, but all would
not do.

17. My very wife thinks much to 17. My breath is strange to my wife, though I
entreated for the childrens sake of mine own body.
come near me, that was wont to lie in my bosom, yea, although I prayed and
importuned her, with the strongest and endearingest persuasions I could use,
and that which I thought likeliest to prevail, even for the conjugall bond
sake that was between us, and the motherly respect she bare to the children,
that in it she has had by me, yet I could not prevail.

18. Yea, to make up my misery, 18. Yea, young children despised me; I arose,
and they spoke against me.
that which I little expected, even young children that should be better
nourtured, and which usually are more pitifully and respectfully disposed, have
yet despisingly behaved themselves toward me, and if I do but show my self,
so sooneas ever they see me in what case I am, they speak against me, and
pass their opinion upon me, as they have heard others do.

19. There is not any one for me; 19. All my inward friends abhorred me: and
they whom I loved, are turned against me.
all my most inwardest and bosomefriends have me in detestation, because of my
affliction, and their ill opinion of me for it, and they whom I most entirely
loved, requite me with injury and opposition.

20. I am so pined away, that my 20. My bone cleaves to my skin and ( or as in
the margin, as) to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth.
bones and skin are met and grow together, as once did my flesh and they,
having now no flesh left to part them; But indeed, to speak properly, I have
nothing that I can call skin about me (being all over of a scab) saving my
gums, which only have escaped this contagion.

21. O consider my misery, and be not 21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon
me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.
so hard-hearted toward me, but be entreated of me to show me some compassion,
you that I have ever taken for my friends, which is your duty to do, and the
thing which God expects from you, now that he afflicts me.

22. Why do you take upon you to 22. Why do ye persecute me as God, and are
not satisfied with my flesh?
afflict me because God does so (have you the like authority) or so
masterfully to censure and judge me for an hypocrite, which is proper only to
God (who searches the heart) both to know and punish; is it not enough for you
to see my body thus tormented, but you will heap more extremity upon me,
laboring to oppress my spirit also?

23. O that what I am about to 23. O that my words were now written, o that
they were printed in a book!
speak were eternized to all posterity in the usual way of writing and
printing!

24. Or rather in some more legible 24. That they were graven with an iron pen
and lead, in the rock for ever!
and permanent way, as by graving them with capital letters in some durable
stone, for the vindicating of my sincerity to after ages, and for the learning
and encouraging of all upright hearted men against afflictions and oppositions.

25. For this with a good conscience 25. For I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the later day upon the earth.
I dare, and can affirm, which no hypocrite can say after me; That upon good
proofs and infallible evidences I assuredly know, That (howsoever I seem, and
am judged by you here a castaway and reprobate man) I truly and faithfully
rest upon the promise; and that my soul is safe (by the mercy of God) in him
whom he has appointed to redeem it, who shall one day live and triumph over
all his sufferings, and so shall I over mine, by and with him; I mean no
fantastical Savior, such as vain men through self-love take up and make to
themselves, but him whom I know full well, is, and must be, as well a Judge as
a Savior, and therefore it booteth me little to dissemble, who (it rejoices
my heart to think) shall one day judge the world in righteousness, and then
shall mine innocence appear.

26. And though not only my skin, 26. And though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.
but this whole body be utterly consumed and eaten to death of worms, both
skin, flesh, and bones; yet for my Saviors sake who shall rise from death, and
live in despite of it, my flesh (so consumed) shall be framed a new into such a
body, and raised again to such a life as wherein I shall see God completely,
face to face.

27. I mean, I shall not see him as 27. Whom I shall see for my self, and
mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within
me.
the wicked shall at the last day, to be another God, and none of theirs, but
that I shall so see him, as that I shall enjoy him for my God, Father and
Savior, I say, mine own eyes shall see him and rejoice in him, for mine own
God, and not another, though now he be pleased thus extremely to afflict me,
both within and without.

28. One would think this faithful 28. But ye should say, why persecute we
him, seeing the root of the matter is found in me?
confession and profession of my faith in the pureness of my conscience,
should make you better bethink your selves, then thus to persecute me with
false and injurious occasions, seeing that however you may condemn me for a
sinner, which I confess to God and all the world, yet there is apparently in
me that which may and does interest me in Gods saving and special favor,
notwithstanding both my sins and his afflictions, to wit, a faithful
uprightness which you ought to cherish, and not to oppose and suppress.

29. And look well to it; be ye 29. Be ye afraid of the sword, for wrath
brings the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.
afraid to go on in this way, lest God unsheath his sword against you for it;
for if you persevere in your persecuting injustice and uncharitableness til
his wrath be kindled against you, punishment will befall you, that so you may
learn to fear to do wrong, and know there is a just revenger thereof, and
that judgment belongs thereto.

CHAP. XX.
1. ZOphar the Naamathite, longing 1. Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and
said:
till his time came to reply upon Job, being full of aggravated displeasure,
thus at last also venteth himself upon him:

2. Says he, I am even in travel till 2. Therefore do my thoughts cause me
to answer, and for this I make haste.
I answer thee, I must needs break in upon thee, however thou may take it,
and that for this reason:

3. Because thou have reproachfully 3. I have heard the check of my reproach,
and the spirit of my understanding causes me to answer.
taunted that truth, which I and my companions (thy friends) have suggested to
thee for thy good: In so much as being well assured of that I have said, to be
no other than a certain and known truth, to wit, that God will punish the
wicked, and that it shall go ill with them, and not with the righteous; thy
disdainful contradicting it has so whetted my spirit, that I can no longer
contain my self, but must needs out of a right under-standing and certain
knowledge of it, urge this truth yet more home upon thee.

4. How can it be, that thou should 4. Know thou not this of old, since
man was placed upon earth?
be ignorant of this, or how dare thou deny it, which God has made apparent
in all ages since the beginning of the world, and which has been ever
received and taught for an infallible truth.

5. Even this, that God suffers not a 5. That the triumphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment?
wicked man long to enjoy his earthly happiness and worldly triumph, but makes
it of short continuance: and that the joy which an hypocrite takes in his
prosperity shall not long last, but shall speedily end in endless sorrow.

6. Though he overtop all men, 6. Though his excellency mount up to the
heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds.
and be never so high in the repute of the world.

7. Yet he shall have such a fall, as 7. Yet he shall perish for ever, like
his own dung: they which have seen him shall say: Where is he?
he shall never rise again, yea, the time shall come, that God will make him
as loathsome and detestable to himself and others, as his own excrements were
wont to be; yea, even those very men that have seen and admired his condition
shall ere long, as much wonder at his downfall.

8. A man you know is no sooner awaken, 8. He shall fly away as a dream, and
shall not be found: yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.
but his delightful dream is forgotten; just so, on a sudden, when God awakes
in judgment, upon him shall all his former honor and happiness be quite lost
and taken from him, not any of it remaining: yea, like as when a man awaketh,
all the imaginary visions of his fancy vanish, so shall all his temporal
felicity by the sight and feeling of the anger and displeasure of God against
him.

9. Those which are able to say, 9. The eye also which saw him shall see him no
more; neither shall his place any more behold him.
they can remember the time they saw him thus and so, shall never live to see
the like again, neither shall the place where he lived so splendidously ever
enjoy him so any more.

10. His children to stop the clamorous 10. His children shall seek to please
the poor; and his hands shall restore their goods.
mouths of the oppressed poor shall be forced to stoop to observe and entreat
them with good words, and fair promises; whom once their father, and they
insulted over with proud oppression, and had them for their observers and
suppliants; yea, the heavy wrath of God upon him shall make him with his own
hands restore to the poor, what by oppression he had unjustly taken from them,
and glad he may.

11. He shall be made to feel the 11. His bones are full of the sin of his
youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust.
weight of his former sins, by the tormenting plagues that God shall heap
upon him, which shall pursue him to the death.

12. Though his sins have been never 12. Though wickedness be sweet in his
mouth, though he hides it under his tongue.
so pleasing to him in their acting, and though that still his mind stands that
way, being loath to forgo them.

13. Although he be exceeding loath 13. Though he spare it, and forsake it not;
but keep it still within his mouth.
to leave them, and hardly brought to repent of them, but with close
hypocritical dissembling would feign excuse them, that so he may retain them
still.

14. Yet as well as he loves them, 1. 4 Yet his meat in his bowels is turned,
it is the gall of Aspes within him.
and as sweet as they have been in acting, in the end they will prove of a
quite contrary effect, bringing deadly plagues upon him, and filling, him with
inward bitterness.

15. He has by ravenous oppression 15. He has swallowed down riches, and
he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his belly.
gotten abundance, but what though? he shall never be able to keep them, but
shall be compelled to part with them again, God shall so torment and fill him
with anguish and trouble of mind that he shall be sick of them, and wish
with all his heart to be rid of them to purchase his ease and quiet.

16. He shall be for all his seeming 16. He shall suck the poison of Aspes;
the Vipers tongue shall slay him.
happiness in his ill gotten goods, but as a man that by mistake has sucked
the most deadly poison in stead of honey; in the just wrath of God he shall be
tormented to death, as if he were stung with Vipers.

17. Though he has promised 17. He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the
brooks of honey and butter.
himself large contentment and felicity by his lawless and sinful courses,
yet he shall find himself quite mistaken, and his expectation utterly
frustrated; neither enjoying less nor more of all that happiness he hoped
for.

18. He shall be quite stripped of all 18. That which he labored for, shall he
restore, and shall not swallow it down: according to his substance shall the
restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein.
that which with careful thought taking he has gained, and shall part with
it to others, himself shall have no good by it, how happy soever he promised
himself to be: yea, to the utmost farthing shall he be disseized of all that
ever he has, for in retaliating justice, God shall beggar him, take it from
him and distribute it to other men: he shall take but little joy, and find
but small benefit in that he has gathered together, for he shall lose it
every jot.

20. Because he has come naughtily 19. Because he has oppressed and has
forsaken the poor; because he has violently taken away an house which he
builded not.
by it, oppressing the poor, and to enrich himself by bribery and
subornation, has refused to do him right, and also by injustice and violence,
unlawfully possessed himself of other men's estates, which he had no manner of
right unto.

20. He shall be incessantly pursued 20. Surely he shall not feel quietness
in his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired.
with vexations, and shall enjoy no hearts-ease; he shall keep nothing of
that which he has got; but shall part with all that whereon he had set his
heart, and built his felicity.

21. God shall never cease taking 21. There shall none of his meat be left,
therefore shall no man look for his goods.
from him, and giving it to others, whilst he has any thing left, and till
folk see that he has not wherewith to sustain himself, they shall not give
over to rob and spoil, and to take from him what he has.

22. Then, when he takes himself 22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he
shall be in straits: every hand of the wicked shall come upon him.
to be in his prime and hight of happiness, shall he be brought to the
greatest indigency and want, God shall let loose every wicked unconscionable
man to molest and impoverish him, like as aforetime he himself has done to
others.

23. When he has satisfied his desires 23. When he is about to fill his belly,
God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him
while he is eating.
to the full, and has gotten every thing that his heart could wish, to make
him happy, so soon as ever he begins to joy himself in them, God, whom he
least looks for, it shall blast his hopes, and disturb his security, by
executing a furious and wrathful judgment upon him in great abundance, very
then, when he bids his heart make merry, and assures himself unchangeable
happiness.

24. The Lord shall wrathfully fight 24. He shall fly from the iron weapon,
and the bow of steel shall strike him through.
against him as a man of war, with sharp and strong weapons, such as he
shall desire and endeavor to avoid and fly from, but shall by no means
escape, nor be able to withstand or to stand under, but what one fails to do,
another shall certainly bring to pass, so that one way or other he shall be
sure to receive his deaths wound by a fierce discharge of Gods wrathful
plagues upon him.

25. God will be sure to shoot home, 25. It is drawn and comes out of the
body; yea, the glistering sword comes out of his gall; terrors are upon him.
so that his arrow shall pierce through and through, he shall make it appear
that it was shot in anger, and that it is his powerful hand that does it, yea,
he shall make his most formidable plagues to appear upon him, they shall
pierce his very intralls, so that with bitterness of spirit he shall be
forced to lament himself, his inward terrors shall so affright and perplex
him.

26. All manner of dismal fears, 26. All darkness shall be hid in his secret
places: a fire not blown shall consume him, it shall go ill with him that is
left in his Tabernacle.
surmising thoughts, and misgiving despair shall enter and take possession of
his soul, and no comfortable hope shall appear in him. He and all his
substance shall by the wrath of God hastily consume to nothing as the stubble
by the fire, yea, so incensed is God against him, as that for his oppression
and hypocrisy sake, such a curse shall cleave to him, and to all that comes of
him, yea, to the very place of his abode, as that whosoever remains in it
shall partake it.

27. God by punishments from heaven, 27. The heavens shall reveal his
iniquity: and the earth shall rise up against him.
shall lay him open sufficiently to all the world to be a grievous sinner, and
a notorious hypocrite, whatsoever he says to the contrary; yea, he shall make
the very creatures to abhor him for it, and utterly to deny their comfort and
service to him, to signify what he is.

28. All his posterity shall be destroyed, 28. The increase of his house shall
depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.
and so shall his prosperity too; even all at once with a sudden ebb, in the
day that God visits him with his wrath and righteous judgments.

29. This that I have told thee is the 29. This is the portion of a wicked man
from God, and the heritage appointed unto him by God.
portion that a wicked hypocritical oppressor must look for, and shall
certainly receive from God, and none but such; God in his just purpose has set
it a part, and assigned it for him, and will when his sins are ripe, and the
time fit, most certainly execute it upon him, as his works have ever declared.

CHAP. XXI.
1. BUt Job being no whit more 1. But Job answered, and said:
convinced or confuted by Zophans foregoing discourse, thus again replies upon
him:

2. Do me that favor, as to give 2. Hear diligently my speech, and let this
be your consolations.
me also leave to speak, and to lend me your ears, which, seeing you have no
other comforts for me, shall be in stead of comfort to me.

3. Have but patience to hear me, 3. Suffer me that I may speak, and after
that I have spoken, mock on.
and when I have done, say you your pleasure.

4. I see it is in vain to make my 4. As for me, is my complaint to man? and
if it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled?
moan to man, if I look for help there, the Lord knows I am in a piteous
case; for I find no comfort from him.

5. I beseech you consider what I 5. Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your
hand upon your mouth.
say, that you may reform your error, and together with me, may with
amazement admire the ways of God, which are wonderful; and give over thus
presumptuously to give boundaries to him in his administration toward men.

6. And well may I bid you wonder, 6. Even when I remember, I am afraid, and
trembling takes hold on my flesh.
and be astonished hereat; for, for mine own part, when I call to mind, and
consider Gods wonderful proceedings toward my self, what I was, and what I
am, they astonish me with most formidable amazement, nor am I able to plum
their depth.

7. And I pray you, if it be as you 7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become
old, yea, are mighty in power?
say, That God only lays his heavy hand upon the wicked, and that they
escape not wrath and punishment, how then comes it to pass (which you cannot
deny but are eyewitnesses of) that the wicked live in health and heartsease,
till they be as old as the oldest, and equal, if not exceed, whomsoever in
power?

8. Their posterity do as well as 8. Their seed is established in their sight
with them, and their offspring before their eyes.
heart can wish, and they live to see them thrive like themselves, and to joy
in their present prosperity and undoubted hopes of future happiness.

9. There is no such fear befalls 9. Their houses are safe from fear, neither
is the rod of God upon them.
them as you speak of, but they live secure and free both from the fear and
feeling of punishment, God afflicts them not one jot.

10. But contrarily, all things hit, and 10. Their Bull gendereth, and fails
not, their Cow calveth, and casts not her calfe.
nothing misseth to make them happy, and rich, they have profit and pleasure at
will; for their bull gendereth and fails less than other men's, and their
Cowes calve, and miscarry seldom or never.

11. None are more happy in the 11. They send forth their little ones like a
flock, and their children dance.
multitude of children than they, nor no men's children lead merrier lives than
theirs, dancing and joviallizing.

12. At the sound of all the choicest 12. They take the timbrell and harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the organ.
instruments of music, which wit can invent, or money can buy, wherewith they
take their fill of pleasure and sport.

13. And they live all their life long 13. They spend their days in wealth,
and in a moment go down to the grave.
in this manner, never tasting sorrow, and moreover, when their time comes to
die, they have as easy deaths as one would wish, without any sore or lingering
pains and diseases, they depart in a trice.

14. Thus they live, and thus they 14. Therefore they say unto God, depart from
us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
die, yea, not with standing that they are so far from being less wicked for
this their prosperous condition, as that it makes them the more sinful and
presumptuous against God, even in effect to dare to say (for their lives show
as much) we care not for thee, nor have no need of thee, thy ways are not our
ways, and therefore keep them to thy self; for we will yield neither
subjection nor obedience to thee nor them.

15. We are able to stand upon our 15. What is the Allmighty, that we should
serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him?
own legs, and we are free for to do our own wills, why should we then
abridge our selves, and become slaves to one whose power we respect not, nor
can it do us any hurt, be it never so great, and to whom we scorn to be
beholden for any thing, who need nothing?

16. Lo, now, how unagreeable this 16. Lo, their good is not in their hand, the
counsel of the wicked is far from me.
is to what you say, that God ever despoiles them of all they have, and leaves
them naked; and yet how ever this my necessitous estate differs from that of
theirs, so commended by you, yet say you what you will, I am not for all that
in love with their prosperous condition; much good do it them, far be it from
me to wish their happiness in their way, and upon their terms, for I have
never trod their paths.

17. You cannot deny but that experience 17. How often is the candle of the
wicked put out? and how out comes their destruction upon them? God
distributeth sorrows in his anger.
proves this true which I have said, that many wicked men do thus pass
unpunished, and prosper; nor again, on the other hand do I deny, but that too
the glory of the wicked is often eclipsed, and destruction often overtakes them,
yea, I acknowledge it to be true, that God does distribute and send afflicting
plagues and punishments in his just displeasure upon them many times.

18. God I know does bring them 18. They are as stubble before the wind, and as
chafe that the storm carries away.
and theirs to ruin and destruction, and disperseth their ill gotten goods up
and down into a thousand men's hands.

19. And makes their children diverse 19. God lays up his iniquity for his
children: he rewards him, and he shall know it.
times feel the smart of their fathers sins; yea, he makes the wicked man
live to see and know the reward of his own evil ways.

20. He himself is made the spectator 20. His eyes shall see his destruction,
and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
of his own ruin, and to drink deep of the cup of the Lords anger.

21. So that the pleasure he took 21. For what pleasure has he in his house
after him, when the number of his months is cut off in the midst?
in the hope he conceived of making his house famous and honorable after him,
shall quite vanish by sudden destruction or death, happening in his prime.

22. Will you dare then thus to teach 22. Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing
he judges those that are high?
God what he should do? will you set bounds to his actions, and measure his
judgments by your rule, seeing they are so far beyond us, and his ways past
our finding out; and seeing he is Judge of the Angels, who are so far above
us in all manner of excellencies, the wisdom of whose ways even they
notwithstanding are ignorant of.

23. Must you not needs confess an 23. One dies in his full strength, being
wholly at ease and quiet.
unsearchablenesse in Gods ways, such as is without the compass of any man's
reach, when as he pleases to do such wonderful contradictory things in man's
reason, and to show himself so free an agent in the things aforesaid, as also
in these that follow; sparing whom he pleas^th, and likewise afflicting whom,
and for what time, and in what measure himself likes, as we continually see
and behold; for instance, Does he not summon one a way by death, even then,
when he is most likely to live, and when he least looks for it, or desires it?

24. When there is not the least decay 24. His breasts are full of milk, and
his bones are moistened with marrow.
in him to cause it, but that nature is every way perfect and complete.

25. And does not another man (we 25. And another dies in the bitterness of
his soul, and never eats with pleasure.
know no reason why) lie and die under woeful pressures of mind and body,
never enjoying good hour in all his life?

26. Thus does God do his pleasure 26. They shall lie down in the dust, and
the worms shall cover them.
upon men, and variously dispense his providence to them here, and yet however
he seem to favor or disfavour them (which is also strange) death concludes
them, and the grave receives them all alike, and there they fare alike, the
worms devouring one as well as another.

27. Alas, I easily perceive you imply 27. Behold, I know your thoughts, and
the devices which you wrongfully imagine against me.
and mean me to be the wicked man that God has done and executed all these
things upon for my supposed wickedness, (wherein (I speak it knowingly) you
are utterly mistaken; for I am no such man, and you do me exceeding much wrong
to think so of me, whilst ignorantly you judge me by the event and Gods
afflicting hand upon me.

28. The whilst you say in derision, 28. For ye say, Where is the house of the
prince, and where are the dwelling places of the wicked?
where is this man's princely pomp, that but even now was so splendidous? What
is become of all the glory, that he in the pride of his heart had thought to
have gained and laid up for himself and his? and of all the great revenew and
goodly houses that he and they by wicked means had compassed and built to
wicked ends and purposes?

29. Is it not notorious what he was, 29. Have ye not asked them that go by
the way? and do ye not know their tokens?
and cannot every man point him out now for wicked and naught, that sees these
marks and judgments upon him? will any man say, that ever any had the like
but such an one?

30. Do not all men know that the 30. That the wicked is reserved to the day
of destruction; they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.
time will come, that God will certainly reckon with a wicked man for his
wickedness, and at last, without fail, bring ruin upon his head, and will
make him an example of his justice to all the world, in the day that he
chooses to execute his wrath upon him?

31. Although no man dare reprove him, and tell him he does wrong, nor 31. Who
shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what he has done?
right himself upon him, or attempt to punish him, because of his
imperiousness and oppressing might.

32. Yet shall God bring him low, 32. Yet shall he be brought to the grave,
and shall remain in the tomb.
his judgments shall bring him to his grave, even to an everlasting farewell
to his former estate.

33. God shall so afflict him that he 33. The clods of the valley shall be
sweet unto him, and every man shall draw after him, as there are innumerable
before him.
shall desire death as the only way that remains to give him ease, and this
say you, shall be, and ever has been the case of every wicked man, as well as
his.

34. Now, how vainly may any one 34. How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in
your answers there remains falsehood?
judge, do you go about to comfort me, which yet you would be thought to do;
when as you apply nothing rightly to me, nor affirm nothing rightly of me;
and seeing all your discourses are composed of nothing but mistakes and errors
touching God and me, affirming that he afflicts none but wicked men, and that
I am and must needs be wicked, because I am afflicted, both which are false.

CHAP. XXII.
1. ELiphaz the Temanite, being 1. Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, and said:
now to speak according to course, falls the third time upon Job, and says,

2. Granting that thou art righteous 2. Can a man be profitable unto God, as
he that is wise may be profitable unto himself?
as thou say, yet thou take a wonderful fond course thus to glory in it,
and plead it unto God, thereby to bind him to thee, seeing a man's being so,
adds nothing to him, it profits him nothing, though it do the owner, who in
godly wisdom has obtained to be so.

3. Not a jot of benefit God reaps 3. Is it any pleasure to the Allmighty, that
thou art righteous? or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect?
by it, nay, he is so far from being a gainer by thy pleading the perfection
of thy ways, as that thou make him thereby suffer in his justice, and by
pleading thy righteousness, make him unrighteous.

4. If he punish thee not for sin, 4. Will he reprove thee for fear of
thee? Will he enter with thee into judgment?
what then does he plague thee for? Is it for fear that in time thou may
grow so over good, that he cannot reward thee, or so over great, that he
cannot command thee? think thou he has need to take such course with thee
for any such cause?

5. Man, never speak more of it; 5. Is not thy wickedness great, and thine
iniquities infinite?
God is just, and so are his ways, and therefore, as thy punishments are great
and extraordinary, so certainly are thy sins.

6. For it must needs be, that however 6. For thou have taken a pledge from thy
brother for naught, and stripped the naked of their clothing.
thou have carried things cunningly, and we cannot so easily detect thy
faults, yet doubtless thou have been extremely too blame, and thy ways very
wicked; would thou but consider and confess them. For no doubt, what ever
thou say to the contrary, but thou have been a great oppressor of the
poor, and a greedy griper, thou have questionless uncharitably taken, and
unjustly detained thy poor brothers pledge to his great damage, and by thy
cruel usage, have extremely impoverished them.

7. And as thou have been an evilldoer 7. Thou have not given water to the
weary to drink, and thou have withholden bread from the hungry.
in the ways of injury and violence, so also doubtless thou have been
backward to do any good or charitable work, thou have not relieved the needy.

8. But all thy aim and care was, 8. But as for the mighty man, he had the
earth, and the honorable man dwelt in it.
to make thy self mighty, rich, and honorable here on earth, and therefore
all thy labor was to ingrosse it to thy self from others.

9. Thou have disappointed the 9. Thou have sent widows away empty, and the
arms of the fatherless have been broken.
poor widows hope, and have not righted her upon her wrong-doers, and thou
have suffered the fatherless to be crushed, and have not afforded them succor
when they relied upon, and trusted to thee for it.

10. Therefore it is, and for no other 10. Therefore snares are round about
thee, and sudden fear troubles thee.
cause, that thou art thus plagued on all hands, these works and ways of
thine, are they that have brought thee into this condition, thus to be
captivated, and all at once suddenly surprised with such fearful miseries.

11. Yea, into worse than the plagues 11. Or darkness that thou can not see,
and abundance of waters cover thee.
themselves, even into blindness and confusion of mind; so as that thou can
neither see what brought thee into them, nor how to find the way out, but art
as a man under water amuzed in these thy afflictions, not knowing which way to
take, nor what to do to help thy self.

12. Is not God infinitely higher and 12. Is not God in the height of heavens?
and behold the height of the stars, how high they are.
more full of light to see and discern, than any of his creatures? consider
how high the stars are, and how far distant from thee, and yet they shine
down to thee.

13. Much more does God see thee, 13 And thou say, How does God know? can
he judge through the dark cloud?
and know thy ways and works; yet such is thy hypocrisy and security, that
because we who are but men, cannot easily detect thee; therefore, thou
think, and thy behavior speaks as much, that God can see no evil neither
by thee; and because thou can not see him through the clouds that are over
thy head, therefore thou think he cannot see nor take notice of thee
through them.

14. And that his sight is not clear 14. Thick clouds are a covering to him
that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit of heaven.
enough to see through such a medium, but that thou art safe enough from his
eyes who has so many thick and dark clouds between thee and him, and who
dwells at such a distance from thee, as is heaven from earth, where it seems
thou think he only manages matters, and bears rule, and not here.

15. Have thou observed the ways 15. Have thou marked the old way which wicked
men have trodden?
of the wicked, and the course that God has of old wont to take with them?

16. Do thou confess, how they 16. Which were cut down out of time, whose
foundation was overflowne with a flood.
have been cut short of their aims and hopes by an untimely end, and how the
foundations which they have laid of riches and honor, have been at last
wasted away with sudden destruction and ruin, as of old by the flood?

17. Even such, as thou say, say 17. Which said unto God, Depart from us:
and what can the Allmighty do for them?
to God, keep thy Laws to thy self, for we'll not obey them, and what care
we for what he can do to us, that expect no good from him, nor fear no hurt?

18. And thou know its true too, 18. Yet he silled their houses with good
things, but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
that once he filled their houses with good things, and plenty of them; and
now, how can thou so confidently and securely exempt thy self from their
condition, and thy ways from theirs, seeing thou sharest in their plagues?

19. For the righteous are free from 19. The righteous see it, and are glad:
and the innocent laugh them to scorn.
such things, what ever thou say to the contrary; they live to see the
justice of God executed upon the wicked, and rejoice therein, laughing at their
folly for taking such ways, which they knew long before would have such an end
and issue.

20. Whereas we that have been 20. Whereas our substance is not cut down,
but the remnant of them the fire consumes.
content with a little, got in an honest godly way, enjoy it still in peace;
but as for proud oppressors, and greedy gripers, rise they never so high,
wrath shall quite ruin them at last.

21. But now therefore, thou for thy 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and
be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee.
part, though thou have been a stranger to the ways of God, yet stand not out
still in rebellion, but come in and make thy peace by confessing thy
guiltiness, and acknowledging him just, cav^lling no longer at his dealings;
and so shall thou receive good for evil, and find mercy to relieve thee in thy
distress.

22. I pray thee as a friend, go not 22. Receive, I pray thee, the law from
his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart.
on presumptuously, but humble thy self for thy former sins, and promise
amendment; covenant to keep his Commandments which thou have broken, and to
frame both thy heart and life thereby for hereafter.

23. If thus thou repent and turn to 23. If thou return to the Almighty, thou
shall be built up thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles.
the Lord, fear not but that he both can, and will repair thee, and so shall
thou put away sin, and the plagues and punishment that sin has brought upon
thee, far from thee and thine.

24. Then shall thou have thy desire; 24. Then shall thou lay up gold as dust,
and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.
for thou shall be rich with content, which is worth a million.

25. Yea, the All-mighty himself 25. Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense
(or as in the margin, thy gold) and thou shall have plenty of silver.
in his love and favor, shall be thy riches and treasure, so that thou shall
think thy self happier and richer than gold or silver can make thee.

26. For thou shall then have that 26. For then shall thou have thy delight in
the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face unto God.
which is worth, and better worth than all, to wit, peace toward God, and the
comfortable enjoyment of his grace and favor toward thee, which shall make
thee with an holy boldness to look God in the face without fear.

27. Thou shall then be able cheerfully 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto
him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows.
to address thy self to him in prayer, and shall receive his gracious answers
to thine infinite solace; so that thou shall have continual cause and exercise
of thanksgiving.

28. Yea, thou shall but say the 28. Thou shall also decree a thing, and it
shall be established unto thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.
word, and it shall be done; such power shall thou have with God, who shall in
favor to thee, approve of all thy ways, and they shall prosper.

29. When other men are cast 29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say,
There is lifting up: and he shall save the humble person.
down as thou art now, then shall thou be able to speak to them, and to God
for them, and both to warrant and procure the delivery of the penitent person
out of his afflictions.

30. Nay the humble and upright 30. He shall deliver the Island of the
innocent: and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands.
man who does righteously, and lives holily, shall not only prevail for one,
but for a many, yea, the whole land or place where he lives shall fare the
better for him. Thy good life and pure prayers when thou art such an one, shall
for thy sake do much with God for all the rest, in working their deliverance
from many an evil, which would else befall them.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. WHen Eliphaz had ended, 1. Then Job answered, and said:
Job thus begins:

2. All this long time of 2. Even to day is my complaint bitter: my stroke is
heavier than my groaning.
suffering I have found no ease, but from the beginning to this very day is
cause of complaint still multiplied and increased upon me by injuries from
men, and calamities from God; so that the sorrow and misery which I endure, do
far exceed my lamentation, and are heavier than my groanings can express.

3. O that I knew where I might 3. O that I knew where I might find him! and
that I might come even to his seat!
meet with God, and how to come to speak with him, that I might be no longer
kept at distance from him, but might obtain access unto him, though it were
even to his seat in heaven!

4. That so I might (as I long to do) 4. I would order my cause before him, and
fill my mouth with arguments.
even plead my cause, and maintain mine innocence before him, for all his
afflicting me.

5. I would affirm as much to God 5. I would know the words which he would
answer me, and understand what he would say unto me.
himself as I do to you, and would not fear what he could, or would say
against it.

6. Assuring my self beforehand, 6. Will he plead against me with his great
power? No, but he would put strength in me.
that he will not contest against me in any transcendent manner, nor stand upon
his rigor and power with me, but that he will graciously enable me to speak
the truth unto him touching my sincerity, and to maintain it before him.

7. I know, however he pleases to 7. There the righteous might dispute with
him; so should I be delivered for ever from my Judge.
deal with the righteous here, yet there they may speak for themselves, and be
heard without repulse; a happy man therefore should I think my self, had I
this liberty granted me; for so I should be freed both from the slanders and
condemnations of my unjust censurers, and also from the judgment of the Lords
transcendent righteousness, and execution of sovereign authority, which it is
his will that here I must undergo, and should in mercy receive there the
reward of mine innocence.

8. But alas, he will not allow me 8. Behold, I go forward, but he is not
there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him.
this happiness to find him out, that I may have speech with him; for he will
not in any way, nor by any means I can use manifest himself so to me, as to
give me the hearing, I cannot obtain it, though I seek it every way I can
devise; for I put my self before him with a confident boldness of purpose to
try if that way I can provoke him to it, but he keeps off from me; also I
humble my self at my distance, to see if that way I can draw him to it, but
all is one, I am never the nearer, he is every whit as far off.

9. I prayed him for the afflictions 9. On the left hand where he does work,
but I cannot behold him: he hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot
see him.
sake which he lays upon me, but I cannot speed, for he quite contrary is
the further off, by how much I desire to draw near to him.

10. But for all he keeps at this distance, 10. But he knows the way that I
take; when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
and seems so strange to me, and will not grant me this favourto admit me to
plead my cause before him; yet I am sure for all this he knows me and my ways
to be such as I have said, and when he has held me a while in the fire of
affliction, my uprightness shall be made manifest, and shall shine as gold in
the eyes of those, that now through prejudice can see nothing but dross in me.

11. For I know, and dare maintain 11. My foot has held his steps, his way
have I kept, and not declined.
it, that I have been no such man as you suspect me for, but that I have
constantly walked in the ways of the Lord without deviation or turning aside
from them for any respect whatsoever.

12. Neither have I ever turned my 12. Neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more than my
necessary food.
back, or refused to yield obedience to any command of God, but contrarily, I
have esteemed them better, and minded them more than my very meat and drink.

13. But that is all one; for what the 13. But he is in one mind, and who can
turn him? and what his soul desires, even that he does.
Lord in his infinite wisdom and good pleasure has determined with himself
to do, he will not alter what ever any man allegeth to the contrary, and what
ever pleases him, however it may displease us, yet that he does.

14. And this is my very case now, 14. For he performs the thing that is
appointed for me: and many such things are with him.
for he does in this my affliction, but only show his just prerogative upon
me, to try me, not to punish me, and many such extraordinary things he
pleases to decree and execute in his great power and unsearchable wisdom,
whereof we can know, nor give no reason.

15. Therefore though I am troubled, 15. Therefore am I troubled at his
presence: when I consider, I am afraid of him.
yet it is this his greatness which I am to grapple withal, and do now
sustain, and not my conscientiousnesse that troubles me, when I consider his
immensity, that is the thing that makes me afraid of him.

16. For in this respect, God melts 16. For God makes my heart soft, and the
Almighty troubles me:
and weakeneth my heart and spirit with fear and astonishment, as the wax
before the fire; and I confess the thoughts of his Almightinesse is no little
trouble to me.

17. For because I see he uses it altogether 17. Because I was not cut off
before the darkness neither has he covered the darkness from my face.
against me, and not for me, for by an Almighty power it is that he has
brought me into this extremity, and therewith still continues me under it, and
has not rather prevented these intolerable evils by it through death.

CHAP. XXIV.
1. IF God be bound by his justice to 1. Why, seeing times are not hidden from
the Almighty, do they that know him, not see his days?
punish evill-doers in this life; why then is it, that he who knows the length
of their life, and the time of their departure hence, yet suffers them to die
unpunished? and why then do not the godly, and they that serve him, always
see it so, but oft-times the contrary?

2. Yea, to instance in all sorts of 2. Some remove the land-markes; they
violently take away flocks, and feed thereof:
wicked men; some go point-blancke against Gods Commandment, and privately
do injury to their neighbor for their own advantage, robbing him of his
right by removing his land-marke, and others with strong hand, take away other
men's goods and cattle, and securely feed thereon.

3. They cruelly oppress the fatherless, 3. They drive away the Ass of the
fatherless, they take the widows Ox for a pledge.
and mercilessely exact upon the widow.

4. They put poor folk to extreme 4. They turn the needy out of the way: the
poor of the earth hide themselves together.
shifts, so as they know not how to live, and drive them to so narrow a
scantling by enlarging their territories, that they are feign to crowd together
like Bees in a hive, and for cruelty and oppression dare not show their faces.

5. See, if they rather like beasts, 5. Behold, as wild Asses in the desait,
go they forth to their work, rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness
yields food for them and for their children.
than men, do not rove and ramble up and down the earth for booty for them
and theirs, and care for no body else, nor how they come by that they have.

6. There is nothing scapes them, 6. They reap every one his corn in the
field: and they gather the vintage of the wicked.
but other men's, both corn and wine, by oppression they wickedly usurp, and
swallow all.

7. They are utterly merciless, having 7. They cause the naked to lodge
without clothing, that they have no covering in the cold.
no charity nor pity, but destitute the poor of their very bed-clothes,
inhumanely exposing them to the extremity of cold without clothing.

8. Driving them to endure most 8. They are wet with the showers of the
mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.
miserable hardship, even to lie out of doors in vehement storms, and
tempestuous weather, and to take up with the holes of the rocks for houses to
dwell in.

9. They cruelly extort even the very 9. They pluck the fatherless from the
breast, and take a pledge of the poor.
necessary food that should maintain and keep alive the widow and the child,
and contrary to all law of God and nature, unmercifully take and detain the
poor bodies pledge to his utter undoing.

10. Not sticking to strip him stark 10. They cause him to go naked without
clothing, and they take away the sheafe from the hungry.
naked of all, both clothing and food, that should either cover his nakedness,
or satisfy his hunger.

11. These oppressors make the poor 11. Which make oil within their walls,
and tread their wine-presses, and suffer thirst.
laboring man to toil hard, and to scruze out for them their oil and their
wine in the places where they themselves dwell safe and at ease; and yet
compel him to suffer thirst the while, being by their cruelty abridged of his
wages and livelihood dearly earned, and not suffered so much as to taste of
his own labors.

12. In so much that the miserable 12. Men groan from out of the city, and the
soul of the wounded cries out: yet God lays not folly to them.
groans and outcries of the oppressed, that can have no justice done them are
vehemently breathed forth to heaven, even as a man that lies mortally wounded
at the point of death; which one would think were an apt occasion, and a fit
season for God to show himself in, to right the poor innocent, and to punish
the wicked oppressor, and yet for all this, we see he keeps silence and does
not plague them.

13. Yea, is not this true, even of 13. They are of those that rebel against
the light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.
such men, whose lives are so notorious, that they hate the very light, which
reproves and discovers their evil doings? does not (I say) God spare even
them, whose own consciences condemn themselves, driving them to act their
deeds of darkness by night, and not by day, secretly and not openly.

14. As for instance; the murtherous 14. The murderer rising with the light,
kills the poor and needy; and in the night is as a thief.
and cruell-minded man, he early executes his mischievous designs with all
speed and diligence upon the poor and needy soul, that can make no
resistance, and then obscures himself in the night as a thief.

15. And so again, the adulterous 15. The eye also of the adulterer waits
for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me; and disguiseth his face.
Whoremonger, he contrives and longs to fulfill his sin which he also
effects in the dark by close and cunning carriage.

16. The thief in the like manner 16. In the dark they dig through houses,
which they had marked for themselves in the day time: they know not the light.
(...) the night-bird, making use of the day to plot, and of the night to
ex^^^re his villainy, not loving the light as inconvenient for his purpose and
vexatious to his mind.

17. For when the morning comes, 17. For the morning is to them even as the
shadow of death: if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of
death.
he is struck with fear, like a man ready to die, he is in miserable dread,
lest he should be known or found of any.

18. He stays not long in a place, he 18. He is swift as the waters, their
portion is cursed in the earth: he beholds not the way of the vineyards.
flies all company, his conscientiousnesse makes him lead a most miserably
solitary, and base life, not daring to come nere any high way or place of
concourse.

19. And so they spend their days, 19. Drought and heat consume the snow
waters: so does the grave those which have sinned.
and will never leave sinning till death, but like as the snow remains
unwasted till the Summer sun comes and melts it into the ground, so do the
wicked subsist and go on, some in one way of wickedness, some in another,
till the period of death finish their course.

20. Then indeed he shall be extinct, 20. The womb shall forget him, the worm
shall feed sweetly on him, he shall be no more remembered, and wickedness shall
be broken as a tree.
and be as if he had never been, returned shall he be to the dust again, and
his memory shall perish, and his flourishing in wickedness shall then have an
end, as a tree that is broken or blown down with the wind.

21. But yet in the mean time, God 21. He evil entreats the barren that
bears not: and does not good to the widow.
may let him live long to do much mischief, and to act many injuries
unpunished, both evil entreating the solitary barren woman who has none to
pity her or take her part as others have, and to offer violence in stead of
yielding succor to the friendlesse widow.

22. Yea, not only oppressing the 22. He draws also the mighty with his
power: he rises up, and no man is sure of life.
poor thus, but also bringing the rich to poverty by his overtopping might,
dominering and tyrannizing over all sorts of men, and making them live in
perpetual fear of him and bondage to him.

23. But though he live never so long 23. Though it be given him to be in
safety, whereon he rests; yet his eyes are upon their ways.
in safety and prosperity, exercising these courses, and rest never so
confidently on it; yet I know he shall certainly be plagued at last (though not
here) for the eyes of God mark him, and he will be sure to reward him with
just punishment.

24. Though God do (which no man 24. They are exalted for a little while, but
are gone and brought low, they are taken out of the way, as all other, and cut
off, as the tops of the ears of corn.
can deny) exalt them here for a while, yet I acknowledge that in justice he
must, and will give an end to their ways, and by death cut them off; but yet
oft-times no otherways than other men, not by any notorious judgment, but by
a common and natural death, without making difference, like corn in harvest.

25. And if this be not true that 25. And if it be not so now, who will make me
a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?
God does many things above, and contrary to man's reason, and that he lets
wicked men spend their days in wickedness, and reserves their judgment till
death, let any disprove me that can.

CHAP. XXV.
1. BIldad the Shuhite, being moved 1. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and
said,
at Jobs boldness toward God, and confidence in himself, thus briefly makes
answer to what he had spoken in the 23. Chapter.

2. God rules with Majesty in heaven, 2. Dominion and fear are with him, he
makes peace in his high places.
and gives laws to his Angels there, which they must obey, in which very
place that there is peace, it is of his goodness and gracious decree, rather
than of their merit.

3. Has he not whole armies of 3. Is there any number of his armies? and upon
whom does not his light arise?
Angels and other creatures in an infinite number, which are ready to execute
his wrath upon whomsoever dare to contest against him? and does not the Sun
behold all men in all corners of the earth, so that God must needs much more
see them what they are?

4. God then being of such perfect 4. How then can man be justified with God?
or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?
holiness, so terrible also, and so allseeing, how dares any man living, or
how is it possible for him to stand it out with God (as thou boastest) in his
own justification, or for him that is naturally corrupt, begotten and borne of
sinful parents, to appear pure in the eyes of such a God?

5. Consider, that by reason of the 5 Behold, even to the moon, and it shines
not yea, the stars are not pure in his sight.
fall of man, the very creatures that in themselves are sinlesse, yea, the very
Moon and Stars (that are so far from earth and so near to heaven) have
contracted defilement, and are blemished; so that with God for man's sake, and
by man's sin, even they are not accounted free from pollution in his sight.

6. How much less man himself 6. How much less man, that is a worm: and the
son of man which is a worm?
(whence they have taken infection) and all that come of him, who both father
and son, are all alike earthly creatures made subject to corruption by sin?

CHAP. XXVI.
1. JOB being angry at Bildads impertinencies, 1. But Job answered, and said:
thus answers him:

2. What am I the better for 2. How have thou helped him that is without power?
how savest thou the arm that has no strength?
this thou have said, how have thou herein discharged thine office to me,
either as a friend or comforter? what help hereby have thou administered to my
helpless state, or how have thou herewith yielded me any aid or support in
this my weak condition?

3. What friendly advice or useful 3. How have thou counseled him that has
no wisdom? and how have thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?
counsel have thou ministered to me by it, which yet thou take me to stand
in need of, and what ado have thou kept to tell me what I know?

4. Who do thou utter these overplus 4. To whom have thou uttered words? and
whose spirit came from thee?
needless speeches to, that is ever the better for them? For my part, I am
not, and whose spirit is any whit refreshed, or ever the better for what thou
have said? not mine one jot.

5. Think thou I know not all 5. Dead things are formed from under the
waters, and the inhabitants thereof.
this? yea, I can tell thee as much, and more than thou have said, to set forth
God withal, whereby thou may see that I am not to learn of thee touching
him: I can tell thee that he is not only admirable above in the heavens, but
beneath also, in so much, as nothing is bred or brought forth, whether animate
or inanimate, fish or other things in all the vast and deep Ocean, but it is
by his decree and power.

6. The hiddenest and lowest parts 6. Hell is naked before him, and destruction
has no covering.
of all the earth, the Grave and Hell, are open before his all-seeing eyes, so
that he sees what becomes of man, and every part of himafter that death has
dissolved him, and the grave consumed him.

7. His eyes of providence, and 7. He stretches out the North over the empty
place, and hangs the earth upon nothing.
arm of power, extends to the most remote and uninhabited places of all the
earth, he over-spreads those as these with the heavens, and disposes things
there as here, and he wonderfully upholds this heavy fabric and huge ball
of the earth pendant in the midst of the heavens without any other support
than his mighty power.

8. He bottells up the abundance of 8. He binds up the waters in his thick
clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them.
rain which falls upon the ground, in clouds made for that purpose, great and
thick, which notwithstanding the weight of those waters, he has made able to
keep and contain them, so that they let fall none but when he pleases.

9. He, when he pleases, withholdeth 9. He holds back the face of his
throne; and spreads his cloud upon it.
the Sun from us, that glorious light and beauty of the face of heaven, and
causes it at pleasure to suspend its power and virtue of light and heat, by
overclouding the heavens, and masking it as with a veil.

10. He has confined the raging 10. He has compassed the waters with
bounds, until the day and night come to an end.
and unruly seas with bounds and limits, which (do they what they can) they
shall never pass till the end of the world, when all things shall be let loose
to devastation.

11. His terror is formidable even 11. The pillars of heaven tremble, and are
astonished at his reproof.
to the mighty and high mountains (whereon the heavens seem to rest as on so
many pillars) which tremble and shake with his thunderclaps and earthquakes.

12. The sea, as outrageous as it is, 12. He divides the sea with his power,
and by his understanding, he smites through the proud.
subjects it self to his command, and against nature divides it self so, that
dry land appears in the midst of it, and he knows how to tame it when the
waves thereof are at proudest, and rise highest.

13. In a word, by his powerful 13. By his spirit he has garnished the
heavens; his hand has formed the crooked serpent.
spirit, wherewith he works, he has both beautified and set forth the
heavens in such a glorious manner as we see; yea, the same powerful hand it
is (which indeed only makes all things) that has also formed the most
deformed and dreadful creature in the earth.

14. Hereby you may imagine what 14. Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how
little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can
understand?
I know think, and believe of God by these descriptions I have made of him,
which yet I know are but parts of his admirable excellencies, and far short
of him; for when you and I have said all we can to set him forth, how little
notwithstanding, will it be in comparison of him and his greatness? as may
appear by one instance more, which sets him forth most of all, and that is the
power and Majesty that he utters in his thunder, which who can sufficiently
admire?

CHAP. XXVII.
1. JOB having thus taken up Bildad, 1. Moreover Job continued his parable, and
said,
his three friends seeing they could do no good on him, held their peace,
whereupon he takes occasion to speak his mind fully, and thus goes on:

2. As the Lord lives, who has 2. As God lives who has taken away my
judgment, and the Almighty, who has vexed my soul;
not cleared me to be what I am, but has laid it upon me to be thus
misjudged; and unjustly censured and condemned for a wicked man, because of
mine afflictions, yea, I protest by the Almighty, who I know, has caused all
these grievous vexations to befall me;

3. That whilst I breath, and God 3, All the while my breath is in me, and
the spirit of God is in my nostrills.
lends me life,

4. No respect in the world shall make me eat my words, or go against 4. My
lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.
my knowledge; for no man's pleasure or importunity will I do wickedly and
betray the truth by saying otherways of my self than I have said, although
never so many should judge against me.

5. No, God forbid that I should 5. God forbid that I should justif^e you; till
I die, I will not remove my integrity from me.
bolster you up in that sinful ^^isprision and uncharitableness of yours, by
yielding it for a truth, which you say, that God does punish me for mine
hypocrisy and wickedness, no, I will never do it whilst I live; I will not
belie my self, nor relinquish mine integrity, think how you will, and say of
me what you will for it.

6. I am resolved to maintain mine 6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will
not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
uprightness, and not to part with it upon your persuasions or suspicions, my
heart shall never be brought by any thing you can do to accuse me falsely of
hypocrisy.

7. For my part, I am sure, I am no 7. Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he
that rises up against me, as the unrighteous.
such man as you conceit me to be, nor do I account my self ever the less
righteous, or the less favored of God for these my sufferings, but it is mine
enemy, and he that has done me wrong, that is, both the unrighteous and the
unhappy man; it is the wicked, and not the afflicted, that is out of favor
with God.

8. As may appear by the hopeless 8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite,
though he has gained, when God takes away his soul?
and comfortless state which the wicked oppressor is in, though he be never
so prosperous, and has gained never so much, when God once summons him by
death.

9. For how in vain does God let 9. Will God hear his cry when trouble
comes upon him?
him cry for comfort, not giving him any, when the conscience of his sins
torment him, and the fear of death approaching, seiseth on him.

10. And what little joy he has to 10. Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he always call upon God?
think of God, and how unable he is to sustain or comfort himself with
faithful and constant seeking and praying to the Lord.

11. I will show you by mine own 11. I will teach you by the hand of God: that
which is with the Almighty, will I not conceal.
observation of Gods usual proceedings toward wicked men, what he has in
store (if that he pleases to execute it) for such wicked wretches as have done
me this wrong, thus unjustly to oppress and rob me, being innocent: (for what
I know to be a truth touching the Almighty, I will neither deny nor conceal
it, though I thereby oppose your false conclusions and collections touching
your prescribing God, and wronging me.)

12. Nor is it any other than what 12. Behold, all ye your selves have seen
it, why then are ye thus altogether vain?
your selves have confessed and affirmed to have noted as well as I, only by
the way, tell me then how you can be so inconsiderate in what you say, as to
affirm outward prosperity and wealth to be the sign of Gods favor, and the
contrary a sign of his disfavour.

13. Seeing, as I say, you know; that 13. This is the portion of a wicked man
with God, and the heritage of oppressors.
this is the portion that God has allotted to wicked men, and that which is
due to them from the Almighty, and which they often actually receive.

14. That is, that they shall be accursed, 14. If his children be multiplied,
it is for the sword: and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.
both they and theirs, and shall be unhappy in their happiness; for though
their children multiply never so, it shall be but the more to serve and
satisfy Gods revengefull displeasure against them, who will wrathfully devour
and cut them off with the sword of his Justice, and though they multiply and
lay up never so much for their children, yet God will bring them to want and
penury.

15. Both themselves and all that 15. Those that remain of him shall be buried
in death; and his widows shall not weep.
come of them shall be hated, so that no man shall speak well of them when they
are dead, but their name shall be buried and shall rot with them, yea, they
shall die undesired and unlamented of their own very wives which they leave
behind them, and of those funerall-women which are wont to bewail the deaths
of the well-deserving, and to weep over their graves.

16. How ever they abound in all 16. Though he heap up silver as the dust, and
repair raiment as the clay;
kind of worldly wealth;

17. Which I confess for present 17. He may prepare it, but the just shall put
it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.
God may permit them to do, but they nor theirs shall be never the better for
it, it shall come again to the just and innocent from whom they had it.

18. They may lay up and build, but 18. He builds his house as a moth, and
as a booth that the keeper makes.
to little purpose, for all shall b^ lost and pulled down again in a very
little time, even as the moth is brushed out of the garment where she had made
her nest; or as the shepherd removes his Cabin.

19. The rich oppressor for all his 19. The rich man shall lie down, but he
shall not be gathered: he opens his eyes, and he is not.
riches shall one day die, as other men do, but he shall not be brought to his
grave as others are with sorrow for his death; upon his deathbed he shall
look about for comfort and recovery, but in stead thereof shall see himself
departing from all his former happiness, and death at hand.

20. And then shall an infinite weight 20. Terrors take hold on him as waters,
a tempest steals him away in the night.
of terrors oppress him, and the wrath of the Lord shall take him away when he
expected it least.

21. The fierce anger of the Lord 21. The East-winde carries him away, and he
departs: and a storm hurleth him out of his place.
shall force him hence, full sore against his will, never to return again,
which shall with irresistible strength thrust him out of his Paradise.

22. For God shall heap afflictions 22. For God shall cast upon him and not
spare; he would feign fly out of his hand.
on him as thick as hailestones, without showing him any mercy at all, and in
vain shall he seek to escape him.

23. Nor shall any man be sorry for 23. Men shall clap their hands at him, and
shall hiss him out of his place.
his death, but he shall depart hence with the reproach and obloquie of all
men.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1. THe secrets of nature, though 1. Surely there is a vein for the silver,
and a place for gold where they fine it.
they be hid and very obscure, yet they are found out, and known, both where
they are placed by nature, and how they are to be used by Art, through the
natural wisdom that God has given to man, as we see in the most hiddenest
mysteries of nature, such as is the silver vein, which though deep in the
earth, and far out of sight, yet is found out and known, as also is the Art
of fining it, and gold, from their dross, to make them useful.

2. So also it is known how Iron 2. Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass
is molten out of the stone.
and Brass comes out of the earth, though it be a notable secret in nature,
and the art of melting it out of the stone is found out and practiced.

3. By the skill that God has given 3. He sets an end to darkness, and
searches out all perfection: the stones of darkness and the shadow of death.
to man, he is able to bring to light, and gain the knowledge of the most
remote and unknown things, and by searching to find out all the perfection of
nature, the pretiousest stones and things that are engendered and bred in the
darkesome and deadly vaults of the earth.

4. He knows how to divert great 4. The flood breaks out from the
inhabitant; even the waters forgotten of the foot: they are dried up, they are
gone away from men.
rivers out of their channel, and for his use to turn their course from those
that dwelt upon them, so that he leaves them dry-foot, and they wonder what is
become of them.

5. He knows how to put the earth 5. As for the earth, out of it comes bread:
and under it is turned up as it were fire.
to all uses, for the superficies of it, that yields him bread, and lower
down, out of the inwards of it he digges the materials of fire; as coals,
etc. or finds out bright shining metalls, and sparkling stones created of a
sulphurous matter.

6. He knows where the riches 6. The stones of it are the place of Saphires:
and it has dust of gold.
thereof are; as precious stones and gold, how to come by them, and where to
find them, the one among the quarries, the other among the dust and mold of
the earth.

7. He by his skill and industry, 7. There is a path which no foul knows,
and which the Vultures eye has not seen.
goes as low under ground for these things, as the fowls fly high; he makes
and finds out such ways in the earth, as the most piercing sighted, or most
prey-seeking bird in all the air, 8. The Lions whelps have not trodden it, nor
the fierce Lion passed by it.
never found nor saw.

8. Neither did the most ranging or fierce prey-seeking beast ever tread.

9. He attempts and effects the hardest 9. He puts forth his hand upon the
rock; he overturneth the mountains by the roots.
matters, and does difficult things, for the very rocks escape not his hand,
neither can the mountains withstand him, but by art and industry he mineth
them, and works his will on both, to find the things he seeks for.

10. By his labor and skill he cuts 10. He cutteth out rivers among the
rocks, and his eye sees every precious thing.
out passages and soughs in the hard and stony rocks, to co^vey away the
subterranean torrents that would hinder his mining; No rich commodity that
nature yields will he let be lost for finding out, but brings all to light
through labor and skill, be it never so low hid in the bowels of the earth.

11. He devises ways to keep out 11. He binds the floods from
overflowing, and the thing that is hid, brings he forth to light.
the floods which are caused by excess of rain, and naturally seeks out the
lowest descent to run into; from falling into his pit, or interrupting his
work, and whatsoever nature has hid from him in her lowest depths and
concaves, he knows how to compass and get it, notwithstanding all manner of
difficulties.

12. Thus man is able to invent and 12. But where shall wisdom be found? and
where is the place of understanding?
find out ways by nature, art, and industry to discover and compass all
things though never so strange and difficult, if they be within the bounds of
nature. But now for supernatural and divine wisdom (which is the knowledge
of God, and his ways that are unsearchable and past finding out) who is he
that can by his art and skill show how to compass that, and find out the way
and means to get this understanding?

13. Herein man is a fool, though 13. Man knows not the price thereof;
neither is it found in the land of the living.
otherways never so wise, he neither has what to bid for it, nor knows how
to come by it; for it is of higher value, and harder to be compassed than the
preciousest things of the world, being no where within the bounds of nature,
nor within the work of creation to be had; for it is no earthly, but a heavenly
thing, hid in God.

14. If you dig to the very center of 14. The depth says, It is not in me: and
the sea says, It is not with me.
the earth to find it out, you shall lose your labor, or if you dive to the
bottom of the sea, you are never the near; for neither sea nor land contain
it.

15. Neither can it be bought at any 15. It cannot be gotten for gold, neither
shall silver be weighed for the price thereof.
rate, God will not merchandise it to man for gold nor silver.

16. Nothing that can be named 16. It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir,
with the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire.
comes near the worth of it, the finest gold nor richest stones.

17. There is no degree of comparison 17. The Gold and the Crystal cannot
equal it: and the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold:
between it, and whatsoever you can imagine besides, Gold nor Crystal, nor
ought else can equal it, and therefore God, from whom only we must have it,
will not give it for any thing we can give for it, not for the finest gold,
were there never so much offered him.

18. It Is in vain to tender the rarest 18. No mention shall be made of Coral,
or of Pearls: for the price of wisdom is above Rubies.
or richest things in all the world for it, Coral, or Pearl; for it is
infinitely beyond Rubies or the rarest and most unvaluable things of all the
earth.

19. Be they never so far fetched, 19. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal
it, neither shall it be valued with pure gold.
or never so much worth, as the Ethiopian Topaz, and the gold of Ophir.

20. So that I say then, How, or 20. Whence then comes wisdom? and where is
the place of understanding?
where is it possible for man to compass this transcendent wisdom and
understanding, which yet you would seem to have?

21. Seeing it is not as other things 21. Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all
living, and kept close from the fowls of the air.
are, within the compass of natural reason, nor by any natural means of art
and industry to be attained. Nature is an utter stranger to it, it is hid from
the knowledge of all creatures, high or low, one or other.

22. The most hidden and secret 22. Destruction and death say, We have heard
the fame thereof with our ears.
things, the grave and hell, though this wisdom be in them, and they be
ordered by it, yet as deep as they are, it is deeper than they, so that they
give not bounds unto it, nor can teach us the way to know it. 23. God
understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof.


23. God only knows the way of his own supernatural wisdom, he has
reserved it to himself, and with him only it remains.

24. For it is he, who alone by his 24. For he looks to the ends of the
earth, and sees under the whole heaven.
own wisdom orders and disposes all things at his pleasure, every where
throughout the whole Universe.

25. Weighing forth that proportion 25. To make the weight for the winds, and
he weighs the waters by measure.
of winds according to his purpose, to blow where and when he pleases; and
likewise sending forth what quantity of rain him likes here and there.

26. Before any thing had being, 26. When he made a decree for the rain, and
a way for the lightning of the thunder.
this wisdom was with him; for out of it he decreed the manner and way of the
rain, so also of the thunder and lightening.

27. Even then was he acquainted 27. Then did he see it, and declare it, he
prepared it, yea, and searched it out.
with it in himself, not in the creature, as we are, which he declared by
the creature; not learned from the creature, as we do, he decreed all things
by it, and brought them forth in their order and manner as they now appear
through it.

28. He has reserved to himself 28. And unto man he said. Behold, the fear
of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.
the wisdom of government, and has taught man another lesson, than to lesson
and prescribe him, to wit, to be obedient to him, to fear his Name, and keep
his holy Commandments, that is his duty, and therein is his wisdom and
understanding.

CHAP. XXIX.
1. JOB after that he had reproved 1. Moreover, Job continued his parable, and
said:
Bildad, justified himself, and convinced his friends of the unsearchable
ways of Gods wisdom, in the three foregoing Chapters; finding them all mute,
and no reply made upon him, thus further proceeds to speak in his own behalf,
by wishes, bewailings, and selfe-justifyings in these three Chapters following.

2. Oh (says he) that it were with 2. Oh, that I were as in months past, as
in the days when God preserved me.
me now as it was heretofore, when God smiled upon me, and upheld me in
prosperity and happiness.

3. When I was apparently blessed 3. When his candle shined upon my head, and
when by his light I walked through darkness.
of him, so that every one saw, and could say, that he exceedingly favored
me, when no cloud overshadowed me, but by the mercy of the Lord being free from
sorrow and affliction whereto this life is so subject, I for my part had all
happiness and good success attending me in stead thereof.

4. In my former days thus it was: 4. As I was in the days of my youth, when
the secret of God was upon my tabernacle.
The special and peculiar love of God to me was then acknowledged by all, and
seen in evident tokens of good will by his blessing and prospering me and all
that belonged unto me; O that it were so now, as it was then!

5. Before this evil befell me, when 5. When the Almighty was yet with me,
when my children were about me:
as God Almighty was extraordinarily with me in the ample manifestation of his
love unto me, and unremoved from me as now he is, when my children were all
alive, and were great comforts unto me.

6. When I had all manner of plenty, 6. When I washed my steps with butter, and
the rock powered me out rivers of oil:
abounding in every good thing, and when as there was nothing but by the will
of God, it was blessed and made serviceable to me, and conduced to enrich me.

7. When I went honorably attended 7. When I went out to the gate, through the
city, when I prepared my seat in the street.
to the place of judicature, having many spectatours; and had the seat of
justice set up, and made ready for me in the place of concourse.

8. When men of all ages and degrees 8. The young men saw me, and hid
themselves: and the aged arose, and stood up.
reverenced me; for the young men knowing my wisdom, and seeing my grave
deportment, would in a respectfull distance, absent themselves from my
presence, as awed with it, and fearing the censure of my wisdom and gravity,
the aged also had me in such esteem, that they would perform that respect to
me which was due to them.

9. My wisdom and my person was 9. The Princes refrained talking, and laid
their hand on their mouth.
had in such account, as that the very chief and prime of all the Princes of
the people would refrain to speak before me in reverence of me.

10. The Noble men were so awed 10. The Nobles held their peace, and their
tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.
with my wisdom, that they were afraid to speak in my presence.

11. When ever I spoke, it was known 11. When the ear heard me, then it
blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me.
to be with such wisdom and integrity, that they that heard me, would bless
me, and bless God for me, and all men when they saw me, would give me the
praise thereof, and acknowledged me for my wise and upright carriage of things
amongst them to be a blessing to them.

12. For, because I righted the poor 12. Because I delivered the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him.
that complained of wrong, and befriended the fatherless in like sort, and was
ever a helper to the helpless person.

13. The affectionate prayer of many 13. The blessing of him that was ready to
perish came upon me: and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy.
a poor soul has been bestowed upon me, who being hopeless, and not
knowing which way to turn him, I have stuck to in his extremity, and kept him
from undoing: And the poor distressed widow, when she was wronged, I took her
part, and righted her upon her adversary, to the chearing and rejoicing of her
sad heart in her friendlesse and exposed condition.

14. It was my study and care in all 14. I put on righteousness, and it
clothed me: my judgment was as a robe and a diadem.
my ways to be righteous, unblameable, and just both before God and man, for
which God greatly blessed me, and men highly honored me.

15. I gave advice and counsel to 15. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I
to the lame.
the simple, and support to the weak and impotent.

16. I was a pitiful to the poor as 16. I was a father to the poor; and the
cause which I knew not, I searched out.
a father to his child, and as careful of them; so that they wanted not what
I could bestead them in; and the cause which to the poor man's disadvantage was
colored over with deceitful pleadings, I took pains in it to find out the
truth, that the poor might receive no wrong.

17. And I disappointed the wicked 17. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and
plucked the spoil out of his teeth.
man's covetous and cruel purposes, nor ever could I suffer his power to
prevail against the innocent, though it was never so great, but evermore
rescued the oppressed out of his malice and rapine.

18. In those days of my foresaid 18. Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and
I shall multiply my days as the sand.
prosperity, which God had so abundantly heaped upon me (to see therefore his
wonderful ways) I little thought I should have come to this estate, having
such abundance of all things, with Gods favor and mine own integrity to
secure me; I little thought, I say, I should ever have come to this, but hoped
that I should have died in peace and quiet, rich and honorable, after a long
life.

19. For I grew up, and increased 19. My root was spread out by the waters, and
the dew lay all night upon my branch.
wondrously in all manner of felicity, and the blessing of God continually
attended on me, and was with and upon every thing I did and all I had.

20. He increased mine honor daily, 20. My glory was fresh in me, and my bow
was renewed in my hand.
still supplying me with extraordinary and seasonable wisdom upon every
occasion, yea, and he increased my power also to execute my counsels.

21. Men longed to hear me deliver 21. Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and
kept silence at my counsel.
my mind in any matter, waiting for Wisdom and Justice to come from me, and
with silence diligently listened to mine advice and counsel.

22. Which when they had heard, 22. After my words they spoke not again, and
my speech dropped upon them.
they received it as an Oracle, without reply; my speech was precious, and like
dew drops, brought refreshing to their longing and expecting minds when it
fell from me.

23. The former, nay, the later rain, 23. And they waited for me, as for the
rain, and they opened their mouth wide, as for the later rain.
after the Summers heat, is not more thirsted for, and gaped after of the
chawned earth, than my judgment and advice was till I gave it.

24. If I by my smiles gave any intimation 24. If I laughed on them, they
believed it not, and the light of my countenance they cast not down.
of my suspicion of any report or business, it was presently distrusted and
dissented from of all the rest; and on the oath hand, my least countenance or
show of approbation to any cause, was observed of others as a rule to go by.

25. In those days I was the only 25. I chose out their way, and sat chief,
and dwelt as a King in the army; as one that comfort the mourners.
man in all matters, chosen by consent of all to be the Prolocutor, and
advanced to the first place in all assemblies and places of Judicature, and had
my house resorted to like a Kings Court in an army for advice, and dispatch of
business; yea, I was flocked unto from far and near, as a man of a
thousand, that is known to be able to administer words of consolation to
mournful and drooping spirits, is wont to be.

CHAP. XXX.
1. THus it was with me heretofore: 1, But now, they that are younger than I,
have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the
dogs of my flock.
whilst I prospered, I was had in honor, and esteem of all men, but now that
God has turned the scales, and cast me into affliction, all men (to see how
variable their judgments are without reason) have me in contempt, yea, even
those that are younger than I, who by all laws of God and nature, owe me
respect for mine age sake, and which heretofore stood in awe of me, do now
scorn me, whose fathers were beggarly shackrags and base conditioned
rascals, whom I scorned to employ in the meanest office I had; for I had none
bad enough for such base companions, who were of such conditions that for my
part, I valued my very shepherds curs beyond them.

2. Men, that neither I, nor any man 2. Yea, whereto might the strength of
their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished?
else, could make use of; for they were never good for any thing, but had
wasted out their whole time unprofitably in idleness and lewd living.

3. Such as through their base pranks, 3. For want and famine they were
solitary: flying into the wilderness in former time desolate and waste?
and vile conditions, durst not appear in open view, but were driven to such
straits, that they have not known which way to turn them, nor what course to
take to get a belly full of meat; for heretofore, when it was otherways with
me than now it is, they were glad for fear of me, to take their heels, and
fly far enough off, into remote and unfrequented places, and there to lurk
where I could not light on them.

4. Who, to avoid me, have been 4. Who cut up Mallows by the bushes, and
Juniper roots for their meat.
feign to live in a most penurious beggarly manner, feeding on nothing but
Mallows and Juniper roots, and such like things in the time of their
banishment.

5. Men of such vile conditions, that 5. They were driven forth from among men,
(they cried after them as after a thief.)
not I only, but no man else could abide them, they were never thought worthy
to live in any civil society, but were outlawed of all men, and hated as if
they had been the arrantest thieves in the world.

6. So as that they were forced for 6. To dwell in the clifts of the valleys,
in caves of the earth, and in the rocks.
fear and shame, to dwell in remote obscure places, and durst not show their
heads:

7. But lived like wild Asses, having 7. Among the bushes they brayed, under
the nettles they were gathered together.
no company but themselves, and their hiding place was among bushes and
nettles, where they hoped no body could find them, or would come to seek them.

8. They were children of most wicked 8. They were children of fools, yea,
child en of base men: they were viler than the earth.
and despicable men, such as were not thought worthy to go upon the ground.

9. And now these very fellows stick 9. And now am I their song, yea, I am
their byword.
not to come out of their holes, and to show their faces in affront of me, and
to triumph over me with scornful Balads and by-words.

10. They abhor, and disdainfully 10. They abhor me, they fly far from
me, and spare not to spit in my face.
keep a loofe of me, as scorning to come near; they beard and affront me in
the vilest manner that can be imagined.

11. Because the Lord has brought 11. Because he has loosed my cord, and
afflicted me, they have also let loose the bridle before me.
me low, and bereaved me of that power and honor which I formerly enjoyed, and
wherewith I held them straightly under; therefore they now take the liberty and
opportunity to despise me, and in an unbridled manner without fear, shame, or
manners, offer me abuse, and let loose the reins of all disrespect and
contempt upon me.

12. A rowt of lawless youngsters 12. Upon my right hand rise the youth, they
push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their destruction.
that could never abide me; for because I was ever most severe against them,
have rebelliously assaulted me, and by strong hand robbed me of all my worldly
substance and support at once, utterly disabling me of all power to right or
help my self, and have fully compassed my ruin, which they have long wished
and intended to me, and have blocked up every door of hope and possibility of
better.

13. They hated my courses, and 13. They mar my path, they set forward my
calamity, they have no helper.
could not away with my ways, and therefore their desire was to overthrow both
me and them, and to this end they forwarded my destruction all that ever they
could possible: They needed none to animate or put them on to so mischievous a
business.

14. For they were forward enough 14. They came upon me as a wide breaking in
of waters: in the desolation they rolled themselves upon me.
to it of themselves, rushing in upon me with all their violence at once, and
slacking no time, but fell pell mell upon all that ever I had, adding one
mischief to another, so fast as ever they could act it, when they saw
opportunity and the breach once made.

15. All manner of formidable evils 15. Terrors are turned upon me: they
pursue my soul as the wind: and my welfare passes away as a cloud.
have light upon me, they have suddenly and vehemently surprised me, to the
great affrighting and amazing of my soul, when as all my welfare is thus
vanished in a moment.

16. In so much as my soul and 16. And now my soul is poured out upon me;
the days of affliction have taken hold upon me.
spirit is quite wasted and spent with sorrow, my afflictions have so sore
oppressed me.

17. Besides the loss of my estate, 17. My bones are pierced in me in the
nightseason; and my finewes take no rest.
my bodily pain is so great also, that my very bones and sinews which should
strengthen me, can themselves gather no strength through pain and restlesnesse
in my very bed.

18. By the extremity of my disease, 18. By the great force of my disease, is
my garment changed: it binds me about as the collar of my coat.
and by the matter that it forces outward in boiles and sores, the issuings
whereof my clothes soake in, it comes to pass they are utterly stained and
spoiled, and so stiffened with that congealed matter, as that they which once
sat loose and easy to my body, are all over now as hard and strait upon me as
my collar.

19. God has, as it were, trampled 19. He has cast me into the mire, and I am
become like dust and ashes.
me to dirt, and made me like an heap of dust and ashes.

20. And furthermore, in all this 20. I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear
me; I stand up, and thou regardest me not.
extremity I cry to God, and can get no answer nor relief; I present my self
before him in prayer, and offer my self to his view, to see if such a pitiful
spectacle and suppliant, can move any thing with him, but it availes me nothing.

21. Thou have not dealt so well with 21. Thou art become cruel to me: with
thy strong hand thou opposest thy self against me.
me heretofore, but now thou dealest as ill; thy infinite goodness seems to
be turned into infinite severity and hard-hearted cruelty; for one would think
that with all the maine force of thy mighty power thou opposest thy self
against me, so as that thou could not use me worse than thou do.

22. As the whirlepust lifts up the 22. Thou liftest me up to the wind: thou
causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my substance.
dust, and carries it far away; so have thou as with a sudden blast,
translated me out of all health and happiness, that the earth and this life
can afford, and have separated me as such an infinite distance from them, that I
am sure we can never meet again; for my flesh is already falling asunder
peacemeale, and turning to dust, as if it were in the grave.

23. And this thou do, because I 23. For I know that thou will bring me to
death, and to the house appointed for all living.
know thou art purposed utterly to make an end of me, and by afflictions to
bring me to the grave, whither all men living must come sooner or later, one
way or other, as it pleases thee.

24. Howbeit I am sure of this, That 24. How be it he will not stretch out his
hand to the grave, though they cry in his destruction.
the Lord will not trouble me here, but that there I shall have rest, both I
and others that are innocent like my self, whom yet here he is pleased to
exercise under affliction, and to make groan under heavy pressures.

25. I did not carry my self toward 25. Did not I weep for him that was in
trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor?
other men, as other men carry themselves toward me, and therefore I hoped for
better. I am sure I wept for them that were in trouble, and my soul had a
fellow-feeling of the poor man's misery that at any time befell him.

26. And now that I ought to have 26. When I looked for good, then evil came
unto me: and when I waited for light, there came darkness.
been so dealt withal by others, it is nothing so, but whereas I expected and
hoped to have found some pity, I find none; and in stead of that comfort I
hoped to have received from my friends and companions, I can find nothing but
discomfort.

27. With most compassionate sympathy 27. My bowels boiled and rested not: the
days of affliction prevented me:
did my bowels earne over the afflicted, so that I could have no quiet in my
self, for grieving and taking thought for them, I was seldom or never without
sorrow for some one or others affliction.

28. Such was my fellow-feeling, 28. I went mourning without the Sun; I stood
up, and I cried in the congregation.
and my heart took on so sore for them, that nothing could comfort me, me
thought the Sun shone not warm upon me the whilst: yea, so sensible was I of
their pressures, that I could not contain my self, but made their cases
known in an open and pitiful manner to other men, to raise them more friends,
and to move others also as well as my self to pity and pray for them.

29. But on the contrary, I am unpitied 29. I am a brother to Dragons, and a
companion to Owls.
and forsaken of all men, a solitary and forlorn man in these my miseries.

30. These things make me in a lamentable 30. My skin is black upon me, and my
bones are burnt with heat.
state, so that my skin with sorrow and anguish, is quite changed from white to
black, and my bones are, as it were, consumed with inward torment of soul.

31. Every thing increases sorrow, 31. My harp also is turned to mourning,
and my organ into the voice of them that weep.
nothing in the world affords me any comfort, so that all my musical
instruments have quite changed their tune, and now there is nothing but woe and
lamentation heard from me.

CHAP. XXXI.
1. BUt however it has pleased 1. I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then
should I think upon a maid?
God to deal with me, or what ever the world thinks of me, I am sure that I
have walked strictly with God, and have given mine heart to him in all points,
with full purpose to order all my ways with self-denial according to his
will; as to instance first in the most flesh-pleasing lust of carnal
concupiscence. I made a covenant with mine eyes touching it, never to look
upon a maid unlawfully to lust after her, and set a strict watch over them
accordingly, to prevent their sudden surprisall and inconsiderate glances; and
like as I watched mine eyes without; so upon the same reason, because I would
not offend God, did I also watch my thoughts within, that they entertained no
Iustfull speculations, thus taking care, and using all diligence to approve my
self every way upright to God, both within and without.

2. For I knew, and well considered 2. For what portion of God is there from
above? and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high?
the reward of a sinful man and an hypocrite that either lived loosely, or
carried it cunningly, how that to such a man, God, who from above sees all
things here below would afford no grace nor favor;

3. But contrarily has in his just 3, Is not destruction to the wicked? and a
strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?
decree appointed destruction for such, and his fearful indignation severely
to light upon them.

4. I evermore set the Lord before 4. Does not he see my ways, and count all
my steps?
mine eyes as seeing all my ways, and observing my paths, who I know, knows
them well enough.

5. And therefore I appeal to him, 5. If I have walked with vanity, or if my
foot has hasted to deceit;
whether I have walked in any vain way or sinful course, or if I have
delighted or desired to do wrong to any.

6. I desire with all my heart that 6. Let me be weighed in an even balance,
that God may know mine integrity.
God would take my judgment into his own hands, where I am sure I should have
right done me; for I know his eyes cannot be so blinded with mine afflictions
(though men's are) but that for all them he will be able impartially to see and
know me to be upright.

7. For my part I desire no favor, 7. If my step has turned out of the way,
and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot has cleaved to my hands:
if he find me not so, if he find that I have (as is said of me) stepped aside
to do wickedly, or that I have willingly with consent of heart, suffered mine
eyes to break their bounds in lust or courting, or that my hands have been
guilty of receiving any bribe to the dishonor of my function, and blemish of
mine integrity:

8. Then let God lay what punishment 8. Then let me sow, and let another eat;
yea, let my offspring be rooted out.
he will upon me, let nothing be blessed that I put my hands unto, but let me
plow and sow and take much pains for increase to no purpose, let others reap
the profit from me; yea, let him root me from off the earth, so that no one of
all mine offspring remain thereon to uphold my name.

9. If I have suffered mine heart to 9. If mine heart has been deceived by a
woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbors door:
be seduced from mine own wife by any other woman, or if I have ever wronged
any one in that kind:

10. Then let me be so dealt withal, 10. Then let my wife grind unto another,
and let others bow down upon her.
as is but just and equal; let my wife break her bond of duty to me, and
subject her self to another, and let her be adulterously prostituted to other
men in like manner.

11. For this is a sin most notoriously 11. For this is an heinous crime,
yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges.
vile, and extremely odious to God, which shall not escape unpunished of him,
who has appointed it to be punished even by the civil Magistrate.

12. If I be guilty of this, I know 12. For it is a fire that consumes to
destruction, and would root out all mine increase.
very well what will come of it, That it shall certainly kindle the wrath of
God against me, to mine utter ruin and destruction.

13. Or if ever through pride or 13. If I did despise the cause of my
manservant, or of my maidservant, when they contended with me:
passion I was wont by strong hand to bear down, or slight the righteous
cause and just pleadings of those that were my servants, man or maid, when in
any business they desired me to hear them clear themselves.

14. For I had this humbling consideration 14. What then shall I do when God
rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him?
ever in my thoughts, which made me carry my self fittingly toward them: If I
reject and scorn mine inferiors, and stop mine ears against their humble
entreaties, and just defenses, how think I, shall I answer it to God, when he
questions me upon it? or how shall I speed with him, who is so infinitely
beyond me, when he takes up a controversy against me? how then shall I have my
prayers heard, or my answers and humble pleadings in mine own behalf find
acceptance, and take place with him?

15. And thus I further considered, 15. Did not he that made me in the womb,
make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb?
Did not the same God make him that made me, and caused us to be borne alike,
and so to be equal in nature, though in civil respects he has preferred me
before him.

16. If I have detained the poor 16. If I have withheld the poor from their
desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail:
man's pledge against his will, or have any way wronged him, either by delaying
to do him right, or by keeping him from his right, or have given cause to the
widow to weep and complain of me, either for doing her wrong my self, or
not righting her on others that wronged her.

17. Or if I have either basely or covetously, 17. Or have eaten my morsel my
self alone, and the fatherless has not eaten thereof.
unhospitably, or uncharitably been wont to devour my substance my self alone,
without imparting it with a free and bountiful mind to the fatherless, and
such as had need.

18. (For I have been ever a harbourer 18. (For from my youth he was brought
up with me, as with a father, and I have guided her from my mothers womb.)
and succourer of the distressed, and have always had a fatherly care to
provide for all such as I saw were helpless and in need, fatherless, or
widow.)

19. If I have seen any poor soul 19. If I have seen any perish for want of
clothing, or any poor without covering:
suffer through nakedness and want of clothing, or any poor man destitute of
necessaries to keep him warm:

20. And have not in pity and charity 20. If his loins have not blessed me,
and if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep:
supplied him, and accommodated him with clothing and all needful conveniences
out of the store that God has given me:

21. If I have taken advantage by 21 If I have lift up my hand against the
fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate:
my power and authority to wrong or oppress any fatherless or helpless one
in judgment, though if I would I could have been sure to have had it gone on
my side against them:

22. If these or any of these can justly 22. Then let mine arm fall from my
shoulderblade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.
be laid to my charge, then let the Lord mark me for such an one by some
notorious judgment, beyond any that he has laid upon me yet; Let mine arm
rot off, or to make it more remarkable, let it fall suddenly from my shoulder,
and be broken from the bone that does uphold it, to my utter disabling, as a
punishment of my sin, and token of my hypocrifie.

23. I am sure none of these can be 23. For destruction from God was a terror
to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure.
justly fathered upon me; for I always had the fear of God before mine eyes;
I knew how he hated and would punish such things, and therefore durst never be
guilty of any of them; his greatness and majesty awed me that I durst do no
such matters.

24. If I have been guilty of spiritual 24. If I have made gold my hope, or
have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence:
Idolatry, making gold my God, by reposing any hope in it to be happy by it, or
have built my faith and confidence of future subsistency and welfare in my
abundance of the choicest and chiefest riches:

25. If in a carnal security I have 25. If I rejoiced because my wealth was
great, and because mine hand had gotten much:
immoderately rejoiced in mine abundance of wealth, or as if because by mine
own wit and industry I had heaped up much:

26. If ever I beheld the Sun in 26. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or
the Moon walking in brightness:
his glory, or the Moon in her beauty, as do the Idolatrous heathen about me:

27. And have either secretly in my 27. And my heart has been secretly
enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand:
heart and affections been enticed to worship those excellent creatures in
stead of the Creator, and ascribe to them the honor and thanks of his
providence, as they do; or openly by such outward expressions as they use.

28. This also, could it be laid to my 28. This also were an iniquity to be
punished by the Judge: for I should have denied the God that is above.
charge, were worthy punishment from God; for it were no less than blasphemy
and Atheism, and so of due to be punished even by the Magistrate.

29. If I revengefully rejoiced at 29. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him
that hated me, or lift up my self when evil found him.
the destruction of mine enemy and him that hated me, or proudly trampled upon
him in his misery, which I have not.

30. (Neither have I given way to 30. (Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin,
by wishing a curse to his soul.)
my passion so much as to let my mouth break out sinfully to curse him, or to
wish him evil)

31. Yea, though I have been strongly 31. If the men of my tabernacle said not,
Oh that we had of his flesh I we cannot be satisfied.
pressed by others to revenge my self, who were near unto me, and had power
with me in other things, and who themselves, out of love and respect to me,
being impatient of mine injury, would feign have wrought my revenge, and
offered it, if I would have suffered them.

32. It Is well known, the stranger 32. The stranger did not lodge in the
street: but I opened my doors to the traveller.
did not lodge harbourlesse if I knew of it, but that I bid the wayfaring
weary traveller welcome to my house.

33. If I at any time have concealed 33. If I covered my transgression, as
Adam: by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom.
my sin from God, as did Adam, and as all men naturally are apt to do, by
excuse or extenuation, and have not humbly with selfe-judging confessed it to
him, but kept it unuttered in my bosom, as loath to leave it, or to be humbled
for it.

34. No, I did none of these, nor did 34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did
the contempt of families terrify me: that I kept silence, and went not out of
the door?
I ever, either for the fear of a violent and combined multitude, or of the
loss of friends and acquaintance, and their falling off from me, (though they
were of never so considerable quality and number) at any time keep within
doors, and hide my head, or hold my peace, but openly reproved sin, and
showed my self always in the behalf of the innocent with impartiality and
justice.

35. O that any one heard me that 35. O that one would hear me! behold, my
desi e is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary had
written a book.
could object any thing against me, nay, if I lie, I desire the Almighty would
tell me so, and that any, whomsoever he is, (for I except none) that can object
any thing against what I have said, would make his allegations against me, and
set down his accusations in writing; that I might read and know them, and so
might completely clear my self by my reply.

36. Surely I would not take it ill 36. Surely I would take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me.
at any man's hands whomsoever, but would think he did me a very great favor
in it, and would set choicely by it, nor should it daunt me, but encourage me,
for I should not doubt, but upon my reply, it would turn to my exceeding
honor; for mine innocence assures me the triumph and victory over any
adversary, or accusations in the world.

37. I would deal truly with him; 37. I would declare unto him the number of
my steps, as a Prince would I go near unto him.
for I would tell him all that ever I know by my self, and would relate unto
him the whole course of my life, nor would I shrink back, or flinch him one
jot, but would boldly encounter him, and make good my matter against him
whoever he were.

38. If my land blame me for unjust 38. If my land cry against me, or that the
furrows likewise thereof complain.
and cruel dealings toward them that plowed and husbanded it.

39. If I have reaped the benefit of 39. If I have eaten the fruits thereof
without money, or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life,
it through other men's labors without wages justly paid them, or have racked
my rents to the occupiers undoing.

40. Then let all my labor and seed 40. Let thistles grow in stead of Wheat,
and cockle in stead of Barley. The words of Job are ended.
be evermore lost; Let thistles grow in stead of Wheat, and cockle in stead of
Barley; let me have weeds for corn. The words of Job in expostulation with his
three friends are here ended.

CHAP. XXXII.
1. FOr these three foresaid men 1. So these three men ceased to answer Job,
because he was righteous in his own eyes.
seeing they could not prevail with Job to be otherways opinionated of
himself then as an upright and innocent man, gave over now at last to press
any more upon him.

2. Elihu the son of Barachel, who 2. Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the
son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of of Ram: against Job was his
wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather than God.
came of Buz, the son of Nahor, who was the brother of Abraham, having heard
all that had past between Job and his three friends was moved with indignation
against both him and them. Now the reason why he was angry with Job, was not
because he maintained his own integrity against his friends, but because he
over-eyed his own righteousness to the lessening of Gods, pleading it too
far (not only against his friends, but) even to God him self in the way of
expostulation, and therewith questioning his righteousness in so dealing with
him, in stead of acknowledging it, and admiring his ways.

3. And the reason why he was also 3. Also against his three friends was his
wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
angry with Jobs three friends, was, because they could not directly tax Job,
nor convincingly prove against him, that which all this while upon a bare
surmise they had accused him of, namely, of being an hypocrite and and wicked
man.

4. Now Elihu (though with child 4. How Elihu had waited till Job had spoken,
because they were elder than he.
to speak) yet had modestly bridled his desire till Job had fully ended his
last and long reply, nor had he ever offered to interrupt the discourse of
Jobs three friends in all this time, or put himself in amongst them; for being
all his Elders, he gave them precedence of speech.

5. But when he had heard out Job, 5. When Elihu saw that there was no answer
in the mouth of these threemen, then his wrath was kindled.
and saw that those three men were gravelled, and that for all that they had
said against him, they were now at last (for want of clear conviction) feign
to leave him as they found him, to wit, a righteous man, and innocent of the
hypocrisy and crimes they laid to his charge. He hereupon was provoked to
utter his mind.

6. And thus at last, Elihu the son 6. And Elihu the son of Barachel the
Buzite, answered, and said, I am young, and ye are very old, wherefore I was
afraid, and durst not show you mine opinion.
of the a foresaid Barachel the Buzite put forth himself to speak as
follows: I am conscious to my self of my youth, together with the weaknesses
accompanying it, and of your precedencie of age, and the advantages which
usually attend it, which did awe me from speaking all this while, so that I
durst not show mine opinion in so weighty a business, nor before such grave
personages, till that I had heard all that you could say.

7. For though my youthful desire 7. I said, days should speak, and
multitude of years should teach wisdom.
prompted me to speak, yet I checked it, and refrained my self, giving leave
(as was fitting) for those who were my ancients to speak first, who I thought
in all probability knew therefore best how wisely to instruct the erring.

8. But though age has odds of 8. But there is a spirit in man: and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding.
youth, yet one man as well as another has a spirit of understanding, (reason
and judgment) in him, whereby through supply of special inspiration from God
that can do all things, he may be able to know that which want of years
denies him.

9. Wisdom is the gift of God, and 9. Great men are not always wise: neither
do the aged understand judgment.
therefore those men always have it not that we think are the likeliest; for
we see great men, who have advantage of means and education, are not always
the wisest men, neither the aged that have advantage of time and experience,
have always proportionable understanding and judgment, but may, and do both
of them come short (at least in some things) of their inferiors.

10. My spirit therefore being inspired 10. Therefore I said, hearken to me, I
also will show mine opinion.
of God, and also stirred up by him to speak, and having noted your errors,
notwithstanding your ages, I am bold to take leave to challenge your
attentions, till I also give my judgment, and take my turn in this cause.

11. Know you all, that I have not 11. Behold, I waited for your words; I gave
ear to your reasons, whilst you searched out what to say.
slept the while I have been silent, but diligently waited for, and attended
to all you said; I seriously considered the reasons and arguments which fell
from you, which I perceived all this while to be the best you could invent to
evince your adversary.

12. Yea, I purposely hearkened to 12. Yea, I attended unto you: and behold,
there was none of you that convinced Job, or that answered his words:
you to have had some convincing reasons from you of that you accused Job, but
the truth is, (for so far I must take his part) there is not any one of you,
that has convincingly proved that you alleged against him, nor answered that
which he has said for himself.

13. God has given him the victory, 13. Lest ye should say, We have found
out Wisdom; God thrusts him down; not man.
that you might see the weakness of your argument, and not continue confident
in your erroneous maxim, as if it were an unerring truth. That Job must needs
be a wicked hypocrite, because God, who is just and all-seeing, and cannot do
wrong, nor mistake as man may, does afflict him.

14. Now, as hitherto I have given 14. Now, he has not directed his words
against me; neither will I answer him with your speeches.
Job no cause by siding with you to say any thing against me, so neither will I
now do it; for I utterly dislike your course, and therefore will neither take
up your Theme against him to condemn him for an hypocrite, nor use your
argument to prove it, because of Gods afflicting him; for I hold it a mere
Sophisme.

15. They that should have spoken 15. They were amazed, they answered no more;
they left off speaking.
to Jobs reply, fell to wondering at him in stead of convincing him with further
and better arguments; for indeed, having no more to say, they were forced to
give over their feeble reasoning.

16. So that when I had waited for 16. When I had waited, (for they spoke not,
but stood still and answered no more.)
their answer as at other times, but heard none from them (for they were all
silent and made no reply.)

17. I was resolved hereupon to take 17. I said, I will answer also my part, I
also will show mine opinion.
the matter in hand, to answer Job my self, and to give mine opinion in the
business.

18. For I have much to say, and 18. For I am full of matter, the spirit within
me constrains me.
many reasons to urge against him in Gods behalf, and my mind stands
vehemently to utter them.

19. Yea, I cannot hold, I even swell 19. Behold, my belly is as wine which
has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottels.
with desire to speak my mind, that Job may be humbled, and God glorified.

20. I must needs therefore speak 20. I will speak, that I may be refreshed:
I will open my lips and answer.
to ease my spirit, yea, I both must, and will make answer for God.

21. In whose business, let it not 21. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's
person, neither let me give flattering titles unto man.
be expected from me to spare any man's fault out of respect to his person or
condition, nor to sooth you up in your errors and mistakes, with fair words,
and flattering encomiums.

22. For I am not skilled in the way 22. For I know not to give flattering
titles, in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away.
of flattery, nor durst I use it, if I were, for in so doing, I know I should
provoke the omniscient God that made me, and who hates such things, to be
avenged on me with speedy destruction.

CHAP. XXXIII.
1. WHerefore, Job, I pray thee, 1. Wherefore Job, I pray thee, hear my
speeches, and hearken to my words.
give good heed to what I shall say, and let it not be tedious to thee, but
conceive of it as coming from one that wishes thee well, and have the patience
to hear me out.

2. Thou see I have not been forward 2. Behold, now I have opened my mouth,
my tongue has spoken in my mouth.
to speak, but have waited till now that all have done, which I take to be a
fit time for me to begin, having heard all that has been said on both sides,
and seriously weighed them, which makes me both the abler and bolder now to
speak my mind.

3. And beforehand, I assure thee 3. My words shall be of the uprightness of
my heart; and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly.
this, which also I would have thee credit, that I will speak nothing out of
passion or partiality, as thou conceivest others to have done, but what I say
shall come from an honest heart, nor will I obtrude mine own conjectures and
surmises for doctrinall truths upon thee, as my forerunners have, but I will
utter demonstrative things.

4. Thou have wished for one like 4. The spirit of God has made me, and the
breath of the Almighty has given me life.
thy self in Gods stead, to dispute the matter with thee, why, know, that I am
he. I am a creature as thou art, neither better nor worse, but in all points
the same with thy self, made by the finger of God as thou art, and have my
life from him as thou have.

5. Therefore now make good thy 5. If thou can answer me, set thy words in
order before me, stand up.
challenge, and if thou can, spare not to answer to that which I shall say;
for thou may boldly speak thy mind, there is no cause of fear.

6. For, as I say, I am in Gods stead 6. Behold, I am according to thy wish in
Gods stead; I also am formed out of the clay.
according to thy desire to dispute the matter with thee, who am just such an
one as thou art, neither higher nor lower, but a pot by the hand of the Potter,
molded out of the same clay.

7. So that (as thou conditionedst) 7. Behold, my terror shall not make thee
afraid, neither shall mine hand be heavy upon thee.
thou see there is no cause of fear to deal with me, nor can I do thee any
hurt or oppress thee, so as to hinder thee from speaking thy mind fully and
freely.

8. I will lay nothing to thy charge, 8. Surely thou have spoken in mine
hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words, saying:
nor object any thing against thee, but what I have heard come from thee, yea,
out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee, for thus thou have presumptuously
spoken.

9. (Justifying thine own righteousness, 9. I am clean without
transgression, I am innocent; neither is there iniquity in me.
and questioning Gods) I have not sinned against God, but am innocent from
giving him any offense, neither can he lay any iniquity to my charge, or show
cause why he thus afflicts me.

10. So that he is over rigorous, purposely 10. Behold, he finds occasions
against me, he counts me for his enemy.
picking quarrels against me, and of his mere pleasure makes cruel war
upon me without just cause.

11. Using all manner of hardship 11. He puts my feet in the stocks, he
marketh all my paths.
toward me, keeping me continually fast locked in afflictions, watching me,
lest I should make an escape, and find some ease, which he will by no means
permit me to have.

12. Thus, or to this purpose, have 12. Behold, in this thou art not just: I
will answer thee, that God is greater than man.
thou charged God, thou can not deny it, and however thou art otherways
upright or righteous, I will not take upon me to judge, only in this I am
sure, and dare say thou art not justifiable, but worthy to be condemned of
sinful and presumptuous arrogance and pride of heart (for which God may and
does justly afflict thee) and thus I prove it, from the wonderful disparity
between God and man, betwixt whom there is no comparison, God infinitely
transcending him, and his capacity to judge.

13. And consequently, how insolent 13. Why do thou strive against him? for
he gives not account of any of his matters.
a thing is it for thee to cample and reason it thus unreverently with God as
thou have done, whose will in all things is a law most righteous, nor is he
bound to give any other reason but his will for any of his actions.

14. In all which, yet there is reason 14. For God speaks once, yea twice,
yet man perceives it not.
and a gracious meaning too, if thou knew it; for God many times, and diverse
ways solicits and admonishes man (as now he does thee) if man would, and
could understand him, which partly through the pride and security, and partly
through the dullness of his heart he does not.

15. Out of which spiritual slumber, 15. In a dream, in a vision of the
night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbrings upon the bed.
God tries all ways to awaken men; for he teaches them by nightly
molestations, in dreams and visions, to the disturbance of their sleep and
rest, as thou complainest.

16. And this way he takes to instruct 16. Then he opens the ears of men,
and seals their instruction.
men, and remarkeably to set his home doctrine upon them.

17. Which is, to withdraw man 17. That he may withdraw man from his purpose,
and hide pride from man.
from cherishing and maintaining himself in his own selfe-valuing conceits,
derogatory to God, and to bring him to stoop to an humble and selfedenying
subjection to him, expunging pride, (which God corrects in thee.)

18. That so he may in mercy keep 18. He keeps back his soul from the pit,
and his life from perishing by the sword.
him from perishing for it, both in soul and body, temporally and eternally.

19. And further also, to work this 19. He is chastened also with pain upon
his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain.
cure, and purge this pride, he brings high-minded man into a woeful
condition, easelessely punishing him with tormenting pains, as he does thee,
yea, making every bone in his body (as many as they are) to ache with vehement
torture.

20. So that he may be forced 20. So that his life abhors bread, and his
soul dainty meat.
through extremity of anguish, neither to care to eat necessary nor pleasant
meat, but neglect all manner of sustenance.

21. Yea, he may be brought to that 21. His flesh is consumed away that it
cannot be seen, and his bones that were not seen, stick out.
pass and such a change wrought in him, as that his flesh which was wont to be
plump and smooth, may be utterly wasted to nothing (as thou complainest thine
is) and his bones, which before were comelily covered, may most deformedly and
ghastly stick out.

22. Yea, he may be at the very 22. His soul draws near unto the grave,
and his life to the destroyers.
point of death, ready to breath out his soul, and his life in continual
jeopardy by his deadly plagues.

23. Now, when God has brought 23. If there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness.
him to this pass, and he still continues blind, and none of all this will
make him perceive his error and Gods intention, if then besides this, God so
order the matter, as that in his gracious providence he further provide for his
instruction, and send as a special messenger (as he does me to thee) a man
faithful and able (which is a singular gift of God and very rare) to bring him
to a sight of his sin, and to set him upright in the sight of God by
repentance.

24. This soon alters the case; 24. Then he is gracious unto him, and says,
Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.
for hereupon God is presently appeased toward him, and graciously accepts him,
comfortably cheering his heart with an assured freedom from death and hell,
his sin upon his repentance being done away in the sight of God by the blood
of his Son which he sees accepted in his behalf.

25. And then, as before, through 25. His flesh shall be fresher than a
childs: he shall return to the days of his youth.
anguish of his spirit his body was consumed; so now, through the abundant
consolation thereof he grows revived, and becomes as fat and faire-liking as
ever he was in his life.

26. And whereas before all his 26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be
favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy: for he will render
unto man his righteousness.
complainings and outcries stood him in no stead, now he shall humbly put up
his suit to God for favor, and shall find it: and whereas, if he did but
think of God, he was troubled; now being justified from his sin, he shall
have abundance of joy and peace in his soul toward God.

27. For God longs to be gracious 27. He looks upon men, and if any say, I
have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not:
to me, and waits that he may be so, looking when a man will see his sin
and confess it, how that he has gone out of the way, and justly suffers by it.

28. Such a man shall soon have his 28. He will deliver his soul from going
into the pit, and his life shall see the light.
pardon sealed, his fear banished, and his soul comforted; so that for
afterward he shall lead a happy life.

29. Lo, I have told thee what varieties 29. Lo, all these things works God;
oftentimes with man.
of ways, and diversity of means God is oftentimes feign to use toward such a
man as he means well to.

30. Aiming only at his good, that 30. To bring back his soul from the pit,
to be enlightened with the light of the living.
his sin unrepented of be not his death and destruction, but that in the sight
and feeling of Gods grace and favor toward him, he may lead a comfortable
and happy life.

31. Job, I pray thee consider well 31. Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me,
hold thy peace, and I will speak.
what I say, as that which nearly concerns thy good, let me yet further have
thine attention without interruption, for I have more to speak.

32. Not that I desire to stop thy 32. If thou have any thing to say, answer
me: speak, for I desire to justify thee.
mouth, if thou questionest any thing that I have said, and have any just
exception against it in thine own defense, if thou have, speak freely, for I
desire not to condemn thee in any thing wherein thou art justifiable; only thy
pride I tax, which is apparent.

33. But if so be thou can take no 33. If not, hearken unto me; hold thy
peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.
just exception, then do not needlessely interrupt me, but let me go on, and
I make no question but before I have done, I shall make thee understand thine
error, and Gods just dealing, and shall show thee the way to find mercy.

CHAP. XXXIV.
1. WHereupon Elihu goes on 1. Furthermore, Elihu answered and said:
further to question Job of, and to give answer to the words he spoke against
God, and appealing to his friends touching them, he said:

2. I pray you listen well to what I 2. Hear my words, O ye wise men, and
give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.
say, and according to your wisdoms judge of it; give ear to what I speak,
and let your understandings censure if it be not right.

3. For a judicious and considerate 3. For the ear tries words, as the mouth
tastes meat.
ear can as aptly judge of things that are spoken, as the palate of a man can
naturally distinguish and relish meats that are eaten.

4. Let us not plead against Job by 4. Let us choose to us judgment: let us
know among our selves what is good.
ungrounded conjectures, but let us state the controversy against him, so as
it is, that it may hold water; let us go knowingly to work according to
apparent truth, which is the likely way to prevail with him.

5. For Jobs miscarriage of himself 5. For Job has said, I am righteous: and
God has taken away my judgment.
is evident, and how presumptuously he has justified himself and accused God,
is known to us all, saying, I am righteous, and God does not do me right
accordingly, but deals too rigorously with me.

6. I should lie and wrong my self 6. Should I lie against my right? my wound
is incurable without transgression.
if I should not justify my righteousness, and maintain it, that this my so
grievous affliction is without just cause.

7. Did we ever hear the like? or 7. What man is like to Job, who drinks up
scorning like water?
was there ever any man that durst in this manner as he has done so mightily
upbraid and reproach God, as if he thirsted to despite him in the way of
revenge?

8. Who has so far forgot himself, 8. Which goes in company with the
workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked men.
as that his carriage under his afflictions is equal, and makes him like to
those that never had knowledge of God, but have ever lived in sin and
profaneness, yea, he walks just in their steps, and does as the wicked do
when God afflicts them.

9. Uttering impatient and presumptuous 9. For he has said, It profits a
man nothing, that he should delight himself with God.
speeches; for upon the matter he has said: That a man is never the better for
loving God, and walking with him, the whilst he justifies his own
righteousness, and taxes God of cruelty.

10. Therefore hearken to what I 10. Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of
understanding: far be it from God that he should do wickedness, and from the
Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.
plead against him, and in your wisedoms, judge if he be not to be blamed for
it; for, is it not a monstrous thing to fasten injustice upon God, and to dare
to lay iniquity to the charge of the Almighty, which is so utterly contrary to
his nature, and can by no means belong to him, but to us:

11. For it is both his covenant and 11. For the work of a man shall he render
unto him, and cause every man to find according to his ways.
custom, to render to men according to their works, and to judge them
according to their ways.

12. Which he is well able to make 12. Yea, surely God will not do wickedly,
neither will the Almighty pervert judgment.
appear, whatsoever we think to the contrary; for there is nothing more
certain and sure, than that God will not do wickedly, neither will the
Almighty, who is Judge of all the earth, deal unjustly.

13. Who has put him in office, or 13. Who has given him a charge over the
earth? or who has disposed the whole world?
charged him with the supervisourship of the earth? that he should be
questioned by him, and account to him, or who but himself (think we) is fit
to dispose of the world, and all things in it in wisdom and justice?

14. If God set his heart against 14 If he set his heart upon man, if he
gather unto himself his spirit and his breath;
man, and resolve either in his absolute sovereignty, or for punishment of his
sin to unmake him again, by taking from him that which at first he gave him
to live and subsist by, that is, his soul and spirit.

15. Then of necessity, mankind 15. All flesh shall perish together, and man
shall turn again unto dust.
must all at once perish, and be annihilated or turned into the matter he made
him of, that is, to dust, and this may he most justly do.

16. Now then Job, if thou have understanding 16. If now thou have
understanding, hear this; hearken to the voice of my words.
(as I know thou have) consider with thy self, how justly he may do thus by
thee, who art but one, seeing that of his good pleasure only it is, that all
subsist. And now yet further, hearken to what I shall say for thy confuting.

17. Shall he, whom thou would 17. Shall even he that hates right govern?
and will thou condemn him that is most just?
make to delight in doing wrong, be fit to govern and punish wrong-doers, and
will thou dare to condemn and tax him thus of injustice, that is even
righteousness it self, and the fountain whence all flows?

18. Thou know both how undecent 18. Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art
wicked? and to Princes, Ye are ungodly?
and dangerous it is, to tax an earthly King, and to say to him, Thou art
unrighteous, though he be so, or to say to Princes, that yet are but mortal
men, ye are unjust, though it be true.

19. How much more both dangerous 19. How much less to him that accepts not
the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor? for they
all are the work of his hands.
and undecent must it needs be, wrongfully to accuse God hereof, who abhorres
injustice and partiality, himself not accepting of any whomsoever for
personal respects, not the Prince above the Peasant, nor the rich more than
the poor; for it is his power that made them equal in nature, and his
providence that made them differ in condition.

20. God brings his plagues ofttimes, 20. In a moment shall they die, and the
people shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away: and the mighty shall be
taken away without hand.
and in many places suddenly, and never expostulates the matter, but in a trice
executes judgment upon all, and makes no difference, but sweepes away the
ignorant common people, at a time when they are most secure, and least fear
it, and the great ones also that was fearelesse of any humane strength, by a
way they never dreamed of.

21. For he is both able and exceeding 21. For his eyes are upon the ways of
man, and he sees all his goings.
careful to do justice, to that end diligently beholding every man's ways, so
that he cannot be mistaken in the execution of judgment, who overseeth and
knows all their courses better than themselves.

22. Yea, he sees them all, and that 22. There is no darkness, nor shadow of
death, wherein the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.
most clearly; for there is nothing can hide the most secretst sins of a
wicked man from the sight of God.

23. So that however it may seem 23. For he will not lay upon man more than
right; that he should enter into judgment with God.
to us, God has justice on his side; for he will punish no men wrongfully, nor
by any unjust dealing will he give him just cause to complain.

24. He punishes all sorts of men, 24. He shall break in pieces mighty men
without number, ( or as in the margin, without searching out) and set others in
their stead.
not sparing those of the highest rank, who yet are his Vicegerents on earth,
but proceeds against them, and that without any legal process and examination
of witnesses, but of his own accord, displaceth them, and places others in
their steads.

25. Wherefore we may be sure he 25. Therefore he knows their works, and he
overturneth them in the night, so that they are destroyed.
has just cause for what he does, and that it is for their deservings that on
a sudden unlooked for he comes so fiercely upon them without warning or
discussion of the cause, and quite destroys them.

26. Though, as I say, they be his 26. He strikes them as wicked men in the
open sight of others.
Vicegerents, and next to himself, yet he spares them not, but being wicked,
they fare alike with others that are so, his justice impartially plaguing them
in an exemplary manner.

27. And the cause, no doubt, is this, 27. Because they turned back from him,
and would not consider any of his ways.
for that in the pride of their hearts, which great men are subject to, they
refused obedience, and would not learn his ways to walk in them.

28. So that by their insolences they 28. So that they cause the cry of the
poor to come unto him, and he hears the cry of the afflicted.
have caused the poor man's cry to come up to God, and he shows it upon them
that he has heard the cry of the oppressed against them.

29. God is he that blesses and afflicts 29. When he gives quietness, who
then can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can behold him?
whether it be done against a Nation, or against a man only.
as he sees good, which no man is able by any reason or allegation, to prevent
or alter, and therefore should not dare to quarrel or question him; for when
he in grace gives happiness, who is there that can make unhappy? And on the
contrary, if he in his just displeasure withhold his favor, who then can
change his mind and countenance when he frowns, whether it be against more
or less, a single man, or a whole commonwealth?

30. Thus does he with great and 30. That the hypocrite reign not, lest the
people be ensnared.
absolute power, and in much justice overruled and order things, that so he may
control the insolent wicked man, and hinder his tyrannifing, and prevent the
peoples oppressing, which themselves cannot.

31. Surely then, if God be so just and 31. Surely it is meet to be said unto
God; I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more.
so powerful; it is a thing meet when we are under his afflicting hand, not
proudly to expostulate the matter with him upon our own innocence, but to
acknowledge him just, however absolute he seems in laying his chastisement
upon us and our selves to have deserved it, so as humbly to beg for pardon, and
promise amendment.

32. And if we know not our fault, 32. The which I see not, teach thou me; if I
have done iniquity, I will do no more.
yet assuredly to believe we are in fault, and therefore to entreat the Lord to
open our eyes, that we may see and know that by our selves, which has
offended him, and which he would have amended, with humble and hearty promise
of it.

33. Think thou it fit that the great 33. Should it be according to thy
mind? he will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose, and
not I: therefore speak what thou know.
God of heaven should be counseled by thee, in what measure he should correct,
or in what way he should amend sin, no, he will go his own way, and do as
he sees good, say thou what thou can, or however it please or displease
thee; and for mine own part, I dare not entertain a thought of prescribing
any manner of course to him in his proceedings, nor censure any of his doings:
therefore, if thou can acquit thy self of this crime and accusation which I
have laid to thy charge, as thou did of theirs, why, speak for thy self
what thou can say.

34. Nay, I appeal to any man of 34. Let men of understanding tell me, and
let a wiseman hearken unto me.
understanding if I speak not truth, and justly tax thee, yea, let any man
that hears me without prejudice, and is able to judge, tax me if I say
amiss.

35. When as I blame thee for thy 35. Job has spoken without knowledge, and
his words were without wisdom.
pride, which is undeniable in thy behavior and carriage toward God, which
has been very foolish and provoking, as thy speeches can witness.

36. My desire of God is, that Job 36. My desire is, that Job may be (or as in
the margin, my father let Job be) tried unto the end, because of his answers
for wicked men.
may be thoroughly convinced of his fault, and at last be brought upon his
knees, and made to eat his words, and to glorify the justice of God by humbly
confessing his sin, that so the mouths of wicked men may be stopped, to whom
he has given great advantage to blaspheme by his accusing God of hard and
unrighteous dealing.

37. For in stead of humbling himself, 37. For he adds rebellion unto his
sin, he clappeth his hands amongst us, and multiplieth his words against God.
and confessing his sin, for which he suffers, and asking pardon for it, he
has added rebellion thereunto, not sticking, as it were, to cry victoria
against God himself in his own justification, even to all our faces, and with
strange pertinacie to quarrel and upbraid God.

CHAP. XXXV.
1. ELihu yet prosecuted his reproof 1. Elihu spoke moreover, and said.
of Job, to procure his conviction, thus:

2. Have thou any plea for thy self, 2. Think thou this to be right, that
thou saidest, My righteousness is more than Gods?
or think thou that thou art not blameworthy, in uttering as aforesaid,
such a blasphemous speech as in effect thou have spoken, to wit, That thou art
more righteous than God?

3. For thou have said, that thou art 3. For thou saidest; What advantage will
it be unto thee, and, What profit shall I have if I be cleansed from my sin?
righteous, and that thou suffer undeservedly, being thy self uublameable
and innocent of any offense against God that might justly cause his
displeasure, and that it avails thee no more to be righteous, than if thou
were the greatest sinner in the world.

4. I tremble to hear such audaciousnesse: 4. I will answer thee and thy
companions with thee.
but I will answer thee, and all such men as dare in the pride of their hearts
venture to stout it thus, and argue the matter so with God in stead of humbling
themselves, and seeking to him in their afflictions.

5. Look thou up unto the heavens, 5. Look unto the heavens, and see, and
behold the clouds which are higher than thou.
view their height, and the clouds which are so far above thee, and think
with thy self, whether thou can add or diminish, make them better or worse.

6. And if not, then consider further 6. If thou sinnest, what do thou
against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him?
of what little advantage or disadvantage, thou must needs be unto God? who is
so far above them, that thou should thus capitulate the matter with him,
in stead of praying to him; as for example: Thy sins, what is he the worse for
them, more than a cloud over thy head, if thou should shoot an arrow at it,
remains not he the same in all points notwithstanding? yea, if thy
transgressions were never so many, how do, or can they any way harm him, who
is selfesufficient and independent.

7. And as it is with thy sins, so likewise 7. If thou be righteous, what
give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand?
is it with thy righteousness which thou bear thy self so much upon; what
benefit is that to God, or what adds it to him that thou art righteous, how
do thou make him beholden to thee by it, who needs nothing that is thine?

8. It is nothing but thy pride that 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou
art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man.
makes thee thus forget thy self, otherways thou must needs know, That God
is nothing bound to thee for any thing that is thine, but that as he is not the
worse for thy being wicked, but thy self, and such as thou art; so on the
other hand, neither is he the better for thy being righteous; but if thou, and
others like thy self do their duty, it is they that fare the better for it,
and not he: small reason therefore have thou to bear thy self thus high
toward God? prayer would better become thee, and more profit thee.

9. But multitude of pressures do 9. By reason of the multitude of
oppressions, they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm
of the mighty.
usually transport all manner of men, and make the oppressed cry and keep ado
when they suffer, against them they suffer under.

10. But few or none are so wise in 10. But none says, Where is God my Maker,
who gives songs in the night?
such a case, as soberly to recollect themselves, and in humility to draw nigh
to God in prayer, putting him in mind of his own gracious nature toward the
work of his hands to have mercy upon it, and in faith to seek to him for
redress and consolation, as to the only he that can relieve and glad the
heart in extremity and grief.

11, Has not God given us wherewithal 11. Who teaches us more than the
beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven.
to know how to carry our selves better in time of affliction, than the beasts
of the earth, and to be wiser than the fowls of the air, which can cry and
complain, when ought aileth them by instinct of nature, but reason and
religion should teach us a better lesson that know who hurts us, and who can
only heal us, to wit, humbly, and in faith to seek to him for release.

12. For want of which, men in 12. There they cry, (but none gives answer)
because of the pride of evil men.
pressures lie and cry like brute creatures, without either help or hope (and
so they may do long enough without answer from God, except they humbly seek
to him in faith) though they endure never so much violence and oppression.

13. For it is certain that God will 13. Surely God will not hear vanity,
neither will the Almighty regard it.
not show mercy, nor grant release for the natural and vain cries, and
outrages of men in extremity; however we poor men through self-love, and
humane pity, think of them, and are moved by them; yet the Almighty regards
them not, but looks for other fruit of affliction, as that they should seek
to him with humble and faithful prayer before he will hear to any purpose.

14. Wherefore although thou desperately 14. Although thou say, thou shall
not see him, yet judgment is before him, therefore trust thou in him.
give thy self for lost, never expecting to see God gracious to thee again,
(thus complaining, but not praying under thy burden) yet I know it, and dare
assure thee of it, that if thou would but take that course whereunto I
advise thee, that is, to humble thy self before him in prayer, thou should
find that he is graciously righteous to hear and answer thee, therefore trust
thou in him, and in faith and hope make thine addresses to him.

15. But now because thou go not 15. But now, because it is not so, he has
visited in his anger, yet he knows it not in great extremity:
this way to work, nor carriest thy self toward him as thou ought, he is
forced thus to entreat thee, and to increase his plagues upon thee, to manifest
his anger against thee for thy pride, which yet thou perceivest not (so blind
art thou) no not in the midst of all this thy great extremity.

16. For which cause, and till which 16. Therefore does Job open his mouth in
vain: he multiplieth words without knowledge.
time that thou humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, and seek unto
him, thou losest all thy labor, and breathest forth thy complaints in vain,
uttering a great many proud and passionate speeches ignorantly to no purpose,
saving to provoke God further against thee, whereas thou might bestow them
more to thine avail.

CHAP. XXXVI.
1. ELihu goes on still to vindicate 1. Elihu also proceeded, and said.
God, and to convince Job of his miscarriage toward him.

2. Suffer me (says he to Job) a while 2. Suffer me a little, and I will show
thee, that I have yet to speak on Gods behalf.
longer, and thou shall see that I have yet more to say in justification of God
against thy calumnies.

3. That which I say, shall not be 3. I will fetch my knowledge from afar,
and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
what first comes to hand, not what humane reason suggests, or what my weak
judgment opinionates to be true, but what by special inspiration and
enlightening from above I know to be so; whereby I will yet further disprove
thy presumptuous taxation, and make it good upon thee, that it cannot
otherways be, but that the maker of thee and me, and all mankind must needs
be righteous, and not liable to the censure of any creature in whatsoever he
does.

4. For I assure thee thus much, 4. For truly, my words shall not be false: he
that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.
That what I urge either for God or against thee, shall not be of mine own
coining, that so thou should tax it of error or mistake, but such as God
who cannot err in truth and judgment (by whose spirit and in whose stead I
speak unto thee) has inspired me with, for thy instruction and direction.

5. Consider therefore, how that 5. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not
any: he is mighty in strength and wisdom.
God is mighty, able to know and do all things aright, and need not through
weakness or want of power be driven to use any unrighteous and indirect means
to compass his ends; for he has power enough to effect them in a justifiable
way, and on the other hand, as mighty as he is, he affects not tyranny, nor
sets he so light by any man as to afflict him causelessely of mere pleasure,
no, but he is of power to order all things with justice and wisdom.

6. And this he does, as we frequently 6. He preserves not the life of the
wicked: but gives right to the poor.
and experimentally see by his carriage toward both sorts of men, bad and
good: For first, if men be wicked, and deserve punishment; God, for want of
power and understanding, lets them not go without it, but they feel and find
him both wise, able, and just to give them their demerits, and to right the
poor man's wrong.

7. And so in the next place, if men 7. He withdraws not his eyes from the
righteous: but with kings are they on the throne, yea, he does establish them
for ever, and they are exalted.
be righteous, God is just, not to forget such, nor is he deficient in power
to reward them, but prefers them to the highest top of honor, yea, and
upholds them in happiness that nothing can hinder, and in despite of all
malignant opposers, they are exalted by him.

8. And if it be otherways with them, 8. And if they be bound in fetters, and
be holden in cords of affliction.
if they be afflicted, and that pressures be upon them, yet it is not for want
of power, wisdom and justice in God.

9. But he shows them cause for it, 9. Then he shows them their work, and
their transgressions that they have exceeded.
some one sin or more wherein they have broken their bounds, and been too
blame, for which he justly afflicts them.

10. And as by his rod he teaches 10. He opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity.
them to know their sin, and his justice, so also by it he warns them of, and
learneth them their duty, which is not to cample, but humbly to yield obedience
to his command of turning from the iniquity for which they suffer.

11. And then, if they take out this 11. If they obey and serve him, they shall
spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.
lesson, and become obedient to him, the fruit of it will be, That they through
the mercy of God, shall be eased of their punishment, and shall spend the
remainder of their life, as their hearts can wish, in prosperity and pleasure.

12. But on the contrary, if they 12. But if they obey not, they shall perish
by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.
stubbornely refuse obedience, then Gods anger shall slay them, and they shall
miserably perish, through their own folly and ignorant presumption.

13. So that those that are thus disposed, 13. But the Hypocrites in heart
heap up wrath; they cry not when he binds them.
and will not convert, but go on to act the Hypocrites part, and affect pride
and perverseness, their portion is thereby to add wrath to wrath, for because
in humble penitency they sue not to him when he afflicts them:

14. Therefore they come to an 14. They die in youth, and their life is among
the unclean.
hasty and untimely end, whereas else they might prolong their days; their
life perishes in his anger, and they make without any difference a like end,
as does the most foul and filthy Sodomite, God esteeming no better of them,
than equal with the worst of sinners.

15. But on the other hand, the 15. He delivers the poor in his affliction,
and opens their ears in oppression.
poor in spirit that cries to him in affliction, them he delivers out of it,
and shows them the cause of their oppression, that they may remedy it, and be
restored.

16. Even thus would he have done 16. Even so would he have removed thee out of
the strait into a broad place, where there is no straitnes, and that which
should be set on thy table, should be full of fatness.
by thee, had thou done thus to him, ere this thou had been let out of the
stocks thou complainest so of, and enjoyed thy liberty to thy hearts desire,
and as much, if not more, prosperity and wealth than ever heretofore.

17. But thou have neglected to do 17. But thou have fulfilled the judgment
of the wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thee.
wisely, and gone a foolish way to work, as wicked men are wont to do,
repining, and not humbling thy self, and now see what comes of it, thou have
multiplied thy sorrows, and heaped Gods just indignation upon thee by it.

18. Now therefore, because God 18. Because there is wrath, beware, lest he
take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.
is a wrathful God, fear to persist, lest in his just anger he take thee
quite away, and then it will be too late to do what now thou may do; for
nothing can redeem thee out of that condition, or make thee alive again when
thou art dead.

19. If thou could bid never so much 19. Will he esteem thy riches? no, no
gold, nor all the forces of strength.
for it, it would be in vain, no riches could purchase or procure it, nor
could any power or strength enforce it.

20. Do not thou peevishly desire 20. Desire not the night, when people are
cut off in their place.
death, lest it come too soon, and it do by thee, as it does by many an one
whom it cuts off in judgment.

21. Take heed betime, affect not to 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity: for
this have thou chosen rather than affliction.
go on in sinful impatiencie, wherein thou have hitherto been too blame,
choosing rather to persevere in that sin, then to submit to the will of God
in bearing thy affliction humbly.

22. But consider well with thy self, 22. Behold, God exalts by his power,
who teaches like him?
who must restore thee, if ever thou be restored; Is it not God only, that
by his power can do it, and who can teach thee this better than himself has
done by keeping thee all this while (that thou have continued impatient) in an
helpless condition for want of humbling thy self to him, had thou eyes to
see it.

23. Think but how unwise thou 23. Who has enjoined him his way? or who can
say, Thou have wrought iniquity?
art in thy reasonings against him: For who has, or can prescribe God his way,
that he should be questionable for erring out of it, or what is he that can say
(if he speak understandingly) that any thing the Lord does is sinful and
unjust.

24. O remember that another part 24. Remember that thou magnify his work,
which men behold.
would better become thee to act then this! and that is, to have him in
reverence and fear for his works sake, that glorious structure of the
heavens, which all men every where behold and see.

25. For it is hid from no man's eyes, 25. Every man may see it, man may behold
it a far off.
but all may behold it, and should do well to consider the height and vast
distance of it from us.

26. O consider that God is infinite 26. Behold, God is great, and we know him
not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.
in greatness, and that we cannot fathom him, nor the wisdom and power
that is in his works, neither can we mortals that measure time by days and
years, conceive the dimensions of eternity which belongs only to him.

27. We, I say, cannot comprehend 27. For he makes small the drops of water:
they pour down rain according to the vapor thereof.
his power and wisdom; for he makes (we know not how) the drops of water which
fall from above to be such as they are, round and small, and causes the
heavens to send down rain in that manner, according to the proportion of
exaled vapors.

28. Which the clouds suck in, and 28. Which the clouds do drop, and distill
upon man abundantly.
resolving them into water, they send it forth in drops, distilling them
usefully in that manner (and not hurtfully by eruption) upon the earth in a
sufficient plentiful measure for man's sake.

29. Again, as thus, we cannot conceive 29. Also can any understand the
spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle?
the workmanship, that is in ingendring rain in the cloud, and the emission
thereof in drops, so neither can any under the skill that he shows in
spreading forth the clouds to that large extent, and disposing them so
universally throughout the whole heavens, as we see they are, which he does by
the winds, which he causes to blow above among them, whereof also we have but
little skill to judge.

30. Consider how he spreads his 30. Behold, he spreads his light upon it,
and covers the bottom of the sea.
light upon the face of the whole heavens, and also how in like manner he
spreads the waters in the vast and deep Ocean, so that no bottom can be seen
or felt.

31. I say, consider thou these, and 31. For by them judges he the people, he
gives meat in abundance.
fear, for by these he judges the heathen folk, that have no other knowledge
of him, but by the works of his hands, and condemns them for not improving
these to his glory, and much more will he do so by thee: He furthermore gives
us all the good creatures which we enjoy for our food and delight, in that
wonderful plenty as we see.

32. By assembling the clouds when 32. With clouds he covers the light, and
commands it not to shine, by the cloud that comes betwixt.
he pleases, he darkneth the sky, and obscures the sun, keeping away the
bright shining thereof from us, by his interpofing some one or more gloomie
clouds between us and it.

33. As often experience manifests, 33. The noise thereof shows concerning
it; the cattle also concerning the vapor.
and more especially, is then to be expected, when as a raine-aboding wind
gives foreknowledge of it, or when as the cattle do give their natural
presages of an approaching rain, which they know by instinct, being first
exhaled in a vapor from the earth, their proper Element.

CHAP. XXXVII.
1. BEsides these foresaid works of 1. At this also my heart trembles, and is
moved out of his place.
God which we come short of in our understanding and capacity; there is yet
one special one that sets him forth extraordinarily, which I never hear, nor
can so much as think of but my heart trembles, and is put out of it is bias at
the consideration of the wonderousnesse and terror of it.

2. Namely, the thunder, which I 2. Hear attentively the noise of his voice,
and the sound that goes out of his mouth.
would have thee considerately to weigh and hearken to, which is, as it were,
the very voice and speech of God, speaking his power and Majesty to man, and
commanding fear and reverence from him.

3. How wonderful is the noise 3. He directs it under the whole heaven, and
his lightening unto the ends of the earth.
thereof, which by his powerful dispensation, is heard both far and near;
and in like manner does he send forth his terrible lightenings far beyond our
discerning, even, as it were, from one end of the earth to the other.

4. And we see, how that so soon 4. After it a voice roareth; he thundereth
with the voice of his excellency, and he will not stay them when his voice is
heard.
as ever the lightening is over, presently the thunderclap ensues, and then
immediately upon the crack he powers forth the aforesaid drops of rain, in a
most vehement and impetuous manner, not gently distilling them, as at other
times; all which together, wonderfully set forth God to our amazement.

5. I cannot enough make mention 5. God thundereth marvellously with his voice,
great things does he, which we cannot comprehend.
of this terrible voice of God, which he so marvellously utters in the
thunder, besides which, other great and wonderful things he does, which we
are no more able to judge of and understand than this:

6. For it is only his power that 6. For he says to the snow, Be thou on the
earth; likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.
causes the snow to fall upon the earth in that quantity which it does, and
only by his appointment is it that it lies there till the time come that it
melt away: likewise by the same power and appointment it is, that we have
sometimes the small distilling Aprill-showers, and other sometimes the
tempestuous storms of rain, thrown out of a mighty hand, so differently
befall us.

7. By the snow lying upon the earth, 7. He seals up the hand of every man;
that all men may know his work.
and by the rainie weather, he hinders all men from going abroad about their
occasions as at other times, and makes them keep house, that so he may give
every man occasion to see and consider his all-disposing hand and providence in
things, who forces them from their imploiments, and on whom they are compelled
to wait, till they be set at liberty, to go about their businesses.

8. Thereby also he compells the 8. Then the beasts go into dens, and remain
in their places.
wild beasts to lie dormant in their dens, till he let them loose, and give
them a fit season to hunt their prey.

9. Out of the South-parts of the 9. Out of the South comes the whirlewind:
and cold out of the North.
world he has ordained the strongest winds to blow, and out of the North the
coldest.

10. By which winds sent of God, 10. By the breath of God, frost is given: and
the breadth of the waters is straightened.
to that end, it is that the frost befalls us, whereby the broad waters are
contracted and condensated into a lesser room.

11. Also by squeezing the rain out 11. Also by watering he wearieth the
thick cloud: he scatters his bright cloud.
of the cloud upon the earth, he utterly draws it dry, and consumes it quite
away to nothing, be it, or seem it never so thick and large; and with the
wind he blows the bright empty lightsome cloud to pieces, which he brought
together, and scatters it by piece-male hither and thither in the air.

12. And all that motion of the 12. And it is turned round about by his
counsels: that they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the face of the
world in the earth.
clouds which we see pass and repasse over our heads, is ordered his wisdom,
so that they are thereby directed to the end and use whereunto he has ordained
them, yea, wheresoever they are disposed throughout the whole heavens, it is in
relation to the earth beneath.

13. He sends them on his errand 13. He causes it to come, whether for
correction, or for his land, or for mercy.
whithersoever they go, and wheresoever they settle, for either they are sent
for correction and punishment to carry unseasonable and superfluous rain, or
else they are sent to fat and fruiten the land which he means well unto, or
else in time of drought they are sent in mercy to relieve them that cry unto
him.

14. Mark well these things, O Job, 14. Hearken unto this, O Job: stand still,
and consider the wondrous works of God.
let them not pass carelessely out of thy mind, but weight and consider all
and every the wondrous works of God.

15. And for thy humbling, call to 15. Do thou know when God disposed them,
and caused the light of his cloud to shine?
mind thy inequality and distance, with so great a God: Do thou know the
time which was from eternity, or wast thou called to counsel when he thus
decreed and disposed all things, and made the transparant clouds? which do not
darken the light as others do, but serve to reflect it upon us the brighter.

16. Do thou know how the great 16. Do thou know the ballancings of the
clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge.
and ponderous clouds come to hang in the air? Can thou fathom the depth of
that power and wisdom that is in these wondrous works of God? who is only
wise, yea, perfect in wisdom.

17. Can thou comprehend the 17. How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth
the earth by the South Wind?
power which he shows in heating the air, so that thou can not endure thy
clothes on thy back, when the season is, that he refreshes the earth with the
summers sun and the warm Southern winds, in stead of the cold nipping
Northern blasts?

18. Wast thou with him, or had 18. Have thou with him spread out the sky,
which is strong, and as a molten looking-glass?
thou any hand in spreading out the heaven over our heads? which is round of
form, and consequently of a most strong and perfect frame, and for it is matter
clear and transparent, like a polished brazen looking-glass.

19. Now thou have heard this of 19. Teach us what we shall say unto him; for
we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.
him, I appeal to thee; if any man know how to dispute or fault the actions of
such a God; for we cannot tell what to allege against him, because we cannot
see the depth of his reach and wisdom in things.

20. Methinks a man as I am, should 20. Shall it be told him that I speak? if
a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up.
fear to have it come to the ears of such a God, that he has been so
foole-hardy, as to open his mouth in such a way; for, if he should be disposed
to answer him (whatsoever he is that speaks) he would certainly be
confounded, and be made to sit down with sin and shame.

21. And now, the very true reason 21. And now men see not the bright light
that is in the clouds: but the wind passes and cleanses them.
of men's over-daring in this kind, is, because they take no notice of these
wonderful works of God, as of the shining and transparant substance whereof
he has framed some clouds, and made them helpful to the light; nor of his
skill in causing this, which is by ordaining the winds to refine them from
their black and watery mixture, and causing them to blow for that purpose.

22. And how he sends dry and 22. Fair weather comes out of the North: with
God is terrible Majesty.
frostie weather by the winds which blow out of the North, which scatter the
clouds, and purge the air: Did they, they would then understand that God is of
awful and terrible Majesty, not to be dealt withal in such a manner.

23. And indeed, he that is Almighty 23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find
him out: he is excellent in power and in judgment, and in plenty of justice;
he will not afflict.
(which God is) we must need think is too deep for us to fathom, and too
high for us to reach; for he is every way transcendent, excelling in power and
in wisdom, and abounding in justice in all that ever he does: He will not
causelessely afflict nor unjustly punish any man.

24. Therefore he looks that men 24. Men do therefore fear him: he
respects not any that are wise of heart.
should fear his rod, and be humbled under it, and not dispute his blows,
this is not the way to come off well with him, who will never show favor to
any man, that through the overweening pride of his own wisdom affects a way
of reasoning the matter with God, as thou do, Take heed therefore.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
1. ELihu being fallen upon the 1. Then the Lord answered Job out of the
whirlewind, and said:
right subject, but wanting Majesty to set it forth, so as to take impression
upon Job: Hereupon God takes the word out of his mouth, and himself takes Job
to task; for the appaling of whose high spirit, and the better making way for
his following discourse to take place, he makes his first onset in a
whirlewind, and thus bespeaks him with a terrifying voice:

2. Who is this whom I have overheard 2. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by
words without knowledge.
to miscarry himself in this manner? Is it Job? I had not thought it; that he
had been so unwise, or durst have been so bold as to cast aspersions upon my
wise and secret proceedings, with his weak reasonings, which faith only can
make him understand.

3. Thou that bravest it so erewhile, 3. Gird up now thy loins like a man; for
I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.
and gave me choice of weapon, now come on, let us see thy manhood, betake thy
self to thy ward; for I mean to answer thy challenge, and to enter the list,
against thee; only I will take the liberty thou have given me, I will oppose,
and thou shall answer, and judge when we have done, if man be fit to cope with
God, or to scan his actions.

4. Where Elihu left, there I Will begin: 4. Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the earth? declare, if thou have understanding.
Where wast thou, when I at first by my power and wisdom alone, without the
help of thee, or any, made the great vast body of the earth to hang upon it is
center? If thou can answer this, do; say man, had thou any hand in it, or
being at it?

5. Tell me, Who has measured 5. Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou
know? or who has stretched the line upon it?
it out in that circumference and diameter which it holds? Did thou? or,
know thou any besides my self that did it; or, who else has disposed it in
that form, and stretched it forth to those several quantities and proportions
of sea and land which it bears?

6. Or tell me if thou can, the way 6. Whereupon are the foundations thereof
fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof?
and manner how it is done: Thou know how a house is built of fit
materials, by laying the foundations thereof with choice stones, choicely
placed in the earth, and artificially agglutinated one to another. Now, let us
see if thy skill serve thee in like manner to tell how this great piece of
Architecture is framed, wherein, or whereon are the foundations of it laid,
which hangs like a ball in the air, or what skillful workman was there to
begin this work, or what materials was there to erect it, which at first was
framed by the mere will and wisdom of God out of nothing?

7. Before man had any being, not 7. When the morning stars sang together,
and all the sons of God shouted for joy.
being yet created, when as at the beginning, Those glorious and excelling
creatures, the first and best of all the works of mine hands, did so
unanimously rejoice; and that all those sons and heirs of heaven, the holy
Angels, were so exceedingly ravished to see me about to put forth my power,
and manifest my wisdom in such a manner, and in such works for my glories
sake.

8. Or tell me, What man, or whose 8. Or who shut up the sea with doors, when
it brake forth as if it had issued out of the womb?
power and skill was it, that brought the sea within compass, and placed it
within it is bounds, when as it (not having the restraint which now it has) so
universally at the first creation of it, with an unlimited violence, overspread
and whelmed the whole earth with such a total inundation and circumvolution;
which is the natural and proper course and motion of it; and from which it was
then as impossible to be restrained or circumscribed by any humane power, as it
is for a woman against nature to withstand her throws, and contain the fruit
of her womb, when the time of her delivery is at hand.

9. I mean, at the very first of all, 9. When I made the cloud the garment
thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it.
when it received it is being; and I had set it no other bounds as yet, but only
darkness, which (before light was made) like a cloud was upon, and covered all
the face of the deep, and when only thick darkness (there being then no
manner of light) surrounded it, as it surrounded the earth.

10. And then, when I, from whom 10. And brake up for it my decreed place, and
set bars and doors.
it had it is being, did also give it the restriction which now it has,
gathering it together by a perpetual and powerful decree into that place and
pit which now contains the Ocean, placing the sand and bancks for bounds and
limits.

11. And laid my commands upon 11. And said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no
further: and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.
it to abide there, and not to pass it is station, which restraint, though it
seem impatiently to bear by it is flowing, yet it cannot prevail or exceed it is
boundary, but ebbeth back again, nor can it with all it is swelling and
mountainous waves, though they toss themselves and roar, go onefoot further
then I have set it, but they vanish so soon as ever they come to their
appointed period.

12. If thou answerest me that these 12. Have thou commanded the morning since
thy days? and caused the dayspring to know his place?
things were all before thy time; then I ask thee, Have thou either lengthned,
or hastened the rising of the Sun at any time since thou wast borne? and have
thou ever caused the morning light in any one of those days thou have seen,
to spread it self to it is uttermost bounds which I have appointed it?

13. That so it may shine forth far 13. That it might take hold of the ends
of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it.
and near, to give light to the inhabitants of the earth, that by that means
those evildoers and night-birds (who hate the day light) might be affrighted
and driven from the face thereof by it is rising, into their dens of darkness.

14. By whose light and rise, the earth 14. It is turned as clay to the seal,
and they stand as a garment.
receives it is proper shape and impression in the sight of all men which it
lost in the dark, and all the several fruits, flowers, and various
workmanship of God in her produced creatures that grow thereupon appear as
the beautiful clothing thereof.

15. But the guilty consciences of 15. And from the wicked their light is
withholden, and the high arm shall be broken.
the wicked shall drive them into dark corners, like banished men; so that
they shall not enjoy the comfortable use and sight of those things which the
light affords; for this shall be the reward of them that rebelliously work
wickedness against God, their lives shall be miserable, and they shall be
deprived of the good that others do enjoy.

16. Have thou ever seen, or been 16. Have thou entered into the springs of
the sea? or have thou walked in the search of the depth?
at the bottom of the sea; or have thou with all thy skill and labor found
out how deep it is?

17. Have thou ever descended into, 17. Have the gates of death been opened
unto thee? or have thou seen the door of the shadow of death?
or seen the deep Abyss of the earth, where it is dark and uncomfortable as
hell, and where the dead only inhabit?

18. Have thou ever placed the 18. Have thou perceived the breadth of the
earth? declare if thou know it all?
breadth of the earth, tell me now thou that promisedst to reply, if thou
can give an exact account thereof?

19. Have thou traveled to the places 19. Where is the way where light
dwells? and as for darkness, where is the place thereof?
of the suns rising and setting, so as to know the place of residence for the
light, and to tell where darkness dwells.

20. That when thou see them 20. That thou should take it to the bound
thereof, and that thou should know the paths to the house thereof?
spread so wide in the air, and wander so far from home, thou may carry
them back, and direct them into their way.

21. Know thou the places of 21. Know thou it, because thou wast then
borne? or because the number of thy days be great?
light and darkness, either by virtue of thy then being, when they were first
created by me, or have thou gained this knowledge by long experience and much
study?

22. Wast thou ever in my storehouses 22. Have thou entered into the treasures
of the snow? or have thou seen the treasures of the hail?
of snow and hail, to see them where they are?

23. Which I create and keep up 23. Which I have reserved agaiust the time of
trouble.
above in my treasuries, till the time come that I think good to send them
down to execute my will in the punishment of men, and for to stand my friends
in stead against their enemies and mine in the day of battle.

24. Know thou how it comes to 24. By what way is the light parted, which
scatters the East Wind upon the earth?
pass that the lightning should so forcibly break out of the cloud in a
thunder storm, as even to break and interrupt the course of the strongest
wind, and suddenly turn and scatter it all abroad into the several corners of
the world.

25. Who is it, thou or I, that divides 25. Who has divided a watercourse for
the overflowing of waters? or a way for the lightning of thunder?
and sends the waterclouds (those great bottells of heaven) hither and thither,
to pour out their rain, and to cause inundations in this or that place, or
that directs the lightning which breaks forth of the thunder-cloud with such
swift violence, to go that way it takes, and do the thing it effects?

26. Causing it by such means to 26. To cause it to rain on the earth, where
no man is, on the wilderness, wherein there is no man?
rain, not only in places inhabited, for the use of men, but even on the
remotest parts of the world, where no man ever came, and in the vast
wilderness, where no man inhabits; (surely then it is not thee.)

27. Thereby to satisfy the desolate and 27. To satisfy the desolate and wast
ground, and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth.
wast places which no man makes use of, and to cause the grass and herb to
grow even there, as I at first decreed it for the use of the wildbeasts also
that inhabit there in stead of men.

28. These things are beyond thy 28. Hahe the rain a father? or who has
begotten the drops of the dew?
sphere, they are not ordinarily propagated according to thy understanding; for
what father has the rain, or who begets the drops of dew?

29. Or what woman can the ice 29. Out of whose womb came the ice, and the
hoary frost of heaven? who has gendred it?
call mother; and the hoary frost that comes down from heaven upon the earth,
by what man and woman is it begotten and conceaved?

30. The waters (thou see) are covered 30. The waters are hid as with a
stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.
with ice as if they were paved over with stone, and the deepest rivers become
passable, being frozen over.

31. Can thou alter the seasons of 31. Can thou bind the sweet influences
of Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion?
the year, by appointing either the Springtime to come later, by hindering
the coming of the seven stars, which are proper to that season, and the
distilling of their sweet influences: or can thou dissolve the Winter frosts,
accompanying the constellations of that season, and so expedite and shorten
that cold and comfortless quarter.

32. Can thou command those remote 32. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in
his season? or can thou guide Arcturus with his sons?
and hidden stars of the South to show themselves in their sommerseason, or
direct the Northern constellations to know their course, and to appear in
Autumn?

33. Know thou the regiment 33. Know thou the ordinances of heaven? can
thou set the dominion thereof in the earth?
which is held and exercised up above in the heavenly orbs, what order and
laws God has constituted for the motions and influences thereof; can thou
who live here below order and dispose them to execute their several uses and
operations on earth whereto I have appointed them?

34. Can thou command the 34. Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds,
that abundance of waters may cover thee?
clouds to do thee service, and to send down rain enough to serve thy turn
when thou have need?

35. Can thou send the swift flying 35. Can thou send lightnings that they
may go, and say unto thee, Here we are?
lightnings, and cause them go from one end of the heavens to another in an
instant, upon thy errand? can thou bring them to offer themselves to be at
thy command, as they are at mine?

36. Who is it that has made man 36. Who has put wisdom in the inward
parts? or who has given understanding to the heart?
a reasonable creature, and given him understanding? have thou made thy self
so?

37. Who with all his wisdom can 37. Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or
who can stay the bottels of heaven?
give a perfect account of those numberless clouds in the heavens, but I? Who
both made them, and disposes of them all, as many as they are, to their end
and uses; or who but I can restrain the rain, which is heavy of it self,
and intends downward, from falling out of the clouds?

38. When the ground has had it is 38. When the dust grows into hardness,
and the clods cleave fast together.
fill; so that the light dust is turned into lumps of earth, and that which was
tossed with every wind, is clodded and agglutinated by water into an heavy
substance.

39. Or, if thou can not skill of 39. Will thou hunt the prey for the Lions?
or fill the appetite of the young lions?
these things, because they are above thee; then will thou undertake to provide
food upon earth, where thou have thine abode, for the beasts and birds that
live thereupon; yea, for the most ravenous of them (which I do) as the Lion
and his hungry whelps.

40. Have thou given them the Art 40. When they couch in their dens, and
abide in the covert to lie in wait?
they use in catching their prey, with couchant and covert cunning to steal
upon, and suddenly surprise it?

41. Or, is it by thy or my providence, 41. Who provideth for the Raven his
food? when his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack of meat.
that the Ravens are provided for, and that the young ones being early forsaken
of the old, and wanting skill to shift for themselves, wandering here and there,
yet have their cries heard, which nature has taught them, to put up to God in
their necessity, and answered with supply of food?

CHAP. XXXIX.
1. Does thine eye of providence 1. Know thou the time when the wild Goats
of the rock bring forth? or can thou mark when the Hindes do calve?
over-looke and take care for the maintenance of each creature in it is kind
and species, reaches it even to wild Goats which are out of any man's dominion,
dwelling in unaccessible rocks, so that is it thou that make them conceive
and bring forth in their season; or do the Hindes either, do the like by
thine ordination and vigilance?

2. Have thou appointed them the 2. Can thou number the months that they
fulfill? or know thou the time when they bring forth?
time they shall go with young before they bring them forth, and when the time
is fulfilled, is it by, or of thee they do it?

3. Is it thou that have given them 3. They bow themselves, they bring forth
their young ones, they cast out their sorrows.
the instinct to know the instant of production, and as wild as they are,
consideratly to go about it in such a manner as may be most easefull to
themselves, and least hurtful to their offspring, by bowing their bodies the
better to strain themselves, and dilate the passage, so they do, and thereby
deliver themselves of their young by this their natural midwifery, and cast
out that in a moment which has been so long time burdensome to them.

4. And when their young ones are 4. Their young ones are in good liking, they
grow up with corn: they go forth and return not unto them.
brought forth, they appear in good plight, by natures nourishing and caring
for them in the mothers belly, and after that, they thrive and come on as well
as if they were fed with corn: They leave their dams betime, and yet by
natures instinct, shift well enough for themselves.

5. Who is it that has ordained 5. Who has sent out the wild ass free? or
who has loosed the bands of the wild Ass?
creatures as well wild as tame, who but I have naturally set the wild Ass
at liberty, and made him untameable to any man's yoke?

6. Appointing him the vast and desert 6. Whose house I have made the
wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings.
wilderness to inhabit in, where he rangeth without subjection or control of
any, and by my constitution chooses of his own instinct to abide and feed
most upon the very worst soil, whereas other creatures desire the best.

7. He knows no obedience to any, 7. He scorneth the multitude of the City,
neither regards he the crying of the driver.
but sets light by all men, scorning to be subjected by how many or
whomsoever, neither will he be ruled as other beasts, to go and come at the
command and voice of the driver.

8. He is not enclosed within hedges 8. The range of the mountains is his
pasture, and he searches after every green thing.
and pales like other cattle, but rangeth at large upon the high and great
mountains, where he feeds, and takes his liberty without restraint, to eat
what ever likes him.

9. Can thou get the Unicornes 9. Will the Unicorne be willing to serve thee?
or abide by thy crib?
good will to come under thy yoke, and do thy work? or can thou tame him
like an Ox, to be a domesticke beast, and at thy finding?

10. Can thou tether or geere him 10. Can thou bind the Unicorne with his
band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
like a horse, or will he be brought to drive or lead at Plough or Harrow?

11. Because he has strength enough 11. Will thou trust him because his
strength is great, or will thou leave thy labor to him?
to do thee service (yea, more than those which do) will thou therefore
conclude he must and shall?

12. Will thou trust to his gentleness 12. Will thou believe him that he will
bring home thy seed? and gather it into thy barn?
to bring home thy corn, and to in thy harvest in stead of thy Ox and Horse?
if thou do, thou will be deceived?

13. Gave thou the Peacock that 13. Gave thou the goodly wings unto the
Peacocks? or wings and feathers unto the Ostrich?
glorious show which he makes when his tail is spread abroad like the wings
of a bird in the air, or did thou bestow those beautiful feathers upon the
Ostrich?

14. Which differs from all other 14. Which leaves her eggs in the earth, and
warmeth them in the dust.
birds, for when she lays, she unnaturally abandoneth her eggs and exposes
them above ground, only covering them with a little sand or dust to cause them
keep their natural heat, in stead of hatching and hurkling them, and so
leaves them to receive production from the Sun.

15. Not heeding what may come 15. And forgets that the foot may crush them,
or that the wild beast may break them.
of them, by exposing them in that manner to the casual mishap either of man,
or beast.

16. And when they are brought 16 She is hardened against her young ones, as
though they were not hers: her labor is in vain without fear.
forth she is unnaturally strange to them, as though they belonged not to her
to provide for: and so through her own carelesnes runs hazard (but for me)
to lose all the labor which by natures providence she had taken in
ingendring, and laying them.

17. And why does she thus more 17. Because God has deprived her of wisdom,
neither has he imparted to her understanding.
then others? but because God who has given instinct of love and providence to
other creatures has denied, and not imparted it to her, as to them?

18. When she stretches up her 18 What time she lifts up her self on
high, she scorneth the Horse, and his rider.
self, and betakes her to her wings and feet (for she flies running, or
runs flying, not being able through bulk of body to sore aloft) she cares
not for her pursuer, scorning the swiftest horseman should overtake her.

19. Have thou put strength into the 19. Have thou given he Horse strength?
have thou clothed his neck with thunder?
horse, have thou armed him with force and power to bear down all before him,
and encounter his enemy with such a shock as if thunder had struck him?

20. Can thou make him flinch 20. Can thou make him afraid as a Grasshopper?
the glory of his nostrils is terrible.
thee as a Grasshopper? noe, he is anothergates creature. The disdainful
snortings which he sends out of his nostrils in his pride, and courage are
terrifying.

21. He paweth up the earth in the 21. He paweth in the valley, and rejoices
in his strength: he goes on to meet the armed men.
place of battle through the impatiency of his spirit, and glories in his
strength as unconquerable, fearelesly marching upon the dreadful enemy.

22. He scorns to fear, nothing 22. He mocketh at fear, and is not
affrighted; neither turns he back from the sword.
can daunt him, the daring sword cannot make him turn tail.

23. The rattling of the Arrows, the 23. The quiver ratleth against him, the
glittering Spear, and the Shield.
bright steel-headed Spear, or shining Shield appale not his spirit a whit.

24. In the imagination of his fancy 24. He swalloweth the ground with
fierceness and rage, neither believes he that it is the sound of the Trumpet.
he overturnes all before him, yea the very ground, he stands on, through his
fierce desire, to be fighting he teareth it with his teeth, or gallops it
amain to be at the enemy. Neither does he respect or conceive any terror at
the sound of their trumpet, which threatens the deadly onset, but in the height
of his courage counts it as a whistle.

25. Deafing their noise, and proudly 25. He says among the Trumpets, Ha, ha;
and he smells the battle a far of, the thunder of the captains, and the
shouting?
answering them in way of scorn and challenge with his loud and daring
neighings, his courage makes him quick sented, so that he smells the battle,
and snorts with a hasty desire to be at it, before it be, being provoked by the
braving flourishes and tumultuous noise of the approaching Army, which he
impatiently sees and hears.

26 Have thou by thy wisdom taught 26. Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom, and
stretch her wings toward the South?
the Hawke her dexterity in flight, and learned her by instinct to choose the
warm Southern parts of the World to take to for the place of her prey, when
cold weather comes.

27. Is it by thy or my power and ordinance, 27. Does the Eagle mount up at thy
command, and make her nest on high?
that the Eagle is so strong as to mount plum up (which no bird else can do)
to an infinite height, and that she build her nest on high in unaccessible
places.

28. She lives and breeds upon the rock, 28. She dwells and abides on the
Rock, upon the crag of the Rock, and the strong place.
upon the Crag of the Rock, which is so steep and dangerous that noe man nor
beast dare climb it, and so strong that the Sea though with all its force it
beat against it, cannot move it.

29. From whence she goes far 29. From thence she seeks the pray, and her
eyes behold afar off.
to fetch her prey, and though her sharp sightednesse can see it thence at a
mighty distance.

30. She trains up her young ones 30. Her young ones also suck up blood; and
where the slain are, there is she.
to her own trade feeding them with flesh, and acquainting them with the sweet
of blood, and where the greatest slaughter is made, and most blood shed, there
is the place of her delight, thither by a strange sagacity of nature she
resorteth, and carries her young ones with her.

CHAP. XL.
1. HAving said all this, now God 1 Moreover the Lord answered Job, and said.
sets it home upon Job with this sharp reprehension.

2. Hear thou this, and by it perceivest 2 Shall he that contendeth with the
Al mighty, instruct him? he that reproves God, let him answer it.
thou not thy ignorance and weakness together with my power and wisdom, and
think thou now that it is fit for any man whatsoever to contend with one so
almighty, and to instruct one so wise; he that dares to question and quarrel
God in any his ways, and works, as thou have not stuck to do, let him make
answer to this that I have opposed, that so there may appear to be some
equality, and this do thou, if thou can?

3. Jobs spirit being appaled by 3. Then Job answered the Lord, and said.
Gods immediate parlee, and unexpected apparition in the whirlewind, and his
understanding being non-plust with such high questions, and withal seeing the
Lord provoked, humbly addresseth himself to make answerto him in this manner.

4. I now confess to thee, and all the 4. Behold, I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth.
world, my sin and folly in misbehaving my self in such a manner toward
such a God, by questioning and not submitting to thee, but in stead of going on
to do so, I revoke my chal^^^ and humble my self at thy feet, acknowledging
my self (compared with thee) every way vile and base, and utterly unable to
answer any of thy demands, therefore I beg leave of thee that I may be silent,
granting all thou have said of thy greatness, and my weakness to be true, and
bewailing my over-daring rashness.

5. Once indeed I was so foolish, as 5. Once have I spoken, but I will not
answer: yea, twice, but I will proceed no further.
to desire a dispute between us, but I repent it, and now my turn comes to
reply, I will make no answer, but confess mine error, yea, though then in
passion I was eager upon it, yet now the case is altered with me, I have
enough of it, and my mouth is stopped for ever doing the like again.

6. But God took the matter so ill 6. Then answered the Lord unto Job out of
the whirlewind, and said.
at Jobs hands, that he should so forget himself, and by his carriage in some
respect, though not altogether, as it were, disprove him, and make good Satan's
words; that he would not accept of this submission, but again quite to break
the neck of his pride, angerly breaks in upon Job thus:

7. What do thou flinch? Sure 7. Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will
demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
thou scornest it; Thou will certainly make good thy challenge; come therefore,
stand to it, and play the man as thou said thou would do, I Will do as I
did; I Will oppose, and thou shall answer.

8. Will thou also question and susspect 8. Will thou also disanull my
judgment? will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous?
my justice, as wicked men, and such as know not God are wont to do? I had not
thought it by thee, or that thou would have carried the matter so high
through pride of spirit, as to go about to condemn me of overmuch rigor, and
justify thy self.

9. Know thou me no better? art 9. Have thou an arm like God? or can thou
thunder with a voice like him?
thou any way my equal, or fit to contend with me; is thy strength like mine;
or can thou equal the noise and terror of my thunder with any speech and
power of thine?

10. Can thou make thy self a 10. Deck thy self now with majestly and
excellency, and array thy self with glory and beauty.
God as I am? if thou can, do; and adorn thy self with such majesty and
excellency, glory and beauty as mine is.

11. Can thou execute judgment 11. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and
behold every one that is proud, and abase him.
in wrath all the world over, and can thou perceive the proud behavior and
carriage of men every where, and abase them as I do?

12. Behold with me every proudhearted 12. Look on every one that is proud,
and bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place.
man, and bring him down, do thou extend thy power like me to root out the
wicked in every place wheresoever throughout the world they exalt themselves,
and practice wickedness.

13. Slay them in thy wrath, and bury 13. Hide them in the dust together, and
bind their faces in secret.
them in the grave of forgetfulness, even all and every one, how many, or of
what condition soever they be, extinguish thou their pride by death, and make
their memories perish.

14. When thou can do these 14. Then will I also confess unto thee, that
thine own right hand can save thee.
things, then will I confess and say with thee, that thou art fit and able to
encounter with me.

15. But yet for thy further convincing, 15. Behold now, Behemoth which I made
with thee, he eats grass as an Ox!
I will instance to thee two of my most remarkable creatures which I have
framed, the one by land, the other by sea, which I would have thee take
special notice of. And first, for the land, Consider the Elephant which is thy
fellow creature, both of you made by me, how far notwithstanding he goes
beyond thee in hugeness and strength and yet by my ordination he is as
harmless as any other beast, preying upon nothing but grass, though he were
able to devour all before him.

16. I have endowed him with wonderful 16. Lo now, his strength is in his
loins, and his force is in the navell of his belly.
strength, but how, and where? Why not in any offensive part; his head has no
horns, nor his feet no claws to do mischief with, but to the end he might
be more serviceable to man in bearing of burdens and drawing loads, I have
placed it elsewhere, and chiefly in his lower parts, as his loins, and about
his belly.

17. In so much that in the heat of his 17. He moves his tail like a Cedar:
the sinews of his stones are wrapped together.
lust he erects his generative part like a strong cedar Tree, being
corroborated from natures cundit-pipes, the sinews of his stones, which are
wrapped together like as you see the roots of a great grown Tree, in the earth.

18. The bones in his body are as 18. His bones are as strong pieces of brass,
his bones are like bars of iron.
strong as if they were made of brass, and like so many bars of iron.

19. He is if well considered the remarkeablest 19. He is the chief of the
ways of God, he that made him, can make his sword to approach unto him.
piece of creation that the earth affoordeth to set forth Gods power, and
might, and yet as strong as he is, I that made him and gave him his strength,
can break his brass and iron bones to pieces at my pleasure, though man be
too weak for him.

20. And surely for all he so far goes 20. Surely the mountains bring him
forth food* where all the beasts of the field play.
beyond all other beasts that none can stand against him or are equal to him
for strength, yet he is nourished with the same food that they are, with
grass, etc. And goes quietly with them, and feeds peaceably among them,
without either hurting, or so much as frighting them, by mine appointment.

21. Through his natural heat and 21. He lies under the shady trees, in the
covert of the reed, and fennes.
being bred in hot countries, his abode is in shady places, and for that cause
lies much under Trees, and where there are high grown reeds, and fennes,
thither he resorts.

22. He hants out the coolest places, as 22. The shady Trees cover him with
their shadow: the willowes of the brook compass him about.
under great Trees and by brook-sides where willowes grow thick and afford
most shade, there is he most conversant.

23. Consider what a huge proportion 23. Behold, he drinks up a River, and
hastes not, he trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth.
he drinks to quench his thirst, as if he would quite exhaust and drink the
whole river dry, and whilst he is drinking he fears no danger as other
cattle do, that through the frightfulnes of their disposition break their
drought to stare about them: In the vast imagination of his fancy he conceits
he can devour, and drink up whole Jordan at once, when he goes thither to
quench his thirst.

24. If he sees a snare set for him, it inrageth 24. He takes it with his
eyes: ( or as in the margin, will any take him in his sight) his nose pierces
through snares.
him being privy to his exceeding strength, in so much that with his trunck he
makes his way through them with ease, and disdain.

CHAP. XLI.
1. HAving thus shown thee, the Elephant 1. Can thou draw out Leviathan with
an hook? or his tongue with a cord, which thou let down?
by land, now in the next place consider well the Whale (or some such
extraordinary fish) by Sea. Can thou angle for him, catch him, and draw him
on shore with a line, and hook, as thou do other lesser Fishes?

2. Have thou strength to over-master 2. Can thou put an hook into his nose?
or bore his jaw through with a thorn?
him and ring him like a Swine or a Bear, or can thou rule him so as to
suffer himself to be led by the nose, as Bears, and some such beasts as thou
have tamed do?

3 Will he lie down like a Spaniel at 3. Will he make many supplications unto
thee? will he speak soft words unto thee?
thy command, and wag his tail to fawn upon thee?

4. Will he put himself into thy service 4. Will he make a covenant with
thee? will thou take him for a servant for ever?
for hay, and corn, as other creatures, and will thou undertake to command and
employ him, like them, upon all thy affairs, and to do thy businesses?

5. Can thou handle him like a Sparrow, 5. Will thou play with him as with a
bird? will thou bind him for thy maidens?
or tame him so that thy maids may play with him without fear?

6. Shall the fishermen who join in 6. Shall the companions make a banquet of
him? shall they part him among the merchants?
company and partnership, catch him in their nets like other fishes, and for
joy of such a draught feast themselves and make merry with him; shall they
merchandise him, shall they share and trade away the several commodities which
he yields of whale-bone and oil, etc.

7. Is his skin penetrable like other 7. Can thou fill his skin with
barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?
fishes, so that thou can take him with such tools and fishing instruments
as thou take them?

8. Draw near and offer but the least 8. Lay thine hand upon him, remember the
battle, do no more.
violence to him if thou dare, and he will quickly make thee repent it, so
that thou will have little joy to fight it out with him.

9. For certain he is a creature that 9. Behold, the hope of him is in vain:
shall not one be cast down, even at the sight of him?
man has small hopes to bring under his dominion and make serviceable, who is
so formidable, that noe man dare attempt it, for his very sight a far off is
able to scarre a man from venturing on him.

10. Who is he that dare provoke him, 10. None is so fierce that dare stir
him up: who then is able to stand before me?
or that has the courage to encounter him? not one, and if so, then how dare
any attempt the like toward me and think to prevail, or not miscarry, who
am the Creator, and he but my creature?

11. Who has been aid full to me in the 11. Who has prevented me that I
should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.
creation, or who has made any of my creatures for me, that I may acknowledge
it and be thankful to him for it, is not every creature that thou see or
know in the land and sea, of what might or strength soever they be, is he
not mine, and have not I made him? what manner of apprehension then ought men
to have of me, and with what fear ought they to reverence me?

12. Yea, this great Leviathan is of 12. I will not conceal his parts; nor his
power, nor his comely proportion.
my making, which I will yet further anatomize and set forth unto thee; for I
would have thee consider him well in his extraordinary qualities, strength and
lineaments, that so thou may learn to know thy distance with God.

13. Who can handle him like a horse, 13. Who can discover the face of his
garment? or who can come to him with his double bridle?
to bring him out of the sea to view him, as a horse out of a stable? Who will
undertake, or dare, to tame and halter him with all the strength and skill he
has?

14. Who dare look into his mouth, 14. Who can open the doors of his face?
his teeth are terrible round about.
as in a horses, when you buy him, which is like a pair of two leaved doors
for wideness; or force a bit between his teeth, which are so monstrous great
and terrible on both sides his mouth?

15. His scales are like so many glistering 15. His scales are his pride, shut
up together as with a close seal.
shields wherein he puts his confidence, and takes his pride, which are so
closed and put together, like paper sealed with wax, as that nothing can part
them.

16. Yea, there is such a juncture, as 16. One is so near to another, that no
air can come between them.
that nothing can go between, no, not the thin and subtle air, which yet
pierces the pores of all other things.

17. They are lapt one over another 17. They are joined one to another, they
stick together, that they cannot be sundred.
like tiles on a house, but so close, and stick so fast together, that neither
sword nor spear can pierce him.

18. His forcible snortings which he 18. By his neesings a light does shine,
and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
utters in his courage, causes, as it were, fire to break out at his nose and
eyes, which whenever they are seen above water, appear as the breaking out
of the Sun in the morning.

19. He breaths out of his mouth a 19. Out of his mouth go burning lamps,
and sparks of fire leap out.
strong sulphurous vapor, inkindled in him from the strength and heat of
nature, which inflameth his breath like fire.

20. Out of the two holes of his head 20. Out of his nostrils goes smoke, as
out of a seething pot or caldron.
whereat he breaths out, and takes in air in stead of nostrills, he sends
thence such vapor of smoke, as if it did rise out of a great boiling caldron.

21. His breath is of that nature by 21. His breath kindles coals, and a
flame goes out of his mouth.
reason of his hot and fiery constitution, that it is able to kindle coals,
and warm like fire.

22. He is infinitely strong and able to 22. In his neck remains strength,
and sorrow is turned into joy before him.
bear down whatsoever he shall encounter, nor fears he an enemy, but takes
pleasure to war with any, joying thereby to put forth his strength and
cherish his pride.

23. And as are his scales without, so 23. The flakes of his flesh are joined
together: they are firm in themselves, they cannot be moved.
is his flesh within, firm, solid, and compact in thick and mighty flakes.

24. He is not timorous like other 24. His heart is as firm as a stone, yea,
as hard as a piece of the nether millstone.
creatures, his heart is as incapable of fear as a stone, yea, as impenetrable
by any such passion as is the nethermost millstone.

25. When as he shows himself 25. When he raises up himself, the mighty
are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves.
upon the surface of the water, he affrights the most courageous warrior,
yea, with his fierce and violent motion in the sea, wherewith he makes his way,
breaking through waves, and sending up foame, he makes the stoutest betake
themselves to make peace with God, and beg pardon for their sins, concluding
death unavoidably to be at hand.

26. If any man be so hardy to strike 26. The sword of him that lays at him
cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.
him, his sword will fly in pieces, his scales are so impenetrable, that
neither sword nor spear, nor dart, nor indeed any other instrument of war
can wound him.

27. He sets as much by iron, or any 27. He esteems iron as straw, and brass
as rotten wood.
weapon that is made thereof, as a man does by a straw; and so by brass, as a
man does by rotten sticks, which he can snap in pieces at his pleasure.

28. He cares not for a whole shower 28. The arrow cannot make him fly:
slingstones are turned with him into stubble.
of arrows shot at him, nor for never so many stones, be they never so
strongly slung; they fall at his feet, and are no more to him than the stuble
which a man treads upon.

29. Darts, though thrown at him 29. Darts are counted as stubble, he laugheth
at the shaking of the spear.
never so thick, are no more esteemed and cared for by him, than a man
respects dried straw; he fears no threatening a man can use toward him, the
shaking of the spear appales not him a jot.

30. He rests himself upon the hard 30. Sharp stones are under him, he
spreads sharpe-pointed things upon the mire.
and sharpe-pointed stones of the rock, and yet they never pierce him, but he
by his weight and strength breaks them off, and tumbles them down into the
bottom of the sea.

31. When he moves in his might, he 31. He makes the deep to boil like a
pot: he makes the sea like a pot of ointment.
makes the Ocean to foame and to boil like a pot on the fire, he raises a
thick scum upon the face of the waters, as if the whole sea were a pot of
ointment.

32. He raises such a white shining 32. He makes a path to shine after him,
one would think the deep to be hoary.
foame all along as he swimmeth, and so changes the color of the water, that
one would think a hoary frost covered the deep and wide sea.

33. I told thee before of Behemoth, 33. Upon earth there is not his like: who
is made without fear.
but this is far beyond him, the whole earth has not the like creature upon
it for a dreadlesse spirit.

34. In his own conceit he so exalts 34. He beholds all high things; he is
a king over all the children of pride.
himself, that through the confidence of his strength and hight of his spirit
he scornfully opinionates even the might and greatest monsters by Sea and
Land to be inferior to him, and believes himself, as indeed he is, for
might and power, to be the supreme of all elementary creatures how ever
excellent.

CHAP. XLII.
WHen Job had heard out 1. Then Job answered the Lord, and said.
God, he thus makes answer.

2. I humbly acknowledge it, that thou 2. I know that thou can do every
thing; and that no thought can be withholden from thee.
and thou only have made all the creatures, and works of wonder which thou
have spoken of, yea that thou can do even whatsoever pleases thee to do,
and that thy power is of such large extent, that not so much as a thought of
any man's heart (which also is of thy making) can be hid from thee, nor can any
thought or intention of thine be withstood or hindered from being brought to
pass by thee.

3. Well might thou tax me as thou 3. Who is he that hides counsel
without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too
wonderful for me, which I knew not.
did of my foolish questioning thy wise decrees and proceedings with my weak
reasonings, which by an eye of faith issuing from an humble heart are only
discernable, therefore I humbly confess my fault, That I have been too bold
and saucy with so great a majesty and with thy sacred decrees and actions,
uttering things ignorantly of thee and them, I wist not what, which now repent
me.

4. I am not the man I was, therefore 4. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will
speak: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
now that thou have done, I beseech thee hear me speak, which shall be in
another manner then at first when I pass my foolish challenge, desiring now to
be instructed and not disputed with by thee.

5. I confess I have been ignorant 5 I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the ear: but now mine eye sees thee.
of thee to this very day, for though I have had some manner knowledge of thee
by hearsay of what has been taught me of old from my forefathers who were
but men like my self, as also even now by Elihu; Yet now this short lesson of
thine own immediate teaching has learned me more, and to more purpose in a
little time being an eyewitness of thy glory, then all that ever I knew
before.

6. In so much that now I eat my 6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent
in dust and ashes.
words and abhor my self for my presumptuous misbehaviour, repenting it with
as lowly a spirit as I sinned it with an high.

7. When God had finished his business 7. And it was so, that after the Lord had
spoken these words into Job, the Lord said to Elipha^, the Temanit^. My wrath
is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken
of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.
with Job, and matters were reconciled between them two, having quickly brought
him to see his folly and repent his pride; Then God turns himself to Jobs
three friends to convince them also of their miscarriage, and because Eliphaz
was the ancientest and had first broached the error whereof the other two were
after guilty, he addresses himself to him by name and tells him, That he was
justly angry with him, and his two companions, for because you have preached
false doctrine touching me, and have been too bold to limit my soveraignety, by
chalking me out ways, and prescribing me rules of justice in the execution of
my will, and dispensation of my providence, as if I always must and did
afflict men for, and according to the measure of their sins, and spare them for
their righteousness and innocence sake, which is a gross untruth, and the
contrary to which my servant Job maintained, to wit, That I am free to do my
will, and incomprehensible in my ways, which is right.

8. Therefore to expiate your offense 8. Therefore take unto you now seven
Bullocks, and seven Rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your
selves a hurnt offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I
accept: lest I deal with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of
me the thing which is right, like my servant Job.
take with you such a sacrifice as I shall appoint, that is, seven Bullocks and
seven Rams, and go to my servant Job, reconcile your selves to him as
touching the wrong you have done him as well as me, and give them him that he
may do the office of a Priest, that is, offer up sacrifice and prayers for you
all jointly, who have all been guilty of the same sin; and the prayers of my
servant Job who is an upright man, and one whom I much respect, how ever you
misiudged him, shall prevail with me (through the office and person of my
son which herein he resembles) to pardon you: I say do this, thus, and
excuse not the matter by your ignorance or welmeaning toward me, nor dispute
my command, as loath to eat your words, or to justify Job whom you have
already condemned; but dispatch, and go about this business, least I give you
your desert and make you feel the effects of your foolish presumption, in that
you have dared to measure me out by your meet* wands, and prescribe me ways to
walk in, and so have falsified the truth, which my servant Job maintained
against you.

9. Whereupon these three aforesaid 9. So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the
Shuhite, and Zophar the Naaneathite, went and did according as the Lord
commanded the^: the Lord also accepted Job.
friends of Job, Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the
Naaneathite went streightway, having received so strickt a charge from God, and
did what the Lord commanded them; for whom at their requests, Job put up his
petitions to God, and was so accepted in his person, sacrifice and prayer,
being a figure of Christ therein, that at his intercession their offense was
forgiven them.

10. And as Job in his meekness and 10. And the Lord turned the captivity of
Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he
had before.
charity forgave his friends their trespasses, and prayed for them; so God
forgave him his, and at that instant released him of his misery which he had
been held in so long, and turned his sorrow into joy, by testifying his love
to him in his acceptance of him, and by vindicating his uprightness and
innocence against his accusers: moreover, God recompensed the loss and
sufferings which Job sustained, with double to what he had before.

11. And brought him into favor 11. Then came there unto him all his brethren,
and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and
did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoned him, and comforted him
over all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him: every man also gave him
a piece of money, and every one an eare-ring of gold.
again with those parties that partly for his poverty, and partly upon
suspicion of his hypocrisy had cast him off, so that now there flocked to him
from far and near, all his brethren and sisters and his old acquaintance,
which it seems though they were near to him, and had been intimate with him,
yet upon this occasion had been of late estranged, till now that they saw the
face of things were changed, and then they come themselves to visit him, and to
pity him for what he had suffered, and to comfort him with gratifying his
deliverance and freedom from all the afflictions that God had laid upon him;
moreover, besides their visiting him, every man further congratulated his
recovery (God moving their hearts) with a present of money and jewels, in
testimony of their love and respect.

12. Thus the Lord humbled Job 12. So the Lord blessed the later end of Job
more than his beginning; for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand
Camells, and a thousand yoke of Oxen, and a thousand she-Asses.
very low, to be a pattern of faith and patience to his Saints in aftertimes,
by remembering his later end, which God made far to exceed his beginning in
abundance of all good things, yea, double to what he had; for whereas before
he had but seven thousand sheep, now he had fourteen thousand, and so
likewise his former three thousand Camels were now multiplied into six
thousand, and his five hundred yoke of Oxen were doubled into a thousand, and
his five hundred sheAsses into as many.

13. And whereas all his children 13. He had also seven sons and three
daughters.
you heard were taken from him, he had them restored him again, even their
full number; seven sons and three daughters. 14. And he called the name of
the first Jemima, and the name of the second Kezia, and the name of the third
Kerenhappuch.


14. Whom he thus named: The eldest daughter he called Iemima, or long life:
The second he called Kezia, or pleasant spice: the youngest he called
Keren-happuch, or the horn of beauty; prophesying in them the long life,
together with the comfortable and happy condition which by the bounteous
goodness of God he should yet enjoy.

15. Which three daughters, for a 15. And in all the land were no women found
so fair as the daughters of Job: and their father gave them inheritance among
their brethren.
further blessing unto Job, were the fairest women in all the land where he
lived, and were had in greatest reputation for their beauty, and as God gave
them an extraordinary blessing to him, so he made them an extraordinary
president; for out of his love to them, and in reward of their virtues he gave
to every of them severally, as to his sons, a portion of his land in stead of
money to inherit, to them and to their heirs for ever; so that they shared
proportionably with their brethren by their fathers Will and Testament, and
were coheires with them in his estate. 16. After this lived Job an hundred and
forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons sons, even four generations.


16. And thus all these sorrows which Job thought he should never have seen an
end of, he survived, and after them lived in prosperity and plenty a hundred
and forty years, so that he became a great Grandfather before he died. 17. So
Job died being old, and full of days.


17. And so Job ended his days in a good old age, and was carried to his grave
like as a shock of corn comes in, in his season.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Tho. Wykes.
Iunij 14. 1638.

