A treatise or Sermon of Henry Bullynger, much fruitful and necessary for
this time, concerning magistrates and obedience of subjects. Also concerning
the affairs of war, and what scryptures make mension thereof. whether
christen powers may war against their ennemies. And whither it be laufull for a
christyan to bear the office of a magistrate, and of the duty of soldiers
with many other holsom instructions for captains and soldiers both. Made in
the year of our lord. M.D. xlix I.F.

Let every subject submyt him self unto the authority of the higher powers.
For there is no power but of god. The powers that be, are ordained of god. To.
xii. a Sapi. vi. a i. Pet. ii. b.

My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and keep no company with ye
slaunderers for their destruction shall come suddenly. proverb.xxiiii. And,
proverb, xx.

The King ought to be feared as the roaring of a Lion, whosoever provoke him
unto anger, offends against his own soul. pro. xx. a.xxiiii. c.

To the most excellent Prince Edward ye.vi. by the grace of God King of
England, France and Itlande, defendoure of the faith, and in earth of the
church of england and Irelande immediately under God suppreme head, your
graces humble subject and daily orator Gwalter Lyn wyssheth abundance of al
grace, and godlynes, with a long and prosperous raygne.
COnsideringe (most mighty Prince), what great benifites I have received of
this your majesty's realm of England which has so mani years nourished and
succored my poor life hitherto. I thought my self no less bound of very duty
but to show some office of recompensation therefore. Again consideringe ye
fervent proceadynge of your majesty in setting forth the word of god, and
also ye towardnes of most your subjects which as a ripe harvest do lack but
workmen, to set them forward, I thought I could gratyfy in no other thing
more both your most graciouse entente and the desire of this your realm,
which now I take for mine own native country, than to search out some necessary
doctrine, which could do all my country men good. Upon the which
consideracion here I brought out of latin into englysh a work of Bullenger
most fruytfull and expedient for all times namely for this time most
necessary, concerning the order of a common wealth the institution of
magistrates, the use of ye sword the obedience of subjects, the ministratio^
of wars, the instruction of soldiers. Which things I think to be so
necessary for these days, that nothing can come in more meite time or place.
And as this work of this excellent auther semyth to me most excellently
handeled full of most notable histores, and excellent doctrine, so I could
find no other so meite to dedicate it unto, as to your excellent majesty to
whom not only I dedicate this work and labor of mine, but body life and goods
to your gracious pleasure, with my contynuall prayer also to almighty God long
to prospere your flourishing state to his glory and forthera^ce of his
well-beloved church. Amen.

Your true and obedient subject Gwalter Lynne.

Henry Boullynger concerning Magistrates and Subjects
War is a thing perteyninge to the sword which is given of god to the
magistrates. Sapi. vt. a prou. cx. and ano. xxiiiic romans xiii. a ^irum. iii. a
1. Pet: ii. ^
For so I declared in my last sermon, that this sword in the magistrates hands
has two uses: other to punysh trespasers, or else to repelle and distroy our
open ennemies with all such other like rebellious and sedicious cytesins, and
subjects. what soever they be. But here commith a dout in many men's heads
whether it be lawful for magestrates to keep war. Whyther it be lawful for
magestrates to wares
And I marueyll that men can be so blind in a thing so evident. For if it be
lawful for magistrates by gods law to punish trespassers, thieves, and
murderers who so ever noyeth the common wealth, whether they be few or many,
that is no matter, as I declared to you yester day, by the same law likewise
is it lawful for them to invade and pursue with arms rebels and seditious
cytesyns, or any forayne enemy who so ever entende the same by ye color of
war, that thieves and murderers do practice within the realm.

Truth it is that ye divine prophet says prophecieng of us Christen men. Esaias.
ii a Joel. iii. b
They shall turn their swords to mattoks, and their speres to syethes. For
Christen me^ keep peace with all men, and utterly avoyde al fyghthing, eeclr.
xxxl, b Job lii ^ Mate vii: a Luc, vi, c
for so do they to other as they would be done to them selves. But for because
all me^ be not of one nature, but mani perturbers, wicked murderers, and
oppressors be myxt amongst honest and quiet citesins, as cruel wolves amongst
simpleshepe, therefore does god permit from heaven the sword to the magistrates
for ye defense of the innocents: Rom xiii a
Neither is it ever red in any place but yt we lawfully may oppress and
destroy wolves, bores, bears, and all such beasts which be noysom to me^ or
cattle. And why then is it not as lawful with war and violence to wtstande the
wicked force of violent murderers, setng yt al such murderers, robbers,
barbarous enmies, seditious citese^s do littel or nothing differ from wild
beasts. Certes, the scripture callith the^ with no other name, tha^ beasts,
to this also agrees ye co^me^ sense of nature. Here to also the doctrine of
religion and faith agreith. If it be possible says thapostle, so much as in
you lies, have peace with al men, romans xii. c Heb. xii, c
reuengynge not your selves. Note, so much as is in you he says. And if it be
possible. For or else it folowet after, ye magistrate bears not a sword for
naught. romans xlii a
As who should say for such manner of persons as do malign and disquiet honest
and quiet me^ which would feign live in rest and cannot. Hereto also agree ye
examples of the most holiest men yt ever were, which did war for ye defense of
their country, and of innocents, As I declared to you out of s. Pa. to ye
Hebre. when I showed you in the.v. commandment, what duty every man owes to
his country. Hereto will I annexe certain places out of s. Austin. Eusilib. xx,
Capl xxv
disputed against Faustus Manicheus.li.xx c. lxxv Neither yet says he, let a
man abhor or meruell at the battayles done by Moses, pro: xvil. Number. xx:
and: xxi. deed xx. etc:
for in them also he followed gods commandment, not for any eigernes, but for
obedience sake. For when he was enforced thereto by god, he exceded not in
rigor, but only recompensed things worthy to men's deserving and brought fear
upon such as were well worthy. For what thing can a man reprove in wars
because men do dye which must dye once, hebre. ix d
wherbye peace may follow? To put blame in this, is not a sign of religiouse
men but of timorous, persons.

The pleasure in hurting, outrageous in revenging, an unplacable stomach, wild
rebellynge gredines to get dominion, and such like, these be they which be
worthily reproved in war, and not only reproved, but also punished. Against
the vyolence of our adversaries, good men may rightfully war, other by gods
law, or by any commandment of superior powers, being in such vocation where
their powers other commands any such thing, or byndeth them to obedience, Or
else Saint Ihon Baptiste, Luce ciii. d
when the soldiers came to him to be baptized, asking what they should do: he
might have answered them again. Cast away your harnes, renounce your
warrfarre, strike no man, wound no man, overthrow no body: but because he
did see them in doing these things in warrfayre to be no murderers but
mynisters of the law, neither reuengeres of their own injuries, but defenders
of publyke wealth, he said to them, stryke no body, wrangle with no man, be
content with your own stipende. But because ye Manichees be wo^t to despise and
blaspheme Ihon, let them hear our lord Jesus christ him self, commanding the
same stipend to be given to caesar, which Ihon aduersited the soldiers to be
content with all: Give unto Ceasar says christ, Matt xx it c and xvi: d roma.
x.ii b
the things which are Ceasers, and unto god, those things yt are gods. For
therefore be tributs paid, whereby wars may be waged, and soldiers
maintained for necessite of war. So he does worthily also commend the faith of
ye centurion saying. And I am a man set here under powers, Mat viii a Luc vi: a
having under me soldiers, and I say to him go, and he goes, and to
another come and he comith. And to my servant do this and he does it, we se he
commends his faith therefore, but he byddeth him not to forsake the wars.
Hitherto also pertains the chapt. following.lxxv. and.lxxvi. etc. But here I
am content to spare you, and not to over burden you with to prolyx recitinge of
sentences. Thus much have I spoken hitherto for that, that it is lawful for
magistrates to war. And upon this we gather that subjects Subjects mir^t
obeys their powers commandyng war
likewise may lawfully and with out reprehension go and feighte in warfare, when
they be commanded by the magistrates so to do.

But if it be so that the magistrates causles do set upon to slay the
innocents and unguilty persons, I have declared in my formar sermons, ^et. iiii
and.v^
in this case the magistrates co^mau^deme^ts are not to be obeyed Therefore let
the magistrates take hyde less they abuse their auctorite. War is a peregous
thing
And all though it be lawful for the Magistrates to keep war for just and
necessary causes, yet is war a most dangerous thing and brings with it
hepes of infinite troubles. And thus be such men punyshed diverse times, whom
no gentyl admonition ca^ move all be it many innocent persons with such be
punished among Now many times it happens that soldiers forget them selves,
and break al good order prouokyng the myghti anger of god upon their heads,
what kind of myscheyfe is in all the world but it is used in war or what
kind of misery is there that is not here First by war spryngeth dearth and
utter scasety of al things, For the ways be stopped, the torn trodden down,
towns set on fire, vitalle distroied and wasted, all occupations and
merchandise cease, both rich and poor decays: In war the most valiante
sonest destroyed, the toward they retire and save them selves whiles greater
afterclappes do fall upon them. The most vile ruffynes, most auaunced, which
abuse men more like beasts then other.

All is full of murning on every side: Wydowes bewail: fatherles children
lament and be destitute, Great riches provided for need to come, clean
spoiled, hole cites set a fire, Esaias. i^ and v
vyrgynes an vnmared mayde^s defiled: Al shame al honesty set a side: no
reverence to age: All manner of right all laws unregarded: al holy religion and
studies clean under foot, vile vacaboundes and desperate dreuylles rule all
the toste. And therefore in scripture war is called the scourge of god. War
^eth scourge of god

Leuit xxvi ii Reg. xxiiii Deuteronomy xxviii


This scourge does god lightly infer upon incurrable and obstinat despisers
of his word. For this cause was the city of Jerusalem subverted with all the
whole nations of the Jews, Mat. xxiii. e Luce xiii d
for as the lord says they did not know ye day of their visitation, but rather
they did shed the blood of the lords apostles, so brynging upon their own
heads all the blood, Gene iiii b ii. par xxiiii d
shed from first Abell the just, unto zacharye.

Number xxi and xxxiii etc
The Chananites for murder, idolatrye, incest, and for abominable letchery were
utterly deuasted. The Moabites, as Esaie says, Esaias. xv and ^vi.
perished for theirr cuelteinclemenci, and proud dispisinge of the pore. The
Ninevites did infest other nations with unjust wars wherefore they were
served with like measure. Again of other countries, as we reed in the
prophet Nahum, Nahum ii and iii
Micheas in the vi cap. declares yt god se^deth war to the unjust, The
causes of war
for their avarice, and fraud using. In Ieremye Ierem v ^ c
arrogance and pride, in Esaye Esaias v ^
ryotenes excess and dronckennes, are noted to be the causes of war.
Farthermore ye incommodities of war do cleave so hard to realms and publik
weals, yt they cannot afterward be removed or shaken of when we would, nether
by humane policy, nor leages, nor riches, nor defense, strength, nor power, as
we may se in Abdias. Abdias ^
Only ye sincere and hearty conversion to god remedyeth this, as Jeremy in.v.
Ierem v ^
capt. do testify. This true conversion to god stands first in the
confession and knowledge of our own wyckednes, than in a sewer faith to have
remission of our sins by grace and merit of our lord Jesus christ. Roma.
v and ^i.
Thyrdly in a perfect hatred, and renounsynge of cure formare iniquite in
study of justice, innocence, charity, and all other virtues: finally in
continual prayer and oration.

Again to some a man shall see war War profitable to some
brings much profyt vtilite and innumerable riches, with no damage or little
at all. Such was the battle of the Israelytes against the Chananaeis, Iosue
Joshua, iii c and xvi, b
being their captain.

I would not hear the commodites of war should allure any from Justice and
equite. For so many times it happenyth that while Magistrates think to have a
just occasion to war against other, and to punish offenders, The good some
times be overcome of the wyck^d
god of his pryue justice reaturneth ye same occasion upon them selves in
prouokyng them, whereby there sins may be punyshed of them whom they intend
to persecute. Examples we have manyfeste in scriptures. Iud seu xix and.xx


The eleven tribes of Israel proclaimed most just war against the
Beniamites, thinking to revenge a wicked fact committed by certain lewd
losels, with the which loselles, the whole tribe took part, communicatinge
with their ungraciousness, yet were they put to the worst and foiled of the
wicked sort. i reg ii^^ and v
The Israelites went about to expel the violence of ye idolatrouse
phylistianes under Hely their preiste yet were they overthrown in battle,
and the ark of god carried away into the cities of idolatours. iiii reg. xxiii,
ii. pa. xxxv d
So ye good king Josias was slain of ye chaldeis because the intent of god was
to scourge ye people, with such evils which he would not ye good king to behold
nothing so deserving. Whereupon this note is to be learned, yt the verity of
religion Religion is not seen by victory.
goyth not by the victory of any nations or by overthrow, as though ye
religion were ye better, whose part had the upper hand, and yt the worste
religion, whose part had ye worst. For religion always must be sequestrede
from the person and respect of men which for diverse causes be diversely
visited of the lord.

All these things admonish us, ye Magistrates had need of much and great fear
of god, in taking up or in laying down their wars, lest perchaunse in
flyenge the smoke they fall into the fire, or while they study to eschew one
harm, by eschuyng thereof, do purchesse to them selves many moo and greater.
Wherefore it is requisite that princes first before al things do thoroughly
considre the causes of their wars. The causes of war must be considered
Now there be mani causes and sundry, but these lightly the greateste. For
other ye magistrate is enforced saying his holds and munimentes in his realm
to be invaded with seige, then he must needs healpe and repulse his ennemie.
For it were to much unfaithfulness to forsake so disloyally his cyteis and
fortres in such extreme peril. Or else the magistrate by reason of his office
is constrained to attempt war against incurable persons whom the sentence
of the lord does condemn, and byddeth to beat down utterly without al pity.

So as Moses did war against the Madianites Saul against Amalechetes Of
this manner be al such kinds of war wherewith men be oppressed, Number xxv and
xxxi i (...) xv
which by the incurable malice of theirs, wylnedes perysh and make other
perysh with them also, which reject all justice, and equite, al set on
myscheif and so stubbornly continu. Iudic xx and xxi Mark well rebellions
Such were the Beniamites wha^ they were distroyed with sword and fire: such
be now a days these obstinate and sedicious traitors troblelers of public
society as was ons Absolon and Seba the son of Bochrus which be mentioned in
the second book of Samu ii ^ Reg. xiii xiiii xv xvi xvii xviii
Samuel. War for religion.
Herto atpartayne also such wars acheued against Idolaters, and oppressors of
catholic faith. for true relygio^ sake. They be in a wrong dream which think
no war ought to be attempted for relygion.

The lord restrained Peter strykynge with the sword: Mat xxvi ^ Luce xxii d
Ioh xviii. ^
Truth I grant he restrained him as an Apostle, he forbadde not the magistrate
the oversight of religion, but that he might defend the verite of our faith. If
the magistrates may lawfullye defend viler things, as liberty, goods,
bodily honestye, and life. etc. How much more may he defend greater things,
yea which be the greatest things of all? For what can be greater than true
religion: Deuteronomy xiii and xvii b
Upon this we have an express commandment of ye lord in Deutronomiu^. Mark
well
For the lord commands ye cite under what magi^trate so ever he be, which
defyleth from god and his worship, to be let upon with war and utterly to be
subverted if it be stubb^rne. Now if the magistrate so be commanded to war
against them yt do disceiuer from him, verily than it is not unlawful to
rescue the church by war in case any barbarus prince come upon it with open
war, to sedewce it from true religion to error. Iosue went about to
expugne ye Rubenites only for an altar erected against the word of god. Iosue
xxii a


i. Macha. v.
Judas Machabeus does fight for the people of god against the gentiles and
king Antiochus his soldiers whose purpose i. Mac iii.
was to vanquyshe the Jews religion, which than was only true, and to place
in the stead of it superstitious gentylyte. Actium, xv
So Paul does commend the captains which through faith wtstode the
incursions of forain enemies. And Paul him self had a conflyct in Cyprus
against Elimas a false prophet whom also he stroke with blyndnes: act. xiii.
And his reason follows that he did it for relygyons sake. act, xiiii.
Will thou not cease, says he, to subuerte the streyghte ways of the Lord.
Against the same Paul there were fourtye men conspyred, act, xxiii, v. c.
which thought that if he were take out of the way / a great part of
CHRIST'S relygyon were abolyshed, and their iudicyall relygyon set up again.
But Paul here plays not the sheep, ^e^um. xxiii
nor turns not the other cheke to them but was erneste and sollicitous to
ask his defense and that not of a christian magistrate, If Paul asked help
of an ethnik magistra^e, more might ^e do of a chrystyan
but a romayne centurion: neither showed he him self any thing grieved thereat,
when lxx. horsemen and.cccc. fotemen. were prepared for him in battle ray to
conduct him from Jerusalem to Antipatrida. act ix b and xxii b ^^^a i
Thus was Paul the elect vessel preserved by an Armed Garrison of romain
soldiers. Concerning the Armenians, sufferynge great violence of Maximinus
the emperor. Eusebius so writes in his ecclesiastical
history.li.ix.c^.viii. They Armenians says he^ons a people kind and friendly
to the people of Rome, eccl. ix ^ viii
what time they should be constrained of Maximinus the Emperor to change the
state of christian relygion (to the which they were al given to) into
worshipping of Idols, and to vet^rat deuyls for god, being his tre^des before
waxed his great enemies, and of their own accord took upon them with open
might of war to withstand his wicked constraynment, and so kept him hard.
^hys says Eusebius. Therefore the magistrates may lawfully defend their
subjects and true religion against idolaters.

Or else an other cause is which is much like. The third cause of war
some foreine and Barbarous adversary does fly upon thy sub^ectes / does spoil
them, and inuadith them / as the cruel wolves do the sheep, when not only thou
haste not provoked them with any injuries, but moreover have offered them
right reasonable conditions of peace, than ought the magistrate to styrte like
a Lio^ to preserve his people against the assaults of such malytiouse
murderers. Example we have of Moses feightyng against ye kings of the Amorites
Aradeus Seon, Number, xxi, and xxxii. deuteronomy, ii c and, iii, ^, ^.
and og. Example we have of king Iosaphat feyghtyng against ye Ammonites, ^,
Para, xx.
and inhabiters of mount Seir; Example we have also in David resistynge against
ye Sitians comi^g upon hi^ with war. ii reg x. c

The.iiii, cause of war


Fourthly it is lawful for the magistrate to feyght in the defense of his
confederat friends and ayders, (for why may not a magistrate be at confederacy
and leyge with other nations so it be not in matters against the word of god)
in case they be iustlye oppressed with violence. So did Iosue deliver the
Gabonities from Seyge, Joshua, ^. i. reg xi
and Saul the cytesyns of Iabes Galaad, warrynge against Naas a prince of
great tyranny. For such causes wars may lawfully be attempted of magistrates
and princes. And the soldiers do well which herein obey their powers, yea
and dye gloriouslye and in a good state, in so dyenge for religion, for gods
laws, for their country, their wyffes and children. Therefore all such as
enter into war, and travel in the same, must not set their eye either upon
fylthy lucre nor voluptousnes, An instruction for soldiers
as they lightly do when Ieoperdy is past, but justice, peace, public
tranquyllite, and the defense of truth and innocence must be al their mark yt
they shute at: so that the wicked sort being conquered, the victory got. and
their enemies other r^pulsed or destroyed, true religion may florysh in
judgment and equity, the church may florysh, divine laws rites institutes,
and ecclesiastike ordinances may flo^yshe, studies and good arts may
prospere, the poor may be seen to: the widows and succourlesse chydren may be
helped, that me^ may live in rest, may serve and praise god, both aged persons,
chaiste maidens and honest matrones. To this mark ought al our eyes both of
mind and body. to be directed. These things had our valiant forefathers in
their sight whansoeuer they made any war against the wicked for their
ecclesiastik and publik right, as Abraham, Moses, Iosue, Dauyd, and other noble
captains, also our progenitors before us, to whom and to all such other
valiant soldiers perpetual fame and laud ought to be given in the
congregation of saynctes,

But to ye other toward and slouggish soldiers, wicked, couitouse,
blasphemers, riotous, and light ruffenes and betrayers, which by their
slougyshnes, riote, lechery, and impiety dis^roy many noble realms, now a
days, and many flourishing cities, to such be continual rebuke, and god him
self has cursed such wicked catyffes for ever. Therefore no war is lawful
except it be against our adversaries and misordered rebellers. Unjust wars be
such as be made against our own fellows or men fauteles, unjust wars
or in whom we se hope of ame^deme^t. Also unjust wars be they which be not
inferred after a dew manner, or for any urgent cause. All manner of ways ought
to be assayed tyrste, before we come to war. An instruction ^or magist^ates,
You must not seek to take in other men's bonds or limittes nothing
pertainynge to your right. You must not oppress the liberti^s of other
nations neither yet of your own. Such affectes which seduce the mind are
not here to be followed, as gredines of dominion, avarice desire of bribes
envy, or any such other like to these. War is a remedy, but dau^gerouse, a
help, but pernitiouse, much like to the cuttynge of of members. In case thy
hand be on fire, and so thy arm be in danger to be brent and afterward the
whole man likewise, yet doeste you not cut away thy hand straight ways
unless thou see, proving al manner of ways, no other help to be. So nether
is war to be set upon but where there is no other remedy, so yet that princes
remember, they do nothing which after wylbe to late. For just wars be not
repugninge to gods word in so much that it describes to us the laws of
warrefarre, and ministers to us many goodly examples of wars of wise and
worthy captains. In deu. xx. deu. xx, ^, xxi
we have laws of war profitable and necessary. so clear yt they need no
exposition Many other co^me^ rules alsoo we may gather out of scriptur as these
Principally and above al things let relygion be most observed in the camp.

Just laws no less ought to be kept in the middeste of wars as in the
midst of cities, the soldiers let them keep them in due order with all
honesty, Rue, iii b
justice, and holiness. For this proverb is of the devil, not of god that some
do say. Sileant inter arma leges. Laws keep silence in war. The chief
captain general let him be chosen a godly man, just, holly valiant, sapient,
and luckey, as was Iosue, David. Judas Machabeus, Constantinus. Theodosius,
Mascelser and many other let there be appointed to him an army of tried men.
^h^wling sou^diours
For in chusyng of soldiers great circumspeccion is to be had, that they be
not a company of weyklinges, vnskylful warryous, unfaithful, blasphemers wicked
wretches, dronken gluttons, and beastely bellyes.

Victory goyth not by the multitude of me^, but by the grace of god Vyctori
goes by grace not by multitude gr^e: iiii d Iudy. vii a i, reg. xvii
and by godly soldiers: it is an old proverb, where is a multytud, there is
confusion. Great and innumerable hosts do but combre and distroye themselves.
Experience and examples of the old time teach this sufficiently. Again such
warriers as will take no pain be lu^kish lubbers, be greatly to be
dyscommendid. Therefore let ever a christian warrioure be doing somethyng,
let hi^ be corrageous, faithful paynful obediente to his captain must never
let slyppe occasion well practiced in the feytes of war not tender but hard,
not cruel and fearse. but grave and gentyl according as time does serve The
thing yt may be sauyd let him not destroy. But above all other especially let
him not forget continually to pray unto god, both in ieopardy and out of
ieoperdy let him begin all things in the lord, a warryer must do all th^nges
in the name of the lord
and without the lord let him attempt nothing: in misfortune he must not be
discouraged, i^ prosperouse success, let him not be exalted, but give thanks
to god and use his victory with mercy, let his vyctorye only stand in god and
not in him self. let him seek for nothing more than for defense of his
country, of laws, of religion, of justice, and of innocents. Some here will
meruell I dare say that I require these things of souldyours, which were wont
in times paste to be required of religious and professed men.

As though soldiers were not also religious and professed to christ, or as
though only they may be profane and wicked, as indede many of them be. But what
fruits I pray you come of this side we be overcome of Turckes. we be a
mockingstoke to all nations, whole kingdoms perysshe, and be subdued to
Mahometes law, and we be daily entangled in great perplexities, what manner
of soldiers in time paste were chuson to war out of the church of
christians, it appears by one memorable hystorye of Tertullianus writing
thus to Scapula.

Marcus Aurelius alsoo warrynge in Germany, The manner of souldy^s in old time
thorough the prayers of christian soldiers made to god, obtained rain in
great drought. The manner o^ soudiours in old time.
And what droughtes can any man say but were stopped through our prayers and
fastyngs? than they also which cried to their great god in the name of iuppiter
did give testimonye to our god. Thus much says Tertullia. Eusebius lib. v ca, v
The same hystory does Eusebius also more largelye express in his
ecclesiastic book. v. cap. v saying, it chaunsed, says he, Marcus Aurelius:
the brother of Antoninus the emperor had warr^ with the germans, and
Sermatens, Iu^table miracle of christian soldiers
the stories witness, that his host was in great danger for drought and
drynes, and as he was consultyng and seking what to be done he found certain
christian soldiers in the camp which when they kneeled down as our fashion
is and prayed to god suddenly against all expectation rain powered down, their
thyrst was quentched their enemies driven away with lightninge and fire. This
same story is also written in the monimentes of ye gentyls but that it came by
the prayers of christians they make no mention thereof, as which give lyttel
credence to al other miracles of christen me^ tertuliane so does writ it
plainli to come by them. So does Apollinaris also a greike which says
moreover, that the same armey for the great miracle showed in it, was called of
ye lightni^g fulminia by the emperor him self. Tertullianus addyth moreover
that the pistle of Marcus the emperor was a broad, where in this miracle is
signified more euidentlye.

Thus much has eusebius, whereby we may see how christen soldiers in time
past, not only were all bent to prayer, but also full of al justice and
hollynes of life. It is evident that s. James says: The prayer of the just
does much avail. Jacob. v, c^
Helias was a man as we be, and he prayed, by and by the heaven gave rain, and
the earth gave his fruit. ^i reg. xviii.
Wherefore it is manifest that the old soldiers than were religiouse and
devout men, but our soldiers because they be far from al religion yea
enemies to true relygion therefore in stead of vyctores they bring a way
overthrows both of me^ and cities. Work well you citisens
And so the citesens be well and worthily served for that they put their
confidence in such wicked warriors which is even as much as if they should
put their confidence in very deuyls, ^f, par, xx^
whom these almost excede in all filthenes, cruelnes, and al wicked arts.
examples of godly wars warryoure, taken out of scripture


Examples of holy and just war, of holly and just captains we have
abundant in the word of god and almost innumerable? Abraham our predecessor
armed with a small host does set upon four ye most mighty kings or robbers of
all the world does overthrow them and drive the^ away, gene. xliii.
restoryth his own men with their goods gyuinge thanks to god the author of
such an incredible victory. Moses with Iosue Joshua: x. and
does throw down about thirtye and nine kings, does punyshe wyckednes sharply,
Number. xxi, and xxxi, etc,
do place their people in their land promised of god.

Iud. i, ii. tit ^ii. vi vii viii ^ede ye hole book.
The judges of israelites did keep worthy wars against the ethnickes and
infideles: and in them did assuage the tirannye of the wicked with which
tirrannye they oppressed ye children of god, and restored ye people to their
liberty and religion. i reg, vli viii and xii etc
Here comes also Samuel a worthy prophet amongst the noble captains of gods
people. i reg xiiii xviii xviiii xx xxiii etc
Ionathas the son of Saul was a noble captain, a notable example of godlynes.
Who was ever a more excellent captain than David he conquered the philistians,
i reg xvii and xx^i ^ ii reg v viii xxi etc i par xv ^ii regr
yt Ammonites and the Sirians and a great part of the east with his wars
both revenging injuries restorynge again liberte, and putting away
innumerable euyls from ye people of god* And yet he that did all this is called
a man after gods own heart ye and the i reg vii ^ romia ma^^ ut^m ii^
father of our lord. i regr evi e psalltre ix e ac um xiii ^
Jesus christ after the flesh.

In the posterity of David ye shall find notable warriors, and syngular
captains, Abias Asas, Iosaphat Amasias. Osias. Esechias with many other.

Judas machabeus amongst all other is not the vnwortheyst which stood so
valiantly for the laws of god for gods relygion, i macha iiiiiiiv vt viiiviiii^
and for the peoples right and at length was slain in Asia for the relygion
and the people of god. Yt nedyth not to ade herto the examples for
Constantinus, Gratianus, Theodosius, and other puissant princes. Of these and
such other S. Augustine in his bocke de, august the ciuitate dei lib v
Ciuitate dei. Lib. v. Has written aboundantlye, and Orosius likewise in his
history. Orosius, libra, vii, cap xxviii
Li. vii. From ye xxviii. Cap. Unto the end. This I thynk sufficient for good
magistrates. Thus far I have entreated of war how magistrates ought to use
them selves, and concerning the use of the sword,

Whereof also I have spoken some what, in my sermon upon the fifte commandment.

These things thus being concluded now we will discuss, whether it be lawful
for christianes to bear office or not and especially for ye occasion of
ceartain furious Anabaptystes, and new diuisors of new found commenweales,
which all eage against us that it is not lawful for christianes to be
magistrates because christianes do not contend in the market, neither do kyl
any man, neither seek again there goods taken away, nether revenge their
iniuties. And although these places of theirs be answered unto sufficiently, It
is lafull for christians to be magistrates
yet I bring here succinctlye certain arguments, whereby a polityke and
christian man against the furyous dreams of the Anabaptists may understand,
if he be called to office, that he may and ought to serve god well in kepinge
and well vsinge his office.

For where as they feign no manner of defense to be lawful by the gospel they
be far deceived for the veryte says otherwise.

For what things so ever be ordained of God to the health and saffety of man,
they be so seyming to a chrstiane man vsyng theme well and appleyng him self
thera^ter that if he refuse them, he is no true christian. For the greatest
charge of a christian. is to set forward with all industry the sauegarde and
wealth of men, Capi di a prou xxiiii c and xx a tuum iii a i p^try i. v
Now the magistrate is ordained of no man but of god him self to the sauegarde
and protection of men. As expressly it is witnessed by the prophets and
apostles and paul especially Ad romans xiii who so does not see than but a
christian may laudably^ bear the office of a magistrate. Forthermore no man
will deny I think that belongs to every christen man to declare his faith
not only with words, but with the works of justice and mercy, to see for the
public peace and tranquilite to follow justice and equite, to defend wydowes,
the fatherles, and expressed. Neither ought he to neglect occasion, place, or
any such mean, whereby he may exercise such benefits upon his brethren
Therefore it is not unknow that a christian may be a magistrate. For the
office of a magistrate is to e^ecute judgment, and justice, and to mayntaine
publyke peace.

Fow it is out of doubt and proved before, Work well
that Moses, Samuel Iosue, and David, and other more, are not to be excluded
from the name of christians, than seeing they were magistrates, why may not
christen men as well now a days bear office^

In the new testament many noble men be commendid which were in rule and
authorite, neither yet did they renounce their office because of religion. Luce
xxxii^
Of ^oseph of Aramatheus thus we reed in Luc. Behold there was a man called
Joseph a Centurion (s. mark says a senator) a good man and just, mar xv
and he consented not to their counsel and doings borne, in Aramathea a city
of the jews, which also did look for the kingdom of god. Note here what a
great commendation is given him.

Joseph is a Centurion, or a senator, and that an honest senator* he did sy^te
in the counsel house and amongst these judges which condemned christ, but
because he consented not with them he is excused gyltles from the blood, the
same also is notefied to be a good man and just, in the number of them, which
looked for the kyngedome of god that is, in the number of christianes, and for
all this was he yet a Centurion or a senatoure and dwelled in the city of
Jerusalem. A christian therefore lawful lie may bear office. Hereto may be
brought examples of the queen's chamberlayne of Aethiopia. Actum. viii. actum,
viii.
of cornelius the centurione. Actum. x. ctum x
of Eurastus the warden or stuarde of the city of Corinthe. Romans xvi.ii, romans
xvi i. T^tum ii^
Timo. iiii But I would the Anabaptists would prove that with scriptures which
they object, that these being converted after did lay down their rob and
sword. For we have proved it before by s. Augustines words upon the answer
of Ihon Baptist to the soldiers which was also a christen preeher that after
they were baptized, luc iii ^ Ihon, ii^
yet notwtstandinge were not deposed from their office neither had any such
commandment of Ihon to forsake their war far.

The lord refused to be made a king
And other objection they have, because the lord did withdraw hi^ self, what
time the people intended to make him king. Which thing he would not have done,
Ihon. vi. v
but to give example to all christians of humility, and to command in a
manner never to suffer any publyke administration to be put upon them, to this
they add the laiynges or the gospel. My kyngedome is not of this world.
Ihon. xviii c
Item The kings of the earth rain over them but you not lo. mat. x. d, mar^.
d^c luc. x^i v. art l^e, i, (...). v. a


Truth it is the lord a voyded the people. But how following the way that was
not reighte, neither intending to do the will of god, but blinded with carnal
affectes, and sekyng such things as were pertaynyng to belycheare. Forby cause
he fed them wonderfully / therefore they thought him a mete king for their
purpose, which could feed his subjects with much fare and no cost. math, xx, d.
Besides this our lord came not to bear rule in earth, after ye fashyo^ of
this world as the Jews imagined, thinking that Messiah should come like
Solomon, here to reign, and as Pilate feared.

Therefore said the lord well. Ihon. xviii e
My kingdom is not of this world. actum i, ^ mat xxvi f man, xxv in c tam
viii, e ephe. i, iiii
For he ascended up to heaven, sits on the right hand of the father, having
al kings subjected to him, and all the world, in ye which now he rayneth by
his word and spirit, which also he shall come to judge at the last day.
mat xxv: c rom, xiii, d ^i cor. ^, vltimo, iiiii, a i pet, iiii a ac^^. x..


And although christ denies his kingdom to be of this world, yet he never
denied but that kings and princes of the world should come into his church,
in the which they should serve the lord, not only as men but as kings and
princes. For kings can not serve the lord as kings otherwise tha^ by
exercysyng that wherefore they be made kings. And unless christian kings
might remain in their office. and govern kyngedomes after their rule and
laws of christ how could christ be called the king of kings, and lord of
lords. Therefore where the lord said, the kings of the earth do raygne over
them but you not so, he spoke this only to his apostles stryuyng for
superiorite, as though he would say. Princes raygnynge in the world be not
put down from their thrones and seats by my doctrine.

For mi doctrine does not abolysh polycie / office, nor magistrate in the world
or in ye church. The magistrate he shall reign, but you not so, you shall not
raygne, ye shall not be princes, but teachers of the world, and servants of
the church. Thus in few words have we answered to the objections of the
Anabaptystes, which we have confuted also in other places. Hitherto I thynk it
sufficiently declared, that a christen man not only may, but ought also to
bear rule and office, if it be ryghtfully offered unto him.

But before we knyt up this disputation, The day of subjects.
we will touch now briefly what is ye office of subjects, what every one owes
to his magistrate. First it is the part of subjects, to have a reverend and
honorable estimation of their princes and powers. And so to reverence them as
gods messyngers and ministres. Also outwardly to exhibit such homage unto
them as every man's countreye requires. It is a foul thing if subjects
irreverently should behave them selves to their magistrates. But a false and a
light opinion ones conceived of any thing does soon bring a contempt of the
same: Therefore here be to be gathered certain open testimonies of the
scripture, whereby to engendre into every man's mind a dew existimation and
reverence toward his magistrate.

Here now all princes and supercious must take heed lest through their
vnsemeable and dissolute life they bring them selves into contempt / and so by
their own default lose al their authority amongst the people. Truly god
him self disdaineth not to call princes and rulers by his awn propre name even
gods the places be Exo, xxi. and Psalm. lxxxii. Exodus, xxi. Psalm. lxxxii.
The apostles called them ye messengers and mynisters of god, ye places be. To.
xiii i. Pet, ii. Rom xiii a i pet ii b
Who will not magnifye with all reverence gods, and gods mynisters, thorough,
whom he works salvation to the people. He that rejects the messinger,
rei^ctyth him which sent him. Who so honoreth the messenger, seems to bestow
his honor most upon ye sender. Also says Solomon. prouer. xvi. prou. xvi
Divination is in the lyppes of the king therefore his heart does not
transgress. And. Ecclesi. viii. ecclesi viii
it is my part to observe the commandment of the king, and to have regard
to the oath of god. Item prou. xxiiii. Prou xxiiii
Mi child fear god, and fear thy king and keep no resort with the
sclaundederers. For their perdition shall rise quickly. ^om. xiii.
Saint Paul likewise Whosoever says he resists the hyer powers resists gods
ordination, and they which shall resist that, shall receive to them selves
judgment. Concerning this matter I have entreated also upon ye v.
commandment, Than let the subjects pray for ye princes and magistrates yt
god may grant them sapience, subjects to pray for their princes
prudence fortitude, temperau^ce justice, dew seuerite meiknes and other
virtues, to lead the^ in his ways and preserve them from all evil that we
may live peaceably and honestly in this world This does s. paul require of
subjects, i. Timo. ii. i timo. ii Iere, xxix,
And Ierem. xxix Many be slothful and negligent in this part and that makes
them some time to be pynched and feyle that they would not. And worthily. For if
they would do their deutye in prayng for their magistrates earnestly / they
should have better, In the old church what a fervent study they had to pray for
their magistrate the words of Tertullianus in his Apo. ca. xxx does well
declare, tertul. apolgeti. ca, xxx,
saying. Let us pray always for all rulers, and kings and Emperors, that they
may have long life, a quiet reign, a sayfe house, valiant soldiers,
faithful counsailers, honest subjects, a peaceable world, and what so ever
man or Emperor or king would have obtained.

Obedience of subjects
Subjects also ought to obei the laws of magistrates if they be good and
equale and so to obey them, that it be with all holy reverence and hearty
religion, as obeyinge not the laws of men but of gods ministers. i pet ii b
For Peter byddeth us be obedient for the lord. rom xiii b Titum iii
And Paul says subjects must be obedient not only for displeasur but also
for conscience sake. That is we must obey our magistrates. not only for fear
least we be punyshed for contempt and disobedience, but lest we sin
against god and our own conscience condemn us. We declared before in the
fifte commandment by diverse testimonies and examples of scripture, that we
be not bownd to obey the commandment of magistrates, We be not bound to
obey magistrates in things contrary to god
in things unlawful and against the word of god The Apostles and christianes
of the primative church would rather be imprisoned, banished, Rom viii ^ ii cor
iiii and v psa xliiii e
spoiled devoured of beasts, slain with sword, burned with fire and hanged,
than to obey wicked and unlawful commandments. The blessed martyr and bishop
Polycarpus Polycarpus
answeringe to the vnderconsul of Rome said. Our doctrine is, says he, to
princes and powers such as be of god to give honor, such honor as is not
contrary to the rule of our religion.

And Ihon Chrysostom Chrysost^
to Gainam said. Yt is not lawful for an Emperor which is the mayneteiner of
godlynes, to attempt any thing against the commandments of god.

Finally Subjects let them give Subei^s to pay trybute
to the magistrate tribute, yea their bodies and life also when need is for the
defense of their magestrate, and country, as I declared in the.v.
commandment, the lord expressly commands in the gospel. Give to god
those things which are gods, mark xxii, e and xvii d, rom xiii b
and to themperoure the things which are the Emperors. Whosoever ever be slack
nygarde, or any thing drawing back in this part they be greatly to be
reproved, Tributes be dew to the magistrate as the reward of his labor, and
as the synewe of public vtilite and quietness. For what man ever goyth to war
upon his own charge and stipend. Every man lives upon his labor which he
susteneth. The magistrate does labor the prince does labor in gouerni^g yt
co^me^ wealth and keeping peace. He omytteth his own private business at home
whereby else he might provide for him self. Therefore it were against al reason if
he should not be maintained with public charges. Also it is requiset that
kingdoms and publik weals be well appointed with sufficient riches, Richesse
be necessary ^o the publyke word.
to aid them with all in wars, in dearth, in fyers and other calamites, in
reparations, or in repellyng of greater dangers, here I speak nothing now of
public buyldinges as of keeping up the walls fortresses, trenches, diches
haue^s brygges, hye ways, fountaynes, condithes, the court haull, the market
place, with many other.

There be also public officers of justice, as sergeantes, herodes of arms,
watchemen and diverse such moo where as if money be not present, how can any
kingdom and commen wealth stand long. Richer work men
Therefore they which deny trybute, deny the dew stipend of men's labor, yea
and seek ye subversion of the comen wealth. They which be slack and vnlusteful
in publik labors and works, do sin not against one ruler, but against ye
whole body of ye comenalte. And commenly it is so seen such lystles and lither
laborers littel to be blessed of god and seldom to thryue.

Yet magestrates and princes here must be advertised, to love their subjects
committed to their faith and tuition, to spare them as gentyllye as they can,
to bear with them, and not to pyntche them with to importunat exactiones.
exactions
This may be done, if they wylbe temperant, and abstain from all superfluouse
excess and pride. Let a good prince thus considre with hi^ self, a goodly
^^^son for princes
how unequal it is for his court to ouerflowe all, withal excess and
superfluyte, and all his other cities and subjects to be pi^ched by the belly
at home. Let rulers of realms remember, tributes, taxes and customs to be
publyke and not private goods.

God hates pollers and extorcioners. God abhors unmeasurable exactions,
taxes or tolles. God does execrate tyrannies still pylelinge the people. He
does bless gentyl and moderate princes.

The just concord of subjects avails more in peace and out of peace, A
golden sentence
than monye unjust. And stronger is the realm with less abundance, Good
subjects mark this lesson.
and more concord betwyxt the superiors and inferiors, than with infinite
treasures, where magistrates and subjects do not agree.

This is no lie / Commen experience testifies the same.

Thus much good audience, have I entreated concerning magistrates upon the
occasion of the syxte commandment thou shall not kyl declaring as brefly as I
culd under your charitable audience, why magistrates be ordained of god, what
is their duty to their subjects. What is the deutye of subjects to the^. Now
let us prostrat our supplication to god that of his clemency he will so grant
both to the magistrates and to ye subjects, that they may both walk worthy
to their vocation.

God grant. Amen.
Of sedicion Insurreccion, and rebellion, and their punyshemente read these
places.

Number, xvi fig. xx. a. Iudicu^. ix. d. e. f. xii. a. b. ii. Reg. xx. iii. reg.
i. a. i. Hester. ii. d. Act. v. e. xix. c. xviii. b. ^

Seek peace, and ensue it.

Psalm. xxxiii. i, pet. iii. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,

Psalm cxi. b. prou, ix, b. Job, xxviii. c. Eccle. i, c, Impri^ted for Gwalter
Lynne dwelling upon Summers Kaye by Byllynges gate. In the year of our lord
god. M.D.Xlix, The xxiii, day of August,

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


