A Comparison between the ancient faith of the Romans, and the new Romish
Religion.

Set forth by Frauncis Bunny, sometime fellow of Magdalen College in Oxforde.

MATTHEW. 15. 13. Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted up.

Printed by Robert Robinson for Raph Jackeson. 1595.

To the Right Honorable my very good Lady Katheren Countise of Huntingdon,
Frauncis Bunny wishes increase of honor here, and everlasting life elsewhere.
*
IF truth shame not more of any thing, Contra valentinianos.
then when she is hid, as Tertullian truly writes: then it behooves her
friends to do her that favor, that by all means possible they will earnestly
endeavor to bring her to light, that she may be seen of them that seek her,
and known of them that love her. And although this may perchance seem a hard
attempt in these our days, wherein falsehoode makes so fair a show, and has
so great appearaunce of that it is not, and every man claims to the truth,
be their doctrines never so diverse, yet since God has given us means to drive
away those thick clouds of error and ignorance, that the sun of truth
may shine unto the world, I have endeavored in this short treatise, to take
away that colorable show of truth from the Church of Rome, that the
undoubted truth of the Church of Christ may the better appear. For we have a
touchstone, the word of God that cannot lie, a rule that cannot deceive, by
which whatsoever we try and examine, it will soon be seen whether it be
true or false. Truth also is a thing that is ancient, and has bin always, De
virginibus velandis.
says Tertullian, and like the good corn that was first sown: but error is
that bad seed which was cast after into that field by the envious man. Tertul.
de prescriptionibus aduersus Haereticos.
Seeing therefore that is true that was first, and what so ever comes after
is false: how easy a matter is it for such as search, to see the light, and
for them that inquire after her, to find the truth? For if it be true that
the Scriptures teach, and that only, then all that is not agreeable to that
truth, must needs be false. And if that only be now true, which in the
Apostles times was true: no number of days or years shall prove that not to
be false now, which then was not true. Therefore for the benefit of all such
as love the truth, I have in this treatise set down, the doctrine which was
first taught and preached at Rome in the Apostles days, whereof no man
doubts, but that it must be the infallible word of God, and Christian
religion. Then also I have added thereunto that which is now holden for the
Romish religion and Catholic faith there. And because these two do very
much differ, as he that reads will soon see (for indeed they are nothing
like:) and we are assured that that which Gods word delivers, and was
first, must needs be current, that which has no warrant in the word, and
comes after, must needs be counterfeite. I have endeavored to be short,
because I hoped it would be the more willingly read, and the better remembered.
And for that cause I have not answered the arguments, which the Romish
Catholics use for defense of their opinions, and the rather because it is
performed in an other treatise. But I trust in this it will appear, that he
that will embrace the Catholic Faith that was then, when the faith of the
Romans was commended, whereof the Papists make great bragges, must needs
detest that Romish faith that is now, and account it most blasphemous. This
little work I have been bold to dedicate unto your good Ladyship, not only
as a discharge of my duty of thankfulness toward your Honor, to whom you
bound me long since by many undeserved courtesies: but also because that
then I knew your great zeal, and fervent desire and love to the truth, and
your Christian care to augment your knowledge of the will of GOD: Whereof I
nothing doubt, but the Lord has given unto you great and happy increase. To
whose abundant mercies in Christ I commit your good Ladishippe, always praying
that he will here confirm you in his truth, and continue all his good graces
toward you, until he shall take you out of this vale of misery, to reign
with him in endless glory, Amen.

A Comparison between the ancient faith of the Romans, and the new Romish
Religion, set forth by Frauncis Bunny, sometime fellow of Magdalen College in
Oxford.
CHAP. I.
IT is a dangerous stombling block, which the Church of Rome has cast in the
ways of the ignorant, whereby they are made to fall into the deep dungeon of
Popish heresies and superstitions, when they bear the world in hand, as much
as they can, that the Apostle in commending the faith of the Romans that then
was, or rather in testifying that it was published through the world, Romans 1. ^.
does approve the faith also that now is there taught. True it is that only
they that are stark blind, would stumble at that stone: for he that is but
half sighted, may plainly see that the Apostle speaks but of the faith of
the Romans that then was, and does not promise or prophecy, that it should be
so always. In the beginning God planted true Religion and the fear of him, in
the hearts of men and women: but in continuance of time, that plant of the
Lords own plaining, was so ouergrowen with the weeds of wickedness of life, and
superstitions serving of God, that it was hardly to be seen emongst men. In so
much as of the times of Enos it is written, (as if the world had for a long
time forgotten that there is any God) that then he began to call upon the name
of the Lord. Genesis 4. 26.
Yea that which was at the first delivered from God as a perfect rule of life,
and written in the heart of man: Yet was by the corruption of man so blotted
out, and by the darkness of our minds so defaced, that God was forced as it were
to write it a new (that it might the better be remembered) in the tables of
stone. Yea and such is the force of our natural and hereditary infection, that
we cannot long keep the truth sincerly delivered unto us, without mingling, or
mangling of the same. De praescrip. aduers. haereticos.
And therefore Tertulian teaches us truly, that the truth must be before
heresy, even as the body is before the shadow: Math. 13. 24.
And he proves it by that parable of our Savior Christ, wherein the good seed
is said first to be sown and after the ^ares. And so concludes that that
doctrine is from the Lord, and true, that is first, and that which comes
after, Contra epistolam Stephani.
is false and strange. And Ciprian also confirms the same, when for
reformation of any error, he teaches us to have recourse to the fountain.
Which rule of Ciprian S. Augustine also commends unto us, De baptismo contra
Donatist. li. 5. ca. 26. Vincient. Common.
as a very good rule and worthy to be followed. And Vincentius Lirinensis in
his Commonitory, does not more earnestly endeavor any thing then that without
any addition, we keep sincerely that which is delivered: yea it is his only
intent and purpose, his whole drift and desire, to teach us to love that first
was taught, and to eschew al new additions. Therefore howsoever religion at the
first, was either at Rome or else where truly established, yet that is no good
argument to prove, that it should so continue always. Whereof if we would make
any doubt, let us look back unto the Church amongst the Jews, where God
established among them for his service and worship, every ceremony, so that in
every thing they had plain direction by Gods law, how to behave themselves:
yet notwithstanding their own inventions which they added thereto were so many,
that Christ when he came complained: Math. 15. 6.
That by their traditions, they made Gods commandment of no authority. And if
this befell unto the people of the Jews, of whom God made especial choice,
and took them to be his peculier people: why may it not befall unto the Church
of Rome that is but one of the places among others, which God had chosen to set
his name in? Romans 15. ^^.
And if the goodness which the Apostle commends in them, was not in them such
a continual or eternal inheritance, but that they have long since lost the
same, as themselves cannot deny: how will they be able to prove, that they must
have sincerity of faith for an everlasting succession? I will not here stand to
examine what the Apostle means by this word faith in this place, although
that perchance might serve to lay their brags. For amongst many significations
of this word faith, there are two that may especially serve for the
understanding of that place. Sometime faith signifies religion it self, or
the rule of faith, as it is taken in this question, what faith or religion do
you profess or are you of? And in this sense it must be taken in this place to
pleasure the papists. And in another sense faith may here signify their
forwardnes, confidence and constancy in this their religion: and so it seems
that the Apostle here does understand it* And then this is the sense of these
words: It is spoken of in all the world, how readely you received, and
constantly continued in the faith. And thus does Chrisostom seem to expound
this place, Ad Romanos Sermon. 2.
when he says that the Apostle gives thanks for their faith and confidence,
as if he would by the latter expound the former, by confidence teach what he
means by faith. Tho. Aquin. in Romans lect. 5.
And even Tho. of Aquin does so take it: The Romans (says he) are commended
for their faith, because they yielded to it so willingly, and stood in it so
stiffly. And this place thus expounded, does not prove their faith to be
Catholic: for many are constant that oppugn the Catholic faith. Neither
yet will I oppose unto this some other places, where the Apostle may seem
perchance to give as great, if not greater commendation unto other Churches;
and yet were not they thereby advanced to be the only patterns that all other
should follow, as they would have this of Rome to be. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8.
For the Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, testifies of them, that they
were an example or pattern not only to them of Macedonia and Achaia, but that
their faith was spread abroad in all the world. Is therefore the faith of the
Thessalonia^s at this day the true faith because it was so sometime? If you say
it is not, what is said here more for the Church of Rome, then was said for
that of Thessalonica? Although therefore to their immortal praise, this just and
due commendation belonged unto them who followed that sincere faith and holy
profession, which at that time was taught at Rome: Devnit. eccle
yet he cannot as much as seem to be a Christian (as Ciprian says) who
continues not in the truth of that gospel and faith* Whereby it is evident,
that unless the Church of Rome can show, that they hold that same faith now,
that their predecessors did whom S. Paul commended, this praise of those
faithful Romans, belongs no more unto them, then this promise that God made
to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7.
That God would be his God, and of his seed, pertains to Ismael and Esau who
although they came of Abraham as touching the flesh, yet were they and their
posterity a godless and a graceless people. But that it may appear as clear
as the Sun at noone day, that under an honest cloak of ancient religion, they
seek to cover their new found superstitions (and whatsoever man has devised
is but new) and under the name of holy faith, they commend unto us, their
gross Idolatries, and most profaned blasphemies: My purpose is, (if God with
his good grace shall assist me therein in this short treatise, briefly to set
down, both the ancient religion of the Romans, which at that time was taught
and received in Rome, when this their faith was published in the whole world:
and also the faith or religion that is now, so violently defended of the Church
of Rome and is (although unjustly) called, the Catholic Romish religion: that
we comparing the one of them with the other, may see how unlike they are, and
that they cannot flow both from one fountain, or both of them be taught of one
spirit. And if we will know the ancient religion of the Romans, and the faith
whereunto the Apostle gives so good a witness, we can have no way more
certain, then to try what was taught in the Church of Rome then. For that
only can be called that Roman faith, that was then taught in that Church, and
believed of the faithful there. All which with reverence we receive, and most
faithfully believe. But the additions of later times, and that which since they
have foysted in under the name of that ancient Roman faith, we justly reject,
as water mingled with the pure wine, whereby the wine is corrupted, or as mire
or filth that has sullied the fined gold, whereby the excellency of the gold
is blemished, or as tares and weeds sown in the field where first good corn
was sown, whereby the growing of the good corn is hindered. But what so ever
the Apostle Saint Paul writing to the Romans, does teach them to believe,
whatsoever faith he would have them to hold, that we acknowledge to be in
deed the true Roman faith, in the which he is desirous to confirm and
strengthen them by some special gift, Romans 1. 11. 12.
and to have mutual conference with them, no doubt to encourage them to
continue constantly therein. Yea what soever he teaches in that Epistle,
whether it be to establish them in that they had learned, or to instruct them
more perfectly in any point whereof they were yet ignorant, I say all that we
embrace as the ancient faith of the Romans. Moreover whatsoever Saint Peter
who they say was Bishop of Rome, and that he wrote his first Epistle from Rome
(for rather then Saint Peter should not be proved to be at Rome, they are
content to call Rome Babylon) whatsoever I say he wrote in that Epistle, which
they say that he wrote from Rome we also most readily receive as that old and
authenticks Roman religion, whereof we will make no doubt at all. And further,
whatsoever doctrine can be proved out of Saint Marks Gospel, De Romans pont li.
2. cap. 2.
which Master Bellarmine goes about by testimony of sundry ancient writers
to show, that it was written at Rome, as he heard Saint Peter preach the same,
that also we will acknowledge to be the Roman faith, which is still to be
followed. So that whatsoever either Saint Paul wrote to the Romans, or Saint
Peter being (say the papists) among the Romans, wrote unto the dispersed Jews,
or Saint Mark at Rome have taught, and what soever is consonant and consenting
therewith, that is undoubtedly received of us. But that which cannot be found
agreeable to any of these writings I trust any indifferent reader will think,
that we may justly suspect, as neither taught by those godly teachers, neither
yet believed of those famous and faithful scholars, and therefore of none
acknowledged at that time for the faith of the Romans. And if then it were not
the faith of the Romans: what need either the Rhemistes in their edition of the
testament, In Romans 1. 8.
or all the rest of them, so confidently to brag, that the faith of the
Romans was so commended of the Apostle? Must it needs follow that the Romish
faith that now is, is true, because that was good and godly? Suspend thy
judgment (good Christian Reader) and come not with a preiudicate opinion. Try
and then trust, prove and examine whether we or the Romish Church, come nearer
to the ancient Roman faith, and be bold to hear and follow them, that
believe as those first believing Romans were taught and veleeued. And who so
ever they be that dissente from that faith, or swerve any thing from that
religion, or ad any thing to that doctrine, say not to such, so much as God
speed* For they are in deed heretics and enemies to Gods truth, they are the
corrupters of his most sacred word, they are the very botches and blanes of
all Christian Religion. And that thou may (good Christian reader) more
readily see, and more easily judge, both of that old Roman faith, and this new
Romish Religion, my meaning is so to compare the one of them with the other,
that at one view, thou may see them both. Wherein I dare promise nothing, but
sincere dealing, both in setting down, whatsoever Saint Paul, Saint Peter, or
Saint Mark have taught us, concerning such points as are in question: and also
in poynting unto the doctrine of our adversaries, I will not charge them with
any thing untruly, I will not falsify any of their writings, that the truth
may appear, and God may have the glory. Let us therefore see first what was
then, and what is now taught there of the word of God.

CHAP. II.
SAint Paul in that Epistle that he writes to the Romans teaches, Gods word
powerful and necessary for all.
that The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes. Romans 1. 16.
By the Gospel, he means that part of Gods word, Gospel.
that preaches unto us that joyful news of our atonement made with God,
which elsewhere he calls the word of Reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5. 19.
This word he says is The power of God: The power of God.
For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to
cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5.
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Of this
powerful word, Iere. 23. 29.
GOD spoke long before Saint Paul's time by his Prophet Jeremy. Is not my word
even like a fire says the Lord, and as a hammer that breaks the stone? Hebr.
4. 12.
Of the power of this word thapostle writes, that It is lively, and mighty in
operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, even to
the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the ioints, and the
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart. Esaias 49.
2.
Yea, Christ himself in the Prophet Esaias is brought in confessing, that the
Lord Has made his mouth like a sharp sword. So that this word is neither so
blunt or dull, or so unable to make the man of GOD perfect to every good work,
as the adversaries of the Gospel would have us to imagine it to be. So that in
this place Saint Paul does give testimony, Iam. 1. 22.
that the word of God is as Saint James says, able to save our souls: 2.
Timot. 3. 16.
And profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
Saint Peter therefore does liken the word to a seed, and that to such a seed,
as does (if the fault be not in us) spring and grow unto eternal life. For as
the good seed, if it be cast in a good ground, and moistened in due season with
the dew of heaven, can not but be fruitful when the time shall serve: even so
Gods word, if it sound To him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, Esaias 66.
2.
and trembles at his words, and be watered by the graces of Gods holy spirit,
it cannot, it will not be unfruitful. Saint Mark also in that parable of the
seed that falls upon the good ground, Mark. 4. 8.
and brought forth fruit, some thirty, some sixty, some a hundred fold: does
sufficiently testify unto us of the efficacy of the word, if by reason of the
infirmity of our flesh, and corruption of our sinful nature, the edge thereof
be not rebated, and the force hindered. Not because I ascribe such force either
unto the sound, that we may hear, or the letters, that we may read, but unto
the sense and substance of the word; unto the lesson that may be gathered out
of the same. Whereunto we see Saint Paul writing to the Romans, and Saint
Peter being at Rome (as our adversaries affirm) and S. Mark also there
according to the doctrine of S. Peter as they tell us, penning his gospel, do
give this effect that it is of power to save, and the very seed of eternal
life. They find not therein any such hardness, as should drive men and women
from the reading thereof. They find no such dangers, they spy no such perils.
But on the contrary it was holden for good doctrine at Rome, 1. Pet. 3. 15.
when Saint Peter did write (if from thence he wrote) Always to be ready with
all meeknes and reverence, to answer to every body, that shall ask a reason
of that hope which is in you. And that this is required of every man and woman,
that should sanctify the Lord God in their hearts, even of servants, and not
of masters only, of wives* and not of husbands only: it is more plain, then
that it can be probably denied. Now to yield a reason of thy faith, requires
much greter knowledge, then to make confession of thy faith. So that here the
Apostle seems to require that of them, that S. Paul does assure himself
that he shall find in them, namely that they are so filled with all knowledge,
Romans 15. 14.
that they can admonish one an other. Philip. 1. 9. 10
Yea this knowledge is so necessary for all Christians that Saint Paul always
wishes it to be in such as he writes unto, Coloss. 1. 9. 10.
and prays that they may have it. But seeing this hope that is in us, is
grounded upon the word (for otherwise it is but a foolsh fancy, and no sound
hope) the knowledge whereby we must be made able to answer of the same, must
be the knowledge of Gods word. Yea whatsoever besides that we do know it may
perchance some way satisfy our humor, and serve for some turns, but this
one knowledge, is that only that is necessary and without which we cannot but
err, as Saint Mark himself reports unto us that Christ told the Jews:
Mark. 12. 24.
Do you not err, because you know not the Scriptures? So that we see, that
the ancient doctrine of the Church of Rome was this: That to know Gods word
is the means or power whereby God saves us, and the seed of everlasting
life. And therefore as the knowledge thereof is comfortable and profitable, so
to be ignorant thereof, is very dangerous for any Christian man or woman.

But the now Romish Church, Gods word reproched.
does not only suffer without any public showing of their mislike, the sacred
Scriptures, and Gods written word, to be most reprochfully disgraced, and
blasphemously scorned at, by comparing it to a leaden rule, a nose of wax,
Inkye divinity, and with such like profane and godless scorns: but also
they teach, that that word of truth wherewith (Saint James says) God has
begotten us, Iac. 1. 18.
is doubtful and may be wrested any way: it is not sufficient to teach us all
truth, Doubtful and not sufficient.
without the help of traditions: Ignorance mother of devotion.
it is hard to be understood, and therefore the people must not read it. And
that it is best for the people to be ignorant still: for ignorance is the
mother of devotion. So that we see the ancient Church of Rome commended unto
us Gods word as most necessary for Christians: the now Church of Rome
condemns the same, not as needless only, Dangerous.
but even as hurtful and dangerous. They hated ignorance as a sworn enemy to
Christianity: these reverence her, as a fruitful and the only mother of
popery. Therefore the old faith of the Romans, and the new Romish religion
are in this nothing like. Gods word must have power from man.
And yet there is not any greater disgrace, that they can lay upon this
powerful word, then that which blasphemously they affirm, and profanely
maintain, that even this power of GOD, and immortal seed, has no power at
all or authority, Eckius in enc^i. de auto Eccle.
unless the Church authorize the same. As though this power of God, that it
may be powerful, Mark. 4* 3.
must receive power from man: and this seed, that GOD that sower went forth to
sow, cannot grow, unless man give it increase.

CHAP. III.
THere is also in these days great question what is Gods word, that is to say,
what that word is, that should be the rule of religion and conversation. What
is Gods word.
For the which the old religion of Rome was this: That in any wise they should
take heed of such as make division, and give occasion of evil contrary to
that doctrine which they had learned. Rome. 16. 17.
And S. Paul prays that they may be Confirmed according to his gospel, and
preaching of Jesus Christ. 25.
As for other word then that he did teach, or other gospel then that he did
preach, as he here teaches the Romans, Gal. 1. ^.
that they ought not to believe, so he flatly writes to the Galathians, that
If he or an Angel from heaven, preach any other gospel, they should be so
far from receiving it, that they should hold him accursed that brings it.
And S. Peter commending the word whereby men (by their sinful nature mortal)
are made immortal, poynting unto that word shows what it is, And this is
(says he) the word, which by the gospel is preached unto you. 1. Pet. 1. 25.
And in the end of this his first epistle he protests. This is the true grace
of God wherein ye stand. That is to say, 1. Pet. 5. 12.
this faith or religion that you have been taught, this doctrine of the
gospel which you have learned, is the true faith, the true religion, a true
doctrine. For so do Claudius Guilliandus and Iac. Faber no enemies to popery
expound it. Then by the old faith of Rome we see, that that which they then
preached, and that which was agreeably to that rule, is the truth: even that
which was then Depositum committed or taught, not any thing that should be
afterward committed to them or taught. And this is in truth that old word of
God, which was then acknowledged for Gods word, and had not any beginning from
later times, this is in deed an ancient religion, Which was promised before by
the Prophets in the holy Scriptures. Romans 1. 2.
But the now Romish faith cannot abide this doctrine. And therefore our new M.
of Rome have decreed, that all the books of the old and new testament (as well
the Apocrypha as Canonical) and also the traditions themselves concerning faith
or manners, Apocrypha and traditions added to Gods word.
shall with like affection be believed, and with like reverence received. Yea
and they are not ashamed to teach that these their traditions are more
necessary and profitable then Gods word. We see then that the old religion of
Rome, taught both by Peter and Paul, is to rest in that word that then was
taught without adding thereto. The Romish religion that now is, does arrogate
unto themselves always to add as they see cause, which their additions are
nothing else but an augmenting of the heaps of their superstitions: whereas
August. Hierom. and others, appoint the listes and limits of Gods word, to be
the Law, the Prophets, the Evangelists, and Apostles.

CHAP. IIII.
THen let us come to the question of justification, which is ye very sum of
true Christian divinity. And it is the intent and purpose of the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Romans, most exactly to teach the same. For when the good seed
of our free justification in and for Christ was sown in the ground of their
hearts: then came the envious man and sought to sow sundry sorts of bad weeds
there also. For some there were that were altogether enemies to the gospel of
Christ as were the obstinate Jews, who could not abide to hear of this
salvation by Christ. Others believed in part the gospel, but thought yet that
the ceremonies which God commanded (not knowing that they were appointed but
until the time of reformation should come) should not be abrogated, and
therefore would mingle the Law with the gospel. Who also looked to be
justified by the Law and the works thereof, Rom 10. 5.
because it was promised: He that does these things shall live thereby. There
were also a third sort perchance, namely such as were converted from Gentilisme
that being proud of that grace that was brought unto them, were not only more
secure of their own estate, then was for their safety, but also despised the
Jews as a people so rejected, as if God unmindful of his promise, would never
be reconciled to them again. Against al which the Apostle in this Epistle
teaches, Justification by faith without the works of the Law.
that al people that believe, of whatsoever cuntry or nation, are freely
justified by faith in Christ. And first he proves that neither Jew nor gentile
(under which two al are comprehended) can be justified by doing the works of
the Law, because none can fulfill the Law, neither the gentiles by that light of
nature, the Law written in their heart, neither the Jews by that knowledge of
the Law that they so much bragged of. And this the Apostle performs (as the
diligent Reader may observe) from the xvii. Romans 3. 20.
verse of the first Chapter, unto the xxi. of the third chapter. So that he
flatly concludes. Therefore by the works of the Law, shall no flesh be
justified. Now this place being so plain as it is, against justification by
works, the doctrine of merits is quite ouerthrown, if some color be not devised
to avoid the force of this testimony. The Romish Catholics therefore endeavor as
much as they can to make us believe that those words must have another sense
and understanding, then we take them to have: but what sense that is they are
not yet resolved. Bellarmin. de iustif. li. 1. c. 19.
For some say that the Apostle by the works of the Law means the works of
the Ceremonial Law, and in deed many of the Papists do so expound it. But
Master Bellarmine likes not of that answer, and confesses in plain terms
that not only the observation of the Law of ceremonies, but also the keeping
of the moral Law is excluded from justification: but yet he would have us to
imagine, that only such works as are done before we believe, Council. Trident.
are denied to justify us. Sess. 6.
As for the works that we do after, they do justify and merit as they teach
us. Against merit,
And this their absurd opinion, proceeds of their ignorance of the intent and
meaning of the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans. For Master Bellarmine in
the place before alleged, does affirm, that the Apostle there, as also in his
Epistle to the Galathians, goes about to prove that none can be saved without
faith, or without Gods mercy: which is in deed the truth, but it is not the
whole truth. For he is also as careful to take away the confidence that any
had or might have in their own works. And because he writes to them who had
faith already (for, Their faith was published throughout the world:) Romans 1. 8.
and teaches us that all our rejoicing, Romans 3. 27.
by this justification by faith in Christ is taken away (but where is merit,
there is rejoicing in our selves) therefore it is plain that the Apostle
excludes here from justifying al works. This also appears by the setting
down the true cause of justification ( By faith) and removing the wrong cause
in so general terms: 28.
( Without the works of the Law) and that also the Apostle does after in the
example of Abraham. All which may teach us, that S. Paul here indeuoreth, to
take from all works, when soever we do them, all hope of being saved thereby,
to the end that our pride in our own works being abated, and our boasting
taken away, He that rejoices may rejoice in the Lord. For this cause also the
Apostle does afterward so set works and merit against grace, as if the one of
them does quite overthrow the other: 1. Cor. 1. 31.
If by grace, not now by works, for then grace is no more grace: but if it be
of works, Romans 11. 6.
then is it now no grace, for then work is no work. We see then, that S.
Paul teaching that we cannot be justified by works, to the end that our Jesus
may be indeed a true, only, and perfect Savior, and fully save us from al our
sins, takes away from all our doings the hope of meriting and deserving the
same. And to this end the Apostle S. Peter also, 1. Pet. 1. 3.
in the beginning of his first Epistle does make mention of Gods abundant
mercy whereby we are not only begotten to a lively hope, but also Kept by the
power of GOD through faith unto salvation. Therefore I say he teaches us, 5.
that we obtain this by Gods great goodness, because he would not have us
any thing to trust in our merits, but in that, God of all grace, who will make
us perfect, (for our works cannot do that) that we may ascribe, 1. Pet. 5. 10.
To him glory and dominion for ever, Object.
(and not to our selves, or our goodness.) But if any man reply that this
doctrine seems contrary to that which Saint Paul writes to the Romans,
Romans 3. 6.
That God will reward every man according to his deeds: Or to that Saint Mark
reports that our Savior Christ promised, Mark. 9. 41.
That he, who in his name, gave a cup of cold water to drink to his servants,
Solution.
should not leese his reward, thus I answer: God in mercy promises reward
to such as do his will, and in mercy he likewise performs the same, not
waighing the work, but remembering his mercy. So that herein we may rather
commend Gods faithfulness, in keeping his promise always: then esteem of our
works. For who will think that a cup of cold water gyuing, may be worthy of
eternal life? And the words of Saint Paul are plain enough, if we wrest them
not out of their natural sense. For we deny not that GOD rewards men
According to their works. And the place proves not that GOD rewards them
For their works, and that sense only can establish their doctrine of merits:
but thapostle says there only thus much, that good works shall have a good
reward of eternal life, glory, honor, and peace: Evil works their due
reward of wrath, indignation, tribulation, and anguish. So that according to
the quality of their works, (the quality I say, and not the merit) GOD in
mercy, according to his promise, shall give honor and immortality to them
that seek to serve him. This therefore stands still, the undoubted old faith
of the Romans, That by the works of the Law, Romans 3. 20.
there shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight. James 2. 21.
For howsoever Abraham was justified by works (before men) as others also are
Justified, that is declared and accounted before men just,) by works, and not
by Faith only. 14.
(For even Saint Bede expounds that place of Saint James, for the approving
of Abraham's faith or making it to appear) yet I say, Before God, works cannot
justify. And this is the ancient Roman faith, received also and taught of the
ancient Fathers, In Romans Ser. 7.
both writing of this Epistle to the Romns, and else where. Chrysostom says,
that this righteousness is called Gods righteousness, because man cannot work it
but God only. And after, That the Son has perfected it wholly with his
blood. In Romans Ser. 2.
And in another place very notably: For thou shall not obtain (this
righteousness) by thy travels and labors, but thou must freely receive that
which is from above of Gods free gift: bringing with thee of thine, only this
one thing, namely that thou believe. Then which words, what can more plainly
impugn the doctrine of our adversaries, or show what was the judgment of this
ancient father concerning this point? But that consent and consenancy which we
find in many of the Fathers, Faith only.
as in Origin, Hierom, Ambrose, Isichius, Basil, Athanasius, Primasius,
Hillary, Theodoret, Bernard, giving that work to Faith only, to save or
justify, may sufficiently persuade us how fast they held this old Religion, or
Romish faith, that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law. I
may therefore I trust with Cyprian conclude, Romans 3. 28.
that If Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness:
Lib. Epist. 2.
Every one also that believes God, Epist. 2.
and lives by Faith, is found just, and is declared to be already made happy
and righteous in faithful Abraham.

But the new Romish Religion is this, Works justify.
That good works do merit justification and eternal life, Council. Trid. sess.
6. can. 26. 32.
So that by their good works they say they can satisfy for their sins. And
for this cause when at shrift they have confessed their faults, their ghostly
father (for so they term him) will inioine some penance unto them, whereby they
tell them that they may satisfy for their sins, and make recompense to God
for them. For alms and fasting (says one) does easily carry men into heaven.
Ioh. Bethel. in rationa. divine. cap. 65.
And thus in this their new Religion they do not only expressly set themselves
against that old Roman faith, wherein we are taught that good works cannot
justify before God, but also blasphemously they rob Christ of his office,
John. 1. 20.
who is in truth only that Lamb of GOD that takes away the sin of the
world: 1. John. 2. 2.
and is the propitiation for the same. Heb. 10. 14.
Who with one offering (by offering himself a Sacrifice for our sins) has
made perfect for ever them that are sanctified.

CHAP. V.
ANd as this ancient faith which was then ye faith of the Romans when their
faith was commended, The manner of justifying by faith.
does put us past hope of being saved by our works: Romans 3. 24. 25.
sait does teach us that this salvation is without our merit freely bestowed
upon us that believe. We are (says S. Paul) justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Whom GOD has set forth to be
a propitiation by faith in his blood, in declaring his righteousness, by the
forgiving of sins that are past, etc. In which words we see again that our
justification is free, therefore not for our works, but by grace. We see the
means of this our salvation, even the redenption that is in Christ Jesus. We
are also taught the means how it is applied to us by faith: And that not
simply by faith, as if it were free for us to repose this our faith and
confidence, according to our own fancy, upon any helps that we can devise,
but by faith in his blood. Then also we learn here what is this
justification, the forgiveness of sins. But is Christ only profitable to them
that were in his time, and to us that have been or are since? Yes verily He
declares his righteousness in forgiving the sins that are past, such as his
chosen servants have committed since the world began, for so both S. Ambrose,
and their own friend Tho. of Aquin seem to understand the sins that are past.
Which former sins or sins that are past seeing it is received by so general a
consent of the old translation, The Rhemists take from the word.
and the interpreters, I marvel that the Rhemists do leave it out. If we had
so done we should have been cried out upon, for falsifyers of the word of
God, and deprauers of the same. I would also ask why in translating into
English, they would rather retain the Latin word Gratis, then set down the
English word Freely. What was the English so plain, that you could not devise
any color, that might seem plausible to your fauorits, for the maintenance of
your new heresy? If you thought so, why give you not glory unto God,
confessing your error, that others might learn by you, not to be deceived any
longer. If you saw not your misliking why when you should translate and make
the word plain, do you so hide this light, under the close bushel of your
words, unknown to them that should read your book? For thus our new
Masters of Rheimes do translate Justified gratis by grace and caet. Romans 3. 24.
what these mean by translating thus let the world judge. But the sum of the
ancient doctrine is this, that we are justified freely without deserving even
by the forgiveness of our sins through faith in Christ his blood, which is
gathered not only out of the words of S. Paul by me alleged, but also
through out all his Epistles. Which testimonies I omit because that which is
already said is so plain, and my especial purpose is to show what has been
the ancient faith of the Romans. As therefore we see what S. Paul taught
them, so let us see if S. Peter in that his Epistle, which they say he wrote
from Rome, have said any thing for that point. He says That we are kept by
faith unto salvation. And that The reward or end of our faith, 1. Pet. 1. 5.
is the salvation of our souls. And again that Christ was showed in these
last times for your sakes (says he) which by his means do believe in God. 9.
20. 21.
And whosoever shall mark, how the Apostle S. Peter in that first Chapter, of
his first Epistle, does set forth the excellency of our hope, and the
redemption that we have in Christ, which is the end or reward (not of our
works) but of our faith, yea how that Christ is showed for us that believe,
and that the Apostle in speaking of our salvation does not make our works any
cause thereof, but on the contrary ascribes it wholly to Gods mercy, even to
his abundant mercy apprehended by faith: he must needs confess that S. Peter
having so good occasion to have spoken of justification by works and yet not
having once mentioned the same, had not any purpose to deliver that doctrine,
that our own works may justify us.

But our new Romish Rabbis that have nothing to vant themselves of,
Justification taught by Christ and his Apostles heresy.
but the rotten ruins of ancient Rome, can abide no doctrine worse then this
that we are justified by faith in Christ his blood. It is heresy with them to
say, that we obtain forgiveness of our sins by faith in Christ. But to
attribute that which only Christ's merits by his death and bloudshedding, and
faith apprehends, to holy bread, holy water, pardons, Popish iustifications.
Agnus deis, blessed graynes, pilgrimages, monks, books and cowles, candels,
crossings, and such like trifling trash is good devotion, and sound religion.
That which they call heresy, we teach word for word, out of the ancient
doctrine of the Romans. But that which they would have the people believe,
concerning these toys, S. Paul, S. Peter, and S. Mark his scholar, would
have been ashamed to have taugh it, to any Christians.

CHAP. VI.
SAint Paul having planted and proved this doctrine of justification by faith
in Christ, This doctrine of justification by faith in doctrine of liberty.
as he does in the fourth chapter of this Epistle to the Romans, and else where
in many places: he then teaches that in respect of this grace, we should be
so far from being imboldened to sin, that on the contrary we are the more bound
thereby to holiness of life. Romans 6. 2. 3. and caet.
For whosoever is dead to sin, must not live to sin. But we if we be not
baptized into Christ, are dead to sin: Therefore such as are baptized into
Christ, may not live to sin or in sin. Yea it is good reason that the servant
obey his Master, but we are Gods servants by promise in baptism, therefore him
we must obey: then we cannot obey him, which God hates, forbids, and
punishes, but we must serve God our Master in holiness and righteousness. And
whereas no man ever more plainly taught, our free justification in Christ,
without our works or merits, or any inherent righteousness, even by the
forgiveness of our sins, then the Apostle S. Paul, both in this epistle and
else where: yet no man more earnestly and effectually then he, exhorts to
holiness of life, good works, and all Christian duties: sin and security have
not a sharper enemy then he is. 1. Pet. 2. 24.
S. Peter also teaches us that Christ his Own self, bare our sins, in his
body, upon the tree. Whereby he shows the satisfaction that he has made, to
be the atonement between God and us: and that without us he has done it,
himself I say in his own body has paid that price, and taken away the
condemnation due to the sin that we have committed. He has done it upon the
tree by his death and passion, purchasing thereby eternal redemption. What can
the Apostle say more plainly, to teach us that the satisfaction for all our
sins is already perfected so in and by Christ, that our own works can be
nothing auayleable to satisfy for them, or that there is not to that use any
need of them? What then? Seeing he bears our sins shall we lay load upon
him, and by our sin and ungodly life, do what we can to make his burden
heavier? No no, he has done all this that we who (by this benefit of Christ)
are dead to sin, should live to righteousness. For if GOD be our God, we
must be his people: If he be our loving Father, he looks that we should
be his obedient children, If he be our gracious Lord and Master, we must not
be ungracious but duetifull servants. For as God does covenant with us to be
our God, so do we also by vow and promise, bind our selves unto him to be
his servants. And this also does the Apostle Saint Peter teach us, who in the
first Chapter has plentifully set forth Gods great merry toward us, even
in this question of our free justification, as also in this place he has done,
and yet will not in any wise that any Christian duties should of us be
unperformed, but exhorts us to be occupied in them as we may see. Chap. 4.
1. 2. 3. 4. and to account them as a debt that we owe unto God, Ephe. 2. 10.
and must pay him. For we are Gods workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them. Saint
Mark reports unto us that our Savior Christ preachd often forgiveness of
sins, as in his third, and fourth Chapters it may appear, which forgiveness
of sin, does quite overthrow that inherent righteousness, and justification by
work that the papists strive to establish. And yet the same S. Mark does
register and record, among many other godly exhortations, that our Savior
Christ made to his disciples this necessary caveat. Take heed watch and pray,
for you know not when the time is: Mark. 13. 33.
By all which this does appear, that sanctification and holiness, must follow
justification and forgiveness of sin (for we are washed that we should not
again defile our selves with the filth of sin) and that Gods love, does more
effectually tie us to obey him, and to endeavor our selves to do his will. And
look how much the more we are instructed, and assuredly persuaded of the free
love of God, so much the more, will our inner man be inflamed with love to him
again. I say even with such love, as will thrust us forwards to walk in good
works. And this is notably proved by our Savior Christ who gathers that the
sinful woman in S. Luke felt, Luc. 7. 47.
That many sins were forgiven her because she loved so much. And thus we see
that the ancient Roman faith was this, that such as have received and felt
Gods free grace in forgiving their iniquities, as in truth they are, Detemp.
ser. 237.
so in duty they must be always ready to serve him. So that I may boldly say
with S. August. It can hardly be that he that believes well should live evil.

But our popish spiders out of this sweet flower do gather their poison.
Romish reproaches against this true doctrine.
They burden this doctrine, which in express words is taught by S. Paul, and
the effects of it by S. Peter also (that we are justified by faith without the
works of the Law) with this slander, that it is a doctrine of liberty, and
occasion of licentious life, a hinderance to good works. And thus this
doctrine, which they cannot confute with reason, they cover with shame and
reproaches. And that which they cannot with all their learning prove false:
Dialog. cum Tripho.
by this shameless shift they seek to make odious. Far otherwise did the
ancient fathers both speak and write. Act. 15. 9. li. 2.
Justinius Martyr learned of the Apostle S. Peter to say that faith profi^eth our
hearts. Epist. 2.
Ciprian says to cease from sin, Aduers. Marce. onem. li. 4.
that begins of faith. Tertulian affirms that faith shows us the way
(whither? In psalm. 115.
to licentious life? No, but) by which we must come to God. Basil ascribes
unto it, great force to allure, draw and persuade the mind, Constit. Mon^st.
cap. 16.
because as in another place he tells us, it strengheneth the powers of the
same, it obtayneth and gets endeavor in us, and Gods help, which both are
necessary in all our works. Heresi. 76.
Epiphanius writes that it preserves every faithful man, In Ioh. 6.
he means from evil no doubt. And Theophilact tells us, that faith in
Christ is truly a holy and perfect work, and does sanctify or make holy him
that has it: In Ioh. 3.
And on the other side, Ti^. 1. 16.
that such as lead an unclean life, are not truly faithful, who profess
that they know God, but in works they deny him. By all which it is plain to
see, Ephesians. 6. 16.
that these holy fathers did think that faith does both quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked, and nourish or maintain within us, the good motions of
the spirit, and so is as it were the fountain from whence does spring
whatsoever good work we can perform. But the papists would bear the word in
hand, that the more we teach them to believe, the wider we open them a door
to sin. But would you in deed find out that doctrine, that does let loose
the raynes of lycentious life? and gives liberty to do what you will? Look
then to our new Romish religion that sells sins for money, and pardons for
faults both past and to come also. Faith (whereby we apprehend this free
justification) is Gods gift, and therefore not easy for us to get, seeing we
cannot have it at all, unless he will give it, increase whereof the Apostles
themselves craved of God, because of themselves they could not get it. But as
much money as will buy a pardon is not hard to come by. Especially rich men
might by their doctrine, be bold to sin, because money would buy pardons
enowe. Now whether the ancient faith of the Romans, or this new Romish
religion, give greater liberty to licentious life, let the indifferent Reader
judge.

CHAP. VII.
BUT this our doctrine of justification by faith in our Savior Christ Jesus,
without the works of the Law, that it may both the better be understood, and
more thoroughly be delivered from the unjust reproaches of such slanderous
spirits: It shall not I suppose be amiss, What justifying faith is.
but very necessary to declare, what manner of persuasion this Faith is, by the
doctrine of the Apostles, if any thing may out of these their writings, which
do any way concern the Romans) be brought to teach us the same. First
therefore this Faith is not only a general persuasion of Gods power, mercy,
and such other things, A particular confidence.
but even a particular confidence and trust, whereby we do not only give our
assent or consent that GOD is mighty and merciful, but also we do with comfort
apply particularly unto our selves, whatsoever greatness and goodness, in
general persuasion we yield to be in God. And this is plainly proved by
thapostle unto the Romans, setting forth the faith of Abraham before our eyes,
as a perfect pattern of true faith, in that he believed not only in
generally, that God could or would do such a thing, Romans 4. 18. 19. 20.
but even particularly, that he would and could perform his promise that he
made unto him concerning Isaac, So shall thy seed be. And so it came to pass,
that neither he considered his own body now dead, when he was almost a
hundred years old, neither yet the deadnes of Saraes womb. But contrary to
hope, believed in hope, that he should be the father of many nations. Now this
constancy of Faith cannot possibly be in any man or woman, unless they have
(besides a general persuasion, and historical assent to this that they hear,
that God is good) a particular application, and an inward feeling, whereby they
may say as their old translation brings in Job, Job. 19. 7.
saying: This hope is laid up within my breast. Faith also must be, if it be
true and such as is required, a constant confidence without doubting. Not
because that we can here attain to that perfection, that our faith should have
no infirmity, but that all weakness in faith, does argue great want in the
same. Such was that Faith, that here the Apostle commends unto us, in the
example of Araham. Romans 4. 21.
For Abraham was Fully persuaded, assured or certified, that what GOD had
promised, he was able to perform. Now fully to be persuaded of a thing, and to
doubt of it are contrary. And Saint Peter wills us, To trust perfectly, in
that grace that is brought unto us. whereby he doubtless means nothing else,
then thapostle S. James, James 1. 6.
when he opposes Doubting or wavering, against true faith: Let him ask in
faith nothing doubting. But that faith must have these properties, that is,
that it must be a confidence and trust, whereby assuredly and particularly, we
apply unto our selves the comfort of Gods promises, or of the examples of his
mercy. Thapostle in this Chapter does farther teach us, Romans 4. 11.
I mean Saint Paul, in the fourth to the Romans, A Seal.
teaching circumcision to be, A seal of the righteousness of Faith. A seal is
set to the writing, to take away all occasion of doubting from the same. So are
the Sacraments added to Gods promises (if it were possible) to make us without
all wavering in Faith. And the writings whereunto seals are affixed, contain
for the most part, particular benefits bestowed upon them, to whom they are
made and sealed: Even so the Sacraments, are to the godly assurances, not only
that God loves mankind, or Christ is a Savior, that takes away sins, and
makes atonement with God for them, but also that God loves us, and Christ
saves us: I say every particular man and woman, if they be faithful, have
within them this faith. Which application of this benefit of Christ to
themselves, and to their consciences, is believing. And they that can attain
to this, have attained to Faith, and this their particular faith is sealed up
to them in the Sacraments. But an assent to the history hereof we may yield,
without comfort or consolation. For so do the Devils believe and tremble. Yea
let us see, what an example of Faith, James 2. 19.
thapostle in the viii. of this Epistle sets forth himself to have, I
warrant you we shall find it neither mingled with doubtfulnesse, nor resting
only upon Gods general promises: But in wonderful assurance, he finds and
confesses in himself, to his unspeakable comfort, Gods great mercy in
justifying and saving him. For he is not only assured, Romans 8. 33.
that none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, because God
justifies, and none can condemn, because Christ died and rose again, 34.
and at Gods right hand makes intercession for us, 35.
but also that nothing can separate us from that love wherewith God loves. And
this he says he is sure of. 38.
This then is the ancient faith of the Romans, Romans 14. 5.
That every one should be fully persuaded in their own mind, (for if in meats
this persuasion must be, then much more in the cause of our justification) and
Trust perfectly (without doubting) on Gods grace. 1. Pet. 1. 13.


Yea the ancient Fathers, do not know any other faith for a true faith, but
only this assurance and particular persuasion of the heart. De Mortal. Ser.
Ciprian calls it A confidence of good things to come, Basil. de vera fide.
Tom. 2. fol. 12.
and proves that it must so be. S. Basil says it is An approbation of that
which is said, with assent, and without wavering, with full assurance that it
is true. Which confident persuasion, is manifestly against popish doubting
neither can it be without particular application of the promises to our selves,
which in their gross divinity they find to be needelesse. Jn Mat. Can. 5.
Hilary will have no doubt at all in our faith. Neither can a general faith,
without applying particularly to us Gods promises, make us abstain from evil
and do that is good, Open. Imper. Ho. 39.
which Chrysostom says is the work of faith. And this does S. Ambrose
plainly teach by the similitude of a physician who although be promise to
heal all, In cap. 2. 1. Tim
yet they that will have help, must seek to the physician. And why? Is it not
every one that stands in need may have the medicine applied? yes verily. For
it will not otherwise do them any good. Now says he, faith gives us this
(spiritual) health, which unless the mind receive withal the heart, it does
no good but rather hurt. As therefore it does no good to a diseased body to
know that he may have help, unless the physic be ministered to him: even so
in these sicknesses of our soul, the assaults of sin, without this
particular applicution there can be no help. Let therefore Master Bellarmine
tell us if he will, Bellarm. de Iustif. li. 1. cap. 4.
that his fellow Catholics of the Romish stamp, do hold it rather a
presumption then faith, To be assured of the promise of special grace or
mercy: yet will we rather hold fast that ancient faith of Rome, approved also
by sundry fathers, then wander with them, in their wavering opinion, and
desperate doctrine.

But our new Romish teachers can abide nothing less then that we should teach
men to assure themselves by faith of their salvation. Bellar. de iustif. li. 1.
ca. 6. 7.
And therefore they teach this faith to be but an assent, Assent or general
knowledge.
not a confidence, and that it may be a general knowledge not a particular and
undoubted persuasion, or trust, that we are justified by Christ. They take for
a pattern of their faith, that faith that the devils have, Iac. 2. 15.
as before out of Saint James I taught that they believe, yea fear and
tremble. And while they make faith to be but a bare assent, they think it an
easy matter to believe (for in deed the most wicked may have such a faith:)
What faith we say justifies.
by this means it comes to pass, that they speak evil of our doctrine
which they know not. For we do not teach that popish faith does justify,
which is but an historical assent, to those things that are spoken of GOD:
but we say that that assured persuasion which Saint Paul commends in
Abraham, Romans 4.
and whereof himself rejoices: Romans 8.
And whereby we are kept by the power of GOD unto salvation: 1. Pet. 1. 5.
we teach that that does not only justify us before God, because it
apprehends and takes hold of him, by and in whom only, we are accounted
righteousse in Gods sight: but God by it does also purify our hearts. Because
it cannot be but that we will have a delight in Gods commandments, if once
this assured and undoubted persuasion of Gods eternal goodness toward us,
be planted in our hearts. Although therefore we still teach constantly with
our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, that faith without works does justify,
speaking of a true faith, and an assured confidence, which was the old Roman
faith: yet we will also say with the new Romanistes, that the faith of the now
Church of Rome, or that faith which the devils may have cannot iustifye. Romish
says justifies not.
But this does nothing hinder our cause, for we account not that bastard Roman
faith, worthy the name of faith. So that in this latter assertion we yield to
them. And in the former, wherein we affirm that faith, as it is an assured
confidence, taking hold of Gods mercy in Christ does justify, I would they
also would yield unto the truth.

CHAP. VIII.
We have seen then the most ancient doctrine of justification by faith
(grounded upon the first promise of the woman's seed, that should break the
head of the serpent) taught by the Apostles: Genesis 3. 15.
who yet meant not thereby, to open a gap to licentious life, because they speak
not there of a deuelish faith, a popish faith, a dead faith, that may be
fruitless, but of such a persuasion, and so assured a confidence, settled in
the heart of the faithful, as will not suffer them to be idle, or unoccupied
in godly works as occasion shall be offered. And if we look further into
the doctrine taught by the Apostles, we shall also learn out of it, not only
that it is necessary to do good works, but also how, and to what end we
should do them. How and why good works must be done.
For if our affection in doing them be not sincere, if our direction and rule
be not Gods holy word, if our intention and end be not Gods glory, and the
performance of our dutiful obedience, unto our Lord and Lawgiuer: whatsoever
our work be called in name, or seem in show, it is not in deed a good work.
First therefore for our affection, not only our Savior Christ who is a
heavenly and true teacher of all truth, Math. 7. 17.
tells us, that the tree of our heart cannot bring forth good fruit, Luke.
6. 43. 44.
unless it (I mean the tree) be good it self: but also S. Paul teaches us
that the flesh, that is that part of man that is not regenerate, strives
against the spirit, whereby he is brought to that, that, He does not the good
thing which he would, Romans 7. 19. 23.
but the evil which he would not. And that through The rebelling Law in his
members, rebelling (I say) against the law of his mind, and leading him
captive unto the Law of sin, which is in his members. Now if we mark why
the Apostle makes this complaint, and adds that grievous and pitiful
exclamation O wretched man that I am we must confess, that he was forced
thereto, because that Although he would do good, 24. 21. 22.
and had delight in the Law of God concerning the inner man: yet his
rebellious flesh did trouble and molest him so, 28.
that he could not so freely, so holily and sincerely, Romans 6.
serve God as he should have done. And that is it that in the sixth chapter he
persuades us, that we ought not to sin, because we are dead to sin, so
that we should not any more have to do therewith, but should have our
affections freed from the same, Romans 12. 1.
and wholly bent to serve God in holiness. And for this cause afterward, when
he begins to come to exhortations, he lays this as the ground and
foundation of al, That we must offer up our selves even our own bodies a
sacrifice to God. For if we begin not with our selves, even with our own
affections, to have them sanctified, whatsoever we do cannot be holy. And
therefore S. Peter also who plentifully exhorts to the performance of
Christian duties, yet tells us before, that we are elect unto
Sanctification. 1. Pet. 1. 2.
For hereby our affections are reformed, that in doing of al our works, we may
do them with a good heart. And afterward (he says) Seeing your hearts are
purified in obeying the truth through the spirit, to love brotherly without
fayning, 22.
love one another with a pure heart fervently. In which words we cannot but
see, how sincere an effection the Apostle requires, in performance of this
duty of love, which must also be a pattern for us to do all good works by,
August. in psalm. 77. enarrat.
for thy heart not being sincere, thy works are not pure, though they seem
good. As for the second point. which is, that our works, if we will that God
should account them good, should be commanded in Gods word, and agreeable to
his will: it may appear to be the ancient faith of the faithful Romans,
because S. Paul teaching them to do good works, seems to require nothing of
them but love, which he says is the fulfilling of the Law: so that he would
have us occupied in performing of love to God, Romans 13. 8.
and love to man, which God in the ten commandments requires of us, and then
we shall not fail but do good works. But this yet he teaches more plainly,
Romans 14. 23.
in the shutting up of that notable discourse, Degrat and libero Arbit. li. 5.
ca. 10.
in the fourteenth Chapter. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. In which place
Master Bellarmine will have us by faith to understand knowledge, as also the
Rhemistes teach us, or persuasion of conscience, that the thing which we do is
good and lawful. But whatsoever we do, for the which we find not our
direction in Gods word, what persuasion can we find for the same in our
conscience, that God shall reckon it among good works? Or rather why should
we not always fear, least God for such works of ours should say, Who has
required these things of your hands? in which respect all the fathers in our
good works require faith. Esa. 1. 12.
And is not I pray you our good work a flower of sweet savor, and a fruit
of pleasant taste unto the Lord? All men will confess it is so. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
From what root then must it come? 1. Pet. 2. 2.
doubtless from no other, but from that immortal seed that Saint Peter
speaks of, The word of God, Whereby he would also have us to grow.
Regulae breu. interrogat. 119
And if S. Basil (concerning the precepts of their monkish life) does think
they must not be left undone to take other works in hand, and that specially
because that every one knows not what is convenient for them to do, but may
as well choose that may be to his hurt and hinderance, as to his help and
furtherance: then how much more should Gods laws be in such account among us
(who are by our profession regular, having an express commandment to do
that only which God commands) that we would not for any thing add unto the
same our own inventions, or mingle with the same our own traditions? And if
we suppose that one man may better see how to set down rules of life then
another: how is it that we are so be sotted, that we give not that glory to
God, that he knows better (I say not then any, but) then all men, what works
they are that please him best? Or if we confess him to have that wisdom, why
do we not follow then this his direction, why do we not study to keep his
commandments? why do we weary our selves in our own ways, and wast our
time in doing our own works? Thirdly in every good work, God also
considers to what end it was done. And principally we must respect Gods
glory. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, 1. Cor. 10. 3^.
do all to the glory of GOD. And therefore Saint Paul finds great fault
with the Romans, or rather writing to the Romans that neither the Gentiles when
they knew God; Romans 1. 21.
did glorify him as God, and the Jews by their sins dishonored the name of
God. Romans 2. 23.
And for that cause giving to the Romans a caveat, Romans 16. 17. 18.
he wills them to take heed of such as made division. And why? For they
serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies. They seek not to
glorify the Lord, but to pamper themselves. Romans 16. 17.
Yea both Saint Paul and S. Peter also, 1. Pet. 5. 11.
teach us this lesson by their own example, giving to him praise, glory and
dominion. And this glorifying of GOD is especially performed, by consecrating
unto him, the good grape of our holy obedience: Even by letting our light so
shine before men, Math. 5. 16.
that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven.
Thus then we see that the ancient religion teaches us, that no good work can
proceed from us, unless the spring of our heart first be purged from the
filth of sin, least our affections by that corruption, should be mingled
(like muddie water) with sinful cogitations, and withdrawn from sincerity in
our action. Then also that such only are in deed good works, In Psalm. 118.
Concione. 12.
for doing whereof we have warrant in Gods word. Lastly that in the said
work, especially we must seek Gods glory, by serving him in duetifull
obedience, for that the work must be considered according to the end
whereunto it is directed, and which we respected in doing the work Augustine
teaches. And if any of these be wanting, either a sincere heart, which cannot
be without faith, a direction out of the word, or a godly end, the work is
not good whosoever works it, or whatsoever show of goodness it seems to have
in the eyes of men. As on the contrary, that which we do according to Gods
word, with a sincere heart desiring to walk on forward in all holy obedience,
that is in deed a good work.

But it is almost a common received opinion of our new Romish Catholics,
Popish good works.
that the good intent makes a good work: Insomuch as many think it must needs
be a good work, that a man or woman does with a good purpose. Neither yet do
they measure this their intent or purpose, with the true line of Gods word,
but with the false measure of their own imaginations. And hereby it comes
to pass, that the outward appearance of a good work, is taken of many to be
an action acceptable to God, although it be not either directed to the right
end, or commanded in Gods word, or done by him that has the spirit of
regeneration. And this makes them so grossly to teach concerning good works,
because they would for the better credit of their works, commend the actions,
not only of the wicked, but of the Infidels also, that never knew God, as if
they might be perfect and void of sin. which is a thing as absurd, to him
that by the light of Gods spirit, does walk in the paths of Gods word, as if
they would affirm, that a wild vine whilst it remains wild, might bring
forth a kindly grape, a crab tree a good apple, Works not commanded of God.
or from a foul and corrupt puddle, might spring sweet and wholesome waters. As
for Gods Law, because the ways thereof are not roomy enough, for such reelers
and rouers to run in, who according to their own foolish phansies, are always
hatching some new devotions, as not only the infinite swarues of their
Religious orders (as they falsely call those irreligious companies) but also
their innumerable toys and superstitions, whereby they would bear the world
in hand, that they please GOD, and deserve his favor do plainley prove: they
therefore now in the new Romish Religion command unto us many things, whereof
in the Scripture they can find no one commaundment, no one example. They quite
forget the straight charge that GOD lays upon his people, Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
when he tells them, that They must not do what seems good in their own
eyes, 32.
and concerning Gods Law: That they must ad nothing thereto, nor take any thing
therfrom. But that they may seem to be full fraught with good works, they
esteem every thing wherein they tie themselves to any strait rule, (although
with neglect many times of sundry Christians duties) or bestow their goods
(for the most part very superstitiously) or make any show of Religion,
glorious in the eyes of the world, this I say and such like devises they
account for good works. And what should I speak of the end where unto they
have especial regard in doing of these good works? The end of Popish works.
Let the practice of the Church of Rome at this day, wheresoever her deceites
are not yet known, or her blasphemies abhorred, let their own consciences I
say testify herein, what they think, what their Priests do teach them. Do
they not inioine them penance to satisfy for their sins? do they not teach
thereby to merit eternal life? Yea, what do the most devout of them, all their
life long, but toil themselves, to kindle to themselves a fire, Esaias 50. 11.
in the sparks whereof they also walk for a time, who yet shall in the end lie
down in sorrow. That is, they seek by their own works, to make for
themselves peace with God, and procure an atonement with him. But when God
shall rise up, and lay open to their own consciences their foolish ways that
they have found out, then shall their own wickedness correct them, Ier. 2. 19.
and their turnings back reprove them: Yea their plague shall be, the fruit of
their own imaginations, Ier. 6. 19.
because they have not taken heed (says the Lord) unto my words, nor to my
Law, but cast it off. And because they are not persuaded that ever they can be
so sure of heaven (now when they are once brought to think that by work, they
must get it) they buy Masses and trentals, Buying of helps for sin.
both quick and dead, they build places wherein they may alvaies be prayed for
(that by that work they may be helped to Heaven.) They hire Pristes and Friars
to sing and say for them. They spare no cost, they refuse no travel. They
impouerish themselves and their posterity, to purchase (if by any means they
may) pardon for their offenses: according to that good Fryer-like and Catholic
verse.

Vestris nostra damus, pro nostris vestra roga^us.
Part of our prayers your friends shall have,
Your goods for recompense we crave.
But in the mean time, while Christians are so busied (as themselves imagine)
to save their souls by works, where is there any time or space to think of
Gods glory, The true end of good works not regarded.
or of our own duty and performing of our humble obedience? We see then how
the Romish Catholics do all that they do, not in respect of duty, but for
reward: not for love, but for payment. And therefore with them no wages, no
work, no penny, no pater noster. Whereas on the contrary, we are so far from
denying that it is necessary for Christians to do good works, that we rather
affirm that they are not a good tree, that in due season will not bring forth
good works. But these our works must be directed to Gods glory, and must
proceed from an earnest love that we have to be occupied in doing of his will
and keeping of his commandments: In so much as though there were no promise
of reward, no hope of recompense, yet because God has showed his mercy, Luke
1. 74. 75.
That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, and has
commanded us to do good works, we will therefore earnestly endeavor to do
them.

CHAP. IX.
NOw seeing our works must be such as I have in the former Chapter declared,
that first it self must be commanded of God, then it must spring from a
fountain by faith santefied, that it may be done sincerely, Lastly it must be
done to such end only as shall tend to Gods glory, and the discharge either of
our general duty of Christianity, or the performing of our particular
callings* seeing I say that if in any of all these things there be imperfection
the work cannot be called good: it is very necessary to examine, whether such
works as we do, may have in them any such perfection, Whether our works can
be perfect.
that they may in deed be perfectly good, and in all things agreeable to the
rule before set down. For if it be not perfect it cannot merit. And if it
might be that we could do some perfect works, yet considering the multitude
of our sins, we were worse then mad if we would imagine, that a few good
works could make satisfaction unto God, for our infinite transgressions. But
to put this matter out of doubt it is most certain that there cannot be
perfection in any thing that we can do, so long as we have this sinful
body. For although we may attain to the first of these three points, and may
endeavor and earnestly labor, to walk in those good works, Ephesians. 2. 10.
Which GOD has ordained before that we should walk in them: Yet in the other
two properties of a good woorks if we be not partial in our own judgment,
and blind in our own ways, we must confess our selves to be far short of
that which God requires of us. And therefore S. Paul describes the true
happiness of a Christian, to consist (not in the perfection of our own works
or that now being stirred up and helped by Gods grace, we are able to
fulfill the Law, or do such things, as shall be found righteous and perfect
in Gods sight) but in the forgiveness of our iniquities, Romans 4. 7. 8.
the covering of our sins, the not imputing unto us our transgressions. For
out of the Prophet David he tells us that such are blessed men. Yea our
Savior Christ him self when he will have us to look unto our true
happiness, if we will believe him that was (say they) S. Peter's scholar
speaks of forgiveness of sins. Mar. 2. 5. 3. 18.
And on the other side when he will threaten wrath, Mar. 3. 29.
he says sins shall not be forgiven. But perchance they will tell us that in
our first justification, we must have this forgiveness of sins, but
afterward once being freed by grace, we can our selves avoid the deceites of
sin, and do such things as God must account meritorious, and therefore
perfect. But Saint Paul a man no doubt regenerate and as perfect a man (I
suppose all will confess) as ever was since, did find and feel that there
was a Law in his members, rebelling against the Law of his mind, and leading
him captive to the Law of sin, Romans 7. 23.
that was in his members, yea and that he felt this, not only when he was
careless of his salvation, or neglected his ways, but even when he
endeavored to serve GOD, and would feign have done good, 22.
Even when he had delight in the Law of GOD, concerning the inward man.
Which does sufficiently prove unto us, that the fountain of our heart, is so
troubled with these foul affections, that it is impossible, that any cleare^
water should come from thence. And for proof hereof, let us look upon some
good work, and with indifferent judgment let us try, Our prayers not perfect.
whether as it comes from us, it can be perfect or not. And what better work
can we find then prayer, which is that sweet sacrifice of perfume that God
delights in? If any man will say that he can offer up unto GOD his sacrifice,
without any want or imperfection, he proclaims thereby unto the world, that
he knows not what it is to pray, or has no feeling of his own weakness. I
speak not here of popish prayers, which are full of horrible blasphemies,
Popish prayers
both in respect of him to whom they pray, and of the mediators by whom they
seek to obtain, and of the merit, which they look for, because they have
numbered up a certain number of prayers. Let the Church of Rome affoorde us but
one man, that justly and truly can say, that he can at any time, with sincere
heart, and unpolluted lips, so earnestly and confidently as God requires,
being lifted up from earth and earthly cogitations, talk with God and sue unto
him for necessary graces, only or especially respecting Gods glory, without
wavering in faith, or wandering in affections, or forgetting that he is
talking with GOD: and then we will yield that our works there may be
perfection: But if in so holy a work, whereunto our own wantes may stir up
us to be the more sincere, yet we shall always find imperfection, how then
can our other works be void of sin? But if any man in his excess of folly,
and depth of ignorance, either of that he can do, or of that he should do,
would make the world believe, that he is able to offer unto GOD the sacrifice
of prayer, without fault or blemish; his own thoughts will testify against
him, his knowledge will accuse him, and his conscience will condemn him, that
he deceaueth himself, and that there is no truth in him. For this is the
perfection which we can look for, and which Saint Paul desires to bring the
Romans unto, not that they should have no sin, for that he knew was
impossible, Romans 6. 12.
but that they should not let sin reign in this their mortal body, that
they should thereunto obey by the lusts of it. And that our prayer cannot be
altogether void of wantes, Romans 8. 26.
what can be more plain to prove, then that which S. Paul himself teaches
the Romans, that We know not what to desire as we ought. For how can we
perform that perfectly, which thing we know not how to do as we ought? The
spirit (of GOD) sends up (I confess in deed) requests for us (that is makes
us to request) with groninges unspeakable. But what is that to us, Bad tools.
and to our nature, to the perfection of our work. We are like bad tools in a
good hand (I speak of the regenerate.) The tool being sharpened by the
workman has an edge, and can cut. So we when God has reformed our will by
the spirit of regeneration, have a readiness or desire to do good. But this
edge if it meet with any thing that is hard as iron or stone, is broken and
made blunt or dull. So is this our willingness or readiness taken away when
our carnal affections and desires, do oppose themselves. So that although
Gods spirit, that works in us and by us is holy, yet because it works by
such evil instruments as we are, look how much we want of the perfection
of our regeneration (which here cannot be perfected, for whilst here we live
we are but children) and are not come to our perfect grows, so much must
needs our work want, of the clear light of the mind to direct it, or of the
sincere obedience of the heart to perform. And because the Apostle ^newe thus
much, therefore that we should not be altogether discouraged, in respect of
the imperfection of our actions, or the corruption of our nature, Romans 8. 2.
he tells us that The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, (mark that
this Law of the spirit of life is in Christ, not inherent in us) has freed us
from the Law of sin and death. So that we have no other remedy for our
wantes and imperfections, then that that holiness which is in Christ, Imputation
of Christ's holiness.
should by imputation become ours. By the which in the end, that
sanctification which by the spirit is here begotten in us, shall be also
fulfilled in us, as is promised afterward. Romans 8. 4.
For that righteousness of the Law that there is spoken of, that it is not, or
cannot be fulfilled of us so long as we carry about us this body subject to
sin and correuption, experience teaches, and I think the papists themselves
that have any shame will not deny. For so long as we have any lust or
concupiscence, which so long as we live we shall have; Admit that lust were not
sin, as the patrons of lust the papists would have us to believe, and
falsely teach, yet whilst that remains, no body can say that the very
righteousness of the Law or whatsoever the Law required is fulfilled of us. For
even themselves confess that lust is aswaruing from the Law, and is not
according to the direction thereof. Whereby it appears that these words of
righteousness of the Law that must be fulfilled in us are to be understood of
that that shall be performed in us hereafter, and not of that righteousness
that we can now attain unto. I cannot therefore but marvel at our Rhemistes,
that by these words would prove, that we may fulfill the Law. For besides
that which I have said that it must be understood of the perfection which we
shall have: the words themselves also teach us, that this is done not by us
(for we cannot attain to that holiness) but in us: now if Christ in us fulfill
the Law, it is not thereby proved that our selves fulfill the Law, or that it
is possible that we should attain to the perfect obedience thereof. I trust
that it appears, that the ancient faith of the Romans which was commended by
S. Paul does so proclaim our unworthiness, and debase our own works, (if we
will consider them how God in his justice may judge of them) that we may justly
confess with the people of God, Esa. 64. 6.
We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy
cloutes, we all do fade as the leaf, and our iniquities as the wind have
taken us away. So that we always have good cause to pray, that God (whatsoever
thing we take in hand) should Forgive us our trespasses. Ser. in Rogationibus.
For as says Says Bernard, we want truth, charity and courage. (Yea and the
more we look into, and the better we know our selves, the more plainly shall
we see that these will always be here imperfect) Reason (says he) fails
through ignorance of the truth, will is weak, because affection faints,
the flesh is unable, through scante of courage. In so much as reason does not
well understand what it should do, and the will has no great liking of
that which it knows, the coruptible body also is a burden to the soul,
Wisd. 9. 15.
so that we cannot do what we would. Which true testimony of S. Bernard,
does sufficiently prove, that in our works there cannot be perfection. Retract.
li. 1. cap. 19.
And S. Augustine as else where, so in his book entitled De perfectione
iustitiae does plainly prove that no man here can be perfect. Enar. in ps. 38.
So that we must be glad that the Lord when he vieweth our works accompteth
that as done, which if it be not done, he pardons as S. Augustine writes
else where. Who also teaches us that our perfection consists in knowing that
here we cannot be perfect: why should we then dream of that to be here in
us, which we cannot possibly attain unto? or what mean we to say that is
straight, that agrees not with the rule? or that is perfect that needs
mending?

But the new relligion of the Romish Church is, Perfection in works.
that the works of the regenerate may be so perfect and holy as that they may
be void of sin, and nothing in them to be reproved. Yea and not that only,
but also that by them they may justify themselves, and merit or deserve eternal
life, because they can perfectly keep the Law. Andrad. Orthod. Explic. li. 5
This is the doctrine which with common consent they teach. And yet themselves
confess that the love of God, cannot be perfect in us, neither so great as it
ought to be. But how that agrees with that which they also affirm, that any
man (I suppose they understand it but of the regenerate) may fully and
perfectly keep the Law, let the reader judge. To salve this sore, Andradius
Payuas takes great pains in the place before alleged. But I cannot but
marvel, that the strength of the truth, did not enforce him to give glory
unto God, and to be ashamed of that silly shift, which he and before him the
Jesuits of Colen are forced to use in their censure. Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
For when they see that God requires that we should love the Lord our God with
all our heart, with all our soul, with all our might: and they confess that
to this love of God, or the keeping of this commandment we cannot attain,
they tell us that God never would deal so hardly with us, as to require that
of us that we cannot do, and therefore that this commandment does but show
what we ought to wish and strive for, but that God means not to tie us to
obey it in this life, as for the fulfilling of it, it shall be after this
life. Would a man think that these men who brag so much of the fulfilling of
the Law, would now in good earnest confess, This commandment is general to
all men here.
that God would have them keep no more of the Law then they can? God in like
manner delivered both the Tables of the commandments, with as great charge to
keep the first, as the second. And in the first, is all that comprehended, even
that earnest love, that in these words is commanded. Therefore if we be tied
unto the performance of love toward men, how can we be free to leave, or to
do our duty toward God? Deuteronomy. 6. 1.
Yea Moses tells the Israelites a little before, as it were by way of preface,
That these are the commandments, ordinances, and Laws, which the Lord God
commanded him to teach them, that they might do them in the land, whither
they go to possess it. Math. 22. 39.
Among which this is one, and the greatest, as Christ himself witnesses. And
shall we then trust them, that tell us that God gave us not that commandment,
to require of us the keeping of the same? No, rather let us believe as the
truth is, that God who gave us this commandment, shall also, and justly may,
without note of cruelty, require at our hands, the performance of the same.
But when we see that it passes our power to keep it (as our adversaries
truly confess) then must we learn to seek for our perfect obedience, to him
only, that did and could only perform the whole Law. And that is the lesson
that Saint Paul teaches us, Gala. 5. 24.
when he says, The Law is a schoolmaster unto Christ, that we may be justified
by faith. Agreeable unto that also that the same Apostle taught the Romans,
Romans 10.
That Christ is the end of the Law to righteousness to all that believe. Now
how little this bastard brood that now is resembles those ancient commended
Romans, let the Reader judge.

CHAP. X.
NOw as concerning the powers of our nature, we humbly acknowledge, that by our
hereditarie corruption they are so stained and polluted, that nothing but
sin, nothing but evil can come from us, or be in us, until God by his
spirit of regeneration has made us new men: De tempore ser. 48.
for we cannot raise our selves from the death of sin, as Saint Austen
teaches. And being regenerate, yet there are in us two men: The new man weak
and feeble, The newman.
better (in truth) in heart and courage, then in hand or power: called a new man
when it is compared with the old man. But when Gods spirit will in deed set
forth, how little our strength is to stand against our spiritual enemies, in
this our spiritual battle, then we are called children in respect of our
weakness. Then also there is in us the old man, The old man.
lusty and strong, come to his full grows. Between these two, in the godly
there is a continual strife. As for the ungodly they are altogether old, there
is in them nothing new, no new heart or affections, no new mind or
understanding, no good desires, no godly motions. Now this old man although in
the regenerat he be but faint hearted: yet has he so many helps, and so many
oportunities and occasions to do evil, and to annoy the new man that he is
over doing, never quiet, always striving against the spirit: Insomuch, as he
never sees the new man, the spiritual man, the man that yeldeth it self to
the spirit of God to be led thereby, indeuouring or attempting any good thing,
but straight way this old man opposes himself with might and main, so that he
will never suffer the new man quietly or freely to do any good. But be the
spirit never so willing, yet will the flesh always be found not only weak, but
also rebellious. By this means it comes to pass, that although God of his
great mercy, by his good spirit, have wrought in his newborn babes, a will
ready to serve him, and a desire or readynes to obey him: yet is not this will
of ours, at any time free or at liberty to perform the same, either as we
should, or as we would. For as Gods children are by the godly motions of the
spirit stirred up to do his will, even then presently do the lust^ 1. Pet. 2.
11.
of the flesh, which fight against the soul, make a mutiny or commotion,
provoking the members thereof, to wrestle and strive against such holy
cogitations. So that it comes many times to pass, Genesis 38. 29.
as it was in the birth of Tamars children: For Zarah being first near the
birth, yet Phares his brother came forth before him. So these godly motions
being first thought upon, yet even in Gods good and obedient children, such
corrupt and ungodly affections will first show themselves. Of which dangerous
battle, comes this troublesome effect, troublesome (I say) to Gods children,
that their love either of God or man, is not without want, their faith, not
without fear, their obedience, not without blemish, their service, not without
negligence, to be short in any good thing that we will attempt, we shall not
be without evil to hinder the same. Which things being well considered of, I
trust it will easily appear that our will though it be good in the regenerate,
yet is not at any time altogether free to do as it would, in respect of these
corrupt lusts of the flesh. And that this is the ancient faith of the Romans,
that was in S. Paul's time, it is more plain then that with any good show of
reason it may be denied. For the Apostle teaches the Romans thus much even by
his own example. Who feeling within himself, this spiritual battle between
the spirit and the flesh, (which only Gods children do feel) and so by
experience being taught, that when he had done what he could, he was notable to
do that which willingly he would have done, Romans 7. 19.
he plainly confesses, The good that I would, do I not, but the evil which I
would not, that do I. Now I trust no man will answer that he speaks not of
that he could do, but of that he did: I trust no body will imagine but that the
Apostle did what he could to do good, and not to do evil, and yet when he
had striuen therein to the uttermost, his regenerate and godly will, was not of
power to perform his godly desires. But if any man would judge so grossly of S.
Paul, as that he might have done more then he did to stand against sin, yet
would they be sufficiently confuted by that which the same apostle adds
almost immediately, whereby he shows by what means it came to pass, that he
was so driven and drawn to do against his will. Romans 7. 22. 23.
Even because There was a Law in his members rebelling against the Law of his
mind, and leading him captive to the Law of sin, although concerning the
inward man, he had delight in the Law of God. Now if S. Paul had not free
will as no doubt in these words he plainly teaches the Romans, that he had
not to do good, shall we imagine that we, who are much less freed from
corruption of sin then he was, have any such freedom or power in us? Shall
we that are in comparison, dry stumpes, and fruitless plants, deceive our
selves in this vain conceit, that we are better able to bring forth the fruit
of good works then he was? God forbid. No I am verily persuaded, that whosoever
does but consider what a good work is, according to that I have before said,
especially in the viii. Chapter: and on the other side how weak we are of our
selves, because our regeneration is not here perfected, and how stirring and
striving our lusts are whereby we are hindered in our good endeavors: he will
utterly detest that deceitful doctrine of man's free will to do good, and
abhor it as a proud presumption. And he will not only with Saint Paul
humbly confess his own weakness, but with S. Peter also heartely give thanks
unto our gracious God who has Kept us by his power, 1. Pet. 1. 5.
(not by the power or free will that we have) unto salvation. Cap. 20. Aura.
Council.
So that we see we to acknowledge this weakness in our selves (yea although we
be regenerate) to do good, and the power whereby we are preserved to
salvation, that we should not quite fall from it, to be from God, and in him,
is the Catholic doctrine, that then when these Apostles taught, was received
at Rome? According to the which also the fathers in the Aura^ican counsel did
affirm, That many good things are wrought in man which man works not: But
man does no good at all, but that God gives (power) that he may work it. And
Theophilact most plainly, speaking of the works that we do after baptism,
In Galata^ cap. 2.
wherein the papists especially brag of their freewill, Our will (says he) is
dead, but his (that is Christ's) lives, and does govern this our life. If
then our life be governed by Christ's will, where is the power of our own
will, which our adversaries so much extol? Ad probam de Virginitate.
I said (says Fulge^tius) that thou wast prevented, not only with that love
wherewith GOD loved thee, but with that also which he freely powered into thee,
that he might be loved of thee. Therefore all even whatsoever holy love thou
have toward thy husband, thou have it in deed in thee, but not of thy self.
Much might be alleged out of the fathers to this end, whereby it might
appear how they did follow this ancient faith of the Church of Rome but I will
take my leave with Arnobius his words. You (says he) repose in your selves
the salvation of your souls, Arnob. aduersus Gentes. li. 2.
and hope to be made Gods by your own inward endeavor. But we promise not to
our selves any such thing of our infirmity seeing our nature to be of no
strength, and that it is overcome by the affections thereof whenever it
strives.

But now would they teach us to speak with new tongues, not the wonderful
works of God, but the strange strength that is in us to serve God: strange (
I say) because we have neither seen it in the godly, nor heard it in the pure
and ancient Roman Church, nor can find or feel it in our selves, unless it
be, when we are past feeling, Trident. Council. Sess. 6. cap. 6.
that we feel not our selves. But thus they teach us that being once stirred
up and helped (for these are their own terms) by grace, man has afterward
such power, Ibi. cap 4. Cens. Colonient. page 33. dial. 2.
that he is freely moved to God, to dispose and prepare himself, to obtain
the grace of justification. Yea that our lusts or desire of sin, are
subjected to reason and free will, with such subjection, as scarsely there can
be any greater. And thus whereas God because the old heart of man is naught,
and has nothing in it that will further, nay that will not hinder us, Iere.
32. 39.
to walk uprightly in the ways of godliness, promises to give us another
heart, Ezech. 36. 26.
A new heart ( says God) will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you: they would make us believe, that this old heart of ours will
serve with a little change. And yet that we may know, that to stir up and
to help our old heart, will not serve the turn, God by Ezechiel in the place
alleged says, I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will
give you a heart of flesh. By which words of giving a new heart, taking away
that we have of stone, giving us one of flesh, God would have us to learn,
that we must not only be stirred up and helped as they say, but even made new
before we can do that which pleases God. And as for those that are so carried
away, with the plausible and pleasant sound of free will, I would request
even for Christ his sake, that they would take a view of their own ways,
and enter into their own secret thoughts, words, and deeds, and if at home
they find all well, if they can as they wish and would (if they be not
senseless and secure in sin) keep Gods commandments, then let them still
believe that doctrine, and follow such blind guides. But if they find, that
the greatest show of godliness that they can make, can be but the performance
of some external work, whether it be in prayer or praising of God, or doing
of any duty toward our neighbors (wherein even the most wicked will
perchance sometime show themselves more devout then they) let them not then
be deceived by any of these seducing words: Cannot I abstain from evil?
cannot I do that which is good? cannot I be occupied in good works? For
although thou can do that work, which may in another be a good work, yet
because the work is not good, that is, not commanded by God, done by a godly
man, and directed to Gods glory, and the doing of our own duty, that work I
say which may in an other be praise worthy, in thee may be sin. Thus
therefore I say that it is no more in thy power to work a good work, then, to
make new thy own heart, but both must be of God of whom we have all our
sufficiency. 2. Cor. 3. 5.


CHAP. XI.
But now concerning the Sacraments, there is not much as I can gather either
in that Epistle written by S. Paul to the Romans, excepting that only that is
in the fourth Chapter that Abraham received the sign of circumcision, Romans 4.
11.
the seal of righteousness of faith: either in S. Peter his first Epistle but
that in the third chapter, 1. Pet. 3. 21.
when he says, Whereto the baptism that now is answering that figure (not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, but the confident demanding which a good
conscience makes to GOD,) saves us also by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
In the former of which two places, The use of the Sacraments
the Apostle does plainly testify that Abraham being justified before by
faith, did afterward receive the sign of circumcision, to seal up in and
unto him, this righteousness by faith. Which says because it has respect unto
the promises, we see therefore that this was the use and office of circumcision
unto Abraham, to confirm unto him the promises of God. And that other place
out of S. Peter, does partly confirm unto us the selfsame use of baptism.
For when Noah and his company saw that the same water that drowned others, and
swallowed them up into the depth, did save them, in carrying the Arc wherein
they were above the waters, this must needs assure them, not only of Gods
power, but of his goodness also and readiness to perform his promise, in saving
them from perishing by water. And in like sort, the water in baptism,
assures that little flock, that is truly belonging to Christ his holy
catholic Church figured by the Arc; of the forgiveness of their sins. And, as
not the water that carried the Arc, was the efficient cause of their saving
which Master Belarmine absurdly imagines (for the water was as apt to have
drowned them as the other) no neither yet the Arc it self, Li. 1. de effect.
although it might more properly be so esteemed (because in it they were carried
above the water but God saved them by the Arc upon the water: Sacr. cap. 17.
and li. 2. cap. 3.
So is it in baptism, as S. Peter teaches us in that he says that it saves
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, I say not by it self, but by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. From whom only it has the virtue and efficacy,
by whom only it turns to our good. And as al perished in the same water,
which by carrying up the Arc saved them that were therein, all I say that by
faith believing the promises were got into the Arc: even so the water in
baptism though it outwardly put away, from all that are washed therein, the
filth of the flesh: yet is it not in deed profitable to any, but to such as
have that righteousness and holiness of Christ Jesus, sealed up thereby unto
their own consciences. Whereby it appears most plainly, that the sacraments
do not give grace, or work righteousness in us, Romans 2. 25.
or of themselves, because they are received of us, do make us holy. But as the
Apostle S. Paul says of circumcision, Circumcision verily profits nothing,
except you keep the Law; so may we truly say of our Sacraments, that not the
receiving of our Sacraments, but the holy obedience springing from our faith,
that is sealed up unto the godly in the Sacraments is the thing that is
acceptable to God, commended before men, and comfortable to our own
consciences. For as in that place alleged, he reckons them only truly
circumcised, that keep and fulfill the Law, and have that true circumcision
of the heart, and that the godless, how so ever they have received in their
flesh the outward mark or sign, yet are in deed uncircumcised: even so how
solemnly so ever the faithless and fruitelesse flock, have received the
Sacraments of our sanctification and redemption which is in Christ, yet if
they bring not forth such fruits of the spirit, as do testify and show that
inward washing away of the filth of sin, they have Baptismum fluminis the
washing of the water, non flaminis, not of the holy Ghost: they have the sign
of Gods grace, but not the substance thereof, the visible token, but not the
invisible grace. But the Sacraments are unto such as seals set to a blanke,
wherein because dothing is contained, therefore by these seals, there is
nothing assured. Now out of this which hitherto I have said, we see that the
Sacraments have these two uses, to assure us of the performance of the promise
of grace, and to preach to us repentance for our sins past, and holiness in
the rest of our life that is to come.

But our now Romish Catholics, who are never content, that either themselves
or other should eat within the teacher of the word of God, do wander far
out of these listes: teaching that our Sacraments have in them that grace
which they signify, Council. Trident. Sess. 7. can. 6. 7. 8
and do give the same grace, to all men, at all times if men be not a let unto
themselves, even Ex opere operate, that is in respect of the work it self,
because the Sacraments are received of them. Whereby they do such injury unto
Christ, as we that profess the name of christian men and women, should be
ashamed of. Math. 1. 21.
For that saving from sin, John. 1. 16.
which God by the ministry of the Angel proclaimed should be by his son,
whom for that cause he called Jesus our Savior, because he should save his
people from their sins, they ascribe unto the Sacraments. And that grace which
we can find only in Christ, of whose fulness we have all received grace for
grace, Cyprian de baptis. Christi.
they would have us to seek for in such visible things, as are in truth but
pledges of the same. Whether (says Cyprian) it be Judas or Paul that
baptiseth, it is Christ that washes, In 2. Cor. 3.
pardons, and puts away sin. And S. Ambrose making a difference between
the watering that is by baptism, and the forgiveness of sins, says, that
to forgive sins (in baptism) and to give the holy Ghost, it belongs to God
only: for the spirit has bin given without laying on of hands, and the
remission of faults without baptism, if we will credit that learned Father.
Contra Crescon. grammat. li. 2. cap. 21.
Both the good and the bad (says S. Augustine) can dip in the water, but none
but he that is always good can wash the conscience. Thus do these agree with
the old Romish Faith, teaching the outward sign, not to give but to assure us
of the invisible grace. And yet they are not ashamed, still to brag that the
faith of the Romans was commended by thapostle: Although themselves that boast
so much thereof, as it is easy to see, if we compare this ancient Faith, with
their new devises, do set themselves as sworn enemies to the same, to fight
against that faith. And this I suppose is the effect of that which can be
gathered out of these first eight Chapters of this Epistle to the Romans, of
such things as are in controversy between us and the Papists. Wherein if they
teach, that which these Apostles and faithful servants of God did teach, let
their doctrine be believed. But if they have changed that ancient Religion,
swarued from that old Faith, corrupted that worship of God, and mingled that
pure wine, either with the water of their own inventions, or the dregs of
Jewish and Heathnish superstitions, why do we not detest these deceiving
Doctors, as enemies to all truth, and hinderers of our eternal salvation?

CHAP. XII.
OF the three Chapters following, I would have spoken nothing, I mean the ix.
x. and the xi. of the Epistle to the Romans, but that I think it necessary out
of one principal point of doctrine that is in them handled, Predestination
free without respect of our works.
to note how contrary, to it self the doctrine is, that the Church of Rome
teaches. For out of them it is most plainly and inuincibly gathered, that GOD
has predestinate and chosen unto eternal life such as it pleases him to take,
freely even in respect of his own purpose and counsel, without any respect
unto good works. Which because it is so manifest, that themselves are ashamed
to deny it, I briefly pass over, without any long confirmation out of the
reasons heerin alleged for proof of the doctrine. Romans 9. 11. 12.
For Master Bellarmine out of these words. When as yet they were not borne, or
had done any good or evil, that the purpose of God might stand, not by works,
but by the caller, it was said to her, The elder shall serve the younger. And
also out of those, Romans 11. 5. 6.
The remnant is saved according to the election of grace, If of grace, not now
of works, for then grace were no grace. Out of these words I say he concludes
very plainly and truly, De Gra. and lib. arbit. li. 2. ca. 10
not only that election or predestination is free, but also without any
forseeing of the works that men should do after, as his words are. And much
more pithyly also is this confirmed by the latter end of the last sentence,
which is with full content left out by the old Translation, the Rheimists, and
the rest of them. For although all the Greek copies but one, and the Syrian
Translation have these words, But if it be of works, then is it now no grace,
for then work is no more work. Yet do they willingly follow the want in the old
Translation, because the setting of grace against works, in such sort as we
see they are opposed, makes wonderful strongly, against the Popish doctrine
of merits. But what should I speak of Master Bellarmine, D. Whitaker contra
Duraeu^ lib. 6. page 762.
John Durey the Scot tells us, that it is famously holden in all the
Universities of the Catholics, That the foreknowledge of merits, is not the
cause of predestination. Although he cannot deny but Pighius was of a contrary
mind. And Master Bellarmine indeuoureth in this point to show his skill, to
satisfy some that think it cannot be, that predestination should be free, if
all men have sufficient help given whereby they may be saved. And because upon
this sufficient help they establish their merit, Sufficient help.
this is therefore also the sum of that he teaches, that Merits and
Predestination may both of them be taught. But how he is heerin deceived, his
own words will best declare. But in the mean time, this is that which Saint
Paul did teach, and they say that yet they (...), that God freely not having
regard to the works which ^e saw they should do, did choose a number, upon
whom he bestows eternal life. Which doctrine as it was daungerously impuyned
in those days of S. Augustine, so was it learnedly defended by him in sundry
treatises. In which it may appear, that the Pelagions then did use the
selfsame objections against this comfortable doctrine, that the papists now
make against the teaching of our free election, August. de predest. and gra.
cap. 6.
as that God may same to deal unjustly in that he punishes the wicked whom he
calls not from their wickedness. Again that thereby all endeavor to live in
Gods fear is taken away, virtue is hindered, fatal necessity established, the
doctrine is perilous, Prosper. Epist. ad Aug. de reliquijs pelag.
and such like objections are reckoned up of Prosper, as also of Hilary who in
like manner writing to S. Augustine rehearses those cauils of the pelagions
against this truth, Hilar. Epistela ad August.
craving S. Augustine his help therein, because many as us says did much
depend upon the authority of men, and as Prosper in his Epistle faith, they
defend their obstinacy by antiquity, alleging that never any expounded those
places to the Romans after that sort. Which objections because it is too long
to confute in this place, I send the reader who is desirous to be further
instructed, unto S. Augustine his books, of the predestination of the Saints
which is an answer to the two Epistles of Prosper and Hilarie, and that other
of the virtue of perseverance, and that of predestination and grace which
before I spoke of. Which thing I may I trust be the bolder to do, because
these are the slanders which the pelagians th^se known and condemned
heretics burdened this doctrine withal; and therefore our adversaries
should be ashamed to use them. Now if you long also to know what these
heretics did teach, this it is. Prosperi. Epist. apud August. De
praedestinat. Sanct. cap. 18.
That God foreseeing who should believe, and continue in that faith, did
predestinate such to his kingdom. Or as S. Augustine says they taught that God
did choose such as he saw should be holy by the choice of their free will, on
the contrary he showed the election to be free, without any regard to works
either before or after, and that which the Pelagians did then and the papists
now do teach he calls a new presumption.

But because they like worse then to be thought new (although in all things
they are new fangled) let us see what it is that they would have us believe.

No doubt the Church of Rome does as much as they can endeavor to obscure and
darken this doctrine, that the glory of merits may shine the brighter. And
therefore even Master Bellarmine who in as plain words as he can devise, has
before taught that this election is free without any respect to works; yet
after (as he now repented him of that he had said) writes That by
predestination the elect get no right or claim to blessedness, Degra. and lib.
Ar. li. 2. cap. 15.
neither is it due to them, but after that by well deserving, they have gotten
the same. Can white and black be more contrary, then these two sayings are
one of them to the other? So that whilst he seeks to establish the opinion of
merits, he does not only gainfay the truth, but even himself also. Let us
mark the similitude whereby he will illustrate his meaning. A king ( says he)
promises a price to the best runner, Ibid. cap. 17.
to whom God reuealeth that if they run upon horses, such a one shall win,
in wagons such a one, on foot such a one, by ship such a one. Then he
appoynteth them to run with wagons, which he also causes to be prepared for
them. Although Master Bellarmine may seem to be run far from the truth,
when by such fond fictions, he would make falshoode carry a show of sound
doctrine: yet we may see his meaning is that as, the king proposes the price
to the best runner, and then appoynteth such a kind of running, as he knows
he shall excel in, whom he would have to win: so God electeth unto happiness,
such as he would, because he knew before that they should merit the same. Is
this free election? Is there in this no regard to works? Psalm. 115. 8.
I suppose it is in our Romish Master verified, that is spoken of the Idol
makers, That they who make the Idols are like unto (...) them. Of Idolaters
they are become Idols them selves, that have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, yea wit and understand not, but say and unsay, almost with one breath. But
when they have done what they can, that ancient faith shall be found not
only true, but also directly against their doctrine, If election be by grace,
then not of works, if by works then not by grace. And because it seems they
are not yet resolved, whether they should mayntaine the ancient faith of
Rome, which sometime they commend, or this new opinion, which they had rather
follow, it were best they would settle them selves to stand to the one or the
other, for they cannot make both agree together. Neither are they content upon
this old garment to set a new patch: Council. Trident. Sess. 6. cap. 12.
but also as much as they dare, they disgrace this ancient faith and old
religion, when they call it a vain presumption and rash to assure our selves
of our election. Romans 11. 29.
But first that our election is certain I hope they dare not deny, because the
free gifts and calling of God are without repentance. The question then is
whether we can be assured that we are chosen: would he that taught us to call
him father, have us to doubt whether we be his children? Or if the spirit it
self bear witness to our spirit, Romans 8. 15. 16.
that we are the sons of GOD, shall these new vpstart Catholics tell us,
that so to do is rash presumption? And why is it called the spirit of
Adoption* 15.
but because it teaches us, nay it assures us our election. Or how can we
attain to that rejoicing in tribulation, which Saint Paul and Saint Peter
also commend in the godly, Romans 5. 3. 4. 5.
but because we are sure that howsoever God seems to handle us, 1. Pet. 1. 6.
yet he still loves us, and therefore his chasticements are not bitter to us,
because the love of God is spread abroad in our hearts. Let therefore these
desperate doctors dececiue such as are devoted to them, let us rejoice in this
assurance of faith, that our names are written in the book of life.

CHAP. XIII.
THe Apostle having hitherto continued in doctrine, especially in teaching us,
that we are freely justified in Christ by faith without works, and that this
justification is common both to Jews and Gentiles* He comes to exhortations*
Romans 12. 2.
moving us to offer up our selves unto God in sacrifice Give up your bodies, a
quick sacrafice, holy and acceptable to God. And that we may be the better
instructed, in offering our selves aright or as we ought to do the tells us
first that we must not Be fashioned like unto this world to follow the
corruptions thereof. 2.
Secondly we must be Renewed in the spirit of our mind, that having our
understanding lightened we may prove what is that will of God, good, acceptable
and perfect: not following too earnestly our own affections, but submitting
our selves and our wills, to Gods good will. And thus must we sacrifice up our
selves to God. Much like is that, 1. Pet. 2. 5.
that S. Peter also writes of Our spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ. Now none can offer a sacrifice, but such as are
priests, but all men must offer these sacrifices: (for the Apostles both of
them write, not only to such as were in the ministry among them, but even to
the lay people, moving then to offer these offerings) therefore all men are
priests. Yea S. Peter in plain words affirms that we are A royal
priesthood, 9.
or as it is in Exodus from whence he borrows those words A kingdom of
priests. Exodus 16. 6.
For there al must be kings, and al must be pristes. Neither can we read that
there is instituted in the new testament any other kind of Sacrifising
priests then these. And we must also mark what our sacrifice is that is
here mentioned: The sacrifice (not of Christ's body) but of our own bodies,
the sacrifising and sanctifing of our selves. Now if the Apostles had known of
any sacricire of the Mass, The Sacrifice of the Mass.
was there not now good occasion to have mentioned it? Yea if it had been in
so great account as the papists hold it to be, how could these two Apostles,
without great impiety have buried in silence, or passed over without
mentioning, so necessary a service of God? But then there was no such thing,
and therefore it is not spoken of by them, who can best tell us what the old
Roman says was. It has been long after that time raked out of the very
channel and sink of superstitions, and is so contrary to that they taught,
that if this sacrifice of the Mass had been but once mentioned in their time,
they would in express words, have made the very name of it odious, among
Gods people. Well of this exhortation we learn, because we are both the
sacrifice, and sacrificer, the offering and the priest, that we must in all
things apply our selves in holiness to serve God. For that which is offered to
GOD must have no blemish: and the priests were consecrated to Gods service:
even so must we strive to be faultlesse, and always endeavor to be occupied in
good works, and in so doing we shall in deed as holy priests, offer unto God
most acceptable sacrifices. As concerning sacrifices for sin we know none
but Christ, we seek none but him, because we need none beside him. If God
have (says Chrysostom) by one sacrifice taken away sin, In Epist. ad Heb.
ca. 10. Ho. 18.
we need not another. And again, there is no other sacrifice, one has
cleansed us, after which follows fire and hell. And Theophilact writes that
the sacrifice of Christ's body once offered, In Epist. ad Heb. ca. 7. Ho. 13
Theophil. in Ep. ad Heb. cap. 10.
shall always be auailable for our salvation, so that we shall not stand in
need of a second. With this one therefore we may well content our selves and
comfort our consciences with the sufficiency thereof, saying with sweet S.
Bernard, In Cantica* sermon. 22.
Thy passion (O Lord) is the last refuge, the only remedy. When wisdom
fails, when my righteousness cannot help, and the merits of holiness cannot
serve the turn, then does it stand me in steed.

But in the Church of Rome which now is, there is no mention of priests, but
only of those shorn and smeered sacrifice^^ And if you desire to know,
Priests.
how and when their priesthood was instituted, they will tell you Christ did
institute their order, when he said at his last supper do ye this. For that
which Christ refers to the whole action of his last supper, Luc. 22. 19.
which then he instituted, they will have it meant of his sacrifice, as if he
had said sacrifice as I do. And as they have in truth no color of truth,
to wring out of those words, their sacrifysing priesthood, so in such sort to
wrest these words could not make for them. For if they say do this, that is,
sacrifice as I do, they are far from sacrifysing as Christ did. For he did,
sacrifice him self in his death upon the tree. But our Romish priests, will
rather leave their priesthood, then offer such sacrifices. Well it does not
appear in the writings of these two Apostles, that ever they dreamed of such
a priesthood but only of that whereof by Christ we are all partakers, even all
that offer up these spiritual sacrifices, men, women, children, of all ages,
sorts, and sexes. So that these sacrificers are a new order, whether they be
regular or irregular, Sacrifices.
it makes no great matter. For they were not so much as thought upon, in the
Apostles times. And for the sacrifices whereunto S. Paul moves us, they tell
us much of the sacrifice of the Mass, an Idol of their own making, set up to
deface and disgrace the virtue and efficacy of Christ his death and passion.
For when blasphemously they term it, Romans 3. 24. 35.
a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead, is not that directly
contrary to that free justification by grace, Heb. 9. 12.
by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus which is eternally obtained by his
own sacrifice of himself once offered, Heb. 10. 10. 14.
even to that propitiation which God has set forth to us in his blood? Which
doctrine the Apostles teach us every where, and namely S. Paul, most
plentifully before has instructed the Romans therein. Other offerings also
they put us in mind of, namely to offer to stocks and stones, which they call
saints, fat offerings, with full hands, that the greater share may come to the
priests. Yea they will also make men believe, that it is no mean sacrifice to
God, if you be good and bountiful to them, but that it smells full sweetly,
and is highly accepted of him. And thus whereas S. Paul teaches us to
sacrifice our selves to God, they tell us that either we must sacrifice our
lands, goods, and possessions to them or their benefit, or else they must
sacrifice for us in the Mass, and not we for our selves. And these are the
sacrifices and offerings that they speak of: how near of kin to those that
the Apostles speak of let the reader judge.

CHAP. XIIII.
NOw the Apostle S. Paul, although he speaks not of a peculiar kind of
priests, ye does he not omit the ecclesiastical function or ministry in the
Church. For having exhorted us by mortifying of our affections, to consecrate
our selves unto God, that we the more thoroughly may submit our will to Gods
will, he persuades us not to busy our selves about that which belongs to
another man's duty, but that every one of us should have a great regard to do
our own. And then beginning with ecclesiastical offices he says, Romans 12. 6.
7.
Whether (we have) prophecy (let us prophecy) according to the measure of
faith: Or an office, (let us wait) on the office: Or he that teaches, 8.
in teaching: Or he that exhorts, on exhortation, or he that distributeth,
(let him do it) with simplicity: He that rules, with diligence, he that
shows mercy, with cheerfulness. I mean not here to make my self a party
in that bitter contention, which miserably has afflicted this Church of
England, which I would to God, either it never had bin begun, or had bin
followed, with more moderation. I purpose not curiously to examine what is meant
by these particular words of prophesying, office, teaching, exhorting,
distributing, ruling, showing mercy. In which many bestow too much labor,
more then in the defense of the truth, against the sworn enemies to our
profession. We have the Papists our professed adversaries, who think their
quietness, consists in our variance, and wish our falling out, as did the
Cananits the falling out of Abraham and Lot. Let us therefore yet at the length
follow Abraham's godly advise. Genesis 13. 7. 8.
Let there be no strife between thee and me, nor between thy heardmen and
mine: for we are brethren. But to come to that which especially I note in these
words, we see that if all these duties before mentioned, Offices in the Church
of Rome.
did belong to the Ecclesiastical function, yet can we not find out the
offices that the Church of Rome that now is, will have to be in their Church.
We find there prophets or teachers, likewise such as exhort. Admit also that we
find the Deacons there to distribute. By rulers some understand not only
Ecclesiastical Rulers, but other Magistrates also. As that likewise of showing
mercy, may well signify any that by office in the common wealth, or Church,
or being moved by their own private affection do show mercy: It is not
unlikely, but that if there had bin at that time any other offices in the
Church, the Apostle would have spoken of them. And to be short, the offices
that the Apostle mentions, either belong to the ministry of the word, as
prophesying, teaching, exhorting: Or to the care of the poor, as Deacons that
distribute, and they that show mercy, or to government and bearing rule (if in
that thapostle speaks of Church offices.) A second thing that must here be
considered of, and that which is in deed the principal intent and meaning of
the Apostle, is the sincerity and that every one in these duties must
perform. For he would have us faithful in the office that is committed unto
us, whatsoever it be, and that according to the measure of Faith, and the grace
that is given to us, we occupy well our talent until our Lord and master come.
1. Pet. 4. 11.
Saint Peter is also of that mind, If any man speak, let him speak as the words
of God. By these things it may appear, to what end the offices were appointed
in the ancient. Roman Church, and what was required at the hand of each Officer.

But afterward as superstition began to grow, so these functions here spoken
of by thapostle began to be less regarded, and other were had in a greater
account. For these are the orders in the Romish Church. Did. 21. cap. Cleros.
Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Candle snuffers, or Candle-cariers, Exorcists or
Coniurers, Readers, Porters. Some also reckon the Singers amongst their orders.
And although even the meanest of these might perform some necessary service
in the Church, yet by what reason can they imagine that their Candle-cariers,
or Porters, are nearer to the Priests office, then other that have no such
office in the Church? As for their Priests, who are to supply the place of
Prophets, teachers, and exhorters, they have in a manner altered that function,
and given them another work to do. For when they take orders, the Bishop
giving them in their hand the Chalice with wine, Durand. Ration. divine. li. 3.
and the cover of the chalice with one of their cakes upon it, says to them,
Receive power to offer a sacrifice to God, and to say Mass, both for them that
live, and for the dead, in the name of the Lord. So preaching is no part of
their duty, but only to sacrifice and say Mass. And if any man will object,
that we our selves have also want of such learned Ministers, as are able truly
and soundly to teach, and rightly to divide the word of life: I must needs
confess that we are neither as we should, neither as we would be for that
point, but wish and pray daily, that the Lord would increase mightily, the
number or paynfull and faithful laborers in his vineyard. But yet we are not
either so senseless or shameless, that we dare alter Christ's ordinance. We
are not so saucy, that when he bids his servants do one thing, we will
command them to do another. Math. 28. 19.
If he say go teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost: We dare not say go offer Sacrifice and say Mass
for the quick and the dead. For that is quite to alter Gods ordinance, to make
them pastors that (I say not) cannot, but must not feed, and teachers that
need not teach. It is a scorn (says one Gilbert as Durand cites him) A
watchman to be blind, Rationat. divine. li. 1.
a forerunner to be lame, a prelate to be negligent, a teacher to be unsavory
or ignorant, and a crier to be dumb. No man therefore can deny, but that there
is in the Church of Rome, a great degenerating and swaruing from the ancient
offices which S. Paul speaks of, so that as in their doctrines they wholly
dissent, from that pure antiquity, so in their doings they disagree from their
perfect pattern. How unlike in affection are these men to the godly fathers
who commended in times past the faith of Rome? Epist. li. 1.
Ciprian is much ^greeued that he could not come to the people (of Assuris as I
take it) that he might use his ministry among them to the comforting of every
particular man. Epist: 8.
God forbid (says Gregory Nazianzen) that I should play the evil
sheephearde, Greg. Nazian. Orat. 4.
which deuoureth the milk, clotheth himself with the wool, and does sell and
kill the fat of the flock, leaving the rest among the wild beasts and rocks.
God forbid that I should feed my self and not my flock. If I exhort not
you (says S. Augustine) to agree with your adversary, De temp. ser. 9.
I shall continue in srife with him. He that bids you do, commands us to
speak, If you become his adversaries, because you do not that he wills, we
also shall be his foes, in not saying that he charge us. Yea Gregory
himself a Bishop of Rome, howsoever it is now enough for a priest to say Mass
and lift fair (for that is a fine quality and much commended) does flatly
pronounce that a priest going in and out must die for it, if he make not his
voice to be heard, and that he provoke against him the wrath of the judge
whom now we see not, De cura pastorali. part. 2. c. 4.
if the voice of his preaching sound not, so that in his time as in the days
of S. Paul, pristes must be preachers, which now is not very necessary or
requisite with them.

CHAP. XV.
AS for obedience to princes, without sin it cannot be denied unto them,
Obedience to magistrates.
because Christ commands to Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's. So that it
is a debt that we owe unto them, Math. 22: 21.
and is due to be paid, Mark. 12. 17.
a duty that they may claim of us, yea that God inioyneth us to do, and
therefore it must be performed. Romans 13. 1.
For this cause the Apostle S. Paul commands every soul to be subject to the
higher powers. Noting thereby not only the outward show of subjection, which
many times may be, where is a traiterous heart: but even that hearty and true
submittnig of our selves with duetiful affection, What subjection is required.
which he calls the subjection of the soul. The same lesson S. Peter did
teach, who they say was Bishop of Rome, and wrote this Epistle at Rome, Submit
your selves to al manner of ordinance of man for the Lords sake. And again,
Honor the king. And this subjection as not only lay men are bound to perform,
but even priests and monks, yea Apostles, Evangelists, 1. Pet. 2. 13.
Prophets, if we (...) believe Chrysostom upon this place: 17.
so the bishops of Rome for some hundreds of yers, dutifully observed the same,
Chrisost. ser. 23.
reuerencing as their Lords the mighty potentates, as by some of their own
writings, and in the histories it may appear, and also patiently suffering
under them reproaches and death.

But the Church of Rome that now is, does many ways seek to raze out this
Law, and to disanull this commandment. First in that the Bishops of Rome have
so exalted themselves above the Emperors who are the greatest Monarchs, Popes
above Emperors.
that they have made them to carry their meat to them, to give them water to
wash, and bow and kneel to them, to lead their horse, carry their canapy,
hold their stirrup, wait at their gates barefooted and bare legged, to lie
prostrate at their feet, with such other most reproachful disgraces as they
have offered unto them. And who knows not the constitution of Boniface the
eight? That if a man will be saved, he must believe that every creature is
subject to the bishop of Rome. God commands every soul to be subject to
princes: Not so says the Pope: all princes, yea the Emperor himself shall be
subject to me, nay his glory is nothing in comparison of mine. And this is not
only, by the pride of the Popes themselves: Rebellion against princes
but whereas stories teach that the godly Christians prayed for infidel
Emperors* now their divines do affirm it to be lawful to disobey, to rebel
against, and to depose such kings or princes as they will call heritickes, yea
to kill such is with them an action godly and honorable, 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3.
yea meritorious too. Would any man have thought, that S. Peter who so humbly,
as a fellow elder entreats the elders to feed the flock which God has
committed to them, not as Lords over Gods heritage, could ever have had so
degenerate a successor, to have sit in his chair (as they say the Pope does)
and yet in pride of heart does not only advance himself above al bishops, but
also over all creaturs? Or would a man have imagined these holy fathers would
ever have hatched so barbarous treasons? Let this then be recorded of a
memorial to all posterity, and for a perpetual stain to that bloody Church
of Rome, the mother of all treasons and tretcheries, of al unnatural and
villainous practices, that she does not only directly oppose herself to the
word of God, the doctrine of the Apostles and the very Law of nature and
nations, but also she and her dear darlinges by their most vile practices,
do cry it out unto the world, more shrill then the sound of any trumpet, that
they quite have abandoned the affections of men. Have not we in England good
cause to detest such doctrine and doctors, who have wrought so effectually in
the hearts of many of our English fugitives, that their treasons have no end,
their cruelty has no measure, but that they desire and attempt to lay violent
hands upon the Lords anointed, which the Godly of all times have feared to
purpose, or think against the most wicked? Yea does not the Catholic Tyrant,
The spanish tyrant.
that calls himself by the name of a king, but is in deed a reproach and
shame to the very name, that he so has dishonored, does he not corrupt with
gold, and entice by all fair promises, subjects to kill their princes, and to
murder them whom they ought to defend, obey and reverence? It is too true,
it is too plain. What kingdoms has he not tempted? what princes has he not
indaungered? How many has he gotten destroyed? So that I am often times
driven to wonder and marvel, A warning to princes.
what sluggishnesse or security possesses the hearts of Christian kings and
princes, that they join not their powers together, against that common enemy,
not to princes only, but even to mankind. His ambition increases, as do his
days, and his cruel purposes cannot be numbered. He incrocheth continually as
he can upon other men's right, and unjustly if his might will serve,
dispossesseth the just heirs of their kingdoms and dominions. His doings
declare that he enuieth all your glory (O you potentates) and aspireth to every
of your inheritances and principalities. And will you thus stand gazing on, as
men amazed at his strange attemptes, whilst having prevailed against your
neighbors, he also take you in hand, when his power shall be increased, and
yours diminished? Do you not know that it is high time for you to look about
you, when your neighbors house it set on fire? Band therefore and combine
your selves together, to reform or restrain his unbridled affections. I do
not wish his subjects to rebel against him, for that we see is unlawful:
but I pray God to put such a heart and courage into his neighbors and equals,
that they would teach him to know, that his omnipotente mind, made proud
with his might and wealth shall not always be satisfied with the spoil of
other. But to leave this Romish Catholic, to his Catholic practices, until
God shall either convert his heart, or confound his power, what cause has the
Pope so to magnify himself, and to claim such sovereignty over them whom he
ought to obey? we see the Apostles would have all without exception subject to
princes. The old Romish fath does not once mention the popes supremacy.
The Popes supremacy is not once mentioned, although S. Paul writing to the
Romans might have had good occasion to have commended the glory of that seat,
if any such thing had been: and S. Peter, if he had any such sovereignty, had
just cause to have required submission to himself as well as to kings, and
should have made more account of himself, then to be but a fellow elder with
others. But the Apostles have bin taught to speak by the spirit of God. 1 Pet.
2. 13.
The Popes have done according to the pride of their own heart. 1. Pet. 5. 1.
And it is a very strong presumption against the supposed sovereignty, which
they say S. Peter had over all, that S. Mark his fauorit and follower, who
also (if stories be true) wrote his gospel at Rome, at the request of Peter's
wel-willers: yet the same his gospel, neither makes any mention of the great
miracles, which they would have us to Imagine that he wrought against Simon
Magus (which is one of their principal arguments to prove Peter's being at
Rome) neither has one word more then the rest whereby we may gather any such
superiority in him. And if he make any mention of Peter, it is without any
signification of his jurisdiction over others. Yea when he speaks of his
calling he thus barely delivers it unto us. Make. 1. 16.
And (Jesus) passing by the sea of Galile, he saw Simon and Andrew his
brother, etc. And reporting the contention that was among the Apostles which of
them should be chief, Mark. 9. 35
he takes no occasion to commend to them, Mark 10. 37.
or to us that sovereignty, Mark. 8. 33
although the later time James and John desired the same from him and the rest,
reporting how Christ reproved him, he uses no excuse, no mitigation of the
offense. Now seeing neither when he sets forth his calling, neither in
pointing to his infirmity, neither in noting these contentions, he has so much
as any way signified his superiority: it follows that either S. Mark was
injurious to his master in not giving to him his due place, or unmindful of
his duty to Gods Church, in concealing from it, so necessary an Article of
religion, as now they hold it, or else that there was rather no such matter,
and therefore he could not write of it. For after Christ was once ascended,
Act: 2
and the holy Ghost sent in visible form, then was it time to know all the
Articles of religion: so that our abuersaries cannot tell us, that S. Mark for
modesties cause did not write of these things. For not to write of that which
is necessary to be believed if he knew it, had been great wickedness.
Subjection therefore to Princes was of the ancient faith of the first
faithful Romans. But this sovereignty and Supremacy of the bishops of Rome,
is but a point of the new learning or else the dregs of Simon Magus his
pride.

CHAP. XVI.
THE Apostle having exhorted unto such Christian duties as we may not omit:
comes in his xiiii. Chapter to take order for such things as of themselves
being indifferent, are according to the circumstances to be used or not. What
are the things indifferent.
Wherein we may also mark, (and it is worth not^ing,) how far they wander
from S. Paul's rules. And first all external or worldly things, are of
themselves, and in their own nature indifferent, meats, and drinks, Romans 14.
14.
apparel, days and times and such like, I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that nothing is common of it self (that is unclean) says S. Paul. And
again the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, as if he had said, true holiness, religion, or
the acceptable service to God, consists not in eating or not eating, drinking
or not drinking, but in this rather, that thy mind being ravished with true
spiritual joy, thou should seek to serve God (not in such toys) but in
sincere righteousness, and to cherish thy brother in perfect peace. And
therefore for the use of such things he gives these rules, Let not him that
eats, despise him that eats not, Exodus 3.
and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats. So that he will not
for such things have one man to judge another. Secondly it is necessary that
Every man be persuaded fully in his own mind, whether he may with a good
conscience grounded upon the warrant of the word, 5.
do that which he does. 22.
For Happy is he which condemns not himself, in that which he allows.
For he that makes conscience is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
faith. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Thirdly, we must not put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in our brothers way, 13.
or do any thing that may grieve or offend him, 15.
for whom Christ has died. But yet we must take heed, that we have not so
much regard unto man, to please and bear with him in his weakness, that we
cherish him in his ignorance or infirmity; 19.
but withal we must Do those things, whereby one may edify another. For even
Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 9. 20. 22.
who made himself a Jew for the Jews, and was made all things to all men,
that he might by all means save some: Yet resisted Peter to the face, that is
plainly and openly, when he had not so due regard to edifying of others, as he
should have had, Gala. 2. 11.
as may appear in that second Chapter to the Galathians. And this is the sum
of that, which thapostle teaches the Romans of these things. For that which he
adds in the beginning of the xv. Chapter, belongs to such points as I have
already touched. And in such things must those exhortations be regarded, 1.
Pet. 4. 8.
which Saint Peter has. But above all things have fervent love among your
selves, for love covers the multitude of sins. 1. Pet. 3. 8.
And that we should all be of one mind. 1. Pet. 5. 5.
And that we should Submit our selves every man one to another. Thus then we
see, that these indifferent and external things, have not in themselves any
holiness, or vnholynesse, but may be used, or not used, if we be rightly
persuaded of our liberty therein, so that we offend not our weak brethren, but
seek their edifying. Therefore in such things we must neither condemn, or
commend others. And this is the ancient and Catholic faith of Rome. Which
although it were by some men (otherwise not evil) dangerously assaulted, and
that not long after the days of thapostles: yet the godly of those times, did
hold fast the liberty which they had by Christ, and would not suffer the
Church to be subjected to such observations. Ignatius.
It may be gathered by Ignatius his Epistles to the Philadelphians, and to
Heron, that some there were then, that put some holiness in eating, or not
eating, against whom he gives this charge in both those Epistles, that they
esteem not such as keep not fast the prescript rules, to belong to Christ,
but to be wolves in sheep clothing, that seek to devour. And yet not long
after, one Alcibiades a good man, Eusebius. Hist. eccles. li. 5. ca. 3.
and one that also suffered Martyrdom, did by too auster diet, (no doubt
thinking therein to consist some service of God) refuse to use Gods creatures,
and gave to other example of offense, and thereof being reproved by one
Attalus, he afterward reformed that his error. Yea in the Church of Rome,
Victor being Bishop there, began some impechment of this liberty, whilst he
sought too earnestly to tie other churches to observe in such things the
customs of the Church of Rome. Eusebius. Hist. eccles. li. 5. ca. 25.
But Ireny worte unto him in the name of the rest of his brethren in France,
letting him understand, that neither his predecessors did, nor he ought for
such things to dissolve the bond of unity that was among the Churches. cap. 26.
And thus we see, how that a good while after the Apostles days, this doctrine
commended here to the Church of Rome was continued both there and else where
throughout the Church, and that they would not suffer any necessity to be
decreed in such obseruances.

But now the new Romish Faith, does bear another stamp, and is of another
making. Mark. 7. 18.
For where Saint Mark out of Christ's mouth says, that meats defyle not the
man, and also the Apostle, that the kingdom of God is not in such things, which
elsewhere he more plainly utters in these words: 1. Cor. 8. 8.
Meat does not commend us to God, that is, to eat, or not to eat it makes us
no better, no holyer, no more acceptable to God. The Church of Rome on the
contrary, has almost all her Religion consisting in such outward obseruances,
all her holiness in a manner is contained within these few precepts, Coloss. 2.
21.
Touch not, taste not, handle not, and some other toys like to these. What is
more commonly taught among them, then that to eat flesh, eggs, or whitmeat at
certain times, is a grievous sin, for any man of lawful years and in
health? Or for some at any time to use them? I know they will answer the Church
has otherwise commanded, and therefore to take liberty to use these things,
is a sin, because the Church has commanded they shall not use them. But
here I might examine who gave authority to the Church to say that is
unlawful, that God says is lawful. Again I might show, that not only in
respect of the commandment of the Church, these things are observed, but even
in respect of some other opinion in the meat it self, then should be had,
because that more superstitiously they observe it then Gods precepts. But if
they had regard only to the commandment, doubtless there is no man so
sottish, but would rather obey Gods express commandment, then any decree of
the Church. But these and such other points I omit: only purposing in this
place to show, how great a piece of popish holiness consists in these
external services, wherein the Apostle tells us there is no such thing.
Holiness in abstaining from certain meats, in keeping of certain days, in
gadding to Rome, Jerusalem or Compostell in pilgrimage, in holy bread, holy
water, palm crosses, ashes, in hairecloth, in going barefoote, in not touching
money, in not speaking, in bearing in thy bosom a piece of Saint John's gospel,
in Agnus deis or blessed grains hanging about thy neck, in a Monks cowle, in
his boots, and great holiness in S. Francis breeches, in dead men's skuls, and
bones, in the blood of hayles, and many other such like things. Whereby the
true holiness, whichis the obedience to Gods holy laws, is almost forgotten,
while men content themselves, with this unholy and trifling trash, which for
want of better stuff, the Romish Church that now is, gives her fools in
steed of bables to play withal, or make them pastime. For why may I not
account and proclaim them for fools, who will not so much as hear the
wisdom of God, and will so readely, nay so greedely follow such follies of
men? Or that will imagine that God who is a spirit, and will be worshipped in
spirit and truth, John. 4. 24.
can be any thing delighted in such apish toys? well to this end have I said
thus much, that we may see, that whereas the old faith of the Romans, retained
a Christian liberty, in the use of all these things, to be used according to
the rule of charity: the new Romish religion, brings them that believe and
follow it, into a great bondage and subjection, to almost all the creatures,
and make them to esteem themselves unholy, if moderately, without breach of
any Law of God or offense of brethren, with thanksgiving as God appoints,
they use the same.

CHAP. XVII.
AND because the Apostle makes his prayers and requests sometime for the
Romans, I think it not amiss to consider of his petitions that he makes,
that we may see whether herein the Church of Rome do follow his godly
example, or in his praises and thankesgiuinges to God for his benefits toward
them. Praying to God only.
Which his prayers and thankesgiuinges if we do mark, are directed only unto
God, in the name of Christ for other mediator he did not Know but only one
mediator of God and man, 1. Tim. 2. 5.
the man Christ Jesus. Romans 1. 9.
He takes God to witness of the continual mention that he makes of them in
his prayers. And why does he call God to witness thereof, but because he
prayed to him he desires that God of patience and comfort will give them on
mind, Romans 15. 5.
and that The God of peace (will) crush Satan under their feet. He wills
them to pray for him to God not to any other, Romans 16. 20.
Help me, or strive with me by prayers to God for me. Romans 15. 30.
And in his thankesgiuings. I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all.
And again To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ forever. The Apostle
Saint Peter blesses God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 1. 8.
For as the prophet David says, I have lift up mine eyes unto the hills, Romans
16. 27.
from whence comes my help, 1. Pet. 1. 3.
my help comes from the Lord that made heaven and earth, Psalm. 121. 12.
The Godly know no other help but God, and therefore pray to none but him,
neither are thankful to any but to him, when they have received any benefit.
And for this cause, Christ when he would have a supply of victuals, Mark. 6.
41.
to relieve them that followed him and were hungry, He looking up to heaven
blessed as S. Mark reports. Mark. 7. 34.
And so he looked up to heaven likewise when he would cure him that was deaf
and dumme. Math. 6. 9.
For he who teaching us to pray, instructs us to say Our Father which art in
heaven, does by this his gesture, teach us to lift our hands and eyes, and
hearts unto heaven, to look for help from our heavenly Father. To him he
prays Abba Father, Mark. 14. 36.
all things are possible unto thee, take away this cup from me. And a little
before he did yield up the Ghost: Mark. 15. 34.
My God, my God why have thouforsaken me? The whole scriptures agree with this
that here is taught. They are full of commandments wherein we are charged
to call upon God in the day of our trouble; full of examples of the Godly, that
make requests to God only: full of thankesgiuings, wherein the faithful
acknowledge that every good and perfect gift comes from above from the
Father of lights, Iac. 1.
and therefore they are moved to say with David, O give thanks unto the Lord,
for he is gracious, his mercy endures for ever. Yea what way so ever we turn
ourselves or what good thing so ever we consider in our selves, we must
confess, that all that we acknowledge our selves bound to be thankful for, is
given us of God. Whether life or living, things temporal or eternal, or
whatsoever other blessing. And therefore to him only must we make our prayers,
for that we want: to him only must we give thanks, for that we have. And such
are the prayers that were made in the ancient Church of Rome. Yea such are the
prayers of all the godly through out the scriptures. And this was the faith of
Rome also in the days of Justin the Martyr who lived at Rome. For he writing
against Tryphon the Jew, or conferring with him of religion, out of these
words of the Psalms, Colloq. cum Trypho.
Thou art my God, depart not from me says thus. He teaches that every man
must repose his trust in God, and ask for health and help of him. So that as
the Apostle did, so Justinius teaches us that we should do. I might to this
end have a whole cloud of witnesses, out of the Fathers of the purer age of the
Church: but because I will not be tedious in so plain a matter, I content my
self with that one place out of Tertullian Ask and ye shall have, De
prescript ad Haereticos.
is spoken to such as know of whom they should ask, that is of him that has
promised anything, even of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And for the
doctrine of mediation this only will I say out of S. Augustine, That he only
that makes intercession for all, and none for him, is the true Mediator.
Contra Epistol. perueniam Donat. cap.
For as he infers afterward, If Paul had been a Mediator, then other also
his fellow Apostls should have been Mediators likewise. And if there should
have bin many, then Paul himself had no reason to say one God, one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Thus we see that S. August.
confuting the ancient heretics called the Donatists, who made other Mediators
besides Christ does even by the same weapons, yea with the same blow beat down
our adversaries the Romish Catholics and gives their doctrine of many
Mediators a deadly wound.

But the Romish Church that now is, as in all things else, they frame unto
themselves new opinions, so here also they have forsaken the old ways, yea
they have committed two evils, they have forsaken God, Ier. 2. 13.
the fountain of living waters, to dig to themselves pittes, broken pittes,
that will hold no water. And we need not herein examine their doctrine: their
practice does sufficiently show and prove, Vows to the Saints.
what blasphemies and superstitions that Church cherishes, In perils and
dangers by sea and by land, they will vow and promise, offerings and gifts,
which if they escape they will also perform to such saints as they vowed
unto. For every sickness they had, and in that Romish kingdom, of more then
Aegyptical darkness, they yet have a peculiar Saint, to whom they would call
for help. Yea every beast had their leach among them, and their very pigs were
not without their Saint Anthony. Honor to Images.
In every Church they had their Images, before which they kneeled, they knocked,
they crept, they prayed, they sweet, thy censed, they offered and did before
them as much outward honor, as they would or could do to GOD himself. In
their names would they dedicate Churches and Chapels, thereby the rather to
bind them to hear them when they pray, and help them when they stand in
need. And whereas that pattern of prayer that Christ has delivered, teaches
us only to pray to him, whom we may call Father, and say Our Father which art
in heaven, yet these Romish Rabbis (in heavenly matters as blind as beetels)
can very well suffer the people, Our father to he Saints and she Saints.
nay they teach them to say that prayer, before every Image not of men only,
but of women also. What madness is this (if it were lawful to pray unto
Saints, which is in truth a great dishonoring of God, and manifestly against
the commandment) to kneel before the Image of Saint Mary the mother of
Christ, or Mary Magdalen, or any other woman saying Our Father to them? If they
could hear us, would not they think we were mad? Or in like manner kneeling
before the Images of Saint John, Saint Peter or any man to say to them, 1. Cor.
14. 1^.
Hayle Mary full of grace? Can we think this to be according to the rule
that Saint Paul gives to pray in spirit, and understanding? And yet these
were their words that they must power out before every Idol, their beads did
teach them to mumble up so many creedes, so many Aue mary's, so many pater
nosters. Their pardons and indulgencies require the like order. God himself
could have no more of them then such stuff as they had learned to reckon or
score up on their beads, and the meanest Saint should have no less. Yea the
learneder sort, yet among other their prayers, must salute God himself if at
any time they would pray unto him or Saint Peter or any other he Saint with
Hayle Mary. Hayle Mary to He Saints.
Fie upon such brutish and beastly blindness, whereby men and women are so
besotted, Psalm. 109. 7.
that they do not only power forth vain prayers that are turned into sin,
wherein they can find no comfort, because they seek it not of him that can
help, but also abuse most foolishly the Lords Prayer which only belongs to
our heavenly Father, yet they will pray with it before every their Saints men
or women. Well their prayers then we see are too absurd. So are their
thankesgiuinges as before I said, in that they yield all praise and glory of
their deliverance, not to God only who only has wrought it, but to their
Idols of whom they asked it. As for Mediator we have none but Christ, we should
know none but Christ: I know not (says Saint Augustine) what other
intercessour to send to thee, Meditat. cap. ^
but him only that is the propitiation for our sin. And before what greater
comfort, then to move the father to pity by remembering his son. He was
figured by the high priest in Moses his Law. He only offered the peoples
offeringes, he only entered into the most holy place, to teach us to content
our selves with one only Mediator which is Christ. Where learned our Romish
Catholics to pray to any other then unto God? Where learned they to seek for
other mediators? We see the ancient faith of the Romans, has no such
commandment, no such pattern or example to follow, but the contrary. Let not
then from henceforth the Romish Catholics, brag of the ancient Roman faith,
for they have it not, they have changed well near every point of it, they
have made it almost all new, so that in the Romish Church that now is, there
remains not so much in a manner as a shadow thereof.

CHAP. XVIII.
I Lastly note in this Epistle to the Romans, what kind of treasure it is,
that he purposes to bring unto them, What treasure Saint Paul brought to the
Romans.
when he comes unto them. I warrant you nothing so glorious and glistering as
the Popes Jewels are. I desire (says he) to see you that I may impart or
bestow among you some spiritual gift, Romans 1. 11.
that you might be stablished. Again I am sure that when I come unto you, I
shall come with abundance of the blessing of the gospel of Christ. Romans 15.
^9.
We see then what are the gifts and graces, that he is minded to give them,
what is the store, what are the blessings, that himself rejoices in, and
seeks to comfort them, in that he is sure he shall be furnished with them, when
he comes among them. It is the ministry of the word, the preaching of the
gospel, the glad tidings of salvation, that he promises to them: which he also
calls a spiritual gift, because it teaches heavenly and spiritual things,
it rejoices, and instructs, the spirit and inward man, it is not effectual
and powerful but by the spirit. And he calls it a blessing, as in truth it
is the greatest benefit and blessing that here we can have. His meaning is to
labor earnestly among them in preaching the word, as he did in all places
where he came, to teach them, that they may know their duty, to exhort them
that they may do it. To reprove them if they be negligent, to council them
when they stand in need, to comfort them when they are in heaviness, and all by
the gospel of Christ, and this is it that he calls The blessing of the
gospel of Christ.

To consider how S. Paul was exercised at Rome, and to see how the Pope is
there occupied, it would make a man to marvel that ever those profane me^ dare
give unto themseues the name of holy father, in whom you cannot find one spark
of that heavenly knowledge, painful diligence, vigilant care, and continual
travel in laboring in the word that should be in a holy father, The Popes
blessings.
or was in Paul, in Peter, or the other Apostles. But I pray you what are the
spiritual blessings that this holy father of Rome bestows. Sometime he will
send to some of his dear sons, a golden rose consecrated, or some picture
consecrated, sometime a sword in token that he would have them fight for him,
yea perchance to embrew in the blood of the Saints, and all must be hallowed
that he does send. Sometimes perchance a Cardinals hat, to one that has
showed himself stubborn enough against his Prince. Sometime he will bestow
Kingdoms, if they upon whom he bestows them, can get them from the right
heirs. Sometime he will bestow upon subjects, immunities from performing their
dutyfull obedience, as he does many times by his privileges. As for
indulgences and pardons, any body that will pray and pay for them, may have
them. And they that dwell at Rome get yet another manner of blessing with his
two fingers, wherewith he blesses the people, that gaze at him when he is
carried abroad. To be short, at certain times he blesses those that are called
blessed grains, or Agnus dei, or such like stuff, and causes these to be
sent into Countries far and near, deluding and deceiving by such toys the
hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 18.
and therwithall filling their own panches and purses, as though they had
gotten, or those had given some great spiritual gift, when they have some such
toy consecrated by the Pope. These are his gifts, such are his blessings. The
Pope does no duties of the ministry.
If you would have better, he cannot afford them. For he is not for the most
part able to preach and teach; It is against honor and estimation to seek to
comfort the afflicted conscience. No neither the Pope nor his College of
Cardinals, will busy themselves in the Ministry of the word, in the abundant
blessing whereof Saint Paul rejoices. Is the darkness more contrary to the
light, Epist. Iud. 12.
then are these vain promises or shows of spiritual comfort (very clouds
without water, and trees without fruit of true consolation) to that perfect
peace of mind, and joy of conscience, which the Apostle promises unto them,
and purposed to work among them, by the powerful preaching of the Gospel of
peace. This, this is in deed a true consecrated sword, which shall pierce even
to the heart and conscience of the sinner, and make a deeper wound, then all
the hallowed swords, that the Popes can sanctify. And thus (to be short) we
see, that where Paul comes, he brings with him spiritual gifts, even
abundance of blessing by the ministry of the word. But the Pope, because he
cannot skill of such blessings uses other, be blesses fire, water, salt,
oil, swords, roses, books, belles, candles, palms, ashes, wax, paper,
parchments, lead, pictures or payntings, falsely persuading silly souls, that
he is able to put holiness into them. And thus it appears, that if we
consider the doctrine of the Church of Rome, examining it with that that was
taught in the days of Saint Paul and Saint Peter, they are nothing like. If
their practice, they are clean contrary, so that the new Romish Church, has
no cause to brag of that old faith of the Romans.

CHAP. XIX.
AND these are if I be not deceived, all the points of religion in
controversy between us and the Church of Rome at this day. Whereof out of the
Apostles epistle to the Romans, we may gather any certain doctrine. Wherein
if we dissent from the religion of the Romish Church that now is, that we may
iumpe and join, with the ancient faith of the Romans, commended by
thapostle, as spoken of, (and that worthily) in all the world, I trust no
indifferent Christian, that in singleness of heart seeks the truth, either
will or can justly reprove us. And as hitherto I have showed what consent
there is in the grounds of their doctrines, between S. Paul who wrote to
Rome, to confirm them in the faith, and S. Peter who (they say) wrote from
Rome, and S. Mark also, who wrote his Gospel at Rome as in histories it is
recorded: so now in one point let us see what Saint Peter thinks, Marriage and
vou^s.
in one point I say not touched by Saint Paul in that epistle, although in
other places plentifully enough by him delivered. Saint Peter therefore in
handling the duties between man and wife, does thereby commend the honorable
estate of marriage, as a state of life whereof God has a care, and therefore
gives laws and rules, in observing whereof husbands and wives may serve and
please God. And if he had so very well liked of single life, as they who call
themselves his successors do, he would no doubt have taken occasion, to
have put in some caveat for the same. Mark. 1. 30 upon Math. 8 ver. 14.
But himself was married as the Rhemistes themselves confess, and though out
of Hierome they would prove, that being called to be an Apostle he forsook his
wife: yet how false that is, Saint Peter himself does plainly enough declare.
For he exhorts Husbands to dwell with their wives according to knowledge that
is, to keep and continue holily and kindly with them, 1. Pet. 3. 7
not ungodly and discourteously to forsake them. And shall we imagine that S.
Peter would teach others and not himself? or say one thing, and do another?
or that in words exhorting them not to depart from their wives, by his example
he would move them to leave them? That be far from us once to imagine. And
this we may be sure of, that if he had forsaken his wife, as our popish
Catholics now, or some other in former times, injurious to that holy
ordinance did surmise, he would yet so have tempered this his general
commandment, that his example should not have been manifestly repugnant to
his doctrine. Therefore that he was married the scriptures report, and it is by
our adversaries confessed: but that he forsook his wife, it has no show of
proof, no color of truth. Yea further the Apostle does insinuate that the
dwelling together of man and wife in knowledge, is a furtheraunce to their
prayers. And therefore unto that former exhortation he adds these words: 1
Pet. 3. 7
That your prayers be not hindered. Thereby declaring, that the dwelling
together of man and wife as they ought to do, is a furtheraunce to their
prayers. Whereas on the contrary, their separating of themselves in body, may
breed such an alienation of minds, with other great inconveniences, as may
interrupt their prayers. And although S. Peter mean not hereby that they
should so continually dwell together, as that they might never withdraw
themselves the more freely to consecrate as it were, and wholly give them
selves to prayer and fasting: yet would he doubtless according to S. Paul's
rules, 1. Cor. 7. 5.
have such their abstinence when any is, To be by consent, for a time, and
again to come together, that Satan should not tempt them for their
incontinencie. For all men and women are in danger of his assaults, and
therefore To avoid fornication, 2.
let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her own husband, 1.
Cor. 7.
says his fellow apostle. And although men or women may for a time feel
themselves void of wanton and unchaste lusts, yet because, Not all men can
receive this thing save they to whom it is given, Math. 19. 11.
seeing I say it is not in their power, but a rare gift of God, which how long
they shall have it they are not certain, (yea to know who gives it is a high
point of wisdom the wiseman says:) what madness is it to promise that which
thou can not perform? Or to seek for that which is not necessary for thee?
or to endeavor to please God, with that which he requires not of thee? How much
better is it for us, to mark the good council and godly advise of S. Paul,
1. Cor. 7. 9.
It is better to marie then to burn, and this commandment of the Apostle
Peter, Let the husbands dwell with their wives, as men of knowledge. And this
is the ancient faith, and the holy practice of the Church of Rome in her purer
age.

But the Church of Rome since that time, which would seem more holy then ever
god made her, or more perfect then he requires, Vowing of single life.
profanely accompting of this holy ordinanuce, as not pure enough for their
vnpure Priests: will not admit any into their holy orders of Priest or deacon
that will not wholly renounce for ever, this holy institution, and vow to live
always a single life. Which their impious and servile ordinances has not one
probable proof, out of Gods word, neither was it the ancient doctrine of the
Church of Rome, in so much as some of them selves, even half ashamed of their
forefathers doings, confess that in the primitive Church there was no such
thing required, but that all men that would might marye. As for such as are
married, if they will be made priests, or enter into their orders, they must not
by their tirannicall decree and decretals any more dwell with their wives as S.
Peter wills, 1. Pet. 3. 7.
but they must rather defraude one an other forever which Paul forbideth, 1.
Cor. 7 5.
and with great reason mysliketh. Thus this their vowing of perpetual single
life, they do not only highly commend, but also do force their clergy to
observe the same: and yet it is not in all the Scripturs old nor new once
commanded or commended unto that calling above any other, not once spoken of or
practiced that can appear in the old Roman Church. And formance of the duties
of marriage which so straightly thapostles require of all that are married without
exception, is not only not furthered in the Romish Church that now is, but
also hindered in some with great severity. And in such sort do they in all
points almost behave themselves, as if they were of purpose disposed or set up,
if not quite to abolish, yet dangerously to corrupt, alter, and change,
whatsoever Christ and his Apostles left pure and sincere. And thus much of the
contrariety of their doctrine, that now call themselves the Church of Rome,
to that which thapostles taught among the Romans. Sup. Cant. ser. 34


Now therefore in respect of their cloked falsehood as Barnard speaks, in that
they hide as he says that which is (true) and falsely invent that which is not,
we may justly say of the Church of Rome, as the same Father complaneth of the
whole Church, but especially in respect of the pride and abuse of that Church,
Al friends, and all foes, all necessaries, all adversaries, all of one house,
none that ensue after peace, al neighbors, all seek their own, In Psalm. Qui
habitat, ser. 6
all Christ's servant, all serve Antichrist. Or as in another place he
bemoaneth the pitiful estate of the Church. Peace in respect of pagans, peace
from heretics, but no peace with false children. Thou (O Lord Jesus) have
multiplied the people, but have not increased our joy: because many are called
but few are chosen. And how little cause the Church of Rome has, to rejoice in
her Catholikenes, and to brag of her multituds, how little cause she has to
increase her joy if she think earnestly of it, let the godly reader
indifferently consider. For seeing she leads men from the pure waters of the
word of truth, unto the unsavory pudles of her own inventions, and has
corrupted that sincere milk, that the ancient Romans fed upon, Revel. 17. 2.
and 18. 3.
with the poison of her own traditions, wherewith the Church of Rome is now
most dangerously and deadly infected: Revel. 18. 8.
the more that follow her, the mo shall testify that they are deceived by her,
and the greater that the multitude is that she misleadeth, the heavier in the
end shall her judgment be. For seeing the inhabitants of the earth, and
drunken with the wine of her fornication, therefore shall her plagues come at
one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire: for
strong is the Lord God which will condemn her.

CHAP. XX.
NOW besides these things, which this degenerat Romish Synagogue teaches and
does, contrary to the Doctrine and practice of the godly, in the first and
purer age of that ancient Church of Rome: there are also many other things
reckoned now in the Romish Church, for some principal points of religion,
the denial or very doubting whereof, would be punished among them with death
and destruction, which were not then among the godly once named or thought
upon: nay rather which do mightily and manifestly impugn that which they
taught. But because my purpose is in this treatise only to show how far
unlike that ancient faith of the Romans, is to this new religion of the
Romish Church, by comparing that old faith, with this new Religion, (which
hitherto I have siucerly done:) it shall be sufficient only to name these
doctrines and doings, which now they have inso great account (as I can remember
them) until they prove out of such histories of that Roman faith as are of
good record, that they were used in that primitive Roman Church. First for that
their gaynefull market and fair of Purgatory fire: where do they find it in
the fore named writings? Purgatory.
In what place of S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans? in what text out of S.
Peter or S. Mark? Out of S. Paul to the Romans they will not so much as
dream of any proof, neither yet dare the learneder sort of them, allege
any thing out of saint Peter. But yet the Rhemistes would feign make the
ignorant believe, that there is somewhat in saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3. 19
for proof of delivering the souls out of some place of torment after this
life. What that place is they dare not tell us confidently: that it is Limbus
patrum, (the place where they imagine the faithful Fathers before Christ after
death were kept) they will not affirm. And they do the more wisely. For saint
Peter there says only thus much, 20
that Christ (who was always present with his Church) Preached in spirit (not
going down in soul) to the spirits or souls that are now in prison, which
were in time past disobedient: now this presence of Christ, being but in
power of his spirit, to wit of his divinity of godhead. Again it was to the
destruction of those disobedient and stubberne men, that would not hear Noah
his preaching (for but viii. souls only were saved:) and therefore how
little this will help, their Purgatory now or Limbus patrum then, it is easy
to see. But on the contrary S. Mark does plainly wring from them, one of the
places which especially they rest upon for proof of their purgatory. For
whereas our Savior Christ in saint Matthew speaking of the sin against the
holy Ghost says, Math 12. 32
It shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, not in the world to come.
(Therefore say they, there are sins that are forgiven after this life, which
must needs be in purgatory.) Saint Mark who comes after saint Matthew, and
heard belike his Master saint Peter expound Christ's meaning concerning that
manner of speech (for out of S. Hierom, and Clemens of Alexandria, Arg. in
Evang. Marci.
the Rhemistes themselves confess, that S. Mark was Peter's interpretor, and
according to that he had heard of the mouth of S. Peter, wrote at Rome a
brief Gospel, at the request of the brethren, which Peter also approved and
allowed of.) S. Mark I say who had such a teacher, does thus teach us to
expound or understand those words of S. Matthew, that he that sins against
the holy Ghost, Mark. 3. 29.
Has not forgiveness for ever, but shall be guilty of eternal death. So that if
S. Peter him self be of that mind that S. Mark his disciple was, we see he
did not once dream of any remission of sin in another world, by these words
of our Savior Christ, but expounds S. Matthew his sense to be (for the
latter must expound the former, when M. Bellarmine has done what he can to
the contrary) that such sin shall never be forgiven. De purgat. li. 1. cap. 4.
And then I trust our adversaries will not thus reason, The sin against the
holy ghost shall never be forgiven, therefore some sins shall after this
life, or in an other world be forgiven, for then the children would spit and
laugh at their folly. And yet out of these words, thus by S. Mark expounded,
all the Priests at Rome and Rhemes cannot otherwise prove this their
conclusion. Near a kin to this purgatory* is their Limbus puerorum, where
they place children not baptized, Limbus puerorum.
but let them show what warrant they have for the same, what proof that it
was then believed, when the Faith of the Romans was commended. Pilgrimages.
Their Pilgrimages, Pardons.
pardons, and indulgences; are very holy things, if we will believe the Popish
Church, that now is called the Catholic Church of Rome. But where does Saint
Paul commend them to the Romans? Where does S. Peter (that had as good power
to give pardons as any Pope could have) either practice it, Agnus deies.
or where does he or his disciple command such things? Blessed grains.
And besides such pedlary ware, Agnus dei, blessed grains, and such paltry
stuff, sent abroad in great packs into all places to abuse the world, are
thought to have many virtues, and to be of great efficacy for many good
purposes: But I pray you my Masters of Rome, when did S. Peter bestow his time
in making such trifles, or in packing up such wares (to sell unto Christians
all Christendom over) as it were in pedlers packs? Crosses.
And how necessary they will account the cross to be, in all their ceremonies
and services, he that reads their books cannot but see. And whatsoever
antiquity they will pretend for the same: yet they cannot teach, that S. Paul,
and S. Peter either taught the Romans to use it, or themselves made any either
upon themselves or other. Relics.
Relics they love so well, that if they cannot get the boans or relics of
good men and women, yet any other such like, be they of men or women never so
bad will serve their turn, so that they be said to be the Relics of such a
Saint. Whereby it comes to pass, that some men and women, who while they
lived, were like others, having no superslous lymmes of their body, now when
they are dead, are by these Romish charmers turned into such monsters, as that
they have some many heads, others many legs, others great numbers of arms:
and so the parts of their bodies are multiplied excedingly, (belike they were
buried in a fruitful soil) and yet every Priest, that shows these relics,
commend that they have to be the true relic, and some miracle, or vision,
every one of them also would commonly feign, to prove that which they said of
their relic to be true. And yet many of them must needs be false: For one
man or woman had but one head, two arms, and so of the rest accordingly. And
therefore all besides that one head, or those other true parts of the body must
needs be false. It is written that one of our Kings of England named Edward,
was evil troubled with the toothache. And who knows not that Saint Apolines
teeth, are a preesent remedy for the same disease, if their lies may go for
true reports. King Edward therefore belike, being desirous to have the true
teeth of S. Apoline, to aply to his teeth, commanded that the teeth of S.
Apoline, that were in all the Churches through the Realm kept for relics,
should be sent to him, which being brought, were sound mo then would go into
some great Hogsheades or vessels. And yet I warrant you yt in every Church
they were persuaded, that they had in deed S. Apolines teeth. But in the
ancient faith of the Romans, what mention is made, or what example is found,
Shrift.
of any such relics. To these may be added their shrift and Satisfactions,
Satisfactions
very injurious to Christ his death, and that satisfaction which he in his
body, has made for us, by that one only sacrifice, which upon the altar of
the cross he offered to his father. 7 Sacraments.
Their number of seven Sacraments, has no warrant out of any of these
writings. Praying in an unknown tongue.
And to be short their prayer in an unknown tongue, and strange language, not
understood of them selves that do pray, I would have them to show how this
together with their halfing of the (...) of Christ's body and blood and many
such like things, can be proved to be taught by word or deed unto that
primitive Church of Rome by S. Paul, S. Peter, or S. Mark, which thing they
can never do. If then in all such points as are in controversy among us,
whereof we find any thing delivered to us, by these holy men and messengers of
God, the Church of Rome (if she teach not clean contrary) wandreth very
much from that ancient Roman faith, as in the 19. first chapters of this
treatise it does (I trust) appear: And if in these latter points of religion
mentioned in this last chap. which they also make great account of,) they have
neither word nor example of these Apostles or S. Mark, to commend unto the
world, such doctrines and devises: what cause is there I pray you, why that
apostolical Church of Rome, that has so manyfestly rejected that old faith,
and so wholly corrupted the auncent religion that there was taught, should so
confidently term her self the Apostolic and Catholic Church of Christ.
With what face dare they tell us, that the faith of Rome is commended, when as
nothing does more convince them of Apostasy, then to try the leaden religion
that now is there taught, by the touchstone of that faith that then was there
preached. And with shame enough may they tell us, that that faith of the
ancient Romans is commended, which most cruelly and stubbornly condemn the
same, and persecute it most bloodily in Christ his members, as our faith so
wholly and perfectly agreeing with the Apostles doctrine, yet pursued of them
with an immortal hatred, intolerable rage, and tirannicall violence does
plainly prove. We say therefore, that that ancient faith of the Romans was
worthily praised. By it we can and do confirm our doctrines: By it we may and
have disprooued their errors. If we swarne one jot from that faith, we crave
no credit, to our words or writings, Psa. 52. 11. ver. 50. and. 51.
no presence or access to our temples. And because they have forsaken it, 2.
Cor. 6.
we hold them as Antichristian Apostates, and forsake their will worshipings and
superstitious assemblies, according to the prophets precise and severe
prohibition, and thappostles comfortable application thereof. Bear not the
yoke with, unbelievers, but come out from among them, and separate your selves
says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing and I will receive you, and I will
be a father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord
God Almighty. Whose assured and undoubted kindness because we cannot but
accept off, seeing we know him to be a most loving Father, therefore we dare
not but detest and hate, the seducing ways of the Church of Rome, because she
is a deceauing and a merciless stepmother. Whose paths do lead to death, and
they that walk in her ways shall find destruction: the remembrance whereof
if it be fearful to us the Lord strengthen us with his grace to strive to
avoid it.

FINIS.

