Of the end of the world and judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ to come, and
of the most perilous dangers of this our most corrupt age, and by what
means the godly may avoid the harms thereof / two sermons preached in latin in
the assembly of the clergy by Henry Bullinger / and now sorely englished by
Thomas Potter.

Heerin are expounded the words of our savior. Mat. 24. touching the end of
the world, and the last judgment. Also the words of Da^^elin the 7. chap.
concerning the most troubleso^e kingdom of the Pope / and the end thereof.
Finally the words of the Apostle. 2. Tim. 5. concerning the perils of the last
times / and the excellency and fulness of holy Scripture.

Imprinted at London at the long shop in the Pultrie by John Allde.

Of the end of the world and the Judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ to come,
and of the most grievous perils of this our most corrupt age or time.
The first Sermon of Henry Bullinger.
THE matter it self requires, and the examples both of the Prophets and also
of the Apostles do instruct us, that all our Ecclesiastical preachings
(doctrines I mean, admonitions, rebukings, exhortations, counsails and
comfortings) are to be framed according to the time. And moreover, that all
Ecclesiastical doings are to be referred unto edifying.

But if we should now entreat and speak as the present time requires, and to
the prophet of us all, who are most of us ministers of the Church, and
therefore are we most cheefely assembled here to th'entent somewhat should
be said concerning the duty of our office, that is most principally requisite
to know: there appears to us no matter more profitable, nor more necessary,
then to admonish your holiness (ye Fathers and brethern honorable and most
deerly beloved) of the consummation of the world, The preposition.
and the final judgment of Christ Jesus our Lord. And also as our special
duty requires) diligently and ernestly to stir up the people of Christ,
committed to our charge: unto a sober watchfulnes, lest sudainly and unawares
the day of the Lord steal upon them, which undoubtedly cannot be far of, and
which our elders before us, teachers in the Church abooue a thousand or ix.
hundred years past, did think to be at hand.

How much rather ought we (upon whom the ends of the world are come, and who
also have most manifestly seenful filled very many of ye Prophesies yt have
been set forth concerning the end of the world, and the things that should
come to pass (immediately before the day of Judgment) to lift up our heds,
knowing that our redemption even now draws near.

Christ Jesus our Lord being yet a favorable high Priest of the faithful,
on, the right hand of his father, but hereafter at the last, a most severe and
yet most just judge of all the whole world, grant me ability to speak duly
unto you, and you grace plentifully to hear with fruit to the glory of his
name and edifying of his Church. And because blessed Peeter the Apostle, the
cheef teacher of this Church, and most faithful Disciple of Jesus Christ our
Lord (says). If any man speak: let him speak as the sayings of God. I will
studiously endeavor to show forth, and with as much plainnes as I may* to
open my whole matter even with the words of Christ our Lord, and with the
sayings of the Prophets and Apostles. For the holy Prophets in whom was the
Spirit of Christ. Daniel most cheefely and Zacharias (omitting Esaias and
Ezechiel) have most diligently and copiously instructed the Church of God with
their prophesies concerning the latter times of the world and the judgment of
Christ our Lord to come.

But Christ our Lord, the light and fulfilling of the law and the Prophets,
has so largely and so manifestly debated of these matters, that if any man do
yet desire a more plain exposition: may seem to seek at the Sun being of it
self most bright shining, a light much brighter.

The prophecy of Christ touching the end of the world and the manner of the last
days.
He being demanded of his Disciples in the mount Oliuet, and in the sight of
the most famous City of Jerusalem, what should be the token of his coming,
and of the end of the world: Made answer. That the holy City of Jerusalem
should first of all be taken and laid flat to the ground, and that the Jews
them selves should be led captive into all nations. Wath. 24
And that the Gospel of the kingdom should be received of all nations
throughout the whole world. And that afterward should false Prophets go abroad,
who with false doctrine and faied miracles should deceive the world and that
with such prohability and happy success: that even the very elect should have
combrance therewith. Among other things he resiteth, False teachers and false
Christ's, and even those Antichrists also, that should forsake the very true
Christ the son of the eternal God, and should not sincerely unto the
faithful show him forth, sitting on the right hand of his father: but in the
earth, in the desert, in sundry and diverse places, and also even En tois
temeios that is to say, in close and secret places, in Chests and Ambries. For
the Grecians call Temeia secret and well fenced places, where treasures are laid
up, also the hidden and privy places of a house, and the very Ambry or Spence.
And the little Sacrament houses diligently fenced with Locks and boltes, the
Popes men call them Ambries, As sure as God is in the Ambry
out of the which as out of an Ambry, they bring forth Viaticum, their viage,
provision or Howzel (as they call it.

But our Lord in the Gospel with loud voice cries out, saying. Do not believe
them, do not go forth, do not believe them. Beeholde, I have told you
before. And heeer he adds by and by, that grievous persecutions shall arise
against the godly, He says, that there shall be great troubles, that there shall
appeer tokens in the Sun, in the moon and in the stars, that some shall be
grieved with great pe^ciuenes through despair, and that so^e being dissolute
and vva^ton through to much and a certain careless security, shall be in that
last day overwhelmed, and that the world shall be about the end altogether such
as it was before the flud and in the days of Loath, while the Giants and
Sodomites lay sleeping and snorting quietly in the dung of wickedness,
despising all the good admonitions of God, given unto them by the holy Fathers,
in so much ye destruction came upon them unlooked for. Paul the Apostle of
Christ, speaking also of that ungodly security. 2. Thesse. 5.
Of the times (says he) and at what moment our Lord vvil come to execute
judgment: there is no need for me to write unto you brethern. For you your
selves do plainly know that the day of the Lord vvil come as a thief in the
night. For when they shall say peace and quiet safety: then sudden
destruction shall come upon the^ as the pain of child bearing up on a woman
in trauail, and they shall not escape. But our Lord in his Gospel proceeds
with his Prophetical exposition, Luke. 18.
and says moreover. Iniquity shall abound and the love of many shall wax
cold, so that the son of man when he comes: shall scarcely find faith
upon the earth. Saint Peeter also fortelling of the extreme wickedness of this
last age. 2. Peeter. 3.
I stir up your minds (says he) to remember the words that have been
spoken heertofore by the holy Prophets and also the commandment of us the
Apostles of our Lord and ^auiour. This understand ye first, that in the last
days shall come mockers* which vvil walk after their own lust, and say.
Where is the promise of his coming? For, sins our fathers died, all things
continue in the same estate from the beginning as they were first made. Our
Lord also in the gospel adds moreover to all these things That he vvil come
in his glory sudainly and unlooked for, to judge the quick and the dead, and
that he vvil give rewards of life to the godly, and vvil commit the wicked
to everlasting Hell fire. For as the lightning (says he) comes forth of the
east, and shines even unto the west: so shall be the coming of the son of
man. Take heed therefore unto your selves lest your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and with the cares of this life, and so that day
steal sudainly upon you. For truly it shall come upon all the inhabitants of
the earth like unto a snare. VVatch therefore praying at all times, that ye may
be counted worthy to escape all these things that are to come, and to stand
before the son of man. Verily in this place our Lord is earnest and urges
so, as in no other place more vehemently, exhorting all people of all kinds,
and of all ages unto a sober watchfulnes. In Saint Mark. VVatch (says he) for
ye know not when your Lord vvil come, Mark. 13.
whether in the evening, or at midnighr, whether at the cock crowing or in the
dawning, lest if he come sudainly, he find you sleeping. In S, Matthew he
sets forth very many parables, so the intent he might the more deeply
fasten this thing in the minds of all men. For he sets before us An
householder that watches, lest the thief in the night breaking in to his
house should steal away all his substance. He sets forth A faithful and
wise servant, that ministers meat in due time to the whole household
committed to his charge. On the other side, he sets against him a noughty
Servant, vnthriftliy wasting his masters goods, and also very unjustly dealing
against his fellow servants, moreover drunken and vnwatchful, not any whit
regarding his masters coming: whom taken with the fault he does rent in
pieces like a Traitor. He sets before us Ten Virgins, whereof five were sober
and wise, but the other v. were foolish and slouthful, and therefore shut out of
the joys of the wedding.

Furthermore he sets before us a certain Noble house holder, that look his
journey into a far country, and yet first before his departure distributed his
goods by Talents, which he left to be occupied in merchandise for his gains,
who bound with everlasting chains his unthrifty servant, wicked and slouthful.
And to every parable: he joins a sentence right worthy and meet to be graven
deeply in our hearts. VVatch therefore be cause ye know neither the day nor the
hour in which the son of man vvil come. But moreover, This doctrine of our
Lord / is to be urged and bear ^ in to our minds.
who can say that this doctrine uttered by our Lord and Savior, concerning the
last age and the judgment to coome, is combersome or obscure? It is surely
more clear then the noone day unto them, that desire to be wise. But unto them
that are blind always, all things become darkness, because of their own
accord they procure unto them selves eue^ very extreme darkness. But this
diligent carefulnes of our Lord, and also this wholesome example ought to stir
up all us his servants unto like desire of godliness, to the intent that we may
with great faithfulness and diligence, stir up also eue^ the whole world
being almost all in these our days deeply fallen a sleep: stir the^ up (I
say) shake them, and sharply with ernest calling on, urge them to watch, pray,
and to consider thoroughly the doctrime of our Savior, and finally to mark well
those things that have been done in times past and those things also that are
now done in these our days.

Verily those things that were foretold by our Lord, By a comparison the
prophecy of Christ is made manifest.
we have seen them, even in the very things them selves, continually and in
long course of time to have been fulfilled. For the holy City weried with the
grievous seege of ye Gentiles, at the length was taken, spoiled, set on fire and
utterly destroyed, scarcely any few tokens or prints remaining thereof. But
those Jews that perished not by famine, pestilence, and the sword: were taken
captive by the Romans, and dispersed into all nations throughout the whole
world. And also the Gospel of the kingdom, in despite of the Jews and
Gentiles, and even in despite of hell gates, has been received throughout the
whole world.

Furthermore we have seen, that there has burst out of the deep pit of hell,
Apoca. 9.
those great hepes of false prophets those deadly locusts, which with most
corrupt and new kind of doctrine, he has troubled, vexed, rent in pieces,
seduced, yea and all so replenished with most unspeakable calamities, the
whole Church of Christ. But if you as yet see not these things: consider more
ernestly, what I shall now say. The foundnesse of doctrine is corrupted.
The simplicity and integrity of the old and Apostolic doctrine was in that
deadly time utterly corrupted. It seemed, and is yet now adjudged by those
Doctors, to be a doctrine very vile, unseemly, and nothing Catholic, which
being taken out of the most sacred Gospel and most simply and plainly set
forth unto all men according to the example of the Apostles, does teach, that
the faithful are justified by the only grace of God, thorew faith in Christ,
or that sinners are acquitted from damnation, their sins forgiven the^, and
everlasting life obtained by the death of ye son of God. which benefits they
receive by faith only and do show forth and testify their true faith by good
woorks. So shall it seem unto the^ a matter unadvised and nothing plain, if
thou say that the rule of Christ alone is a most absolute rule of true faith
and good life, also that Christ alone suffiseth unto the godly. And that he
alone remains the Head, the King, the high priest, of the Church, in which he
is present and which he rules very well with his spirit and power, even unto
the end of the world: that the Church cleueth only to him, honoreth him in
Spirit and truth: that the same worshippeth him, not in elements, or
corruptible things, but in glory, and at the right hand of God the father. If
thou do thus believe, and do thus plainly and simply confess thy faith: thou
shall be accounted nothing Catholic, yea suspected of heresy, or rather a very
Heretic indeed. For heerunto thou must ad, that Christ indeed does justify
us, but not freely. For Our merits must come to, and so our salvation thereby is
made perfect. And therefore by all menes possible, they impugn and persecute
this proposition as heretical namely, That Sinners are justified by only
faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law. Moreover they teach us to
speak more Catholikly and to frame our talk in this wise, namely that men
have their sins in deed forgiven through Christ: but not without the Key
granted unto ye Preests, which is lawfully employed in Confessions. That
men's sins are indeed pardoned, as touching the fault: but not as touching
the pain, which pain (say they) is taken away or ministered by Satisfaction, or
by the Popes pardons. And the believers are saved indeed, but yet their souls
must first be well sodden and purged with Fire and Holy water. They ad
moreover, that in very deed the Gospel of Jesus Christ is the rule of true
faith and good life: but not altogether perfect. But that the want thereof is
patched up with lively Traditions, and by the decrees of the councels and
Fathers. That the rule of Munks are most alowable. and most perfect, because
(forsooth) they are in the state of perfection. That Christ in deed is ye hiest
head in Heaven: but that he in earth has placed in his-sted ye Bishop of Rome,
with fulness of power to be the head of his Church. So that they which do not
acknowledge this head, cannot enjoy Christ in Heaven: for that we ought (under
pain of damnation) to be subject to the Bishop of Room. So they grant that
Christ is in deed in Heaven with his Father, an intercessor and mediator for
the faithful: yet they ad by and by: But he is not a mediator alone: For the
same thing also is granted unto the merits of ye Saints in Heaven so that by
their menes also they cause our Lord to extend his mercy unto sinners calling
upon the names of the Saints. So they grant that Christ is to be worshipped
in spirit and truth: but yet they affirm, that he is nevertheless to be
worshipped with gold, with silver, and all kinds of precious things, John. 4.
Daniel. 11. Acts. 17.
that are to be offered and dedicated to the ornament of temples. So they say,
that the faithful do indeed worship Christ at the right hand of the father in
glory: but that he nevertheless must be adored also and worshipped under the
form of bread, in their Chappeles, in their Alters, in their Temples, in their
store boxes and Pixes: when by the power of God, and of the words of
consecration, the substance of bread and wine is turned, yea transubstantiated
in to ye substance of the body and blood of Christ, no one jot of the
substance of the bread and wine remaining, but only the very accidents and
outward shows, that appeer. Therefore, that Christ is to be worshipped here,
even here on the earth, and under the elements and outward creatures, they do
ernestly affirm by the traditions of the Popes, Innocencius, Honorius and
Vrbanus, and do even point him out, as it were with the finger in the earth,
here, and there, moreover in the desert, in the secret places, in their
Clausters, and in those their monasteries. Yea farthermore, to the intent that
the admonition of Jesus Christ our Lord, might not be obscure or dark, saying
in the Gospel. (They shall say unto you: behold here is Christ, behold he
is there, behold he is in the desert, behold he is in the store boxes, or in
the secret places) round about the Pix or little Sacrament box, they write in
great golden letters. Here worship thou God. If in any place out of Room they
do open their Romain pilgremage (Ein Romfart) that is to say, if any where
they happen to lay out those their indulgences and Pardons to sale for
merchandise, then again in the forefrunt of their Scrips, satchels, boxes and
shops of pardons, they write in great golden letters. Here is full remission of
all sins, and these things truly are well known to all men throughout
Christendom. But what does Christ our Lord ad moreover unto those things?

Go not forth, do not believe them, behold I have told you before.
Furthermore, we have heard and seen in more then a thousand places, great
fearful Miracles to have bee^ wrought before dum Images, and before ye bread
turned into God. And all things were done to this end that these new and Doctor
like decrees of the tra^substantiatio^ of ye bread, of the worshipping of
Images, of ye invocation of Saints, and the purchasing the merits of Saints,
The persecution of the Church of Christ.
might be set forth and commended to the faithful. But he yt will not believe
these things, or shall in any jot speak against them: is by and by snatched up
to prison, and to execucion of death. We have learned out of histories, that
there has been never at any time stirred up against the people of God, any
persecution more grievous, of longer continuance, and finally also more cruel
then this last by Antichrist. The affliction of the people of God in Egypt
continued not abooue two hundred years. It is written in deed that they were in
Egypt and on their journey iij. hundred years. But all this time is not
ascribed to the persecution of the Israelits. But the persecutions, which they
sustained under the Judges and Kings, were very short.

The captivity of Babylon was ended within ye space of lxx. years. The
affliction of Antioche and Greece was contained within certain bonds. Moreover
the ten persecutions of the primative church, lasted three hundred years, even
to the reign of Constantine the great. And they had in the mean while certain
breathing spaces, certain respits, and quiet times.

But since the time in which the Bishop of Rome invaded the kingdom of Christ,
and began usurpingly to take upon him the rule of the Church, and lastly to
challenge to him self the fulness of power: there was then no rest at the end of
lxx. years and abooue. None, or very short truces, but continual laying of
trappes and snares, perpetual practices and torments (as it were) everlasting.
The sharp and cruel Inquisicion was written with the blood of the faithful:
that is to say, a more rigorus way, to enquire against the faithful, then ever
was practiced, by the Emperor Dioclesian, such as was never seen in any age or
time from the beginning of the world. Hereunto is mixed Excommunication, the
strong sinew of persecution. This kind of persecution, has shaken the most
mighty Kings, the Henry's and Fridericks, and their children and nephews, the
Levvises, and innumerable princes. With the same, the Pope has subdued unto
him self, people otherwise very fierce and courageous. The same has taken away
the most holy and most learned men in the world: and has compelled the
simpler and more unlearned sort, either utterly to keep silence, or else to
dissemble. For at the length by this his outrageous tirany: be made kings and
princes thrall and obedient unto him, so that all me^ (by hepes) have greedely
heertofore, and now do still bear armor in defense of this new God, and to
maintain, and by violence to force upon all men, his new Religion. I do fain
nothing heerin, neither reliue I my gaul, neither speak I any thing for
hatered, or favor of any man. God, the judge of all men is my witness in this
behalf.

Moreover, all historyes both old and new, do make mention of these things.
Finally what is done in our days, and with what persecutions are oppressed,
not the blasphemers, not the contemners of Religion, not the adulterers, not
those that are defiled with incest, with whordomes, with fornications (to speak
nothing of more filthy acts) not murderers, not Sorserers, not Traitors, not
deceitful persons, covetous men, Usurers, or Thieves and oppressors of widows
and fatherless children: but the professors of the true Religion, and the
confutors of the Popes abominations.

They that do not see it, and with greef mark it, are more blind then ye
Jews, who when they heard this saying (Christ when he comes, shall he do mo
miracles then this man has done? (and when also the thing it self did bear
witness in the mean while most apparently, yet by no means did they believe
in him. Yea, how is it, that they more freendly do spare and favor Thieves,
and murderers, then the loouers of the Evangelical truth? The Jews are
suffered and borne with all, the Turks, the Sarasens, and the most naughty and
most hurtful men of all. The Gospellers alone being vnharmful, are never
thought worthy of any pardon. These only seem meet to be dispatched out of
the way without any mercy. So that heerin also thou may perceive Christ's
saying to be verified. You shallbe hated of all men for my names sake. Also The
time will come, that he, which shall kill you shall seem to do honor unto God.
Again who is ignorant, with how great straitnes even in the Papistrie most
chiefly in the Abbeys, are vexed, men not altogether evil, and many with
troubled consciences? Who knows not that God and godly men, not a few, pine
away even with very sorrow? But who shall recite unto us the age, of late days
and in this our time, notable and famous in signs, ^^u^ders and strange
tokens? I will not now speak of the civil and forain wars, seditions,
schisms, sects, debates, tumults, trecheries, treasons, unfaithfulness, wiked
leages, men's cruelty most extreme, and destructions most horrible, and those
not a few.

Of these things who cannot gather, that faith and love is become cold upon
earth, and that extreme wickedness boyleth in the hearts of men? Furthermore, we
see that the world at this day, being in such horrible dangers, is most
abundantly stuffed and replenished with such as despise God, and make a mock of
all truth* the most religious (that is to say) they, unto whom this name is
given, and who have their living and gains by Religion, make Religion it self
a very game. Unto us it is a good persuasion (said that most holy one) which
makes us Lords over the whole world. And I am a shamed, to rehearse those
things that are spoken by learned and religious fathers in this kind of
matter. The Epicures being a company of Swine, do laugh and plesantly make a
jest at the love of virtues, and at the calamities, which the faithful do
patiently sustain for Religions sake, at the immortality of the soul, and the
resurrection of the body, also at ye rewards of the godly and punishments of
the wicked, and at those things whatsoever, which are spoken conserning
spiritual and heavenly matters. More over, we see that the people of all sorts
one with another are deeply drowned in a careless security: and that
therefore reigns among them a monsterous love of surfeiting and drunkenness.

Most men do promise to them selves many hundred years yet to come, and
therefore they make merry or else with dissimulation do let pass all prechings
of of repentance, of fasting, and of sobriety, of faith and of prayers of the
end of ye world now at hand, and of the eschuing the infection of evils. Gene.
18.
But if any do somewhat freely reprove these Swine for their shameful
filthiness: by and by he hears that, which Loath heard at the hands of his
Citizins the Sodomites. Thou came hither as a stranger, and will thou now be
a Judge among us? But (I pray you) which be the days of Noe and Loath, if these
be not they? All good admonitions, and the very word of God it self are most
extremly despised. What remains therefore (ye fathers and brethern honorable
in Christ, and most deerly belooued) but yt the last day of our Lord is not
very far absent: and that therefore all our sheep committed to our charge, are
to be exited and stirred up unto a diligent and sober watchfulness? In vain
shall we cry out, when the very day falls upon us. For it shall invade us
upon a sudain, like unto a lightning.

Wherefore, the minds of all men must betimes before hand be made ready, and
verily with none other doctrine, tha^ with the same of Jesus Christ our Lord,
of which I have hitherto entreated with as much brevity as I could.
Notwithstanding, I do advise all men, The day and year of the last judgment
cannot be discerned.
heerin ernestly to take heed, lest in scanning and sifting out of the time or
else the day or year of the last end, we be to bold or rather to rash: as so^e
lewd fellows there have been of late years, who have (as it were) with their
finger poynted out ye day and the year of ye final judgment, therein shewi^g
forth their folly worthy to be mocked of all men. Christ Jesus our Lord, the
judge of all men, who, according to his Godhed, Mark. 13.
understands all the councels of his father, said in the gospel of S. Mark.
Of that day and time no man knows, no, not the Angels which are in Heaven,
neither the Son him self (as touching his humain nature) but the father
alone. And a little after. Ye know not when that time shall be.

Therefore as the Lord him self has taught us to speak: so let us speak, and
say. Take heed, watch and pray. For ye know not when your Lord will come, in
the evening or at midnight, at the Cock crovving, or in the davvning, lest if
he come unawares, he find you, sleeping. Wherefore when ye shall se these
things come to pass which I have told you before, should happen: know ye
that the kingdom of God is at hand. And therefore look up and lift up your
heds. For your redemption draws nigh.

This short doctrine of Christ our Lord may suffice unto his Disciples, being
careful and diligent, and not delighting in long process. And because I dout not
but that some yet do desire and look for a more ple^tiful discourse upon these
things: we will therefore breefly ouerrun the doctrine of blessed Daniel upon this
matter. The prophecy of Daniel touching the end of the world and the times of
the last age.
Him we choose out among others, and before others, because our Savior
entreating of the destruction of the City and the world, sent us back to this
Prophet, whose prophecy we should easily understand, Daniel. 7.
if we did give good heed thereunto. Daniel therefore being taught by the
heavenly vision: rehearceth four Monarchies, that should arise in the world,
among which: the last be calls a Beast, which, (he says) should have ten
horns, among which: one Little horn springing up should cast down iij. of
them and that the same should grow up in marvelous forse, and far excel all
the rest. The same also (says he) had the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking
great things, and that he made grievous and perpetual war against the Saints,
over who^e also he easily prevailed and reighneth most puisauntly and most
licenciously, until the seats were prepared and judgment placed in throne.

For then was all that kingdom rent in pieces, and the beast thrown into the
fire to be burnt with everlasting flames. Saint Jerome expounding these things
says. By the fourth Beast, the Prophet understands the Roman Empire,
which ^e neither calls a Lion, as the Empire of Babylon, neither a bear as
of Persia, neither a Parde, as of Macedonia, but he calls him a Beast* to the
intent that what soever we imagine most fierce and cruel in beasts: the
same we may understand by the Romans. Thus much says S. Jerome. But seeing
Daniel him self has sown abroad the seeds of the right exposition heerof: by
following the things them selves, and conferring of historyes: I will show the
interpretation of this prophetical vision, not enforced: but taken out of the
words of ye prophet and out of the very things them selves, and therefore easy
and apparaunt of the own accord, Verily, it is well known, that the Romain
Empire has raged over the whole earth with furious woodnes more the^ beastly.

For, if I should omit to make mention how that under this Empire (whose
vassals were the Herod's) Ihon Baptist was beheaded, and at the last Christ him
self was crucified under Tiberius the Emperor ( Pontius Pilate being then
Lieutenaunt for the Romans) all the Apostles of Christ were also most
grievously afflicted, and at the length most cruelly slain, and the Primitive
Church (with the x. most fierce persecutions with fire and sword) worn away
yea, and almost utterly consumed: yet who knows not, yt there was almost no
part of the world inhabited, wherinto the most raging weapons of the Romans
have not broken in, and vexing of the same (with their filthy lust, in
tolerable pride and insatiable coueteousnes) have at the length utterly
devoured it? But the just Lord, in due time has recompensed blood thirsty Rome
according to her deserts, The Romain Empire destroyed.
and by division has made concord, and so also has rent her strength in
sunder, which thing the prophet has signified by the x. horns. For, while the
prouinses revolted from the Romain Empire, and some of them created Kings unto
them selves: and other some bare armor against the imperial City, and the
Emperors them selves, within few years it came to pass, that the City
being Lady of the whole world: was taken and sacked of barbarous people, and
also made a mocking stock, and at the last set on fire and destroyed by
Tottilas of Ostgothia, a prince worthy of eternal remembrance, and a most
famous servant of God.

At the same time and before also, when the City was come into the hands of
Gensiricus the VVandall, and when immediately afterward it was governed by
Odacer king of the Saxons, who being dead: it was subject to Djetricus of
Verona and the Ostgothes, all that while there was no lawful Emperor or Caesar
in Italy, as before at Rome. Only at Constantinople, in the City of
Constantine, the great ye most godly prince, reigned the Emperors of the
East, until Ioannes Paleologus the son of Mahuel being the last Emperor of
Constantinople (except one) did in the council of Florence acknowledge Eugenius
then Bishop of Rome, unto whom he there submitted him self and his also. This
was done in the year of our Lord 1439. For, The Emp^r^ o^ Constantinople
^^^oued and overthrown
straight ways his son Constantine the vij. surnamed Draco, being subdued
by Mahumedes the Emperor of the Turcks, lost his City, his life, and his
Empire. So that for a just punishment of that most filthy reuolting and
backsliding: the most ancient Empire of Grecia, that had stand upright 1119.
years, was by yt Turcks thrown down and very cruelly subverted. This calamity
happened in the year of our Lord 1453, So that from the council of Florence to
the reuolting: were only xiiij. years between. And S. Jerome in his
Cronicles notes that the City of Constantinople was dedicated by Constantine
in the year of our Lord 334.

Consider here, in the mean while (ye worthy men) the goodness and Justice of
our Lord God, and therewith all his meruellous truth. The benefits of God
bestowed upon Constantine the greae.
The blessed Emperor Constantine faithfully served the true God and his son
Jesus Christ in rooting out, and suppressing of all hethenish Idolatry and
superstition and on the other side in planting, spreading abroad, and
establishing of Christian religion, and for that cause (as S. Augustine makes
mention) God that plentiful rewarder of all good men, was willing to adorn him
not only with eternal joy in Heaven: but also with most ample glory and
renown upon earth.

For he gave unto him the most famous City in the world, and a continual and
most invincible kingdom. For, God drawing him away from that fatal land of
Italy, and from the bloody City of Rome (which also, it is likly the prince
him self to have abhorred) brought him unto Bizantium in Thracia, where he
built a famous City of his own name which was unto his posterity even unto
the end of ye world a most worthy remembrance of so very good and most mighty
a Prince. Whereby it come to pass by a certain providence of God, and (as it
were) by a certain prophecy, that it should take the name of Constantine him
self, and also of that good christian woman Constantia. Like as some report,
Rome to have taken name of Romulus, that slew his brother, or (as so^e say) a
robore tirannico and immensa superbia, that is of the tiranicall force, and
unmeasurable pride (what if ye ad, vom braemen vstrumen vnd be schissen) with
which it has been a raging enemy against the whole world both spiritually
and corporally. Assuredly all historyes do witness, that our Lord God bare a
singular great favor unto the City of Constantinople. One matter only will I
resite.

After the decay of the Romain Monarchy, how soever ye whole world run
together with mutual wars among them selves, and most kingdoms tasted of
marvelous alterations: yet nevertheless the kingdom of Constantinople remained
steadfast and vnmoouable, giving often repulse unto barbarous nations, and also
to the very Sarasines, being enemies otherwise most mighty and fierce. But
at the length being utterly void of Gods protection: it was laid open to be
spoiled and trodden under foot by the Turks, at what time the Princes of
Constantinople being deceived by Eugenius the Pope, to the great calamity of
most mighty Princes. (For at that season by the unhappy council of Amurathe,
he overthrew Ladislaus the most victorious King of Hungary and Polonia, with
all his whole host) departing in the council of Florence, from their true
head Christ, acknowledged the Pope of Room to be the true Vicar of Christ,
on earth, and the lawful successor of Peeter (I rehearse the words of Platina)
to occupy the cheifest and highest place in the world, whom the Church both of
the East and also of the West ought of duty to obey.

But seeing that these things have happened to this most noble and most
ancient City, through the just judgment of God: let men take heed in these
days what they do, that being delivered through the tuicion and diligence of
good Princes, from this Romain beast outrageous, proud, insatiable in blood and
riches, filthy and deceiuable: yet will again throw down the^ selves to be
stamped under his feet, and to be overwhelmed Since all kinds of legerdemain.

But now I return to Daniel. It appears out of histories (as I was about to
tell) that in the West, within Room and Italy, being the ancient seat of the
empire, there was no Caesar or Emperor, all the time from the desolation of
the West Empire, unto the days of Charles the great, which was three hundred
years and more. For the Horns, that grue up by the division of the Romain
Empire, being diverse and many, did fiercely fight together, and slew one
another. So that Room and Italy was governed now by the west Goths afterward
by the VVandalles, after that by the Saxons, so by the East Goths, then by the
Greeks: and at the length the Lombards also, and Frenchmen attained to the
Empire.

And during this unhappy time, while the frantic Prinres slew one another
with mutual wounds, there sprung up in the midst of this contention, that
base and despised little Horn that Daniel speaks of, namely a parish Priest
of Room, who a little before this time through most wicked devises and
practices, began to be in authority: which helped him exceedingly to ye
attainment of the Empire. For now he was accounted almost of all men in the
west parts for the universal pastor, as Bishop of that place, which (after
long contention had, first with the Churches of Africa, and afterward of
Constantinople) Phocas the Emperor, altogether an infamous and unfortunate
Prince, commanded to be cheifest and head of all Churches in the world.

Therefore now the Popes judgments and decrees were of great authority among
princes, as of a man altogether Apostolic: who nevertheless hitherto was
equal with other Bishops, and had no princely superiority, and therefore, was
a base and despised little horn.

And Daniel does not let to tell, by what means, that base person not
accounted of, who was once under the subjection of the Romain Princes, is now
started up to so great a dignity and power, The little horn overthrows iii.
horns.
namly by the overthrow of three Horns in that sharp conflict of the other
Horns. And here I would have you to note dilyge^tly, how yt Daniel, in
declaring of this matter, used not one only word but three.

For he says, that the Horns were pluct a way, brought low and fell down.
Namely, that one of the three horns was plucked away, an other brought low,
and the third fell down. For Grigory Bishop of Room the second of that name, a
Cirian born, and a man very witty and subtle, did excomunicate Leo Isauricus
Emperor of Constantinople (being a good and other wise a strong Prince) for
taking away the Images out of the temples of Christians, whom also he plucked
away and drove him out of Italy. Heerin reigned the Saxons and Ostgothes, men
barbarous about Clxxv years. But these were subdued by Bellisarius, a man very
expert in the affairs of war. And Narses a skilful and mighty warrier, being
sent by the princes of Constantinople, drove them clean out of Italy, and he
him self ruled Italy, as Liuetenant for the Prince of Constantinople.

After this, Longinus brought a new kind of government into Italy called the
Exarchate, The Exarchate af Rauenna.
such a one as was the Deputy and Viceroy in Italy in place of the Prince of
Constantinople. He was termed Exarchus, who had his seat at Rauenna and not at
Room, because it remained, very filthy, and (as it were) desolate, by means
of the waste and destruction done by the Goths. And after Narces and Basilius,
Rome had never Consuls, nor senate lawfully assembled. But the Romain state
being utterly wasted: was governed a long time by the rule of a Grecian, who^
the Exarchus sent from Rauenna. And it was not called the Exarchate of Room:
but of Rauenna.

But after that Leo the Greek Emperor was excommunicated, and Gregory the Pope
had persuaded all the Cities of Italy to revolt: they began to choose them Dukes
to rule over them. Whereby it came to pass immediately, that casting away the
government of the Exarchate, they slew through sedition Paul the Exarchus
together with his Son at Rauenna, and expelled the Grecians out of Italy. And
so this horn was plucked away.

Moreover, Pope Zacharias, whereas he was falsely esteemed by the Frenchmen and
other nations, to be the true Apostolic and universal bishop on earth, was
chosen vmpire, to pronounce whether were more worthy of the kingdom Hildericus
or Pipin the dwarf. But he brought low the true King Hildericus, in place of
whom he exalted Pipine being the cheef ruler of his house.

Wherefore, Stephen the successor of Zachary, second of that name (the repulse
being given to the Lombards, and also in despite of ye Greeks) received for a
reward of his wicked fact, the Exarchate of Rauenna, lately made desolate by
the practices of the Pope. And so another of the three Horns was brought low,
and the little horn was exalted, into a higher estate. Furthermore, now after
these comes Charles the great, the son of Pipin ye dwarf, who being called
forth by Pope Adrian in to Italy against the Lumhards, at Papia or Ticinum
'beseeged and took Desiderius the last king of the Lombards in Italy, and so
overthrew and rooted up the kingdom of Lombardy. Whereby the third of the three
Horns, may very well be said to have fallen down. But the City of Room was
given by the ^a^e Charles unto Saint peeter, and to the bishop there, the
successor of Saint Peeter and to the Romain Church. And those things, which his
elders before him had given lately: the same he enlarged and confirmed.

But before I proceed to other things partaining to this matter: I cannot omit
the exposition of Daniel, and the judgment of that most famous and godly man
Ebarhardus Archbishop of Salisburge concerning Pope Gregory the ninth, and
other Bishops of Rome, who about the year of our Lord 1240. in a common
Parliament of the kingdom (as it is mentioned by Ioha^nes Auentinus in his
seventh Book of Cronicles) thus said.

These mighty holy Preests of Babylon desire to reign alone. They cannot abide
to have any equal. They will not cease til they have brought all things under
their subjection, and sit in the Temple of God, and lifted up abooue all
whatsoever is woorshiped. Their hunger for riches, their thirstinesse for honor
is insatiable. The more thou give to a covetous man: the more does he covet
and desire. Reach him thy finger and he will covet for thy whole hand, We wax
the worsse (even all the sort of us) through immoderate liberty. He that is
the Servant of Servants, desires to be the Lord of Lords, even as though he
were God him self. He disdaineth the holy assemblies and councels of his
brethren, yea, of those that be Lords and rulers over him. He is afraid lest
he should be compelled, to yield account of those things which he does daly
more and more against the laws. He speaks great things, as though he were a
God. He imagines in his heart new devises, to the intent he might establish a
Kingdom to him self. He changes laws, confirms his own, defiles,
robs, spoyleth, defraudeth, kills, even he that wicked outcast, whom they
use to call Antichriste. In whose forhed is written the name of blasphemy (I am
God, I cannot err) he sits in the temple of God, and rules far and near.
But as it is written in the secrets of holy Scriptures, he that reads let him
understand. The learned shall understand, but all the wicked shall do wickedly
and shall not understand. And by and by after this. The majesty of the people
of Room, by which in times past the whole world was governed, is taken away
from the Earth, and the Empire is returned back into Asia. The East shall bear
dominion again, and the West shall be brought under subjection. The kingdom was
multiplied, and the highest government of things, is now dispersed in to many,
cut in sunder, diminished (I will not say) torn all to pieces. Civil dissentio^s
are sowed abroad for ever. And we see no end of deadly wars. The name of
Emperor is but a vain name, and but a shadow only.

There are now ten Kings at once, which have parted amongst them the whole
earth being heertofore the Romain Empire, not to rule and govern it: but to
consume it. The ten Horns (which seemed incredible to Saint Augustine) that is
to say. The Turcks, the Greeks, the Egiptians, the Africans, the Spaniards, the
Frenchmen, the Englishmen, the Germans, the Sicilia^s, the Italia^s, have in
possession the provinces of Rome, and have rooted out the Romans, that
inhabited the same. And under these grew up a little Horn, which had eyes, and
a mouth speaking presumptuous things. He brings into subjection under him
three Kingdoms most chiefly, that is to say. Sicily, Italy and Germany, and
compels them to serve him. He vexes the people of Christ, and the Saints
of God with his intolerable soueraintie He turns all things vpside down,
both things divine and humain. He attempteth matters horrible and excecrable.
What can be more evident, then this Prophecy? All the miracles and prodigious
wunders, of which our Hauenly master did admonish us (read ye the chronicles)
were wrought a great while ago, in which presumption and violence possess all
things. Good me^ are tossed to and fro with all reprochefulnes and poverty.
All right is confounded, and Laws perish, there is no faith in men, no peace,
no gentleness, no shame, no truth, and there withal no safety also, no
government, no rest at all from evil men, all the whole earth is in a
whurlyburly, wars do rage on every side. all nations are up in armor,
assaulting one another. Cities near bordering do fight together. Kingdoms are
overthrown, and Cities do utterly perish not only with Sword and fire, but
also with continual Earthquakes and ouerflowings of waters, and with often
diseses and hunger. Marvelous wunders happen every where in all the Elements of
the world. The air is infected, corrupted, and unwholesome through insatiable
rain, sometime with unprofitable drought, sometime with cold, sometime with
to-much heats. Neither does the Earth yield any foyson unto man, neither the
corn, nor trees, nor Vines have any fruteful increace. And though in their
bloughth they give great show: yet in Harvest they bring no fruit. Cattle and
beasts dye upon the earth, Birds in the air and the fishes in the waters.
Blasing Stars and darkness of the Sun, the color of the Moon, the sudden
and vnaccustomable falling of the shooting Stars, the heavens ouerspred with
blood, confounds the minds of men with dreadful terror. through the wrath
of God against men, there rages Sword, fire. hungar and siknes. Nevertheless
the ungodly acknowledge not the Justice of God, but rather increace more and
more in evil. In so much that they have eyes and see not.

And this have I resited word by word out of the Chronicle of Auentinus,
which if any of you desire to read, ye shall find it in the Copy of
Ingolstadius printed in the year of our Lord. 1554. in the lefe 684. and 685.
etc. All these sayings of the Archchbishop agree very well to our matter and
expound the same. And it appears, that I am not alone of this opinion that he
puts other Kingdoms in place of the three Horns. Which thing I commit to
the Judgment of the reader. With my exposition accords the number of the
beasts name. Apoca. 13. of which I have elsewhere discoursed more at large.

Now let us return to our Daniell, breefly to expound that also which
remains. But thus by casting down of the three horns, that little horn
mentioned by Daniel, namely that bace Servant of Christ, and even the Servant
of Servants, did not only clime up to the highest top: but also became the
most mighty Prince of that fatal Land of Italy, Apoc. 17.
and Lord of seven hilled Room, and of the Palaice of Antichriste. The which,
he and his repaired and adorned by the space of seven hundred and fiftye
years, so that old Rome by the help of these worthy Patriarchs, may now
seem to be newborn again. And heerunto Saint Paul seems to have relation,
1. Thessa. 2.
who in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, plainly said.

This thing only now vvitholding until he be taken out of the way, and than
that wicked one shall be reveled. Which is as much in effect, as if he had said*
This only that now lets, namely the Empire of Room shall be taken away, and
when Tocatochon that is, the same impediment shall be taken away, then shall the
Romain Sea be erected, and in the same new and second seat shall be placed the
two horned beast, bearing the badge of keys, and armed with two swoords.
Neither do I alone expound this place of Paul after this sort. Tertulian did
even so expound the same abooue fourteen hundred years ago, who in his book of
the resurrection of the flesh.

Who shall be taken away (says he) but the Roman estate, whose departing
scattered in to ten kingdoms shall bring in Antichriste?

The same meaning also has Saint Jerome in the eleventh question to Algasia,
The Pope / a new King and troubbler of kingdoms.
who manifestly calls Room by the name of Babylon, the seat of the Beast and
of the purple Harlote. And thus the Pope this new king, being established in
his kingdom, began even him self also to create kings, and in greatness of
glory to excel all christian Princes, and afterward in all kingdoms to make
trouble and whurly hurly.

For Leo the third Pope of that name, restored, or rather raised up anew the
Romain desolate and defaced by the space of three hundred years and more,
rejecting utterly the Princes of Constantinople, For he appointed Charles the
French King to be Emperor: and yet in such sort, that beside the vain name it
little auailed him. For he reserueth Room to him self, and the cheifest part of
Italy, which the Greeks had possessed, and was called by the name of Exarchate.
But he granted unto Charles a part of Italy, (some Romain titles) which was
recovered from the Lombards, and also the empty name of Emperor. Therefore
according to the prophecy of Jesus Christ, uttered by John in the Apocalips.
The Image of the beast is seen, stirred up by the false Prophet. No dout, the
same was done by the marvelous crafty woorkmanship of that old wily Fox. For
when all antiquity looked for Antichriste about the end of the Romain Empire,
and when he was about the very same time risen up and had placed him self in
the seat of god* he going about (as it were) to repair the dcayed Empire,
brought to pass, that he was not known of the faithful. But, they rather
being deceived with his subtle practices, looked for a certain (I know not
what) Antichriste of Babylon, whom in their published Books they declare,
should be yet to come, and whom also they earnestly dispraise.

Yet should they not miss the right mark, if they would with all elder times
call Room that Babylon, and in stead of time coming to place the time
present. At the length the stock of Charles and Pipin being rooted out, so
that the Popes had remaining little or no help at all from the hand of the
french Kings, as in time past they had abused the power of the Greeks and
Lombards, from whom afterward they flitted unto the French men, so now they
creep in to the favor of the Princes of Germany, the better to bring their
matters about.

Wherefore the Othoes with their Armies, set upon Italy with great labor and
expenses. Under these are chosen vij. men, whom they term Electors. They
choose the Emperor. But the Imperial majesty and estate is given by none but
by the Pope. For now the Popes of Room had gotten the Monarchy in to their
own hands, whereby also within a while after they plucked away the Empire from
the Henry's, Frediricks, Lewis, and many other notable and holy Princes of
Germany, troubling in the mean season, and wasting with sword and fire, all
the kingdoms in Christendom, so that (not without good cause) they were
called the Children of Perdition.

I will now speak nothing of the war that was commonly named the Holy war, which
was procured most chiefly by the industry of the Pope. In that war were
joined together all the nations and kingdoms both of the east and of the
west, moreover also of ye North and of the South. Whereby followed so huge a
bloodshed, that there was never at any time in the world any battle fought
with more ireful and obstinate minds, and with so great loss of things as
this the popes holy battle.

Moreover, they began to thrust out Kings from their ancient inheritances and
kingdoms, through treasons and murders, and in their places to exalte others
for their own pleasure and commodity.

For which cause both Kings and kingdoms fought most fiercely one against
another. So they stirred up the Kings of Hungary, the Kings of France, the
Kings of Germany, and the Princes of other nations, against those, whom they
accounted for their enemies. So was Cicily and Naples wrested away from the
posterity of The Emperor Friderick the Sweuian, and cruel war was between
the Germans, Frenchmen and Spaniards. But often times the French Kings were
lewdly recompensed at the Popes hands.

In deed Boniface the viij. with wunderfull impudency being bold to claim
the kingdom of France to be the benefit of the Popes majesty: took away the
same from Philip the fair, then King of France, and gave it (forsooth) to
Albert of Awstrey. But, impossible it is, to declare, in few words, how sore
this new unhappy kingdom of the pope, and most mischeuous Monarchy has shaken
the whole world. It is sufficient, to have at the least wise touched these
things, that by them, as through a lattise window, ye may see, that there is
not, or was not at any time any kingdom in all Christendom more troublesome,
then the Popedom of Room. The histories do at large prosecute the same.

Now I return to Daniel. let us therefore consider Daniels most perfect and
evident description of this new king, and let us compare the things them selves
with him, to the intent all men may plainly know with out any douting, that
the prophecy of Daniel is to be expounded and meant of none other then of the
bishop of Room, and of his kingdom, and that all things touching him, are all
ready thoroughly fulfilled. Whereby it comes to pass, that we can look for
none other thing, but the last judgment and therwithall the end af all things.

For which cause, let us all watch (as duty binds us) and stir up all men to
a circumspect watchfulness. The eyes (says Danial) of this little horn were
the eyes of a man. For this King was thoroughly exercised, wily, deceitful, and
furnished with all kind of arts and practices. And his retinew excels in
this faculty all the practicioners of all princes. And surely this faculty
has promoted him unto his kingdom, augmented his power, covered his
wickedness, and keeps him yet in safety.

The Prophet adds further. His mouth speaks great things, or presumptuous
things. Also, He shall speak marvelous and wunderful things against the God of
Gods. So that the prophet does meruail greatly at his impudency. But (reverend
masters and deerly belooued brethren) if ye desire to hear some of his great
presumptuous words give ear. I will rehearse some of them unto you out of their
own books. What things are taught in the decrees decretals / and gloses
touching the Pope of Rome / his majesty and Monarchy.


The Pope (say they) is above all laws. He may prefer by his own
interpretation equity not written before the law written. For he seems to
have all laws in the Cofar of his breast. Therefore, what soever the Pope
allows or dissaloweth, the same ought we also to allow or dissalow. Of the
judgment of the Apostolic seat no man ought to judge: neither is it lawful
for any man, to correct or repeal the sentence of the same, namely because of
the primacy and soueraintie of the Romain church, given from abooue by the
benefit of Christ in blessed Peeter the Apostle. The Judge ought not to be
judged, neither of council nor of Emperor, nor of the whole clergy, nor of
the Kings, nor of the people. The causes of others: God would have to be
determined by man. But without all question, God has reserved to his own
Judgment, the high ruler of this Sea: In somuche that if he should carry with
him by heaps innumerable people to hell fire, yet no mortal man may presume,
to reprove his faults heerin, because he is to judge all men, and himself is
to be judged of no man. God suffers not the church of Rome to err. And every
one, that obeys not the decrees of the Romain Seat is an Heretic.

And Pope Adrian says also. We judge and ordain by general decree, that he
be detestably accursed, and remain always gilty before God, as a breaker of
the catholic faith, whosoever shall suffer to be violat^d, or believe that
there ought to be violated in any point, the sensure of the decrees either of
the ki^gs or of the Bishops, or of any hereafter the mighty Popes of Room.
All the ordinances of the apostolic seat are so to be esteemed, as confirmed
by the divine voice of Peeter him self.

With loud voice (says Leo the fourth) I fear not to pronounce that whosoever
shall be found, not indifferently to receive and allow all the decrees of the
holy fathers, which are entitled among us by the names of Canons, he is
thereby approved such a one, as does not profitably and effectually to his
behoof, keep or believe either the Catholic and apostolic faith, or else the
four holy Gospels. For, whosoever does against her which is the mother of
faith: does indeed break and violate the faith. And albeit the Fathers of the
Apostolic seat, some times be not good: yet they are always presupposed to
be good. The Pope sins when he commits adultrye or murder, but he may not
be accused. It were apoint of Sacrilege to dispute of the Popes doings: whose
wicked acts are excused, as the murders of Sampson, the robberies of the
Hebrews and the adultery of Jacob. Yea, also if one of the Clergy do embrace
a woman, let it be said that he does it to bless her.

Let no man think that I have ^ai^ed any of all these things. For I have in
effect resited the very words of the Canonists, which I am able to show in
their own Books if any man shall require it.

The Pope alone (say they) has all the dignities and all the power which all
the Patriarcks have had. His authority is greater then the authority of the
saints: because whom he confirms, no man may disable the same. He has both
the swords. He is not to be called to account by any man, no, although he be
called an heretic. He alone appealeth from all men to God him self, because
he is the Vicar or deputy of Christ, and has fulness of power from God. He
may spare whom he lust. To him alone and to none else: it is lawful to take a
way from one and give to another. All the whole world is the diocese of the
Pope: and the Pope is the ordinary of all men, having fulness of power in things
spiritual and te^porall. For he is Lord of Lords, having the right of the King
of Kings over his subjects. He is all things and above all things. And it is
requisite under pain of damnation to be subject to the Bishop of Room. For God
and the Pope have both one co^sistory. Also, the pope is said to have an
heavenly power and authority, and therefore also to change the nature of
things, by turning the substance of one thing into an other. And of nothing he
can make something. And the sentence that is of no force: he can make it of
some value. Because in those things that he likes: his will stands for
reason. And no man may say unto him, why do thou thus? For he may dispe^ce
with all laws, and of iniurye make Justice, by correcting of laws and
changing of them.

Hitherto have ye heard the mouth speaking great things, worthy truly to be
stopped up with the Turds of the Devil. But thus the Rat is bewrayed by showing
of her self.

And while he thus did shite forth these most filthy Turds in the midst of
the Church: yet still he would needs seem to speak on the behalf of the highest,
whose Vicar he bosteth him self to be on earth. Who (as Daniel says) does
think that he may change both the times and the laws. In very truth, no
man can or ought to change the ordinances of God. Therefore Antichriste shall
think that he may change them. Er wirds whaenem.

Saint Ierom notes upon these words of Daniel, that Antichriste shall make
subject under his power, the whole Religion of Christ, Wherein we have seen the
Popes to have done what they lusted them selves. But because all times do
bring forth faithful Preachers of Christ, Enoches and Eliases, who do
withstand such abominations: therefore Daniel says very well, that he made war
against the Saints, and prevailed over them. Of which war, because I have
spoken before, when I expounded the words of Christ our Lord: there is no
need here to make repetition again.

But because the godly, upon whose shoulders this burden and care does test,
might demand, how long time this other beast should rage, and waste the
kingdom of Christ, and blaspheme the name of the eternal God: Daniel
preuenteth this thing and says.

The end of the Popes kingdom.
They shall be delivered into his hands, until a time and times, and half a time.
In which dark kind of speaking, he seems to signify nothing else, but that
the Saints must constantly abide in that fight, whether the time, that they
must fight in, be long or short. For no certain determinate time is declared,
and therefore none must be looked for.

Most men have understood, by a time, For a time / times / and half a time.
times and half a time, one, year, ij. years and half a year, in which
Antichriste should rain, and then afterward should be quite abolished. But the
doctrine of the Gospel is repugnant to that interpretation, which constantly
affirms that the day of judgment is known unto no man. And Daniel also in
the self same chapter says, that the beast shall rage, until the seats be
prepared, that is even until the day of judgment. And that he shall then be
thrown down hedlong in to the deep pit of Hell, and also that the faithful
shall be delivered and glorified, who have for Christ's cause sustained all
kinds of punishments.

Verily Paul agreeing with Daniel: Whom our Lord (says he) shall put away
with the brightness of his coming. But who can certainly declare unto us the
time of Christ's coming, that is, the day of Judgment? But he, which shall
say, that Antichriste shall reign iij. years and a half, and straight ways
after be abolished, may seem to declare it plainly. For the end of
Antichrists kingdom, is the very last day of the final Judgment.

Therefore by that dark kind of speaking, no time certain is appointed. But
rather the godly are admonished, of patience, and long suffering, and that we
should not over curiously seek out the very moment of this time, but rather
refer it unto Christ, who says in an other place unto his Disciples. It
belongs not to you, to know the times and moments of times, which the father
has reserved unto him self. But vvatch ye, that when your Lord shall come, he
may find you waking.

After these things Daniel most plentifully witnesses, that the world shall be
at an end, and that the day of judgment shall certainly come, and throw down
Antichriste in to Hell.

Upon which treatise, Christ our Lord has set forth a large Commentary and an
exposition, by the hands of John, his Apostle in the xix. and xx. chapters of
the Apocalips, the which I leave unto your diligence to be serched out, and for
brevities sake: I do not over busily sift out this matter.

The conclusion.
And now (I suppose) it appears unto you, by the most clear doctrine of
Jesus Christ our Lord, and also by the evident sayings of the most holy
Prophets of God, and by the plain interpretation of the most select and chosen
Apostles of Christ. Finally the manifest comparison of the things them selves,
which partly the Histories do testify, to have been done a long time ago,
and partly we see them daily come to pass before our eyes, that the
Prophecyes of the last time are now all ready fulfilled, and that therefore the
day of our Lord is at hand, and our redemption approaches near.

Whereby (I think) you all do understand that your duties require you, to
admonish, to exhort, and instantly to call upon, and urge the faithful, to
watch and lift up their heads, shaking away all drowsines. And that they look
for none other signs, nor other times: but to believe the Gospel, the Prophets
and Apostles, and the very things them selves apparent before the eyes of all
men, and also that they wait not for any other Antichriste to come, but to take
now good heed to them selves, of him, that is now presently reigning and
troubling all things, and to flee unto Christ Jesus, who is the fulness of the
faithful, and in him to seek all things pertaining to our salvation, to depend
wholly upon his mouth, and upon his help, to have respect unto him alone, to
depart from all uncleanness, to live godly and honestly, and most chiefly to
beware of ungodly security, and careless negligence, and also of drunkenness
both spiritual and corporal, that when the Judge our Lord Jesus Christ
shall appear in the clouds of Heaven with great power and glory, we may
joyfully be taken up in to the air to meet him, and so always live with our
Lord. To whom be glory for ever.

FINIS.
THE SECOND Sermon of Henry Bullinger, teaching by the words of the Apostle.
2. Timothe 3. after what sort the godly may avoid the harms of the most
perilous dangers in this our last age.
RIght notable is the place of the Apostle Paul, which in the latter epistle
to Timothe, and the third Chapter is word by word after this sort.

But persevere thou in those things, which thou have learned, and which have
been committed unto thee, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and for that
also thou have known holy Scriptures from a child, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. For all Scriptures
given by inspiratio^ of God: are profitable to teach, to reprove, to amend to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfet, preparad to all
good works.

The Scriptures set forth even to our eyes
The bountiful goodness of God, toward mankind shines forth in many things,
but most chiefly in that, that he has so measured the doctrine of our
salvation, which he committed to the world, by most excellent men, that it is
agreeable not only to the same time, in which it was first set forth by the
prophets and Apostles: but unto us also, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. And truly all the most holy cumpany of the Prophets and Apostles with
one consent do testify, that the last times shall be of all other most
perillus. They do most diligently and copiously, not only describe those
dangers: but also set them forth before our eyes to be seen, to that end (no
dout) that the godly should not be entangled and perish in evil and in perils.

The argument and drift of the matter.
Of that number is Paul the vessel of election, who at this present, proceeding
in most godly order, does first of all very diligently show forth the
dangers of this our last age. Afterward he declares a remedy, whereby the
godly may escape the harms thereof. The thing is not only elegant, notable and
wholesome: but also very necessary, most chiefly for us and our time.

Therefore have I chosen this place, to entreat of now, before you (ye honorable
fathers and brethren most deerly beloved in our Lord) that being instructed
with the doctrine of the Apostles: we may through the spirit of God, be
strengthened in true godliness, and he able to deliver out of dangers, the
flock of our Lord committed to our charge, the Lord blessing our labors. Our
Lord assist us with his grace, and direct us always in the way of salvation.

But, The description of the evil acts and dangers recited in the Scriptures.
like as the Physicians in their books do most diligently describe even such
diseases, as are most filthy, not to the intent to praise and commend them, or
else allow them: but to th'nd they may be exactly known, and the more perfectly
cured: so the Scripture in this present place, and infinite others, does most
manifestly rehearse mischeuous deeds even such as are to be abhorred, and not to
be named without sir reverence, not to the intent to teach and commend the
same: but to the end we might know them the better, and judge thereof, not
according to the flesh: but according to the spirit of God, and also that we
might warely avoid them. And more over apparently beholding, those things to be
fulfilled in the world, which the holy Prophets of God and the Apostles of
Christ have foretold should come to pass, we might understand, that those
times are now at hand corrupted and perilous, and for that cause should pray
the more ernestly, and watch the more diligently.

The Apostle therefore about the beginning of the Chapter, a little before the
words that I have resited, does rehearse in a long beadroll, diverse wicked acts
and wicked men, And says that all ages, all kinds, and all degrees of men in
this our last time, shall be most corrupt.

The discrption of the manners or men of the last age.
This know thou (says he) that in the last days shall come most hard and
perilous times. For men shall be loouers of them selves, standing greatly in
their own conceits, and seeking for their own gain, lovers of their own
gain, lovers of money, scraping the same by hook and by crook, and not
refraining from very sacrilege, nor from most filthy Simony. Men shall be very
disdainful, puffed up, proud, and vain glorious, also blasphemers, most
chiefly against God, secondly against holy men and against the truth it felt,
and against holy things. They shall be disobedient to their Fathers, to their
mothers, to their magistrates, to their masters, and to their teachers, being
not only unthankful to God and to men: but also requiting good turns with
evil. They shall be wicked men, such as have no fear nor reverence, and such as
impude^tly run hedlo^g unto all kind of mischeuous acts. They shall be Astorgoi,
without any hearty and fervent charity, without any zelus remorse of love,
godliness, and humanity, not loving so much as those that be near unto the^, as
Fathers, mothers, Children, VViues and kinsfolks. But bitter, cruel, and
ungentle, endued utterly with vvilde and uncivil manners, who also have not
the common sense and remorse of nature, measuring all things by affection, by
covetousness, by ambition, and greedy desire.

They shall be vnmindeful of their couena^ts, of their faith, of their bargains,
and of their promises, being unfaithful and most vain, and utterly inconstant
and most light persons, finally, back biters and slanderers, scoffers and
mockers of holy, good and honest things, perverting also things well spoken
into a peruerst meaning, and wresting things after their lewd affections,
that are singly and plainly uttered. They shall be vvanton and outrageous, namely
in the apparel of their bodies, in buildings, in garments, in meat and drink,
filthy glutto^s, drounckerds whoremongers, adulterers, and Sodomits, proud
Pecoks, nice and folish Phrigians.

They shall be moreover Anemeroi, ungentle, uncivil, rude, barbarous, and even
vvilde men, row wild vndfihisch lijt. and therefore Aphilagathoj such as
greatly regard not or love not good and honest men, neither delight in their
company. For, as they abhor the best things and accustom themselves to the
vvorst: so they cannot abide a faithful Counceller. Therefore they shall betray
these men, that love truth and godliness. They shall do no thing sincerely
and incorruptly, but shall entangle all things with practices (as they call
them) with crafty fetches and traitorly suttleties. Moreover they shall be heddy
and willful, doing nothing by the rule of reason and judgment, but all things
rashly stoutly, and obstinately. For they shall be of a mind altogether proud,
puffed up and swelling. They shall love their pleasures, more then God him
self and godly things. For they shall convert the very religion in to gain, to
the intent they may have to bestow upon their pleasure.

Certes, thou may see very many, that more heartily delight in Tauernes then
in Temples, do more esteem the furnished dainty, yea drunken feasts, then
ecclesiastical preachings sober and full of the spirit of God. For the matter
is now come to this point, that most men have in deed an outward show and
resemblance of godliness, and will be called most holy, most spiritual,
most catholic, most right belonging, and very good Christians, but yet in
the mean season they lack the virtue and power of godliness and true Religion,
and are most vain Hipocrites and dissemblers, men without all religion and
humanity, abominable and execrable.

And hitherto has the Apostle declared these things concerning the corrupt
men, that shall be in the last time, and the naughty conditions of all kinds, of
all ages, and of all degrees.

But have not the Prophets, and even Jesus Christ him self, the Lord of
Prophets, foreshewed these things also before hand? For in the Gospel (omitting
the Prophets) he speaking most manifestly said.

Luke. 18.
But when the Son of man shall come, shall he find faith upon the Earth?
Math. 24.
And again. Iniquity shall utterly abound, and the love of many shall abate.
And yet again most manyfestly.

As were the days of Noe (says he) so shall be also the coming of the son
of man. For as they were in the days before the flud, eating and drinking,
marying and married, even unto the day when Noe entered into the Arc, and knew
of nothing, until the Flud came and took them all awaiy: so shall be the
coming of the Son of man. Luke. 17.
In like manner also, as it happened in the days of Loath, they did eat, drink,
bie, sell, plant, and build. But what day as Loath went forth from the Sodomits,
it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all, so shall be
also the day in which the Son of man sbalbe reveled.

Wherefore there is no cause, to show forth in many words, what kind of men
they were in the days of Noe and Loath, seeing our Lord him self has most
plentifully declared the same unto us, namely, that they were men altogether
carnal, utterly despising divine and holy things, seeking nothing but carnal
matters, so that they might seem to degenerate or be turned in to certain brute
and wild beasts. But who can deny, that such are at this day the greatest
part of the common people, and the nobility and rulers, and almost all wise
men? Behold what Kings and Princes do, and also the spiritual fathers, like
wise the learned and excellent men in the world. Harken what the common people
talks of Religion, of righteousness, of honesty, and of the hope of the
world to come. You shall be forced to cry out with the Prophet and say.

There is none righteous no not one. Romans 3.
There is none that has understanding. There is none that seeks after God.
All are turned aside, and are become unprofitable. There is none that does
good, no not one. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, they have used their tungs
unto disceit, and the poison of Asps is under their lips, whose mouth is full of
curssing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood. Destruction and
wretchedness is in their ways, and they have not known the way of peace.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.

The Apostle proceeds to reckon up greater dangers, which spring out of
corrupt men, and out of their corrupt and wicked doctrine.

The dangers of the corrupt doctrine of the last age.
For he says, there shall be in the Church. Some deceivers, flattering, witty
and crafty, that vvil enter into noble houses, and bring women into bondage,
which women are led with diverse lusts. He adds. That their doctrine shall
find no Haven, nor have any end, and that no man's conscience can thereby be
prepared or made quiet.

And to the intent they might the better be known when they come: he likeneth
them to the Soothsayers of Egypt, who with there speaking, with their wicked
practices, Sorceries and most crafty legerdemain: wrought means before Pharao
the King of Egypt, that he should not let go the Israellits ye people of God, to
do honor to their God. And Christ our Lord making mention of the very same
deceivers, says in the Gospel.

There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, who shall work great
miracles and great vvunders, so that the very elect, if it were possible,
should be brought in to error. Behold, I have told you before.

Neither is it needful for me, to make plain and with large discourse to
approve how these things already have been abunda^tly fulfilled long time ago,
and in certain hundred years together. A thousand examples and testimonies
may thou find in the Temples of the Papists, in their Chapels, in their
Schools, in their Halles, in their Colleges, in their Abbeys and religious
houses.

To the great weight of the dangers of this last age, Persecutions of the last
age.
are now added also even most cruel persecutions of the truth, and of the
Saints, which the Apostle has foreshewed should come to pass.

Moreover he says, that the wicked should with fortunate success, prosper,
and go forward, but contrary wise that the Godly should be oppressed with all
kind of calamities, the which thing should blind very many, and keep them in
error. The very same also did our Lord Jesus foretell of in the Gospel. And
Daniel disputing of Antichriste and his kingdom.

Daniel. 8. and 11.
And he shall prosper (says he) and shall work, and slay the strong ones, and
the people of the Saints, according to his own vvil, and falshod shall prosper
in his hands. Also. The teachers of the people shall instruct many, and shall
be overthrown through the Svvord, through fire, through banishment and
extortion, even until the last time.

But that even these things also are accomplished: it is plentifully witnessed
by the Histories of certain hundred years last past. England also at this day
yielding forth abundant store of Martirs, does testify the same. France
does witness it. Italy and Germany do record it.

And these things hitherto the holy Apostle of Christ has spoken, touching
the great perils of the last age. All which things to appertain unto us most
chiefly and to our times, he, that as yet sees it not: does see no thing at
all. Notwithstanding, in knowing these diseases and discerning them with right
judgment, although it be of no small importance: nevertheless a more
wholesome fruit proceeds unto us by the diligent consideration of the
medicine, faithfully ministered unto us by the Apostle.

But what medicine does the Apostle bring forth and minister, by help whereof
these diseases are to be cured, and the great dangers made free from
hurtfulnes? The medicine or cure of these mischeefs.
And these men (says he) avoid thou. It is short council, and a medicine
nothing curious, but yet of marvelous force. But whom does he mean, while he
says. And these men? Forsooth wicked men past grace, enemies of true Religion,
and most chiefly subtle Sophisters, deceivers, bloody percecutors, false
Prophets, and such as are drunken with the prosperity, happiness and pleasures
of this world.

These (I say) and all their partakers and confederates avoid thou. The which
thing is as much in effect, as if he had said. Such wicked men and destroyers,
thou shall detest as an heinous abomination

Thou shall not fear them, thou shall not esteem them, thou shall not allow
them nor follow them, thou shall nothing at all believe them. No do not play
with them, nor confer with them. Finally, thou shall turn from them perpetually
with ernest endeavor, and with a whole bold and a stout mind. For the Lord
also has said in the Gospel. Believe them not, or follow not, nor imitate the
false Prophet. But, thou will object, that this is a hard matter to perform.
But unto God, and to him that believes: nothing is impossible or hard.

John the Apostle cries out saying. He is greater, 1. John. 4. and 5.
that is in you, then he, which is in the world. And again. This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even your faith. For our Lord first cried
out in ye gospel. Behold I am with you even unto the worlds end. Math. 28.
John. 1. and 14. etc. Luke. 21.
In the world ye have affliction. But be of good cheer, I have ouercom the
world. One here shall not perish from your head. I vvil give to you my spirit
the comforter. And other such like sayings, which are read in the Gospel.

Furthermore, the Apostle shows a very commodious way, how we may be able to
avoid these corrupt men, and all corruptions in Religion, and also to eschew
those perilous dangers, namely, if with a certain holy ernestnes we cleue
unto the example of the Apostle, and taking fast hold upon the canonical
Scriptures, do not suffer our selves to be shaken of, or pulled away one here is
breadth from the same. And the Apostle him self commends unto us the example
of an Apostle saying.

Thou have seen the experience of my doctrine, fashion of living, we must not
depart from the Apostles example.
and my purpose also, namely in teaching, in living, and in all my office, what
I regard in these things, verily the glory of God and salvation of souls.
Finally thou know what my faith has been always, my long suffering, my
constancy and my patience in persecutions. Follow thou these things, declining
no whit from the example of Christ and of me. For our Lord said also in the
Gospel.

John. 8.
I am the light of the world. He that follows me, walks not in darkness,
but has the light of life. And the Apostle to the Corinthians. Be ye folowers
of me as I follow Christ. But, because the men of this last age, do not much
esteem the example of Christ and of his Apostles, but do more regard the
examples of Fathers (I know not of what sort) and of most filthy Munks, that
is therefore the cause, why there are so many sects, and that so many wander
about, and grope like blind men, not knowing what or whom to follow, or what
they may teach. Wherefore, as many of us as desire to be saved: let us keep our
selves within the bonds of the example of Christ and of his Apostles.

^e must continue in the Apostles doctrine.
Now touching the Apostles doctrine, we are admonished by the Apostle: First
that we must continue in the Apostles doctrine. Afterward, he shows the
causes, why every godly man ought to continue in that kind of doctrine. For he
pronou^ceth plainly and techeth with great power, he says. But tarry thou, or
continue thou steadfastly. As if he should have said. How soever the deceivers
and deceived, go foreward in their errors, housoeuer graet numbers of men
departing from the plainnes and singleness of the Apostles, do follow corrupt
doctrine and those Egiptian Sophisters: yet nevertheless, persevere and continue
still thou and all others, that covet to please God, and to abtain true
salvation. In what things I pray you shall they continue?

The Apostle adds it. In those things which thou have learned, and which
have been committed unto thee. But Timothe had learned the Scriptures, and out
of the^ the holy gospel, as straight way the Apostle will expound him self.

And this was that precious pledge which was committed unto him. Therefore the
godly must persevere and continue in the Scriptures and in the doctrine of the
Gospel. So shall it come to pass, that they shall not be a pray to the
deceivers, and to the most wicked men of this last age. what was committe^ unto
Tim^ the and against traditions.
Neither must we think (as certain foolish men do fain) that unwritten
Traditions were committed unto Timothe, as though the Apostle had meant, that
without traditions, the Scriptures suffice not unto godliness, or that he had
taught one thing by word of mouth: and another thing in writing. For by and by
the Apostle him self will declare, that the Scriptures are most full, and most
absolute, such as are able thoroughly to fashion and make perfect the worshipper
of God. The Apostle else where affirms very entirely, 1 Cor. 4.
that his doings agree in one sort all alike, and that he teaches like
doctrine in all Churches. He says also, that he and his disiples walk all one
way, and being all led by one spirit, do all things with humility.

^. Cor. 3.
Again to the Corinthians. We write (says he) none other things unto you
then which ye read, and which also ye know. Yea and so I trust, that ye
shall know unto the end And again. 4. Cor. 10.
As we are in words by letters, when we are absent: such are we indeed
also, when we are present.

But it is openly apparent that those things, which those men reckon up among
the unwritten verities, affirming the same to be received from the Apostles,
even (as if were) from hand to hand, are so disagreing with those things which
are contained in the writings of the Apostles: that they are even directly
repugnant and contrary.

Of which kind are those matters, which they stuf in, conserning the use of
Images in the Church, conserning the Mass, conserning single life and
Munckery, and infinite other such ingling deceits. Where also even that is
diligently to be noted, that he said not. Tarry thou in those things which thou
shall learn yet hereafter. But, tarry thou in those hings which thou have
learned. To us therefore, partain not those things, which wretched men after
certain hundred years, have learned of Fathers (such as indeed may be called
stepfathers) and of lewd and superstitious Munks.

It follows now, why we ought to cleue only to this doctrine. Why we ought to
cleue only to the scriptures.
Indeed many reasons may be alleged, but among many these are the cheifest.
First, Knovving (says he) of whom thou have learned them. Truly it is much
to be respected of what masters or teachers we learn any thing. For the
doctrine receives authority from the teachers, or author thereof. It is thought
that from the more excellent, cunning and holy men, proceeds some excellent
learned and holy thing.

Verily, from men proceed human things, and from God proceed godly and divine
things. But of whom had Timothe learned? or from whom came the doctrine received
by Timothe? Surely, from the most holy Apostle, and most select instructment of
God. Therefore, not the man Paul, but rather the Spirit of Christ (inspiring
Paul) has purchased authority unto the doctrine. Therefore Timothe knew,
and all the faithful also at this day know, that the doctrine of the Apostles
sprang not from men: but from our Lord God him self, and that therefore we ought
to believe the same, and inseperably cleue unto it. For our Lord him self says
in his Gospel.

John. 13.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he, that receives an Apostle, or vvhomsoeuer
I shall send: receives me. And he that receives me: receives him that sent
me. Math. 10.
And again, speaking of the Apostles. It is not you that speak but it i^ the
spirit of your father, that speaks in you. John. 3.
And again. He that is from above, is above all. He that proceeds of the
Earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth. He that comes from Heaven, is
above all, and what he has seen and heard the same: he testifies.

Wherefore in as much as it appears, that the doctrine of the Apostle is
heavenly and divine: with good cause do we believe, with good cause do we
inseperably cleue to it. Neither did the Apostles without great reason say.
therefore shall thou continue in the apostles doctrine, which thou have received,
because thou do surely know that thou have received and learned the same
from Heaven.

But can we so say of the unwritten traditions, and of the ordinances of man?
No, by no means. Therefore, why should we beleeeue them? why should we receive
them? why should we continue in them? These things are due to the holy
Scriptures only and alone. They are utterly mad, that make humain things equal
with divine. But they are led by the Devil, that prefer things humain before
divine, and thrust down and embace divine things as though they were
uncertain, doutful, imperfect and dark.

David the most notable King, and most excellent Prophet of God, cries but
against such filthy and blasphemous persons, and pronounces with most true
mouth.

Psalm. 19.
The law of the Lord is a perfect law converting the soul. The testimony of
the Lord is true, giving wisdom to the little ones. The statutes of the Lord
are right, and rejoice the heart. The commandment of the Lord is pure, and
gives light to the eyes. Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto
my steps.

Furthermore, the Apostles doctrine is grounded upon the Scriptures or
writings of the Prophets, The Apostles doctrine is grounded upon the
Scriptures.
Paul bearing witness and saying. I was put a part to preach the Gospel of GOD,
which he promised before by the Prophets in the holy Scriptures. But we know,
that the same are therefore called holy, because they are uttered by the holy
Ghost. It follows therefore in the words of the Apostle. And for that also
thou have known the holy Scriptures from a child.

The holy fathers in old time were w^nt to instruct their children out of the
authentical Book of the law of God and of his Prophets. Therefore, because
Timothes mother was a Jew borne (albeit his Father was a Gentil) he being
exercised in the scriptures from a child, had accustomed him self thereunto.

And when he heard the Apostle preach the Gospel of Christ, he understood
straightway by the inspiration of the spirit of God, and by conferring of the
words of Paul, with the words of the Prophets, that the Apostles doctrine
touching Christ, was taken out of the law and the Prophets, and confirmed by
the testimonies of the same. And for that cause he knew that he had not learned
the faith of Christ, out of wandering rumors, and vain talks of the people:
but out of the autenticall Book, that is to say, out of the holy Scriptures,
namely inspired from God (as I have already declared) and devoutly taught and
written, touching things most pure of all other, by none, but by such as were
most holy men. All other books that where out of the Canon and common use of
the Church: are accounted under the name of profane Books.

But this is an effectual reason, and such a one as ought thoroughly to move
the minds of all men, that we must therefore believe the Apostles doctrine, and
cleue only to ye same: because it proceeded from God, and is confirmed by the
Authentical Scriptures, being most ancient and most holy of all other.

What so ever book of what so ever Authors thou shall compare with these
Books: thou shall scarcely compare Lead or dirt it self, with most fine and
shining Gold. Most rightly therefore do we believe that they of all men be
most foolish, who either omitting the Apostles doctrine, and writings of the
Prophets, turn aside to the inventions of man (as though there could be taught
or contained in these, more absolute, more clear, and more certain things,
then in the other) or else utterly give no credit at all unto the Scriptures.
The taunt which our Lord gave to the unbelieving disciples, is right notable
and worthy of special remembrance, Luke. 24.
when he said, O ye fools and slow of heart, to believe all those things
which the Prophets have spoken.

The Scripture is able to make a man wise unto salvation.
And now ensues in the Apostle, another reason no less evident, why we ought
only to believe and stick fast to the Apostles doctrine, and to the holy
Scriptures.

Because (says he) they are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith in christ Jesus.

The Philosophers have disputed much of true and false Wisdom, True wisdom.
and have so entangled them selves with their chattering, that they scarcely
understand them selves, and much less reaped any fruit of their disputations.
Paul does simply and truly derive true Wisdom out of the Scriptures of God,
and out of the Apostles doctrine.

For God (being most excellent wise) does very often in his word call his
commandments and the doctrine (set forth in his law, and by the Prophets)
true Wisdom. And Moses being elder then those men, whom the Gretians call
most ancient, namely Homer and Hesiodus, and the Battle of Troy, and also
being much more excellent then Hercules, Museus, Linus, Orpheus, Mercurius,
Apollo, and the other Gods of the Gentiles, or then even the holy Soothsayers:
elder also then the wise men of Greece. Much more ancient then Plato and
Aristotle, does expressly say in Deuteronomy. Deu. 4.
You shall keep and do the commandments of the Lord for this is your wisdom
and understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
ordinances, and shall say. This people only is wise and has understanding, a
famous Nation. But the Apostles also at this present does show, that salvation
is the end and also the fruit of true wisdom, saying. Which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation.

But, without the true salvation of man, what shall avail (I pray you) the
empty name and vain title of wisdom? Wisdom is the knoweledge of things
divine and humain, and most cheefely of those things, by which we may know
the highest good even God him self, and therwithall to be joined together with
Christ. The which indeed is true blessedness and the highest felicity. And now
I omit to rehearse, how that out of this knowledge of God, springs
righteousness, and the love and exercise of true virtue, and of all deeds
that are truly good.

But the Scripture and doctrine of the Apostles, abundantly suffiseth to give
this Wisdom and true salvation. Therefore it becomes us, to content our
selves with the same. Yea, it is expedient for us, to bestow all our life and
all our labor upon those holy books, to depend wholly upon them, to direct
all our saylings and all our ways by the same, as by a most infallible and
most sure l^de Star, to run and flee wholly unto them, as to a most safe
Sanctuary. For, David cries out and witnesses saying

Blessed is the man that delights in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.
and ernestly studieth in the same, both day and night. Luke. 11.
For the Lord says also in the Gospel. Blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep the same.

And in deed this shall be the only and safest way, to escape all perils of al
times and all deceits and legerdemain, yea, even the most sharp and cruel of
this our last age. But, because salvation might be hoped for by this heavenly
wisdom, and also by the reading and bare knoweledge of the holy Scriptures, or
else by the merits of the virtues, which we have learned out of the Scriptures,
therefore in deed very godly and Apostolikely he adds and says. Salvation
comes by faith in Christ.
Through faith in Christ Jesus. Therefore salvation is learned out of the
Scriptures, because it consists in Christ alone.

And Christ, who is the bread of life, the salvation and fulness of the Saints,
does only and alone give true salvation. But true faith being instructed by
the spirit of God, and by the holy Scriptures, receives the same.

Salvation therefore is to be attributed unto faith, and not to any other thing
but yet not to every faith: but only unto the same that comes unto us by the
grace and benefit of the holy spirit, ye which we learn out of the Scriptures,
the true wisdom of God, and which extends and is stayed upon the a^only
son of God, who is our only most absolute, most assured and eternal
righteousness, redemption, satisfaction, sanctification, life and fulness. But,
The end and ^^^ft of the Scriptures
as soon as the Apostle has expounded these things very elegantly and plainly
he shows, what is the end and mark, to the which we must direct all the
reading of the holy Scriptures, that is to say, to learn faith, even faith in
Christ, who is our life and salvation.

To that very end did John the Apostle stretch forth all his whole story of
the Gospel, while (concluding the same) he says. These things are written, to
the intent ye might believe, that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that
believing: ye might have life in his name.

Consequently, the Apostle proceeds with a short praise, The praise of holy
Scripture.
but yet notable comprehending many things, and therefore worthy to be
remembered, to commend unto us the Canonical Scriptures, not so much, to prove
them to suffice to the learning and attaynment of salvation, as with them to
glue fast together the minds of all men, while we all understand that there
remains utterly no whit of sound profitable, wholesome and necessary doctrine,
but the same is handled and taught most perfectly in the holy Scriptures.

Therefore Paul the Apostle pronounces and says. All Scriptures given by
inspiration of God, are profitable, to teach. etc. And he plainly says, All
Scriptures. For if thou shall diligently read and consider every of the Books
of holy Scripture (be they never so short) thou shall find in every of them
all these things that are here recited, that is to say, that every one of them
is able to teach, to reprove, to amend, and to instruct. But very skilfully he
adds, Theopneustos, given by the inspiration of God

The Scripture is given by the inspr^tion of God.
For there be extant every where authors and books innumerable, being not
inspired of God, but set forth by the will of man: with the which we have here
nothing to do. For the holy books have this thing proper and pecul^ar to them
selves alone, namely that they be given by inspiration of God, as I have all
ready said a little before. And Peter also the Apostle testifies saying. No
prophecy of the Scriptures has any private interpretation. 2. Peter. 1.
For the Scripture came never by the will of man: but holy men of God, spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost.

And in this point are all our Canonical or holy Books, discerned from the
unholy and profane books of all other wise men. And it is a principle of our
religion and of our faith, namely that the Scriptures are given by the
Inspiration of God. Whereby it comes to pass, that this saying is very often
read in the prophets. Thus says the Lord. Thus says the Lord god of hosts.

Most truly therefore Josephus, albeit he was a Jew, speaking of the Books of
the old Testament, against Appio Alexandrinus in his first Book says thus.

We have no infinite number of Books amongst us, dissagreeing and repugnaunt
one to another: but only xxij. books, wherein is regestred all the whole time to
the which we justly give credit. For it is manifest by our doings, how we
believe our own writings. For in all these many hundred years past, no man
has presumed either to add, or to take away, or to change any thing.

For, it is implanted in to all the Jews, even from their cradles, to talk of
these holy decrees, and steadfastly to dwell in them, and also, if need require,
willingly to dye for the same. With good cause, therefore do we believe our
books, of the two Testaments, without gainsaying and curious search, or busy
enquiry. It suffiseth whatsoever the holy Scriptures shall say unto us, if we
rightly understand the same. For need we must believe it.

The profit of the holy Sciptures.
But, now let us hear to what uses the holy Scripture is profitable. The
Apostle recoueth up iiij. kinds, and under them he comprehends all other the
like. For it is most certain, that there is nothing wanting in the holy
Scriptures, namely, whatsoever it be, that seems to appertain to most
perfect wisdom and doctrine. And first he says, That the Scripture given by
the inspiration of God, The Scripture teaches.
is profitable to teach. For indeed, to understand the true doctrine and
wisdom, it behooves us first of all to have the right knowledge of things, to
the intent we may perceive what and of what kind every thing is and so what
God is, what his will is, what he requires of us, what we ought to do, and
what we ought to leave undone, what the duty is of the true worshipper of God,
what man is, and what kind of one he is, what was his corruption and fall, and
what was his setting up again, what is the salvation of man, in whom it
consists and how they may obtain the same, who is Christ, what his
redemption is, how far it extends.

But there are infinite other such like things, all which for so much as is
sufficient unto godliness and piety, the Canonical Scripture does declare
unto us and teach us. Whereby we read in the Gospel, that our Lord being so
often demanded, how we should be saved, what we should do, to enter in to
the kingdom of God, which be the cheifest commandments of God, what our
duty requires wherewith God is most chiefly delighted: did always after one
sort make answer out of the holy Scripture, and sent us back to the holy
Scripture.

The rich glutton being in Hell, desiring to come out from thence, and to teach
and give warning to his brethern, Luke. 16.
he sends him back to the Law and to the Prophets, that is to say, all the
faithful, that desire to be instructed touching the judgments of God, and the
state of Souls in another world, he sends them back, not unto Ghostes or
unto spirits appeering in man's shape: but unto the Scriptures. Wheruppon
Paul wrat unto the Romans.

Romans 15
Whatsoever things have been written: they were written for our lerning. Let
us therefore take the necessary rules of our religion out of the scriptures. And
those things, that are not taught in the Scriptures: let us not think them to
be either necessary or wholesome for us.

Moreover, in true wisdom it is requisite that we be taught nothing but that
only, which is true and good, and yet that we should understand also, what
things are false, and so resist the same. The Scripture reproves.
It follows therefore in the words of the Apostle, that heerin also the
Scripture is profitable, Pros elenchon, that is to say reproouing, and to the
conviction and confutation of falshod, finally, to blaming, to accusing, and to
sharp rebuking.

Therefore if any false Iugler, or crafty deceiuer bring in an opinion untrue
and ungodly, Heresies or confuted by the Scripture.
if he corrupt the pure understanding of the word, forthwith the Scriptures
ministers holy arguments, with which the godly may confute such a false
deceiuer. And after that sort we see, our Lord Jesus to have done in the
Gospel, who, as often as either the Pharisees or else the Saduces were to be
confuted, with the Sword of the Scripture, slew their false opinions and
interpretation. Therefore are they most foolish, who think that heretics
cannot be over come by the Scriptures only, but that rather they are to be
convinced by councels, and decrees of councelles, or else by cursings.

For we find that Paul the Apostle also in the acts of the Apostles, did with
stand and overcome both the rebellious Jews, and also all the enemies of the
Gospel, with none other weapons, then of the Scriptures. And very well and in
good time comes here to my remembrance a noble sentence of Saint Augustines,
which he uses against Maximinus the Arrian Heretic in his third Book and
faith.

But now neither I ought to allege the council of Nice, neither thou the
council of Ariminu^, as thereby to obtain the victory. And neither I nor thou
to be bound to the authority of this man or that man. But by the authority of
the Scriptures, being witnesses not proper to any, but common and indifferent
to us both, let matter with matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason,
contend together.

You see therefore how Saint Augustines judgment was, that the detestable
heresy of Arrius could be confuted by the Scriptures, and not by councels.

But now at this day we have the self same Scriptures. What should set
therefore, but that we may with the Scriptures strongly convince all errors and
heresies, whatsoever, at what soever time they spring up? For the Apostle had
said, that the Scripture is mere for confutation.

Furthermore, if there be any thing corrupted in the Church (as many times the
most excellent ordinances of God are perverted either by the rashness, The
Scripure amendeth and reformeth.
or the superstition, or the foolishnes of man) it is necessary to be amended.
It follows therefore in the Apostle, that here also the Scripture is requisite.
Pros epanothosin, that is to renew, and (as I may so say, to make straight and
amend.

The holy histories sets forth unto us in many and sundry places, the use
and example of that thing. For, as often as the sincerity and pureness of
Religion was defiled by the negligence, wickedness, ignorance and covetousness
of the Rulers and the preests, and then by God were sent Prophets and Kings, to
amend the errors, that were generally received: we read, that they did none
otherwise reform and correct the Church, then acording to the form and rule
of the divine Scriptures.

The holy story of Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, well enough known. And also
our Lord Jesus, with holy Scripture corrects the vices of his time corrupting
holy Matrimony. He also purging the Temple of Jerusalem, through the
covetousness of the preests filthily converted in to a market place, does even
of his own accord bring forth scriptures and says. It is written my house
shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den for thieves.

Moreover it behooves them, that are taught and reformed aright, The Scripture
keeps us in order.
to be kept under the rule of discipline and good order, lest at any time they
do unchristianly and unshamefastly wax dissolute and careless. Paul therefore
does show, that not somuche as in this behalf, also any thing can be lacking
in holy Scripture. For it is profitable (says he) Pros paideian, that is,
unto discipline and chastisement. Zuor ziichtigung vnmeister scafft.

For it ministers the perfect rules of life and shows sharp chastisements.
In d^^d from thence did Esdras and Nehemias fetch the right Discipline. From
^^ence did the Apostle fetch his doctrine as often as he reproved the
Churches, that went a^ray into error, whom he ^^adeth into the way again, and
keeps them in order, with the Scriptures.

What soever rules of life the Apostle prescribes to every degree, every
kind, and to every age, the same he fetches out of the Scriptures.

Finally, the holy Scripture does teach and instruct us in all things, in
which we have any need of teaching or instruction. The same does reprove,
rebuke, accuse, draw forth, convince, and refute all kinds of errors, and
heresies. The same corrects, ame^deth, reformeth, and finally keeps us
under h^l^ discipline, lest we should wax ^^^s^ and run at riot: and it is a
most perfect Canon and a most sure and infallible rule of holy life and true
salvation.

Therefore, why should not the same suffice in the Church, to govern the men of
this last age, and to deliver them from all corruptions. Neither is there any
cause, why we should take unto us the rules, that is to say, the reuoltings
and Apostacies, of the Munks. There is no cause, why we should beg or borow
these things necessary to salvation else where out of the stinking puddles of
men, and out of the counterfeit traditions and decrees of men. The Fountain of
living water is set forth, and laid open unto us of God.

But all those parts of godly wisdom and of christian doctrine, The drift of
the wisdom and doctrine of God.
are directed to a certain and an only end and mark, which the apostle adds,
and says. In righteousness. But we know that Christ is the righteousness
of the faithful. To this end therefore all these things do partain, namely,
that Christ may live in us, and we in him, that he reconciling us to God, may
take away our unrighteousness, and so give his righteousness unto us, and
that he may be our righteousness before God the Father, through whom
afterward we might walk in righteousness, during our whole life, with
continual repentance. For (as I have showed already) this is the only end and
scope of the whole Scriptures.

But nevertheless, the purpose and meaning of the Apostles words remainethe
as yet vnperfet. For the Apostle has said All Scripture given by inspiration
of God is profitable to teach, to reprove, to amend, to instruct in
righteousness. It follows that he must make an end of the sentence, and finish
the matter.

That the man of God may be made perfect, The Scripture fashioneth and makes
perfect the true worshippers of god
prepared unto all good woorks. All the parts of this doctrine (says he) do
tend to this end, and do woork this effect, that he, which will be a faithful
and perfect servant of God, may want nothing thereunto, but may obtain by the
instruction of the Scriptures, to be made perfect and prepared to every good
woork.

Let us note well in these words of the Apostle (ye reverend Fathers and deer
brethren) how that unto the Scripture is manifestly attributed a most
absolute perfection against the madness and furies of all men, yea, against the
raging blasphemies of those, that falsely affirm the same to be imperfect and
maimed, and therefore meet to be patched up with the rags of the traditions and
decrees of the Church. That the man of God (says Paul) may be made Perfet.

Perfet I say: Artios, whole, sound, absolute in all points, and such a one
as lacks nothing at all. What is it therefore that is needful to be mended by
these traditioners?

Moreover he adds. Prepared unto every good woork. He says not to one good
woork or two, or a few good woorks: but to every good work Exertismenos,
prepared, perfited, ended, thoroughly trimmed up, Vsgebutzt, made absolute and
finished. Nothing therefore remains for the Munks and Balls Traditioners,
that should by their inventions be added now at the length after certain
hundred years, to make the matter perfet. The holy Scripture is most
absolute, most fully teaching all those things that belong to the attainment
of godly life and salvation. And the same is able thoroughly to fashion or
instruct, and make perfet the true worshipper of God.

The Scripture excels Philosophy also.
Heerin also the holy Scripture does far surmount all Philosophy, and all
Philosophers them selves, much more the papisticall Sophisters, or
traditioners of Ball. Very triuily and very truly spoke Firmianus Lactantius
that Christian Cicero, concerning false wisdom, in his third Book of
institutions, the xxvi. chapter.

Only the heavenly doctrine (says he) the which alone is wisdom, brings
to pass those things, which the Philosophers were never able to do. The
commandments of God, because they are sincere and pure, of how great force
they are in the hearts of men, daily experience does show it. Bring me a man
inclined to anger, il tunged, unruly, and rash, with a few of Gods words I will
make him as quiet as a lamb. Bring me a covetous person, a greedy scraper and a
nigard, henceforth will I make him liberal. Bring me one that is fearful of
death and of pain, straight way he will despise hothe Gallows and fire, and
dangers, yea, and the torments of the brazen bull. Bring me him that is a
lecherer, and adulterer, a ruffian, and a royater, henceforth shall thou see
him sober, chaste, and continent. Bring me a cruel person, and one that
thirsts after blood, soon shall that fury be changed into clemency and
mercy. Bring me an unjust man, unwise and sinful, he shall be straightway just,
wise, innocent and harmless.

So great is the might of godly wisdom, that being powered into the heart of
man: it will at once even with one push, expel and drive out foolishnes the
mother of all sin. Has ever yet hitherto any of the Philosophers performed
these things? or if he were willing, were he able to do it? Who, when they
have spent their whole time in the study of Philosophy, yet nevertheless are
not able (if nature do a little withstand it) to make them selves or any others
the better therewith. Their wisdom therefore (how much soever it can do) yet
does it not root out vices but hide them.

But a few of Gods commandments do so thoroughly and wholly change a man,
and by garnishing the old, do so make him new, that thou can not know him
to be the same man he was.

But these very trim sayings of Lactantius do very much make to the praise of
our holy Scriptures, or of the word of God. The which word in deed excels
infinitely the wisdom of the world, be it never so absolute and perfet. So that
this chosen and special Apostle of Christ, with very good cause would have
all the faithful, in all things to have respect only to the word of God, and
to cleue fast unto the same even to the very last breath.

Conclusion
Moreover now it should remain for me, to gather those things in to a short
sum, which I have hitherto expounded somewhat at large, and to stir up your
minds to a most fervent study and love of the holy Scriptures, that being
instructed and prepared: ye might be the better able to keep the flock
committed to your charge, from those perils of these our days, that be the
last and therefore most corrupt, most miserable, and full of all calamities.
But, seeing that through the singular grace given unto you from the Lord, ye be
otherwise vigilant and watchful, and do understand and feel also, to how
great and what kind of dangers we are laid open and oppressed with all,
which cannot any way but only by fervent prayers unto God, and sincere and
diligent doctrine taken out of the Scriptures, be put back, driven away, or be
made vnhurtful to the godly. I will now conclude with the holy and vehement
words of the blessed Apostle which he Joins immediately to those which I have
all ready rehearsed and expounded.

He speaking to every one of us, says. I beseech thee therefore before God and
before our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appeering in his kingdom, preach the word, be fervent in season and out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine.

For the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they (whose ears itch) get them an heap of Teachers,
and shall turn their ear from the truth unto fables. But watch thou in all
things, and suffer adversity, and do the woorks of an Evangelist, fulfill
thine office to the vttermoste.

But, because every good gift, and every perfect gift comes from above,
descending from the Father of light: (making our humble petitions unto him) let
us ask of him those things, which are necessary to the performing of this
business, weighty indeed and hard. And let us pray Our Father which art in
Heaven. etc.


