PROBLEMES OF BEAVTIE and all humane affections.

Written in Italian by Tho: Buoni, citizen of Lucca.

With a discourse of Beauty, by the same Author.

Translated into English, by S. L. Gent.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Edward Blount, and William Aspley. 1606.

To the right worthy, and my honorable friend, Master Samson Lennard, Esquire.
AMongst those many duties that are required in a man any way obliged for a
benefit received, Seneca sets this down for one, Cave ne clam gratiam
referas, Take heed least thou smoother thy thankfulness in such a manner as if
thou were ashamed, either of him from whom thou receiuest, or of thy self that
thou should receive; for, Ingratus est qui remotis arbitris gratias agit.
This is the reason (right worshipful) that has made me bold at this time to
dedicate these my simple labors unto your self, not because I think them any
way worthy your worthiness, or sufficient in the smallest proportion that may
be, to requite those infinite bounties. I have received from you: but to make
known unto the world that I am not ashamed to acknowledge how much I am bound
to be thankful, and how little I am able to express my thankfulness as I
should, that have no better means to requite, then by craving more, that is,
by humbly entreating that you will be pleased, as a full recompense of your
former goodness in supplying my wants, in this little work, to protect my
infirmities: you shall thereby not only add much unto your former kindnesses,
but give quickening and spirit to my future studies, and make me bold, by your
favorable acceptance of this, to undertake matter of far greater
consequence, and better befitting your worthy patronage. Which I do the more
willingly promise, because I want not will to perform it. For pity it were but
I should ever live in wants, if I should ever live to want will, ever to love
and honor him that has ever supplied my wants. And though this be reason
enough to bind me to more then I can either do or promise, yet Nature, and
Name, and blood, and near alliance, challenge a greater duty at my hands: and
if none of these were, yet forasmuch as I know not any upon whom it has
pleased God with a more bountiful hand to pour down his earthly blessings in
this life, then upon your self, it cannot but be wisdom in me, to make choice
of him to bless this work, whom God has so blessed in this world. Pardon me
(Good Sir) if out of a true acknowledgment of Gods goodness toward you, and by
you toward me and mine, and not from any the least touch of vain glory, or
flattery, or doubt of the like acknowledgement in your self, I be bold to
tell you (for to my own comfort I speak it) that God has from time to time,
even from your cradle unto this day, cheered you up with a bountiful change,
and variety of his blessings. First, with a Father whose provident care for
your education when you could not provide for your self, made you a man before
you came to man's estate, and laid a foundation so firm, not only for your
own future benefit, but for the ensuing felicity both of yours, and his
posterity in this world, as that I cannot but joy in the remembrance of his
wisdom, and careful foresight, and congratulate the happy success thereof
in your self. I mean in providing for you in your riper years, and his
declining time, a better comfort to supply his want, even that honorable Lady
your dear and loving wife, who has not only multiplied your happiness in
this life by her many virtues, and even v^speakable affection toward you, but
by her large and lawful patrimony, the revenues and honor of an ancient
Baronie, to yours and her heirs for ever, lineally d^scending from so many
noble Lords her parents and honorable Progenitors. From both whose loins has
sprung a third blessing not much inferior to the rest, not only numerosa
proles, many children, but many good: and among the rest, your worthy son Sir
Henry Lennard, (whose name and nature I must always love and honor) as heir
both to your honors and honorable virtues. Thus has God ever blessed you, a
child, a husband, and a father, and thus God ever bless you, and add unto
these his blessings a long life, that you may long live to be a blessing to
other men, and to patronage this, and my future labors in this kind. Touching
which work so unworthy your acceptance, let me entreat you not to stick in
the title, or to think it a subject unworthy your gravity, being gravely
handled. It is one thing to write of passion, and another to be subject to
passion. The best and grauest writers have writ thereof, and it vnbefittes
not any man to read what they have written. The Author I will not commend: let
the work commend the Author. The translation I must not commend, only I wish
the volume had been far greater, so less Philosophical. Howsoever, if it
find favor in your eye, I have my desire, and I shall think it the greatest
happiness that ever befell me in this life, to have done any thing that may
content him by whom I live. And so I end, wishing you all happiness in this
life, and after this life, that which never has end.

From my lodging in Westminster 30. Aprilis 1606. Your Worships in all duty to
be commanded, Sams: Lennard.

A discourse of the Author, upon Beauty.
AMongst those clear lights, which in the midst of the darkness of
ignorance, can direct the mind of man to the knowledge of the magnificence of
our great God, the clearest, and most resplendant seems to be that of Beauty,
which shines not in one only part of the universal, but in the whole:
appears not only in things animate, but inanimate: shows her greatness,
not only in the accidents but in the substance: lays open her riches, not
only in the Elements, but in the compoundes: not only in the superficial
part of the earth, but even within the bowels thereof (as within a safe
treasury) hides her manifold beauties, extends her golden rays, not only
to things visible, but invisible: manifests her sparkling lustres, not only
to things earthly, but heavenly. So that ascending even from the lowest things
that are, unto the highest, we do still discover the greater wonders of this so
great a God, communicated unto us by the Arch-figure of al beauties. Hence it
is that the Platonists would, that passing by the creatures as it were by so
many steps, or degrees of nature, we should ascend to the knowledge of that
supreme Monarch, who with his infinite power, and unspeakable wisdom,
causes that ornament of Beauty to shine in every part, which to no other end,
benign nature has framed an ingin so heigh and so wonderful, then to direct
us to the knowledge of those attributes, which in truth are dew unto him. And
therefore says the father of all Roman eloquence. Quid potest esse tam
^pertum, tamque perspicuu, cum coelum suspeximus, etc. What can be more plain,
and manifest when we behold the heavens, and co^template the celestial bodies,
then that there is some kind of Godhead whereby they are governed? The
creatures of God are the footesteps of the great God, which show unto us his
greatness: they are the looking glass, which a far off represe^teth unto us the
rich colors of his immesurable Beauty. they are a book of artificial notes,
written in letters of gold, which instruct the simple minds of me^: they are
the finger of that divine wisdom, which discouers unto ^s the greatest
treasures of the greatest ^ood: they are so many learned tongs ^mute I must
confess) but yet more ^loquent then all humane eloquence, which in a still
tongue instruct our ignorance, and persuade us to the ser^ice, and worship of
the true God. And lastly, they are so many goades, which by a sweet kind of
inuitation prick us forward to the knowledge of the original fountain of
all good. And to say the truth, what clearer footstep, what brighter Looking
glass, what easier book, what readier finger, what wiser tongue, and what
more easy spur can any mortal eye discover then Beauty? It shines in the
east, is admirable at noone, is pleasant even at night, but most resplendant in
the day. It is white in the snow, red in the rose, gracious in the violet,
delightful in the flowers, rich among the plants, wonderful among the beasts
of the field and glorious amongst me^? Who beholds and rests not asto^ished at
the clear light of the Moon, the bright beams of the sun the whitenes of
silver, the sple^dor of gold, the purity of the marble, the sparklings of the
diamo^d, and ye high prise of al other precious stones, and artificial Iuels?
What eye can rest satisfied in beholding the variety of the forms, and colors
of the rainebow, the great riches of the spring, which in all things, in all
places, even the most solitary in holes, and caves, upon high hills, the craggy
rocks, hollow mountains, desert corners, and in all other places most remote,
and aba^doned, displayeth the majesty of her mother Venus? who is not
astonished to behold the rich garments of the beasts of the field, and the
birds of the air, rich in their proud mantles, their glorious maynes, their
beautiful backs, their soft feathers, their comely spots, their glittering
wi^gs? who wondereth not at the hair of the Lion, the spotted garment of the
Panther, the excellent feature of the horse, the back, of the Leopard, the no
less delightful, then alluring skin of some little dogs, which furnished
with a thousand strange delights, attend us every hour in our houses? who can
sufficiently display the Beauty of the Cock, the rich tail of the Peacocke,
the innumerable colors of the Pigeon, the glorious feathers of the Fesant? who
can describe the silver scales of the fish, their slippery backs, their ruddy,
and hyacinthian purple ^olours, their diverse purflings, in man^er of little
drops of gold, their forms, their finnes, their barbes, their arms, and their
innumerable fashions? Who can by speech sufficiently set down the whiteness
of the Lilly, the redness of the rose, the purple of the violet, and the
multitude of those excellent beauties, which we behold with singular delight
and admiration in every flower? Who can describe the colors of the Apple, his
red, and white, and yellow, and medley of al colors, the form sphericall,
oual, piramidall thereof, with a thousand other wonders, which upon their
plants we see in them? who is so wise as by his speech to add beauty to the
beauty of the plants, to their barks, their tall trankes, their strong bases,
their spreading boughs, to the delicatenes of their leaves, the prise of their
gummes: the diversity of their flowers, the magnificence of their fruit, the
beauty of their tops, and the diversity of their kinds? who does not admire
the comlines of the Mirre tree, the nobleness of the Cedar, the height of the
Pine, the strength of the Oak, the beauty of the Cypres, the fecundity of the
Olive, the rarity of Agnus castus? who can suffieciently celebrate the amenity
of the meadows, the fertility of the ^^eldes, the height of the hills, the
greatness of the mountains, the beauty of the Islands, and the stately bounds
of sundry provinces, favored with a thousand sundry properties, by the
celestial influence? who can sufficiently commend the clearnes of the water,
the swift current of the channells, the sweet murmur of the fountains, the
treasures of the rivers, the strange wonders which the Mediterran, Hiberian,
and Ocean sea, yea every go^fe, every depth does hide in it? What style so
grave, as to set down the riches of the rain, the Beauty of the clouds, the
strange grace of the falling snow, the twinkling of the stars, the flaming
of the cometts, the motion of vapors inflamed, and the sweet breathinges of
the celestial air.

Alas these, and a thousand the like can never be expressed, nay the beauties
of Gods creatures cannot be considered of without wonder, without astonishment.
If then such be the visible things of nature, what shall we think the
invisible are? for we cannot but know, that those things that are most
excellent, nature has hidden, and kept most close. ^old so much esteemed in
the world, it ^ath hid in the bowels of the earth pre^^ous stones, and pearls
of greatest prise, (...) the bed of the sea: the seed, in which (...)
preserved the life of every plant under thousand barks: the sweetness of every
^^uit, with the marowe thereof, and every thing of greatest prise, it has
hidden ^^om our eyes. If then we are but as it ^ere stammering children in
expres^ng the beauties of corporal things, as of the cold marble, the dead
stone, and other things insensible, how should we ^e able to express the
Beauty of an angel, an Archangell, a Seraphin, a Che^ubin? Alas too dull is the
mind of man, ^oo incapable of so excellent a know^edge, too dead is every
style, to silent all eloquence, too slow are al pens, and too rude are all
tongues. Al we can do, is but to pass by these mortal beauties, as it were by
so many shadows, which do weakly guide us to know in part the
incomprehensible beauties of invisible creatures, and from thence to proceed
with strange astonishment, to the contemplation of the first Fair, which is
the invisible God, who, to no other end, has framed these outward beauties,
then to direct us to the inward, the visible, to stir us up to the invisible,
the corruptible, to inflame our desires to the incorruptible, the terrestrial,
to raise us up to the celestial. But man having forgotten both himself, and
his duty, as if he were merely earthly, fasteneth his thoughts upon earthly
things, unthankful unto God the Author of so great a good, and to himself the
cause of his utter ruin. But to pass from nature unto art. It was only
Beauty that did first minister the occasion unto art, to find out the
knowledge of Caruing, painting, building, to find out the modells,
prospectiues, and rich furniture of so many proud, and wonderful edifices: and
from hence have our Poets taken occasion to celebrate not only natural Beauty,
but artificial: not only the Beauty of the body, but of the mind too: in so
much that many times with the sweetness of their verse they leave the reader
full of wonder, and astonishment. As amongst others, says Politian of
artificial Beauty.

The princely house diuides the terrene air,
more bright with gems of gold then I can tell
Which maks the darkest night then day more fair,
the workma^ship the maker does excel.
^n Adamantine pillars hangs there.
(...) floor of Emralds, that does fit full well,
their hearts to comfort that do pant with care
to mount up Sterop, Bront, or Mongibell.
And Ariosto following the description of another proud building, says.

^he high pillars and the Capitels of gold,
^heron those thrice fair gemed floors did stand
Those stra^g marbles which such art did unfold
graven in sundry forms by learned hand.
And Hugoni coloring the Beauty of the spring, utters these verses.

The earth that her due ornament had lost,
and nothing brings but horror to the eye
With thousand colors of far greater cost.
does, once again reuiude, adorned lie,
The n^ghtingale renewes her warbling plaint
and they renew the fire in frozen heart.
And wanton love grows strong which the^ did faint,
the air, and water laugh in every part.
And Veniero to the like purpose.

The woods and medows every where grow green
the waters are in every fountain clear.
The southern wind that never blows too keen
so moves the leaves as motion none appear.
But all these passing from this Beauty, to the Beauty of man (whereof it
seems that al our Tuscan poets have delighted to write) could never think
themselves satisfied with the commendations thereof and therefore says Petrark.
I thought perhaps to number all the stars,
And to enclose all fountains in a glass:
When first I thought within these paper bars,
to praise that Beauty which al pens does pass
Or to commend that flower which is the rarest,
because it gives Beauty to the fairest.


And Ariosto, following the same subject, says.

He that commends Phillis or Nerea,
or Amarillis or Galatea,
Tytirus and Melibe, by your leave,
Let him be mute, my love the praises have.
And Sanazzaro

My Phillida whiter then the Lilly,
more lovely then the feelds in midst Aprile.
And of the Beauty of the mind says Mattelli.

Princely spirit whose fame all limits scorns,
whose name no pen sufficiently adornes.
And lastly Caro.

And the^ they called him wise, and strong, and just,
Miters, and garlands they put on his head,
And termd him great Father, King August.
Here I pass over with silence the description of those pleasant places,
delightful situations, hills, cities, temples: neither will I speak of those
affections of the mind, of joy laughter, glory, hope, love, modesty, comlines
shamefastness, ciuility, affability, wisdom, valor, patience eloquence, and
whatsoever else that concurreth to the forming of the inward Beauty of the
mind, which by daily speculation, and frequent action is obtained: for
whosoever attentively reads those wise and sage Poets, not so careful to
describe lascivious Beauty, as that which is joined with true shamefastnes,
modesty, te^perance, and virtue, shall find in them, not only those excelleat
poetical figures, which give a kind of luster, and Beauty to their
sententious speech, but that greater Beauty of the mind, beautified by their
learned pens. Let it not therefore seem strange, if I in this little work
have bin bold, by way of Problemes to handle this subject of Beauty, and
thereby to pass to the matter of Affections which by beauty are especially and
most strongly stirred up: for if it be true (as among al philosophers it is
held most true) that love is the rule, and measure of all other affections, and
that love is moved by that which is fair, as by her proper object, I could not
with any conueniency have written of Beauty, if I had not passed to that
affection, which especially (as the proper object and matter belonging
thereunto) co^templateth that which is fair, neyth^^ could I well have
followed this subie^^ of love, if I had not likewise written ^^ al other
affections, among which lo^^ is the predominant, and from which the rest
receive their original, being, confess, it was beyond my skill exquisitely to
handle a matter of this worth and therefore following only a problematicall
style, under probable reason and brief conceits, I have briefly (...) up
this whole discourse, persuading m^ self thereby, both to have done tha^ which
was answerable to my own strength, and this present subject. An^ therefore to
conclude, let ingenious m^^ convert their studies to the contemplation of the
Beauty of Gods creatures, (...) thereby learn to direct their loves, t^ the
love of that chief, and suprem^ fair, which can only make them happy and
give them perpetual felicity. And as the beauty of the mind is of higher
prise, then that of the body, so let them remember that the invisible beauty is
more worthy o^ Love, then the visible, because that endures for ever, and this
even with wings passes away.

Problemes of Beauty written by Thomas Buonie, Citizen of Lucca.
Why is Beauty so universal? Problem. 1.
PErhaps because it is a kind of good, which being by nature communicable,
does therefore shine in every part ^f the universal world. Or Perhaps because
all things being the effects of ^ne and the same Nature, which is a ^enigne
mother unto all, it was not ^onuenient, that any thing should be ^n his degree
deformed: but that all ^hinges according to their due forms should have some
perfection of Beauty; and as the Pecocke is fair, the Eagle ^aire, the Swan,
the Lion, fair, so should the Serpent be fair, the Crocodile, the Aspe, in
their kinds: from which Beauty is framed that universal Beauty of this
inferior created world which is a kind of foot step of the divine Beauty.
Or Perhaps for the conservation of the kinds, the which by generation are
preserved: unto which action of generation, it was not requisite, that the
Agents should be violently drawn: but being gentlely allured by the Beauty of
their kinds they should willingly frame themselves to the act of generation.
O^ Perhaps that sovereign creator of al things being the Supreme Essence
which has in it al kind of perfectio^s i^ an infinite degree: and consequently
al Beautyes, and being the first Fair, in a degree that is infinite too, he^
would likewise in his great bounty universally impart a kind of perfection to
all Nature.

Wherefore is Beauty imparted to every particular Creature? Problem. 2.
PErhaps because man should not only consider it by the diverse kinds: but ^y the
particulars of the universal, and ^^om thence should pass with the ^inges of
his cogitations, to the con^emplation of the highest Fair, from ^hence, as
from a fountain all smaller ^^uers derive their Beauties. Or Perhaps because
benign Nature intends also ^he conservation of every particular ^^eature:
which by nothing can be bet^^r performed then by union, which v^^on, arises
from Love, and Love by nothing but Beauty can be engendered. ^r Perhaps because
the universal cannot be fair, except the particulars be ^^kewise so: and
therefore to the end ^is universal Theater of the world ^ight appear more
beautiful: the ^reator of things did not only adorn, ^^e universal parts,
with beautiful co^^urs, which are the general kinds, but ^^e particulars also,
to the end, that ther^^ the universal Beauty might shine ^ore clear. Or
Perhaps because every and should be admired for the Beauty ^f their
particulars, and so being settled ^ithin the bounds of the Beauty of ^^eir
indiuidualls, should rest conten^^d, and satisfied.

Wherefore does Beauty shine especially in women. Problem. 3.
PErhaps because such is the order of nature, that what it wants in one, it
supplieth in the other, and therefore having indewed man with a wit, and
judgment far more excellent, and more fit for the contemplation, and
speculation of things, and framed him in respect of his mind, in a manner
divine, she would supply this want, and give a full recompense unto women with
bodily Beauty, whereby she should be in some degree superior unto man. Or
Perhaps because women knowing their bodily Beauty, should by their studious
endeauours, seek to attain that of the mind, and should endeavor to be
that in their minds, in their spiritual part, which in their bodies, nature
has framed them. Or Perhaps because she should not by man be contemned; but
rather for he^ Beauty be reverenced, admired, and only loved. Or Perhaps to the
end she taking knowledge of these her perfections, should the rather be guided
by ^he zeal of honor, and the bridle of ^hamfastnesse, not to violate so
vn^^eakable a treasure, being assured that ^o great a grace was never given her
^^om heaven, to defile with Luxury, but ^^ther to be a Bridle to that heat of
^oncupiscence, which in her weak nature would gather strength. Or Perhaps
because having received so great a ^lessing, she should learn of her mo^her
nature, to hide it, which covers ^uery fair, and precious thing, under a
^housand shells, and barks: yea in hard ^ocks and bottomless depthes, and not ^o
lay it open as a thing common.

Why does Beauty so soon decay? Problem. 4.
PErhaps because Nature admits no permanent estate in these infe^iour
things; but gives only the being, and the increase: to the full whereof, they
are no sooner arrived, but pre^ently they tend unto their declination, ^or no
state perfect, is permanent, but ^ike brickle glass is broken with every ^alle
Or Perhaps because discret Nature has assigned to every age some especial
good, to infancy the comfort of the dugge: to Childhood childish recreations:
to youth a desire of civil conversation: to riper years the fruition of that
Beauty, which stirs up a desire of generation, to perfect man a delight in
honorable actions, whereby he aspireth to immortailitie: to old men the gift
of counsel, to decrepite a delightful remembrance of things past. Whereby
according to those offices, especially necessary unto Nature, either
particular, or universal, was given the excellency of some good, to every
particular age, which being expired) men gave over their delight in that gift,
as no longer necessary, and betoke themselves to that which was more fit. Or
Perhaps because we may know that earthly Beauty is like a flying shadow, and
therefore we are not to fasten our eyes upon it, but to turn them to that
sovereign Light, that is free from all change, from all passion. Or Perhaps
because love is proper to young men ( Beauty being only found in that age)
the which lasting but a short time, suddenly does the flower of that fading
good vanish, which adorneth their youthful mem^ers.

Why is Beauty especial apprehended by the sight? Problem. 5.
PErhaps because Beauty is a certain divine splendor which is showed unto us
in things natural, and that does most participate of the divine Nature, which
is least earthly, and ^uch is the eye (among other senses) ^n apprehending
things, and therefore the fittest mean to discern so great a good. Or
Perhaps because the eye is, as ^t were the clear looking glass of the soul,
in which are descried all the affections of the mind, as Anger, Disdain,
Passion, Love, and so forth, among which the principal is Love: the eye
therefore longes after Beauty, (and whilst it contemplateth the colors, the
forms, the features, the carriage, the complexion, the comlines, the grace,
the laughter, and whatsoever excellent quality belo^gs unto Beauty) is deemed
fittest to be the principal judge thereof. Or Perhaps because the first object
of the eye, is the light, without which all Beauty (as being buried in the
dark) is made vain, and therefore no marvel, if the eye being in it self
so clear, and transparent, seek the light of Beauty in every dark body with
such delight. Or Perhaps because many things concur to the framing of a
perfect Beauty, and therefore the sight being that (among the other senses)
which apprehends most things, by this organ, a lover does best discern the
perfection of all those principal parts, which are required to the framing of
a complete Beauty. And therefore we see that lovers by the bare report of
virtue, in any honorable breast love imperfectly, but if report be once
confirmed by an interuiewe, and the eye be made judge as well as the ear, it
gathers strength, and grows wonderfully, which proceeds from no other
cause, then from the great force that the eye has in the true judgment of
sensible things, besides the power thereof extending it self, more then all
the other senses to the multitude of objects, and more speedily apprehending
them.

Wherefore does Beauty always delight? Problem. 6.
PErhaps because whatsoever has any thing in it, that is divine (such ^s
Beauty is) does always bring with it some Joy: In so much that we see, that
many things according to the portion of that treasure of divine greatness,
which they participate, do yield ^s pleasure, and delight, more, or less. As
a meadowe decked with a thousand ^arieties of flowers, breathing as it were
unto us refreshing odours; a fountain abounding with Christaline waters, and
adorned with many tender sprouts, and bowing shoots; a magnanimious horse
strong of body, pleasant in countenance, maiesticall in ^ase, dapled in
color, bold in nature, ^ glorious Pecock, beautiful in his golden feathers;
a glittering Diamond, an Orient Pearl, a shining Carbuncle, and every other
rich and precious Gemme, brings always delight and pleasure with it. Or
Perhaps because diverse colors well placed and artificially enlightened, are apt
always to bring delight unto the eye, as also a tuneable voice unto the ear.
For among those things that give greatest grace, and Beauty to a woman, the
principal are, the gracious colors of her well featured members, and her honey
words, which being sweetly uttered, make excellent harmony, and yield
unspeakable delight. Or Perhaps because that, which perfecteth not only the
outward powers, but the inward also, brings always delight, and therefore the
corporal Beauty reducing in to act the senses, and the incorporal, inuiting us
to contemplation, and inuesting us (as it were) into all virtues, both the one,
and the other, must necessarily yield delight, and pleasure, for this is the
property of the natural powers, that in the presence of those objects that
serve them, and belong unto them, being invited unto action (which they
naturally delight in) they take great Joy, and contentation, and the reason is,
because by their objects they are fed, terminated, and perfected, and therefore
the understanding at the presence of an intelligible, Species, the will in the
presence of any kind of good, the memory of any Image presented unto it, and
the sense at the presence of ^ sensible object, receives joy, and ^ontent. So
that the corp^rall Beauty, ^eing gazed on by the outward sen^es, and the
incorporall Beauty, that is, ^he Beauty of the mind, being appre^ended by the
inward senses, and that ^y the help of the ear, cannot but ^ringe unto either
sense, great plea^ure, and delight. Or Perhaps because ^he comfort which the
other sensible objects do give, ends in some special ^ense, as the pleasure
which a color ^iues, is only the pleasure of the eye, and the delight which
a good savor ^rings, is only of the Nose, but the ^elight of Beauty is a
content common ^o all the senses, which falls out, because Beauty depends
upon many and diverse goods, they which delight ^ow this sense, now that: So
that there ^s no time, in which Beauty bestrowe^h ^ot upon man, some kind of
delight, and contentation.

Why is Beauty worthy of Love? Problem. 7.
PErhaps because bodyly Beauty is a clear sign (if Malignity be not hidden
under it) of a fair (that is) of a virtuous mind. The which by those rich
doweryes, which it gathers unto it self, deserves to be known, celebrated,
and accounted worthy of honor, which honor that it may duly receive, love is
the best guide, which best knows, the merit of the thing beloved, and
therefore this man it honoreth, that it admireth, this in private discourse it
prayseth, and that both in prose, and verse it extolleth, which are all effects
of love. Or Perhaps because Beauty either true, or seeming, is also a good,
either true, or seeming, and whatsoever is such, cannot but be worthy of
reward, and a more acceptable reward cannot be given, to make manifest the
merit thereof, then the heart wherewith Love is given. Or Perhaps because that
which brings solace, and recreation to the mind, delight to the inward
powers, pleasure to the senses, deserves recompense, and such effects does
Beauty produce in us. So that the pleasure that we take, being great, it is fit
that the recompense be answerable thereunto, and sure a greater then Love
cannot be given, Beauty is worthy of the greatest. Or Perhaps because the
Excellency of Good, deserves the excellency of the affections, and the
greater Good, the greater affection. Hence it is that greater courage is showen
in the defense of a great personage injured, then of an other of base degree,
and condition. As a learned man is more carefully guarded, and defended then an
Idiott, a Queen then a common woman, a Nobleman, then a Commoner, a Citizen
then a Slave. And therefore Beauty being a Good, which conteyneth in it the
excellency of many other Goods, as well natural, as acquired, it follows
necessarily, that the excellency thereof must be very great, as being that
which is framed of a multitude of al other excellent things, whereby, it
likewise follows, that it challenges the greatest affection which is love,
and the supreme Beauty, the supreme Love.

Why are not all men delighted with one and the same Beauty? Problem. 8.
PErhaps because that is fair which to every man so seems, little
considering the reason of true Beauty, but only that which is ministered by the
sense, wherein delighting themselves, they stick fast. Or Perhap^ the
diversity of men's complections, breeds a diversity in their desi^es: whereby
they judge diversely of things present, and follow those which do best agree
with their constitutions, whereby we see that in the Election of any thing
whatsoever, the Appetite does accommodate it self to the te^perature of the
body, and it hold^th not only in things natural, but mortal also: for we see
that as the country Swain desires gross meats, such as agree best with the
grossness of his nature, labors, and education, as Onions, Leekes, Garlike,
Beef, Bacon, and such like: and these meats to him are sweet, and sauory. So
we see that men fitting themselves in their customs, and carriages to their
bodily temperatures, do ever desire to converse with their like, and therefore
no marvel if the same happen in the election of Beauty. Or Perhaps because
Nature would have it so, to the end that every one should be esteemed, and
beloved, and they that are not absolutely fair in every part, should not be
despised, but being received into grace, and favor with their lovers, might
live honestly, and in good esteem with them. That so the profit of the union
of the whole universe, the benefit of Peace, mutual society, and safe custody
of all earthly blessings, might supply all other defects, and losses.

Why is Beauty enjoyed, least esteemed? Problem. 9.
PErhaps because the Agent possessing his end, in it rests contented and
satisfied* and the Lover enjoying that Beauty which he loves, queales in his
affection, by the fruition of that he desired, which we may easily observe in
every thing else. The fire being mounted to his natural sphere their rests:
Every heavy body desce^ding to the Center, cease motion. A Captain when he
has gotten the victory, lays aside his arms. A shippmaster being entered
the haven gathers up his sails. He that thirsts having with water alaied
his thirst, desires water no more, and the traveler being come to his wished
home, has ended his trauells: whereby we may likewise understand, why a Lover
possessing his treasure of Beauty, expresses not so much delight in the
having, as desire in the getting. Or Perhaps because there is no earthly thing
whatsoever, that has not some imperfection annexed unto it, the which a Lover
in the certain possession of that he loves finding, presently, faints in
his desires: which to be true, our Sense and experience teaches, in as much as
we are many times either for want of due care, and foresight in our selves, or
the dissimulation, and colored art of others, deceived; For (not to speak of
those manifold imperfections, that many even from their cradle bringes with
them) How many vices are often times hidden under long garments? What pride,
intemperance, Luxury, Immodesty, Gluttony, Sloth, Envy, Lyeng, Decipt,
^^olating of honor? How often is ^^e loyal heart found to be disloyal; ^^e
chaste mind unchaste, the modest ^ou^tenance lascivious, the sound affection
^orrupted, the honorable hand theeuish, (...) the honorable man infamous? how
of^^n under the cristaline Ise, lies hidden a ^tinking dunghill: under a white
tooth a ^oysome worm under a fair glove, a ^oule hand; under a rich garment,
a crooked ^odie, and in a straight body, a croo^ed mind? How often are we
with ^ained colors, outward resemblances, with words, garments, art upon art
deceived, and abused? So that it is no marvel if the affections of men, be
sometimes altered and changed. Or Perhaps because Beauty when it i^ possessed,
it still declineth, and decays in her perfections, not continuing in that
flourishing state it was first in. Or Perhaps because every thing, as it is more
frequent, and common, so more contemptible, and less esteemed. Or Perhaps
because the possessor understanding not his own good, because he knows it
not, esteems it not.

Why is the Beauty of a light woman less esteemed? Problem. 10.
PErhaps because she has wronged that natural gift of hers, and darkened the
light thereof by her deformed actions, for it is great reason, that she that
for a little, and that dishonest pleasure, took delight to satisfy her
unbridled desires, even to the dishonor of her own name, should by the
selfsame instrument, wherewith she foolishy offended, be not only despised,
but with shame and infamy abhorred. Or Perhaps because that is no perfect
fair, which is only bodily, and that dishonored too, nay neither can it be
called a bodily Beauty in the^, who having torn the sanctified vailes of
shamefastness, have offered the use of their bodies to common prostitution:
much less is the Beauty of the mind found in them, having already by the
choice of a dishonest life, made known the foul deformity thereof. Or
Perhaps because untrue and deceitful things never pleased, and therefore the
Beauty of the body ^^ing an outward sign of the inward ^^auty of the mind,
but in such a wo^an made a cloak for sin, she belieth ^er bodily Beauty. Or
Perhaps because ^^ings common in this kind, yield not ^^fects of Love: but
rather of disdain, and hatred: which simple nature does ^^ctate unto us, who
as a zealous nourse flawefull bir^hes, has always in ha^ed the adulterous,
who bringing nothing with them but confusion (because their certain fathers are
never known) ^hey are no sooner borne, but as soon ^bandoned, and their eyes
are shut, before they see the light of the sun, and ^o it comes to pass,
that both by the ^^ght of nature, and that dear respect that every man should
have unto his own honor, that those women do never please, who though they
be fair, yet by their lascivious behavior have made their bodies common to
every man.

Why does every man desire to be fair? Problem. 11.
PErhaps because whatsoever has a show of good, is desired of every man, and
such is Beauty: For every thing that is Good pleases our appetite, As when we
hear any sweet harmony, either of Instrument or voice, any eloquent tongue to
speak, when we see any strange, or ingenious workemanshippe, or excellent
quality, or any thing that is exquisite, their arises presently in us a
desire of the same excellencies and perfections: and so forasmuch as Beauty is
an excellent perfection, we desire that too. Or Perhaps because the outward
Beauty of the body, is a token of the inward Beauty of the mind, and
therefore is not only desired, but admired, forasmuch therefore as all men do
affect admiration, and a vainglorious applause, among the people, they
desire Beauty to be wondered at. Or Perhaps because the fairer a man is, the
nearer he comes to the divine Nature: For the Essence, or being to every
creature was not equally communicated, but according to the excellency of their
Nature, whereby one is more perfect then another, and so likewise in their
qualities. Or Perhaps because things highly prized in the world, are highly
desired, and most honored. Or Perhaps because (as it is (...) the proverb) he
that is borne fair, (...) borne fortunate. For we see that ma^^ fair women by
the excellency of ^^eir Beauty attain to high estate, and ^omen of basest
condition by the ma^age of great Lords have enobled their ^^milies. Or Perhaps
because things ^re, do more participate of that which (...) excellent in
Nature: As we see a^ong the Planetts, one only sun, among the mettalls, one
only gold, and therefore things fair being rare, ^re most desired, and we
desire to be that which is most desired.

Why is he that is fair inclined to Love? Problem. 12.
PErhaps because the Cause of Love is Beauty, and he that has the cause in
Potentia, does easily produce the effect; And therefore says divine Plato,
that Love reigns most in the hearts of those young men, that are honorably
borne, and tenderly brought up, who as apt subjects receive into them that
passion which Perhaps refineth their inward part, and adornes them with the
Beauty of the mind, whereby they are made totally fair: And therefore from
hence it is, that Beautiful women, even for the Love of virtue, which adorneth
Beauty, endeavor to furnish them selves with virtuous qualities, as skill in
music, history, curious needle-works, embroderings, and the like womanly
exercises. Or Perhaps because he that is fair, is for the most part beloved,
and Love (according to Seneca) must be requited with love, as the love of
friendship is to be answered with the like loving affection, civil Love with
the zeal of our Country, matrimonial Love with faith, honest Love with virtue,
divine Love with religion. Or Perhaps because they that are fair, are thought
to be borne under Venus, which being the Planet of Love, inclines those to
Love whom the celestial planets with their influe^ces have made beautiful. Or
Perhaps because it is the property of those that are fair to be moderate in
their affections, as having a true te^perature in their co^plections, and
therefore Love being the moderator of al affections, it should seem to build
her ne^st in those that are Beautiful. Or Perhaps because it seldom ^leth
out, that Beauty is separated ^^om the force of Love, and therefore ^^rasmuch
as custom in all things has ^^e force of a law, they that are beau^^full
following custom, cannot but ^oue.

Why are there borne in some Provinces, ^^tties, Castells, and Villages,
Beautiful women, in others Beautiful men, in some Countries men of tale
stature, fat, and white, in others lean of body and of a sallowe complexion?
Problem. 13.
PErhaps because to the generation of every kind, the good quality, and
^emperature of the generating parts, ^oeth much import, which does plain^y
appear in them which are defective ^n any of their members, who commonly get
children like themselves. As we s^^ ^athers that are purblind, crokebacked,
^quay footed, get children like them^elues in those imperfections, insomuch
that the children do not one^y in the feature of their bodies prove like the
principal Agent, which is the father, but like the principal patient too,
which is the mother, yea and sometimes like to their causes more remote, as the
Grandfather, and great Grandfather both by Fathers side and the Mothers. Or
whether it be by reason of the strong imagination, o^ the operation of the
seed, or the concurrence of the blood, or any other cause that works in the
act of generation, we must conclude howsoever that the first women of those
provinces Cities Castells, villages, having been of a right excellent
complexion, and due proportion of members, with other circumstances that
confer any thing to the perfection of a bodily Beauty, were the first
original causes, of the Beauty of the women in those places, unto which we
may likewise add, the influence of the heavens upon those territories, the
fitnes, and temperature of the Climats, with the concurrence of meats, and
drinks, be^^ befitting those celestial operations, which does plainly
appear in Gaeta, Beneuento, the hills of Pisto^a, and in other places: The
like may be said of those men who in the beginning by ^eason of their tale
stature, big bone, ^leasant aspect, accompanied with a ^^nde of Lordlike
majesty, by virtue ^f their active seed, and the climate ^isposed to the like
temperature, have ^ade their progeny admirable, and ^eautiful. But as touching
fattnesse, and ^eanenesse, accompanied with a certain ^inde of witness, or
blackness, per^aps the one is caused by the coldness ^f the Climat, which
being far distant from the force of the sun, makes the ^ugestion more strong,
whereby much of the nutriment is converted to the be^ifit of nature, and
consequently the ^arty made more fat, and more fair, ^s does plainly appear
in our women of high, and low Germany, whereas ^he contrary cause, works the
contra^ie effect, that is, makes women lean, and of a sallow complexion,
which we may easily see in the women of Spain, and forasmuch as the Italian,
is neither so near the North as the German, nor ^he South as the Spaniard, he
participateth of both their natures, and flies both their extremes. Or Perhaps
the frequent aspect, and interuiew of the Beauty of each Sex, offering it self
oftentimes to the windows of the senses, imprinteth a daily imagination of
Beauty in the minds both of the man, and the woman, by which means Beauty
abounds in those places. And contrariwise, great plenty of deformed
countenances, and bodies il featured, make these blemishes, and unpleasing
defects by imagination to pass into nature*

Why does the Beauty of women consist sometimes in one color, sometimes in the
variety of colors? Problem. 14.
PErhaps because corporal Beauty is not only placed in the due proportion, or
site, or quantity, or quality of the members, but much more in the appetite,
which by reason of the diversity of the complexion where it resideth, wills
and desires diversely. And therefore to the eye of the Moore, the black, or
tawny countenance of his Moorish damsel pleases best, to the eye of another,
a color as white as the Lilly, or the driven snow, to another the color
neither simply white, nor black, but that well meddled Beauty betwixt ^^em both,
like the red rose in pure ^ilke, or the purple violet amongst the ^hite
Lillyes, for an absolute Beauty ^arieth away the bell. Or Perhaps because every
like desires and loves his ^^ke, whereby even for the public good, ^here
remains nothing despised, because there is nothing but has his like. and
therefore we see that a man na^urally given to sport, and delights, de^^ghteth
most in the company of inge^ious, and pleasant wits, a soldier in ^he
company of him that is warlike; and ^alorous, a Saturnist in one like unto
^imselfe, which falls out no o^herwise in the appetite and desire ^f Beauty,
and therefore the Moore, Loves the Moore, and so of the rest. Or Perhaps
because Beauty consists ^ot so much in the color as in the ^lumination, or
illustration of those ^oulours, which gives grace, and ^ustre to every
countenance, and without which all Beauties are languishing: So that this
illumination which gives such splendor, and ma^estie to some countenances,
being ioy^ed to one only color, forms, a true, and an excellent Beauty,
which we may plainly see in the faces of those Moors which though they are
black, do many times bewray a strange kind of Beauty in them, and therefore
no marvel though many praise the Beauty of one only color, as some one only
sun, one only Moon, one only heaven, one only light, notwithstanding
being common unto al Or Perhaps because (as I have already said) Nature by
love being made saciable, stirs up and awaketh in the heart of man,
whatsoever hidden, or least appearing Beauty.

Why does the sweetness of Speech, and comely carriage of the body give
greater grace unto Beauty then any other part? Problem. 15.
PErhaps because Beauty without that grace, which is discovered, either in the
tongue or in the motion of the body, seems the Beauty of an Image, drawn in
dead colors, or rather a figure which either in marble, or bras, lays open
the worthy acts of Hercules, or Achilles, without any motion of ^he members,
so that it seems to be a ^ead Beauty in a live body, yet lang^ishing in his
powers. Or Perhaps because as without the happy influence ^f the vital
spirits (which give life to ^he powers, and organes, in their strong
^perations) the body remains cold, ^nliuely, and unfit for action and
exer^ise, so Beauty without grace, causes every part and quality belonging
there^nto to languish, whereby it works ^n the field of Love without life. Or
Perhaps because Beauty being in it self ^ltogether earthly is little esteemed:
but ^he grace thereof being a certain ce^estiall beam, issuing from the
bright ^pheare of the Beauty of the mind, is dispersed through all the members
of ^he body, and accompanies them in all their motions, and therefore is
deemed ^he first quality, necessary to the framing of a complete Beauty. Or
Perhaps because it is not the simple speech that persuades us: nor the only
motion that makes the work perfect, but the grace in speaking and the grace in
the carriage, is that that kindles the heart, and inflameth the mind of man;
And so likewise, if to bodily Beauty, there be added that grace, which
manifests it self in all the motions both of the body and of the mind, it
presently works in every man an opinion, of perfect Beauty, and persuades to
love and honor it. And therefore from hence it is, that even tears
accompanied with I know not what celestial grace, falling from the cristaline
eyes of a Beautiful face, do draw the heart of man with such force to
compassion, that he thinks every tear, a drop of blood fallen from his
own heart. And even the like force has a gracious laughter, a kissing of the
hand, a pleasant delivery, a modest courting, a sweet song, or any other
carriage of the body, or manifestation of the mind. Or Perhaps because the
Beauty of the body by it self moves the bodily sense, but the mind which is
more noble then the body is not easily moved with such an object, if Beauty it
self be not Beautified with some thing more excellent, which is grace, which
shines through the Sphere of the body.

Why is the Beauty of women especially seen in the face? Problem. 16.
PErhaps because the face is the true resemblance both of the Beauty of ^he
body, and of the mind, for in the ^ace as in a living figure are seen, those
^uelie colors with their apparent ^^ghtnings, the proportion, Quantities,
Qualieties of the members, and what^oeuer is besides necessary to the Beauty ^f
the body. And as for the Beauty of ^he mind it is manifest in the face, as
(...) were in a clear looking glass: For ^n it are seen the vales of
shamfast^esse, the true ornaments of an honest mind, the treasures of
chastity, the ^plendours of Clemency, the riches of Silence, the crown of
Honor, the majesty of all Virtue, the Lodge of Love, ^he neast of Grace, the
center of Joy, and the inestimable prise of honored Fidelity. So that very
deservedly does ^he face challenge the first seat of true Beauty in all women.
Or Perhaps because the face (among all the other bodily parts) is the more
Noble, where the mind by those senses that are in it, exercises his effects
and operations, and therefore a quality so supreme and excellent as Beauty is,
could not be placed in any place more convenient for contemplation, more Noble
for situation and all other respects then in the face: And therefore we see
that although the virtuous life of a woman, the excellent feature of her body,
or whatsoever can be more excellent, be highly esteemed and honored, yet the
first thing that is contemplated, and approved, is the face, as that part which
of all other is most noble. Or Perhaps because Beauty is best liked laid open,
not veiled, apparent not masked, clear not darkened, and the face (among all
the parts of the body) is such, as at all times presents it self unto the
eye, as it were to enlighten the heart of man, when any passion or Melancholic
thoughts do trouble him: And therefore it comes to pass many times, that the
Beautiful looks of a fair wife, rays^th up and comfort the heart of her
afflicted husband, when he returns unto his house from his labors, as it were
to the haven of rest, after the trouble, and turmoyle of his ^oushold business:
which Beauty if it ^ad been hidden had never yielded ^o comfortable an effect.

Why do women which are not borne fair attempt with artificial Beauty to
seem fair? Problem. 17.
PErhaps because they knowing that those women are of highest ac^ompt in the
world, which excel the ^est in bodily Beauty, and being natu^ally addicted to
affect honor, and to ^^e highly accounted of, they are en^orced to add those
colors to their ^aturall Beauty, whereby they may be^ome famous in the like
grace, and fa^our of the heavens. Or Perhaps because women being for the most
part ^ubiect unto that pleasing rednes, which ^riseth of shamfastnesse, being
no other ^^ing then a tender care, or rather fear ^f the loss of their own
honors, and ^nowing that this Beautiful bashfull^esse, gives splendor and
ornament ^o all women, it seems to their vn^erstandings a great note of
infamy to be deprived thereof; and therefore to avoid so great a blotte, they
fear not with a thousand arts and inventions to give the like Beauty to their
faces. Or Perhaps because their desires are so inflamed with the multitude of
Beautiful things, which present them selves unto their view, especially of
those, which are best befitting their soft, and delicate natures, that being
desirous to participate of the greatest excellencies of them, from some they
take their colors, from others their odours, from others their arts, from
others their golden ornaments, from others their attires. Or Perhaps because
there is not any woman (except she be very rare) which desires not to please
some eye, and therefore being well assured that they cannot please any without
some special Beauty, they desire at the least to be adorned withsome appearing
Beauty, wherein they sometimes proceed so far, that they do not only
exceed their hability, but work in themselves a contrary effect, and in
steed of making themselves lovely, they many times become odious even to
those, whom they desire most to satisfy and content. Or Perhaps because they
being quit from those buesinesse, both private, and pub^ike, which do many
times afflict the hearts of their miserable husbands, and so pass their days
in Idleness, without care, without trouble, either of body or mind, they
apply all their studies, and endeavors to the adorning of their bodily Beauty,
with a thousand colors and devises, as if they were only made, ^o make
themselves appear Beautiful unto their husbands, and to procure ^n opinion in
the common people of ^inguler Beauty: Of all which the reason is, because they
judge it a treasure of singular prise to be fair, or at leastwise to seem
such in the eyes of every man.

Why does the Art, and multitude of Beauties, which women use being
discovered, breed a kind of loathing and disdain in the hearts of men?
Problem. 18.
PErhaps because as the first Fair by created Beauty, inclines our hearts to
Love; So he being the first Truth, by the inestimable prise of Truth, wins
us to follow the truth with invisible Love, whereby the deceit of such
Beauties or abilliments, which many times tie, and entangle the minds of
unadvised young men, being discovered, their arises a strange kind of scorn
and disdain even against those whom before they admired. Or Perhaps because
that besides the hatred of that foul, which is hidden under those fair,
though false Beautyes, the very art, and skillful workemanshippe that is used
about the bodily Beauty pleases not, whereas contrariwise in the Beauty of the
mind, art, and exercise of wit is much approved. And therefore a man loving a
Beautiful countenance by the gift of nature adorned with that quality, and
(...) Beautiful mind by art, made wonderful, finding this order confounded,
by little and little, he repents and turns his love into disdain. Or
Perhaps because every object being altered from his natural Essence, as being
out of his natural seat, does presently decay and corrupt; as it does plainly
appear in every natural thing: Now then that gift of nature, which in women
they call Beauty; being by art removed from his first state, is suddenly
extinguished; which we may easily see in many women, who having with multitude
of colors, and to studious endeavors hidden from the world their natural
Beauty, presently they decay in that small portion of fair, which it has
pleased the heavens to impart unto them: whereby it comes to pass, that they
are not only little esteemed, but loathed and detested, as being such as have
sinned against the liberallitie, and bounty of Nature it self. Or Perhaps
because men from those outward deceipts, gather the inward untruth and deceit
of the mind: For she that fears not to falsify these exterior parts, may
with more ease and less fear adulterate the inward Beautyes of the mind, and
so much the rather, because the sense, or corporal organe cannot act any thing
that is false, except the mind be first made false, having first consented
thereunto, whereby it comes to pass, that men taking knowledge at the last,
of this so great a blurre, both of the body and the mind, they cannot, if they
be not over vicious love such women, but rather as falsifiers of themselves,
and mockers of others, fly, dispraise, and detest them, and as much as in them
lies, forget them, and banish them the confines of their memory.

Why does the Beauty of the body with greater celeritie wound the hearts of
men, then that of the mind? Problem. 19.
PErhaps because the bodily senses are more apt and more speedy by nature,
without the help of any art to apprehend their objects, and especially the
sense of seeing, which is so powerful in love, by presenting the Beautyfull
features, and liniaments to the common sense, that from it to the other
inferior powers, love with admirable celeritie, nussels it self in the breast
of mortal men, the which thing falls not out in the Beauty of the mind,
which besides that it requires a longer time to manifest it self (because it
lies hidden under the bodily vailes) does not imprint her image with those
lively colors in the outward sense, as the bodily Beauty does* Or Perhaps
because the Beauty of the mind is invisible, and therefore does slowly move
the powers, and that only by the means of that which is corporally visible,
whereas the visible Beauty is by it self made manifest. Or Perhaps because
mortal man being ouerladen with the bodily spoils, does more quietly incline
himself to corporal things then to spiritual. Or Perhaps because that which
does most often wound the senses, and comes nearest unto nature, works
likewise a more speedy effect in Love, as in the other senses.

Why do wise men more esteem the Beauty of the mind, then of the Body?
Problem. 20.
PErhaps because the colors which do form the invisible Beauty, are of
higher prise then those of the bodily: For the Beauty of the mind arises from
the rich colors of all the moral virtues, as from Temperancy, Shamfastnesse,
Chastity, Modesty, Clemency, Sufferance, Fortitude, Wisdom and the like, and is
also made more glorious, by other colors more noble, as the Liberal Sciences,
the sweetness of utterance, the knowledge of high mysteries, the use of
studies, the happy remembrance of times past, and the studious search of divine
things, whereas the Corporal Beauty is restrained to a few colors of small
prise, which do speedily vanish and decay. Or Perhaps because the Beauty of
the mind is of a more high and Sublime order, because in some resemblance it
comes near unto the angelical spirits, who as by nature they excel all
^nferior things, so do they likewise in their qualities upon which their Beau^y
depends. Or Perhaps because corporal Beauty is the simple gift of nature,
which as it is more common, so less esteemed. But the Beauty of the mind, not
by simple nature, but by art, and study, and industry, and watchings is
hardly after a long time discovered, and therefore of better esteem, because
more rare, and with more difficulty attained.

Why do young men prefer the Beauty of the body before that of the mind?
Problem. 21.
PErhaps because being provoked thereunto by nature, as being more apt to
generation then old men, they follow their like (for Beauty is proper unto
youth) and no other thing can satisfy them, then the present, visible, and
sensible object, but old men who contemplate the invisible Beauty of the mind
(which by reason of their great experience is commonly found in them)
themselves growing as it were to nature invisible, by contemplating this
spiritual Beauty, inamour themselves therewith. Or Perhaps because young men
are strongly moved by bodily delight, as being great well-willers to the
pleasures of the sense, but old men having often times quenched their thirst at
the like fountains, with the great hurt and impeachment both of their persons
and honors, do no more esteem those floating vanities, and therefore resting
themselves content with the bare remembrance of those times, they do willingly
embrace that Beauty, which depends upon the many and dear experiences of
things past. Or Perhaps, because young men in every thing show themselves too
credulous; whereby they turn their thoughts to every appearing Beauty that
presents it self unto the eye, neither caring for, or dreaming of any
greater, but old men being more slow in their judgment, and always hardly
persuaded to give credit to outward things, having found the inward Beauty,
do better accoumpt of it, as knowing it by ^xperince to be more rare, and
hardly ^ttayned.

Why is the Beauty of the mind more often seen in old men then in young?
Problem. 22.
PErhaps because the Beauty of the mind being framed of many difficult, and
ingenious habits, it falls out, that young men being distracted with their
youthful cares, and affections (attending more to the pleasure of the sense,
then the delight of the mind) do little or not at all endeavor by labor and
industry to attain to those virtues and knowledges, which are necessarily
required to so precious a talent, to the obteyning whereof, men of riper
years, employing all their thoughts, studies, and endeauours (the sea of their
affections being calmed by the constitution of their bodies) attain unto this
precious Gemme, which shines, and shows it self in the gravity of their
speech. Or perhaps because old men wanting the flower of all bodily Beauty,
which reigns only in younger years, they desire at the least to be in some
account, and reputation in the world by their internal Beauty, which always
accompanies their nature both in their private, and public government. Or
Perhaps because multitude of years brings with them sage and grave Counsel,
to have heard much inricheth knowledge, to have read much, increases
judgment, and the frequent conversation with men of diverse qualities, and
countries gives a perfect knowledge of humane affairs, the which not happening
to young men, they want those grave parts that concur to the framing of the
Beauty of the mind.

Why is the Beauty of the mind accompanied with that of the body in the
breasts of young men, so much esteemed? Problemes. 23.
PErhaps because that, which by more then ordinary art, and virtue, sel^ome
comes to pass, deserves both ^lory and admiration, as it falls out ^n the
Beauty of the mind, for young ^en being no friends unto labor, but ^ather to
sloth, and idleness, it seems to be a thing out of order to see a young man
adorned with so noble a quality, and consequently winnes him ^oner and
estimation Or Perhaps because a young man besides the fruition of the Beauty of
the body (a thing perhaps of it self sufficiently esteemed of many)
possessing that of the mind too, is in an order more honorable, yea accounted
in a manner divine, and esteemed accordingly. Or Perhaps because that which is
Fair shines more splendantly being accompanied with that grace, and pleasant
comeliness, which as a thing that brings unspeakable delight with it, smileth
(as it were) in the countenances of young men. Or perhaps because an entire
good i^ best esteemed; and therefore perfect Beauty consisting of a mind made
rich by virtue, and other honorable abilliments, and a body accompanied with a
due proportion of the parts, a true illumination of the colors, and a pleasing
grace in the carriage of them both, which is only seen in young men, no
marvel if they which enjoy this Beauty be accoumpted fortunate, both by the
gift of grace and nature.

Why does the Beauty of the mind always help, and that of the body often
times hurt? Problem. 24.
PErhaps because the Beauty of the mind is always joined to the wit or
understanding; and that of the body oftentimes violently enforced by the
affections; and as wit and judgment moderateth us in our wills, so ^ontrarily
the affections do blind us, (...) that we are many times deceived by ^^em. Or
perhaps because the Gods of ^^e mind, which frame the Beauty ^^ereof, being
communicated to others be not darken the mind, but rather ^erfect themselves:
but the goods of ^^e body, which give color to the ^eauty thereof, being
imparted unto others, besides the corrupting of a chaste ^ody, they make the
mind infamous, and dishonor their whole families. Or ^erhaps because there is
a far greater ^umber of those, which having their ^ppetites unbridled, follow
their own ^ense, in oppugning the chaste breasts ^f the feminine Sex; then of
those who ^s lovers of honesty endeavor to pre^erue it: And from hence come
those ^ommon murders, poysonings, open ^reacheries, violated faithes, and all
^inde of infamous enterprises: To which reason we may likewise add ^he
inconstancy of a woman, her facili^^e to be persuaded, and the small
re^^stance she makes against her vn^ridled appetite, which together ^eade her
to her utter ruin. Or ^erhappes because the Beautye of the mind does always
bring forth good fruit, and makes men temperate, just, valiant, wise, but that
of the body guides us to luxury, wantonness, and all kind of infamous
intemperancy.

Why does the Beauty of the mind make us like unto things heavenly, and that
of the body many times like unto earthly? Problem. 25.
PErhaps because that Chief good, which is the first Fair, is invisible like
a fair mind, and the Beauty of the body earthly, as depending upon earthly
colors, earthly qualities, and quantities, as all other things under the
Moon are Or Perhaps because the Architip of every Fair, good immortal) being
the first wisdom in understanding, the first power in forming, goodness in
communicating; and the first rule in directing, causes likewise, that they,
which are beautiful in wisdom, power, goodness; and discipline should
approach so much the nearer unto him, by how much more they are adorned with so
excellent qualities; But bodi^y Beauty many times blotting her glory by
affections altogether earthly, is made like to the most abject, and basest
things of nature, even to brute beasts. Or Perhaps because the weight of our
bodily lump presses us down to the center of our earthly thoughts, and
^ransformeth us into a nature altoge^her earthly, but the mind being crea^ed
by heaven, aspireth to heaven (for a spirit desires spiritual things) and as
being above all earthly, with wings ascends to things heavenly.

Why would the Platonists, that the Beauty of corporal things should be as a
Lader to ascend unto the first Fair? Problem. 26.
PErhaps because such is the order of nature, which proceeds from the lowest
things unto the highest, from imperfect, to perfect things. Or Perhaps because
such is the order of our knowledge, which takes beginning from things
sensible, and proceeds to intellectual, from particular things to
universal; from accidents to substances; from the effects to their causes,
from compounds to their simples, from things visible to invisible, from
corruptible to eternal. Or perhaps because it is not convenient that the
understanding should tie it self unto the sense in any created Beauty, either
more general, or individual, when it mounteth it self to that knowledge of
the first fair, which as yet is confused: but rather necessary with the eye of
contemplation, to pass through that universal chain of all the creatures. As
by the Beauty of the precious stones, mettalls, plants, beasts: of the heaven
the Stars, the Planets, the morning, the day, the night: of herbs, flowers,
fruits, and the like excellencies: we pass in a confused manner to the
speculation of the chief sovereign Beauty. Or Perhaps because it so falls
out sometimes in the knowledge of the Beauty of the mind, that (at the least)
it is confusedly known by the fair figure of the body.

Why did the Platonists under two special senses of seeing and hearing
comprehend all Beauty? Problem. 27.
PErhaps because every fair is either visible, or invisible: if it be visible
^t is corporal, and falls under the ^ense of seeing: if it be invisible,
either ^t is known by some other corporal ^pecies, or by proportion, or by
simili^ude, and so it is acquired by the sense ^f seeing too, or it is
invisible in it self, ^ut visible by the help of another ^ense, and so it is
attained by the power ^f Hearing. By the first kind, that is ^he visible
Fair, we come to the know^^dge of the Beauty of all corporal ^^ings. By the
second we arrive to the ^nowledge of the Beauty of intellectu^l things, even
God himself, and ^^e third lays open unto us by the ^^ngue, the Beauty of
the mind: and (...) by these two aforesaid senses every Beauty comes to the
knowledge of man. Or Perhaps because the sense of feeling being very earthly,
and the sense of taste transforming the accidents of the object into his organ,
they excluded the one from the knowledge of Beauty, as being too bold, the
other as being less continent. Or Perhaps because they would not that the
operations of the understanding should be blotted, or altered by the sense, and
therefore they appointed to such speculation those senses, which were farthest
off from being defiled by the pleasures of Venus. Or Perhaps because it is
sufficient that a Lover know both the inward Beauty of that which he loves,
which he does by the help of the ear, and the outward corporal Beauty, which
he knows by the eye.

Why would that famous Philosopher, that his disciples should oftentimes take
a view of their own Beauties in a glass? Problem. 28.
PErhaps because the Beauty of their members being known, they should be the
more inflamed, with those colors of Nature, to stir up the colors of
virtue, and endeavor to add unto their outward Beauty, the Beauty of the
mind. Or Perhaps because they being enflamed with their own Beauty, should
endeavor by the purity of their manners, and conversation to preserve it in
her chief flower: that so it may be made a spur to virtuous and honorable
attempts, and not a snare to entangle the liberty of virtue. Or Perhaps to the
end that if they should not find that exquisite Beauty in themselves which
they saw in others, they should endeavor to awaken themselves to all honorable
exercises, and by their inward virtues supply their outward defects. Or Perhaps
that they might thereby learn to follow the discipline of truth, which as a
glass whatsoever presents it self before it, without respect of degree, or
quality of any person, shows openly either the Beauty, or deformity thereof,
so they knowing in whatsoever person the Beauty of virtue, they should commend
it, or the deformity of Sin, they should reprehend it. For there is nothing
more hurtful and dangerous to an noble mind, the^ a lie in the open field of
truth.

Why do Princes and women of honorable birth prove for the most part fayrer
both in body and mind, then women of baser condition. Problem. 29.
PErhaps because their delicate, and exquisite diet, both in their meats, and
drinks, make their blood more pure, their vital spirits more lively, their
co^plection more Beautiful, and their nature more noble, so that passing their
time without interruption of any troublesome, or disorderly molestations, they
become by their high thoughts, and honorable imaginations, both Beautiful and
gentle in aspect, about other women of inferior condition, who by reason of
their base estate, taking a contrary course in whatsoever belongs unto their
life, they participate contrary effects. And forasmuch as the inward powers of
the mind do depend upon the excellency of their actions, and bodily organs,
and much more the wit upon the complexion of the body, and these bodily parts
being in women of high lineage, most exquisitly perfect, it must necessarily
follow, that even by nature they prove admirable, in the gifts of the mind,
whereby it comes to pass, that we do not admire so much the singular Beauty
of their bodies, as their gracious carriage, their sweet speech, their divine
judgment, their chaste thoughts, Beautified with a strange kind of majesty in all
their actions. Or perhaps because their education being even from their
infancy under a discipline more noble, and excellent (to omit the generous
blood of their parents from whom they descend, and the pure milk which they
draw from the dugs of women of a most temperate constitution) they cannot in
common judgment but prove admirable in the world.

Why do fair women prevail much in obtaining grace and favor with Princes?
Problem. 30.
PErhaps because it seldom comes to pass, that women that excel in Beauty,
do not likewise excel in the sweet delivery of their speech, which does so
much the more inflame the heart of man, by how much the more they have commonly
joined thereunto a pleasing carriage, and heavenly grace, in the other parts of
the body, which deservedly wins unto them so much favor, especially with
men of highest state and condition (who by their nobility are made more facill
and gentle) that whatsoever the cause be, they think they have sinned against
the rule of Justice, if they condescend not to their desires. Or Perhaps
because by a beautiful face bedewed with tears trickling down her cheeks,
and accompanied with amorous flames of honest and chaste love, the greatest
Princes without any other supplication uttered by the tongue (even out of the
generositie of their own hearts made to pity, do feel themselves to be
wounded with the darte of true clemency, and commiseration, and therefore do
endeavor in what possibly they may, though perhaps not in all, to satisfy
their desires, and to give comfort to that appaled countenance, which has lost
the color, though not the Beauty. Or perhaps because women adorned with such
a quality, do either love or hate beyond measure, and so much the more, by
how much they are higher in estate and condition. And therefore if their
supplication be for love and favor, they assail with those darts that are
most effectual to move unto pity and clemency, and to make a breach into the
will, and affection of the hearer; As the misery of their present estates,
their greatness ^n former times, their little desert of ^hese their miserable
fortunes, the danger that is yet behind, both of their honors, and their
fortunes, the great confidence that they have ever had in his Crown and
Scepter, as having no other friend under heaven, to whom ^hey may lay open
their griefs and lastly their promises of all manner of bands of
thankfulness, and recompense that may be made. I omit their tears, their
interrupted sighs, and all other their passionate actions, and carriage of the
body, whereby they so hide, and cover their art, that they bind, and ensnare,
and as it were violently enforce the hearer. But if for hatred they have made
themselves suppliants, they change their tune, and betake themselves to new
arts, new protestations, new desires of Justice accompanied with a fyerie
tongue, which clearly lays open the injury that they have received, the
troubles they unjustly suffer, and to conclude, what with their modest
blushings, and their just zeal of honor, their honest requests, and their
scalding tears, the greatest personages are soonest persuaded to do their
pleasure, and to grant their desires. Or Perhaps because women being by nature
fall of pity and compassion, and soonest moved to a feeling commiseration of
the miseries of other men, they are worthy of the like pity and compassion,
when in the like case of misery they are suppliants to other me^. Or Perhaps
because the inuisyble Beauty of the mind, adorning the outward semblance, with
I know not what divine grace, does inuisybly wound the hearts of great Princes,
and with a sweet kind of violence, stirs up their wills to grant unto them
whatsoever they shall demand.

Why is only the Beauty of women amongst all other Beauties, named, praised,
and esteemed. Problem. 31.
PErhaps because Beauty is the only ornament of women, their only dowerye,
their divine gift, their rich pledge, and their highest glory, and therefore no
other creature may justly chal^enge it but by special privilege. Or ^erhaps
because notwithstanding Beauty may be given to a young child, a towardly youth,
a handsome man, an honorable knight, a venerable old man, a magnanimious
Prince, nevertheless man being borne unto labor, their co^mendations must not
take root from ^he simple gift of nature, but the child (...) commended for
his towardlines, the ^outh for his dexterity. and readiness in ^erformance,
the man for his wisdom (...) matters of importance, the knight ^or his valor
in dangerous services, the ^ld man for his sufficiency in giving ^ounsell, and
the Prince for his justice. Or Perhaps because women are not to glory in any
other gift then in the liberality, and bounty of nature, who has adorned them
with so precious a quality, that they might preserve it as a crown to their
other feminine virtues, as temperance, modesty, shamfastnesse, chastity,
zeal of honor, Clemency, Religion, Taciturnity and the like. For it becomes
not a woman (but for special cause) to wear armor, to exercise the feats of
war, to apply her self to those actions, which do better befit a Senator or
a Soldier, then the tender, and delicate nature of a woman. Or Perhaps because
men may certainly know, that the heavens have imparted a special raye of the
first Fair unto women, that whilst they with their tongues commend it as
divine, and with their deeds deforme it, they might endeavor to better them
selves by the imitation thereof.

Why is the Beauty of women served and adorned with the excellency of
whatsoever things are Beautiful in the world? Problem. 32.
PEerhaps because the Beauty of a woman is the touchstone whereby al other
Beautyes are tried: the worthiest and most noble quality of the body, the
first Sphere of all corporal Beauty, wherein are descried the greatest
perfections of all other Beauties. And therefore hence it is, that all other
things (though most fair in their kinds) by the just law of Nature ought to
do service, and homage to that principal bodily Beauty, which in their
aspects, and countenances is adorned with those colors, enlightened with those
splendours, endued with those graces which procure unto the^ honor and
admiration. And therefore as being the Ladies of all other Beauties, they
adorn ^hemselues, with the Beauty of the flowers, the Rose, the Violet, and
the Hia^^r^th, and a thousand colors, devises, and sweet smelling odours,
with the inestimable riches of precious stones, of Rubies, Margarites,
Amatists, Turkeys, Pearls, Diamonds, Emraulds, and a thousand the like Jewels
of highest price: They crown themselves with gold, and silver, deck
themselves with pendants, braselets, Embroderinges, chains, girdells, rings,
and a thousand tires of sundry fassions: They make a glorious show with their
feathers, and fannes, and pearls, and silks, and crestes, with their hanging
sleeves, their furs of Sable, their garments of satine, silk, damask,
velvet, tinsell, cloth of gold, and a thousand the like. So that as if they
were the rulers, and commanders of all Beautyes, they will have the colors
of the heavens, the light of the Planets, the purity of the Elements, the
strength of the mettalls, the prise of precious stones, the adours of flowers,
the variety of fruits, the ornaments of beasts, the wit of a thousand arts,
the novelties of as many inventions, and the broad Ocean of all manner of
delights. Or Perhaps because a woman being by nature gentle, and of complexion
delicate, as following her like, desires the things that are most noble, most
dainty and delicate: And from hence it likewise proceeds that being by
nature fearful, she loves her solitary house, flies all unhappy desasters,
as having little strength to resist them, so that in every thing she desires
ease, and comfort, and pleasure, and recreations, as daunsing, music,
feasts, Beautiful spectacles, pleasant places, houses richly hanged, goodly
Palaces adorned with all kind of costly furniture, that may content the eye.

Why is the Beauty of women of such force that it many times overcomes the
greatest personages of the world? Problem. 33.
PErhaps because the sense being too much fastened in that supreme humane
Beauty, does not only (as if it, gazed upon an object above his strength)
remain dazeled with the rays thereof, but reason it self is darkened, the
heart is fettered, and the will by love made a prisoner. Or Perhaps because too
much boldness in beholding the highest things, (being instigated thereunto by
our corrupt appetite) and the unadvised counsel of our blind sense (which in
the best sort of men does many times, though not openly, yet secreatly run
riot) does carry even the wisest, and the strongest men that are to their utter
ruin, let Solomon make good this truth unto us, who amongst all the men of
the world for wisdom wore the Diadem, yet by this snate of Beauty was drawn
to commit adultery. Let Sampson auerre the same, who being the strongest man
that ever was, was yet overcome by the Beauty of Dalida: Let David prove it
true, who though he were a man framed after Gods own heart, yet by one only
view of Bershaba he was inflamed with dishonest love, and feared not to commit
both adultery, and murder: yea all histories both divine, and human, ancient,
and modern, speak of thousands that have been famous in the world both for
valor, and wisdom, who by gazing either too much, or too unadvisedly upon
these Beautiful objects, have fallen into many dangerous and enormous sins.

Why does the Beauty of a women being violated, bring infamy and dishonor not
only to her self, but to her whole family? Problem. 34.
PErhaps because the body being violated, the mind is likewise corrupted: and
the first action in such a case by Election being infamous in the mind, and
from thence passing to the act of the body, and so to the notice of the world,
both the election, and the action being unlawful cannot but be likewise
infamous, and dishonorable. So that the woman being totally dishonored both in
body, and mind, she disperseth this her infamy even to those that have
begotten her, as if they that first gave her her being, gave therewith her
corruptions, and the first occasion of this her infamy. Or Perhaps because
Beauty being not only for it self highly esteemed, but also much more for
those virtues that do accompany it, being robbed, and spoiled of these
excellent ornaments, it remains naked, both in prise, and honor. And
forasmuch as by Election she fell into this folly, notwithstanding she knew
that she thereby should offend her whole stock, and Progeny, it follows
that she likewise makes them partakers of her infamy. Or Perhaps because that
faith, which passes betwixt a man, and his wife, being violated, does not
only offend the mind of those that break it, but the body also, and not only
both these, but the posterity that shall arise out of so corrupt a seed, and
unlawful copulation, and not only that nether, but forasmuch as the
husband, and the wife, are held to be one body, and he one flesh, and blood,
with his progenitors, they are not altogether clear from this infamy.

Why is it the custom to hang Beautiful pictures in the chambers of those
women that are with child? Problem. 35.
PErhaps because those strange occurrents that in former times have fal^en out,
are an instruction to men in ^hese days to prevent the like events: For great
women by contemplating, and gazing on serpents, and Moors in their chambers in
the act of generation, have brought forth monstrous birthes, ^n some figure,
and proportion like unto them: By which strange events men ^eing terrified, to
the end they may prevent the like dangerous issues, they hang their Chambers
with Beau^ifull images, and pictures. Or Perhaps because the desire of parents
to have Beautiful children is so great (for Beauty being powerful to incline
the hearts of men) promises (as it were) a future felicity, that knowing the
great force of imagination and conceit in the act of generation they are
careful to furnish their Chambers with fair, and Beautiful pictures: to the
end that their children may come into the light in some sort answerable to
their desires. Or Perhaps because men not being content with the nobility of
their own blood, and Beauty, they desire likewise the outward helps of those
princely Beauties of the most famous women in all Countries, to the end their
children may likewise prove admirable in that quality, and they win unto
themselves greater honor. Or Perhaps because as they use with a thousand
restoritiues to comfort the fearful hearts of their afflicted wives being
near their labor, so they are no way backward by these present figures
adorned with diverse colors, and strange Beauties to make them comfortable.

Why do they make Venus the mother of Beauty? Problem. 36.
PEerhaps because they make her the mother of Love, and Beauty is that which
(by means of that content, and ^easingnesse which is in it) ingendreth ^oue in
the hearts of men. Or Perhaps because Beauty is the proper ornament ^f women,
and Venus is said to have ^eene the fairest woman that ever ^as. Or Perhaps
because among the ^elestiall Planets their is none more ^elightfull, more blithe
and bucksome: ^r by reason of her silver lights more ^anton, then the planet
of Venus, which ^ualities do all concur to the for^ing of the Beauty of a
woman. Or ^erhaps because this planet by her hap^y influences works much to
the ^^aming of every woman gracious, ^ayre, and lovely, therefore she has
de^erued the name and title of the mother ^f all Beauty.

Why is only the Beauty of heaven amongst other Corporal things of it
self permanent? Problem. 37.
PErhaps because a body unchangeable, incorruptible, and no way subject to the
voracitie of consuming time, such a quality best befitteth, as is answearable
to such a subject. And notwithstanding the Celestial mantell do not always
shine, and therefore sometimes the golden rays of the Sun, and silver beams
of the Moon, the glorious light of the Stars, the noble compartiments of the
celestial signs, the illustrious splendor of all that region, and to
conclude a fair night, a beautiful morning, a glorious day may not be seen.
Yet nevertheless the darkness of the Element, the fury of the winds, the
pitchy obscurity of the whirle-winds, the thickness of the clouds, and all
other darksome oppositions being taken away, the heavens do always shine in
their ^reatest Beauty, appear glorious in ^^eir supreme Monarchy, and display
^^emselues adorned in every part, ^ith a thousand Beautyes Or Perhaps be^^use
the eyes of those that contem^^ate the heavens, seeing so supreme a ^eauty, in
so supreme, and celestial a ^ody, with the eyes of the mind they ^ould
think, and consider that vn^hangeable Beauty, is only found in ^^e celestial
parts, and that no Beau^^ in this inferior world lasts long: ^^d so with
heavenly desires, and in^eauours they should aspire to the ce^^stiall Beauty.
Or Perhaps because men ^^owing so noble a Beauty, and so ^^nstant, to be in a
body so sovereign, ^^ey should from thence learn in their ^inds created
immortal, to place the ^^auty of virtue, of wisdom, and of ^^ery noble art,
and science, that, that which is enclosed within a mortal sub^^ct, may by
glory, and honor be made ^^mortall. Or Perhaps because the ^^st invisible
Fair, being willing to ^^awe unto the knowledge of his ^^auty all mortal men,
partly by the ^^iuersall Fabric of the world, and ^^rtly by some special
visible creature, he has placed (as it were in a throne) this his Beauty, and
there made it permanent, that all eyes might see and behold it, and so
beholding it, he might draw the hearts of all from time to time unto him, that
there might be no reason of excuse, left even to the slowest eye, and all such
as are most backward in the search of highest mysteries. Or perhaps because
such is the order of every thing, that the more they are parted, and separated
from the original fountain of all Beauty, the more they decline in their
own, which does plainly appear, if we descend from the Heavens, to the
Elements, and from them to their com^ounds, and from the perfect compounds, to
the less perfect, and so forth.

Why is the first fair to mortal eyes invisible? Problem. 23.
PErhaps because the Sphere of his infinite light is so high, that it is past
the power of any created Organe to pierce so high, as to behold even the
darkness of the outward entry or lobbie thereof; much less to discern the
immensitie, and exceeding greatness of that sovereign object, in the presence
whereof, the glittering rays of the Sun are darkened; the Stars lose their
light; the sparkling Diamond is defased, the flashing Ruby shines not, the
white Lilly is black, the Spring not beautiful, Laughter not pleasant, Music
not delightful, Iuceus not odoriferous, Nectar not sweet, gold not rich, and
the highest Monarchies base and contemptible; And therefore the Angels in
heaven lay down their crowns at the feet of so infinite a Beauty, and all
creatures are altogether impotent, yea vnwotthy to consider the
incomprehensible greatness thereof. Or perhaps because things most rare and
excellent, do always bot^ by Nature, and Art lie hidden, and therefore we
see, that the deepest, and most important matters in the Scripture, lie covered
and veiled under a thousand figures, similitudes, mysteries, parables, and the
like, which does likewise appear in nature, who hides things of greatest
prise in g^eatest darkness, and makes those things seem invisible that were
framed visible, as we see in the seed of every plant, which lies hidden in a
thousand rinds, skins, and shelles, in the inward powers, which are made
invisible by the outward organs, in the substanciall forms, which lurk under
their matter, in precious stones, which she has buried in the sandy bed of
the sea, in gold, and silver, which she has hid in the bowels of the earth,
in the Angelical spirits, who by the curtine of heaven placed betwixt their
sight, and ours, are separated from our sense, and in all other Beautiful, and
excellent qualities whatsoever: and therefore no marvel if the first Fair
likewise be hidded from our eyes. Or Perhaps because it is not fit that so
high, so supreme, yea so infinite a Beauty should be gazed one by mortal eye,
but only in the other life by the help and assistance of the light of glory:
In the mean time let it suffice that it is not altogether invisible, but by
the light of that Beauty, that shines in all creatures we may discern at the
least a shadow thereof.

Why do many men little regard the first fair? Problem. 39.
PErhaps because man being ouerladen, and pressed down by the ^ense, by reason
of that ancient sin ^f his first father Adam, knows not ^owe to raise up
himself to so great a ^ood, without the special help of him that framed him
immortal, for being weak in himself he cannot by his ^wne strength ascend to
so great a ma^^sty. Or Perhaps because he being ^^aced in the middle of the
Theater of (...) many Beauties, created both in things ^enerall, and more
special, and indi^^duall, and as it were dazeled, and ^^inded with the light
of them, does ^ot know how to discern the better ^^om the worse. Not
considering that (...) was created to understand, and vn^^rstanding the
excellency of the crea^^res of God, by them to pass to the ^^owledge of the
Creator, and so from ^^e inferior Beauties to the supreme. Or ^^rhaps because
having fastened the eye of his sense upon some earthly Beauty, pleases himself
so much with the present delight thereof, that forgetting the greater Beauty,
and not knowing any greater delight, he places therein his last end and
chiefest felicity, offending thereby both the law of reason, and of God. Or
perhaps because man being made blind by sense, and love of a momentary
delight, he desires not by contemplation to enjoy the Beauty of God For
neither can the sense, or any other powers, exercise their operations in any
degree of excellency, if not in one only object, and at one only time, and
therefore the eye being fastened in an earthly Beauty, with an earthly love, how
can he by contemplation behold the celestial Beauty, with angelical love?
How should a man that has abased his lips, by inordinate lust to the standing,
and stinking poole of a rotten Beauty, dippe them in the pure fountain of the
only fair, by a regular and orderly desire? How should he gazing, by a
sensual, and brutish love, upon a corporal, and corruptible Beauty, fasten
the subtilitie of his understanding, upon the first fair, who is merely
spiritual, and heavenly? what proportion has the Sun with darkness; the
day with night, truth with a ^ye, a Prince with a slave, fire with Ise, snow
with durte, gold with Iron, honor with infamy, divine with earthly, treasure
with poverty, virtue with vice, order with confusion, infinite with finite,
immortal with mortal? so long therefore as he fasteneth his eye upon an
inferior Beauty, he cannot possibly ascend by contempla^ion to the first
fair. Or perhaps because the sense being debased to a thousand concupiscences,
the Appetite drowned with the lascivious billows of intemperancie, the taste
glutted with the honey of Cupids appearing ^ainties, the will placed upon
frail ob^ects, and willing nothing but to satis^ie the desires of the flesh,
the body more then furiously and inconsiderate^y accustomed to Venus beds,
the ^oynes always walking to the common forge of every brothelhouse, the ^yes
open to nothing but the spectacles ^f Sardanapalus, the thoughts ascend^ng no
higher then the contriuing of ^dulteries, and wanton sports, Religion ^anished,
the vailes of chastity broken, ^he bridle of the law nothing regarded, All
good counsel, and civil discipline set at naught, and man being made more
then an enemy to himself, he cannot even by the law of custom (which is
converted into an other nature, yea a necessity) lift up the eye of his
understanding to heaven, and to the contemplation of the first Fair.

Problemes of the Affections. Where at full are set down: Their Causes,
properties, offices, uses, and ends,
Of Love.
Why has nature ordained that their should be affections in the world?
Problem. 40.
PErhaps because the world being a kind of well ordered Commonweal, where
beholdicg the Beautiful ^i^position of all visible bodies, both ^ght, and
heavy, and neither light, nor ^eauy, and contemplating the power^al workma^ship
of the celestial Spears, which for the perpetual generation of (...) things,
are perpetually carried about that great shop of those first Elements, ^y them
framing, and fashioning all ^ompound natures, and beholding in ^his Elementall,
and lower world, ^he Citizens thereof, which are all living creatures, and
among them the chief and principal which is man; who is Lord and governor of
the rest: it was fit, and necessary that there should be assigned unto his
perfection some order for his military strength, which could not otherwise be
done, then by placing in the mind of man these affections, which for the
benefit of the whole world, by Love might defend, by Hate might offend, by
Desire of victory might attempt, in the presence of greater forces by
counterfeit flights might retire, by Delight might rejoice in the benefit of
peace, by the death of the conquered be stirred up to Grief, by Hope might
willingly offer their necks to the yoke of labor, by Despair might fight
courageously, and not in vain, by Fear might learn to provide for future
wants, either of victual, or munition, by Boldness might not fear to
undergo any danger, for public honor and benefit, by Anger might be
enflamed to shed their blood, and to lose their lives for a general peace. And
so all the works of nature might remain safely defended from their enemies,
and quietly enjoy that benefit which nature has bestowed on them. Or Perhaps
because it being impossible to preserve nature without generation, and
generation not to be had without love, and Love not working without desire, and
Desire not moved without hope, and Hope not obtaining his wished end without
audacitie, and Audacitie not doing the uttermost without Anger, nay without the
violent motion of all the irascible part, and the irascible part not being
thoroughly stirred, and quickened, without some feeling grief, and Griefs
being not perfected without fear of greater, and Fear being not cleared
without the certain delight of a present good, ^t follows that all the
Affections are necessary for the preservation of the whole.

Why is some special affection predominant over every age? Problem. 41.
PErhaps because Nature seeks in every thing, both the universal be^efit and
private good: and therefore (...) has ordained that fear should be the
predominant in all mothers over their tender infants, to the end that the
universal generation of humane kind might be preserved, and their own
children thereby, to their own benefit carefully guarded and attended, which
by reason of their own weakness they cannot do. And for this cause it has
likewise given to Childhood delight in childish sports, and pastimes, and Shame
to be a bridle (as it were) to that age, to withhold them from dishonest, and
untowardly actions. To youth, Love and desire of generation, to men of riper
years, hope, and courage to the performance of acts worthy glory, and
immortallity, to old men, pity, and compassion in judging, and censuring
huma^e accidents, and fear to make the^ circumspect, and wary in that small
remnant of their life which is behind, to decrepite old age, pain, and
grief, and sorrows, as forerunners, and messengers of appoching death: And
that to the end they may thereby be driven to despair of all humane helps,
and in god alone put their whole trust, and confidence. Or Perhaps to the end
that man in the change, and alteration of his life, might likewise change his
will, and desires, passing always to that which may be most worthy, and best
befitting his years, for hence it is that men desiring things contrary to
their age, and with an earnest desire following the^, purchase to themselves
Shame, and dishonor. As for example, it is not fit and convenient that a man
of perfect years should take delight in the toys, and sportes of little
children, or that an old man should follow the fancies of Love, which are
proper unto young men, or that women should exercise arms, and chiualry, which
is proper unto man, or that a Prince should fear the clattering of his enemies
Squadrons, which is the property of women, and therefore wise nature by these
affect^ons seeks a certain kind of decent com^ines in all humane actions Or
Perhaps to the end that humane nature by this means might be made more lovely,
and sociable, for a modest young man does much p^ease, and content with his
modesty, and bashfullnesse, and so does a breast adorned with chaste and
inter^hangeable love: we do much commend ^he valor of men of riper years in
the ^erformance of difficult, and dangerous ^nterprises: We reverence the
piety, and pity of old men, and embrace their ^ounsells, when by their own
fears they withhold us from the execution of our rash, and inconsiderate
furies. And hereby appears the great profit, and commodity to this
community, and decent proportion of every affection to every age. In that fear
unites the parents to their children, the delight of friendship breeds
ciuillity in conversation: the kindled desire of Love, knitteth the hearts, and
the bodies, and the minds in one, and the same will: manly courage by
defending the weal public, makes civil union more perfect, and counsel
which depends upon the wise and fearful tongues of old men, draws young
men to a true unity in all their desires. Whereby it plainly appears that the
Affections of the mind make the life of man both pleasant, and sociable.

Why would Nature that in every thing in the world there should be Love?
Problem. 42.
PErhaps because the first Creator, and universal formor of all Nature, having
wrought out of that confused Chaos, or rather nothing, so noble, and so rich a
fabric of the inferior, and superior worlds, not moved thereunto by any
necessity, but stirred up by his own will, would of his infinite Love,
communicate the Essence, or being to all creatures; By which his love, it
likewise pleased him to give unto his creatures this precious affection of
Love, to the end that imitating their Creator, they likewise might work to
the common benefit of nature. Or Perhaps because the Sovereign Monarch, and
chief good being an infinite Love, would likewise that all the Creatures,
which by his infinite Power he has framed, should carry the same badge, with
in their bowelles as an open sign, and clear seal, of their true Archytect
and Creator. Or Perhaps because that he having formed the whole Universe,
united in him self, and for him self, would likewise have it continued by an
amorous chain of Love, to the end that such union by length of time, and many
succeeding ages, should not grow tedious, but rather that all things in
general, with their special, and particular kinds, being recomforted by the
sweetness of Love, should much more desire to continue therein Or Perhaps
because he having framed al things in the world in an excellent order, for the
continual conservation of that order, gave such an affection to all his
creatures, as might spur them forward, with sweet desire to follow, and
affect their natural places, to procure, unto themselves whatsoever might be
profitable for their healthes, and preservation, to fly the contrary, to
engender their like, and to preserve themselves, and their kinds, with the
whole universe.

Why is Love so potent? Problem. 43.
PErhaps because it has beginning from an infinite Power, and every effect
has some resemblance, or at least carries with it some kind of footesteppe of
the Excellency of his cause, and thereby makes known the power of that, which
has framed it so powerful and excellent. Or Perhaps because it has the
Empire and rule of all other affections, and as a sovereign Lord has the
whole multitude of them (as well of the concupiscible part, as the ^irascible)
at her command, and service. O^ Perhaps because it relieth and rests it
self upon powerful natures, as Angels, who for Love wherle about the
superior Spheres in continual motion. As the heavens, which for Love working
by influence as a father, and first begettor, distill a seminall kind of
virtue into all earthly things: as the Elements, which for Love are united, and
mingled together to form a compound body: as living creatures, who for Love
diue into the bottomless depths of the water, dominere over the earth, and at
their pleasure fly hither, and thither in the Air: As men who for Love of
their Country sweat in their armor, for the Love of God, suffer martyrdom,
for the Love of society, honor fidelity, for Love of marriage, effect honesty,
for Platonicall Love, contemplate, for reasonable Love, esteem of virtue, for
zealous Love, fear no dangers, no times, fly not the horror of ^e^pests, are
not co^fou^ded with a thou^and deaths and to conclude account al labors
light, all loss gain, all difficulty facillity, al misery pleasure, all
crosses comforts, all sower sweet, all sorrow Joy, and death life. Or
Perhaps because Love is of so great force and authority, that it subiugateth
unto her will, the greatest power of the mind, that is the will, which rules
and governs all the other, both interior and exterior powers, and yet the will
is many times constrained for the better pleasing, and content of Love, to
follow those things which it does altogether abhor, and detest, so that
having so wonderful an Empire, and command over all the powers, both inward,
and outward of the body, and of the mind, no marvel if Love both will, and
can do what it will. Or Perhaps because Love aspiring to a good that is great,
and wonderfully delightful, (whereto nature gives a friendly assistance, and
encouragement) even from the object that is loved, gathers strength, with
more ease to attain unto it, whereby the powers irascible do run at her
command with those greater forces that are wont to expugne, and overcome
things most hard, and d^fficult: the motive powers with all the members of the
body grow strong, and nimble in her service, and the heart it self being
incited, and stirred forward by her pricking go^ds, does their settle it self
where Desire though with much difficulty carries it. Or Perhaps because every
first thing, and more excellent, is in his order more potent. As it appears
in God, the first of al other things, who is only said to be omnipotent, in
the Seraphins, who in knowledge are more noble, and more powerful then all
other angels, as in heaven, which among all other bodies is the mightiest, and
works with greatest power, upon these inferior parts, as in the fire, which
is the strongest among the Elyments; as in gold which is the purest of all
other mettalls, and so in the rest: add therefore Love being the first
amongst all the effections, no marvel if it work more strongly, and
effectually.

Why are there so many kinds of Love under the command and Empire of Love?
Problem. 44.
PErhaps because the universal union of the world depending upon the union of
the parts, with the whole and the special common globe of the world, upon the
united assembly of the vniuersalls, and this by the means, and occasion of the
power of Love, it was fit, and convenient likewise to give unto every special
nature his Love. And therefore the Angels have that angelical Love, which being
far from the rage of Sensual passion, continues always pure and clear.
Things inanimate, as the heavens, the Elements, and their Compounds, have for
their Love that invisible appetite, provoked by an invisible force, and
directed by a kind of knowledge to attain their determinate ends, their
seats, their sites and their best means for their best preservation. Although
they have likewise that Sociable Love whereby they desire to approach near
unto their like, unto their beginnings, their begettors, their preseruers. As
the planets have in them that Love, which the causes have toward their
effects, the Elements to their Compounds, the Begettors to their parts, and
therefore besides the preservation of themselves, they give Sap, and humor
to their fruits, as milk from the duggs of their roots, they cover them, they
defend them with leaves, and with boughs, and bear, and sustain them (as it
were) with indefaticable arms. The Beasts of the field, besides a Sociable
Love, have a se^sual, so called because notwithstanding it be accommpanied with
a kind of knowledge, yet for as much as it is guided by the simple Sense, it
takes name thereof. Men have a reasonable Love, by which with the discourse of
reason, they unite them selves unto that which is fair, they have a
Platonicall Love, whereby they love by comtemplation, a Civil Love, by the
force whereof they defend their Country, an honest Love, by the spur whereof
they follow virtue, a friendly Love, by the gift whereof they are united, and
knit together, a divine Love, whereby they are inflamed to the Love of God
above all things, and to the Love of their neighbor for Gods sake. Or Perhaps
because to diverse natures diverse loves should be acco^modated, coresponde^t to
the degree, and merit of their perfection: For excellent effects best befit
excellent natures, whereby they may best maintain their excellencies.

Why are the outward signs of humane Love the uncertain passions that they
suffer, who Love? Problem. 45.
PErhaps because it is only proper to Angelical, and divine Love, to be freed
from the tempestious, and turbulent Sea of passions, for the Angels in heaven
being never absent from their chief good, and felicity, cannot fall into that
discontent, and vexation of spirit, which they that are in love suffer, when
for a time they are deprived of their best beloved object: much less are they
tormented with that fear which men call Jealousy; or with any the like
passion, which commonly afflict the minds of those men who by loving, follow
Love, as with grief, false suspicions, accidental brawles, compassionate
tears, throbbing of the heart, distracted cogitations, frequent blushinges,
deep sighs, inconstant desires, and a thousand the like launsing razors that
cut, and wound the hearts of men: for those blessed spirits, inioye all manner
of delight, perpetuity of estate, and whatsoever good besides, in that first
Fair, whose presence they eternally enjoy. Or Perhaps because humane Love
entering into humane hearts, by the windows of the senses, the which often
times are deceived, by the diverse accidents of their objects, does many times
present a false appearing Beauty to the mind, the which in tract of time being
descried, the mind grows sad, and heavy, and melancholicke, and by that
humor opens the vain to all those passions which make bitter the Sea of
Cupid. Or Perhaps because humane Love being mingled with reason, and sense, and
the sense for the most part by the diverse appetits thereof, and much mo^e by a
kind of ouerboldnes grounded upon small knowledge, darkninge the fair light
of the superior part of the soul, brings such discontent and ruin to the
mind of man, as greater cannot be wrought by the hand of his greatest enemy,
whereby he yields such strange effects of passion, as many times the fame
thereof ascends up, even to the heavens. Or Perhaps because every thing in
this inferior world, being subject unto a thousand mischaunces, and as many
chaunges, and alterations, either of nature, or chance, or the will of the
heavens: love it self is not freed from the same inconstancy of Estate. For
the mind of man under this outward garment of the body, is no other thing, then
a Sea governed by the rage, and fury of the affections, whereby it appears
tumultuous, hauty, foaming, inconstant, tempestuous, and sometimes wi^h the
pleasant gale of reason, calm, and fair, and quiet, whereby it is made
altogether amiable, friendly, clear, and comfortable. So that as our senses
do sometimes enjoy a mea^y tide, and season, sometimes a troublesome, and
turbulent, so falls it out in our Love, which forasmuch as it is humane, is
sometimes cleared by reason, sometimes darkened by affections, and for one
drop of sweet, yields a whole Sea of sower, and bitter discontent.

Why is Love called a flame, a fire, and the like? Problem. 46.
PErhaps because that as the fire has always need of some nourishment,
without the which it vanishes into nothing. So Love without the nutriment of
Hope, to possess the thing beloved, decays and grows less, and less: for
if every thing that works or endeavors the acchieument of any thing, must
be nourished with the confidence and assurance of his wished end, without
which it will never endure the greatness of these labors, which a thousand
sweating accidents bring with them, much more has the kingdom of Love (being
molested by the daily assaults of humane passion, not those that it would, but
those that are most strong, and powerful in assaulting) need of this special
comfort of hope, and assurance. Or Perhaps because Love awakeneth, and
inflameth the heart of a lover, with an invisible Fire, within which he lives
like another Salamander of Egypt: for to say the truth, a lover finds and
feels within his breast as it were the forges of a certain fire, which by
the many passions of ardent zeal, enkindled desires, scalding sighs, enflamed
tears, fervent emulations, ruddie bashfulnesse, fretting fear, and jealous
thoughts, do burn, and yet maintain the invisible flames of Love, and
therefore hence it is, that for the most part Lovers are lean of body, pale of
countenance, spent in their spirits, and much altered from their first estate
and former Beauty. Or Perhaps because the Beautiful object, from which love
takes greatest force being present, a lover by reason of that great joy that
he feels in the presence thereof, sends forth those lively flames, which
being plainly descried in the superficial part of the face, do many times
give such a vermilion tincture, that the whole countenance seems to be
co^ered with a flashing kind of Ardour, and that by reason of the great store
of ^pirits gathered into that place. Or ^erhaps because, as the fire amongst
^he Elements is the most noble, so amongst the affections, Love is the most
^xcellent, as being the rule, and mea^^re of all the rest: and therefore ^oue
is said to have the Empire, and ^ominion over all the other affecti^ns, and to
rule, and to govern them ^ it pleases her. For, for no other ^use is grief
or sorrow great in ^^me, but because the Love is great for which that sorrow
is undergone: and ^r no other cause in others is the va^ur great, but because
the Love is ^eat which spurreth them forward to ^ngerous attempts. Or, Perhaps
be^use the fire is the most active Ele^ent, and so Love pricking us forward ^
all honorable enterprises be they ^uer so difficult, is not in actiuity
in^^ior thereunto, and therefore, besides those above said metaphorical names
and titles, by the greatness of her virtue, property, and strength she
challenges likewise other names both Metaphorical and proper: And therefore
to speak only of her proper names which sufficiently manifest her power, Love
is a word of honor, whereby honorable enterprises are atchiued: It is a word
of majesty, which governs all the interior and exterior powers: Love is a
word of comfort which mitigateth by a hidden and powerful kind of virtue, all
labors whatsoever. It is a ri^^ word, which by diligent endeavors ^uer
affects treasures of highest pris^^ as friendship, civil community, our
Country, our children, and of all others the chiefest good, which is God. So
that no man can deny but that Love ^^ of singular force and power.

Why do Poetts feign Love a Child? Problem. 47.
PErhaps by reason of the diverse appetits, that reign in children, which
likewise appear in them, which ^e inflamed with Love, who some^mes desire that
thing, which at ano^er time they abhor, sometime ac^mpt that for good, and
excellent which at another seems ugly, and ^athsome unto them, insomuch that
^ey are as changeable in their opinions, as the Camelion in his colors, or ^e
moon in her figures; which aris^^ not from any other cause, then, ^^m the
multitude of those affections which in loving they suffer, being ^metimes
moved with fears, some^^es with gelosies, sometimes vio^tly enforced with
sorrows, blinded ^h anger, vexed with melancholy, ^priued of counsel, robbed
of ^anes, pricked and pierced through ^th desire of honor, and so by ^nging
their affections, they do change their wills. Or Perhaps, because Love as if
it were always a child in the heart of him that Loves, is always growing
and never waxes old, because the desire of the possession of his wished good
is always renewed in him, and notwithstanding it seem sometimes after the
lawful fruition thereof to decay, or at leastwise to lose some part of his
first vigor, which in respect of the extension, and outward manifestation may
be granted true: that is in as much as those outward figures of Love, which
Lovers use to show, do not so commonly appear, yet in respect of the
internal force, and virtue thereof, it does every day increase: which does
often appear by those dangerous attempts which men for their enjoyed Loves do
many times undergo. Or Perhaps because Love makes wise men children, and many
times depriueth them of true discourse and reason, whereby they fall into such
errors as children do, who by their apish imitation, which is propper unto
children, do no sooner see any thing done, but presently (as far forth as
their wit will give them leave) they seek to imitate it And even so every
Lover studieth, and indeuoreth in every thing to imitate that which is Loved,
and does his best endeavors (to the end he may win grace, and favor) to be
like unto it.

Why naked? Problem. 48.
PErhaps because he that follows the school of Love must not be loathed with
the garment of simula^ion, but simplicity: for there is not a^y thing, that
more offends the ^awe of Love, then a lie, which as it dis^leaseth all, so
especially those which ^oue: neither is the force of Love any ^onger sweet,
and pleasant, then that it ^ found true, and faithful, and from ^is truth it
is, that every part thereof, ^ecomes so amiable, and every virtue, ^ade as it
were handmaid unto Love, ^ Confidence, which makes us secure ^f things most
precious: Faith by which ^e believe without doubting: Truth which always
helps, and delights: ^ommunity of counsels, which makes us wise in all out
actions, and as every good thing whatsoever Or Perhaps because Love cannot long
behidden, but must necessarily be manifested, and made known both to the
obiecte beloved, and strangers too, and if not by other means, yet by
passions, and sighs, and tears, and palenes, unwonted blushings, unquiet
sleeps, change of manners, and many the like. And perhaps this was some cause
too, why it was called fire, because as the fire mainfesteth it self by ye
smoke that ascends from it, So Love by those passions that arise from it, And
therefore it is said in the proverb, that Love, and a laugh will not be
hidden Or Perhaps because nakedness for the most part brings with it a ruddy
kind of bashfullnes, and so he that is in Love, his Love being descried,
commonly blusheth, which is not the fault of love but rather of those that
living intemperately, Love intemperatly, whereby i^ comes to pass that the
very name of Love being made by lascivious action^ infamous, painteth the face
with a verm^ion kind of tincture, which we c^ bashfullnes, although there be
no such effect in Love as may deserve it.

Why winged? Problem. 49.
PEerhaps because, As wings though they be made of light feathers, yet raise,
and mount up things of weight into the air, So Love, though settled in a
base subject, does yet awaken, and stir up their hearts that Love to the
attempt of high, and honorable enterprises: For Love is an enimye to flow and
slowthfull spirits, and a friend to ^uch as are quick, and industrious, who not
like earthly, and marrish, or moorish Angels, fly downewardes to the center of
the earth, but like the lofty eagle, aspire with swifte flight to immortality.
^t is therefore an error to think that Love takes pleasure in bedds of down,
^leasant fields, dainty and delitious ^ardines, in idleness, and wantonness, ^ut
desires to seat her self rather in ^ temperate and well settled heart, ^amed
to endure al hardness and to pass all difficulties, then in those mischievous
inconveniences, that lascivious wantonness, long sleeps, Bacchus blemishes,
the sensual pleasures of Venus, and the flatterings of blind appetite brings
with them, which being all, altogether earthly, belong unto unchaste Love, which
never rayseth her flight to things high, and excellent. Or Perhaps because Love
does swiftly rooste her self in the hearts of Lovers, sometimes by a bare
look, darting her self in (as it were) at the windows; sometimes with
pleasant laughter undermining: sometimes with simple words assaylinge, sometimes
by a gracious, and comlie carriage of the body: and many ways besides
attempting the hearts of vnhiddy young men, of whom she makes a large pray.
And therefore Love is said to have many branches, many netts, many snares, by
which diverse inst^uments, she diversely hunteth, nay forages, and prays upon
all natures, taking some by delight, some by commodity, some by honesty, some
by grace, some by the goodness of nature, others by the gifts of the mind,
some by hope, some by courage, and others by appear^ng goods. Or Perhaps,
because we may thereby understand how swift the thoughts of those are, which
are in Love, who how distante soever they are in place, from that they Love,
yet by their thoughts they are always present attending, and discoursing, as
it were, with their best beloved.

Why with Bow and arrows? Problem. 50.
PErhaps because that as an arrow being shot pierces through the flesh into
the bowels, so Love, first by Beauty assayling the bodily part, gives
afterward a deadly wound unto the heart. For Beauty first presents it self
unto the sense, either to the eye, or to the ear, and afterward to the
^easonable appetite, and so first by Beautiful colors it delights the eye,
and by the sweetness, and eloquence of speech the ear, and from them, ^he
delight passes unto the mind, the which consenting thereunto yields ^^
self to the force of Love. Or Perhaps, because as an arrowe pricketh, and
wounds that body which it hitteth, so Love with her passions, pricketh, and
gawleth the heart of him that loves. And yet this is no reason why Love should
therefore be accounted cruel, because by these her goades she makes her
Lovers valiant, hardy, and vigilant, pitiful, patient, bold, and constant
against the inconstant violence of fortune, whereas without these passions,
these virtues would die and languish. Or Perhaps, because as an arrowe being
but parted from the Bow, does neither hurt, nor offend, until it hit the
mark whereat it was shot, and then it wounds and tears. So likewise Love
in the beginning manifests not her passions; until it be settled in the
heart, and then it works strange, and wonderful effects Or Perhaps because by
carrying arms offensive we should know that she is always prepared to
offend, whomesoeuer shall go about to wrong her. For as every creature is
naturally armed with some thing to defend it self against outward violence; So
it was fit that Love should not be altogether unarmed.

Why Blind? Problem. 51.
PErhaps because it makes Lovers blind, not knowing many times what losses,
and dangers, and mischiefs they are thereby falling into. For such is the
force of Love, (and it is strange) that for the thing beloved they neglect
their own good, fear not to expose their bodies to the edge of the sword,
deny unto themselves, whatsoever is profitable to themselves, sleep to their
eyes, quietness to their minds, rest to their members, ease to their bodies,
yea and more then all this, they glory in those inglorious attempts, those
labors, and sweatings, and watch^ngs, and freesings, yea and wounds ^oo; which
for their Loves they have ^ndergone, and endured. Or Perhaps, because it
seldom falls out, that he that is a servant unto Love, does know ^he
imperfectio^s of his loved object, but ^ther couers them, and acco^ptes them
^ertues. For this is the property of Lovers highly to esteem of whatsoever
belonges to that they Love, insomuch that they cannot endure that any man
should oppugn their judgments herein, and from hence proceed many times
those their resolute challenges, and valorous defenses. Or Perhaps, because
Love for the most part respects not persons, discerns not the worth, and
merit of her Lovers, but as it is best pleasing to her self, (not respecting
gentility, or nobility, or principalities, or Beauty,) takes delight to
sollace her self amongst the baseste sort of people, and does many times
place them in the highest seats: and therefore we may read, and in our own
times have observed, that great, and mighty personages have loved women of base
estate, and condition, and contrariwise, some of lowest degree, to have dared
to make Love to the greatest and mightiest Princes of the world. Or Perhaps, to
the end we should know, and understand, that earthly Love being blind is
rather an imperfection, then a perfection, if by the light of virtue it be not
enlighted. And therefore it may be that our ancestors did not vainly in
paynting Love blind, if they meant thereby wanton, and vicious Love: because
that is properly said to be blind, which follows blind Sense, which
carries a man to blind desires, blind sins, and the palpable darkness of
black infamy.

Why ruddy, or high colored? Problem. 52.
PErhaps because a lively color being accompanied with an outward comely
grace, does with greater force stir up, and awaken Love. For, for no other
cause would nature that in every thing there should be accidental signs,
whereby the agents should be moved to work those effects which might be best
pleasing unto her: And therefore, when we see a Beautiful face, of a
vermilion, and sanguine complexion, adorned with a comely grace in the carriage
thereof, we presently conclude that Beauty worthy of all Love. Or Perhaps,
because Love always affects ^ife, which the Sanguine red best expresses, as
contrarily Palenes death: for it is manifest, that Love was orda^ned for
generation, wherein life consists, yea the life of those that give life unto
otheres, I mean the begetters, the race, or offspring of man's body, being
nothing else then a certain pattern of the life of their fathers, who for
Love, even out of the bones, and blood, and flesh, and all other their outward,
and inward powers, beget the bones, and the blood and the flesh, and the powers
of their children. And therefore no marvel if Love be described to be a ruddie
and cheerful tutor, and preserver of life. Or Perhaps because he that follows
Love, makes always show of a Cheerful heart, if he be not assailed by some
inward passion, and therefore we commonly see Loue^s (I mean such as prosper,
and speed in their Loves) full of spirit, pleasant of countenance, quick in
their eyes, eloquent of tongue, and in their whole carriage full of joy and
comfort.

Why sometimes languishing? Problem. 53.
PErhaps by reason of the languishing faintnes of those that Love, who always
following with an over earnest desire that which they Love (in so much as every
day of absence seems an age) do many times in their solitary chambers, cast
down their ^weried members upon their lothed beds, filling the air, with a
thousand ^nterrupted sighs, which may the less seem strange, because there
is no artificer that daily, and hourly busieth his head, and bends all his
endeavors to ^he perfecting of some special work, which wholly depends upon
the skill of his hand, that is not enforced, either ^y the continuance of
labor, or his ^any watchings, or some other incon^enient accidents, not only
to rest his ^oyled body, but to send out many a ^lent sighe, and invisible
tear. Or Per^aps, that we may thereby understand, that a Lover is always
accompanied with a thousand other passions: Sometimes troubled with fears, and
doubts of little Love, or affection in his Lover, toward him, sometimes
quelled in his hopes, by those many difficulties that withstand his quiet
possession of that he loves, sometimes disturbed by the riualitie of others,
sometimes afflicted with the pangs of the heart, and fear of those manifold
mischaunces, that may befall the person beloved: So that the many passions,
that multiply in the heart of a Lover do bring with them an extenuacion, and
impayring of the complexion, a palenes in the face, a wearisomnes in the
members, and sometimes a strange kind of alteration in the individual
Essence, from whence do a rise those furies of Love, and potent frensies, and
insensible astonishments, which happen many times to those that Love, either
because they make not reason the forerunner of their sense or because before
they loved, they loved not temperancy, or because they direct not their Loves
by the rule of wisdom, and discretion, which only teaches the only means to
the attayning of all other virtues.

Why do Lovers delight in flowers? Problem. 54.
PEerhaps, because in them they see the colors of the things beloved. For
their is not any thing that wants his like, or that has not something that
carries some resemblance in nature unto it self, and therefore in those
flowers they contemplate those lively colors which they see to shine both in
the flesh, and habit of their best beloved. Or Perhaps because the colors, and
names of flowers are apt to display those passions that they feel who are
subject to this passion of ^oue: for every color has his proper
signification. As white signifies innocence, Black unchangeable gravity,
Purple a heavenly mind, Red, boldness of Spirit, Carnation life, yellowe
Empire, or ^elowsie; Green hope, Ash color multitude of virtues, Sea water
green the riches of fortune, Blew magnanimity, Lion Tawny strength, and the
like: which may also be very well said of flowers, As the lilly signifies
chastity: the rose virginal integrity, the violet a languishing life, the
Hyacinth virtue. Furse generosity, the white daffadill piety, Gesmme small
comfort: and so of the rest. And therefore not unfitly to discover their
passions do Lovers delight in flowers. Or Perhaps because in that diversity of
flowers, and colors they seem to contemplate the large field of the virtues
of their beloved. Or Perhaps, because Love like a wanton, takes delight in
delicate things, and to roll, and enwrappe it self in sweet odours, taking
from thence some comfort in her passions. And this is the reason why we many
times see Love painted in a pleasant field, sitting upon a multitude of
flowers merry, and iocund, crowned with garlands, lying upon a bed covered
with a thousand roses and viole^ts, fast by a fountains side, compassed with
many rich verdures and Beautiful plants.

Why do not Lovers in the presence of those they Love know how to frame
their speech? Problem. 55.
PErhaps, because the Senses of a Lover being too much settled by an over
earnest intention in the contemplation of the Beauty of his best beloved, he
does as it were altogether forgette himself, and being lulde a sleep in his
beloved object, the over vehement intention of the mind takes away the
outward use of the tongue: which is not unlikely, because every man by
experience finds, that whilst he attentively hears any sweet or pleasant
sound, he has little use of any other of his senses, all the powers being
hindered from their due operation, by the concurse of the vital spirits to
that only power, which so attentively works, and therefore no marvel if men
stand mute in the presence of their Loves, when they should speak. Or Perhaps,
a Lover fearing that he shall not speak so as may please, and content the
ears of his mistress, chooses rather to be mute, and silent, then to utter his
conceit imperfectly, And if he dare proceed so far as to open his mouth, for
as much as he still fears that he cannot sp^ake as he should, he utters his
mind stammeringly, and interceptedly. Or Perhaps, because from the Image of
that virtue and worth which they know to be in the thing they Love, they frame
in them selves a conceit thereof as of a thing divine, and from hence they
gather great matter of fear and it commonly falls out with them as with
those that are to speak before great Princes, who being accompanied with the
self same imagination, tremble, and grow pale when they speak, and utter
their conceits many times both brokenly, and unadvisedly.

Why do Lovers blush in the presence of their mistresses? Problem. 56.
PErhaps because the heart dilating it self in things pleasant, sends forth
great abundance of the spirits ^o the superficial part of the face, which by
that outward rednes are made aparent, and the Lover filled with ^ kind of joy
by the sense of his best beloved, such being the property of all men, that
enjoying the presence of that good which they so much desire, ^hey become
merry, and iocunde, and by reason of that great joy they feel, they appear
fresh, and fragrant, as con^rariwise, pale, and wan in the presence of that
they hate. Or Perhaps, because Lovers do many times blushe of modesty (a thing
proper unto that age as being careful, and ielous of each others honor, for
Love is proper unto young men, who are naturally governed by the bridle of
shame, and bashfullnes, especially in the presence of those whose good opinion
of them they especially desire: and therefore they are very careful not to do
any thing in their sight that is not fit, and convenient. Or Perhaps, because
by those amorous glaunces they are more inflamed with the Love of each other,
and so laying open their inward fire to one an other, they are never satisfied
with the looks of one an other.

Why do Lovers take pleasure in the tears of their beloved? Problem. 57.
PErhaps because Lovers are then meriest, when they are assured of the Love of
their beloved: and better assurance thereof they cannot have, then when they
see them for their Love to languish, sigh, and shed tears: For notwithstanding
tears, in their own natures, cannot be without some bitterness, yet
forasmuch as they arise from a pleasing cause, though the root be sower, the
fruit is sweet. For there is no greater felicity in the whole Empire of Love,
then the certain assurance of the true heart of his best ^eloued, which
contenteth so much ^e more, by how much the greater ^e signs thereof are,
that do yield ^ch strange effects. Or perhaps, because ^y such signs they
discry, that it wil^e no difficult matter for them to be ^ossessed of their
Loves, and from thence ^ey conceive joy, and rest conten^d. Or Perhaps they
take comfort, in ^at by tears they know that it ^eth in their power to make
their ^eloued happy in the service of Love, ^d therefore knowing the means
^hereby they may shorten their mour^ng, and wipe away their tears, ^ey are
not grieved with the sight of ^em, as otherwise they would be, ^t rather
conceive an inward joy, ^d comfort in them.

Why do Lovers, whither soever they go, carry with them their amorous
passions? Problem. 58.
PErhaps because to whatsoever part they turn their faces, and wheresoever
they bestow themselves, they do always carry with them imprinted in their
minds, the Image of the thing beloved, and consequently those passions that
arise from it. For he that carries with him the cause, proves likewise the
effect, as he that carries fire in his bosom must needs feel the heat
thereof: And therefore Lovers having always with them in their minds the Idea
of that they Love, which they never cease to contemplate, they must necessarily
by contempl^tion fall into those passions, which the present object brings
with it: yea far more violently do they feel the force of the^, because
imagination by absence works more violently, by the power whereof, the
gesture, and grace, and Beauty, and lineaments, and all the parts of the party
beloved are made present. Or Perhaps, because they finding themselves as it
were hanted with a continual desire of seeing, and contemplating that which
they Love, and so long as they find themselves ^bsent from it, living an
unquiet, nay ^ dying life, they multiply their pas^ions with the days, nay
hours of their absence, and as time increases, ^o do passions. Or Perhaps
because nothing can content a Lover in his ^iolent absence, not sweet music,
^ot Beautiful gardens, not Lovely ^ompany, not eloquent tongues, not ^uill
intertaynment, but every sweet ^ turned into sower and nothing can ^ontent but
the wished object, which ^eing far distant from their infla^ed desires, does
engender that grief ^ the heart, which can hardly be ex^essed by themselves
that prove it, ^uch less by those that are not ac^ainted with the like
miseries.

Why do Lovers so much delight in in the neatness of their apparel, and
bodies? Problem. 59.
PErhaps because there is nothing more natural unto young men, then to desire
always to seem beautiful, and therefore if nature have not made them such,
they endeavor by a^^ to seem that they are not. And from this cause proceeds
their exquisitenes their art, their diligence, their care ^ their apparel,
their gate, their speech, and in every thing else, their endeavor to seem
nimble of Body, strong in forces, subtle in wit, wise in speech, wary in
dangers, honorable in conditions. Or Perhaps, because such Elegancy, and
Neatenesse purchase grace, and favor from their beloved, and therefore they
use these means as a pleasant bait to possess them of that which they so
earnestly desire. Or Perhaps, because to make manifest the purity of their
minds, they desire to trim and polishe their bodies, and to wi^^ ^n opinion in
the world of great plen^y of the goods of fortune, they adorn their bodies
with sumptuous attire, ever endeavoring with themselves to set^le a belief in
the minds of their be^oued, that they want not much of the ^ull fruition of all
humane felicity, which consists of the goods of the mind, of the body, and
of fortune. And therefore it contenteth them much ^o hear that any has related
unto their ^oues the virtue of their minds, know^ng thereby that he lays
open the ^rincipall part of the felicity, and orna^ent of man. As for the goods
of the ^ody, and of fortune, they undertake that task themselves: the goods
of ^he body they make known by pre^nting to the eye of their mistres, the
^earnesse of their complections, the ^ood proportion of their members, ^eir
comely carriage, their readiness ^ the performance of honorable ex^oyts: the
goodness of fortune, by ^eir rich apparel, their Rings, their ^iamonds, their
Rubies, their Chains, ^eir gold, their Jewels, their horses, ^eir servants,
their multitude of friends, ^eir liberality, and bounty, and their honorable
progenitors. And all this they do to give their best beloved to understand,
that if by the lawefull band of marriage she will be his, she shall participate of
that felicity, which all men by all their best endeavors strive and study to
attain. Or Perhaps to the end that thereby they may draw the eyes of their
Loves to behold, and contemplate both the richness of their attire, the
variety of their fashions, and their comely carriage both in their gate and
other gestures of the body. For it pleases a Lover, to see that which he
loves, love to see him.

Why do lovers so much esteem the gifts of their beloved? Problem. 60.
PErhaps because they see, I know not what kind of grace to shine, and show
it self in that gift which comes from that they best Love, the which they
esteem so much the more, by how much it seems to present, the excellent,
and honorable qualities of the giver. Or Perhaps, because those gifts are as
rich pledges of that grace, and favor, whereby they may easily obtain to the
possession of that they Love: And therefore, as they that have any thing in
their custody, either in value, or Beauty extraordinary, with an extraordinary
heed, and care look unto it, so they prizing these gifts above al their
earthly riches, do likewise above all take care to keep them. Or Perhaps that
they might thereby show and give testimony, that if they have that thing in so
high esteem that comes from their beloved, in how much more the person that
sent it, who does as far exceed the gift in value, as the substance the
shadow, and a perfect, an appearing good.

Why do Lovers so often use the similitudes of things most excellent, to
display the Beauty of her they Love? Problem. 61.
PErhaps because they have a singular conceit of their beloved, insomuch that
being unable in the least degree that may be, to express it, they are enforced
to make use of the simitude of things most high and excellent: Sometimes
comparing her to the light, sometimes to stars, sometimes to the Sun,
sometimes to the morning, sometimes to the snow, milk, the lilly, the rose,
sometimes to the myrtle, the marble, the alablaster. Sometimes to gold, rubies,
diamonds, sometimes to the heavens, the spring, paradise and whatsoever is in
any degree excellent. Or Perhaps because they think their beloved to be the
receptacle or storehouse of all the beautiful things of the world, in whom
all perfections are united, and gathered together, and therefore they think
themselves sufficiently warranted to use the whiteness of the Swanne, to
express her hew, the unspotted purity of the snow, the cristall, the diamond,
to show her purity: the light, the stars, the sun, to signify how clear
her eyes are, how bright her countenance, and a thousand other things of
highest excellency, to make known the Beauty of those parts, with the Love
whereof their hearts are so enflamed. Or Perhaps, to the end that all the world
may know in how high esteem they hold their Loves, when they extol them above
things most excellent, and of humane creatures do their best endeavors to make
them divine.

Why are Lovers many times troubled with iealosie, and grief of the heart?
Problem. 62.
PErhaps because both the one, and the other do most fear to loose that which
they most desire to keep, and has cost most labor the getting, and therefore
their fear does many times breed an inward distemperature at the heart, though
they outwardly dissemble it. For this is the custom of Lovers, that though
their hearts be violently assaulted with greefes, and false suspicions, in so
much as they can never rest in quiet, yet nevertheless they make show
outwardly of a happy life, and a careless neglect of their best beloved,
though in despite of themselves, and their best endeavors, they cannot long
dissemble it. Or Perhaps, they did little dream to have found that in their
Love which by dear experience and many wrongs they find true: and therefore
their hearts being ouerladen with abundance of grief, they vent the anguish
thereof sometimes with disdainefull speeches, sometimes with passionate
glaunses, with absence, with threatenings, and fayning the Love of another. But
this war endures not long, but procures rather peace, and greater content
in the field of Love.

Why do lovers many times dream of horrible things? Problem. 63.
PErhaps because it is the property of Lovers, by reason of those continual
passions they are subject unto, to be melancholicke, and they that are governed
by that humor, are accustomed to dream of horrible and fearful things.
Which does the more commonly fall out, because they are usually subject unto
fears: and forasmuch as this affection of all others does most disturb, and
afflict the spirits, from this disturbance, and perturbation, these monstrous,
and horrible dreams do arise. Or Perhaps because Lovers withdraw their
minds, and their senses from al things whatsoever, except from that they love
above all, so that though they see others, they see imperfectly, and though
they hear, they hear imperfectly, and therefore those shapes, and nightly
visions make an imperfect presentation to the inward discerning powers, and
breed such inquietnes in the mind, that many times by reason of the greatness
of the passion that they suffer in their sleep, they bewray a strange kind of
horror and astonishment in their countenances.

Why do Lovers delight in morning music? Problem. 64.
PErhaps because they desire not only to honout their mistresses in the day
time with Cappings, and congees, and courtesies, but also with musical
instruments, and pleasant voices. Or Perhaps because music being fit to
manifest affections, either of Joy, or of sorrow, they make use thereof, to
displaye their inward griefs or delights, and therefore they commonly make
choice of such music as does best fit the time, and their own affections.
Or Perhaps, to the end that by means of that delight, which is in music,
either vocal, or isntrumental, and that willingness they express thereby to
please, and content, they may stir up the affections of those they Love, to
requite them again with reciprocal affection, which many times does happily
succeed. For a man's own virtue, and a diligent care to be over indulgent in
honoring those that are mighty, are the best means to, purchase to themselves
grace and favor. Or Perhaps, to the end they may imprinte the self same
affections, in the hearts of those they Love, that themselves feel, and
suffer. Or Perhaps because there is not a thing that does better express an
angelical mind, then an angelical voice, which having something in it, though
I know not what, that is divine, they desire, by the worth thereof, to
express their own worthiness. For every action of a Lover should be such,
as by the virtue, and valor thereof, may stir affection.

Why do Lovers desire to be thought Valiant? Problem. 65.
PErhaps, because Love ministers strength and heart, And for as much as they
feign Love armed, to express the power thereof, they that are Loves followers,
must be armed as love is, and yield the like effects. Or Perhaps, because
Lovers, fearing to lose that they so much desire and so highly esteem of, do
little account of their own lives, without the fruition of their desire, for
there is nothing more odious, then baseness of mind, and little zeal of
honor, and not to follow an iniust, ^niurye, with a just revenge, is
pusillanimitie, and brings with it nothing but shame, and dishonor. Or Perhaps,
because they fear, that their fearful hearts being descried, they should
never afterward be able to make way (by reason of their many riuales) to the
quiet possession of that they Love, for fortune always favors those that are
valiant, and resolute.

Why do Lovers defend their beloved even in a wrong and unjust cause?
Problem. 66.
PErhaps because that thing which they do once love with an earnest intent and
affection, they think them selves, in duty, and in requital of that pleasure
they have enjoyed by their Loves, bound to defend them from dishonor, and
infamy. For if it become any man to be thankful, and mindful of any
kindenes, or courtesy received, doubtless it becomes none more then a Lover.
Or Perhaps because from the first day that they first fastened their affection
upon that object, they prise it above their own proper Essence, or being: and
therefore how justly soever an injury or violence may be offered unto it,
they think it no injustice in themselves to defend it. Or Perhaps because a
rigorous censure of that we Love, is never commendable, and a man does sildome
offend by too much Clemency, and Love especially it least becomes to be a
severe judge, that has always been by nature a compassionate father. Or
perhaps, because by winking at the wrongs that are offered their Loves, they
make themselves unworthy of their grace, and favor. Or perhaps, because by not
defending their Loves, they confess the wrong to be no wrong, and the injury
to be just, and so draw a kind of dishonor upon themselves, by loving that
which deservedly is dishonored.

Why do Lovers take so much delight in the contemplation of the eye?
Problem. 67.
PErhaps, because the eyes are many times by reason of their Beauty the true
cause of Love, and therefore they take delight to contemplate that noble part,
which by the Beauty thereof, has enchained them in the fetters of Love: for if
every well featured part of the body be apt enough to stir up Love in the
hearts of men, much more the eye, wherein we first of all contemplate the grace
and dignity of the mind. Or perhaps, because among all the other parts of
the body, the eye is most wonderful, and therefore does first draw the eyes
of others to behold it. For this is the property of those which contemplate,
that whilst they behold the curious workmanship of a thing that has any
thing in it worthy admiration, to cast their eyes first upon that, that has
most majesty, and means of allurement, to draw the eye unto it. Or perhaps
because the eye is as a Looking-glass, wherein all human affections are
discerned, so that looking upon them, as upon a clear Fountain, they behold
the mind of their best beloved, and so have a guess at their present
inclination, and affection, whether they be inclining to clemency, or
severity, pity, or cruelty, myrthe, or melancholy, Love, or hatred, and
according to that disposition they find in them, they take counsel, and
advise, in those things that appertain unto them. Or Perhaps, because there is
no other sense, that takes that delight in his like sense, that this does,
insomuch that the eyes of two Lovers being fastened upon each other, by their
amorous glances, and silent noddes, they enjoy not only the fruition of each
others eyes but understand the very inward thoughts of each others heart.

Why is the anger of a lover soon alayed? Problem. 68.
PErhaps because wrongs offered by Lovers, and friends are more unkindly taken,
and stir up the passions, for the time with greater force, but presently the
fury of them being ouer-blowne, they grow calm, and quiet. For what soever
thing, either in nature, or art is engendered, or framed, with greater force,
and less time then is fit, as monstrous birthes, they vanish and cannot long
endure. Or perhaps, because the fire of Love cannot long endure the waters of
passion. Or Perhaps, because the means of reconcilement is easy betwixt them,
both parties being willing to ask pardon, willing to forgive: for every
amorous breach has a thousand silent defenses, and as many kind
acknowledgements of the fault. Or Perhaps, because there is a kind of
magnanimity in pardoning wrongs, and therefore to the end they may be so
accounted, they easily and speedily forgive. Or Perhaps, because the law of
Love does not admit cruelty, for it is never seen that two truly united
hearts should ^ong continue at jar, for light occasions (for great will not
be offered) but as such ho^ should brawles do easily arise, so they are as
easily pacified. Or ^erhaps, because to those that are most dear unto us, the
least repentance beggeth pardon for the greatest offenses, which does
manifestly appear in the Love of Fathers.

Why cannot Lovers hide their passions? Problem. 69.
PErhaps, because amorous cares ouercharging and oppressing the heart, are
hardly endured, and therefore they do endeavor, having found a friend fit for
that purpose, by communicating their griefs unto him, to ease themselves of
that burden. Or Perhaps, because amorous passions do prick and wound the
hearts of Lovers, and therefore provoked by the sharpness of such a spur,
they cannot but manifest their griefs unto those, who though they cannot ease,
may yet pity them: for it is some comfort to him that is assailed with grief,
to vent it at the mouth by the help of his tongue. Or Perhaps, because in
relating them to others they feel their afflicted hearts to be comforted, for
every passion communicated is lessned. Or Perhaps, because by laying open their
passions, they make known their own faith, and the disloyalty and falsehood
of their beloved. Or Perhaps, because the least wrongs that proceed from that,
that has least cause to offer them, are accounted greater, then the greatest,
and confound the mind of a Lover, with such a kind of astonishment, as
nothing but utterance, can either ease, or take away.

Why cannot Lovers conceal the favors of their best beloved? Problem. 70.
PErhaps because the benefits of those we Love make a deep impression in the
memory, and so being often cal^ed to remembrance, they think they should wrong
both their Loves and their own memories not to utter them. Or Perhaps, because
Lovers desire in every thing to show themselves ^hankfull, especially toward
those whom they Love, by displaying whose bountiful favors they seem both to
^equite what is past, and to crave more. Or Perhaps because Lovers do highly
esteem of those things which they receive from those they love, and therefore
thinking it not fit that things of worth should always lie hidden, they
reveal them: For by the law of nature we are taught to commend good turns
received, especially when they are such as carry a proportion to the worth, and
excellency of the giver.

Why do lovers put their favors they receive from their Mistresses in the
most noble parts of the body? Problem. 71.
PErhaps thereby to signify, that those things they receive from them, they
prefer above all other, and therefore they commonly make choice either of the
head, as the highest, or of the heart, as the dearest part of the body. Or
Perhaps, because the heart signifies life, and the head understanding, and
both perfection, and therefore in those places, they place their favors that
are most perfect, and most dear unto them, to give them to understand how
dearly they Love, and how honorable a conceit they have of them. Or Perhaps,
to the end the giuers should understand, that they have the full possession
both of the best parts that are in them, and their whole body.

OF HATRED.
Why is hatred ordained by Nature? Problem. 72.
PErhaps, because provident nature being willing to remove all those
contrarieties, that might either ^lter, or offend her works, she thought ^t
not amiss to give unto all creatures, ^uen from their first nativity and
being, such an affection as might be fittest or such a service And therefore we
see that the Lamb does naturally hate the Wolf, the Wolf the Dog, the
Crab, the Serpent, the Weazell the Toade, the Lion the Cock, man the
Crocodile, yea a man borne under Jupiter a Saturnist, a valiant man a coward, a
temperate man a lascivious, a religious an irreligious, a faithful a disloyal,
and an honorable man a base and dishonorable* neither is this natural hatred
seen only in things animate, reasonable or sensible, men, or beasts, but also
in those things that are far from sense or understanding, as in herbs, and
plants, and metals, and compounds, which by a hidden hatred, and contrariety
in nature cannot brook and endure one another. Or Perhaps, because that though
Nature fly her extremes, as being very dangerous to her workmanship,
nevertheless she admits contraries for the benefit of the whole. Which does
plainly appear in heat, and cold, fire, and water, in corruptible things, and
incorruptible, mortal and immortal, earthly, and heavenly. Neither would the
day shine so clear, if the night were not dark, nor laughter be so
acceptable, if it were not sometimes mingled with tears. And therefore no
marvel, if as we see a begetting Love in the Universe, for the benefit of
nature, so from the self same Nature, we have a conseruing hate, the better to
attain the wished end.

Why does Love sometimes engender Hate, being by nature contrary unto it?
Problem. 73.
PErhaps because every cause that (either by reason of the matter, or quality,
or place, or temperature, or concourse of contrary causes, or by inordinate
suggestion, or any other ob^tacle to the true generation of things) ^s altered
and changed, brings forth ^n steed of lawful birthes, monsters, and
prodigious compositions; and ^uen so Love whilst it contemplateth ^n the
person beloved those virtues, whereby it is enkindled with an hono^able desire,
to serve, and honor him, ^ breeds and brings forth Love, a ^uite like to
it self: but those vices being discovered that are opposite unto ^ertue, to
chastity, temperancie, shame^stnesse, and the holy laws of Love, even from
the object beloved, it is enforsed to conceive h^te, and bring forth a horrible
monster, far different from the nobility, and generosity of it own nature.
Or perhaps, because time, the first changer and corrupter of every thing, not
always permitting one and the same estate in human things, as another
destroying nature, interrupteth, deuoureth, consumes, and changes every
thing, and in altering the complexion, alters the desires too; and therefore
it many times falls out, that, that which a man loves being young, he hates
when he is old, and what he hated when he was young, he loves when he is old,
and what he loathed being at liberty, he loved being a prisoner: the reason
whereof is, because that which he conceived by the simple knowledge of the
sense to be good, reason increasing with time, he knew, and understood to be
wicked, and evil. Or perhaps, the affections may be a cause, that we
oftentimes change our judgment of things, and therefore a father judges
otherwise of his son, when in his fury he considers the quality of his
offense, then when out of a quiet, and peaceable mind he frames an opinion
thereof: which likewise appears plainly in those that Love, who according to
those affections that are predominant in them, do either Love, or hate.

Why is the hatred of men against things general, and universal, their anger
against things more particular? Problem. 74.
PErhaps because as Love (which is contrary to Hate) spreads his wings to all
helpful things what^oeuer: So Hatred to all hurtful. Or Perhaps, because the
cause of Hate which is vice, and common to many, more universal, then the
cause of ^oue, which is virtue, and Beauty, and ^und in few. Or Perhaps,
because ^e hatred of a nature in general, ^akes no exception of any particular
^f that nature, but under the vni^rsall all particulars are contained. ^or that
Hatred which a sheep bears against a woolfe, excepteth no particular woolfe,
but extends it self to all wolfes, as being all enemies to his nature, and
so likewise a virtuous man, in that Hatred that he bears against vice and
vicious men, excepteth no man as he is vicious, but as so qualified hates them
all, but anger being a suddayne disdain arising from a sudden, and present
Injury offered, and that by some particular person, extends it self no
farther then that particular, which by that particular act has offended. Or
Perhaps, because Anger arises from an offense committed by some particular
person, either against our selves, or those things tha^ appertain unto us, but
Hatred arises from a wrong offered neither to ou^ selves, nor what belongs
unto us, bu^ has a cause more universal, an^ though perhaps we hate any
particula^ man for his vice, yet we seek ^ revenge against him, which ange^
does.

Why is Hatred conceived everlasting. But anger soon allayed? Problem. 75.
PErhaps because Hatred arises from a settled, and appeased reason, and a
certain assured knowledge of vice, but Anger from an offense, that arises
from sudden affection, and blind knowledge. So that there being in the first
right judgment, and in the second blind passion, it is no marvel if the one
continue, and the other by a true acknowledgement of the offense be easi^y
alayed. Or Perhaps, because that ^orasmuch as Hatred looks only to ^he
universal benefit, and good, the care whereof should never have end, it is
^kewise necessary, that Hatred which ^eeldeth that care, should likewise be
^ndlesse: but Anger tending only to ^e ruin of one particular by a parti^lar
affection, the party being pacified, ^ere is no reason why Anger should ^ntinue.

Why do men sildome hate either their country or their parents? Problem. 76.
PErhaps, because the benefits they receive both from Country and Parents, are
great and excellent. Our Country gives us honor, civil education, and many
honorable privileges, defends us in time of war, and in time of peace
feeds and cherishes us with a thousand delights and delicacies, adorneth us
with excellent Arts and Sciences, watches over us whilst we sleep, being
beaten down by fortune, recomforteth us, and lastly sweetneth the whole course
of this our pilgrimage. Parents being provoked by their particular Love, which
they bear toward their particular children, do not only give them life and
being, by that seminall virtue they receive from them, but welcome them into
the world, with such joy, and content, that so long as they live, it sweetneth
all that bitterness they have endured for them, which does plainly appear by
those many labors and afflictions, that many miserable mothers endure for
their children, who besides the bearing of them so many months in their own
wombes, with so much pain, so many bitter throngs, and that dangerous travel
they endure at their birches, in the whole time of their infancy and
childhood, they do never abandon them, but with their milk they feed them,
with their songs they still them, with their arms they embrace them, with
their eyes they gaze on them, and with tongue, and arms, and eyes, and all
with ^ndefatigable toil, and affliction, they never cease day nor night, to
defend, and comfort them Neither are the labors of the father in disciplining
them, when ^hey come to riper years, in nourish^ng them, in defending them, in
proui^ing for them whatsoever is necessary, ^ither for the enriching of their
minds, ^r the maintenance of their lives, any way inferior to those of the
mother: ^o that the heap of those manifold be^efits received from our Country
and ^om our Parents being so high, and so ^finit great, it is no marvel if
nature as ^ lover of virtue, and an enemy to vice, ^oth not permit (if the
wickedness of their own natures withstand it not) that either Citizens
should Hate their Country, or Children their progenitors: And therefore we see
that the Love of a man's own country is of such force, that men of base
parentage, borne in places as base, and obscure, arising by their valor and
virtues, to honor, and dignity in their country, and common weal, do
nevertheless nothing disdain the memory of their Countries, and parentage,
but desire to honor them with their often visitations, and presence, their
arms, their impreses, and magnificent edifices. Nay the very beasts of the
field that have been bredde in rocks, desert places, and obscure dens, are
content for them to leave the pleasant fields, the sweet meadows, the
delightful groves, and fertile territories of the world. Or Perhaps, because
those things that are given us of Nature, and are near unto us, as our fathers
that begotte us, our mothers that bare us, and our country that has preserved
us, we cannot Hate, not only because they are near, and dear unto us, but
because they are ministered, and given unto us, even before we came into the
world, by that first provident Cause that provides all things necessary for
them, and us.

Why is the Hatred of great Princes, and noble men inexorable? Problem. 77.
PErhaps because the height of their minds being wonderful, and yet they
abasing themselves to vouchsafe ^he company, and familiarity of their vassalls,
and subjects: when there a^iseth from this familiarity a kind of ^ontempt, and
careless respect of that honor that is due unto them, as their Love works
this unnatural effect ^n those they Loved, so it turns their Love into an
unnatural Hatred, which makes their offense irremissible. Or Perhaps because
the minds of great Princes for the most part, being en^ued with a knowledge of
things more ^hen humane, and so better discer^ing the ill deserts, and with a
more ^earcing eye looking into the wicked ^onditions of any man, the Hatred
they conceive against such qualities, and manners, is so much the greater, by
how much the better they are able to judge of such inconveniences as follow
such conditions. And therefore no marvel since as years increase, so
judgment, if their Hatred against that do still continewe, which they still
judge worthy of hate. Or Perhaps because in natures more noble, and honorable,
and in minds more divine, the affections making deeper impressions, are of
greater force, and therefore great Lords, and princes having bodies more
disposed to affections, and to greater alterations in affection, it is no
marvel if Hatred once seated at the heart, sit too fast to be easily removed.
Or Perhaps because it becomes not great Lords to be inconstant, because
inconstancy argues a kind of leuity in mind, and manners, and therefore they
judging it a note of infamy, and dishonor to be over mutable in opinion
touching those they hate, they harden themselves like a Diamond in their hard
conceypts. Or Perhaps because great Princes, being for the most part of happy
memories, of all others they do least forget those which in any respect cross
their desires, or oppose themselves against their pleasures, and delights. And
therefore a certain great Prince, being by nature very liberal, and
bountiful, was wont to say to a familiar friend of his, that it was more
possible for a man to forget a thousand injuries, then one good turn.
Inferring thereby that as it is impossible to forget one offense, without a
lawful defense, much more to forget a thousand: so most impossible to forget a
benefit received.

Why is the Hatred of women without end or measure? Problem. 78.
PErhaps because as in their Loves they are accustomed to exceed, and Love
without rule, or measure, in so much that they pass many times beyond
affection, even to the frensye of Love, so in their Hatred, they are over
violent, and no way able to bridle themselves, and therefore as in their mad
unbridled loves, there can be nothing found that may moderate that passion, in
so much that they run headlong to the utter ruin of their own chastity, and
honors: So in their headstrong Hatred, there is no tongue, that can persuade,
or pacify them, no force, that can ouerrule them. Or Perhaps because women
loving with a strong, and earnest affection, and therefore not fearing to
communicate unto those they Love, not only their most secret cogitations, but
whatsoever they enjoy of best esteem and highest prise, and afterward
discovering either a false heart, or a mind unthankful, or whatsoever else
that may be opposite to virtue, they presently change their Love into Hate,
which continues as long as their dissimulation without honest excuse. Or
Perhaps because women being always careful, and studious to please the sense,
and altogether careless to satisfy reason, they do for the most part apply
themselves unto the extremes leaving the mean wherein the seat of virtue is
placed, whereby they being miserably deceived by a false appearing truth, too
late bewail their losses, and hard fortunes, and seek to ease themselves by
the continual Hatred and revenge, that many times brings misery and misfortune
upon themselves, and their whole families.

OF DESIRE.
Why has nature given to every thing a Desire? Problem. 79.
PErhaps because these inferior bodies, having need of a thousand helps for
their preservation, as of place, nutriment, rest, delight, generation, and
other things healthful, and helpefull to their benefit which being not always
present, and if present, yet not befitting their natures, and though not
befitting, yet willing to have them present, and in their own possession, it
was necessary that these things should be followed, and forasmuch as that
could not be done without a Love, and a longing after them, wise and provident
nature would first give Love, and thereby desire, whereby every thing being
spurred forward to his own benefit and good, they might follow those places
that do best befit their own natures, find out meats answerable to their
complections, and attain that perpetuity by special generation which is
proper unto them. And for this cause nature has given to some things
lightness of body, to some weight, and heaviness, as fit means whereby to
attain their natural places, unto others, members fit for the motion of
themselves from one place to another, with apt sinowes, and bones, which being
subject unto the moving virtue, and this to the appetite, do express unto us
the great care and wisdom of nature, in giving to every thing their fittest
means to attain their fittest end. Or Perhaps, because Nature not allowing of
idleness in any thing, as being very hurtful to all things both general, and
particular, she gave unto them Desire, whereby they might exercise themselves
in honest, and honorable actions. For we see, and by experience find in our
selves, that except we be kindled, and stirred up by a certain Desire, we
know not how to shake of that idle rest, and quietness, which does rather
devour the goods of the mind, then add any thing to the perfection thereof.
And therefore hence it is, that being carried away with that delight we take in
hunting, we are not able to contain, or bridle our selves, but whatsoever the
weather be, cold, or hot, wet, or dry, we bouldly betake our selves to the
open fields, we travel up the highest rocks, and mountains, run through the
thickest forests, fly neither waters, nor Ise, nor snow, nor whatsoever
inconuenients may follow those sports. So likewise we are carried with the like
Desire to the delight of fishing, wherein we refuse neither by night, nor by
day, with nets, and a thousand other devises, rather to adventure our bodies,
nay our lives to the merciless sea, then not to enrich our selves by
whatsoever shall come unto our hands. Here I pass with silence those benefits
that arise unto al living creatures being pricked forward by the spur of
Desire to exercise that strength, and agility of their members, that nature
has given unto them, and therefore no marvel if vigilant Nature always
working without weariness, have bestowed so excellent an affection upon all
creatures to keep them from idleness.

Why is Desire the first lawful birth, or first borne of Love? Problem. 80.
PErhaps because humane Love not settling it self in that pleasing content
which it has from the Beauty of the aspect, or countenance beloved, which to
the nature of Love is intrinsicall, yea formally love it self, but as being
accompanied with sense, and reason passes likewise to the Desire thereof, as
it is delightful in it self, and possible to be attained, and with all
earnest endeavor seeks the fruition thereof. Or Perhaps, because it is
natural, that Desire should be kindled in the hearts of those that Love,
because delight by the means of Beauty touching the sense, moves the
sensible appetite, at which motion the figure or Image of some excellent thing
being framed to the inward sense, the reasonable Desire makes known his force
by a willingness to possess the thing that is framed. And from hence it
arises that Lovers being provoked by this inflamed Desire, become bold, and
venturous to any attempts, prompt, and ready, to undergo labor, and toil, fly
no dangers, no cares to attain their desired end. For the office of the
moving virtue is to serve that ready Desire, which extends it self to all
the members. Or Perhaps, because Desire is as it were a property which arises
from his subject Love, and therefore Desire is as the effect, and Love as the
cause.

Why is Desire infinite and endless? Problem. 81.
PErhaps because the mind is of such excellency, that being made like unto
our great God, it has an appetite (at least) enclining to infiniteness, which
always searching, always seeks with earnest desire; which may plainly
appear in man, who ascending by the creatures of God, as by a Ladder, to the
contemplation of all sciences, does never by all the excellent knowledges that
are, rest fully satisfied, but in his riper years having already tasted the
sweetness of both humane, and divine wisdom, he does every day more and more,
desire to clime higher, and not contented to have passed the highest Spheres
of the heavens, and all visible nature, with a thousand speculations, he
attempteth the knowledge of visible nature, even the chiefest good which is God
himself. And forasmuch as every nature is infinite, and all knowledge thereof
like unto it self, yea the very nature of the first Essens, or being, as it is
comprehended by a created understanding, is also infinite, it can never in this
inferior world, by any length of time rest satisfied, until it unite it self
to the chief Creator of all things, and that by grace in another life. And
from hence likewise it comes to pass, that men being mocked by their sense,
and carried by the force of that appetite, and desire, which they call
reasonable, desiring gold with an unquenchable thirst, they attempt the
getting, and possession of it, and having obtained a full fruition thereof,
their desires are nothing alayde, but as riches increase, so desires increase
with them, for that which is capable of God himself, whatsoever is less then
God can never satisfy. So likewise others bring spurred forward by a desire of
delight in some subject or other, are strangely enflamed with a greedy kind of
longing after it, which they do no sooner enjoy, but allured by the corrupt
sense, they are as much enflamed with the desire of new pleasures, and assaye
new means be they never so unlawful to attain unto it, little dreaming in
the mean time, that that delight, which can satisfy our desires, no man has
ever found in those lower parts, nor ever shall. For it is God alone, who in
this life cannot be discerned by mortal eye, that in the other life can give
us absolute and eternal happiness. Or Perhaps the variety of things in the
variety of interchangeable time, being adorned with like variety of unspeakable
Beauties, either of the parts, or of the whole, with the diverse states of the
Bodily co^plexions, which being moved from their natural, and wonted seats
carry men to diverse and sundry appetites, may be a strong, and mighty cause of
this insatiable desire in man For every thing presented unto the sense, whether
it be truly fair, and good, or appearingly (like another Adamant, which by a
hidden virtue draws the iron unto it) allureth the sense, moves the
affection, and being moved by a present intentiall delight, it knows not how
to desire it, that it may enjoy it. And forasmuch as the variety of beautyfull
objects, fit to allure the sense, is infinite, no marvel if man in his desires
be as infinite.

Why do diverse men desire diversely. Problem. 82.
PErhaps, because men being inflamed by the invisible fire of wise and
^rouident nature, which especially wil^eth and desires (in humane kind) a
so^iable life, by that commodity which ^he union of hearts brings with it,
^hey are likewise inflamed to a fervent ^esire of some particular good, to the
^nde, that, that being gotten by the ^weate both of their own, and other men's
^rowes, they may prise it accordingly, and yet (if honesty forbid it not, nor
coue^se thereof) they might gently, and libe^ally communicate it unto those who
^or the supply of their necessities desire ^, So that both the one, and the
other ^hewing themselves prompt, and ready ^t al occasions, there might arise a
great ^ond of amity, and friendship, and a fa^ter knot of good fellowship And
therefore has nature ordained that some desiring the knowledge both of divine
and humane Sciences, by daily labors and nightly watchings, should endeavor to
attain unto them, that having possessed themselves of so rich a treasure, they
might impart some portion of their knowledge unto others: That others thirsting
after gold, and transitory riches, by a thousand tricks and devises, they
might heap up mountains of treasure, that when they were possessed of them,
or rather glutted with them, they might employ them both to the public good
of the common weal, and private benefit of as many as stand in need of them,
that others puffed up with a desire of glory, should follow the field, and by
their arms, and valiant service, mount themselves up to the thrones of Kings
and Emperors, and so communicate their honors to their whole families, their
trophies to their countries, and draw others by an honorable immitation to
immortallitie. That others drawn by the amiable chain of virtue, might by the
help of good discipline, adorn themselves with honorable conditions, that
thereby they might be an ornament to their City, and Citizens, a light unto
the Court, a glory unto themselves, and to all honorable minds an excellent
pattern, and example: That women moved with the zeal of honor, should
highly esteem of their feminine virtue, to increase their glory, and so might
leave it as a rich treasure, to their children, and their Country: That the
common sort of people, spur^ed with a Desire of gain, and commodity, should
endeavor to attain skill, and knowledge in mechanical arts, that thereby they
might, both enrich ^hemselues, and serve others, and last^y that countrymen
following the de^ights of the country, might attend no other thing then their
pick axe, and their ^pade, and that for the ease of other men. Or Perhaps
because by this diversity of Desires, the desires of every man are more easily
satisfied, then if al men should Desire one, and the same thing, which
forasmuch as it could not be divided unto all: some, nay the greatest part,
must needs continue thirsty in their Desires, without any one drop to
quench, and ^lay the thirst thereof. And therefore al men desiring diversely,
the appetite of al ^n some sort remains satisfied, and peace, and quietness,
(which in this difference of Desires could not otherwise be) is procured, and
maintained.

Why are the desires of the father more noble, then those of the mother.
Problem. 83.
PErhaps, because the minds of men are more generous, and strong then those of
women, who following the temperature of their own bodies which are altogether
soft, and delicate, and fit for ease and idleness, do always prove
fearful, flexible, inconstant, altogether unapt for Hercules labors, yea are
always wallowing in the filth of wanton pleasures, and amorous allurements,
whereby it comes to pass that fathers being directed by that knowledge, and
understanding, that time and experience brings with it, and not by the
blessings of nature, or delight of the sense, and beauty of their children, do
rather wish unto their children those honors that are gotten in the field, by
the strength of their imbrued hands, and won with the danger, nay the loss
of their own lives, then that they should live in the world idlye, with
infamy, and dishonor, whereas mothers on the otherside, ^eeing always idle,
and wanton, and tender, and fearful, do ^lwayes admit those things as most
it and commodious for their children, that do quit them most from all occasi^ns
of fear: and therefore they cannot ^ndure to hear any speech of wars, ^f
the dangers that follow them, both ^y sea, and land, and of those valiant
a^hieuements, that bring same and ho^our to valorous hearts. Or Perhaps,
because the Love of fathers is more ^rong, and vehement then the Love ^f
Mothers, and therefore they wish unto their children those appearing goods
which are weak, and tender, like their ^oues. But the desires of fathers are
wholly bent to that firm felicity which ^ purchased by honorable and glori^us
actions.

Why is the desire of those that Love toward the thing beloved so fiery and
ardent? Problem. 84.
PErhaps because Love from whence Desire rises, is an invisible fire, which
within the hidden forges of their breasts, burns, and consumes their
miserable hearts, and blazing in the flames of Desire, yields no other sign,
or testimony thereof then an ardent Desire of the thing beloved. Or Perhaps,
because this Desire, springs from the force and strength of Love, which
forasmuch as it does best befit the first encounter of a matrimonial bed, it
was wont to be expressed by those burning tapers of blushing Himeneus. Or
Perhaps because such a will, or Desire, fostring, and nourishing it self, by
special privilege in the hearts of young men, who abounding with much blood,
and consequently with great store of vital spirits, are wont to be more
ardent, and fiery in their Desires, especially in matters of Love, the delight
whereof gives best relish to the pallats of young men. Or Perhaps, because
cold is a sign of death, and heat of life, and lovers enflamed with the
Desire of their best beloved, think^ by the fruition thereof, they enioyes
happy life, whereof they give a manifest testimony, by that ardent Desire that
makes them nimble, and valorous, and reddy, and ruddy, and full ^f wanton, and
youthful ardour.

Why do the Desires of children end in matters of small weight? Problem. 85.
PErhaps because they are but the new births of Nature, which is best ^ontented
with a little, and has always been offended with too much: and therefore
being directed by so ^ise a mistress, they know not how ^ desire things above
the reach of their ^wne natures, but content themselves ^ith childish sports,
as feigned wars, ^d such pastimes as do minister grea^st delight unto their
minds. Or Per^ps, because children exercising the ^owers of the mind but
weakly (the ^ractise whereof depends upon much ^te, gotten with much pains,
and la^our) but using the outward discerning ^wers, which are the senses, which
are ^uer moved but by corporal things ^ed, and united to matter, subject to
cor^ption, and only present, and besides ^at being led by no kind of
experi^ce, but giving credit to deceiving ^dgement, and to that only de^ght
which is present, nothing respecting that which is most noble, most honest,
most honorable, being all full of solace, and delight, they desire nothing
else, but sports and pastimes, as Beautiful spectacles, maskes, and meriments,
birds, dogs, hoby-horses, and a thousand the like ridiculous toys and
inventions Or Perhaps, our great grandmother Nature, seeing the simplicity of
their nature (for wisdom is gotten by the use, and experience of of humane
things) altogether carried with a sweet kind of forgetfulness of things of
greater weight, and better befitting riper years, was willing to inflame their
minds with a desire of light, and friuilous things, to the end they might pass
their tender age without tint tediousness, that idleness brings with it. Or
Perhaps because the powers do never work upon their subjects above their own
force, but more or less strongly, according to their own power, and
excellency, and therefore children being by nature weak and tender, soft and
delicate, and little or nothing accustomed to matters above their own reach,
what marvel is it if they esteem most of those things that are most agreeable
to their natures? as the sap, and sweet of every sweetness, of milk, honey,
fruit, drinks, and whatsoever may give best delight unto their pallats: as
old wives tales, childish sportes, apish imitations of every art, every
invention. As the melody of every sound, every instrument, and whatsoever else
may bring delight without labor.

Why does the Desire of immortality make men bold, and resolute, in undergoing
labors, and dangers? Problem. 86.
PErhaps because the end or reward being great, and excellent, it requi^eth
great hearts, great labors, great means, and if need be, great dangers ^oo.
For a victory gotten without fight, without danger, without stratageme, is
never celebrated, and commended but for a gift of fortune. And therefore he
that desires to be excel^ent, let him frame his endeavors ^o the thing he
desires, for Hercules without his great Labors, had been without his honors.
Or Perhaps, to the end that wise men being mortal, yet desirous to make
themselves immortal (a work that passes our weak strength) might be given
to understand, that that cannot be done by ordinary labors, but only by
those that come nearer the nature of things divine then humane, And therefore,
for as much as it is a work of divine understanding, to understand all things
without error, hence it is that they to the uttermost of their power do
endeavor to attain to the knowledge, not only of as much as is hidden under
the curtains of heaven, but whatsoever was created above the heavens, yea
their speculations ascend even to God himself, neither made, nor created. And
forasmuch as it is a work of divine understanding, to be profitable and
helpful to the whole universe, they endeavor to be such upon earth, as may
help by their wisdom, and justice, in governing kingdoms, and commonweales,
forasmuch as it is a work of divine understanding, to beat down the proud,
and tyrannous, they nothing fear to assail barbarous, and untamed people, who
live without law, according to their own lusts, and being by just war
overcome and vanquished, they rule, and make tame their wild affections, with
the bridle of just, holy, and religious laws: for as much as it is a work of
divine understanding, to be gentle, and merciful unto those that are penitent,
and beg mercy at their hands: they endeavor likewise to make themselves
pitiful, and compassionate, even to their enemies: and lastly, they refuse no
pains, no labors, no studies, be they never so difficult, and dangerous, to
make themselves in some sort worthy of immortality. Or Perhaps, because not
the report, or brute of a few common base people, who commonly admire base and
obscure actions, not the voice of one only Village, or Town, or Castle, which
being rude, and ignorant of honorable actions, cannot but confusedly judge of
whatsoever is done, or undertaken, not the commendations of persons knit, and
united by blood and alliance, or bewitched by passion, who many times by too
much praising, do but enlarge the field of their own shames: but the common
fame, and report of great kingdoms, spread through many regions and countries,
by the clear light of their undaunted spirits, and valiant acts, undertaken
with much labor, and many dangers for the common good, and that glory that is
atteyned by daily study, and nightly watchings for the enriching of man's
understanding, and every other trumpet of more honorable fame, either of
magnanimity, or wisdom, or justice, do raise and exalt noble and valorous
hearts, to the high temple of immortality.

OF FLIGHT.
Why has Nature given flight to things created? Problem. 87.
PErhaps because things natural, as by desire they follow those things that
do nourish and give life unto them, so by flight they avoid their contraries,
which may any way either offend, or alter, or corrupt, or altogether take away
their lives. For to say the truth, how should the whole universe be preserved,
if Flight were not? whereby the benefit of life for the time present, is
preserved free from all violent mishap, and reserved for that time, which by
our mother Nature was first determined and set down? And therefore of such
force is this affection, that we see and find it in every sensible creature
whatsoever. In the heavens, wherein it falls out sometimes, that from the low
center of the earth descrying some light or other ecclipsed, we may likewise
discern with what celeritie, and have they are carried about by the upper
Spheres, as it were to free them from that trouble and disturbance, which that
noisome darkness brings with it. In the Elements, where we see, that the
devouring fire approaching near to the cold Element of water, the water being
only by provident nature instructed, does no sooner feel the violent force of
the fire, which conuerteth into his own nature whatsoever comes near unto it,
but it presently withdraws it self from one part to another, with a swift
flight to avoid that which by no auoydance must needs destroy it: And as the
water the fire, so the fire feeling the approache of the water, which by the
cold moisture thereof, quelleth and quenches, the violent heat of the fire,
for the preservation of it self, strives to avoid it. The force of this
affection, we may likewise see in compoundes, as in gold, and silver, which
being cast with Iron into one and the same furnace, do in such sort fly the
base nature of the Iron, that by the force of fire, they are sooner consumed,
then mingled together. In flowers, and Plants, which with a kind of invisible
flight, by little and little, turn their bodies and branches, to the Sphere
of the sun, flying all unpleasant shades, and darkness: In all living
creatures, who being assailed by other natures stronger then themselves, with
flight, and running, and swimming, and creeping, and shutting their shelles,
and gathering their bodies and backs together, do fly the force of those
their enemies that seek to take away their lives. And lastly in man, who
feeling, or seeing, or foreseeing, any thing that is contrary to his own
nature, or may any way offend him, either fire, or inundation by waters, or
ruin of buildings, or poysonings, or hidden treacheries, or open violence, or
whatsoever the like, does presently by all means possible seek to avoid it.
Or perhaps, to the end, that hereby the force and power of all natures, might
the better be known, which be they never so little, do many times strike a
fear, and terror into the strongest hearts: which does plainly appear in
the serpent, the scorpion, the Efte, who though their bodies be but small, do
yet sufficiently make known their power, by that inward venom that lies hidden
in their natures. So likewise the Sparrow hawk, the falcon, the Eagle, with
their talents, and armed beakes, and a subtle kind of boldness withal, dare
to seize upon every prey, though greater then themselves* to give us to
understand, that it is not the huge bulk of the body, or the strength of the
arm, or long life, or whatsoever besides that is strongest, or greatest, but
that invisible force, that many times lies in a weak body, that is especially
to be feared.

Why does it bring safety and honor, not only to particular men, but to whole
Cities, to fly sometimes the commodityes of Nature? Problem. 88.
PErhaps because, though nature as a liberal mother has given unto us many
treasuries of delights, assigned many restoritiues, and comforts, and fitted
every thing, for the best ease of every Nature, yet she has not t^ught us the
true use, and just end of them, but has left open unto us that gate which (at
our own liberty) leads us to these her riches, and treasures: and therefore
she will, that wisdom gotten by study, and experience, should be our guide,
and direction, to the best, and most regular use of them: for it is not ^he
purpose or meaning of nature, because she has bestowed on us great plenty of
precious wines, that we should be drunk, or because she has given ^s great
store of delicate meats, that we should therefore be gluttonous, or because
she has been bountiful ^n her manifold Beauties both of beasts, and
flowers, and all other creatures, that we should therefore ^e wanton and
lascivious: but she gave much, to accommodate her treasures unto all, and to
satisfy the diversity of appetits, with a regular desire. And therefore wise
men being advised that the virtue of temperance, is a rule, or direction to the
appetite, whereby vice, which always imbraceth the extremes is avoided, they
thought it not the least point of their wisdom, to fly superfluous
commodities, and those proud fortunes that many indiscreat men fly after. Or
Perhaps, because both the virtue of temperance, and the end for which men that
follow the wars do accustom themselves to that hardness, and those
dangerous inconveniences, which either for their Country, or desire of honor,
beyond all credit they endure, does inure their bodies to suffer, and endure
all manner of troubles and molestations. And therefore we read that in former
times, both the Grecians, and the Romans, did accustom their children to fly
all manner of ease, and delicacies, and to that end there were Censors
ordained, whose office tended no farther then to maintain Temperance, and good
discipline in the common wealth: whereby it came to pass, that their bodies
from their tender years, were made as a but, or mark, to receive all injuries
of heaven, and earth, of heat, and cold, of ise, and snow, of wind, and
weather, of famine, and nakedness, and whatsoever hard, and unhappy fortune,
either in the field, or in the wars, or in the waters, or in the earth, could
lay upon them. From hence therefore it was, that Alixander the great, endured
so much thirst, and hunger, yea many times when he needed not. That Caesar
feared not to pass the high, and craggie mountains, and snowye cliffes, and
that in the deadest time of winter, that he doubted not, to commit his body to
the merciless seas, even in his greatest pride of fortune. That Fabritius in
great poverty maintaitained his life a long time against the enemy, feeding
basely, and taking his drink out of a wooden cup. For which their resolute
minds, their memories are consecrated to immortality, and they made glorious
thoroughout the whole world.

Why is it commendable, sometimes to fly honor, the City it self, and Civil
conversation? Problem. 89.
PErhaps because, that man shows himself to be truly magnaninimous, who
despising the fleeting, and slipperie honors of this life, casts up the eye
of his reason, to those that are high, and heavenly: and therefore forasmuch as
he shows himself to be wise in choosing that which is eternal, and not
transitory, he that by flieng the earth, gains heaven, cannot but deserve
honor, and commendations. Or Perhaps, because a man flying the company of
men, does likewise forsake those appearing goods, that are commonly seen
amongst men, as dissembled friendshippes, secret treasons, flattering
speeches intemperate actions, uncivil sportes, and laughters, vain thoughts,
affected ceremonies, and, in civil conversation inciuility. And to speak the
truth, what are honors, but appearing goods? A crown is often envied, and by
mighty competitors being beaten down, falls to the ground: The scepter of
ius^ice, does many times stoop, and incline ^t self, either to the passions
of Love, or Fear, or the force of a golden bribe. The purple robe does
sometimes adorn the body of a prince, and leaves his mind naked of those
princly virtues that best adorn so royal a personage: many attendants, are so
many domestical ^heeues, and bosom enemies. The bright splendor of
nobility, by the base idleness of those that are nobly borne, is no occasion
of light, but dark obscurity to their posterities. So that we may easily be
persuaded, that they ^re but appearing goods, and if there be any thing in them
that is to be desired, ^t is so borne down by many evil circumstances, and a
thousand other unhappy accidents, that it can hardly appear, even to the
quickest eye.

Why is it sometimes infamous, and dishonorable to fly, and especially to
Soldiers? Problem. 90.
PErhaps, because it is the office of him, that takes upon him to instruct
others in the art military, not only to tell others, what they should do,
but in his own person to encounter the enemies force, and by his own valor,
either to resist the enemy, or to overcome. For there is nothing more
necessary to the obteyning of a future victory, then the undaunted spirit,
and courageous heart of a resolute leader, in the heat of fight and on the
other^ side, nothing brings greater ruin unto an army, then the cowardly
baseness of those that take more care, how they should fly in the time of
fight, then how they should, either defend them selves, or vanquish the enemy:
such a one therefore, having hereby offended the excellency of so honorable a
profession, and discipline, and discovered the inward spotted baseness of his
mind, it is no marvel, if such a soldier blush for shame, and never dare
afterward to show his face in the feld, or in any honorable assembly where the
glorious light of Mars does shine, and appear. Or Perhaps because he that
flies virtue, which is only worthy the reward of honor, unites himself
unto vice, from which, as from his proper fountain all infamy, and dishonor
does spring, and arise. And therefore from hence it is likewise, that ^hey that
fly the company of those that ^e virtuous, and in conditions more ^onorable
then other men, declare ^ore and more the foul deformity of ^eir minds, and
heap up unto them^lues, whole mountains of infamy, and dishonor. As it
plainly appea^th in those, that fly the lovers of truth, ^e principal virtue
to win, and to ^cline both the hearts of men, and ^od himself unto us. And
in those ^ewise, that do so much despise both ^uine, and humane wisdom, that
hea^ng any learned man to discourse, of ^atters appertaining either to pub^ke,
or private government, or of those ^arninges, that enrich the vnderstan^ng with
much knowledge, as enemies ^all learning, and discipline, no less ^amfully,
then basely, they fly from ^em. The like error is likewise in those ^ung men,
who seeing their elders, or ^ntients, (the best Censors, and Judges ^ their
youthful deameanors) by all ^ssible means they can, either avoid ^e sight of
them, or with much grief ^d sorrow lend their ears to their ^herly
instructions, making known thereby, the corruption of their desires, more
inclinable to a licentious life, which brings nothing with it but shame and
dishonor, then to those wholesome admonitions, which proceeding from much study,
and many dear experiences, are as a loadstone, to direct their hears through
the dangerous sea of this world. And therefore says the first Truth whilst he
conuersed upon the earth, clothed with the garment of our mortality, he that
hates the light walks in darkness The reason whereof is, because wicked and
ignorant men (being blind in the light of that reason, which with an
incomparable kind of comlines, at all times lays open unto us, the way of
Justice, and equity, opens the gates unto honesty, discovers the footesteps
of virtue, and instructs us in all holy, and religious laws) will not lift
up their eyes to behold the clear light of the wisdom of those, who by their
learning, and virtuous conversation can instruct them in all manner of
discipline, but according to the darkness of their own unbridled affections
they follow their own immoderate desires, be they never so dishonorable: and
therefore no marvel, if infamy, and dishonor to themselves, and incredible
loss unto their whole families, follow such loose, and unbridled affections.

Why are not all to be blamed that fly their countries? Problem. 91.
PErhaps because he that flies the fury of the common people (who many times
moved by particular affections, and hatred suddenly conceived, run headlong to
the ruin of other men) flies likewise an unlawful violence, and an unjust
sentence. Or perhaps, because, as a Son hates not his Father, because he
hears him in the fit of his burning fever to rave, and to talk idly, yea
otherwise then beseems his fatherly gravity, but rather moved with a filial
love, and dutiful compassion of so great a change, hates the cause of this
his distemperature, and gives place to the disease: so many sons, of many
famous commonweals, seeing their countries ouerladen with ambition, and
covetousness, and oppression, and many other the like disorders, compassionating
the miserable estate thereof, and hating the occasion of so dangerous a
disease, by staying, not being able to redress them by flight, have bin
content both to yield unto them, and to avoid them; yet not with a purpose for
ever to abando^ their countries (which were a sin of great impiety) but
forasmuch as they find themselves too weak a medicine, to cure so great a
malady, not being able to help, they remove from their eyes those mischiefs,
which in public perturbations and disorders, good citizens with much grief,
and anguish of heart are accustomed to behold; and this was a thing very common
both in Athens, Rome, and diverse other co^monweales, where forasmuch as this
their flight was grounded upon good, and lawful reasons, there was little
reason, why they should be stained thereby with any note of infamy, but rather
by men of soundest judgments, thought worthy of honor, and commendations.

OF DELIGHT.
Why has nature given delight unto creatures? Problem. 92.
PErhaps because the end of every work, being the first moouer of every agent
unto his work, it was not convenient, that it should be done by any violent
force, for that were the way to make every work odious, or at leastwise less
pleasing, and every workman being wearied with the tediousness thereof,
either to set at naught every enterprise be it never so weighty, or at
leastwise following it, with a more unhappy end to accomplish it* For the end
of every work, having in it (at the least) a show of good, and especially of a
good that is pleasant, and delightful does with a kind of sweetness, inuit, and
stir up every thing to follow it. making every motion pleasant, every labor
easy, every difficulty plain and open, and every heavy thing light, every age
short, every discommodity comodious, and every sour, sweet and acceptable. And
therefore hence it is that all the motions, and works of all things natural
whatsoever, being conformable to their nature, are acted, and exercised with
delight. The heavens with their swift, and indefatigable motion do they not
from far make known to as many as contemplate them, that delight which they
hide under those rich curtains? and do not the Elements by their swift, and
direct motions show as much? The fire takes pleasure in those twinkling
sparkles, that expresses the force thereof: the air feels the like delight,
when all the regions thereof, are freed from those turbulent motions that arise
from the rage, and fury of the winds. The water running by her channels, and
rivers, and pores, and aqueducts, and fou^taines, unto her common mother the
Sea, with her silver surges, gives sollace even to the heavens, and with a
calm and quiet delight setleth it self. The earth by those manifold riches,
that it brings forth, makes known that inward delight which it co^tayneth
within the bowels thereof. The plants with their fecundity, All living
creatures with their generation: men with ^eir arts, and ingenious industries,
make ^anifest the delight and pleasure they ^ioy upon the earth: yea the Angels
^ their understanding, the heavens by ^eir circular motion, the night by the
^riety of lights, the day by the great^sse of that one light of the sun, the
^ by the flames thereof, the air by ^e pleasant, and pleasing flowers of ^ne,
the water by her christalline fou^^nes, the earth by her riches, the spring
^her flowers, the summer by the heat, ^e autumn by the fruits, the winter ^
the snow thereof, birds by their flight, ^es by their swimming, all creeping
^atures by their crawling, wild beasts ^ their free walks in the spacious, and
^asant woods, Domestical, by their ^ightfull pastures, and lastly man by ^
daily endeavors to attain immorta^, feels that joy and solace, and con^t
that cannot be expressed by any ^gue, be it never so learned, and elo^t. Or
Perhaps to the end that delight ^ght be that sweet sauce, that princely ^ion,
that Nectar of the gods, that a^ble pattern of pleasure, which nature ^
liberally divided to her parts, for the ^ort and recreation of their works, the
^ard of their labors, the wages of ^r sweatings, the ease of their motions.
For how should any man after long labor, and travel, be desirous to return
unto it, if after his labor, he be not by some delightful nourishment
strengthened, and recomforted? And therefore the Seaman, though he be tumbled
and tossed by the dangerous, and tumultuous waves of the sea, yet having tasted
that Delight that follow these dangers when he comes to the shore, forgerting
all that is past, he lancheth his ship again into the sea. And even so every
agent being allured by some delight or other, is encouraged to his action, and
after ease returns to his labor.

Why has Nature given such diversity Delights unto man? Problem. 93.
PErhaps because man is the Epilogue and end, or rather receptacle of all
natures, as having in him the degrees of that perfection, which is in every
other kind: and therefore he is likewise called the Horizon of all creatures,
because represents the superior, and invisible creatures with his mind, and
the inferior with his body, and therefore whatsoever is delightful in every
kind must necessarily in some sort belong unto him. Or Perhaps, because
Nature having given Delights unto every thing conformable unto their Natures,
and to the diverse constitutions of diverse creatures, diversity of food, and
sustenance, as to the swine acornes, to the woolfe flesh, to the ferret blood,
to the horse hay, to the goat leaves, to the sheep grass, to the be
flowers, and the like: and having framed and fashioned man, of a more noble,
and excellent complexion then any other creatures, in touch delicate, in cast
temperate^, and in all the other senses more perfect, and excellent, as being
(also) more apt to judge of ^h^se sensible obiectes that appertain unto him,
it was likewise fit, and ne^essary, that she should give unto him, ^he
excellency of every Delight, which should not only shine in their rare and
^ingular qualities, but be answerable likewise) in respect of their multitude,
^o her many, and natural prerogatives. And therefore with a bountiful hand
she has bestowed upon him all those Delights, which are proportionable, either
to his own greatness, or the magnificence of his maker. And therefore she
has not given unto man one only food, and sustenance, but many, and those
most delicate: she has not given him water to drink, as to other unreasonable
creatures, but precious liquors, and wholesome beuerages: yea all other Delights
whatsoever, belonging unto the other special senses, were especially granted
unto man, and though happily they may appertain unto other creatures, they are
rather appropriated unto them as signs, and differences of their natures, then
as any way delightful unto themselves. For the variety of colors, the Beauty
of the heavens, the goodly feature of bests, and birds, the glorious splendor
of precious stones, the diversity of mettalles, and the incomparable Delights
of the Spring, were all made, and ordained, to please, and content the eye of
man. The fragrancy, and sweet smelling odor of so many flowers, the Hyacinth,
the Gesmine, the Rose, the violet, with other inumerable, were only made to
Delight, and satisfy the smell of man. The sweetness of so many voices so
many musical accents, so many instruments, was made, and ordained for the
only benefit of man, to Delight, and comfort his ear: for we have never
heard of any creature besides man, were he by the gift of nature never so wise,
that for Delight only, does contemplate the Beauty of the heavens, or any
thing else: that for pleasure and Delight smells to any flower, or harkneth
to the harmony of any other Creature, as a musician to the notes, and
compositions of an other. So, that as man is superior to all other creatures,
so he excels them all in the variety of his Delights, and pleasures. Or
Perhaps, because only man having been created, among other inferior
creatures, for that pleasant and delightful place of Paradise, where those
pleasures are found, and tasted, that man can nether conceive, nor imagine,
GOD would likewise give unto him, the choice above all other Creatures, of all
the pleasures, and Delights of this life, that being drawn by the sweetness
of them, he should so much the more aspire every day to that prime, and
principal Delight, that does never alter, nor decay.

Why does man, being not content with such variety of Delight as nature
affords, procure other unto himself by art and invention? Problem. 94.
PErhaps because this is the difference betwixt man, and other living
Creatures, that he receaueth from Nature his inferior powers, rude, and simple,
and unwrought, as it were seeds to be sowed, tilled, and manured, by the sharp
plough share of his penetrating wit, whereas unreasonable creatures, as being
created by nature for themselves, in the works and effects of their own
powers rest and settle themselves, and though some of them being helped by
outward discipline, may appear more apt, and active in bettering that which
nature has bestowed on them, yet it is ever without knowledge, or Delight, and
therefore man having received from the self same nature, that twofold desire,
of knowledge, and of good, as two spurs, accompanied (besides) with an
inclination, both of wit accommodated to speculation, and of hands the
fittest instruments of all others to act any thing, and being moreover invited,
by the perfection of so many Beautiful works of nature, which make rich the
Theater of this world, he would with a sweet kind of Culture, and tillage of
his understanding powers, habituate, and accustom himself to virtuous
actions, Delight himself with a thousand acts, a thousand ingenious
inventions, make himself amiable by his gracious carriage, and by his high
courage, and valor purchase unto himself honor, and felicity: And therefore
hence it is, that we see him diligent, and industrious (and that with an
unspeakable Delight) in the attayning unto virtue, to temperance, justice,
fortitude, wisdom, Chastity, Clemency, Vrbanity, Truth, and to every other
virtuous habit: that we see him (according to that full measure of wit, and
understanding that he has) follow with pleasure, and Delight, the Princely
sportes of of hunting, pleasant comedies, pastoral compositions, grave
tragedies, celestial Harmonyes: that we see him altogether given to
magnificence, to the the Beauty of rare figures, excellent pictures, rich
statues, artificial perspectiues, ancient monuments, proud edifices, and the
like: that we see him zealous of honor, and with equal valor to pass the
seas, the mountains, the craggie Rocks, to enter into battle with barbarous
people, and by many victories to win honor, and immortality: that we may
see him painful, and vigilant in contemplating the heavens, in pearcing into
the Elements, in searching every Nature, every cause, every effect, every
property, every substance, every accident, every power, every act, every
simple, every compound, every alteration, generation, motion, rest, quantity,
quality, body, place, action, passion, habit, privation, matter, form, kinds
general and special, sense, and sensible, intellect, and intelligible things:
and whatsoever besides he seeks, and searches to minister unto him self
Delight, and pleasure. Or Perhaps, because man being of a noble, and generous
mind, and observing those many excellent qualities, which in the variety of
kinds, in the world do manifestly shine, and appear, and finding the
imitation (even) of things most difficult, to be but easy unto him, the
nobility of his nature would not suffer him to yield unto them, but rather
spurred him forward with a desire of glory, both by art, and labor, and
industry, to excel them all, and to make himself Lord, and chief commander
over them And therefore man considering the liberality of the heavens, the
confederation of the Elements, the fecundity^ of the plants, the majesty of
the Lion, the fidelity of the Dog, the strength of the Panther, the wisdom
of the Ante, the meekenes of the Lamb, the vigilance of the Crane, the patience
of the ass, the te^perance of the Camelio^, the providence of the be, the
subtlety of the Fox, the boldness of the Swanne, the force of the Elephant,
the courage of the horse, the music of the Nightingale, the grammar of the
Parret, the arithmetic of the Tunnie, the Astronomy of the Cock, the Logic
of the Dog, the sollid firmness of metals, the price of precious stones,
and the virtue of the herbs, he could not contain himself, in this noble
Theater of all the creatures of the world, adorned with so many and so
excellent qualities, but that he must, not only imitate them, but far excel
them. The heavens are liberal by ministering unto us, (by their influence,
motion, and light) every good thing whatsoever: The Elements are confederated,
for being bound with a band of Love, they hold the whole world in unity and
concord: the Plants are fertile, for they yield unto us the delight of their
fruit: the Lion is maiesticall, for he is King of all other beasts: the Dog
is faithful, for he never forsakes his Lord and master: the Panther is
strong, for with his strength he fears not to encounter the strongest beasts
of the field: the Ante is wise, for within her little celles she hides her
necessary victual, until time of need: the Lamb is gentle, for he offends
not, though he be offended: the Crane is vigilant, for whilst his company
sleeps he stands Sentinel: the Ass is patient, for though he endure, many
blows, he strikes not again: The Camelion is temperate, for he lives by the
air: the Be is provident for with an excellent order she appoints her
troops unto their labor. The Fox is subtle, for with wonderful art he
obteyneth his prey: the Swanne is bold, for he fears not to enter combat
with the Eagle: the Elephant is strong, for he carries upon his back a tower
of armed men: the the horse is valiant, for at the sound of the trumpet, being
thirsty of glory, he fears not to run into the enemies squadrons. The
Parret is a Gramarian, for he utters an articulate voice: The Nightingall is
a Musician, for with a thousand tunes he delights the ear: the Tunnie is an
Arithmetician, for having counted his troops, he gathers them together into
a formal squadron in the waters: The Cock is an Astronomer, for with his
morning song he foretells the quality of the times. The Dog is a Logitian,
for not finding his master in one place, he seeks him in another, and so in
a third, framing thereby an argument from the whole to the parts, that is, that
his master being in the house, he must necessarily be in some part thereof,
and therefore not finding him in the first, nor in the second, he concludes
that he must necessarily be in one of the rest: Mettalles are solid, and
permanent, for time can hardly corrupt them: Stones are precious, for in price
they exceed gold, and herbs have many hidden virtues in them, for they cure
all diseases: so that man learning from every thing, and taking singular
delight in them, would not, being monarch of this inferior world, be inferior
unto it, but gathering unto himself by his own arts and industries, all
those excellencies, which he observes to be divided in the multitude of things
through out the whole universe, enjoy them for his unspeakable delight and
comfort.

Why do women, and young men especially love things pleasant and Delightful?
Problem. 95.
PErhaps because women and young men, are of all others best friends unto their
senses, and therefore in every thing most intemperate, the reason whereof does
arise from no other ground, then that they are nouelists to nature, and
therefore thirsting after every delightful thing, they desire to prove all,
and yet withal be never satisfied; and women by reason of that tender and
delicate soft nature we see in them, are more inclinable to the flattering
allurements of every pleasing and pleasant object. Or Perhaps, because they
naturally loving meriment and laughter, desiring sports and pastimes, thirsting
after solace and content, and being free to attempt (if their minds be not
ruled by the bridle of shamefastness) whatsoever they wish or desire, and not
finding that their desire, but in those things that either by nature, or art
have Delight in them, with all their strength and study, and by all means
both open and secret, they endeavor to possess themselves of those delights,
which do best befit their own wills: And therefore we do plainly see among
other senses, how much they are carried away with the delight of those dainties,
that do best please their taste and pallates, they Love sweet meats, delight
in banquetings, desire novelties, follow delicacies, and are common gests at
rich and bountiful tables. Or Perhaps, because women and young men, being more
drawn by the force of Love, which affection (according to Plato) does
especially reign intender breasts) and Love leading all Lovers to a chief and
principal delight, they cannot endure to be deprived of all other delights,
but rather direct all other unto that, as the parts unto the whole, and as
rivers unto their fountain. Or Perhaps, because young men abounding with much
natural heat, and women being weak, nature provoke them to refresh, and
strengthen themselves, with the comfort of those things that are pleasant and
Delightful.

Why does the multitude of those delightful things that especially appertain
to the sense of feeling, taste, and smelling, make us many times intemperate?
Problem. 96.
PErhaps because those senses participate much of that which is earthly, and
therefore having an earthly apprehension of their sensible objects, the senses
do not only unite, but drown and ouerwhelme themselves with their objects,
and so being altered by the sweetness of them, become intemperate, to the hurt
of themselves and others. For the sense of Feeling, being overmuch accustomed
to things, either by nature, or art over soft and delicate, and the sense of
Taste to sweet and pleasant meats, and the sense of Smelling, to the sweet
fragrancie of odoriferous smells, the vital spirits grow and increase about the
heart, the Desires are awaked, concupiscence inflamed, the appetite inclined,
and the will (amongst the dark flames of corrupt sense) gives consent, and so
the evil habit of the sin of intemperancie grows in us. Or perhaps,
because the force of concupiscence spreading it self from the heart (as from
the fountain of all heat, and with that heat, the abundance of vital
spirits to the whole body, even to the superficial part thereof, where the
sense of feeling especially has place, and that being much more awakened by
the excellency of those objects that are presented unto it, and likewise
strengthened by that heat which the sense of Taste, by the diversity of whote
drinks, and nourishing meats, brings with it, and yet more increased by sweet
and exquisite odours, it carries us headlong to the highest degree of
intemperance. For where the sense bears rule, and without the curb, or
bridle of virtue, is made the predominant, reason in despite of our selves is
made a slave, and quite overcome. Or Perhaps, because these senses do so
thoroughly make proof of the delight of their objects, that they are in such
sort bewitched with them, that with a sweet kind of forgetfulness of
themselves, they carry the Empire and rule of reason, in a kind of delightful
Lethargy, to the end it should not discern that error, which by their
greediness to their common loss they commit: and by so much the more are they
therein burdened and ouercharged, by how much accustoming themselves thereto,
they do not afterward in the like affairs so much obey their own wills, as
that necessity, which by frequent practice they have brought upon themselves:
So that being all, and altogether intemperate, they know not or seem not to
know, how to better themselves.

Why did Athens glory in the delight of wisdom, and Rome of arms. Problem.
97.
PErhaps because Athens loved more the long robe of peace (an outward badge of
that wisdom and gravity, which in peaceable times gave life and strength to
the whole state, but especially to those which willingly employed rhe^selues to
the speculatio^ of natural causes, seuering themselves from all rumor of
wars) then the helmet, and curasse, or complete armor: for military
exercises are never without loss, and hurt, both to the assaylants, and
assailed, But Rome, as being more inclined to the glory of labor and pains,
and valor, then to that idle life, which peace commonly brings with it, did
wholly addict it self to the labors of Hercules, the honors of Mars, the
valiant encouragements of Bellona: and as the Athenians took delight in
wisdom, in the attayning whereof, they placed their whole studies, and
indeauors, so the Romans in that strength and fortitude (which made manifest
the valor of their hearts) tasted that pleasure, and delight, which cannot be
expressed. Or Perhaps, because Athens did more attend the tillage, and manuring
of the mind by discipline, and study, as knowing that man was borne to
contemplate, and therefore for no other cause has wise Nature given him the
force of wit, but to penetrate: of understanding, but to conceive, and a
countenance looking upward, but to co^template. But Rome did more attend the
outward glory and ornament of the body, then that of the mind, as knowing that
man was borne to labor, and therefore has Nature given unto him every
instrument, apt, and necessary thereunto, as bodily strength, to sustain
himself, to beat down others, to darte from him, to draw unto him, to run,
to leap to break in pieces, to beat down, to shake, to ruinate, agility of
members, swiftness of pase, strength of the arm, cunning of the hand, courage
of the heart, heat of blood, plenty of spirits, readiness of the sense, the
knitting of the sinowes, a firm settling of the bones, and the vigor of life,
whereunto she has added, the inflamed desire of the part concupiscible, the
ready help of the irascible, the moving virtues, and the rich treasury of all
the powers outward, and inward: whereby those generous champions of Rome (not
altogether abandoning the wisdom of Minerua) gave themselves wholly to military
exercises, and by the strength of their arms, and valor of their hearts, won
both to themselves, and to their country immortal honor, and renown. Or
Perhaps, because Athens was always moved with that difficult invisible good,
which is the gift of wisdom, for the invisible power of the understanding does
likewise learn, although it attain thereunto by visible creatures, and
visible senses: which good, by how much more difficult, by so much the more
pleasant it is, after it is obtained, and of invisible, is made visible, by the
help, and communication of the tongue And therefore they having had in their
possession so great a treasure, to all others (yet) invisible and unknown, it
was no marvel if they gloried so much in those whose honorable fame did
spread it self to the uttermost confines of the world. But Rome being moved
with a difficult visible good, such as is a Monarchy, the supreme and highest
honor of all others, which is gotten by fight, and wars and visible
conflicts in a field, open to the eye of the world, made it far more visible
by the conquest of so many crowns, so many Kingdoms, so many triumphs over
barbarous nations, which set the flashing lightning of their glory to the most
unknown parts of the world, and the eternity of all times. Or Perhaps, because
the Athenians laid the foundation of their state, and commonweal, in a time
of peace, and therefore Idleness best befitting the speculation of all
creatures, they applied themselves so much the more willingly to the
contemplation of divine wisdom, by how much the more they perceived it to
shine in the creatures, both by the order and disposition of the parts to the
whole, and in every kind, both universal, and particular. So that every day
increasing their labors herein, they became famous for wisdom through the
whole world, But Rome taking her beginning from that war that Romulus made,
when upon just cause he drove his uncle Aemulius out of his kingdom, and
thereby the common weal being hardly begun, much less settled, he was enforced
presently to take arms against the Sabines, and other countries, and so by
little and little the glory of the Romans increasing, being allured, partly by
the valor of their arms, partly by the greatness of their Monarchy, and
partly awaked by the generosity and magnanimity of their hearts, they won
honor, and glory in the world, and in all future ages immortality.

Why do Kings and Princes, contrary to the opinion of the common people taste
least of pleasure and Delight? Problem. 98.
PErhaps because they want that liberty that other men have, being commonly
shut up in imprennable fortresses, and stately palaces, compassed with many
walls, kept with guard upon guard by day, and watched by sentinells at night,
for which debarment of liberty they may thank those suspicions, and enuies,
and emulations that they endure: and if all these were not, yet the regal
respect and majesty of great personages permits the^ not to walk abroad at
their pleasure, much less does it become them to show themselves, either in
public spectacles, or private assemblies, so that being detained by the bridle
of comely dece^cie, they are deprived of the sight of many delightful things,
which if it usually happen within their own land, or city where they make
abode, much more in strange countries, which are far distant from them, and
most of all in those that are under the empire of another crown: for to those
places they cannot go without great suspicion, and danger to their states, and
persons: and if sometimes it do fall out, that they do go, it is seldom
granted unto them, and never without inconvenience. And therefore they live
deprived of all those wonderments, that are seen in so many strange cities,
and provinces; and kingdoms. And if it fall out that by reason of their
greatness, and bounty, any Beautiful, or strange thing be brought from
far to their own palaces, this happens but seldom, and the reward (thereof)
must carry a proportion to their own greatness, though there be no proportion
betwixt that one thing they see, and those thousands that are in other
countries, and cannot be brought unto them. So that the poorest creature that
is, in this condition, excels the greatest princes on the earth: for every
common person being a free man borne, has liberty to dispose of himself, and
at his own pleasure, without the fear, and suspicion of any: he goes forth
off his simple cottage or pastoral cell, and visits the City, gazeth, and
glutteth himself, with the strange wonders thereof, is present at every
public spectacle, every private pastime, every show, every recreation, yea and
with little charge, he passes over the highest mountains, from kingdom to
kingdom, from province to province, and glutteth his eyes with delightful
objects, proud magnificences, inestimable treasures, princely statues,
sumptuous edifices, and enricheth his knowledge with variety of manners, and
complections, and languages, and the hidden virtue of every herb, and plant,
delights himself with the beauty of every beast, with their colors, their
strength, their discipline, and therefore who can deny but this man (having
this liberty of his body, whilst at his own pleasure he wandereth through
the spacious Element of the earth, and of the sea, viewing the most noble parts
of Nature, and contemplating the manners, and customs of nations, and the
strange arts of man's invention) far excels the little experience of the
greatest Potentates, who spend their time within the small circuit of their
walled Palaces. And therefore it consequently follows, that they taste less
of the delights of this world, then men of base estate and condition Or
Perhaps, great Princes always abounding in every good thing that brings
delight with it, want, by the continual fru^tion of them, that pleasure, and
content, which the lack of them procures unto others. Whereby we see (to
speak of the sense of Taste, for in the sense of Seeing it does already
appear) that their tables being always furnished, with exquisite meats of
all sorts, and that in great abundance, and those so dressed and seasoned, and
sauced by the art of a skillful hand, with a thousand tricks, and inventions
that every day ingenious gluttony finds out, they never sit down to the
table with hungry appetites, but being always accustomed to have the self
same dishes, of flesh, and fish (for variety cannot always be, had) their diet
(were it Nectar it self) grows loathsome unto them: whereby it comes to
pass, that they relish nor the dainties of their sumptuous tables, but
sometimes they condemn nature as imperfect, in not providing better variety of
viands: sometimes their Cook, as not skillful enough to devise sawces, and
quelquesehoses to Delight their pallats, yea such is their infelicity, that
those sollemne times of meetings, and meriments, wherein every appetite
glutteth it self to the full, (as Shrouetide, marriages, gossiping feasts, and
the like, where no dainty dishes are wanting, that either nature can yield, or
art can devise) are no meriments to them, because being always accustomed to
them, they prise them not as things new, every day being a festival day to
them, and every dainty their ordinary diet. And that which is worst of all,
and does most express their infelicity, is, that many times, especially forth
off their own houses, in cups of gold, in fruit merely natural, not
artificial, in precious drinks, and broathes, in sweet, and sumptuous
banquets, they meet with mortal poison: and in those viands that are provided
to maintain life, they fear, and find the cause of death: So that few are
the Delights that Princes find in the sense of taste, and those few not
without just cause of suspicions, and danger to their own persons: whereas men
of low degree, and estate, yea the country swain, plucking an apple from his
tree, and allaying his thirste, with a cup of cold water, his stomach being
whetted thereunto by his daily labor, feels that sweet relish, and pleasant
delight, which great personages in their greatest plenty, and variety of
diet, are never acquainted with. And in solemn times of the year, appointed
to feastings, and civil recreation, a small diet, but little more then
ordinary, brings with it that admirable content, that delight to the palate,
that pleasure to the mind, which by their free and pleasant discourses, and
friendly communication of each others thoughts, is made known to all that
behold them, and they likewise made merry with their meriments. So that it
cannot but be plain and manifest, that the pleasure that princes and great
personages take in the delight of Taste, is no way comparable to that of men of
far inferior estate and condition. Or Perhaps, because the powers are
offended with the ouer-excellencie of their objects, as we see the excessive
light of the Sun offends the eye: and therefore it is no marvel, if in
Princes and great personages, the senses of Taste and Smelling, are always
languishing, as of Taste it already appears, and of Smelling we may say, that
by the great and daily fragrancie that all the odours, and ciuets, and muskes,
and spices, and waters, and a thousand the like precious ointments do make,
the organe of their Smelling (which is the nose) being ouer-glutted and
weakened, they cannot possibly give any true judgment of any odours, nor
consequently take any true delight in them. But the simple and silly swain of
the country, being not only not acquainted with the variety of sweet
smelles, but sometimes with savors very unpleasing, receives greater content
and comfort in the smell of one only flower, one only Rose, then the greatest
Princes of the earth, in the greatest variety of sweet smelling odours. Or
Perhaps, because great Princes and Potentates, by flattery and dissimulation (a
sin too common amongst them) are to commonly deceived. For the fear that
every man has of the power of great personages, which holds every man (be
he never so bold) from uttering any thing unto them that may any way discontent
them: so that they hear nothing but pleasing news, their own praises and
commendations, and the vain glorious bragges of those that attend them, which
forasmuch as they are for the most part untrue (for then are praises only
true, when they are uttered by a free tongue, with much knowledge, and little
affection) bring with them rather a noisome tediousness, then any delight, and
dark ignorance in discerning a true friend from a false. But a man of lower
degree, and far meaner fortunes, as he wants power to give cause of fear,
so because he knows men speak not for fear, he takes more delight to hear
other men speak well of him. And though Princes sometimes in their private
Chambers, enjoy the delight of Music, yet the common people have it more
common, and when they want that which art can affoorde them, the birds of
the fields, with their pleasant notes are never wanting unto them. Or
Perhaps, because it often comes to pass by the corruption of Nature, that
the delights of the sense of Touching are sildome exercised without danger of
intemperance, which falling out in the person of great Princes, especially in
the act of Luxury, the infamy and dishonor thereof, is so much the greater,
by how much they are higher and greater then other men. For a Prince can never
commit any sin, but it is presently censured by his people, and therefore the
infamy depending upon many tongues, must necessarily spread farther, and grow
greater, so that they can safely enjoy only the honest delight, which all men
(besides) by lawful matrimony may be possessed of. Or Perhaps because great
Princes do commonly want those goods, especially of the mind, which can only
make them truly happy in this life: For Peace is an excellent good, and this
they can never wholly enjoy either with foreign Princes, or their own
subjects: war is a great evil, threatening unto us the loss both of life and
goods, and whilst it bears swaye, the Princes themselves are not secure,
even within the walls of their Cities, and when it bears not swaye, they
still endure the effects thereof, secret hates and treacherous underminings:
The sweet band of friendship is an excellent good, the very shadow whereof (by
reason of those continual flatterers they have about them) they cannot promise
themselves; It is a great benefit to make proof of the faith and fidelity of
those they love, before dear experience bewray their infidelity, being many
times flame by their own children, their brethren, their wives, their
neighbors: for which they may thank their unbridled desire of bearing rule.
The peace and quiet of the mind, is an excellent good, whereof they are in
such sort deprived by public business, and the many and daily complaints of
their subjects wrongfully oppressed, that they pass over whole nights with
watchful eyes, and troublesome thoughts, exceeding therein the unfortunate
condition of the basest slaves, who after their wearisome travels in the day,
in the midst of their chains and fetters, sleep soundly and securely at
night. And lastly, the felicitye and prosperous estate of children is a
singular good, but the children of great Princes grow thereby intemperate,
proud, and insolent: which blessings meaner men do many times enjoy, with
greater pleasure and content, then the greatest potentates of the earth.

OF SORROW.
Why has Nature given Sorrow unto Creatures? Problem. 99.
PErhaps, because the presence of contraries which are wont to corrupt every
particular thing, by offending, and altering the parts thereof, being by the
flownesse of the powers of the other senses unknown, and by the awakened sense
of Touching, being with much grief and martyrdom apprehended, Nature is
stirred up by flight and all possible means to save it self. Or Perhaps,
because that which the concupiscible part could not do with the irascible, that
is, what desire and anger together cannot effect, might be supplied by the
help of Sorrow: for we see a beast being provoked by the Huntesman that
follows him in chase, flies with all the possible speed he can make: but if
by chance there be added to this his fear, some blow, or wound, he doubleth
his force in flying, runs through every thicket, leapes every ditch, every
mound, yea casts himself headlong from the highest rock to the lowest
valleys, the pain and grief, that he feels by his late received hurt,
still increasing his strength. Or Perhaps, because though Nature especially
intend Delight in every creature: yet by accident it intends Sorrow too, that
is, to give notice to every creature, by such sensible grief and torment,
their approaching ruin and decay, and that therefore it is necessary they
give what aid and assistance they can to the part offended. Or Perhaps,
because the excellencye of every thing, is better known by the opposition of
his contrary: and therefore light would be nothing so precious, if there were
not darkness, nor the Spring so pleasant, if there were not Winter, nor
laughter so grateful and acceptable, if it were not mingled with some tears,
and therefore, besides delight which is so sweet and lovely to nature, she has
likewise added grief and sorrow to make delight more amiable. Or Perhaps, to
the end that man should be far the more ready and willing to aspire to the
true felicity of that other life, where only there is delight without sorrow,
and joy without fear of melancholy, which in this life (where there is an
everlasting combat betwixt a thousand contrarieties) cannot be found.

Why the sense of feeling most subject to grief? Problem. 100.
PErhaps, because the Nature of every particular creature, being subject to
that ruin which the contraries thereof from all the parts of the body, as
well behind as before, on the right side, as the left, above as beneath, do
present unto it, benign nature has provided the sense of Touching: which
dispersing it self through the whole body and life of every creature, does
presently find, and feel every contrary, and enemy, from what part soever
it shall come: And therefore, the sense of Touching, by reason of the Organ
thereof (which is the flesh with the sinowes, and veins of the whole body) is
most subject unto grief. Or Perhaps, because no sense is more sensible of
offense then Touch, as having an Organ very gentle, and soft, and quick to
apprehend every impression of heat, or cold, soft, or hard, pricking, or
cutting, or the like: and therefore, though it fall out sometime that the sense
of Hearing, Smelling, Seeing, Tasting, have lost their force and operation, yet
the Touch is not only the last that loses his virtue: but when it seems to
be lost by the languishing, or rather insensible weakness of the body: yet in
some part or other it manifests it self: and if by no other mean, yet by
applying bands, or any other offensive instrument, it is presently awakened
and revived. Which comes to pass because the sense of feeling is very
strong, and quick in apprehending contrary objects, for the health and
preservation of every creature. Or Perhaps, because the sense of Feeling is
more in exercise then the other senses: for the eye does not always See, the
ear does not always hear. The pallat does not always Taste: the nostrelles
do not always Smell: but the sense of Feeling is always in action, and
always feel some sensible quality, being ever compassed, if with no other
body, yet with the air, which by the diverse impressions thereof, being many
times altered, comunicateth unto, the body which it compasses, her changes,
and alterations, of cold, and heat, drith, and moisture: whereby it follows,
that though the other senses do sometimes take some breathing, and rest
themselves from their work: yet the sense of Feeling is always vigilant, in
so much that whatsoever do approach that is any way contrary, or hurtful to any
creature at rest, and in his dead sleep, as fire, or the like, he presently
awaketh and starteth up upon his feet, because the touch by that grief, which
is caused by an approaching enemy, stands Sentinel, and gives warning of
defense.

Why are griefs of the body communicated unto the mind, and those of the
mind unto the body? Problem. 101.
PErhaps because the union of the form with the matter, is a sweet ligament
of nature, or rather an amiable chain of Love, so that the form loving her
natural matter, by it perfected, and brought into action, and ability to
exercise her works, it cannot but grieve with it, when sorrows affflict it, or
contraries any way deforme it: and therefore no marvel, if the sorrows of the
body are communicated unto the mind. Or Perhaps, because the reasonable soul,
for the time is tied, and united to the body, depends upon it, as upon her
organe, or instrument to exercise her natural powers: for the inward discerning
faculties, in their operations, depend upon the outward discerning powers,
which do carry the sensible kinds to the inward se^ses: whereby it comes to
pass, that the body being martyred, and consequently the senses altered, which
in that mass of the body are contained, they present those corporal kinds or
species very imperfectly to the inward powers: and therefore remain likewise
in their works very confused, and impotent, whereby follows that grief, and
heaviness of heart, and affection of the mind, which every man finds in
himself by the passions, and sufferings of the body. Or Perhaps, because in
the composition of man there is a kind of order or marshalling of the powers
among themselves, which has the similitude, or resemblance of a Monarchy: all
the parts in due place, and order obeying the Empire, and command of the first
moving power, which is the will. And therefore if the body, and every member
thereof be well disposed to their work, it is all to do service unto the
will, and if by the power, and puissance of the bodily forces it come to pass,
that any thing be acted worthy comendations, worthy a crown, the honor is the
wills, which gave in charge to the hands, and other parts of the body to
attempt so honorable an enterprise. And so likewise, if it come to pass, that
the hand cannot work, the foot cannot go, the eye is dazeled, the ear
observes not, and all the members of the body be weak, and the whole body
languishing, it is a token that the Monarchy of the will is deprived of that
train of the universal powers, which showed themselves so prompt, and ready
at her service and command. And therefore no marvel, if the mind be sorry
for the grief of the body, because she sees by the ill disposition thereof a
great part of her glory extinguished. Or Perhaps, because the mind, by a
kind of foreknowledge, sees that the griefs of the body are but as precedent
forerunners to the ruin, and corruption of the whole, by which ruin there
follows the separation of the soul from the body: which is so much more
grievous then any other, by how much the mind of all other substantial
forms is the more noble: and this grief contineweth so much the longer, by
how much longer it has bin united unto the body, and therefore the mind
seeing the natural strength of the body by the extremity of grief to decay,
and fearing a future ruin of all, is many times opressed, nay overwhelmed with
melancholy and grief. The like may likewise be said of the griefs and
sorrows of the mind, which the body does so participate, as if they were
proper unto it self. For the body seeing his natural force, the exercise of his
powers, his action, and life to be placed in his Form, from which it takes
his being, powers, operations, name, and distinction, it is no marvel, the
mind being Melancholic, and full of heaviness and grief, if the body
likewise do decay and languish. For the soul being separated, the eye sees
not, the hand moves not, the tongue speaks not, the ear harkneth not, the
foot goes not, the shoulder susteyneth not, and the whole body, as unapt to
do any thing, like an earthly burden falls to the earth.

Why are the griefs of the body more sensible and violent in soft and
delicate bodies, as of women and honorable personages, then of those that are
strong and valiant? Problem. 102.
PErhap^, because the senses, by how much more pure and noble they are, by so
much the more excellently do they apprehend those sensible kinds, and objects
that belong unto the^. Now the flesh being the organe, or instrument of the
sense of Feeling, and that Organe in noble men (their bodies being framed of
purer blood, by reason of a purer diet) and in women (by reason of a their thin
and delicate skin, and excellent temperature of body) most pure and noble, it
could not otherwise be, but that women, and noble men should more sensibly, and
strongly feel the bitterness of any bodily grief. Which may likewise appear
in the Ox, and the Ass, who stir more slowly with the prick of the goad, or
spur, then either the dog, or the horse, because they, abounding with a nature
very earthly, and melancholic, receive not the blow with that feeling grief
that the dog, or the horse does, being beasts of a more noble, and generous
nature. Or Perhaps, because noble men, being much given to the commodities of
Nature, and women to the delights of Bacchus, and the wanton alluring pleasures
of Venus: they pass they whole time in joy, and pleasant recreations: in so
much that if it fall out, that they are enforced, either by chance, or defect
of Nature, or violence, to suffer any grief of body, they are far more
afflicted with it, then men of baser estate, and condition, who besides that
they have bodies, either by nature, or education of a harder temper, and
consequently are less apt to feel the grief and vexations of the body, they
are commonly accustomed to much variety of misfortunes, and to suffer the
discommodities of nature, and the injuries of all times.

Why are the griefs of the mind far greater then those of the Body?
Problem. 103.
PErhaps, because the judgment of the reasonable, or intellectiue part, is
more perfect, as having knowledge of causes remote, and near at hand, then
that of the sense, which many times erreth about his present sensible object,
whereby that grief, which the sense feels by the alteration of the bodily
parts, is joined to the confused judgment of his own passion, and does only
grieve without reason and discourse: but reason, which seeks all things by
subtilty of wit, understands and judges all things with equity and justice,
does not so much consider the offense of the sense, as the injury of that hand
that offers it, the iniquity of that mind, the unhappy chance, blind fury
or whatsoever besides that offe^deth. Or Perhaps, because the sorrows and
griefs of the soul, have a more potent and effectual object in their
martyrdomes, then the sense has. For, the griefs of the body do many times
proceed from those things that are contrary to nature, from the violent
assaults of bruit beasts, from humane chances and the like, which use to
change, and alter the body: but the sorrows of the mind, from those great,
and strange occurrents, that happen either to our selves, or to any thing that
is ours: especially from injuries, loss of honor, or goods, death of friends,
iniust persecution of mighty Princes, treachery of friends, iniust judgments,
loss of children, senses: and (that which makes up the heap of all these
griefs) from the unkindness of those that in the midst of them do abandon
us. Which occasions of sorrow, of how great importance they are, the weakest
judgment may easily conceive. Or Perhaps, because the remedies for the griefs
of the mind are not so easily found, as those of the body, and therefore we
see that a Chirurgian, or a Phisician (many times) with a small plaster heals
a deep wound, whereas the grief of the mind, by no manner of means can be so
much as comforted, much less thoroughly cured. And therefore hence it is that
these griefs being remediless, they that should endeavor to cure them, are
soon discomforted, and by surceasing their comfortes, increase the malady. Or
Perhaps, because the griefs of the body, be they never so great, in time are
cured, or at the leastwise lessened: but in the griefs of the mind, the
length of time does rather every day discover our greater losses, and
consequently does rather increase our greater griefs, then any way mittigate
the fiersnes of them. Whereby we see, that that loss which has happened,
either by shipwreck, or other casualty, to any family, does every day grow
greater in the future posterity: insomuch that we never behold men subject to
such miseries, but they draw from us a special kind of compassion, and
commiseration. But especially, that deep wound of infamye, which kills the
civil life, and many times the vital too, pierces (like a sharp razor) even
to the inward closets of the heart, and can never be removed. So that we see,
that the causes of this inward grief of the mind, are strong, and mighty, and
the remedies either none at all, or very few, and slender: and therefore it
sufficiently appears, that the griefs of the mind are far greater, then
those which pearce no farther then the outward sense.

Why are great Princes commonly afflicted with the griefs of the mind, and
men of baser condition with those of the body. Problem. 104.
PErhaps, because princely privilege or the dignity of dominion, and
sovereignty, carries with it plenty of all those things which especially
procure the health and welfare of the body. As to live in howses holesomely
situated, to use a dainty and delicate diet, to drink pure wines, to take
their repasts at dew times, to cloth themselves according to the seasons of
the year, to apply themselves to those exercises that are not ouer-violent,
which altogether with a just temperance, and moderation of their whole life,
maintain the health and prosperity of the body. In so much that they are
seldom, or never assailed with the griefs of the body by any accident of
Nature, and much less by the hand of their enemy, their strength and powers
being so far from fearing any such force, as that they always strike a
fear, and terror into the hearts of others. But men of meaner state and
condition, that have scarce a cottage to cover their heads, much less
Lordships, and rich revenues to maintain their state, are enforced to dwell
where they may, to feed upon such as they have: yea many times to kill hunger
with that which kills the^. Neither can they observe hours of repast, nor use
the benefit of seasons: but are constrained to lay open themselves to all
manner of inconveniences, and to will that which their own necessityes
require. And that which is more, they are enforced by their business, and many
occasions, to undergo labors insupportable: whereby it comes to pass: that
men of base condition, are commonly assailed with grievous diseases, and a
thousand pains, and aches of the body: and by reason of their sle^der ability,
are subject to contempt, and the many oppressions of the mighty. But
contrariwise Princes, and great personages, as having the prerogative of blood,
the greatness of honor and state, the height of fortune, are very much
afflicted with the griefs of the mind, whether it be, because the least
wrongs that may be, to the^ seem great, or because fears, and suspitio^s more
then any other affection affright them, or because the disobedience of
subjects, or envy of their competitors inflame the^, or because hatred and
malice does many times macerate them, or whatsoever be the occasions, they are
always assailed with much variety of passion: whereas men of low degree, who
neither have their estates so entyre, not those offices which by the greatness
and gravity of their business, press down those with heaviness and grief
that bear them, after their labors are ended, pass their hours, and days
in peace and tranquillity, sleep soundly without molestations, are freed from
the envy of others, as possessing nothing that another should envy. Anger
deuoures them not, but all brawles, and contentions with a word or a blow, are
concluded, and ended. Fear afflicts them not because they want the many
occasions of iealousies, and suspicions, and lastly their own affections and
desires consume, and spend them not, because they never pass those bounds that
they may not easily be obtained: and therefore they are little disquieted with
the griefs and vexatio^ of the mind. Or Perhaps, because the little liberty of
great princes makes them continent, and therefore healthful of body, and the
great freedom of inferior persons makes them licentious, and intemperate, and
therefore subject to the griefs of the body. So likewise this debarment of
liberty, and too frequent retyrings of great personages, as they are an
occasion of bodily health, so they bring many passions, and torments, and
melancholic discontents unto the mind which then work their force with
greatest violence, when their thoughts may wander without disturbance. Which
falls not out with common persons, who by reason of their liberty go forth of
their lodgings, delight themselves with variety of fights, and company, pass
away the time in pleasant discourse, sometimes with one, sometimes with
another, whereby he quitteth himself of his worldly cares and discontents,
and either grieves not at all, or mittigates that little that he has.

Why are the griefs of women in labor of all other bodily griefs the
greatest? Problem. 105.
PErhaps, because women being willing with their labors to give life and light
unto their children, they cannot do it but by passing the dark gates of
death, by those grievous and bitter torments they endure in their labors: for
to speak Philosophically, the generation of the one, must be the corruption of
the other. Or Perhaps, because the parts of the Matrice being enlarged, and the
gate of Nature being opened beyond the wonted bounds, there is a kind of
commotion or distortion made of all the other parts answerable unto it: from
whence arise those fierce and bitter sorrows which threaten death it self:
for we all know how great that alteration is which we feel in the dislocation
of any one member or bone, which troubles the whole mind, and tormenteth the
whole body, the parts thereof being in such sort tied and entangled together in
an excellent order, that from the violent remove of any one member from his
natural place, all the rest are strangely affected with pain and grief. But
in so great a mutation, and dislocation of the chief master bones, and in so
great an undoing, and dissoluing of the rest, what incredible pain and torment
is endured, they only can best tell, who upon their bed of death have made
experience thereof. Or perhaps, because the woman was no sooner created, but
bytasting the forbidden fruit, and delivering it to our Grandfather Adam,
brought death unto her self, unto Adam, and to all his posterity as yet
unborn: So that by the just judgment of God, even in the gates or entrance of
life, whereby her child first enters this life, she is constrained to pass
through the gate of death.

Why would Plato, that children from their tender years should be accustomed
both to delight and Sorrow? Problem. 106.
PErhaps because these two affections, are the end of all other, all being
ordained to follow Delight, and fly grief and Sorrow, which being well
understood by young men, they easily know afterward how to discern for what
causes a man should rejoice, and for what he should grieve, which is a great
cause of their good education, and their future service for the good of the
commonweal. Or Perhaps, to the end they should learn the true discipline of
that honesty, wherewith a wise man is delighted, and the hatred of that sin,
which brings Sorrow to honest minded men; and consequently be moved to
follow the honesty of virtue, and to fly the hatred of sin, being allured
to the one by delight, and terrified from the other by grief. Or Perhaps, to
the end that being instructed by public Justice, which ministers unto the
wicked infamy with corporal punishment, and to the good a crown of honor
and immortality, they should fly dishonor and infamy, and follow virtuous
and valorous enterprises.

Why do many dye with too great an apprehension of joy, others with too much
grief and sorrow of the mind? Problem. 107.
PErhaps because in great joys and delights, (that are either new, or long
expected, or very soodaine, and bring much felicity with them) the store and
plenty of vital spirits, enlarging and spreding themselves at that new and
sudaine delight, to the superficial part of the body, and the heart the
fountain of life, being thereby forsaken, it is no marvel if the heart faint,
and the man perish. So contrariwise in great and unspeakable griefs, which
arise from strange and sudaine occasions, Nature being willing to succor the
part offended, the vital spirits which are dispersed through the whole body,
gather themselves unto the heart, as the part most noble and most necessary to
be relieved: the plenty of which spirits being ouer-great, the miserable heart,
by the abundant heat of them, is not succored, but smothered, and
overwhelmed, and so dies. Or Perhaps, because every superfluous overmuch, is
always hurtful, and therefore though delight do help Nature, yet it is
only when delight is in his just temperature: for meat helps that creature
which it nourishes, ^ut yet too much does not only offend, ^ut kills him:
and if grief be mode^ate, though it be always offensive, yet if it be not
ouer-great, and patiently borne, it overthrows not.

OF HOPE.
Why has Nature given Hope? Problem. 108.
PErhaps to the end that Hope might be an especial help to give heart and
courage to those, who have newly undertaken difficult and dangerous
enterprises, for without the sweet and pleasant pasture of assured hope, they
that are wearied and weakened with their labors, can never attain their
desired end. And therefore Hope is termed an Anchor, because, as when it
falls out that a tempest arises at Sea, by casting the Anchor into it, the
vessel is secured from the assaults of contrary fortunes, the Anchor not
suffering it to floate a^ the pleasure of the raging winds: S^ they that are
actors and laborers i^ the world, being tumbled and tossed sometime with one
difficulty, somtim^ with another, they are many times in the sea of their
actions and operations, in such sort overwhelmed with doubts and dangers, that
were they not stayed and strengthened with the Anchor of Hope, doubtless the
worthiest and most excellent enterprises would be drowned in the raging tempest
of despair, and never attain the haven of light, or come to the knowledge of
mortal men. For to say the truth, how could the husbandman endure frost, and
snow, cold, and heat, wet, and drouth? how could he go through his labors,
in plowing and digging, and deluing and dunging, and a thousand the like, yea
and as many losses, and hindrances, if he were not recomforted by the
sweetness of Hope? How could the Artificer amongst so many labors, so many
inconueniencies, cares, dangers, and hard occurrents of fortune, govern his
estate, and pass through his trauells without the sweet entisements of some
hoped good? How could students and learned men spend their solitary days and
nightly watchings, in deep study and contemplation, in much reading, frequent
observations, long disputes, continual speculation, multitude of books,
variety of authors, diversities of opinions, in the search of hidden causes,
strange effects in the difficulty of arts, the the darkness of a thousand
doubts, and contrariety of textes, if Hope did not still give comfort unto them
in the search of the truth? The husbandman therefore hopes in his plough, the
artificer in his instrument, the Notary in his Pen, the Sayler in his ship, the
Soldier in his sword, the Courtier in his courtly carriage; the Nobleman in his
blood, the Philosopher in his speculalation, the wiseman in his discreet
government, the Prince in his justice and fortitude, and the whole world lives
and is sustained by Hope. And therefore it was not without good cause, that
they have fained this only goddess Hope to be remaining upon the earth, and
the other divine powers to be translated into heaven. Or Perhaps, because it
was not sufficient, that Nature has given Love, which is the first pleasing
content of that good we see and desire, which is that kindled thirst to
possess it, but least despair should quench the heat of either, she added
the Spur of Hope, that notwithstanding there be many difficulties in
obtaining that good we seek, we should nevertheless with all diligence and
patience, leave no way unattempted to win the possession thereof.

Why do rich men, noble men, and young men hope much? Problem. 109.
PErhaps, because gold (especially in these days) seems to be the measure or
rule, nay the prise of every good and temporal honor: for we see
magistracies, public offices and dignities, and every great place to be sold
for money, and therefore rich men knowing they have those riches lying by
them, that excel in prise the rarest things, it is no marvel if they do not
only hope after great matters, but (as times now are) obtain them. Or
perhaps, because noble men and mighty, knowing that the opinion conceived of
them among their followers, and others, is very great, and presuming withal,
of their power and blood, there is not any thing so high and so difficult, that
can limit their hopes: and so much the rather, if to their power and nobility
there be added abundance of wealth, which corrupts even Balsame it self.
But young men, by reason of their youthful heat, being carried by the store,
and plenty of those spirits which abound in them, and wanting that great
experience which makes men wise, and depending rather upon that which is to
come, then what is past, full of boldness they hope all things, though far
above their own strength: whereas old men contrarily ruling, and directing
themselves rather by that which is past, then that which is to come, from that
experience they have had in being often deceived in their hopes, they fear to
hope any more. Or perhaps, because riches, and power, and nobility, being three
principal worldy excellencies upon the bright splendour whereof a^ eyes do
gaze, as all men desire them: so they desire to follow those that ha^ them:
which rich and honorable personages being well advised of, they imagine they
have with them their heart too, nay the love, and affection of as many as for
their riches love them, and therefore they fear not to hope, for as much as
they imagine to be worth the hoping, be it never so hard, and difficult. And
young men having multitude of friends, and delighting to please themselves with
vain and strange imaginations, hope in the strength of their own arms, which
forasmuch as it is grounded upon a weak foundation is many times deceived.

Why does Hope deceive many? Problem. 110.
PEerhaps because few follow that moral discipline, which trayneth men up to
knowledge and wisdom: few that consider the times, weigh the accidents, know
the qualities of persons, truly esteem of every force, judge of every place,
every end, set just and true limits to their own desires. Whereby it comes to
pass, that many hoping much, but not hoping with knowledge and discretion, hop
without their hopes, as they do who seek the end by unjust means. Or
Perhaps, because many being rather friends to idleness and delicacy, then
labor and watchings, and yet willing either out of bold simplicity, or
ignorant presumption, to Hope for better effects then idleness is accustomed
to produce, they fail as much in the fruition of their hopes, as they err in
the means to attain them. For it much more becomes a wise man, to take much
pains, and to hope little, then to labor slowly, and yet to be puffed up
with vain hopes. Or Perhaps, because men for the most part choosing the end,
not withal considering their own forces to attain that end, and that which
is worse, not consulting with fit, and oportune means, but being indiffetently
carried with a kind of plebeian fury, they endure many strange encounters, and
unexpected crosses in their promised hopes. And therefore, if they did consider
hereof aright, they would not complain so much of Fortune, as of their own
indiscretion: for what proportion is there betwixt the plough and the sword,
that he that is accustomed to the tillage of his land, and the keeping of his
flocks, should presently betake himself to the wars, undertake the managing
of his weapon without any premeditated military discipline? What resemblance
is there betwixt the sword and the settled wit of Minerua, that he that is
accustomed to the wars, should without the knowledge of the laws, undertake
the government of a state? For though his end be government, yet the fruit
is fear, or rather the hatred of those he would govern: if therefore they
find themselves frustrated in their hopes, let them lament their false
persuasions, and with true repentance chastise their own foolish
forwardenesse, whereby they shall give better testimony of their discretion,
then in feeding themselves with those vain hopes that are no way befitting
them. Or Perhaps, because few they are that hearken to the grave admonitions
of old men, who being furnished with plentye of wisdom and experience, are
excellent helps to indiscreet and heedlesse young men: and therefore always
giving credit unto those that rather flatter them, then speak the truth,
whether they be friends, or strangers, they wander out of the true path of
humane wisdom, and are ever deceived in those hopes they promise unto
themselves. Or Perhaps because most men being given to pleasure, and to please
their sense, desiring without knowledge, and endeavoring without persuera^ce,
though they sweat little for it, yet they promise enough, and glorying
themselves in their vain hopes, being deprived of them, with much laughter of
all that behold them, they lament their own follies when it is too late-For it
is absurd to think, that the appetite should do his office without reason, or
the will choose, without the knowledge of the understanding, or will his end
without counsel, or that counsel should be without wisdom, or wisdom,
without experience, or experience without time, or time without motion. Many
therefore three are, that are deceived of their hopes, not because Hope does
deceive, but because their Hope is tied unto a will without reason, their
discourse to an end without means, and to flesh without the eyes of
understanding, and therefore the fault is not in their hope, but in the want of
discretion in attaining their Hopes.

OF DESPAIR.
Why has Nature given Despair? Problem. 111.
PErhaps because every agent laboring to an end above his strength, and not
deteyned by this affection, would fall into the sin of folly and ignorance:
which brings with it much shame and dishonor unto a man that is governed by
reason, and by counsel: and wisdom should attempt only those enterprises that
are answerable to his own forces. And therefore prudent nature very opportunely
has provided this affection, to the end that the difficulty, and impossibility
of any eterprise being sufficiently known, we might easily abstain from the
labors thereof, and turn our endeavors to that which is within our powers,
and better befitting our own studies. Or Perhaps, because by this affection,
Art and the merit, and exquisite skill of every skillful hand might be known,
that what one dispaireth to perform, another undertaking, and perfecting in
laudable manner, the one for his art and ingenie, might receive his dew
co^mendations, and the other be likewise commended for his wisdom, in yielding
that to the sufficiency of another, which he knew to be above his own
strength to perform.

OF FEAR.
Why has nature given Fear? Problem. 112.
PEerhaps because as Nature, for a future difficult good, was willing to give
the help and assistance of Hope, which might carry us merrily through our
labors unto the end: so she would likewise arm us against a future difficult
evil, with this passion of Fear, whereby we might with better speed and
prepared force, fly the presence of that evil, which brings ruin and
destruction with it, if it be not avoided. And therefore we see, that brute
beasts being taught by this affection in whatsoever imminent danger, that may
bring either grief, or death with it, though the avoydance thereof seem never
so hard, yet with trembling of the members, and beating of the heart, and loss
of sight, and faltering of the tongue, and disorderly gronings and gast
countenance, as much as in them lies, they help themselves to avoid the
fierce cruelty thereof. Or perhap, because an iminent danger being foreseen,
fear by the very conceit, and apprehension thereof makes so strong an
impression in the imagination, that the danger being avoided, they never
afterward forget to fly and eschew the like: which we may observe in the
Ass, who if he chance to fall into a ditch where he has made some proof of
peril unto himself, his danger past is an instruction unto him to avoid the
like to come: and as much as in him lies, he will not come near the place.
So likewise, if a Dog be stricken by a man, in such sort that it stick by
him, he ever afterward fears and flies his presence, neither will he be
won by all the flattering alluring speeches that may be used, to trust him
any more: which proceeds from the remembrance of what is past, and the Fear
of that which may be to come. So that we see that Fear helps the basest
creatures, even the ass himself, much more man, who is furnished with the
rarest excellencies of all the affections. For by Natural Fear he flies and
auoydeth the injury of times, of tempest, of famines, of pestilence, and the
like miseries that usually fall out in the world, and all this by that
industry, and diligence that proceeds from Fear. By civil Fear he flies
those punishments that the laws impose, which concern either the loss of
honor, or of the goods of fortune, or of the person it self: and this by that
careful observance of Justice which Fear stirs up. By supernatural Fear
he flies eternal death and damnation: and that by the Love of God and his
neighbors. So that by the first Fear he saves his body, by the second his
honor, by the third his Soul: and therefore no man can deny but that Fear is
necessary, nay beneficial in Nature, because it does not only instruct, but
preserve too.

Why do Lovers always fear? Problem. 113.
PErhaps because it is the property of lovers to be always vigilant over that
they love, and of Sentinelles that watch and guarde, always to Fear, and
therefore lovers being employed in the same kind, are subject to the same
passion. Or Perhaps, because they that love, do not so much Fear, least that
good which they love be taken away by other lovers (which kind of Fear, men
call ielowsye) as least any evil, or hard mischaunce should befall it, or that
they should be any way inferior in virtue to those that emulate them in their
loves. Or Perhaps, because Fear is a certain kind of providence. And
therefore we see, that fathers, who are strongly moved by the excellency of
that Fear, which is full of amorous zeal, by such affection are stirred to
provide against whatsoever dangers shall any way threaten their children. And
therefore wise and provident Nature would, that Lovers should be in continual
Fear of that they Love, to the end, that at every need they may provide for
their necessityes: For Fear is as a spur to make men fly what dangers soever
general, or particular, and especially in reasonable creatures. Or Perhaps,
because humane love being always full of the swelling inflammation of some
affection (for never was the sea of love free from the furious winds of such
like cares) Nature would that the hearts of lovers should always be
accompained with Fear, for the perfection, not corruption thereof: for by
Fear, evil is foreseen, danger avoided, things necessary are acquired, and
virtue increased.

OF BOLDNESS OR COVRAGE.
Why has Nature given Courage? Problem. 114.
PErhaps, because that Courage which we see in all creatures, is the strength or
bulwark of nature, which then with much honor appears in every particular
kind, when they cannot attain without special danger their purposed end. For
then they arm themselves with new forces, and with all their powers abandoning
all fears, they make strange and incredible proofs of their strength, and
courage, run through all dangers, beat down all forces: which if they
should not do, they could never attain that end which is compassed with so
many dangers, so many difficulties: for love and desire are not sufficient, as
being both employed about those things that bring only pleasure, and ease, and
delight with them without danger, much less does hope suffice, which hops
only that which is simply good: nor Fear, which flies, and dares not
encounter a danger. And therefore courage which is the fortress which nature
has given to her works, was most necessary amongst other affections to serve
the irascible part. Or Perhaps, because every agent wills his end, as his
good: but many being by nature we^ke, seeing some difficulty in the end, are
comforted by hope, but finding not only difficulty, but danger too, if by this
other affection of Boldness, and Courage, they were not strengthened, they
would never stir farther to attain their desired end. For such, and so
great are dangers many times, that men are hardly stirred up by this affection
to undergo them. And therefore we read of one only Horatius in all Rome, that
durst oppose himself against the Thuscane armies, of one only Curtius, that
cast himself into the fiery gulf, to free his country, of one only Mutius,
that passing to his enemies camp, durst in the midst thereof assault the
person of the king, of only three Horatij that committed their lives to the
danger of a single combat, to quit their country of their enemies forces: Of
one only Caesar that durst commit his body to the mercylesse seas in the dead
time of winter, and that to fight with his enemy. So that, to the atchieuing
of dangerous enterprises, an undaunted courage is always necessary.

Why are young men commonly bold and courageous? Problem. 115.
PErhaps because young men abound with much blood and heat, by the vigor of
Nature, and consequently with much vital spirits. Whereby they are made
strong, and hardy in undergoing dangerous enterprises, insomuch that neither
fearing death, nor the dangers thereof, every thing to their ardency seems
casye. Or Perhaps, because young men are commonly ambitious, and carried with a
fervent zeal, and desire of honor, whereby being spurred forward, there is
not any enterprise so difficult or dangerous, which can strike fear into them:
or they dare not undertake. Or Perhaps because being strangely possessed of an
opinion of that shame, and dishonor which fear and cowardly dastardlines
bringes with it, they will rather choose to lose their lives with honor, then
live with infamy. Or Perhaps, because young men by reason of the multitude of
those affections which abound in them, and those the most headlong and
dangerous, as Anger, a fervent desire of things delightful, Fury, and a
thousand the like unbridled affections, whereby they many times fall into
great, and unavoidable dangers, they are enforced to the end they may free
themselves from those perilous chances, to gather heart, and spirit, and
courage, to sustain and encounter whatsoever shall happen unto them.

OF ANGER.
Why would Nature give Anger unto all living Creatures? Problem. 116.
PErhaps because by such means the Choleric humor easily awakening those
forces that in our quietter moods are fallen a sleep, and stirring them
forward against those dangers that shall any way encounter them, ^hey might
arm themselves with a de^ence answerable to those dangers that do assail
them. For if a dog ^eing assaulted by any other beast, ^ere not carried by the
violence of this Anger to his own defense, he would neither show that courage
that he does ^^ his fight, nor endure the combat, ^ut rather loose his own
life. And ^ horse so magnanimous a beast, at the ^^und of the trumpet, would
never be so ^eady, and hardy to assail the enemies quadrons, if he were not
spurred forward by the force of this affection, which by the great concurse of
blood about the heart, inflameth the spirits, and ministers new vigor unto
the members. Or Perhaps, because there is no Nature under the heavens that has
not some contrary and opposite nature unto it, as the water to the fire, the
Lamb to the Wolf, the Wolf to the Dog, and the like have all other
creatures. From which contrariety of Natures there arises plentiful occasion
of wrongs, and violences, to the utter ruin of one another: and therefore it
was necessary, to the conservation of every particular Nature, that it be
furnished with the strength and vigor of this angry affection, whereby such
offenses might be removed as shall any way assail or encounter it. And
therefore we see that nature has not only given this potent affection to this
necessary end, but has likewise furnished every creature with outward arms
for his better defense: as with horns, tuskes, teeth, beakes, tallants,
heels, prickles, poison, and a thousand the like forces, both to offend their
assailants, and to defend themselves. And if she have given none of these, yet
she has given flight, swiftness of running, agilitie of body to succor
themselves: for in vain had that force of courage been, which Anger
ministers against a present injury, if it were not for that assistance that
it has from those outward arms, whereby Anger being kindled in the breast of
any creature, he becomes hardy and bold, to defend, and offend, to enter
combat with his adversary, to beat down his forces, to wound, to tear, to
kill, whatsoever shall make resistance, or seek to offend him.

Why is Anger in the breast of men easily turned into a sin? Problem. 117.
PErhaps, because such is the property of humane affections that they are
always engendered with some alteration of the body, as it plainly appears in
Sorrow, which afflicts the sense; in Fear, which makes pale the
countenance: in bashfulnesse, which adorneth the face with a chaste and crimsin
hew; in Delight, which disperseth the spirits through all the members: and in
every other affection more or less sensibly: from whence it follows, that
those affections that do most change and alter the body, do likewise most
distemper the mind, which in many operations does communicate with it: and
therefore Anger, by reason of the great store of blood, which gathers if
self to the fountain of life, ingendereth a strange kind of commotion
throughout the whole body, and consequently a great perturbation and
distemperature in the mind, or reasonable part: and therefore it is no marvel,
if a man that is Angry, be unfit for counsel, which requires a special and
principal use of reason. And therefore it is wisely said, that Anger is blind,
because it makes men blind in their judgment and common discourse: whereby it
comes to pass, that Anger does sildome times contain it self within the
bounds of virtue, because fury, and blind desire of revenge, causes defense
to pass into offense, and offense to injury, and injury to injustice, and
injustice to vice. Or Perhaps, because the arm of Anger is too heavy, and
with too great a violence presses down his patient, and of a help is made a
hinderance, and by exceeding his just measure, of a virtue, is made a sin,
and therefore from hence proceed those many grave and wise aduertisements of
ancient Philosophers, which are as a bridle to this rash and inconsiderate
affection, which with such celeritie depriueth us of all wisdom, and counsel,
and use of reason: which takes away all light of understanding, robs the
will of that wise choice which deserves commendations, and brings greater
danger to the mind of man, then all the other affections.

Why is the Anger of Princes, and great governors commendable? Problem. 118.
PErhaps, because by office and right it apperteineth unto them to chastise and
punish the wrongs, and misdemeanors of those their subjects, which by
violating the law take from a peaceable estate all felicity; and therefore that
anger is much co^me^ded in their breasts, which according to the law gives
condign punishment to the wicked: and therefore they carry the Scepter in
their hands, as always seeming to threaten wicked men. Or Perhaps, because the
Anger of Princes, which has his beginning from zeal and public benefit, is
not directed by those furies of particular persons, who are moved to anger for
their private benefit: but having always, before their eyes the true end,
which is public felicity (a good beyond measure esteemed of all noble and
generous hearts) it cannot but be commendable in them, so it pass not the
rigor of justice: in so much that those judges, that in hearing causes, and
censuring controversies betwixt party and party, are nothing moved with such
just affection, deserve rather blame then commendations. Or Perhaps, because
great Princes are wont to represent (as the heads of their people) the
public, person of their states, and therefore when a wrong is offered to any
private person, it is offered to a member of the Prince, whereby it stands
him upon to withstand and revenge such injuries, whereunto he is moved by the
violation of those laws which he has established, and by Anger stirred up to
execute justice, either against the goods or persons of the offenders: which so
long as he does according to equity and justice, cannot but increase his
honor and reputation. Or Perhaps, because the actions of princes (being
subject to the view and censure of common people) are always accompanied with
a gracious kind of decency and reason, which conferreth much to the
confirmation of their estates: and therefore their anger for private offenses
is far from fury, and always tempered with that gravity which best
befitteth their royal persons.

Why do many exercise their Anger against themselves? Problem. 119.
PErhaps, because they doing that they should not, do many times find and
feel that they would not, and therefore they learning by dear experience,
that they have offended the inward rule of reason, with strange repentance they
fall out with themselves, reprehending their own errors, and many times bestow
upon themselves condige punishment. Or Perhaps, because it sometimes falls
out, that men being ouerladen and pressed down with grief and melancholy, by
the remembrance of their passed errors, whereby they are fallen into many
miseries, many infirmities, forasmuch as they find the cause of all this to
proceed from themselves, they know not upon whom to practice their fury, but
themselves: like those, that either by too brutish a desire of fleshly
pleasures; or want of discretion and government, have misspent their talent of
Nature, and the inestimable treasure of their good names. Or Perhaps, because
men many times entering into a loathing and detestation of themselves, by reason
of those many cares and crosses, and molestations, and in maladies, small help
of friends, and dispaires that do accompany them, they stir up against
themselves (like mad men) that little of divine Nature which is remaining in
them, and with their own fury consume their own hearts, which forasmuch as
it is a matter of injustice in them to execute, how justly soever they deserve
it, they are not to be pitied by others, that pity not themselves: but the
sin is to be hated: For humane actions though they be ouerladen with
mountains of miseries, must yet never exceed the limits of reason: which even
out of the craggy mineralls of tribulalation, knows how to work out the
purified gold of virtue.

OF SHAMEFASTNES.
Why has man only obtained of Nature the gift of Shamefastness? Problem.
120.
PErhaps, because all other creatures, even from the day of their creation,
were made and ordained to one only end, which they could never alter, being
provoked and directed thereunto by nature: but man being created free in his
will, to put his hand to the fire, or to the water, to follow virtue, or vice,
it was necessary that he should be tempered and governed in his will with
some bridle, to the end he might not run riot, and be utterly overwhelmed
with intemperancie: and this bridle or restraint, is Shamefastness, which
(forasmuch as that freedom of will to sin, does still continue after the fall)
does still remain both as a bridle to sin, and a treasury of all feminine
and youthful virtues. Or Perhaps, because other creatures cannot have any
matter of shame, or shamfastnesse, there being in them no such zeal of
honor, as is in men, and therefore, to whatsoever part is deformed in them, or
has but the least show of indecencie in it, Nature has provided a cover,
least it should offend the eyes of the beholders: for our wise and provident
mother Nature, would that in every thing there should be comlines, honesty,
vtility, and beauty: but man, who by wit, and art, and industry, and labors,
and watchings, ought to aspire to honor, glory and immortality, has a large
field, yea many occasions of Shame, that being moved thereby, he might imitate
the magnanimous, and studious Caesar's, Alexanders, Aristotle's, and the like.

Why do women and young men especially blush? Problem. 121.
PErhaps, because the zeal of honor which is placed in a good name (either
already purchased by that good which is already done, or is now in doing, or
may be hereafter) makes them to fear, especially those things that may offend
that treasure, that by virtue and temperate actions is preserved: and because
women, by reason of the weakness of their nature, and young men by reason of
their little experience, and great store of blood, may easily fall into those
intemperate errors, that defile their own good names, and dishonor their whole
families, yea cities where they dwell, Nature has provided them this bridle,
to withhold them from all unchaste, dishonest, and dishonorable actions: yea it
moderates their thoughts, makes them modest in their speech, temperate in their
actions, and wary in all their deliberatio^s. Or Perhaps because a woman allured
by that Beauty that shines in her face, and a young man carried by the
abundant heat of his nature, being neither of them governed by this
affection, we see them presently in such sort made a prey to their sense, that
there is not any lust and luxury so dishonest, and shameful, which they fear
to commit: yea those manifold inconveniences, and mischiefs do every day
appear, which they bring both unto themselves, and to other, who wanting the
bridle, and rule of this affection, tear in pieces the precious veil of
modesty, and minister great cause of Sorrow, and lamentatio^, not only to
themselves, but to whole Cities.

Why is the seat of shamefastness in the forehead? Problem. 122.
PErhaps, because as Nature has assigned to all other the affections their
seat in some special part of the face: as to Joy, a merry Semblance, or
outward appeara^ce, to Laughter the Countenance, to Sorrow the eye: to fear
palenesse of face, trembling of the voice and the like, so to this affection of
Shamefastness, she has given that place which did best befit the office
thereof, and has placed it in the highest part of the face, which we call the
forehead, because it is most visible and apparent to the eye of man. And it was
fit and convenient it should be so, because that crimson ruddines that does
there reside, was ordained as a sign of that chaste and honorable mind, which
for just cause fears to loose his good name, by those unchaste, eyt^er
speeches, or actions, that are presented unto the sense, either to himself, or
any other in presence. Or Perhaps because Nature would by such open place, and
change of color make manifest to him, that fears not to undertake any
dishonorable enterprise, that she approoueth not intemperate actions, or
speeches, and whether they be past, or present, or to come, she does not only
not commend them, but has made her self a displayer of that infamy, which by
their dishonest desires at their pleasures they would commit. Or Perhaps,
because men placing their honor in that public fame and report, which by the
mouths of wise and honorable personages, is made manifest to Cities and
Countries, Nature would likewise be correspondent, by a public, and open sign
thereof in the forehead.

OF COMPASSION.
Why has Nature given Compassion? Problem. 123.
PErhaps, because it especially becomes a man to be kind, and courteous,
gentle, and pitiful. For therefore has Nature given him a nature so noble, so
co^passionate, and so apt and fit to perform whatsoever civil and courteous
duties. For to be inhumane, savage, violent, bloody and cruel, befits savage
and cruel creatures, which live in mountainous and wild thickets, dark caves,
craggy rocks, and thick forests, and not man, who inhabiteth delightful
places, conuerseth with gentle and generous spirits, amiable aspects,
compassionate hearts, and true and virtuous friends. And therefore when we
behold the hard mischances and desastres of those that are our friends, and are
dear unto us, that are wise and industrious, that employ themselves in
honorable services, both for their private and the public good, that refuse
no labors to quitte us from dangers, it is just, and honorable, civil and
religious too, that in the ruin of their declining fortunes, and undeserved
miseries, we should express this affection of compassion, and with tears of
pity, and offices of humanity, and a fellowlike feeling, even in the bowels
of mercy, and commiseration, condole, nay suffer with them: for we cannot but
know how welcome and oportune these comfortes are, which are ministered in the
loss of children, death of Parents, shipwreck of fortunes, weakinesse of
Senses, decay of strength, either of the mind, or of the body, loss of
friends, and when, in the multitude of our merits, and good deseruings, we be
robbed of that honor, which justice and the common applause of the people does
put upon us Or Perhaps, to the end that men afflicted with miseries (especially
by the inconstant course of humane things made miserable) should not by the
multitude of their afflictions despair of help and comfort, but satisfy
themselves with the compassion of just men, the relief of their friends, the
condolings of the common people, and so, every fear, every inconvenience,
every calamity, and hard fortune should be recomforted by the offices of
compassion.

Why are women and old men most pitiful? Problem. 124.
PErhaps, because benign Nature has given unto women a more benign heart,
which may partly appear by their more delicate, soft, and amiable
complections, and therefore the actions of women are never cruel: (except some
special wrongs urge them unto it) for we seldom or never see them to embrew
their hands in the blood of any, to delight in arms, or the clattering of
armor, but meek and gentle, willing to pardon injuries, content with slight
and slender chastisements, and always pitiful: whereas contrariwise, men are
commonly hard hearted, not easily persuaded to forgive, greedy of revenge,
swifte to shed blood no way enclyning to that compassion whereunto women are by
reason of their more humane, and pitiful Natures: So likewise old men being
such as have passed diverse fortunes, and experience has taught how grievous
the loss of things most dear is, what the worth of virtue, the prise of
honor, the force of misery, the falshod of friends is, seeing honest and
ingenious men, that deserve honor and reward, rewarded with the loss of
fortunes, and miseries, both of body and mind, they cannot but with a
fellow-like feeling condole their losses, and afflictions, to which compassion
young men are little disposed, by reason of the little experience they have in
the changes, and chances of this world, but are rather given by the fervor
and heat of their blood, to implacable furyes, little considering their own
good, much less that of other men whereby it comes to pass, that either
they know not, or do seldom put in practice this compassionate passion. Or
Perhaps, because women are little accustomed to cruel and lamentable
spectacles, as the firing of houses, ruinating of Cities, murdering of
innocents, and the like extremities of fortune, because they seldom go forth
of their own houses, and therefore the very report of these things strikes a
terror into their hearts, and a bare disgrace without any farther damage
stirs up compassion in them: whereas men on the other side, by the daily
custom of the world, and the greatness of their hearts, forget these greater
miseries, and no calamity seeming new to them, and they fearing none, they
know not how to pity other men. But old men by experience knowing the heavy
and bitter blows of mortal miseries, cannot so soon forget them, but rather
calling to mind their own forepassed calamities, they cannot but pity those
that imitate them in the dear experience of the like fortunes: which young men
having not yet tasted, know not how to commiserate.

Why are they that are angry, or in misery, not merciful? Problem. 125.
PErhaps because they that are inflamed with Anger being wholly given to
revenge, which admits no pity, and having forgotten all kind of
compassion, apply themselves only to cruelty, and are seldom satisfied
without blood, yea being blind and confounded with the fury of this passion,
they care not how far they proceed in their slaughters, and butcheries,
harkening to no submission, no entreaties of their adversaries, but so much the
rather embrew their hands, in the blood of their enemies, as if it were absurd
that any pity should appear in the acts and execution of revenge. So likewise
they that are in misery, and want ability at their own pleasures to free
themselves from it, attending only their own proper evil, which much
afflicts them, and little remembering bring the losses, and crosses of other
men, they grow not so pitiful toward themselves, as pittiles, nay cruel
toward other men. Or Perhaps, because they that are angry, being deprived by
the fury of that affection, of that reason which rules and directs every
virtue, they either cannot, or know not how to perform any virtuous act, much
less keep their affectons within bounds. And they that are subject to any
cross or affliction, do first pity their own miseries as being next unto
themselves: and in this self compassion they are so much busied, that they
forget those troubles, and inconveniences that other men, no way inferior unto
them in their fortunes, doindure,

OF EMVLATION.
Why has Nature given to man Emulation. Problem. 126.
PErhaps to the end that even from his infancy, he should delight to follow
(being spurred on by the desire of glory) those interprises that depend upon
wisdom, valor, justice, and all other moral habits, that are any way
assistant either to private, or public felicity: And therefore we see
children, even from their tender years (the use of reason being scarce awaked
in them) to imitate those things which in the day time (out of their little
experience) they see acted by others, and in such sort they please themselves
in them, that neither with threatenings nor stripes, they will be dissuaded, or
be made to forget them: but with new means, and a thousand arts, and
inventions, they endeavor to imitate those things, which they have observed to
be done by a skilful hand: and therefore hence it is that we see them imitate
hunting with their runnings, and cries, and counterfeit voices, and snares, and
tramells, and the like apish imitations. Hence it is, that seeing the ordering
of great armies, skirmishes, fightes, and other military exercises, they
enforce themselves (as much as in them lies) to imitate them, by making
weapons of wood, and canes, and other matter, and ensigns painted, and
adorned according to their childish manner. Hence it is, that we see them
counterfeite gravity in their paces, audacity in in their countenances, bravery
in their bodies, with their swords by their sides, their poynardes prepared,
their gunnes on their shoulders, with drum and trumpet, incountring one
another, discharging their pieces, making show with their hands, but noise
with their mouths, letting fall their pikes, joining their battles, taking
prisoners, and ransoming them again, and what not, that any way apperteyneth
to military profession. Hence it is, that we see them imitate eloquent men,
their action, their pronuntiation, their manner of speech: that we see them
build themselves houses, and gardens: yea that they imitate the very public
justice, and execution even to the axe, and the halter. Or Perhaps, because man
being alured by the delight of imitation, might know, that he is borne unto
labor, and hereby even from his tender years accustoming himself to the
habit of virtue, by those frequent actions, which imitation ministers unto
him, it might not seem strange unto him, being grown in years to follow with
generous courage, and hardiness, those valiant acts, that crown their actors
with honor and glory: those just actions that maintain states: wise actions,
that makes us wary and provident: and studious actions, that makes us immortal.

Why do men emulate things most noble? Problem. 127.
PErhaps because we find that those things only make men honorable, and of
better esteem in the world, which in their own natures are principally good,
and of highest account: and therefore we desiring those things, that may
innoble our natures, and make us in quality like themselves, we seek to excel
in things supreme and excellent, and by this envious affection contemn things
of lowest value, and estimation. And therefore we emulate, and seek to excel
other men in learning, which feeds the understanding with the food of truth,
the end of all speculatiue knowledge: In eloquence, which is the publisher of
those things which with much study, and many watchings we have gathered
together, and that with a golden style, stirring up the affections of the
hearers in wisdom, which is the perfect knowledge of things high and low,
heavenly and earthly. In riches, which are wont to be the prise of mortal
things, and the aptest, and most noble instrument to attain the happy treasure
of all virtues and sciences. In power, which by the majesty of a Crown, and
Scepter which governs the whole world, brings honor and splendour to as many
as possess it: and in any other thing rare and excelent, which may any way
increase our honor, renown and reputation Or Perhaps, because we emulate
glory, which is awakned by things of worth, and singular greatness: for by
such an affection we are only spurred forward, when we see our equals, and
such as are like unto our selves, to excel us in those things that are in
repute, and honor in the world: which seeming to our own strength no way
impossible to be attained, we employ all our studies, and endeavors, not only to
equal, but excel our corriualles. Or Perhaps, because whatsoever is little or
base, as little understanding, little knowledge in matters of small moment,
little store of earthly possessions, little authority over the people, and
whatsoever is less, then that opposite which carries us unto glory, seems
rather priuations, then habits of good things, whereby we ascend to immortal
fame. For little knowledge is rather presented unto us by the name of
ignorance, then knowledge: little valor in military affairs, rather by the
name of Cowardice, then fortitude: little skill in humane business, rather by
the name of Simplicity, then providence: little eloquence, rather by the name
of rude speech, then eloquence: little store of possessions, rather by the name
of poverty, then dominion: and every other thing that is less excellent,
seems rather unto us to be baseness, then (in the least degree that may be)
height of state and condition: whereby it follows, that as men borne free,
and sprung from a generous and magnanimous offpring, we are not to labor and
weary our selves in emulating things of small worth and estimation, but we must
turn our minds with all our wits, and best endeavors unto those things,
which are of highest esteem with the best and wisest sort of men: as
discipline, which instructs us in those things that concern God and Nature:
as fortitude, which crowns us with glory and honor: wisdom, which teaches
and directs us in the whole course of our lives eloquence, which makes us
admirable: Riches, which help to adorn^ us: and lastly, power and authority
which mounteth us up to the highest pitche of honor and immortality.

FINIS.
The Table of the Problemes.
And first of Beauty.
1. Why is Beauty so universal? page 1. 2. Wherefore is Beauty imparted to
every particular creature? page 2. 3. Wherefore does Beauty shine especially in
women? page 4 4. Why does Beauty so soon decay? page 5 5, Why is Beauty
especially apprehended by the sight? page 7 6. Wherefore does Beauty always
delight? page 9 7. Why is Beauty worthy of Love? page 12 8. Why are not all
men delighted with one, and the same Beauty? page 14. 9. Why is Beauty
enjoyed, less esteemed. page 15. 10. Why is the Beauty of a light woman
less esteemed. page 19 11. Why does every man desire to be fair. page 21.
12. Why is he that is fair inclined to Love. page 19 13. Why are there borne
in some Provinces, Cities, Castles, and Villages, beautiful women, in others
beautiful men, in some Countries men of tall stature, fat, and white, in
others lean of body, and of a sallow complexion. page 23 14. Why does the
Beautye of women consist, sometimes in one color, sometimes in the variety of
colors. page 26 15. Why does the sweatnesse of speech, and comely carriage of
the body, give greater grace unto Beauty, then any other part. page 28. 16.
Why is the Beauty of women men especially seen in the face. page 31 17. Why
do women which are not borne fair, attempt with artificial Beauties to seem
fair. page 33 18. Why does the art and multitude of beauties which women use,
being discovered, breed a kind of loathing and disdain in the hearts of men.
page 36 19. Why does the Beauty of the body with greater celeritie wound the
hearts of men, then that of the mind. page 38 20. Why do wise men more esteem
the Beauty of the mind, then of the body. page 40 21. Why do young men
prefer the Beauty of the body before that of the mind. page 41 22. Why is
the Beauty of the mind more often seen in old men then in young. page 43 23.
Why is the Beauty of the mind accompanied with that of the body in the breasts
of young men so much esteemed. page 45. 24. Why does the Beauty of the mind
always help, and that of the body often times hurt. page 46 25. Why does the
Beauty of the mind make us like unto things heavenly, and that of the body
many times like unto earthly. page 48 26. Why would the Platonists, that the
Beauty of corporal things should be as a ladder to ascend unto the first
Fayrenesse. page 49 27. Why did the Platonists, under two special senses of
seeing and hearing, comprehend all Beauty? page 51 28. Why would that famous
Philosopher, that his disciples should oftentimes take a view of their own
Beauties in a glass. page 53 29. Why do Princes, and women of honorable
birth, prove for the most part fairer, both in body and mind, then women of
baser condition. page 54 30. Why do fair women prevail much in obteyning
grace and favor with Princes. page 56 31. Why is only the Beauty of women,
amongst all other beauties, praised and esteemed. page 59 32. Why is the
Beauty of women served and adorned, with the excellency of whatsoever things
are Beautiful in the world. page 61 33. Why is the Beauty of women of such
force, that it many times overcomes the greatest personages of the world.
page 63 34. Why does the Beauty of a woman being violated bring infamy and
dishonor, not only to her self, but to her whole family. page 65 35. Why is
it the custom to hang beautiful pictures, in the chambers of those women that
are with child. page 67 36. Why do they make Venus the mother of Beauty.
page 69 37. Why is only the beauty o^ heaven amongst other corporal things,
of it self permanent. page 7^ 38. Why is the first fair to mortal eyes
invisible. page 72 39. Why do many men little regard the first fair. page 75
Of Love.
40. Why has nature ordained that there should be affections in the world.
page 79 41. Why is some special affection predomina^t over every age. p. 81
42. Why would Nature that in every thing in the world there should be love.
page 84 43. Why is Love so potent. page 86 44. Why are there so many kinds of
Love, under the command and empire of Love. page 88 45. Why are the outward
signs of humane Love, the uncertain passions, that they suffer who Love. page
90 46. Why is Love called a flame, a fire, and the like. page 93 47. Why do
Poets feign Love a Child. page 99 48 Why naked. page 101 49 Why winged. page
103 50 Why with Bow and arrows. page 105 51 Why Blind. page 107 52 Why
ruddy, or high colors. page 109 53. Why sometimes languishing. page 111
Of Lovers.
54. Why do Lovers delight in flowers. page 113 55. Why do not Lovers in the
presence of those they love know how to frame their speech. page 115 56. Why
do Lovers blush in the presence of their mistrisses. page 117 57. Why do
Lovers take pleasure in the tears of their Beloved. page 118 58 Why do Lovers
whether soever they go carry with them their amorous passions. page 120 59. Why
do Lovers so much delight in the neatenesse of their apparel, and bodies. page
122 60. Why do Lovers so much esteem the gifts of their beloloued. page 124
61. Why do Lovers so often use the similituds of things most excellent, to
display the Beauty of her they Love. page 126 62. Why are Lovers many times
troubled with iealosie, and grief of the heart. page 127 63 Why do Lovers
many times dream of horrible things. page 129 64 Why do lovers delight in
morning music. page 130 65. Why do lovers desire to be thought valiant.
page 132 66. Why do lovers defend their beloved, even in a wrong, and unjust
cause. page 133 67. Why do lovers take so much delight in the contemplation of
the eye. page 134 68. Why is the anger of a lover soon alayed. page 136 96
Why cannot lovers hide their passions. page 138 70 Why cannot lovers conceal
the favors of their best beloved. page 139 71 Why do lovers put their favors
they receive from their mistrisses in the most noble parts of the body. page
140
Of Hatred.
72. Why is Hatred ordained by nature. page 141 73. Why does love sometimes
engender hate, being by nature contrary unto it. page 143 74. Why is the hatred
of men against things general, and universal, their anger against things more
particular. page 145 75. Why is hatred conceived, everlasting, but anger soon
allayed. page 147 76 Why do men seldom hate, either their country, or their
parents. page 148 77. Why is the hatred of great princes, and noble men
inexorable. page 151 78. Why is the hatred of women without end, or measure. pa.
153
Desire.
79. Why has nature given to every thing a desire. page 155 80. Why is desire
the first lawful birth, or first borne of love. p. 158 81 Why is desire
infinite, and endless. page 160 82. Why do diverse men desire diversely. page 163
83. Why are the Desires of the father more noble then those of the mother.
page 166 84. Why is the Desire of those that love, toward the thing beloved,
so fiery, and ardent. pa. 167 85 Why do the Desires of children end in
matters of small weight. page 169 86 Why does the Desire of immortality make
men bold, and resolute in undergoing labors, and dangers. page 171
Of Flight.
87. Why has nature given flight to things created. page 175 88 Why does it
bring safety and honor, not only to particular men, but to whole Cities to
fly sometimes the commodities of Nature. page 179 89. Why is it commendable
sometimes to fly honor, the City it self, and civil conversation. page 182
90 Why is it sometimes infamous, and dishonorable to fly, and especially to
soldiers. page 183 91. Why are not al to be blamed that fly their countries.
page 185
Of Delight.
92. Why has nature given delight unto Creatures. page 189 93. Why has
nature given such diversity of Delights unto man. page 192 94. Why does man
being not content with such variety of Delights as nature affordes, pocure
other unto himself, by art, and invention. page 196 95 Why do women, and
young men especially love things pleasant, and delightful. page 203 96. Why
does the multitude of those delightful things that especially appertain to
the sense of feeling, taste, and smelling, make us many times intemperate. page
205 97 Why did Athens glory in the delight of wisdom, and Rome of arms. page
207 98. Why do kings, and Princes, contrary to the opinion of the common
people, taste least pleasure and delight. page 212
Of Sorrow.
99. Why has nature given sorrow unto creatures. page 222 100. Why is the
sense of feeling most subject to grief. page 224 101. Why are griefs of the
body communicated unto the mind, and those of the mind unto the body. page
227 102. Why are the griefs of the body more sensible, and violent, in soft,
and delicate bodies, as of women, and honorable personages, then of those that
are strong, and valiant. page 231 103. Why are the griefs of the mind far
greater then those of the body. page 232 104. Why are great Princes commonly
afflicted with the griefs of the mind, and men of baser condition with those
of the body. page 235 105 Why are the griefs of women in labor, of all other
bodily griefs the greatest. page 239 106. Why would Plato that Children from
their tender years should be accustomed both to delight, and Sorrow. page
241 107. Why do many die with too great an apprehensio^ of joy, others with too
much grief and sorrow of the mind. page 242
Of Hope.
108. Why has Nature given Hope. page 244 109. Why do rich men, noble men,
and young men Hope much, page 247 110. Why does hope deceive many. page 249
Of Despair.
111. Why has Nature given Despair. page 253
Of Fear.
112. Why has Nature given Fear. page 254 113. Why do Lovers always Fear.
page 257
Of Boldness, or Courage.
114. Why has Nature given courage. page 259 115. Why are young men commonly
bold and courageous. page 261 116. Why would Nature give Anger unto all living
creatures. page 263 117. Why is Anger in the breast of men easily turned into a
sin. page 265 118. Why is the Anger of Princes and great governors
commendable. page 267 119. Why do many exercise their Anger against themselves.
page 269
Of Shamefastness.
120. Why has man only obtained of Nature the gift of Shamfastnesse. page 271
121. Why do women, and young men especially blush. page 273 122. Why is the
seat of Shamefastness in the forehead. page 274.
Of Compassion.
123. Why has Nature given compassion. page 276 124. Why are women and old
men most pitiful. page 278 125. Why are they that are angry, or in misery
not merciful. page 281
Of Emulation.
126 Why has Nature given to man Emulation. page 283 127 Why do men Emulate
things most noble. page 285.
FINIS.
Errata.
In page 3 line. 18 for creator of things, creator of all things. page 11. line
2^. for bestroweth, bestows. page 13 line 5 for sure, since, page 28. line
11. for saciable sociable, page 47 line. 3. for gods goods. page 73. line 11.
for Iuceus Incens. page 81. line 23 for pease please. page 89. line 20 for add
and, page 79. line 4. for diposition disposition. page 102. line. 17. for laugh
cough. page 160 line. 20. for visible invisible. page 162. line. 23. for
intentiall intentionall.


