A DIVINE TRAGEDY LATELY ACTED, Or A Collection of sundry memorable examples
of Gods judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, and other like Libertines, in their
unlawful Sports, happening within the Realm of England, in the compass only
of two years last past, since the Book was published, worthy to be known and
considered of all men, especially such, who are guilty of the sin or
Arch-patrons thereof.

Psalm. 50. verse. 22. Now consider this, ye that forget God, least he tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Gregorius M. Moralium. lib. 36. c.
18. Deus, etsi quaedam longanimiter tolerat, quaedam tamen in hac vita
flagellat, and hic nonnunquam ferire inchoatur quos aeterna damnatione
consumat. Tibullus Elegiarum. lib. 3. Eleg. 7- -- Foelix quicunque dolor
Alterius disces posse carere tuo. Council. Paris. 2. lib. 3. c. 5. Salubriter
admonemus cunctos fideles, ut diei Dominico debitum honorum and reverentiam
exhibeant. Quoniam hujus dehonoratio, and a Religione Christiana valde
abhorret, and suis violatoribus animarum perniciem proculdubio generat. Alex.
Alensis ex Hieron. P. 3. Q. 32. M. 4. Art. 1. Resol. Quis dubitat Sceleratius
esse commissum, quod gravius est punitum? ut Number. 15. 35. ibid. Anno M. DC.
XXXVI.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, it is a true saying of that royal King Solomon Prove. 19. 29.
Judgments are prepared for Scorners: that is, for such who contemn the
precepts and admonitions of God, and his faithful Ministers. And as they are
thus prepared, so are they often times executed upon such, even in this present
life: that Gods power, truth, and justice might be manifested, and wicked men
frighted from their evil courses: So the Psalmist: Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is
known by the judgment that he executes; the wicked is snared in the work of
his own hands: the reason is thus rendered by the Prophet Isay. c. 26. 9. For
when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness; though never so indocible and refractory before. Neither does
God so inflict his judgments, As he has done on the 4. Commandment itself,
and on these Infringers of it.
as to have them presently forgotten; but he stampes a Memento on them; having
so done his marvelous works (as well of justice, as of mercy) that they ought to
be had in remembrance. Psalm. 111. 4. Himself therefore has vouchsafed to
record (even in sacred writ) many notable examples of his avenging justice,
both general, National, and personal, for all posterity to contemplate;
prefacing some of them with a special Memorandum for our more serious
consideration of them; with Luke 17. 32. Remember Lots wife: which judgments
though executed many thousand years past, yet they remain still fresh upon
record, as done but yesterday, even for this very end, that they might be
examples unto us, not to last after evil things as they lusted, nor to trace
the footsteps of their sinful ways, lest we should incur the self same
exemplarie punishments as they sustained. 1. Cor. 10. 5. to 12. And as God
himself, so holy men of God in all ages, following his example, have carefully
observed, and registered to posterity the special most remarkable judgments of
God upon obstinate sins and sinners of all sorts, (with which not only
ecclesiastical, but even profane Stories, are fully fraught) happened in the
ages, and the places wherein they lived: Many whereof Mr. John Fox in his Acts
and monuments, near the end, Mr, Raynolds in his Treatise concerning the
miraculous discovery and punishments of murders and Murderers. Dr Thomas
Peard in his Theater of Gods judgments, with sundry others, have collected and
digested into entire Tractates, the very reading and serious perusal whereof,
would no doubt daunt the most professed Atheist, and reclaim the most
incorrigible sinner. I therefore desiring to tread in their pious footsteps,
having received from good intelligence many memorable presidents of Gods
avenging Justice upon Sabbath Breakers; and the profaners of Sacred times
devouted to his service, happening within the compass of our little Island
within two years space, (since the publication of the Declaration for Sports
and Pastimes after evening Prayer on the Lords day, in Parish Churches by
diverse( Nullam habet spem salutis ager quem ad intemperantia^ Medicus hortatur:
Sense.
Ministers) has set open the floudgates to this presumptuous Sin of
Sabbathbreaking; thought it a part of my bounden duty to preserve and propagate
their memory both for the honor of Gods truth and justice; the vindication of
the entire sanctifycation of his sacred day, (which he has visiblie pleaded
for from heaven, since men have been audaciously profane, as to plead, and I
would I could not say to See the doctrine of the Sabbath; The History of the
Sabbath; the treatise of the Sabbath Day and discourse of the Sabbath lately
printed: whichthough they condemn the very name of Sabbath, as Jewish yet they
are all characterised with that name and title.
write and preach against it upon earth) the clearing of those Ministers
innocence, who now unjustly suffer thorough the malice of ungodly persecutors,
and raging Prelates, for refusing to join with others in spurring on the
people to the greedy pursuit of this crying dangerous Syn, to the ruin of
their Souls, their bodies, and shame of our religion, and the monition of this
present, and all future ages, to beware of this so dangerous a transgression.
How God has punished this very Syn in former ages, in such who have either by
dancing, Sports, Pastimes, orunnecessary Labors and travels profaned his Sacred
day, I mean not to record: he that lists may read store of such examples
registered to his hands in the Counsel of Paris, under Lewis and Lotharius anno
829. l. 1. c. 50. (which relates in general; That many present in this
Council were eyewitnesses, and others of them had it by relation, that some
men upon the Lords day being about their husbandry, have been slain with
thunder, some punished with the contraction of their joints and sins, some
even with visible fire have had their bodies and bones burnt up in a moment,
and suddenly resolved into ashes, and that many other terrible examples of like
nature has happened and did fall out daily: By WHICH IT WAS DECLARED, THAT GOD
IS MVCH OFFENDED WITH THE DISHONOVR OF SO GKEAT A DAI;) Petrus Plessensis in
Litania major Sermo 20. In Matthew Paris, Historia Major Anno 1200. p. 194. in
Roger Houenden Anno 1200. p. 822. In Matthew Westminster. Flores Historiarum:
Anno 1200. In Vincentius Beluacensis, Speculum Morale l. 3. pr. 9. Distinctio
9. ofdances, In the flower of the Commandments, printed in the beginning of K.
Hen. 8. fol. 159. to 163. In Henricus Gran. Distinct. 9. Exemp. 51. in the
Magdeburge Centuries Centurie. 12. c. 6. In Dr. Bownde his doctrine of the
Sabbath Edition. 2. p. 252. to 263. the first book: in Mr John Field his
declaration of Gods judgments at Paris garden: in Mr Philip Stubs his Anatomy
of abuses. p. 185. in the Practice of Piety: 429. to 434. and Dr. Beard his
Theater of Gods judgments. All which have registered sundry notable Judgments
of God upon sundry Sabbath Breakers (which have presumed to dance, work, or
travel, on the Lords holy day) of purpose to show the danger of profaning holy
times, and to deter men from this common sin, for which so many have
smarted from heaven in an exemplarie manner. I shall therefore confine my self
only to such domesticke examples, as have fallen out in sundry corners of this
our Realm within these two years, of purpose to refute the 2. Pet. 2. v. 16.
madness of those Prophets, who in the Press and Pulpit; and the profanes of
those people, who in their dauncing-greenes, and maypole arbors, have been so
audacious, as to affirm, the Profanation of the Lords day by Maygames,
Daunces, Maypoles, Wakes, and common Labor out of time of divine Service, (
especially after evening Prayer) to be no sin at all against the 4.
Commandment, or any other Law of God or man; but See the History, Treatise,
Discourse, and Doctrine of the Sabbath accordingly, and sunday no Sabbath.
necessary and commendable point of true Christian Liberty (they should have
said of carnal and heathenish licentiousness rather) from which the people
must not be debarred; But let these blind guides, and libertines learn from
these examples, to correct this their erroneous judgment, and practice; for
fear the Lord make them the next examples in this kind, to teach others to
keep his Sabbaths better, and more entirely for the future. And if these
tragical spectacles of divine justice will not persuade them, that such
profaning of the Lords most Sacred day, is a Syn, yea and a crying Syn too, as
all our writers, (yea and our Prelates generally, till now of late have
unanimously defined, and the whole State in Parliament in 1. Car. c. 1. 3. Car.
c. 1
two late famous Statutes and 1. 27. H. 6. 5. 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 3.
two more ancient Acts, to omit our Of the Time and Place of Prayer. part. 1.
Of Disobedience and unlawful Rebellion. part, 3. p. 293. 293.
Homilyes The Prayer after the 4. and 10. Commandment.
Common Prayer book, Canon. 13. 163.
Canons, Article 35 of Ireland. 56
Articles, and Queen Elis* Injunct: 20.
Injunctions, which conclude the same) I say have adjudged such a presumptuous
transgression, as will draw down Gods vengeance on men's heads; Our late
Sovereign K. James of happy memory and our present gracious Sovereign Lord R.
Charles with all the Prelates, Clergy and people of the Realm in the first
years of both their Reigns, in the several Books of Common Prayer, and
order for the public fasts set out by their royal authorityes, and the
Bishops advice, with the Consent and hearty desire of the whole Realm for the
abating aversion, and ceasing of those dreadful eating Plagues which then
swallowed up many thousands of people every week will inform them; That
among other Syns, The profaning OF THE SABBATH (So King James his Book styles
the sunday) and not keeping holy the Lords day, was one chief cause why those
two great terrible Plagues (and why not also this great Plague which is now
begun and spread much abroad) brake in upon us; to the destruction not of some
few Particular persons, but of many thousands, and the punishment of the whole
Realm, and Nation in general. And because some of these men plead most
falsely, that the chiefest writers of the reformed Churches are of their
opinion, Homil. 162. in Matthew. fol. 308. Hom. 28. in Mar. f. 35. Hom. 56. in
Lu. f. 141. Hom. 36. in Joan. f. 77. Hom. 88. in Act.
Mr. Rodolphus Gualter, and Comment. in Matthew. 12. and 14. p. 376. 423. in
Joan. 7. f. 293.
Wolfgangus Musculus (men of principal note and learning among them) will
both assure them, that the Lords day is not only WHOLLY, ONLY, AND ENTIRELY TO
BE SPENT IN RELIGIOUS PVBLIKE AND PRIVATE DVTIES OF GODS WORSHIP, AND THAT
DAVNCING, SPORTES, AND PASTIMES, ON IT, ARE SINFVLL, AND EXECRABLE; (the
constant judgment of all foreign Protestant divines whatsoever, as I am able
to prove; what ever History of the Sabbath. part. 2. c. 6. Inst. 9. 10.
Dr Helyn or D. ^ooklinghton Sunday no Sabbath p. 8.
others have rashly averred to the contrary; But likewise further inform them;
That God may justly revenge the great contempt of his Deity in profaning his
Sacred day with daunces and such like Revells and discorders, WITH HORRIBLE
PVNISHMENTS, NEITHER IS IT TO BE DOVBTED ( says Mr Gualther) THAT THE
PROFANATION OF THE LORDS DAY, IS NOT THE LEAST CAUSE OF THE EVILS AND
CALAMITIES OF OUR AGE, Yea their own most illustrious Cardinal Robert
Bellarmine (whom they almost deify when they do but name him:) is so far a
Puritan in this particular, that he not only spends Concio 6. 9. 19. 20. 21.
4. or 5. whole Sermones against dancing, mummeries, maskes, and such like
Bacchanals, (which he simply condemns at all times, but especially on sacred
festivals and Lords days as most detestable profanations of them;) but
likewise professes; that the practice of them upon sacred times, was the
occasion of all the public calamities and judgments which they suffered. But
by these Daunces, Mummeries, Bacchanels, and discorders (says he) we polute
the holy days of the Lord: and yet nevertheless do we inquire the reasons why
God does punish us? why we are slain in our very houses? do not the
Scriptures cry aloude, Sin makes a people miserable: And there is no evil
in the City, which the Lord has not done. Therefore these our sins of
profaning the holy days of the Lord with daunces, revels and bacchanals, have
procured us famine, and poverty, and pestilence, and sedition, and ALL PLAGVES
AND SCOVRGES. And verily (says he) in another Sermon. I vehemently fear, that
if we proceed to celebrate the Bacchanals with mummeries, and maskes, and
daunces, as we do at other times, and to provoke God to wrath, with so many
wicked Pastimes, our sin will be grown to the full at last, and the anger of
the Lord be so far incensed, that he will utterly destroy us, as we see he
has destroyed many nations, for what I pray has destroyed Grecia? But even
that very thing which we do? They were men exceedingly given to drunkenesses,
feasting and DAVNCING, ( and that upon sacred times) as may be known, by the
Orations of Basil, and Chrysostom. But what has God done? because they were
addicted to these things, and especially to DAVNCING, he has imposed such a
severe tyrant ( to wit the Turk) upon their necks, that they now groan under
the yoke, and are pressed with so heavy a burden, THAT THEY HAVE NEITHER TIME,
NOR WILL TO DAVNCE OR CAPER. Thus Bellarmine to his great admirers shame and
refutation. If then this sin of profaning the Lords day, by dancing,
Maygames, Ales, Pastimes, or unnecessary travel and labor, draw down Gods
Plagues and vengeance upon whole Kingdoms and Churches, as these authors,
(together with Mr. John Field, in his declaration of the judgment of God, at
Paris Garden; and Humphry Robarts in his complaint for the Reformation of
diverse vain, and wicked abused exercises, practiced on the Sabbath day, which
tend to the hinderance of the Gospel, and increase of many abominable vices:
printed by Richard Jones, London 1580. together with Mr. Philip Stubs, in his
Anatomic of abuses, and Mr. John Nortbrooke in his Treatise where in dicing
DAVNCING, vain plays and Enterludes, with other idle Pastimes and exercises
commonly used on the SABBATH DAY, are by the Word of God, and ancient writers
reprooved, printed for George Bishop* London: 1579.) most punctually testify:
and the Practice of Piety dedicated to his Majesty, and 39. times printed by
public authority resolves: no wonder if it has lately caused God to unsheath
his sword of exemplarie justice upon these particular persons, (that I speak
not of the whole Kingdom in general now scourged with a fresh plague and
lately a drought) whose tragical examples I here present unto your view, to
deter all others from this Sin. It is a true saying of Cyprian, Praebentur
cunctis Exempla, cum fuerint quibusdam irrogata Supplicia. The Divine
Punishments of a few are warnings to all: God grant that these may be so to us.
He (says the same Father) is over audacious, who strives to pass over there,
where he has seen another to have fallen; he is outragiously bead-stronge,
who is not struck with fear, when he beholds another perish in that course;
which he is running; he only is a lover of his own safety, who takes warning
by the Deaths of others: and he alone is a prudent man, who is made wise by
the Ruins of other men. God of his mercy vouchsafe that the exemplarie
deaths of these few here specified (and of thousands more in this time of
mortality, occasioned by this Sin of Sabbathbreaking were as the former
pests; Together with a Plague in Pope Pelagius the second his time An. Domin.
591. as Petrus Blessensis in his 20. Sermon de Litania majori, records:) may
prove life to many; and the judgments on some, become remedies to cure all,
who are sick of the selfsame Sin.

Amen.
Examples of Gods judgments UPON SABBATH BREAKERS.
THese Examples of Gods judgments hereunder set down, have fallen out within
the space of less then two years last past, even since the Declaration for
sports (tolerated on the Lords day) was published, and read by many Ministers
in their congregations; for hereupon ill disposed people (being as dry fuel,
to which fire being put, quickly flameth forth; or as waters, pent up and
restrained being let loose, break forth more furiously) were so encouraged, if
not enraged, as taking liberty dispensed, thereby so provoked God, that his
wrath in sundry places, has broken out to the destruction of many, would to
God to the instruction of any. And the judgments are so much the more
remarkable, that so many in number, as here are observed, (besides many more,
no doubt which have not come to our ears) should fall within so narrow a
compass of time, so thick, and that in so many places: as we read not of such
a number of judgments in this kind for this one sin throughout the whole
history of time, from the Apostles hitherto: So many there are of them, as, it
were too heathenish to impute them to chance, and too much stupidity, and envy
of Gods glory, not to acknowledge the special hand of God in them, upon such
transgressors of his own sacred day: And it were to be wished, that all the
examples in this kind, within this compass of time; were diligently collected
and compiled into one Narration, for the further illustration of Gods glory,
and for admonition to all Sabbath Breakers, who if they repent not, nor
surcease from such their profanesse, it may justly be feared, that the number
of such examples will be daily increased, till they make a heap for all the
World, to stand amazed at. In the mean time, who so is wise, and will observe
these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord:
Psalm. 107. 43. As for the truth of them, I have good testimony under the hands
of men, of sufficient credit, for the most of them; and the rest has come to
our ears by credible report. If it shall so fall out, that one or two, or so,
should prove otherwise, either for the substance, or circumstance; let not the
Reader blame me, who have used my best diligence to inquire out the certain
truth of them all, and I am sure the most of the examples are confirmed by
witnesses without all exception, and none of them is to me of any suspected
credit; So as here are no fained miracles, nor fabulous stories, nor old Wives
tales, for profane Scoffers to ieare at, and play upon, thereby to disgrace and
discredit all truths in this kind, as some of late have done (History of the
Sabbath. part. 2. chap. 7. page 223.) but these examples are such, as will
abide the and search of this present age, wherein are yet living so many both
ear and eye witness of them.

EXAMPLE. 19.
A Miller at Churchdowne, near Gloucester, would 1634.
needs (contrary to the admonitions both of his Minister in private, and
generally in public, yea and that very day, and of other christian friends)
keep a solemn Whitson ale, for which he had made large preparation and
provision, even of threescore dozen of cheescakes, with other things
proportionable; in the Church-house, half a mile from his mill, his musical
instruments were set forth on the side of the Church-house, where the Minister
and people were to pass to the Church to evening Prayer. When prayer and
Sermon were ended, the Drumbe is struck up, the pieces discharged, the
Musicians play, and the rowt fall a dancing, till the evening; where they all
with the Miller resort to his mill; where that evening before they had supt,
about 9. of the cloak on Whitsunday, a fire took suddenly in his house over
their heads, and was so brief and quick, that it burnt down his house and
mill, and devoured with all the greatest of all his other provision and
housholdstuffe. This is confirmed by sundry good testimonies.

EXAMPLE. 20.
Richard Benfield an Apparitor in the parish of Hemsteed 1634. April. 20.
kept an Ale in the Church-house, joining to the Churchyard with dancing and
revelling night and day without control: pretending that the Bishop would
bear him out) and not unlikely, because at his complaint to the Bishop of his
Minister, for preaching against dancing and Maypoles, he was suspended for his
labor) It happened that upon the Lords day at even, being the 20. day of
April, that his youngest Son was accused for stealing a purse, and 20.
Shillings in it, from a Butcher who lay drunk upon the board or table in the
Churchhouse, for which he was like to be hanged (the purse being found about
him.) Upon the 21. day of the said month, Benfield his eldest Son Richard
went down into Hempsteeds Peirse, about some business, and his youngest brother
with him, where they met with a little boy called Baker (that had been a
fishing) having some small fishes in his hand. Benfields youngest Son would
have taken these fishes from Baker, whereupon they fell together by the ears.
The eldest brother Rich. Benfield went to help his younger brother, being too
weak for Baker. This Baker did swear a great oath that he would stabbe him,
if he did meddle with him, upon which words Benfield fell upon Baker, gave him
a box or two, and ran away. Baker followed him with his knife in his hand,
overtooke him, and thrust his knife three inches deep into his body, which
wound prooved mortal, so that he never spoke more words then these; oh Jack
Baker has killed me, and so fell down. Two men being present there, took him
up in their arms, brought him up into the Church-house alive, and so soon as
they had put him out of their arms upon the Table, he groaned, and died.

Remarkable it is, that where the Father drew ale upon the Lordsday and so
profaned it: In the same place his Son the next day drew his last breath; for
that the punishment inflicted was stamped with the resemblance of the sin
convicted.

EXAMPLE. 21.
At Baunton in Dorcetshire some being at bowls 1634.
on the Lords day, one flinging his bowl at his fellowbowler, hit him on the
ear, so as the blood issued forth at the other ear, whereof he shortly died.
The Murderer fledd.

EXAMPLE. 22.
One good man Paul near Stoke in Dorcetshire, 1634.
rejoycinge much at the erection of a summer-pole, at a Parish called Simsbury in
Dorcetshire, and saying before one his Neighbors, he would go see it, though
he went naked through a quickset hedge: which is a common proverb they use:
Going with wood in his arms to cast into the bonfire, where he lived, and
using these words: Heaven and earth are full of thy glory, O Lord: he was
presently smitten by the Stroke of God, and within 2. or 3. days dyed, and his
wife with him. These two last examples are testifies by a Minister in his
letter to a brother Minister.

EXAMPLE. 3.
A Maid at Enfield near London, hearing of 1634.
the liberty, which was given by the book, which was published for sports,
would needs go dance, with others on the Lords day, saying she would go
dance, so long as she could stand on her legs; she daunced so long, that
thereof within 2. or 3. days she dyed.

EXAMPLE. 23.
In the edge of Essex near Brinkley, two fellows working in a chalk pit,
the one was boasting to his fellow, how he had angered his Mistrisse with
staying so late at their sports the last sunday night, but he said he would
anger her worse the next Sunday. He had no sooner said this, but suddenly the
earth fell down upon him, and slew him out right, with the fall whereof his
fellows limb was broken, who had been also partner with him in his jollity on
the Lords day, escaping with his life, that he might tell the truth, that God
might be glorified and that by this warning he might repent of his sin and
reform such his profanesse, and remain as a pillar of salt, to season others
with fear by his example.

EXAMPLE. 24.
The last Spring a Miller hard by Wootton in Worcestershire, went on the
Lordsday to a wake, whence returning home again, the same day at night found
his Mill and house all on a fire; this was testified by a Minister (in a Reply
to another Minister) who was an eye witness.

EXAMPLE. 25.
At Woolston in the same Country, where the said Ministers father had been
Minister 40. years, and by Gods blessing upon his labors, had reformed things
very well, yet upon the publication of this book in printe, many of the
inhabitants the spring following, were imboldned to set up Maypoles, Morris
dance, and a Whitson ale, continuing their rude revelling a week together,
with many affronts to their ancient and reverent Pastor: but it pleased God,
that not long after, a spark from a smithes shop, caught in that room where
the ale was brewed, and though means were ready at hand, yet it could not be
quenched, but set the house on fire, and presently flew to the barn in which
their disorder was, and burnt the same with 13. dwelling houses more, most of
whose inhabitants were actors or abetters in the same: This is testifies by
many.

EXAMPLE. 12.
At Topudle in Dorceshiere, one John Hooper alias Cole, upon the promulgation
of the said Book, was let down into a Well to cleanse it, for to brew beer
for a Whitson ale, by Francis Laurence, alias Smith, and Stephen P^pe
Churchwardens, which Well was in the back side of Richard Laurence alias
Smith. Which John Hooperfel^ from the rope into the Well, where he dyed.

EXAMPLE. 26.
Richard Jones son of Widow Jones, Iul. 1634. not far from Dorchester, being
severely admonished by his Mother, when she understood he had a purpose on
satturday night, to go on the Lords day with other companions to Stoake to
play at a sport, called fiues, but persisting in his resolution, and going the
next day, accordingly being the Lords day at Stoake, where he played at the
said sport, at night returning home with his companions, Wm. Burges, Wm. Hill,
John Edwards, after they had there well drunk, they fall first a justling one
another in the way, then to boxes, and in the end Edwards stabbing Jones under
the left side, he dyed thereof, the monday night following about seven of the
Clock. Behold here a terrible example of disobedience, to Gods holy
commandments, not only the fourth, but the fifth also.

EXAMPLE. 27.
At Ovendeane in Sussex about 9. or 10. miles from Alfriston, alias Ason, one
John Arcold, of the age of one or two and twenty years, eldest son to John
Arcold, a blacksmith dwelling in Ason, with other younkars would needs fall a
ringing of the bells on a Sabbath day, presuming the Book for Sports gave them
full liberty so to do. One of the Churchwardens Robert Kenward hindered them
from their jangling; whereupon the said Arcold, and his companions fell in some
contestation with him, telling him that though he hindered them now, yet they
would ring the next Sunday, whether he would or no. But the said John Arcold
the ringleader before the next Sunday came, was struck with a sickness, in
which he continued a fortnight or 3. weeks till he died, in which time Robbert
Kenward the Churchwarden, repairing to him, and putting him in mind of his
bold affronting of him, he seemed to be sorry for it, and promised, if God
would be pleased, to restore him again to his health, he would never do the
like. God make his surviving companions, and all others, wise by his example.

EXAMPLE. 28.
At Walton upon Thames in Surrey, not far from 1634.
Oatlands, in the last great frost 3, youngmen on the Lords day, after they had
been at the Church in the forenoone, where the Minister pressing the words of
his text, out of 2. Cor. 5. 10. that we must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ etc. they the while whispering one to another, as they sat. In
the afternoon they went together over the Thames, upon the Ice, unto a house
of disorder, and gameing, where they spent the rest of the Lords day, and part
of the night also in revelling, one of them in a Tavern merrily discoursing
the next day of his Sabbath-acts, and voyage over the Ice; but on the Tewsday
next after, these three returning home wards, and attempting to pass again
over the ice, they all sanke down to the bottom as stones, whereof one only
of them was miraculously preserved, but the other two were drowned. Rejoice, O
young man, in Eccl. 11. 9.
thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk
in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou, that
for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment.

EXAMPLE. 29.
In the year of our Lord 1633. October. 26. after the book for sports was known
to be published in print, David Price a Welshman, servant to one Thomas Hill, a
known Grasier of that Country, coming to Banbury with his drove on Satturday
night, declared his purpose of driving them the next day, early in the morning
being the Sabbath or Lords day: his Host where he lodged, dissuaded him,
because it was the Sabbath day, and told him that he would certainly be
stopped, and made to pay for it according to the Statute. He answered that he
would drive them, and let me see (says he) who will hinder me. So in the
morning two other accompaning him, he went to fetch the Cattle out of the
ground, one that knew him, met him at the Towns end (not yet oUt of the
Town) and admonished him, saying, What, David, today, today? he made no
answer, but went onward, and though for any thing, that appeared to any other,
or that himself complained of, he was then in good health, as ever he was, yet
within little more then a stones cast of the Town, he fell down dead
suddenly, and was burried in Banbury Churchyard the next day after; None
could discern, any sensible or evident cause of so sudden a surprizall; and
himself gave no sign of any pain, weakness, or illness, till the instant
time that he gave up the ghost.

EXAMPLE. (5.)
On Ian. 25. 1634. being the Lords day, in the time of the last great Frost 14.
young men presuming to play at football upon the ice on the river Trent, near
to Ganisborrow, coming altogether in a scuffle, the ice suddenly brake, and
they were all drowned.

EXAMPLE. 30.
At Wicks a Town betwixt Colchester and Harwich in Essex, upon Whitsunday last
in the afternoon two fellows meeting at the football, the one killed the
other.

EXAMPLE. 31.
At Oxford this last Summer on the Sabbathday, one Bally Hawks a Butcher,
would needs go into his field with an hatchet and showell to mend his ditch:
his Wife dissuaded him what she could, being the Sabbathday, but he said he
would go and make an end of his work, which he did, for suddenly he was
struck dead in his ditch, and so made an end of his work, and his life
together.

EXAMPLE. 32.
Also at Oxford a carpenter undertaking to mend a Stage in S. John's Colleidge
on the Satturday night, for the finishing whereof he must of necessity spent
some part of the Lords day morning, that the Stage might be ready against the
Monday following, he that night fell backward from the Stage, being not far
from the ground, and brake his neck, and so ended his life in a fearful
Tragedy.

EXAMPLE. 33.
At Iuye Hinckley a mile from Oxford (about the time when May-poles are set
up) on the Lords day after evening Prayer, when most of the Town were at the
May Pole, one John Cooper, servant to master Tinmore of the said Town, going
along the street, a Maid out of a window in John Nicols his house, not far
from the May Pole, called him to come in thither; where also was another Maid,
and a young man named Christopher young, servant to Master Willis of the said
Town; John Cooper at first refused to come to them, but the maid earnestly
entreating him, he yielded to her, and being come in, sat down by the other
two, where having sat a while, the foresaid Christopher young spied a Gun
over the chimney, which he supposing not to be charged, fondly took down, and
fell a tampearing with it, and first levelled at the mayds, and after held it
up against John Cooper, as he sat, and unwittingly lifting up the Cock, it
struck fire, and the piece discharged, and shot the said John Cooper through
the shoulder, so that he dyed presently, being heard only to say, O Lord.

EXAMPLE. (6.)
At Dover the very same Lords day, that the book 1635.
was read, one in S. James Parish that played on a kitt, went and played, and
thereby called together a sort of wenches and young men: But he was thereupon
that very day struck by divine hand, so as within two days he dyed.

EXAMPLE. 34.
A young man near Bow, going to swim in the river on Essex side, on the
Lords day in the afternoon, was drowned.

EXAMPLE. 35.
Two boys of S. Albons, going to Verolanes Ponds, a mile off to swim on the
Lords day, July 19. one of them was drowned, and the other hardly escaped.

EXAMPLE. 36.
At Ramsey in Suffolk, a tall man on the Lords day going with others to
swim, and being advertized and warned of a hole in the water; he swear that
there was no place there could drown him, but by and by on a sudden he was
missing, being now under water, and so drowned.

EXAMPLE. 37.
On September 13. 1635. being the Lords day, two young men of the Parish of S.
Dunstans in the West, London, going to swim, were both drowned.

EXAMPLE. (7.)
At Thurlow in Suffolk, one making a Feast to his friends on the Sabbath day,
for joy of the publishing of the Book for sports, was the next day pressed to
death, by the sudden fall of a faggot stack.

EXAMPLE. 38.
At Twiford in Buckinghamshire, a fellow playing at cudgels on the Lords day
(or as some say, upon a revell day) received a hurt in the face, whereof he
dyed the next week.

EXAMPLE. 39.
At Lemster, one Master Powel, Ian. 1634. on the Lords day serving a writ of
sub poena (and that of purpose on that day as is credibly reported) upon one
Master Shuit a Gentleman, this he did in the Churchyard, so soon as they were
come out of the Church: Master Shuit thereupon told him, I thought you had
been an honester man then so, to do this upon this day; he replied, I hope I
am never a whit the more dishonest, or less holy for that: having spoken this,
he suddenly fell down dead, and spoke not a word more, his wife seeing this,
was suddenly struck with sickness.

EXAMPLE. 40.
A fellow in Sommersetshire being to make a tente upon the Lords day, for a
fair that was to be kept upon the Monday following, said to one on the
Satturday, that they would rear it to morrow, so the next day which was the
Lords day, being drunk, he dyed the same day roaring.

EXAMPLE. 43.
At Glassenbury in Sommersetshire, at the setting up of a May Pole, it
miscarrying fell upon a child, and slew it, and it is reported that it was the
Churchwardens child, who was the chief stickler in the business. Also when
the May Pole in the same Town, was again the second time a setting up, a fire
took in the Town, so as all the people about the May Pole were forced to
leave it, and to run to the quenching of the fire.

EXAMPLE. 44.
A May-Lord of misrule, not far from thence became madd upon it.

EXAMPLE. 45.
Also at Battersey near London, the last year a notable example of Gods
judgment befell a fiddler, the youth of the town of both sexes, being assembled
solemnly to set up a garland upon their may pole, and having got a Taber and
Pipe for the purpose, he with the pipe in his mouth, fell down dead and never
spoke word.

EXAMPLE. 41.
At Corsham in Wiltshire in the Whitsunweeke, at a whitson-ale, one Mark
Hulbert, a lusty young man, undertaking to act the fools part, was so
extremely drunk and hurt with falls taken in the time of his drunkenesse, that
shortly he took his bed, where he lay very loathsomly, in most grievous pain,
until the sixth day of June, being the Lordsday, on which he dyed at 4. of the
clock in the afternoon (the usual time for youth to take their liberty) and
was burried the same day before 9. of the clock, and yet he burst, before he
was laid into his grave. See Job. 31. 3.

EXAMPLE. 46.
On May 31. 1635. being the Lords day, one Richard Clerk (an apprentise unto
Timothy Denorell shoemaker of Sherston in the Country of Wiltshire, within 3.
miles of Tedbury,) being drunk at the Church-house in the same Parish, told
Henry Larrum of the same Parish, that was then in the same place drunk
likewise with the Churchhouse ale, that he the said Richard, would either hang
himself, or drown himself, demanding of the said Henry which of the two was
best; unto whom he replied, that he hoped he would do neither; on the day
following, being monday in the morning, the said Richard Clerk was seen to
go through the streat, without a band, as if he had been going about his
masters business, and putting on his band without the Town, he got up into
the middle of a tree, and there did hang himself. A miserable effect of
carnal liberty and profane meetings on the Lords day.

EXAMPLE. 47.
The 31. May 1635. the book of recreation was read in the Parish Church of
Alvelye in Commit. Salop, in the afternoon, after all divine exercises public
ended, there fell out a bloody fight betwixt 3. of Alvelye above said, and one
of Envield of the Country of Stafford near Adjacent, in so much that the man
of Envield was sore wounded, and had his jaw bone broken, so that he could not
eat his meat for the sustaining of nature; In his extremity he laid his death
to the charge of the other 3. The Churchwardens of the Parish of Alvelye above
said, presented these 4. for profaning of the Sabbath to my Lord his grace of
Canterbury (to use the words of the relation) being the time of his
metropoliticall visitation, since which time two of the parties fledd; the
third was committed to prison in Shewsbury, and was the next assizes to come to
his answer.

EXAMPLE. 48.
In March, betwixt 1634. and 1635. at Billericay in Essex, one Theophilus
Pease, the Ministers son of that town, went to ring the bells on the Sabbath
day, whom the Churchwardens for that time hindered; But against the next
Sabbath, he gathered a company together, saying he would ringe in dispite of
the Churchwardens. While he was a ringing, he was taken with a giddiness like
one drunk, and so sickned, and about three days after dyed.

EXAMPLE. 49.
Anno 1635. January or there about in Chichester Diocese, one Thomas Perkin,
a wilful and usual profaner of Gods Sabbath in Hailing South, being ringing
on a Sabbath day, the rope took him up, and flinging him about 8. foot high,
he fell down on his head, and was taken up dead, and so remained long, but
life at last was gotten into him, yet the bruise in his head is so great and
dangerous as death is expected, and little hope of life remains.

EXAMPLE. 50.
At Craies, two miles from Billerikey, a servant of Master Holdsworth Minister
there, ringing on the Sabbath, his Master sent to forbid him: but he would ring
still, and before he had done ringing, he was struck sick, and a while after
dyed. This was a little after the book for sports was publicly read in the
Church.

EXAMPLE. 51.
In June 1635. on the Lords day, the Tapster and Chamberlain of the Queens
head in Southwarke, ridd into Kent to be merry, and having drunk liberally,
riding homewards, the one of them fell from his horse, and broke his neck.

EXAMPLE. 52.
Also in June 1635. and as some report the very same Lords day, in Southwarke
at the red lion, near S. Georges Church, in the afternoon, a man with another
sat drinking so long, that the other about six of the clock departing, fell
a sleep so, that he never awaked again.

EXAMPLE. (8.)
At Hellingsby 5. or 6. miles from Ason in Sussex, the book being read on the
Lords day, in the Church by the Minister, on the next day being Monday, an
honest man, one Tomkins being on his way, a neighbor overtakes him, and
scoffingly asks him, if he would go dance with him the next Sunday; to whom
the man aswered, take heed that thou be not dancing in hell before that day
come, or before it be long; By the next week Gods hand fell on this Scoffer,
that himself and two more of his family dyed.

EXAMPLE. 53.
In the month of July 1634. one Master Quince the Chirurgio^ of the Tower of
London, having an horse to sell, and meeting with a chapman, went to
Coleman-street, where the horse was kept, to see and contract for him, on the
Lords day in the afternoon; the horse being sadled, M. Quince gets upon his
back, to show his chapman how well he would pace; which done, as he was a
lighting of his back, his foot, which lighted on the ground slipped, the
other foot hung in the stirrup, so as he fell to the ground, and with the fall
brake his thighbone short off, so that he was carried from the place to an
house near adjoining, where he lay in great pain, and agonye for 8* weeks
space or more, almost despairing of his life, and never stirring out of his
bed: at last it pleased God, by degrees to recover and restore him to the use
of his leg again, he having little use of it, (and that with great pain)
for half a years space and more. His son had dissuaded him from riding,
because it was the Lords day; and himself has since acknowledged it a just
judgment of God upon him for profaning that sacred time, which has made him
more carefully to frequent the Church, and to avoid the profanation of the
Lords day ever since. This the party himself, and most of the Tower can
testify.

EXAMPLE. (9.)
On February 9. 1634. being the Lords day, an Apothecaries man in Limestreat
London, rid to Barnet with another companion, to make merry, who returning home
drunk, near high gate, met a Tinker, and offering him some abuse, the Tinker
strikes one of their horses, whereat the one bid the other run him through; who
drawing his rapier, ran the Tinker through the breast, that he fell down dead:
thereupon being by and by apprehended, and confessing the fact, they were both
sent to Newgate.

EXAMPLE. 10.
At Thorneton near Westchester, the people there, 1634.
upon the first publishing of the book prepared for a solemn summer ale. The
bringing in of their Lady flora should have been guarded with a Marshall
troop: the lustiest wench, and stoutest young man in the town were chosen to
be the purveyors for cakes, and for ribbons for favors, the solemnity was to
be on the monday, but the preparation on the Lords day; this lusty tall maid,
on the satturday before went to the mill, to fetch home the meal for cakes on
her head, she being strong and able for the purpose: but in the way, passing
by a hedge, she was suddenly struck by a divine stroke, and fell into the
ditch, where she was found dead; she was suffered to lie abroad in that
pickle all the Lords day, til monday morning, when the Coroner being send for,
she was thence carried to her grave immediately, where all her solemnity was
burried with her, and all her vain thoughts in that very day, wherein the
great solemnity should have been. And see what a good effect this wrought in
the whole town; First, all their mirth was turned into mourning, no summer ale
kept, and besides that, they being moved by the dreadful stroke of God, took
their may pole down, which they had before set up, and never after would
presume to set it up again, or to have any more summer-ales, or may-games. God
grant they continue in their sober minds, and that all other would learn to
be wise by their example.

EXAMPLE. 11.
In Yorkshire at a Wake, in the Parish of Otley at 1634.
Baildon, on the Lords day, two of them sitting at drink, late in the night,
fell out and being parted, the one a little after finding his fellow, sitting
by the fire with his back toward him, comes behind him, and with a hatchet
chines him down the back, so as his bowels fell out; the murderer flying
immediately, and being hotly pursued, lept into a river, and so drowned
himself. O fearful fruits of carnal liberty!

EXAMPLE. 18.
One in Glocestershire being very forward to advance a solemn sommer-meeting,
wherein his son was to be a chief stickler, went himself in great jollity
to see it, and there beholding it, he fell down suddenly, and so dyed.

EXAMPLE. 12.
One at Ham near Kingston, being a scoffer of all 1635.
goodness, and a common profaner of the Sabbath, going abroad to see his
grounds on the Lords day, and finding some neighbors cattle to have broken
in, he runs to drive them out, and that with such eagerness, that he fell
down dead instantly upon the place.

EXAMPLE. 13.
One Wright at Kingston, being a scoffer of Religion, and rejoicing much at the
suspending of his Minister, and others, for not reading the book of sports in
their Churches, saying, he hoped to see them also served shortly: was within
a day or two after struck with a dead Palsy, all over the one side, and with
blindness and dumnesse, that he could neither go, see, nor speak, and so lay
in a miserable manner for a fortnight, and then dyed.

EXAMPLE. 14.
In Moorefields near London, sundry youths playing 1635.
at Catt on the Lords day, two of them fell out, and the one hitting the other
under the ear with his catt, he therewith fell down for dead in the place,
the other was sent to prison: but the dead for the time, by Gods mercy
recovering, the prisoner was released; which may be a warning both to them, and
all other youth, to take heed how they so profane the Lords day.

EXAMPLE. 1.
A woman about Northampton, the same day that she heard the book for sports
read, went immediately, and having 3. pence in her purse, hired a fellow to go
to the next Town to fetch a Minstrell, who coming, she with others fell a
dancing, which continued within night; at which time she was got with child,
which at the birth she murdering, was detected and apprehended, and being
convented before the justice, she confessed it, and with all told the occasion
of it, saying it was her falling to sport on the Sabbath, upon the reading of
the book, so as for this treble sinful act, her presumtuous profaning of the
Sabbath: which brought her adulte^y and that murder. She was according to the
Law, both of God and man, put to death, much sin and misery follows upon
sabbath-breaking.

EXAMPLE. 2.
Also at Northampton, in the last Easter assizes, there was a youngman who
formerly, by seeing the example of good people, in the due sanctification of
the Lords day or Sabbath, had begun to reform his former loose kind of life,
and to frame his conversation, according to Gods word, and that in the well
keeping of the Sabbath, abstaining therein from sports and pastimes, and
spending the whole day in the public and private duties of it; but when once
he heard of the publishing of the book for sports, and pastimes, he fell back
again to his former wallowing, and being taken as he was picking a pocket,
when the Judges wear in the Church, upon examination confessed what he had
formerly been, and how he had been reformed, and that upon the publishing of
the said book, he was encouraged to run riot a fresh, by which means he fell
into this impiety and iniquity, for the which he suffered death.

EXAMPLE. 15.
April 1^. 1635. being Satturday, one traveling with three others from London
to Maydenhead, he (the rest spending the Sabbath there) would travel on his
way, the next day being the Lords day, contrary both to Gods commandment, and
also of the Lady whom he served: who had given him strict charge; to observe
the Sabbath, and not to travel on it. He rode in the morning to Henley, and
there heard the Sermon, after that he fell to travail in the afternoon, but as
he went in the way, leading his horse in his hand gently down a plain
descent, and even way, his horse suddenly fell, and broke both his fore legs,
the man sore aghast at this not more sudden, then strange disaster, which he
could not but attribute to the immediate hand of God, and being past all hope
of recovery was forced himself to knock his horse in the head, and so to
leave him, and being the next day overtaken at Abington by his company, whom he
had left the day before, and they asking him how it fell out, he was no further
on his way, he smote his breast, and told them how it had befallen him in the
way, saying that he had heard many a good Sermon, yet none of them or any thing
else did so work upon his conscience, as this thing did; and that this example
should be a warning unto him for ever travailing on the Sabbathday again. This
is testified under the hands of those 3. which had travailed with him, and over
took him.

EXAMPLE. 16.
At Dartmouth 1634. upon the coming forth and publishing of the book for
sports, a company of younkers on May Day morning before day, went into the
Country, to fetch home a Maypole with Drum and Trumpett; whereat the
neighboring* inhabitants were affrighted supposing some enemies had landed to
sack them, the Pole being thus brought home and set up, they began to drink
healthes about it, and to it, till they could not stand so steady as the pole
did, whereupon the Major and Justice bound the ringleaders over to the
Sessions, whereupon these complaining to the Archbishops Vicar General, then
in his visitation he prohibited the justices to proceed against them in regard
of the Kings book. But the justices acquainted him, they did it for their
disorder, in transgressing the bounds of the book, hereupon these libertines
scorning at Authority, one of them fell suddenly into a Deuteronomy. 28. 22.
Consumption, whereof he shortly after dyed; now allthough this revelling was
not on the Lords day, yet being upon any other day and especially May Day, the
May Pole set up thereon, giving occasion to the profanation of the Lords day
the whole year after it was sufficient to provoke God, to send plagues and
judgments among them.

EXAMPLE. 17.
In the same year 1634. and in the same Shire, one Edward Amerideth a
Gentleman, having been pained in his feet, and being upon his recovery,
whereupon one said unto him, he was glad to see him so nimble. Amerideth
replied, that he doubted not, but to dance about the May Pole the next Lords
day: But behold the hand of the Lord, for before he moved out of that place, he
was smitten with such a feebleness of heart, and dizsines in his head, that
desiring help to carry him to an house, he dyed before the Lords day came; so
fearful it is to fall into the hands of the living God.

EXAMPLE. 54.
Many more examples might here be added, not only such as have fallen out
within these two years last past, since the said book was published by the
Ministers in their Churches, but also, since the book was first of all printed
and published, the very brute whereof, without being read by Ministers, was
enough, and to much to imbolden youth to take their liberty in profaning the
Lords day, but for the present, I will add but one more. At Chidlington upon
the edge of Hertfordshire, not far from Hitchin, a company of fellows upon a
holy day being to play a match at foot ball, one of them was tolling the bell,
to assemble the rest, some being come into the Church the randevoze of their
meeting, suddenly it thundering was seen a black ball come tumbling down a
hill near by: which took its course directly into the Church, there it flew
into the bell free and first slew him, that tolled the bell, then it flustered
about the Church and hurted diverse of them, and at last bursting; left a filthy
stink like to that of brimstone, and so left a terror to all such spend
thrifts of precious time, and especially such as is dedicated to sacred uses,
who so is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107. 43.

EXAMPLE. 4.
Upon May day last, being the Lords day, a maid of 1634.
the Minister of the Parish, Cripplegate, London, was married to a Widower
having 3. children, the youngest being at Nurce in the Country; upon this day
they kept their feast in the Church-house joining to the Church, where they
spent all the afternoon in dancing: but within one week after, the Plague
began in that Parish in the new married man's house, where within a month it
took away the man and his wife, and his two children that were in the house.
And thus was the Plague brought first into that Parish this year.

To this we will add another example, because it fell within the same month,
in the same city. A Minister, Rector of a Church in London, on the saturday
would go with two of his neighbors, boon companions, to be joviall the next
day, being the Lords day, they conditioning that he should bestow a Sermon upon
them. They on the Lords day, being now in the country, spent the forenoone
idly: in the afternoon they go to visit another London Minister, who had
another benefice there in the Country; he puts his brother to preach: which
done invites him, with his companions, to a bottle of Sack. They drank so
long, that the two neighbors tongues began to fail them. Home to their
lodging within a few miles they betake them. That night their Minister could
not sleep; and raising early to walk abroad, he returned with such a
coldness upon him, that he looked, and felt like cold pale death; the two
neighbors much dismayed, and with much ado get him home to London, where in
that case continuing, he dies before the next Sabbath day.

EXAMPLE. 55.
Upon May-Eve Thomas Troe of Gloucester, Carpenter 1634.
in the Parish of S. Michaell, some coming unto him, and asking him, whether
he would go with them to fetch the May Pole, he swore by the Lords wounds,
that he would, though he never went more. Now while he was working on the
May Pole on May day morning, before he had finished his work, the Lord smote
him with such a lamenesse and swelling in all his limbs, that he could neither
go, nor lift his hands to his mouth, to feed himself, but kept his bed for
half a year together and still goes lame to this day; May 4. 1636.

EXAMPLE. 56.
About a year since 1635. in Ashton under the Hill, in the Parish of Beckford,
in the Country of Gloucester, the Minister there Master Blackwell, having
occasion in his Sermon in the afternoon on the Lordsday to reproove the
profaning of that day by sports etc. as soon as the Sermon was done, a
youngman of that place used these words, Now Master Blackwell has done, we will
begin; and so taking the Cudgells, plays with them; and at the second or third
bout, he received a thrust in one of his eyes, that thrust it quite out, so as
it hanged by, and could never recover it again.

THese Examples of divine justice, so notorious, so remarkableboth for number
and variety, having fallen out in so narrow a compass of time, and so
dispersed over the whole Land, as every particular place, and country might
take special notice thereof: if they will not take, and make impression in our
stony hearts, to moove us to speedy repentance (as for many other enormities,
and crying sins, so in special) for this our ringleading sin of the
heathenish profanation of the Sabbath, or Lords day: what plea can we make for
our selves, why the Lord of the Sabbath, should not send some universal,
epidemicall sweeping calamity uponthe land, sparing neither small nor great?
And now, that the plague and pestilence begins to break forth, and spreeds
itself much amongst us, the Lord shooting these his terrible venomous arrows,
from which not even Princes nor Prelates palaces can secure themselves, from
becoming his butts and marks: What can we more impute it unto, as the cause
thereof, then to this grand sin, of the profanation of the Sabbath or Lords
day, occasioned so much the more by the publishing of the late book for
sports, and that, by the Ministers themselves? For was it not the judgment and
confession of King James of famous memory, and of the whole state and Kingdom
in an exhortation published in that great plague, beginning with his reign,
1603, where are these words: The Lords Sabbath is not kept holy, but polluted
etc. and therefore the cause is apparent, why the plague is broken in amongst
us? And was not the same exhortation afterward republished by our gracious
King Charles (whom God long preserve a religious and righteous Governor over
us) in the first year of his reign, with the approbation of the whole
Parliament, where the same is acknowledged of that other great Plague, in the
beginning of his Reign 1625. namely, that one principal and special cause
thereof, was the not keeping holy, but polluting the Lords day? And if this
were a principal cause of those great plagues then, why not of this which now
we suffer? yea what Plague upon plagues may we not justly expect to break
forth upon us in these days, wherein we have increased and surpassed our
fathers sins, and that in such a height, as they reach up to heaven, to pull
down flames and flakes of vengeance upon our heads. And so much the more, since
upon the publishing of the said book, so manyfold mischiefs have attended and
followed, as never any age since Christ, much less such a Christian state as
we profess to be, has seen, or ever heard the like. For besides the open
violation of Gods holy commandment, the 4. Moral, acknowledged in our Homily
of the time and place of Prayer. Part. 1. page 124. 125. 126.
Homily to be the ground of our Christian Sabbath day (as it is there, no less
then 8. several times distinctly styled; as also in another Hom. against
Rebellion part. 3. page 292.
Homily twice, which by the way makes me wonder at the audacious insolence, and
arrogant ignorance of some new Masters in these days, and in particular of Dr.
Poch. in his Sunday no Sabbath, who is not ashamed to avouch with open mouth,
that the name of Sabbath was never given to the Lords day, until it was
brought in by John Knox, and others of the Puritan faction in the year 1554.
What says he then to the Homilies of our Church, which were set forth in K.
Edw. 6. his Reign, and so I am sure before 1554. by 3. or 4. years; now these
(to omit innumerable testimonies more, both out of ancient Fathers, and the
Prelates of this Land; too large to be comprehended in a Parenthesis, being now
to furnish a pretty Treatise) these our Homilies (I say) so frequently and
clearly called the Lords day the Sabbath day, before John Knox called it so,
1554. And the same Homilies being set forth a fresh by Queen Elizabeth, 1562.
will Dr. P. dare to charge the learned and pious compilers of them, a pack of
Puritans, or (as Doctor Wh. Bp. of Ely.
some other) NOVELL SABBATARIANS? But this by the way) by which violation (I
say) of the Sabbath or Lords day, God is intolerably dishonored, and his
Religion disgraced through outrageous libertinisme: What an invention of
Antichristian tyranny has broken in at the opening of this great sluice? What
havoc is made in our Church by sundry of the Hierarchy in suspending godly
Ministers, depriving them of their liberty, livelihood, and Freeholds, against
all Laws of God and man, so as they, their wives and children are exposed to
beggary and all misery, and their flocks to be devoured of the wolves, and to
become a prey to that roaring Lion; and all this, because they dare not offer
violence to their consciences, in doing that, which should dishonor God,
endanger their own, and their peoples souls, abase before God and man the
authority and dignity to their Ministry, condemn the innocent people of God,
and call the wicked righteous, teach inferiors rebellion to their Superiors,
and in a word hasten the pulling down of vengeance from heaven upon the Land?
O ye heavens, stand amazed at this sight! Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it
in the Streets of Askelon, least the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, least
the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. What could the Pope have done more,
then some of our Prelates have done in this kind, for the darkening of the
glory of Christ's Kingdom, and for the setting up of Antichrists throne again
in this Land? But our Lord says, Ye shall know them by their fruits. Besides,
what impudency and impiety has broken out from sundry aerie and ambitious
spirits, who have dared in their late published books upon books, to belch
out their blasphemies against God, and the power, purity, and profession of the
Religion established amongst us for so many years. Nor only is the floodgate
of all profaneness and impiety broken up, in the violation of the 4.
commandment, but of the 5. also, when as, by occasion of the publishing of the
said book (which inhibits Magistrates and superiors, to restrain or punish
youth for taking such liberty on the Lords day, as the book allows, and
which all other books, writings, monuments of Fathers, Counsels, Kings,
Emperors, Divines ancient and modern, Protestants and Papists, have
universally with one vote and voice cried down, till now but yesterday a new
generation of Maleferiati has risen up, out daring and defining the whole
world, and God himself) inferior persons exalt themselves in high contempt
against their Superiors, as the common vulgar against the Magistrate and
Minister, servants against their Masters, children against their Parents, and
wanton wives against their husbands, which has caused such outcryes and
complaints of masters, for their servants unbridled and uncontrowled outrage on
the Lords day; which must also in-jure them with pride and presumption of
spirit the whole week after, and so their whole life, while like untamed colts
they have thus learned to take the bitt between their teeth, and so to run a
gallop into all excess of riot. So as if the book be not all the sooner
called in, and the authors of those late books against the sanctification of
the Lords day condignly punished; and a speedy reformation hereofset on foot:
how can we look for a stay of the plague until the Land be consumed? Now the
Lord make us wise, to lay these things to heart, least he tear in pieces, and
there be none to deliver. For as never any Christian Church has produced such
monstrous impieties: so never any Church has been the theater of such
tragical examples of divine wrath, as our Land is like to be, if we speedily
repent not. Unless therefore we repent, we shall all likewise perish, as these
examples have done before us.

Now for these so many, so markable examples of Gods judgments inflicted upon
the violaters and profaners of the Lords day, and that in so short a time, even
since the book for such sports was published, we may thus argue and conclude.

That, for which the Lord inflicteth and executed so many notorious and severe
judgments, must needs be a notorious and heinous sin, and so a breach of his
holy commandment.

But for the violation and profanation of the Lords day by sports and pastimes,
or by servile works, the Lord inflicteth and executes many notorious and
severe judgments, as of late we have seen. Erg. the violation and profanation
of the Lords day is a notorious and heinous sin, and so a breach of Gods holy
commandment.

The Major Proposition is a Maxim in Divinity. God punishes no man, but for
sin: and sin is a transgression of Gods law: 1. Ioh. 3. 4. For the Minor
proposition, it is so clear, as it cannot be denied, except men will be
senseless and blind Atheists But they that fear God, shall declare the work
of God, for they shall wisely consider of his doing; as Ps. 64. 9. Now if the
violation or profanation of the Lords day be a sin, and so a transgression of
Gods holy commandment: then of what holy commandment, but of the 4. And if of
the 4. then the holy keeping of the Lords day for the Christian Sabbath, is
grounded upon the 4. commandment, and commanded in it, as God has abundantly
testified by his many remarkable judgments, even within this two years, as
has been showed.

Ob. But here some may object: God may punish men for the breach of human
ordinances, which are not the express commandments of God. So in this
instance, God may punish the violation or profanatio^ of the Lords day by such
sportes, or wakes, as being a breach of a human ordinance, or Ecclesiastical
institution.

Answ. I answer it is true, all human ordinances, being not against Gods
word, are to be observed for conscience sake of Gods commandment, commanding
subjection to all ordinances of men for the Lords sake.

And if it were a human ordinance, to dedicate this day of holy rest to God
by a perpetual vow and Decree: then the greater is their sin, that devour
that which is sanctified, and after the vow make inquiry, how it may be
violated. So as they ly under the wrath of God, for so doing, and are liable to
the like judgments, without repentance.

THE EPILOGVE.
THus have I presented you with a large scene of late several examples of Gods
judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, and such So the Statute of 1. Caroli c. 1.
styles them.
disorderly people, who have been so presumptuous as to profane the Lords own
sacred day, against the monitions of Gods faithful Ministers, with unnecessary
labor, vain sports and idle pastimes. To which I might annexmany ancient
Precedents of like nature which I pretermit, onley one excepted, which is
remarkable. In the year of our Lord 1583. in the famous Metropolis of this our
Land, the City of London, two Citizens the one leaving his wife, the other her
husband, and committing adultery together on the Lordsday, it pleased God to
strike them dead with fire from heaven, whilst they were in in the very act of
uncleannes, their bodies being left dead in the place half burnt up, sending
out a most loathsome savor, for a spectacle of Gods avenging justice unto
others, to teach them both to shun the sin of adultery and of Sabbath-breaking
too, and to take heed how they commit any sin or wickedness at any time and
especially on Gods sacred day, or how they follow dancing, may-games,
morisdaunces, ales, and such lascivious pastimes, Vincentius Volnacensis Spec.
moral. li. 3. ps. 9. Distin. 6. Master Northbrooke Stubs, Brant Lovel, and
others in their Treatises against dancing.
which commonly end in whoredom, adultery as being strong allurements
thereunto, this judgment was so famous and remarkable, that Laurentius
Bayenlinke, a foreign Historian, in his Opus Chronologicum orbis universi
Antwerp. 1611. p. 110. has thought good to register it to posterity; if any
deem those judgments strange, or that God should inflict such punishments on
this sin, which some now justify, as a part of Christian liberty, both in the
Pulpit and in The late Treatise, history and discourse of the Sabbath, sunday
No Sabbath, Doctor Pri. and a sovereign Antidote against Sabbatarian novelties.
printed works. I shall only entreat such to remember, that the whole
Convocation house, all the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and greatest
Clerks of England in their book entitled THE INSTITVTION OF A CHRISTIAN MAN,
subscribed with all their names, and dedicated to K. Hen. 8. an. 1537. and K.
Hen. 8. himself in his own book inscribed A necessary doctrine and erudition
for any Christian man set forth by the Kings Majesty of England, with the advice and approbation of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Nether house
of Parliament, an. 1543. and by the King himself, dedicated under his name and
title to all his faithful and loving subjects, and published by virtue of the
Statute, of 32. H. 8. c. 26. in the exposition of the 4. Commandment, have in
the very dawning of Reformation enjoined all Bishops and Preachers diligently
to instruct and teach the people, committed to their spiritual charge ( and I
wish that some Bishops would now do it) that against this commandment
generally do offend all they, which having no lawful impediment, do not give
themselves upon the holy day to hear the word of God to remember the benefits
of God, to give thanks for the same, to pray, to exercise such holy works both
publicly in the Church, and privately in their houses, as be appointed for
such holy days: but (as commonly is used) pass the time either in idleness,
in gluttony, in riot or other vain and idle pastime, DO Ergo it is in force
and the profaning of the Lords day a sin against it.
BREAK THIS COMMANDMENT. For surely such keeping of holy day, is not
according to the intent and meaning of this commandment, ( as some new As the
Treatise history discourse of the Sabbath.
Doctors now dogmatize) but after the usage and Custom of the Jews, ( though
some late Rabbis would make the world believe that the strict sanctification
of the Lords day, and the restraining of vain Sports and Pastimes on it, is
Jewish, when Epist. 6. ad magnesianes.
Ignatius, Tract. 3. in Ioh. de 10. chordis. c. 3. In Ps. 32. 91. De consensu
Euang. li 2. c. 77.
Augustine, In Ioh. Euang. li. 8. c. 5.
Cirillus, Alexandrinus, Homily de festis diebus.
Ephraim, Syrus, Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 13.
Socrates, Scholasticus, Codicis Theodosij li. 15. tit. 5. lex. 5.
Theodosius the Emperor, Enare in Ps. 91.
Beda, Vincentius Belvacensis, and generally all authors since, have branded
dancing, sports, and recreations on the Lords day both as jewish and
heathenish* and Edit. 5. Lon. 1624. Sect. 38 n. 1. p. 110. Se. 43. digr. 46. n.
6. p. 165. 186.
Dr John White in his way to the true Church, defended and published by his
elder brother, Dr Fr. White now Bp. of Ely, In 4. preceptum.
Mr Zanchie, In John E^. c. 7. fol. 273.
Wolfg. Musculus, Proposition for the Christ. Sabbathd. p. 4.
Mr John Sprint, as Popish and licentious; tending to the overthrow of piety,
and desolation of public Government,) and does not please God, but does much
more offend him, and provoke his indignation and wrath toward us. For as In
Johan. tract. 3. in Ps. 32* and 91. de 10. chordis c. 3.
S. Augustine says of the Jews, they should be better occupied, laboring in
the feilds, and to be at plough, (h) Speculu^ morale li. 3. part. 9. c. 6.
then to be idle at home. And women should better bestow their time in spinning
of wool, then on the Sabbathday to loose their time in leaping or dancing, and
other idle wantonness. Now if the whole Clergy, King, State, and Parliament
were so quicke-sighted as in those times of darkness to see a Lords day Sabbath
in the 4. commandment, to be Wholly, only and entirely dedicated to God and
his true worship, as they there teach; and so pious as to believe, that the
exercise of vain idle sports, Pastimes, and dancing on it, did much more
offend God, then ploughing or spinning, and provoke his wrath and indignation
toward us; no wonder if we in the clear sunshine of the Gospel behold so
many sad spectacles of his wrath, and indignation against the offenders of this
commandment in this kind, to teach these blind Seers, and seducing guides (as
In his Sermons.
Bp. Latimer long since named them) that God is now as jealous for the
sanctification of his day, and as much offended with the profanesse of it, and
infringers of the fourth Commandment, by unnecessary labors, travel, or idle
pastimes, as he had been in any age, if not rather much more, in regard of the
great light of the Gospel, that has for these many years so clearly shined
amongst us, which if they will not yet believe, I shall at once close up their
mouths with the resolution of our Homilies ratified by 13. Eliz. c. 12. which
ratifies the 39 Articles.
Act of Parliament, and the 35. Article of our Church, to which these Novellers
have subscribed, and whose Patronage they pretend against all The treatise and
history of the Sabbath.
novell Sabbatarians: But alas ( says Part. 1. of the time and place of
prayer. p. 126.
the Homily) all these notwithstanding ( and I pray God, I may not still say
notwithstanding all these fresh examples) it is lamentable to see the wicked
boldness of those, that will be counted Gods people who pass nothing at all
of keeping and hallowing the Sunday. And these people are of two sorts, the one
sort, if they have business to do, though there be no extreme need, they
must not spare for the Sunday, they must ride journeyes on the Sunday, they
must drive and carry on the Sunday, they must come and ferry on the Sunday,
they must buy and sell on the Sunday, they must keep markets and faires on the
Sunday, finally they use all days alike, work days and holy days are all
one. The other sort is WORSE (so the Homily against these Treatise of the
Sabbathday. p. 231.
new masters, who make labor in men's callings on the Lords day WORSE and more
unlawful then dancing and Pastimes, contrary to the judgment of Tract. 3. in
Ioh. In Ps. 32. and 91. de 10. chordis c. 3.
S. Augustine, Gregory the great Apud Alex. Alensis sum. Theologiae part. 4.
q. 11. m. 2. Art. 11.
Alensis and all Media villa Peraldus Nider Volaterranus F. Martyr, Musculus,
Stuckius, Aretius, Hyperius, Szegedine, Angel. de Clavasio. Dr* Bound, Dr
Criffith, Williams Practice of Piety, Osmund Lake, and infinite others*
writers since who unavoce resolve, that it is better and more lawful to
plough and spin on the Sabbathday, then to dance:) for allthough they will not
travel and labor on the Sunday, as they do on the work day, yet they will
not rest in holiness as God commands; but they rest in ungodliness and
filthiness, prauncing in their pride, pranking and pricking, pointing and
painting themselves to be gorgeous and gay, they rest in excess and
superfluity, in gluttony and drunkenness (as they do at wakes, Ales, and
May-poles) like ratts and swine, they rest in brawling and railing, in
quarrelling and fighting, they rest in wantonness ( and what else is dancing,
moris-dauncing, maygaming etc.) into-ish talking, in filthy fleshlines, so that
it does too evidently appear, that God is more dishonored and the devil
better served on Sunday, then upon all the days of the week besides. And I
assure you, that the beasts that are commanded to rest on the Sunday, honor
God better then this kind of people, for they offend not God, they break not
their holy days. Wherefore, O ye people of God, lay your hands upon your
hearts, repent and amend this grievous and dangerous wickedness, stand in awe
of the commandment of God, gladly follow the example of God himself, be not
disobedient to the godly order of Christ's Church used and kept from the
Apostles times until this day, fear the displeasure and just plagues of
Allmighty God if ye be negligent, and forbear not laboring and travailing on
the Sea the Homily 8. times styles the Lords day and the 3. homily of rebellion
twice.
SABBATH DAY, and do not resort together to celebrate and magnify Gods
blessed name in quiet holiness and godly reverence. I shall conclude all with
the words of the Council of Paris under Lewis and Lotharius. Anno 829. li. 1.
c. 50. and. li. 3. c. 5. and 19. Multa alia terribilia judicia etc. Many other
terrible judgments have been, and hitherto are, whereby is declared how much
God is offended with the dishonor of this day. Wherefore the Imperial
highness is specially to be implored of the Note.
Priests, that this power ordained of God for the honor and reverence of so
great a day, may put a fear into all men, least none of what condio^ soever
presume on this holy and venerable day to use these and the likesports,
dauncings and leapings hereafter, because while they do these things, they
both darken the glory of Christianity, and give occasion to the blasphemers of
Christ's name the more to dishonor him.

We require also, and earnestly entreat, that in the observation of the Lords
day, as we have a long time beseeched you, you use due care that unless great
necessity constrain you, free your selves on that day, as much as may be from
worldly cares and sollicitousnesse. And that which becomes the honor of so
great a day, that both you your selves do it, and by your example do teach
and compel yours to do it.

We wholsomly admonish all faithful people, that they give due honor and
reverence to the Lords day, because the dishonor of this day does both much
swerve and abhor from Christian religion, and does without doubt procure the
peril of souls to the violaters thereof; And with that of the Council of
Burges, an. 1582. apud Bachellum Decreta Ecclesiae Gall. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 21.
Allthough Lords days and holy days are instituted only for this purpose, that
faithful Christians abstaining from external and gainful works, might more
freely and with greater piety give themselves to divine worship, and to the
meditation of the infinite benefits of Gods goodness toward mankind, and so
being WHOLLY taken up with the wholesome duties of religion, should diligently
beware as Ignatius admonishes the Philippians, that they should not abuse holy
days with any disgrace or injuries, yet notwithstanding in our times, it
preposterously and usually comes to pass, that both solemn and religious
days are not only spent in transacting, unlawful and secular business, but
likewise in luxury, lasciviousness, prohibited sports and pastimes Revells,
and the exercising of other wickednesses, whereupon it is not to be doubted,
that for the greatest part, so many calamities wherewith we are so long since
consumed are justly inflicted on us by God, who is incensed against us by so
great wickedness. To appease whose present anger and likewise to avert his
greater indignation hanging over our heads: we command all Parish Priests of
our Province, that they frequently and seriously admonish the people, that on
Lords days they not only keep themselves from all prohibited works, but
likewise that they be ex animo cordially and religiously, present at all sacred
mysteries of the Church, and at the preaching of Gods word, and that they
pretermit not the works of piety in releiving the poor, comforting the
afflicted, and in doing other pious things, wherein Christian profession and
charity do most of all shine forth. And we exhort all Magistrates according to
their and our duty, as far as possibly we may, that they would take care,
that those holy and solemn days should be holily and piously celebrated, this
being principally in their power, and belonging to their charge. Neither verily
can any manner of Governing the common wealth, be better or more praise worthy
then that which gives the first place and care to divine worship and religion.

FINIS.
Christian Reader, as these examples have been displaced, so one of Examp. 57.
them has been omitted in the printing, which because it is notable and
worthy consideration, I shall here add for a conclusion. Mr. William Noy, that
great Gamaliel of the Law, his Majesty's late Aturney general, as he had a
great hand in compiling and republishing the late Declaration for pastimes on
the Lords day (thrust out by his, and a great Prelates practice, to thwart
Judge Richardsons good order for the suppressing of Wakes and Revels in
Somersetshire, and the Justices of that Shires Petition to his Majesty for the
continuance of it, and to make way for a Starchamber censure against Mr.
Prynne) so he eagerly persecuted this wel-deserving Gentleman of his own
Profession and Society, (to whom he was formerly a friend in appearance, but an
inveterate enemy in truth) for his Histrio-Mastix, compiled only out of the
words and sentences of other approved Authors of all sorts, against the use and
exercise of Stage-plaies, Enterludes, Morisdances, Maygames, May-poles, Wakes,
lascivious mixed Dancing, and other Ethnic pastimes, condemned in all ages,
without any thought or suspicion of giving the least offense, either to the
Kings most excellent Majesty, the Queen, or State, as he averred in his Answer
upon Oath. And although this book was written 4. years, licensed almost three,
printed fully off a quarter of a year, and published 6. weeks before the
Queens Majesty's One of the actors whereof and he who first showed his Book
to the King within few months after came to be his fellow prisoners in the
Tower for a real comentary on his misapplyed text
Pastoral, against which it was falsely voiced to have been principally
written; diligently perused and licensed by Mr. Thomas Buckner the then
Archbishop of Canterbury his Chaplain, both before and after it came from the
Press, entered in the Stationers Hall under the Wardens hand, printed publicly
in three authorized Printing-houses, without the least control, and published
by the said Licensers direction, who would have nothing new-printed in it, as
appeared upon oath at the hearing: and although Mr. Noy himself (to whom he
presented one of the Books) upon the first reading of it, commended it,
thanked him for it, often affirmed that he saw no hurt in it, and at the hearing
confessed, that the worst and most dangerous phrase and passage in it, might
have a good and fair construction, and Scholars would all take it in a good
sense; yet he handled the matter so (by The Judge who upon his reference
suppressed these exhibits contrary to law and promise to the Gentleman, was
himself not long after unexpectedly thrust out of his place before he knew of
it.
suppressing the Gentleman's exhibits and defense, wresting his words and
meaning, refusing to discover the particulars of the book on which he would
insist, though ordered so to do by the Court, it being else impossible to
instruct Counsel how to make a reply, and by tampering under hand with some of
his Counsel by no means to make any justification or defense to clear his
innocence though the party earnestly entreated, and gave them instructions to
the contrary) that the poor Gentleman at last received the heaviest The great
Lord that began this censure lost his Lady in childb^d some three days after,
who much grieved at this sentence and blamed him for it. Which Lord riding the
last Christtide into the Country to keep his Christmas on the Lords day, his
Coach and honor in the plain street at Brainford were both overturned and laid
in the dirt, himself sore bruised, and thereupon forced to keep his chamber a
good space, there being some doubt of his recovery for a time.
censure that this latter age has known, all circumstances considered, being
expelled the University of Oxford and Lincolnes Inn, thrust from his
profession in which he never offended, fined 5000. pound to the King, ordered
to stand on two several Pillories, and there to lose both his ears, his
books to be there burned before him, and to suffer imprisonment during life
besides. Which Sentence thought by most that heard the cause to be meant only
in terrorem, without any intention at al of execution, being respited for above
three months space, and in a manner remitted by the Queens most gracious
mediation; was yet by this Atturnies and a great Prelates importunity, beyond
all expectation suddenly and severely executed, without any the least
mitigation, few of the Lords so much as knowing of it. The Gentleman hereupon
is set on the Pillory at Westminster and there lost an ear; Mr. Noy like a
joyful Spectator laughes at his sufferings, and this his great exploit he had
brought to pass, which diverse there present observed and condemned in him. The
Gentleman like an harmless Lamb took all with such patience, that he not
so much as once opened his mouth to let fall any one word of discontent. Yet
that just God and Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth, Psalm. 10. 14.
Who beholds mischief and spite to requite it with his hand, and avengeth
the innocent blood of his servants, took this his mirth and malice so
hainously, that the same day (as some about him, and of his own society
reported) he who thus shed his brothers and companions blood, by the just hand
of God fell a voyding and pissing out his own: which so amazed him, that he
used all means he could to smother it from the world, charging his Laundres,
and those about him, not to speak of it, refusing to acquaint his Physicians
with it: hereupon he grows very palid and ill, the Physicians wonder at it;
he complains to them only of the gravel and stone in his kidneys, till at
last he grew so ill with this divine stroke, that he was forced to disclose his
grief to them, yet so as they must faithfully promise to disclose it to no
man, for fear people should say it were a just judgment of God on him for
shedding Mr. Prynnes blood: But God would not have this secret long concealed;
his Laundres, men, and some Gentlemen of his society discover and talk of it:
he much vexed in mind, in stead of repenting of what he had done, and seeking
to right the party wronged for his irreparable damage, like a Heart or Beast
once mortally wounded, proceeds on in his former fury, seeks to bring the poor
distressed Gentleman into fresh trouble and a further censure, brings him
Oretenus, into the Starchamber, reviles him with all manner of uncivell words,
moves to have him close prisoner among the rogues in Newgate, sels his Chamber
as forfeited to the House by his expulsion, seiseth his books: and when as the
Court would not grant his unreasonable malicious motion, above 5. weeks after
in the long vacation, when most of the Lords were gone, and his Majesty in his
progress, draws up an order of his own making in Starchamber for the
Gentleman's close imprisonment (the last order he ever made) caused the register
to enter it, and sends it to the Tower to be executed the same day he went to
Tunbridge waters, without the Lords or Courts privity. The day following
drinking of those waters he was in miserable torture, in so much that most
dispaired of his life, and some reported he was dead: and hearing there, that
his disease of voyding blood was then publicly known and talked of in London,
he was so vexed at it, that he fell out with his Physicians and servants,
railing on them like a frantic man, as if they had betrayed him, and disclosed
his secrets; Yea it so fretted and gnawed his heart and conscience, that it
made his very heart and intrails to perish: and about a fortnight after brought
him to his end. Being opened after his death, there was not a drop of blood
found in his body, for he had voided al out before, his false malicious hard
heart with inward fretting and vexing was so consumed and shrinked up, that it
was like an old rotten leather purse or mere scurfe, the Physicians never
seeing the like before, his flesh and kidneys were as black as an hat, his
intrails (except his lungs only) all putred; and his carkas a miserable
spectacle, but no stone that could trouble him was found about him: his
funeral according to his desire was so private, that there were hardly
Gentlemen enough to carry him to his grave, but that some came in by accident.
His clients the Players, for whom he had done knight service, to requite his
kindness, the next Term following make him the subject of a merry Comedy,
styled; A Projector lately dead; wherein they bring him in his Lawyers robes
upon the Stage, and openly dissecting him, find 100. Proclamations in his head,
a bundle of old motheaten records in his maw, half a barrel of new white soap
in his belly, which made him to scour so much, and yet, say they, he is still
very black and foul within. And as if this voiding of all his own blood, and
public disgrace on the Stage were not sufficient to expiate the wronged
Gentleman's blood and infamy: himself in his last will lays a brand on his
own son and heir: bequeathing all his goods and lands not therein given to
others, to Edward his eldest son to be scattered and spent, nec de eo melius
speravi: enough to make a dutiful child turn unthrift, and a sign of a
dispayring man. Which son of his upon his own challenge and rashness has since
been slain in a duel in France by Captain Byron, who escaped scotfree and
had his pardon. Thus has God punished blood with blood: thus has he dealt
with one of the chief occasioners of this The occasion of most of these
tragical examples.
Declaration, and burner of that book, which learnedly manifested the
unlawfulnes of the several sports and pastimes countenanced in it, especially
on the Lords own sacred day out of old and new Writers of all sorts, and
specified diverse judgments of God upon the authors, actors, and spectators of
them, not unworthy consideration in these sable times of plagues and
judgments. O consider this and all other the foregoing examples, ye impious
Prelates, that so far forget the Lord, as still to silence, excommunicate and
persecute godly Ministers for not reading this Declaration (though there be no
Canon, Statute, Law or Precept extant that requires it) to the ruin, not so
much of them, as their poor innocent peoples souls: ye that in these doleful
days of Plague and pestilence suppress, neglect all public fasting,
preaching and praying, which now if ever should be cried up and practiced, and
in stead thereof give your selves over to Neh. 13. 17. 18.
dancing, feasting, playing, Bishops says Augustine Cont. Btil. l. 3. c. 6.)
were all wont vain dances to reprove, But now they are so far from it, that
they to dance do love. Thomas Lovel his Dialogue. Witness their late Oxford pro
phane plays and dances.
Sabbath breaking, to draw down more wrath and plagues upon us. You who
oppress and maliciously persecute godly men, for crossing you in your delights
of sin, lest ye now perish as these have done, and so much the rather, because
you have al these presidents to admonish you, and yet will not be warned. Well,
if you will not be admonished but proceed as you have done, if you perish,
thank your selves; I can say no more to you but this: Virgil.
Discite justitiam moniti and non temnere divos.

Courteous Reader, I pray correct with thy pen these mistakes and omissions of
the Printers, ere thou read the Books, Errata and Omissions.
In the Title page, l. 17. r. inchoat. l 18. r. cansummat In the Epistle, p. 2.
l. 3. for with. r. as l. 15. r. happening. p. 3. l. 4. r. so audaciously. l. 24.
f. sins, r. sinews. l. 27. f. has, r. have. l. 31 r. In Petrus Blesensis. p
4. ^. 29. r. points. p 5. l. 13. r. and such p. 8. l. 31. f. were as, r. as
were In the examples, p. 11. Exam. 5. l. 8 were all drowned: add this
omission: as some letters report: Others say they were only in great danger of
drowning, a spring tide breaking the Ice, but with much labourwer at last saved
after 2. or 3. hours space by the help of hotes. p. 15 l. 13. f. rear, r
rear p. 28. l. 1. f. 1634 r. 1636 l. 2. r. Parish of S. Giles p. 32. l. 1. f.
now, r. enough. l 6. r. Dr. H. l. 11. f. invention, r. inundation. l. 23. f.
to, r. of. p. 33. l. 19. f. defining, r. defying. p. 38. l. 31. profaneness, r.
prophaners. p. 39. l 1. had, r. has. l. 18. come, r. row. p. 40 l. 30. this,
r. his. l. 32. none. r. any. p. 41. l. 20. r. Bochellum. p. 36, in the marg. r.
Beluacensis.

Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. Levit. 26. 27. 28. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me,
but walk contray unto me:

Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury, and I, even I will chastise
you seven times more for you sins.

An advertisement to the Reader, COURTEOUS READER.
Be pleased to understand, that through some oversight at the press, the
foregoing Examples are not orderly placed. Indeed it was the authors mind that
they should have been otherwise to wit, 1. 2. 3. and so all the rest, in order
one after another, as they are numbered in the book, and to this end gave
direction, but the same was not considered of these who where employed for the
printing, until it was to late. Now this we thought good to certify thee of,
that so the mistake may be imputed, to the parties deserving it, and not to the
Author, who it blameless herein.


