GNOSOTHEO

THE FIRE OF THE SANCTVARY newly uncovered, or A Complete Tract of Zeal. by C:
Burges.

It is good to be Zealously affected always in a good thing. Galath: 4. 18.

THE FIRE OF THE SANCTVARIE newly uncovered, OR, A Complete Tract of ZEAL.

By C. BVRGUS.

GALAT. 4.18. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, and Richard Badger. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, Earl of Pembroke, etc. Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter; Lord Steward of his Majesty's Royal Household and
one of his most Honorable Privy Council.
MOst Noble Lord, if shadows could amaze the Wise, my Title Page might give
offense. It speaks of Fire: but such as was made only to warm, not to burn
any thing, unless stubble. No man shall need to call for Buckets to put it out,
or Hooks to pull down any liuing-house on whom it kindles.

Here is no ground for an Vtopian Spirit to mould a new Commonwealth: no
warrant for Sedition to touch the Lords Anointed, so much as with her Tongue:
no occasion administered to Ishmael to scoff at Isaac: no Salamanders lodge
themselves here.

But here is a Flame that will lick up all angry Waspes, and inflamed Tongues
that presumptuously and without fear, speak evil of Dignities, and of things
they understand not; railing on all not so free as themselves to foame at the
mouth, and to cast their froth on all that are near, without difference.

If any think I thought your Lordship a cold, because I humbly offer you the
chief place at my Fire, he shall do me much wrong; and your Lordship, much
more. Men that are in greatest vigor of blood and spirits, count it no shame
to creep to a Fire at Winter; not because Nature is defective; but oft-times
their Employments deny opportunity of getting heat, and keeping themselves
warm, by natural agitation.

I bring not this as a Tutor; but as a Pupil, for Protection to preserve this
Fire from Quench-coale. Shall you vouchsafe me the honor of your Arms upon
mine Alter, I shall be confident that no man will dare to approach these
harmless Flames with Spouts and Pailes.

It were a fault piacular to put your wisdom (as the manner is) read Your
Self; I mean, to ^ntertaine you with your own Praises. It is enough to your
Lordship, that you merit all that Nobleness, Loyalty, Religion, and untainted
Honor can attend you with; although no Echo do present her self.

And let it be enough to me, that in the General, (for if I should do more,
I should be thought by Some, rather to boast of favors, then to acknowledge
them,) I make bold to proclaim that the Honors you have done, and still do
to me, must for ever oblige,

Your Lordships most humble and thankful Seruitor C. BVRGES.

To Judicious and vnpreiudiced Readers.
I Have a Suite: Before you run through this Holy Fire, or give my Book the
Peepers Censure, let me beseech you to take this Apologetick Preface in your
way that neither I nor you be wronged or mistaken by occasion of some passages
in this Treatise.

I confess I have entered upon a difficult Province in undertaking this
subject, and adventured almost beyond Hercules Pillar in prosecution of it.
Others have landed at the shore of this Terra del Fuego, and looked into it;
but I have Coasted it and made a rude Description of every Part. If any please
to make a new Survey, and more exact discovery; It will be (as the Proverb
says) the better for us all.

I looked when Gray-hair'd Pensil should have drawn this Picture. But if other
men's better Colors be frozen, I have now brought a Fire to thaw them, in hope
that we may once see some exquisite Piece, from some Curious Limmer.

This Work is intended to suppress turbulencie and all extremities; and yet
to press unto Duty too.

Wonder not to find me somewhat hot: I work at the Fire. To write of Courage
like a Coward, and of Fire as if one were frozen, deserves the Bastinado, and
the Fire to boot. My spouting of Fire among the rude multitude, is but to make
way for their betters.

He that will part afray, must not think to do it with his Cap in his hand,
but with a sour Club. And you know, if fire be gotten up into a Chymny; do
but shoot a Musket after it, and this will fetch it down with a Powder.

My sharpness against some Democraticall Anti-Ceremonians, is not meant to
weak Consciences joined with pious, sober, peaceable courses. In some cases,
(if I may be bold to speak after the Apostle,) I know, that God would have no
man to be judged for his (...). Romans 14.1.
doubting; so it be only in smaller matters of opinion, wherein the Learned
differ without blame, or schism.

But I speak to such as keep a frantic Coil about Ceremonies, and think
they never take their level right, but when, with every bolt they shoot, they
strike a Bishops Cap sheere off his head; and yet are more fantastical,
ignorant, proud, selfe-will'd, negligent and deceitful in their particular
Callings then many whom they despise and condemn to Hell for Carnal men,
forsooth; as any observing eye may easily discern.

If any condemn me of indiscretion for writing so much of Discretion, and
think me arrogant in this Attempt: know, that I am not yet so near madness
as to take the height of Discretion by the Instrument of mine own Brain. I
^aue only collected such scat^ered Rules as in the sacred Scriptures,
Venerable Antiquity, and mine own observation, I have met withal, and put
them upon one File together.

Touching the carriage of Zeal toward Princes, my Conscience witnesses with
me in the sight of God, that I have spoken nothing but what in my judgment,
is the truth, without sinister or base intents.

Nor do I touch on that, presuming to teach my Betters; but rather (as men use
to do when they go for Orders, or a Benifice,) to give account. And yet I
would teach withal; I mean the boisterous Multitude who ever prefer the
rough Channel before the temperate shore, and think no man preaches well in a
Prince his Court, but he that is so fiery and rude, ( plain, they call it) as
with his thunder shakes the very House. And if he cast no Squibs in a Princes
face, or preach not like a Privy Councellor, they say he has no Holy Fire in
him.

If men dislike a Book in this Age, their Censure is usually this; It has no
Salt in it. A Discourse of this Nature, should have Salt good store, for all
Sacrifices must be seasoned with Mar. 9.49.
Salt: so is this; but intended to Season only, not to fret any unless by
accident.

If any Grain chance to fall into a Chapt singer, the best way is, not to cry
out; but to wash it out, and say nothing: and no harm done.

A fire of this nature is at no time unseasonable. With most men it is winter
within doors, when it is Summer in the fields. Some are so hard frozen that
they had need be set near a good fire to thawe them; and when they are thawed,
to heat them.

If any man therefore approach these flames, and complains, they are too hot
for the season, the remedy against scorching of his shinnes is easy. He need
not put the fire out; but only sit, or stand further off, and all will be well.

Thus have you my Apology (if it be one) as a small skreene to hold between
you and the fire if you think it too bigg, or too near, and that it would
heat you too much.

Valete, Calete.
The Contents of the several Chapters of this Treatise.
CHAP. I. page 1.
THe Introduction, containing the inducements of the Author unto this Work,
and the Sum of the whole.

CHAP. II. page 8.
Of the Nature of Zeal. The signification of the Word. page 9. the several
acceptations of it as it is by use of speech applied. page 10. the Definition
of Zeal. page 14. Confutation of 2. errors. page 20.

CHAP. III, page 25.
The Objects of Zeal, Good to be maintained, Evil to be opposed. Good things
to be defended are Gods Word. page 27. His Worship. page 36. His Servants. page
47. What Zeal opposes must be certainly evil. page 56.

CHAP. IIII. page 70.
Of the Grounds of Zeal: A distinct Knowledge. page 71. A lawful Calling.
page 88.

CHAP. V. page 101
Of the Ends of Zeal: these are either.

1. Principal, the advancement of Gods Glory. Ibid. 7. Rules to try if our
Zeal aim at this end. page 103.

1. Rule, Zeal must be universal. page 104. Trial. page 107. 2. Rule. It is
moved only by sin, not by private injuries, or profits. page 114. Trial.
page 119. 3. Rule. It makes no difference between friends and foes. page 122.
Trial. page 125. 4. Rule. It equally sets upon poor and rich. page 128.
Trial. 132. 5. Rule. It is inflamed by difficulties. page 133. Trial. page
137. 6. Rule. It is most sharp against a man's own corruptions. page 140.
Trial. page 141. 7. Rule. It is constant. page 143. Trial. page 145.

2. Less Principal. Reformation of what is amiss. page 148.

CHAP. VI. page 161.
Of the Qualification of zeal with Boldness free from cowardice and
Luke-warmenesse. page 163. The Boldness which is requisite in a Minister. page
164. The Reason of the dislike of it page 176. True boldness never exposes to
so much danger as cowardice does. page 177. Two cautions touching Boldness.
page 189. 190.

CHAP. VII. page 196.
Of Discretion, the second thing required to the right Qualification of Zeal.
The praise of it. Ibid. Discretion without Zeal, compared with Zeal without
Discretion. page 198. The Counterfeit of Discretion. page 199. What true
Discretion is. page 206.

The use of Discretion in Zeal, which is to respect Circumstances of Person,
Place and Time.

Discretion. 1. 1. The Circumstance of Person considered either Morrally, or
Ciuilly.
Regards the circumstance of Person. page 209. Directing Zealots to consider
men in a twofold respect;

The one Moral, considering them as Good or Bad: and the bad, again, as
Private or Public offenders; and both these sorts, as they offend either of
infirmity, or of resolution.

2. The other Civil as they are ranged in their several ranks among men:
some being Public, and some Private Persons: some above us, some below us,
some equals, some elder, some younger: and accordingly directs Zeal to
treat with them.

1. Of the moral consideration of men.
Of the Moral consideration of men, defending the good. page 210. reproouing
the Bad. page 211. And herein discretion teaches care of 2 things.

1. Be sure the fault to be reproved be certainly committed. Ibid.

2. Make a difference between a private and public offense. page 216.

Private offenses how handled. Ibid. that is, privately. for 5. reasons. page
220. Five Cases of exception. page 222. The least faults, though private must
be reproved. page 230. the reasons why. page 232.

Public offenses how reproved. page 238. to this belong 2, things. 1.
Assurance that it be such. Ibid. What makes an offense to be accounted
public. page 239. 2. such offenses must be publickely reproved. page 240.
If they be faults of infirmity, more mildly. page 243. if of resolution and
purpose, more sharply. page 247. Two Cautions about sharp Reproves. page 248.
Public Reproves to be often iterated. page 253,

Of the Civil Consideration of Persons as they are Public or Private. page
261. 2. Of the Civil Consideration of Persons.


Public Persons are either Magistrates in the Commonwealth, or men of
Public office in the Church. In the Commonwealth, again, Public Persons
are either supreme, or subordinate.

How Zeal may handle a Prince. Princes.
page 262. Three Rules to be observed. page 264. difference between
temporizing and true discretion. page 275. Unlawful to censure Princes in
common speech. page 280. to depose them, much more unlawful. page 284.

Subordinate Magistrates Other Magistrates.
how to be handled. page 288. especially in public. Ministers.
Ecclesiastical Persons how to be handled. p. 301. Three Rules to be observed
in it. 1. Rule. p. 302. Some charged with faults that are not faults but
virtues: viz. that they are not Good fellows, that they reprove sin
sharply. page 303. preach too often. page 306. A defense. hereof against the
concio-Mastix. Ibid. The second Rule. page 319. Ancient decrees and Canons to
prevent the molestatio^ of good Ministers. page 322. The third Rule, who may
and who may not reprove a Minister. page 330. How far private Persons may go
herein. page 331.

Private Persons how to be reproved. page 337. Discretion teaches a man to
consider when he undertakes to reprove others, what he is himself, whether a
Private or public person. p. 338.

Private Persons Private Persons.
must consider whether the Persons they would reprove be under their special
charge, or not. Ibid.

Those under their charge are either, Elders, Equals, Inferiors. If Elders, how
to be handled. page 339. if Equals, how. page 340. If Inferiors, how. viz. if
a wife. page 342. If children or servants. page 349. The Decription of a bad
Father, or Master. page 363. The cure of such. page 368. Directions how to
chastise. page 374.

Those without our charge how to be dealt with. Two Rules. 1. Rule. page 379.
Direction to young men. Ibid. The second Rule. page 383.

The Ministers duty about private Persons. page 386. If they be erroneous in
judgment, how to be dealt with, if they be ingenuous. page 388. if they be
wilful, how. page 395. If they be corrupt in life, how to be handled. page
404. especially in Public. page 405. the danger of opposing them for it. page
410. How far a Minister may go in reproouing. Inuectiue.
page 416. What a Personal Inuectiue is. page 417. and seq.

2. The Circumstance of Place.
Discretion in the next place regards the Circumstance of Place. page 439 sundry
Rules about this* first and second Rules. page 441. third Rule page 444. fourth
Rule. Ibid. fifth. Rule. page 450.

Discretions Rules touching the Circumstance of Time. 3. The Circumstance of
Time.
page 459. 1. Rule hereabout. page 460. the second Rule. 462. wherein a man may
somewhat yield to the times, and yet not be a Temporizer. page 467. How far
evil men may in some cases be tolerated. page 469. some indiscretion to be
pardoned to some men. page 478.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Compassion, the last thing with which Zeal must be qualified. page 479.
False Compassion. page 482. Three sorts of Compassion. page. 485. The
fruitlesnesse of Zeal without Compassion. page 490.

THE FIRE of the SANCTVARIE Uncovered. OR, A TRACT OF ZEAL.
CHAP. I.
EXCELLENT and Admirable is the Nature and Use of the holy Fire of Zeal. No
acceptable Sacrifice can be offered without it: Nullum omnipotenti Deo est tale
Sacrificium, quale est Zelus animaru^. Greg. hom 12. in Ezekiel.
no oblation it self so pleasing to God; yet no one Grace, so much in
disgrace; what by ignorance of, and emnity against this arch enemy to sin.

Irae sua stimulum iustitiae Zelu^ putant; and cu^ vitium virtus putatur, culpa
sine metu cumulatur. Greg de past. cura lib. 3. cap. 1. adm^n. 17.
Some take the heat which their fiery disposition blows up, to be Zeal for
Religion; and let vice once be thought a virtue; What a mountain of evils
will soon be cast up without fear of ill-doing!

Others, truly zealous, are often at a loss when they set upon the chase;
which profane men espying, think that warrant enough to pull down the whole
Fabric of Zeal, because indiscreete Zeal has sparkled two far. And
laying themselves in balance with such zealots, suppose that of the two,
themselves (though the worst) be the wisest men. Thus is the precious fire of
Zeal blasphemed because mistaken.

And when more then now? How few Ieremies feel that fire in their bones, Ier.
20.9.
which will not be kept in! How many, ready to cut in whole rivers upon that
little spark which is in those few! How few David's that are eaten Psalm. 69.9.
up with the zeal of Gods house! How many, zealous to Psalm. 83.12.
take to themselves the houses of God in possession, and eat them up!

The general coldness of these last (and therefore worst) days benu^ming our
spirits, req^ires a fire to warm them. And the malice of the world puts a
danger upon Zeal, unless we have wisdom so to guide this fire as to avoid
the Snares which malice will set before us, and endeavor to hunt us into. The
more disgrace to be zealous, the more need to show zeal accompanied with
discretion to rule this heavenly flame. Fireworkes prove dangerous to the
unskillful. Better quench that fire which is already kindled, then to kindle
that which we cannot govern.

It cannot then but be a needful and grateful work, to show the Nature and
Qualities of a Fire so useful, that he can be no good Christian who is without
it: so unknown, that hardly the best know the properties of it, and how to use
it.

How little has been written on this Theme, a more able and exquisite
Lynceus, has made report, and powered out a zealous complaint against the great
injustice offered to zeal, for that no man has done her the right of a just
Treatise. This, I think, is one maine cause that makes the world so strange to
her, and her, to the world.

The Ancients, Amb. in Psalm. 119. Greg Naz in Laude^ Heronis and alibi. August.
tract. 10. in John. nec n^^ in Psalm 69. Chrisost. hom. 62. ad Sopul. Greg. Mag.
Hom. 12. in Ezekiel. Bern. Ser. 23 and 24. and 49. super Cant. and alibi.
who taught it rather by Practice then Pen, spent more lines in the praise,
then in the description of it. After them, the Schoolmen (their translators)
either spoke less, or less to the purpose. For by that time, a thing,
nicknamed Discretion, had raked out this fire. He now was the only man that
could chop Divinity into smallest shreds, and drive it nearest together:
placing Religion rather in Contemplation then Action. No marvel therefore if
Zeal got no more rome in their Voluminous Writings; and that, as if she had
deserved no better then Iezabel, there is scarce so much left her as the skull,
and the feet and the palms of her hands, to know her by.

Long after the rode of Zeal had been vntrauelled, and the High way grown
over with the Moss of Key-coldnesse, New Zelographers arose, who like Caleb
and Joshua in coasting of Canaan, began to travel and discover that Region
anew; setting up way-markes, and encouraging others to go up and possess it.

Of which first discovery, I hope it will offend no good man to say, that it
deserves more honor then the latter more elaborate Descriptions of Others, who
taking direction from those first Spies, have made the paths more plain, and
the way more direct.

Those first Searchers of late time, gave a good guess at the Nature, and
Bounds of Zeal; but drew it not in so large a Map as could be wished Their
meditations and labors in this kind, are herein like the Observations of
several Travelers into Foreign Countries, some observing one thing; and
some, another; but none, all that deserves to be noted.

It will not then be amiss, out of the several Trauells of Others, and mine
own Survey, to compile a Complete Treatise of Zeal. In persuite of which
project, my chief aim is to set forth to life, the Nature, the Objects, the
Grounds, the Ends, and the Qualification of this Sanctuary Fire.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Zeal.
This Chapter has 3. Sections.
THE first thing to be known, is the Nature of Zeal. To attain this, we
must, first, search out the precize signification of the word: then, the
several acceptations of it, as by use of speech it is applied: and thirdly,
ariue at some Definition of it.

Sect. 1. Sect. 1. Of the signification of the word Zeal.
The word it self is Greek, which is therefore retained in the best later
Languages, because the most Learned could never find another word fully to
express it; as he Joan. Driedo de R^gul. and dogm. S. Script. lib. 3. tract.
2. Cap. 1. Augustinus autem quibusdam in locu, and Suida^, and alij vtriusque
linguae periti, qui non habentes latinum vocabulum quo vim verbi Zeli
sufficienter explicarent, etc. inquit ille.
that has done best in explication thereof has observed. Zeal (...) a (...).
ferueo, bullio. Eustathius annotat vero per onomatopaeian esse factum hoc
verbum a sono literae.
is a branch of that Root, say Gramarians, which signifies a hyssing noise
made by burning hot mettle cast into water. Zeal then in strict acception of
the word, is a fiery hissing heat fighting with some contrary.

Hence is it translated to express that fiery heat in the several passions
of the soul, vehemently extended to their several objects and proiects. Such
was that burning fire Ier. 20.9. (...).
in the bones of Jeremy. Such that feruencie of spirit Romans 12 11 (...).
which Saint Paul exhorted the Romans unto. And such those coals that
Timothy was to blow up. 2 Timothy 1.6. (...).
Opposite hereto was that Lukewarm Revel. 3.16.
temper in distempered Laodicea, of which she was zealously warned to repent,
and to grow more hot.

Sect. 2. Sect. 2. Of the use, of the word in Scripture
We see the nature of the word: behold how it is used. The Scripture attributes
it to God, to man.

First to God, to signify sometimes his just indignation and direful
vengeance smoking against sinners, and burning Deuteronomy. 32.23
unto the lowest hell. Sometimes the extreme heat of his love, expressed in
protecting his Church afflicted. Thus himself sets it out by the Prophet
Zachary, Zach. 8.2.
I was jealous for Sion with great jealousy: and I was jealous for her with
great fury: that is, with a zealous affection for her defense.

Secondly, the Scripture attributes zeal to man: and so either in a bad Aug.
de Ciuit. dei. lib. 20. cap. 12.
sense to denote some evil in him; or in a good, to signify some virtue.

Zeal taken in the bad part is used in a fourefold sense.

First, sometimes for envy and spleen at another welldoing, or being: the
disease of those pining and selfe-macerating Priests and Saduces at the
Apostles of our Lord. Act. 5.17. (...).
And in this sense that cankred envy of the Patriarckes, which moved them to
that tyrannical sale of their natural brother Joseph (in this only faulty,
because more loved) is styled Zeal.

2. Act 7 9. (...).
Sometimes for Iealousy Pro. 6.34. (...).
of some person suspected of doing wrong to a man in something near unto him,
and intimately loved by him.

3. Sometimes for a quarrelous contentious disposition, Iam. 3.16. (...), etc.
that upon every trifling occasion breaks out against all that are near.

4. Lastly for counterfeit jealousy, Gal. 4.17.
which some seem to have of others, they pretend great love unto, and care of,
for fear they should do amiss; whereas this fair show is but a show to hold
the others the faster in their nets, for the better compassing of their own
sinister ends, and to make them more willing to stoop at their Lure.

Zeal taken in the good sense as it is attributed to Man, imports three
things, viz.

First, an emulation to overtake and outgo others in goodness, without envying
those a man strives to outstrip. Such was the zeal of many in Macedonia 2.
Cor. 9.2.
unto liberality, provoked thereto by those of Achaya, and particularly of
Corinth the Metropolitan City.

Secondly, Godly jealousy over some we love, for fear they should sin
against Christ their husband. The affection of Saint Paul for his beloved
Corinthians, and termed by himself (in opposition to the bad) 2. Cor. 11.2
(...).
godly jealousy.

Thirdly, an extreme heat of all the affections, for and toward one we
esteem, burning in our love to him; our desire of him; our joy in him; our
indignation against all that speak, or do any thing against the honor and
good liking of him: thinking nothing too good, too dear, too much to bestow
upon him: whether we make man, 2. Cor. 7.7. Gal. 4.15. Number. 11.28.29.
or God Psalm. 69 9. Ioh. 2.17.
himself the object hereof.

Sect. 3. Sect. 3. Of the acceptance of zeal in this Treatise.
These being the chief acceptations of zeal that the Scriptures mention,
among them all, I pitch on the last, and the definition thereof I thus
express. Zeal Zeal defined.
is a spiritual fire inflaming all the affections of a Christian, for
preservation and advancement of the glory of God.

Zeal considered according to the rules of Art, is a Quality; and such a
quality as Logicians call an Habit, which must be defined by the general
nature, Object and Ends of it.

All these are expressed in this definition. Spiritual fire is in room of the
Genus, and declares the general nature of it, (to which I add by the way for
plainness sake, the subject and state in which it is; viz. all the affections
of a Christian.) Gods glory is the principal Object Obiectum cui.
it looks at: the advancement and preservation whereof, is the highest End it
tends unto.

First for the Genus or general nature of it, 1. The general nature of it.
I term it a fire, a spiritual fire. A fire, not a heat only, which is in
some degrees found even in Luke-warmenesse, wherein yet coldness is the
predominant quality, and this makes it faulty. Zeal has heat as hot as
fire, therefore so is it called by Jeremy, in Analogy to Elementarie or
material fire.

And in this respect is it spiritual, which in this definition is put in, not
as intending a specificall difference between this and culinarie fires, but to
show the subalternate general nature of it, as the word spiritual comprehends
all analogicall fires in man's passions, which are diverse; some lawful; others
irregular and unlawful; some holy; others impure. There is the fire of lust,
Romans 1.27.
and the fire of the tongue, Iam. 3.6.
as well the fire of zeal.

Add hereunto that zeal is kindled by the Spirit, and therefore is it
spiritual also. Howbeit the spiritualitie of it can be no specificall note to
distinguish it from other graces, they being all in this respect spiritual.

This spiritual fire has for it hearth to burn in, Subiectum in quo.
all the affections and passions of a Christian as they serve, or may be of use
for advancement of the glory of God. Nor does zeal only inhabit the
affections, and work in them, but upon them too: they are not only the hearth
to burn in, but fuel to kindle on.

Thus zeal set all David's affections on fire, which in his holy poetical
raptures we may see blazing. In his love, Psalm. 119.97
we may find him transported beyond expression. In his desire, extremely
thirsting and panting: Psalm. 42.1.
and this heat, by an Antiperistasis, droping down tears in such plenty as
if he were to make them his meat. Psalm. 42.3.
Yea his grief proves a Moses rod to smite the rock of his heart, that rivers
of water gush out at his eyes. Psalm. 119.136.
And as for his anger, that so burned that it consumed him up. Ibid. ver. 139.
Nay his zeal did not omit to inflame his very hatred, making him hate the
enemies of God with a perfect Psalm. 139.22
hatred. Thus where ever zeal comes, it sets the whole heart on fire,
making men say with those two Disciples; Did not our hearts Luke 14.32
burn within us?

Object of zeal, to wit, the principal and the chiefest White it leuels at,
is the glory of God. There be, I confess, diverse particulars which zeal
shoots at: but Gods glory is the highest, and comprehends all those under it
as means to advance it.

Some make the worship of God to be the principal Object of zeal, which they
nominate in their Definitions: but this is too low, and too narrow. Too low,
because the glory of God is above it, as much as the End is above the Means.
Too narrow, because there be other things wherein Gods glory is as deeply
interessed as in his worship. Therefore besides that which is in this place
spoken by way of explication of the Definition, I have purposely intended the
next Chapter to declare more particularly and largely, the several less
principal Objects of zeal, which could not be conveniently and artificially
couched in the Definition it self.

3. Finis.
Thirdly, the End of zeal is the end of all our Actions, 1. Cor. 10.31.
the preservation and advancement of the glory of God. To prove this at large
were but to ouerlade the Treatise needlessly, and to prevent my self of
speaking of it more copiously in that place, Viz in Chap. 5.
to which (according to my method and project) it more properly pertaines.

Confutation of two errors
But before I can go further, I must tumble aside two errors laid just in my
way. one by some Neotericks, who for have discerned not a simple from a
compound, supposing upon their first view of zeal, that it was a compounded or
mixed affection or Anger and Love: And so without more fixed inspection
commended for such unto others.

other, by more antique Schoolmen, who prying more curiously into the nature
of this burning heat, found it (indeed) a simple: but withal simply confined
it to one affection of Love, Aquin. 1. 2. q. 28. ar. 4. Bonau. in Prol. sent.
dub. 3. Greg. de val. super Aqui. Disp. gener. 3. q. 2. p. 3. alijque.
as if zeal had no hearth or tunnell, but this. Both which blocks I shall
endeavor to remove with one lift.

Zeal is neither any one Simple or Compounded passion, or in any one only:
but a fiery temper and disposition in all, differing from them as fire from
mettell in a furnace. And as courage in a valiant man is no compounded thing of
his passions and spirits, but a brave temper and intention of both; so also is
zeal.

This truth the Rule of contraries will yet better clear, if we set zeal by
the opposite to it, luke-warmnesse. To be lukewarm, is not want of sufficient
heat in one affection only, but all. Zeal therefore must needs put fire into
so many of the affections and passions as luke-warmenesse depriueth thereof.
Hereupon it is that zealous men feel a burning in all their affections as well
as in any, as objects present themselves.

It is a wonder to see those elder exact Professors, pin Zeal to one Passion;
whereas it cannot be denied that Zeal, in one zealous action, shows it self
equally in diverse passions together. Moses declared as much heat of
indignation against those Calueish Idolaters, Exodus 32. as he did Love, for
God. The like did Phineas in the slaughter of Zimri and Cosbi. As one Driedo.
l. ^. de Reg. script. tract. 2. cap. 1. Jn zelo Phinees bis zelus ponitur.
Semel pro vehementia amoru erga deum, zelum autem irae habuit contra peccantes.
Eodem modo and Hugo. de S. vict. in Joel. 2. zelus est feruor animi ad
compassionem naturae, ad vltionem paenae, ad deuotionem gratiae proni, etc. Ita
August. Tract. 10 in Joan. Quis comeditur zelo domus? qui omnia que ibi videt
peruersa satagit emendare, cupit corrigere; non quiescis: si emendare non
potest, tollerat, gemit etc.
of the faction of Schoolmen has (to his praise) long since confessed. And in
godly Jealousy (all one with Zeal,) do not Love, and Fear, and Anger,
equally present and bestirre themselves with like feruor?

Breefly: I will no more deny Love to be the Master Passion, in setting Zeal
first on work, then I will grant Zeal to be an effect of Love; it being
rather a Consequent then an effect thereof. A true Zealot Sacrificing all his
Affections to the honor of his God, has this fire of Zeal to kindle them
all, like that celestial fire, consuming the Sacrifices of Eliah. Which Fire
was no effect, flowing from the Sacrifice it self, but only a means, by
fiering it, to make it accepted.

To conclude, Zeal cannot be without Love, Love cannot live without Zeal: yet
is not Zeal any more participant of the nature of Love, though joined with it
and all the the rest of the Passions to inflame them, then that thin water
which runs along with the blood in the body of man, to temper it, is of the
nature of blood.

CHAP. III. The Objects of Zeal.
Having uncovered this Fire by a Definition, my next work is to discover more
largely the several subordinate Objects, for whose sakes it burns.

Zeal has a double task: the one of a Defendant, the other, of an Opponent.
Accordingly it has a twofold Object; Good and Evil, maintaining that;
opposing this. It ever defends what is truly Good. This Chapter has two
Sections.
It never opposes any thing but what is certainly Evil.

Sect. 1. Sect. 1. Of the good things which zeal defends. viz.
The first task of Zeal is on the behalf of Good to abet it. What heavenly
wisdom counts worthy, our choice is an honorable cause for Zeal to
maintain. Now what will either Grace or Nature desire, but good? It is not
then for the honor of Zeal to take part with any thing else. It is good (yea
comely (...).
) to be zealously affected in a good thing always: Gal. 1.18.
that is, for that thing which is good: for every thing Ego volo vos in omnibus
bonis resplendere. Theodor.
that is good: not only that good which reflecteth on our selves, but all that
any way concerns the honor of him who is the Author of goodness. If the love
of goodness provoke us to Zeal, where ever Zeal finds goodness in
distress it becomes her Champion.

But though zeal undertakes the protection of every thing that is good, yet
chiefly it patronizeth that which comes nearest the chiefest good, and
wherein the glory of our Highest Sovereign is more deeply interessed. Of this
nature is his Word, his Worship, his Servants.

1. 1. The word of God.
One particular Object of zeal then is the Sacred word of Truth, containing
all necessary rules of Faith. Zelus cum in bono accipitur, est quidam feruor
animi, quo men's relicto humano timore, pro defensione veritatis accenditur.
Alcuinus
The office of zeal about this is, to preserve the honor thereof untainted
from all blemishes of error, stains of heresy, and indignities of Tyrants and
Atheists: striving for the faith of the Phil. 1.27.
Gospel: Holding fast Tit 1.9.
the faithful word: not quarrelling to separation for every difference in
opinion touching points not fundamental, and undecided. In which case no man
must be judged for his doubting; Romans 14.1. See the marginall note of our last
Translators.
nor may any doubting man judge others who Ibid. ver. 3
doubt not.

The fire of zeal must blaze highest in maintenance of capital truths, Jude
ver. 3.
Earnestly contending for the faith once delivered unto the Saints. Wise men
will defend that part of a City most, which may occasion most damage by
suffering a breach. And zeal will then especially be as one of the Cherubins
with a flaming sword to keep safe the word of Life, when the chiefest
mysteries are corrupted, or questioned.

Saint Paul, when the honor of his Gospel lay at the stake, seems unable to
express the heat he was in: mark his vehemence; though we, says he, or an
Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel unto you, Gal. 1.8.
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. A heavy doom
most vehemently denounced. And yet not satisfying himself in showing so much
zeal as he was able to express by one single pronouncing this dreadful
anathematisme, he doubles his speech, as if the furnace of his heart were now
heated with zeal seven times hotter then it was wont: Ibid. ver. 9.
As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach unto you another
Gospel, then that ye have received, let him be accursed. Thus in cases of like
consequence, must we be affected.

But to be all on fire in defense of questionable truths, which if they were
yielded unto us, could add nothing to that stock of graces which accompany
salvation, is a thing ill beseeming those divine flames of holy zeal. To what
profit are those hot disputes and sharp contentions about the place assigned
for (that maze of horror unto ungodly men) the Oecumenicall Assise; the
Equality of glory; the Hierarchy of Angels; and many more?

He that puts himself upon the office of a Superuisor and Controuler of
other men's opinions touching points of this nature, may breed vain ianglings,
but will edify but a little. These things are of the nature of sauce rather
then meat; dish them out as curiously as Art can devise, and when all is done
they nourish not. Mark such as are zealous of spiritual gifts; if they seek
not to excel to the use of edifying; you shall be sure to find them excelling
in vanity. And more quarrels arise by one such conceited Doctor, then many
wise men with all their wisdom shall be able to take up.

This is that bloody knife that cutteth asunder the very sinews of Christian
love. This causes Professors of the same faith to lead huge armies of
sectaries like Pigmies and Cranes one against another: so wasting their zeal
in defense of trifles, that they have none left to make a wall of fire about
points of more moment.

With what heart can we join against a common enemy, when every little
difference is prosecuted with such heat as if it were unlawful, or at least
dangerous to unite our forces, for fear of fiering one another tents by
encamping together? He that can be so hot with his brother for a trifle, would
certainly exceed the proportion of any cause with an enemy, destroying more by
intemperance then he is able to build by his zeal.

Witness the bickerings between some Lutherans and Caluinists, (as they are
by some nicknamed,) which have given RELIGION (since the last reformation
thereof) a greater blow, then all the thunderbolts of Rome set together.

Is it not Nuts to our Romish neighbors to see men belch out such bitter
raylings, and to put out such tart volumes one against another, touching the
manner of Christ discension into hell; the liberty of the Sabbath; the power
of Witches; the possibility of Demoniacall possessions; the seat of faith;
the superiority of preaching, reading, and praying? In all which and many more
the divisions of Reuben are great thoughts of heart. Is it now a time to be
divided among our selves, when all our forces united are little enough to
withstand the common adversary? Oh when will our eyes be opened to see, and
our hearts be mollified to bewail the breaches of the enemy upon us, by such
unbrotherly childish contentions among our selves!

Ere while we could see nothing in S. Paul but fire, when the foundation of
the Gospel began to shake by the undermining of seducers. But in an inferior
point, which was but as a Pinnacle, not of so much necessity as beauty to set
out the Pile; he lays his hand off the bellows, and puts out the fire.

For being consulted touching Virginity; 1. Cor. 7.
and having no particular direction therein from the Lord, he sparingly and
mildly set down his judgment, and that by way of friendly advise only, not
of command from the Lord. And as if this were not enough to manifest his
moderation, he will by no means peremptorily determine the question; but gives
every man liberty therein, that is of another mind, Ibid. ver. 36
to do what he will.

These two presidents of the Apostle may suffice to declare what temper our
zeal must ascend unto in defense of the Word. Maintain we must with all our
might the Principles of faith. But of inferior doubtful truths, we may only
gently discourse what seems most probable; not violently hold them to
dissension 2. Tim. 2.23. etc.
and Schism: no, though the grounds of such our opinions seem never so
solid. Herein it is as honorable to yield as to conquer; since every man
must follow the things which Romans 14.19.
make for peace, and wherewith one may edify another.

2. The worship of God.
2. Another particular which zeal must fortify, is that Worship of God, which
the Word prescribes. The second Commandment which interdicts Idolatry and
false worship, does as firmly enjoin zeal for preservation of that true
worship which the Lord does appoint. Therefore the Apostle ioynes Zeal and
Worship together: requiring that worshippers be zealous Romans 12.11
in spirit, serving or worshipping the Lord.

It is then a good and comely thing to be zealously affected toward and for
the worship of God. For this our Lord was so zealous that the zeal of the very
house of God did even even eat him up: by the house no doubt understanding and
meaning Synecdochically the whole Worship Quis comeditur Zelo domus dei? qui
omnia quae ibi videt peruersa cupa emendare, etc. Aug. tract. 10. in John.
of God there to be performed, but by profane employments polluted. A thing
so provoking his spirit, that he could not express indignation enough in
rescuing the honor of that place from such abuses.

This action so well beseemed Christ himself, that even by this he clearly
demonstrated to his Disciples the substance of that Type which David once was:
they then remembering that it was written, the Ioh. 2.17. ex Psalm. 69.9.
zeal of thine house has even eaten me up. And what need we any further
precept; any better warrant herein?

Howbeit as in defense of the Word, the rule of worship, most Zeal must be
spent for points fundamental: so care must be had in maintaining the Worship
it self, to fortify the Substantialls most.

Such was the flame of Elias Zeal, 1 King. 18.40.
that nothing but the blood of all Baals Prophets could quench it. But mark
the object of it: It was no small matter. It was for no less then Gods
Covenant, which by their means, the children of Israel had forsaken: Ibid.
ver. 10.
for his Alters which they had thrown down: and for his Prophets which they
had slain with with the sword.

Thus when any Substantial part of Gods Worship is corrupted, deteyned,
removed, or endangered; then is a time for Christians to quit themselves like
men in vindicating the same.

But here a Caution touching the former example. It is no warrant for our Zeal
to break out so far as his did: it only shows us wherein we must be
zealous so far as the bounds of our Calling admit. It had not been lawful
for Eliah to put those Idolaters to the sword, if he had not been able to
plead his special Commission from God, as he did; Ibid. ver. 36.
I have done all these things at thy word.

The want of which warrant made Peter liable to reproof of our Lord, even when
he fought in defense of our Lord, and cut off but an ear of the high Priests
servant. For this little, Christ applied unto him that Law against Murderers;
Mat. 26.52 Ex Genesis 9 6.
All they that take the sword shall perish by the sword. Not that this little
deserved that judgment; but to give him notice, whereto his Zeal would make
him obnoxious, if he proceeded to the taking away of any man's life upon so
slender a ground.

It is then the duty of Christians, if private men, to pray zealously; if
Ministers, to preach zealously in defense of Gods Worship: vseing no Arms but
those of Ambrose to Augustus, Prayers, and Tears. Rogamus Auguste, non
pugnamus: non timemus, sed rogamus. Hoc Christianos decet, vt and tranquillitas
pacis optetur and fidei, veritatisque constantia. Amb. Epist. 33. ad
Marcellinam And again, Orat. in Auxentium: coactus repugnare non noui, dolere
potero, potero flere, potero gemere: aduersus arma milites, Goth^s quoque
lachrymae meae arma sunt, etc. aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere.
He that being under Authority, will rather resist then suffer, makes the
cause suffer by his resistance; and so in steed of standing zealously for it,
he does in effect raise forces against it.

It was not the prohibitions and threats of the Jewish Governors, that could
silence Peter, and John, from preaching Jesus; Act. 4.18.19, 20.
because their Commission from God must be executed against all injunctions of
Men. But on the other side, their Zeal never made them resist with hostile
force, even in their greatest affronts. If they were apprehended, they suffered
with patience and rejoicing; if they could, they fled.

Zeal may stand with suffering and flying; but not with resistance, which is
flat Rebellion. And no good cause calls Rebellion to aid. Christ gives not
only liberty, but precept; when we are persecuted in one City, to fly into
another: not meaning we should be less zealous, but spare our selves for
better times and occasions.

If it were contrary to Zeal, to fly; Christ would never have given Reu. 12.14
wings of a great Eagle to the woman, that she might fly into the wilderness
into her place, from the face of the Serpent. And though our Savior makes it
the trik of an Ioh. 10.12.
hyreling to leave the sheep and flee, when he sees the Wolf coming: yet
that is when the Wolf comes to worry and devour the flock principally; not
when many Woules come directly against the shephard himself, after the best
sheep be slain or fledd, and the rest ready to join with the Wolves against
him.

Then, a Minister may, yea must fly if he can, when his flock, notwithstanding
his best care and diligence, be either so scattered that he cannot draw them
together, or so ouergrowne with the scab of heresy, that it is impossible to
cure them, and every man ready to seek his life to take it away; making the
quarrel personal against the Shephard, rather then general against the
sheep. In this case Eliah fled from 1 King. 17.3.
Ahab, and that by Gods own direction: And after, from Iezabl; when he thought
that 1 King 19.10.
he only was left alone; though at that time there were seven thousand that
never bowed knee unto Baal; yet so scattered, that he knew not where to find
them. So also Paul fled from Tessalonica to Act 17.13.15.
Athens: and from the Governor of Damascus, desirous to apprehend him, 2 Cor.
11.32.33.
being let down through a window in a basket by the wall and so escaped his
hands. So did Athanasius often fly from the Arrians.

Nor is any man debarred this benefit, if the case be alike. Herein, if in any
thing, the Proverb is true; One pair of heels is worth too pair of hands:
which any man may use without disparagement to his Zeal, or danger to be
branded with the opprobrious Mark of an Hireling.

But in matter of Circumstance or Ceremonies, which are not parts, but only
appurtenances of Worship; Non parts cultus, sed ad cultum ceremoniae.
no need, no warrant to be so hot, as for defense thereof to incur such
perils. In Substantial duties of Worship, he that is not with God in a
zealous defense, is against him. Luke 11.23.
And yet in things of less moment, he that is not against him, by an open
crossing, is with him, Mark 9.40.
by holding the maine.

Zeal therefore must not spit fire at such as are not foes but friends: nor be
at defiance with those who holding the head, do not putrify the members.

I think no wise man doubts that even in the purer times of the Old Church in
Israel, corruptions grew in Ceremonies as well as in the substance of Gods
worship. And yet, pry into the Scriptures never so carefully, we shall not
find any of the most zealous Saints fall on fire for Ceremonies. Which is
worth observation, and the rather because Saint Paul says that, even in the
Churches of the Gospel there was, then, 1 Cor. 11.16.
no such custom.

Now what comfort can any man reap of that Zeal which makes him separate, for
not having his will followed in Ceremonies; when such Zeal was never practiced
or commanded in Scripture?

Liberty is given to every Church to use what Ceremonies they will, that agree
to the general rule, and tend to edification and decency. Yet liberty is not
lest to every one in the Church that he may set up or pull down what he
will. This is in the power of the Governors only, who being dispensers of the
Mysteries of God 1 Cor. 4 1.
are best able to judge of conueniencie and decency.

If every one in the Church of Creete might set up what they would, Paul might
have set Titus about some other business, and not for this very cause have
left him there, to set Tit. 1 5.
in order the things that were wanting.

3. The last particular which zeal must maintain, be the Servants of God. 3.
The servants of God.
He that held himself despised, when his Mat. 10.40.
Servants were; intended thereby the defense of them as well as of himself.
And it is one part of Eliahs quarrel against the Prophets of Baal and their
followers, that they had slain Gods 1 King. 19.10.
Prophets with the Sword.

When we see the Servants of God reproached, scandalized, and oppressed, then
is a time for zeal to appear in their defense: and such as by their place and
Greatness are able to give countenance to good men in good causes, should then
hold it an honorable duty to show themselves. Thus did Jonathan for David 1 Samuel 20.32.
, even when Saul himself was enraged: Hest. 7.3.
Hester for the Jews, when Haman plotted their Destruction: And Nicodemus for
Christ; Ioh. 7.51.
though the Pharisees boiled in malice against him.

What Zeal is in that Person that can be content to see a good man perish
before his eyes, and under his nose, never opening his mouth in his defense,
for fear of offending such as care not for offending of any; but practice the
ruins of all that cross their humors?

The Lord, to teach men their duty herein, does sometimes vouchsafe himself to
plead the cause of his servants, as he did in the particular of Moses, against
Aaron and Miriam Number. 12.4.
. A remarkable example, to show how the Lord takes to heart the indignities
that are put upon his Servants, especially when they are busyed in his own
Service. He will not allow it even unto Kings to do them any harm: Psalm.
105.14.
but has reproved, and will reprove kings for their sakes.

Yea further such as be able to do no good by speaking for them, must yet
mourn for their distress. It is recorded to the shame of Israel, that such as
were at ease, themselves took their fill of voluptuousness, but did not
remember with compassionate grief Amos. 6.6.
the affl^ctions of Joseph.

When Jerusalem was laid wast, how did zealous Lamen.
Jeremy take on! When Herod had cast Peter into Prison, how incessant were the
faithful in their prayers, Act. 12.
till he was delivered!

Observe the plagues that come on such men as are never touched with the
miseries of Others. They commonly fall under the same judgment, which others
vnpittied, have tasted before. They that would be at their banquets, not
remembering the afflictions of Joseph in captivity, therefore shall go captive
with the first that go captive, Amos 6.7.
and the banquet of them that stretched themselves, shall be taken away.

On the other side, such as in Zeal for Gods Servants do but mourn for their
afflictions shall be sure to share with them in the comforts of their
deliverance, and to be kindly invited by the Lord himself, to their mirth.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all
ye that mourn for her, Isay. 66.10, 11.
that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations.

But yet because the purest metals have some dross, and the best men, some
imperfections that cannot be defended; Zeal may not undertake their defense
in all they do, or hold. Moses, a man zealous and loving enough, would not
maintain, could not but check his own brother for making the people naked, by
Idols, Exodus 32.25.
before their enemies. A thing which if either Zeal, might have past over, or
love covered, his meeknes had never so sharply reproved.

The Actions of the cheifest Apostles are not always warrantable, because done
by Apostles: for even they also, when they follow not Christ, must be forsaken.
If they do any thing contrary to the rule of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11.
they are to be blamed; but if they teach men so, Gal. 1.8, 9.
they must be accursed.

Paul was not to learn his duty of defending good men; nor ignorant of his
rule to guide him therein: yet when Peter was at Antioch and had offended,
Saint Paul withstood him, even to his face. Now, what confusion? Ibid. Gal.
1.11.
what a maze of error had Peter's Scholars been cast into, if they should with
heat have vowed the maintaining their Masters Action, which no doubt they
disclaimed Chrisost. in hunc loc. (...).
on Paul's reproof? neither love, nor reverence, but Judgment must lead our
troops to the aid of Good men.

If such, or such a good man, held for a Scholar, dislike a Ceremony, this is
to many, ground enough to co^demn it to the pit of hell, because they are strong
in opinion, that so worthy a man would never find fault without cause.

But was not this the Mother of all that mischief now befallen, that once
famous Romans 1.8.
Church of Rome; where, the high respect and immodest admiration which some
Venerable Pastors were raised unto, (either by the dotage or flattery of their
people, receiving all for Gospel, which proceeded out of their mouths;) at
first conceived, and at length brought forth that prodigious blasphemy of Not
that I grant this Tenent to be in being of ancient times: but only that the
high respect of the B^. of Rome so long as they had virtue, drew so much
reverence to that Sea, as after, the brood of Jesuits made use of it, by
wresti^g some speeches of the Fathers, to ^et ^b^^^h this poison. Albert
Pighius Hierar. Eccle. lib. 4. cap. 6, 7 was the first Divine that ever
undertook expressly and professedly to maintain the infallibility of the Popes
judgment, which he professes to undertake, against the consent of all the
Divines and Canonists. A thing whereof Paul 4. was ashamed, and condemned
Pighius for it. In Epist. ad Groper Cardinal.
Impossibility to err.

A Doctrine abhorred by us. And yet, alas! How often is it unawares maintained
by such as would be thought our greatest zealots? Many of them being in
Argument) brought to a Nonplus; for their last reply and strongest refuge,
they fly to this; and I know this to be the judgment of able, sound, worthy,
Reverend Divines; and therefore, all the world shall never drive me from it
while I live. Which is no better then the last Argument of Scaligers fool, who
thinks, by a wager to maintain that, which by reason he cannot.

Is not this to set men up in the Infallible Chair; and to create Popes at
home, while we defy them abroad; yea, to hold the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as we affect and respect the Persons we choose to follow therein?

The Apostles rule is, to follow men as they follow Christ. When they step out
of his paths, let us (if we can) reduce them, if we cannot do this, let them
wander without us. It is more gainefull and safe to travel alone, in the high
way of Christ; then by following the best company out of the common Rode, to be
set fast in a slough.

Sect. 2. Sect. 2. Showing what Zeal must oppose.
One Task of Zeal has been showed, wherein it must be a Defendant: the other
follows, wherein it must be an Opponent.

Zeal must never fly on the throat of any thing but what is certainly evil.
Whiles it is but suspected, Zeal must be countermanded from discharging
against it, least shame sound a retraite to our furious marching, and disgrace
retort that bullet which was too hastily shot into the Adverse Camp.

The Israelites beyond Jordan thought there had been great cause of a zealous
quarrel at the Alter Josh 22.11, 12.
erected by the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and part of Manasseh, on this side the
River. But when better information declared it to be built only for a Memorial
unto Posterity, of their samenesse of blood and Religion with those within
Canaan; they saw cause to justify what before they condemned, Ibid. ver. 31,
32.
and to blame themselves for blaming their Brethren.

Saul was a zealous persecutor of David as of a dangerous Traitor to his
Crown: 1 Samuel 20.31.
But which of the two was more righteous, Chap. 24.17
Saul's after-confession declared.

The Jews wanted no heat against the Doctrine of our Savior, and the rest of
the Apostles. But whosoever shall read those stories, may from them for ever
take warning not to set against that which only their own frowardness,
fancies, or humors have made odious to them; no sound evidence being found
among the sacred Records to condemn it.

The believing Jews of the Circ^mcision, thought Peter Act. 11.2, 3
a profane offender for going to the Gentiles, and sharply rebuked him for
it. Yet was not as they imagined: for after his defense, Ver. 18.
they glorified God, for that which before with great heat they condemned.

The like violence have I known in Some, against some things in our Church,
which, better understood, they admired. Yea I am persuaded that ignorance of
the original causes and true use of diverse things amongst us, does breed a
lo^thing of that which deserves good acceptance. Some stomakes loath unknown
meats, which if they took down, would do them no hurt: yet out of a peevish
humor, choose rather to cast away their meat, then their ignorance of it.

Many inueigh against Partiality, that are themselves the greatest Partialists
to their own Gamaliels. It becomes every sober Christian to doubt rather of
the judgment of few, especially of his own, then of a Whole Church. It is more
easy to quarrel, then to find cause: to contradict, then to disprove.

Where silly ignorance, wilful prejudice, and affected partiality sit as
Triumuirate Officers to judge of the soundness, lawfulness, and conueniency
of what they do not, or will not, or cannot understand; it will be easy for
them to affirm that any thing maintained by others (though sound, lawful, and
fit,) does hit again Scripture.

It is then our safest course to Submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords
sake 1. Pet. 2
, so far as they disanull not the Ordinances of God. Nor may we take up an
opinion upon trust from any man living against even humane Ordinances, nor go
about to oppose them, till our own understandings discrie in them some
contrariety to the written word.

Our liberty must not be confined to the close prison of another man's 1. Cor.
10.29.
conscience: nor his to ours. Let us not therefore judge one another any more,
but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to
fall, into his brothers Romans 14.13.
way. Cast not scruples into men's minds touching the unlawfulness of that,
which for the most part, such as be most violent and bitter against, are least
able to infringe.

On the other side, such, as, to feed other men's humors, will turn Ithacius,
(Who mightily bending himself by all means against the Heresy of Priscilian,
the hatred of which one evil, was all the virtue he had, became so wise in the
end, that every man careful of virtuous conversation, studious of Scripture,
and given to any abstinence in diet, was set down in his Calender of suspected
Priscillianists; for whom it should be expedient to approve their soundness of
faith, by a more licentious and loose behavior M.R. Hooker, ex Sulpit. se^^.
:) such, I say, are but base clawbacks, that so their own turns be served,
care not whom they wrong by false accusations, nor how much they abuse them
whom they flatter by misinformations.

And here an Item to such as it concerns to punish the sins of the people,
(I speak not now of the laws and constitutions themselves; but only to
prevent corruption in such to whom the execution of them is committed by
superior Governors:) if they shall for gain or other respect make the unwitting
or unwilling omissio^ of an inferior duty, to be as bad as a breach of any
substantial part of Gods worship; some small indiscretion and weakness,
either of judgment or conscience, with odious whoredom, reeling gogle-eyed
drunkenness, and blasphemous swearing, etc. winking at these, and prosecuting
the other with extremest rigor: this is up and down to act a Pharisees part.
Woe to such Mat 23.23
tything of Mint, Annise, and Cumen, when the weightiest matters of the Law,
mercy, judgment, and faith are omitted Mat 23.23
. They are but Ver. 24.
Blind guides, who strain at gnats, and swallow Camels.

Nor is it only Pettielarcenie, but even a capital crime against zeal it
self, to drive it at the head of things not simply evil, or to make use of
the sharpest edge of severe justice to hew down lesser faults, whilst greater
sins be rather stroaked, then so much as stricken with her scabberd. This
brings up an evil report upon the best zeal, and among such as are not able or
willing to discern of things that differ, takes away all difference between a
zealous Christian, and a headstrong headlong Ajax. Some certainly in all places
will be found that will be glad to take occasion to lay on Rutilius for
Aemilius his fault.

Let Authority consider how great wrong it were to a commonwealth, to punish
Felons, and to pass by Traitors. The scandal is no less to the Government of
the Church, to use severity against peccadilloes, and make a gain of more
scandalous courses.

Samuel never acknowledged Saul's diligence in killing the meaner Amalakites, to
smell of any coal from the Alter, so long as Agag and the best of the Prey
were spared alive.

It were a foul blot to Israel, that Tamar having played the incestuous whore
should escape the fire; yet most unreasonable that guilty Judah should
pronounce that sentence: for though she deserved death by the Law of God, yet
was she in the conscience of her Judge more righteous Genesis 38.26.
then himself; so that he must needs condemn himself first, in condemning of
her.

Again, let such as be zealous sticklers for Democraticall or Aristocraticall
discipline, consider how ill the Church can be governed by one polity, and the
Commonwealth by another. Let them take notice of that woe which sticks as
close to the ribs of such as call good, evil; and sweet, sour: as of such
who call evil, good, and sour, sweet Isai. 5.20.
.

The terror whereof should assuage the heat they are in, against things not
yet decided to their liking: and keep them from that violent pelting at
Ceremonies, and crying away with that which themselves are not able from good
grounds to condemn.

It were ridiculous to the world, scandalous to the Church, dangerous to a man's
own self to be observed more afraid of a Ceremony in a Church, then of
worldliness, pride, malice, and self-love in his own bowels.

Poor Vzzah was smitten dead but for touching the Arc, when it was not
lawful for any to touch the body of the Arc: and when, if in that case of
necessity it might be thought a tolerable offense, yet it pertained to others
more near about it to perform that office. And yet men now count it an high
piece of zeal to direct their Directors, and like Clockemakers to take the
Church all in pieces at their pleasure.

But what should the sheep do with the shepherds crook? what, the foot, in
turning the body topsy-turuey, to become the head? and what the common
soldier, in leading the Greg Naz. in Orat. de moderatione seruand. in disput.
(...).
army?

It was long since the zealous complaint of an holy man, that men could no
sooner get up their names in the world, and be able readily and confidently to
muster up a few places of Scripture nothing to the purpose, but they thought
themselves sufficient to encounter Moses himself, setting upon him as
furiously as Idem ibid.
Dathan and Abiram ever did.

Happy were this age, had it none of that temper. To such as these, it is in
vain to say any thing, therefore directing my speech to them whom moderation
has yet a better hand over, I will say but this of that same ancient Father;
their co^tumacie, I beseech you, let us fly from, their madness let us
abhor, lest we perish with them in the same vengeance.

If there be any thing amiss, let our zeal set us to praying, not to railing,
which becomes neither men nor Angels toward the Devil himself. If the Church
be foul, the struglings of private persons will but raise the dust. If any
thing be faulty, our Saviors rule in another case will fit inferiors passing
well; Let him that is without sin cast the first stone at it. If we cannot
do this, the next way we can possibly take to the best reformation is by
prayers Psalm. 83.
and tears Psalm. 119.136.
.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Grounds of Zeal.
WE have seen the Objects for which, and against which our zeal must give
fire. Next I must show, on what Grounds we must plant it. This Chapter has two
Sections co^taining the two grounds of zeal.


Our zeal cannot but be naught, be the Object never so good, unless we go
to work upon Grounds as good. The grounds be generally two: A distinct
knowledge; and a lawful calling.

Sect. 1 Sect. 1. Showing the first ground of zeal knowledge.
One Ground of zeal is, a distinct knowledge of the cause we take up. The
goodness of any thing is not of it self warrant enough to us, till in our
apprehension we know it to be good. A Lawyer may have a good cause brought
him; but it were neither safe for his Clyent nor wisdom for himself, to
plead it till he fully understand it from one end to the other, because of the
many turnings and windings which a subtle adversary will make advantages of.

It is Satan's policy not to cast any quench-coale into an ignorant Zelots
fire, but rather help him with bellows to blow it up. The Devil sees that
such an one will not prove so dangerous to any as unto himself; unless it be
unto God and Religion, who many times receive greater blows from such fresh
water soldiers, then from a professed enemy. For though they have an heart
willing to stand for good things, yet they are like a second, that fighting in
the dark, many times knocks down his friend in stead of his foe.

This ignis fatuus or fools fire haunted those Jews, who by the Apostles
testimony, were zealous enough, but it was not according to Romans 10.2.
knowledge. This want led them so much astray, that when they thought
themselves in the best and straightest course, and most zealous for God;
Phaeton-like they did what they could to set the world on fire, and became most
sacrilegious against the Son of Quid prodest habere zelu^ Dei, and non habere
scientia^ Dei? Iudei putantes se zelum Dei habere, sacrilegi extiterunt in
filium Dei, quia non secundum scientiam zelati sunt. Origin.
God.

So then, zeal is worth nothing without knowledge to guide it: yea ignorant
zeal is an intolerable Importabilis absque scientia zelus est Bern Sup. Cant.
ser. 49.
evil. Who would endure a Commander setting or directing a battle when his
eves be put out? Who would trust a headstrong blind horse with the raines?
Would he not more often run his head against a post, then keep his way? and if
he come at a dangerous bridge, choose rather to go beside it then over it.

It is as natural to error to draw ignorance after it, as for the lodestone
to attract Iron. An ignorant man being ever suspicious that others will deceive
him, preuents them by doing it himself: and then proves more confident then
before he was suspicious. And though he may have an Item, that he has abused
himself, yet this will but add passion to error; fire to tow; making him more
mad: as once the constancy of Christians in the truth, made Paul in Act. 26.11.
persecuting them even to strange Cities.

Nor is it strange to see men more violent in a wrong way, then in the right,
since in a wrong course, they have wind and tide with them; but in a good, both
against them. Their corruptions will easily hoyse sail to their irregular
passions, and the Devils suggestions like strong gales of wind, will set them a
running in a headlong voyage.

But all these will oppose them when the ship is more carefully steered in a
straight course by a true compass, by reason of the natural enmity and
cross disposition that is in them, against all that is good.

Violence therefore is dangerous in ways unknown; because after entrance into
a by-way, direction comes (for the most part) too late. Then, either shame, or
choler at their own mistaking makes men more violent: as they that in a
journey having lost their way, out of very anger post harder in bypath, then
they did in the Road.

An absolute necessity of distinct knowledge is therefore laid upon every
Zealot. And this knowledge must be had from the Law and the Testimonies Isai.
8.20.
; beyond which if zeal go, it wanders in the dark without warrant, but not
without sin. Whatsoever is not of faith is Romans 14.23
sin. And that cannot be of faith, which is not cut out by the pattern of the
word. Faith will not build upon humane foundations, or credit of man; but the
understanding and judgment must have immediate information and satisfaction
from the Divine word of truth.

It is then an extreme rashness and folly for any man to suffer his zeal to
run before and beyond his knowledge, relying upon the judgment or practice of
other good men, as if it were warrant enough for him to swear, what a good man
will say: and to defend what a goo^ man has done.

That is zeal ill spent which wastes it self in crying down other men's
opinions, not as judgment, but as affection kindles it; being able often times,
to say no more against them, then the chief Priests and Officers could allege
against Christ unto Pilate; If he were not an evil doer we would not have
delivered him up unto thee: yet seem to take it ill that their bare clamor,
without any either evidence or particular accusation, should prevail with him
to put an Innocent to death.

Many good (but weak) Christians expose themselves and their Zeal to much
reproach and disadvantage, by standing out in some things which they have only
received by Tradition. There are some whom they will rely upon without all
doubt or gainesaying, or so much as searching to the bottom of their Opinions.
And yet these people would think much to subscribe to another man whom they
love not so well, without requiring many reasons more then enough.

Is not this one of our just quarrels against the Papists at this day, as it
was formerly of Christ himself against the old Pharisees, for their
Traditions? Yet when many people are demanded their reasons of diverse opinions
which they stand stoutly unto, is not their answer this? Because the contrary
is against Gods word. Being pressed to show wherein, they reply; We are but
ignorant people, we cannot dispute with you: but so we are taught by Reverend
men, if you talk with them, they will be able to satisfy you to the full.

Upon this ground they stand so firm, that none is able to remove them. Their
heart, they would you should know, is as good as yours, though they cannot
maintain their Tenants as others can: and therefore they are resolved to
continue their course.

If this be not blind zeal, I know not what is. Let them suppose what they
will: such good meaning is naught, and their zeal too. For without knowledge
the mind is not good; and he that hastes with his feet Pro. 15.2.
sins.

Such a zealous man is like one that being blind or hood winkt, should hastly
run in an uncouth and dangerous way full of blocks, rocks, ditches, brooks,
quagmires, or pits, and never give over till destruction her self put a period
to his desperate race.

This is the reason why men become Sectaries and Schismatics so fast: they
suffer themselves to be seduced before they discern the traps into which they
are trained. And commonly such as be most zealous in this kind, change
Religion as often as young shoo-makers and tailors do masters, running over all
the Sects that be in the world, unless their course be interrupted by
authority, and themselves constrained to inform themselves better.

But if they may run on, what error or heresy will they not in time swallow
down like Gulls and Cormorants, and digest like Ostriges? The best things
corrupted, prove to be the worst. And zeal that gives luster to all graces,
if it once exceed the circle of knowledge, becomes most pernicious.

Who derides not the madness of those hare brained Ephesians Acts 19.32.
, that upon mere instigation of Demetrius against Paul, filled a whole City
with an vproare, some crying one thing; and some a another in great confusion,
the more part not knowing wherefore they were come together?

I wish it were breach of charity to compare the stirs of our Brownists,
Anabaptists, Familists, and all the rabble of such schismatic Sectaries,
(who may truly be termed Puritanes,) with this inconsiderate action of those
rude Ephesians. If there be any difference, it is only in this, that these
mad-Martin mar-Prelates profess in their words that they know God, but in
their works they deny him.

What then remains but that we all learn to make knowledge and humility,
Vshers to our zeal. Beware of Ignorance and Arrogancy; they are birds of a
feather; seldom asunder: for who so bold as blind Bayard? Put not the raynes
of zeal into their hands; for they will certainly set all on fire; and if it
prove not so, it shall not be their fault.

Zealous David thought it a good argument to prove his heart free from pride,
that his zeal had been confined to the Region of his knowledge and capacity.
Mark his plea: Lord mine heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; neither
do I exercise my self in great matters, nor in things too wonderful for Psalm
131.1.2. (...)
me. And it is a ruled case; he that will be super wise Romans 12 3.
, busy and earnest beyond sobriety and the measure of faith dispensed to him;
and thinks he does well: sets an higher price upon himself then ever any
man, but some fool like himself, will give for him.

This, lamentable experience has in all ages taught to be too dangerous: it
being ordinary with selfe-conceited Zealots, rather to defend schism, heresy,
blasphemy, then by an ingenious retractation of error, (which would honor
them more,) to confess their ignorance and temeritie.

An evil which the whole Christian world had once ruefull cause to observe and
bewail in that Great Wit, Arrius. This man out of a vain glorious emulation
to excel Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, (where himself was also a Niceph.
lib. 8. cap. 5.
Minister,) diued so far into curious Questions beyond his reach, that at
length he went as low as hell it self, and brought up thence that Heresy,
which, to his everlasting reproach, bears his name denying the Godhead of
Christ.

After him, Nestorius, out of Zeal maintaining the rashness of his much
admired friend Anastasius; Socratt. li. 1 cap. 32. Niceph. lib. 14 cap. 31, 32
33.
fell into as gross an Heresy. The occasion, this. Anastasius having in a
Sermon bitterly railed against that Ancient Title (which he understood not,
says Nicephorus,) given to the Virgin Mary, Maria (...). The mother of God.
Vide Origin. tom. 3. in Romans Eusebius lib. 3. de vit. Constant.
by the Fathers: and that sharp Censure of his being distasted by them,
Nestorius would needs undertake in favor of his Anastasius to justify,
spending whole Sermons in protesting against that Phrase of speech.

Afterward, being by that Reverend Alexandrian Cyril in sundry letters showed
the lawfulness of that which he with much heat had publicly condemned: And
his shallow brains not able to hold it up any longer without admitting many
gross absurdities against the Person of Christ; and Lastly his proud heart
disdaining submission and recantation, made choice in maintaining thereof (for
want of other arguments out of which he had been beaten by disputation) to fall
into that most execrable Heresy which denies the Union of the two Natures of
Christ in one Person.

It were tedious to particularize the detriments of blind Zeal; since this
has been the wall by which the Iuy of Heresy, error and schism has ever got
up to that unhappy height which often they mount unto. Great reason then it is,
that we should ever build our Zeal on the sure foundation of a distinct
knowledge: and rather stand in doubt and suspense touching things unknown;
Melius est dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incer^is. August. de Trin.
li. 8. Cap. 5.
then contentiously bicker for things uncertain, or beyond our Ken.

Sect. 2. Showing the other ground of Zeal, a lawful Calling.
Sect. 2. The other Ground of Zeal no less necessary, is a Lawful Calling.
If Inferior Magistrates may not execute any part of Justice without Authority
derived from Superior Power: how much does it concern Christians to attend
upon God for a Calling and Commission to warrant their proceedings?

Once have a Calling, and spare for no Zeal which that Calling will admit. It
is not for Saul himself, but for Samuel to offer Sacrifice. It is not for
every Person to mount the Magistrates Chair, or the Prophets Pulpit, but for
such as are called of God, as Moses Exodus 3.10.
to the one, and Heb. 5 4
Aaron to the other.

How often have the Lords Messengers powered out bitter complaints and heavy
woes against such as run before they were sent? Did they only touch such as
in those times usurped the Prophetical Office, as their Successors the
Anabaptists do now? Does not the Gospel also confine men to their proper
stations, which they may not go from, or beyond?

It is true, that in times of general Eclipses, and corruption of Gods Word and
Worship, Elisha have been from the Plowe, 1 Kin. 19.19
and Amos from the Heard, Amos 7.14, 15. Hooker, in his Preface to his Eccl.
Polity.
advanced to the function of Prophets. Calvin left the Profession of Civil Law
in France, to profess Divinity at Geneua, forsaken of her Bishop, and
impatient of longer bondage in Popery.

But where the Word and Worship is truly taught by able Professors, and when a
man is set and settled in a lawful Calling already, and not forced out of it;
then to suppose that Zeal for God moves him to abandon his former function,
and to become a Preacher, (unless he be unable or unfit for his former
Calling, and extraordinarily fitted for the function he would now embrace,) is
to suppose without ground, and against that Rule, 1 Cor. 7.23.
Let every man abide in the same Calling wherein he was called. And again,
Ibid. ver. 24.
Let every man wherein he is called therein abide with God.

If God in his Providence have set a man in a Calling of use, fitted him for
it, and given him comfortable employment in it; abide in it he must, though he
imagine he could be more useful in another course, or else he abides not with
God. Leave that, and he leaves God. Go beyond that, and he goes without God.
His utmost tether, is, 1 These. 4.11
Study to be quiet, and meddle with your own business. Every one must be a
Labourer 2 These. 3.11
no Loyterer, no Wanderer; a Workman no idle Person; watchful in his own
charge, 1 Pet 4.15. (...).
no Bishop in another man's Diocese.

It is not for every man to punish or magisterially reprove sin in all that
commit it. No man could have better cause to draw sword, then Peter for Christ,
if our Lord had given him as good a calling, as the Jews did, occasion: but
both not co^curring, his zeal proved but rashness, Mat. 26.
and incurred his reproof whose cause he defended.

David would not fall upon sinners, nor be speaking of good things in
companies known to be desperately wicked; accounting it a duty to keep his
mouth close shut whiles the wicked were before him: Psalm. 39.1, 2, 3.
and says of himself, I was dumb with silence, I held my peace even from
good, and my sorrow was stirred, my heart was hot within me, while I was
museing, the fire burned. Here was zeal, but no speech. And when he did
speak, it was not to them, but to God; and that no doubt in such a tone as
they descerned not: for otherwise it had been as good to have spoken unto them,
as in their hearing.

If any doubt whether David did well, they may be resolved by comparing this
action to the rules of Solomon and Christ: the one counselling not to rebuke a
scorner: the other aduising not to cast Pearls before swine, least they turn
again, and all to rend you.

It is then a clear case that a Christian is not bound to reprove, or
discourse of Religion to known or suspected Scoffers. If he testify in secret
unto his God, his dislike of such Varlets, avoid needless society, and
unnecessary Commerce with them, and in his soul secretly mourn for their
dishonoring of God; he has done his duty.

To lead the Reader in circuit to the particular bounds of each man's calling
were too long a Walk, and it would tire us both. Breefly therefore, it may
suffice for the present, to know that every man's Zeal must be principally
spent within his own proper and distinct charge.

Were it equal that a Justice of Peace should be as busy and peremptory in
execution of his Office in another County, as where he is Authorized by
Commission, and when he is within his own Division? Can it be requisite that
a Christian should be as zealous beyond his Charge, as in his special
precincts? In no wise.

David in his own house will be peremptory in driueing from him all that be
wicked. Psalm. 101.
But when he is abroad and meets with company that like him not, his Zeal will
show it self not so much in thundering on them, as leaving of them. Psalm. 26.


Howbeit as a Justice seeing disorders though out of his reach, may friendly
advise, direct, and mildly admonish the disordered; so may a Private man, his
brother offending, although he have no particular charge of him. In
performance whereof a man's age, place, and esteem is a great advantage, or
prejudice.

Young men, and such as are not of eminent respect must be more sparing, as
Elihu was till his Elders had spoken. That will not be well taken from them,
which would be received with thanks from some other. Herein every man's
wisdom must foresee what is fit, before he adventure on that thanklesse
office which by his place and calling he is not tied unto

And this in proportion must be the Ministers Line. In his own Cure he must be
resolute; otherwise, more sparing in particulars. In another man's station he
must do what he may; in his own, what is needful, whether he be old or
young, whether they will hear, Ezekiel. 2.5.
or whether they will forbear.

The want of a Commission the Devil will soon espy, and make contemptible
what was well meant, for want of Authority to countenance the action. Act. 19.
The Sons of Sceua seemed to undertake a charitable work in casting out
Devils in the name of Jesus: but the Devils were not such fools as not to
discern their want of Commission, and therefore leapt upon them and overcame
them, and prevailed against them, Ibid. ver. 16
so that they fled away naked and wounded.

The former alleged example of Vzzah, but stepping out of his rank to stay up
the tottering Arc by touching the body of it, which he ought not to have
done, should make men tremble to exceed their Callings though in Zeal for
God, since what they therein may account devotion, he may condemn for rash
presumption.

Such fires then as cannot be kept within their own Chimnies, but like
sparks of green wood will be continually flying out upon all that stand
near them, and like squibbs run sputtering without difference or order til
they be quenched or spent, are but wildfires, that sometimes do hurt, but
never do good.

If men know not their bounds, their Zeal will be best employed in learning
them, and waiting till they have a Calling from God, who will then employ them
when they are fit for employment.

A Soldier out of rank, the more he bussles and lays about him, the more he
disordereth the whole Army, and exposes it to greater danger; so does a Zelot,
out of his Calling. He ever fails in discharge of his own duty, that
intrudeth upon another man's Calling.

Saul while he seemed very devout in offering sacrifice, therein being out of
his calling offended, and neglected his own, in sparing of Agag, manifesting
in both so much rebellion as was worse then Witchcraft* and so much
stubbornness as was in Gods account whose service he prepretended, 1 Samuel
15.23.
as bad as Idolatry.

Nor is this all. He that adventures beyond his Calling, ever exceedes the
proportion of the cause he medleth with, as Simeon and Leui who destroyed a
whole City Genesis 34.27.
for one man's offense, and that after terms of satisfaction were both
profer'd, and accepted.

The Apostle charge that no man suffer as a busy body in other men's matters.
1 Pet. 4.
They therefore that lash out beyond their Callings, do often suffer, but never
have comfort in suffering; because they suffer for that they should have let
alone; and so they bring themselves to shame; and Zeal, to reproach.

CHAP. V. Of the Ends of Zeal.
THE End, in intention, The ends of Zeal are 1. Principal, or 2. less
Principal.
ever precedeth a Wise man's Action. A true zealous man never kindles a fire
till his ends be resolved upon.

Zeal has Two maine ends at which it aymeth. The One, Principal, and that is
the advancement of the Glory of God. The Other, Secondary, and that is,
Reformation of what is a miss.

Sect. 1. Sect. 1. Showing the Prinpall end.
The maine and and top End of Zeal is the advancement of Gods Glory. At this
every true zealot must truly and sincerely Leuel, else, let his knowledge be
never so exact, his Calling never so warrantable, his Zeal cannot be
justifiable.

Moses commanded those that were on the Lords side against Aarons Calfe, to
slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, Exodus 32.27.
and every man his neighbor. But mark: he first charged them to go about
this bloody service for the Glory of God, which was then laid in the dust by
Idolatry. For Moses had said; Ver. 29.
consecrate your selves to day to the Lord, even every man upon his son, and
upon his brother, that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.

He therefore that in that slaughter slew his own Father in Zeal for God,
offended not; because in that case Father and mother must be hated. Whereas on
the contrary, he that put to the sword his very enemy, upon this occasion
taking revenge on him, under color of execution of Justice for God, was a
murderer.

It was not the affection it self that Saint Paul condemned in those seducing
Zelots among the Galathians, but their sinister ends. Gal. 4.
They zealously affect you, but not well. That is, their ends be corrupt. And
the same Apostle has set down, 1 Cor. 10.
elsewhere, this End, to which all our Actions must directly point as the
needle to the Pole: Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

The heart of man is deceitful above all things, 7. Marks to know that Zeal
which arms at the glory of God.
sometimes persuading him that he aims at this end, when indeed he does not,
other times putting him into needless fears that he shoots wide, when yet
his aim is well enough taken. It will be therefore needful to insert some
Rules and marks whereby every man may be able to know whether he steereth his
course to land his Zeal at the Port of Gods Glory.

The first Rule is this; True Zeal is entire and universal. 1 Rule. Zeal is
universal
It makes a man as careful to approve the inside to God, as the outside to
men. It prouokes to a conscionable obedience in all things, as well as in that
particular we seem sometimes to be so zealous in.

Holy David by this Rule, was a sound Zealot indeed. He often burned in spirit
when he suppressed the flame from the view of man. God only discerned the vent
he gave it. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace even from good, and my
sorrow was stirred. My heart was hot within me; while I was musing the fire
burned. Then spoke I with my tongue, Lord make me to know mine end, etc. His
heart was first on fire before the flame was in his tongue* and when he opened
the tunnel, it did, after the nature of fire, ascend, and showed it self first
unto God. This Zeal of his did not make him fiery only in a point or two: for
he says of himself; Psalm. 119 128.
I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every
false way.

On the other side we may see the Zeal of the Pharisees discovered for
counterfeit. They took great pains to set out a glorious outside and a
painted face of Profession: but within were no better then painted Sepulchers,
or the Sumpters of See Speeds Chron.
Cardinal Wolsey.

If you look upon their outward carriage, it is with as much austerity and
rigor as may be. Behold their very pots and platters; Math. 23.
you shall see them bright without: but look not within, least the filthiness
annoy you, they being filled to the brim with extortion and excess. Outwardly
they appear righteous unto men, but within they are full of hypocrisy and
iniquity.

To this must be added, that even in their outward Actions their Zeal is not
universal. They are more careful for Mint, and Annis, and Cummin, then for
the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faith. For these
haultings, our Savior brands them with the Hypocrites mark, over and over,
three times together. Hypocrites in grain.

If then a Minister set himself in great heat against some sins and not against
all: The Trial.
If he press many duties on his flock and perform few or none himself;
denounce terrors with a thundering tone, but not comfort the broken spirit;
inueigh against Conformers on the one side, or Puritans on the other, and yet
live like an Atheist: let his pretense be what it will, his End is not Gods
glory, for then his Zeal would be Universal.

I do not say that he should at the same time do all things at once. There is a
time to lance and cut, as well as to bind up and heal. All Texts afford not
al points, al sorts of application: All Anditories require them not. But I
speak this only to this end that a constant zealous temper must be showed in
performance of every particular duty throughout so often as opportunity and
occasion are offered; and that as well in life, as in Preaching or any other
Ministerial Service. If he be not thus proportionable in all, he is not truly
zealous in any.

So for a Magistrate to be very sharp against some outrages committed by mean
and contemptible persons, but letting alone such as offend as highly in other
kinds, and perhaps in the same kinds too, if they be persons of Quality, or
otherwise can make him by friends. To be hot against strangers, but cold
enough in punishing such as are under his own roof: to seem zealous for God
and the King only to prosecute with more violence, such as they bear a secret
grudge unto: to boast of impartialitie, and yet give no countenance to
Religious men; but rather for this very cause, that they labor to live
strictly, in the sense of the Apostle, Ephe. 5.15.
(although they be every way conformable to the Laws of God, the Church, and
Commonwealth) to have a preiudicate opinion of them, and a secret
heart-burning against them: this is not zeal, but furious passion, blazing
only that way which the wind drives it, and flaming as the base affectation of
windy popularitie which God abhors, shall happen to blow it up.

Iehu was so sick of this disease, that he was not ashamed to be his own
Herald to proclaim it under the name of zeal; fathering his bastard fury
upon zeal for the 2. King. 10.16.
Lord, when none but the base ambition of his own false heart begat it. He
must needs call Iehonadab to witness his zeal, when Gods Spirit discovered it
to be but an hypocritical ladder to ascend the Throne.

Could that be zeal to grub up Ahabs stock by the roots for his sin against
God, that could yet suffer those monuments of Idolatry in Dan and Bethel to
remain as quiet, as much esteemed, as much adored, as ever before in Ahabs
life, and that by Iehu himself?

How is it that the Lord complains; Iehu took no heed to walk in the Law of
the Lord God of Israel with all his heart, Ibid. ver. 31
etc? Here is evidence enough to prove his zeal to be counterfeit, and to give
all men notice how little the Lord cares for such flashes of lightning in stead
of a solid fire of heavenly zeal.

Such also who being in inferior offices, take occasion then to cry quit with
some that heretofore did offend them; and present a few poor snakes, let^ing
more escape unobserved that deserve punishment more; cannot so bleare the eyes
of the world, as to be taken for zealous. They will be discovered by the most
blincking drunkards to be malicious reuengers of their own private passions,
and that it is not conscience of an Oath, but other respects that make them so
busy.

Finally, by this all civil Professors and formal hypocr^tes may find
themselves empty of zeal for Gods glory, in the best actions they perform.
What shall the zealous fastings Isai. 58.3.4.
, and sacrifices Cap. 66.3.
of hollow hearted Christians, who want zeal to kindle them, gain at Gods
hand but reproof and loathing?

That is not zeal that brings men to Church on the Lords day, and yet
suffers them to live like Devils all the week after; that will make a man
pray in the Church, or in his family in the morning, and yet never put him in
mind (to any purpose) of God all the day after, unless to blaspheme his
terrible Name: that will make men seem devout in the duties of the first
Table, and yet suffer them to be very deceitful, covetous, and corrupt in
their dealings with men: that will carry them with violence against an oath,
but not against iugling and lying for their own advantage.

2. Rule, zeal is moved by sin, not by private injuries or profits.
2. True zeal is set on work by the consideration of sin against God, and
not by injuries or profits of our own. Zealous Lot, doubtless, suffered much,
and long under the unclean, unnatural, barbarous Sodomites. Yet we hear of
no fretting or impatience at their vnneighborly dealing. Nay when he was in
peril of his life, and they ready to offer violence unto him, and to pull his
house down about his ears: he answered with mildness and prayers; I pray you
brethren do not so Genesis 19.7.
wickedly.

Yet the dishonours of God he took deeply to heart, and feared not to declare
how much he was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked. For that
righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with their unlawful 2. Pet. 2.7.8
deeds. He that could contemn all injuries done to himself, could not digest
any that was done to his God.

When Moses was personally abused in a high degree, not only by the skumme of
the Congregation, but by his own Brother and Number. 12.
Sister; he was not stirred a whit. The holy Ghost notes of him, even at that
very time, that he was very meek above all the men that were upon the face of
the Ibid. ver. 3.
earth. Howbeit when God was abused, he could then send forth great flames of
sire. Witness his zeal in the matter of the Exodus 32.19
Calfe; and after, in the business of Corah Number. 16.15
. He that before, could neglect his honor to retain his meekness; now
forgets his meekness to show his zeal for the Lord.

Let it not seem tedious that I add the example of our Lord himself. Never
any suffered so many, and such contradictions of Heb. 12.3.
sinners: yet at private wrongs he was never troubled. When he was reviled, he
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened 1. Pet. 2.23.
not. Nay, not so much as opened his Isai. 53.7.
mouth. Nevertheless, when he saw the Temple profaned, Gods worship polluted,
whereby the honor of God was laid in the dust; so great a fire was kindled
within him, that the flame was ready to wast and eat himself Ioh. 2.17.
up.

And as zeal is not stirred with the apprehension of injuries offered; no more
is it blown up by the bellows of profit expected. He, that was so zealous
that no man was in labors so abundant, under stripes so much, in prisons so
frequent, in deaths so often, in iourneyes so painful, in perils of waters,
of robbers, by his own Country men, by the heathens, in the City, in the
wilderness, in the sea, among false brethren, etc. in zeal so much exceeding
others, that when they were but offended, he burned 2 Cor. 11.
: not counting his life dear unto himself, so that he might finish his course
with joy, and the Ministry which he had received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the grace of Acts 20.24
God; he, I say, that adventured and endured so much, undertook none of all
this for his private advantage.

To the Ephesians he appealed, that he had coueted none of their silver, or
gold, or apparel; but they well knew his own hands had ministered to his
necessities, and to them that were with Ibid. ver. 33.34.
him.

To the Corinthians he protests, that he sought not his own profit, but the
profit of many that they might be 1. Cor. 10.33.
saved. And when he was so jealous over them with godly 2. Cor. 11.2
jealousy, it was not for fear he should loose their exhibition: for he
preached unto them the Gospel of God Ibid. ver 7.
freely. He sought not theirs but 2. Cor. 12.14.
them. All this did abundantly demonstrate his zeal to aim at the glory of
God.

Now then, Trial.
if men can see God dishonored, and their brethren abused, yet lie still and
be as quiet as Lambs, till some personal wrongs arouze and enrage them, and
then play the Bedlams, and Tigers under a pretense of zeal; this is certainly
no fire from heaven, nor kindled for God.

The heat of Simeon and Leui was great for the defiling of Dinah their Gen
34.7.
Sister: but because it was not the consideration of sin against God, but the
apprehension of an indignity put upon themselves; it was justly censured and
accursed by their own father, for no better then cruel Genesis 49.7.
wrath; though Sheche^ could not be excused.

If men make zeal a means to discharge their gaul against such as are
faithful in the Land, and to be as Gunshot to revenge their private quarrels
upon the Servants of Christ, making a man a transgressor for a word, picking
quarrels for trifles, and taking malicious advantage from the omission of of
some small thing (for which they care as little as for the dust of their feet,
yet) to make this for want of a better, the cudgel to give him whom they hate
the Bastinado: If all this I say, or any of this may pass for zeal toward
God; then, bloody Doeg (glad of an opportunity to murder the Priests of the
Lord,) 1. Sam. 22.
and the Butcherly Jews who persecuted to death the Lord of life, may be
accounted good Zealots. Yea the Devil himself would put in for a room among
Zealots, as high as the best of them all.

So also if men shall make zeal their drudging Ass to bring in gain to
themselves; make devotion the cummin to towle customers to their shops; and
profession, a painted cloth to cozen them with a false light when they have
gotten them thither; and in all these pretend zeal, and the glory of God; they
exceedingly gull and deceive themselves.

This is, with Ziba, to accuse Mephihesh^th to Saul, in hope of his estate. It
is like Iezabels Fast, for Naboths Vineyard; like Judas his Sermon, for the
cramming of his bag; like Felix his hearing, in hope of money from Paul; like
Demetrius his practice, to keep up his trade; like the zeal of Iehu, to
obtain the kingdom; and like the preaching of the Devil, to persuade our
Savior to swallow his bait.

3. 3. Rule. zeal makes no difference between friends and foes.
True zeal is as violent against sin in the dearest friend, as in the greatest
enemy. It sets against every one that sets against God. It takes them for
enemies that are enemies to God, be they father, brothers, sisters, or any
others never so Ambros in Psalm 119. zelu^ Dei qui habent, omnes sibi inimicos
putant, qui sunt hosts Dei, quamuis patrem, fratres, sorores, etc.
near. Do not I hate them, says a zealous spark, that hate thee, and am not
I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect
hatred: I count them mine Psalm. 139.21.22.
enemies.

In this case and sense our Savior speaks, If any man come to me, and hate
not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters,
yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Luke 14.26
disciple. It was Leui his commendation in revenge of Gods Exodus 32.27, 28.
quarrel, to know neither father nor mother, brethren nor children, so as to
pity or spare when God bad kill Deuteronomy 33.9.
them.

Memorable also is that of good King Asa, who for Idolatry deposed his own
mother, M^acha his mother, Even her, says the text, he removed from being
Queen, because she had made an Idol That obscene Idol Priapus.
in a grove, 1 Kings 15 13.
afterward, he cut down her Idol, and stamped it and burnt it at the brook 2 Chronicles. 15.16.
Kidron, that the very place of execution might further express his heat and
hatred against that sin, and disgrace that fact of his mother the more.

And left any should think this a work of superirrogation, let him observe
that iniunction in the case of false Zach 13.3.
Prophecy; When any shall prophecy (falsely or without commission) then his
father and mother that begat him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live: for
thou speak lies in the name of the Lord: and his father and mother that
begat him: (mark how he purposely repeates the relation) shall thrust him
through when he prophecieth. No combination so near must smoother the zeal we
ought to express against such as offend against God in so high a degree.

When a man therefore is like a Lion awaked out of sleep, Trial.
if his enemy do but look or set a foot awry, and seem in his passion
deeply affected with the wrong offered to God; and with those hypocritical
Malice-Pits, cry, away with such a fellow from the earth: But on the other
side, no such taking on when a friend does as bad, or worse by tearing Gods
name in his mouth, profaning the Lords day, keeping of whores, delighting in
drunkenness, and taking a pride in boasting of his filthiness, etc. This is
but frantic passion in the one, and partial affection in the other; both
differing as far from zeal, as kitchen fire from the Celestial. Love is
blind, they say: It appears in nothing so much as in this. It cannot see any
faults in our special friends, till God find them out, and lead us unto them
by the marks of his vengeance.

How many parents and husbands now adays think every thing done or spoken by
wives, or children, to be pretty, and witty; which they condemn in others,
as bold and scurrilous; and others, in them? David had cause to rue this, in
Adoniah, and let all doting parents that can be so indulgent to children,
(whiles they are cursed enough and too much to their servants) remember what
bitter fruits both David and Ely reapt of their cockering folly.

How many are there that can term that, thrift in a friend, which they would
call, covetousness in an enemy; call that, handsomnesse in one they affect,
which they would condemn for pride in another, esteem that, salt, and
smartnesse, of wit in him whom they love, which they would call railing in him
they hate; call that but a trick of youth in their companions, which they
would make another stand in a white sheet for?

Let all such be admonished, that true zeal, aiming at Gods glory, as it
loves goodness in an enemy as well as a friend; so it hates vice as much in
a friend as in an enemy. It affects every one, as they affect God. It cannot
but love piety in a professed enemy. It cannot but set fire on sin in the
bosom of the dearest friend. It offers violence to the heart, as powder to the
bullet, that the heart cannot but offer violence to sin where ever it be
found.

4. 4. Rule, zeal equally set upon rich and poor.
True zeal opposes sin in the rich, as well as the poor, in great persons
as well as in mean. Celestial fire catches in the highest turrets, rather
then in the lowest houels: melts the hardest mettle, rather then more
yielding matter: zeal tells them their own, that if they be so diuellishly
minded, may be able to do us a mischief; as well as it is plain with such,
as we are sure can do us no harm. Fire will burn the houses of rich men, as
well as of beggars. Zeal, so long as it keeps within those bounds which God
has set down, fears not the proudest He that can swell in his passions as
big as Beh^moth who thinks to drink up Job 40.23.
Jordan at a draught, or that can cast fire out of his mouth, and towers of
smoke at his nostrels enough to darken the heavens, as fast as Job 41.19.
Leuiathan himself.

If greatness attempt to ring Cour-feu to zeal at midday, and to cover it
with the ashes of thunder, when God would have it to flame; Zeal will not so
be kept in, but rather fly in their faces that seek to suppress it.
Ieroboams presence shall not hinder the man of God from prophesying against his
Idolatrous Alter, and of the ruins of those that offered 1 King. 13.2
thereon.

Let Ahab resolve to chop Eliah into gobbets, the Prophet will not be afraid to
look him in the face, and roundly to tell him, that He is the troubler of 1
Kin. 18.
Israel. Micaiah will not baulke him a whit; though he know too well the hatred
of the Tyrant, and be sure to kiss the iayle for his 1. Kin. 22.
labor.

The Nobles of Judah shall not escape Nehemiahs check, no more then the rest
that trod in the steps of their godless example in the breach of the Neh.
13.17.
Sabbath. What cared the three children for great Nebuchadnezzers wrath,
burning 7. times hotter then his seauen-fold hot fiery Dan. 3.
furnace.

Proud Agag shall speed no better in a Samuels hands, then the basest 1. Sam.
15 33.
Amalakite. The great Jewish Sanedrim shall not go without reproof of Peter
and John, The Sanedrim was their great Iudiciarie Council, consisting of 72.
persons.
if they shall forbid them the service of Acts 4.19.20.
God.

And why not? Is the great God of heaven and earth, whose service zeal
undertakes, a respecter of Persons? If great men offend, must they not know
that there is a greater then they, who will trample on the necks of Kings that
dare trample on his word? Are not they worthy of so many deaths over and Greg.
Mag. lib. 3. Past^. 1 admon. 5. Scire etenim praelau debent, quia si p^ru^^s^
^nquam perpetrant, tot mo^tibus digni sunt, quot a^ su^ ditos ^uo^ p rditio^is
e^e^pla transmitiunt.
over, as they give lewd examples to subjects that are more apt to imitate the
evils of bad Princes, then the virtues of good?

It is not a more thanklesse then perilous task to perform: but the danger
of this is nothing to that of letting it alone. To do it may offend men that
shall die; but to omit it, when God calls us to it, is to run upon the rocks
of his displeasure, who is Lord both of us and them, and can cast both into
hell. Better suffer on earth for doing our duty, then fry in hell for fearing
the faces of men.

Trial.
If then our courage go no higher, then the beating of curres, not daring to
look a Lion in the face: If our zeal do love to run upon the ground, and
dares not fasten upon the high places of sin: if we set our foot upon silly
worms, that if they turn again can do us no hurt; but are afraid so much as
to touch the hole of the Aspe; and to put our hand on the cockatrice den; this
is as far from zeal for the glory of God, as cowardice from the noblest
valor. None so tyrannical over inferiors as the basest Cowards. True valor
counts nothing so base, as meddling with such as are not very well able, if they
list, to resist.

5. True zeal not beaten down, but more inflamed by difficulties. 5 Rule.
Zeal is inflamed by difficulties.
It deuoureth the briars and thorns, prick they never so sharply. It kindles
in the thickets of the forest, be they never so green and sappie to quench
it. It will not only burn when it has authority to countenance it, but
blazeth aloft when greatness it self seeks to bucket it out.

We may see it in Nehemiah counseled by Shemaiah to leave work and take
Sanctuary for fear of Sanballet conspiring to surprise and slay him in the
night. Should such a man, as I, flee? and who is there that being, as I am,
would go into the Temple to save his life? Neh. 6.11.
I will not go in, says that burning Lamp.

As fire leapeth from one house to another, burning the air as it goes; so
Zeal, from one duty to another, notwithstanding all oppositions; and it
causes a Christian to be among difficulties, as a man made of fire, walking in
stubble.

Much puddle water may be cast upon it, but fire from heaven not be so
quenched. Yea as water causes the fire in the forge to flame the higher; so
difficulties increase the feruor of Zeal.

Paul being dissuaded from going to Jerusalem, because of the dangers waiting
him there, grew into a passion, which made him more hot on the journey, not
without anger at them who out of the heat of their entire affection desired to
Act. 21.13.
preserve him in peace.

Luther fears not his Enemies at Worms, though he have timely intelligence
of their conspiracy to cut him off. The news rather animates then abates his
resolution, and thither he will, though he were sure to meet with as many
Devils in that place, as there are tyles on the houses.

Yea in very Horses that have mettle, we may discern most courage to the
Battle, when the Instruments of War sound loudest in the enemies Camp. Let
difficulties daunt Fools that never expect them, nor know how to break
through them. A true zealot has fireballes enough to fire the strongest Fort
of the Enemy. He knows the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and there is
no taking of it, but by force. Nothing befalls him which he looked not for.

Seneca's enemies could not faster learn to rail; then he, to contemn it.
Will the Christian Zealot then be to seek, how to keep off the boyish
squibbs of scorn and disgrace? Nay; if any man will hurt Gods faithful
witnesses that vex those that dwell on the earth, they have fire enough in
their mouths to devour Reu. 11.5.
them. Nay; Antichrist himself with all his forces and Armies cannot stand
before them: for Zeal in them is that Reu. 20.9.
fire (if Saint Augustine mistake De ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. cap. 12. per totum.
not,) that came down from heaven and consumed them all that compassed the
Camp of the Saints above, and the beloved City.

Such Zeal then as goes out by every drop of water cast on it by a flouting
Sanballat, or a gybeing Tobiah; and by every glimmering Sunshine of
persecution arising: such as make a great blaze when prosperity, credit, peace,
and preferment are bellows to blow it: but are so carried about as hay in a
whirlwind with the blast of the Time, that they will be ready to fire that
which before they maintained, if the wind turn never so little about; and
through fears or hopes will be of any Religion and temper, that the strongest
Faction imbraceth; resolving to go no further then a fair wind and weather
and a calm tide will carry them; and, and if any storm arise presently to
make to the shore, to prevent peril of life and goods: Such Zealots I say, as
these never had any coal from the Alter to kindle their Sacrifices; they never
knew what it was to aim at the Glory of God.

If they did, they would not like sheepes-heads fall a running at the sight of
every dog that offers to put his nose over the hedge. They would not be such
cowardly cu^res, as to run in at doors, so often as they see one stoop for a
stone.

If their Zeal were true, they would make all time seruing-Monkies afraid to
play with their fires, or to come near them: and the world should soon know
that it were better to anger all the Waspes in the Country, all the Witches in
the world, all the Devils in hell, then one of these Sparks, by sin against
God.

The right Zealot dreads no weather, fears no colors: he takes Christ's Cross
on his shoulders, a faggot in his arms, and his life in his hand, and so
resolves to go through fire and water, prison and sword, or any thing else
that stands in his way unto God.

Reproaches for Christ, he lays up as his Treasures. The greatest
difficulties opposing, are not so much as unwelcome to this Herculean
Christian. Joshua will not loose Canaan for the Iebusites Tower: even the
children of Anak are but Number. 14.9.
bread for his teeth.

6. Rule. Zeal is most sharp against a man's own corruptions.
6. True Zeal Prosecutes not sin in any, so much as in our selves, we are so
well acquainted with our own corruptions, that impartial Zeal cannot find
so much cause of fury against others as our selves: nor will it allow us that
liberty which we deny Chrisost. hom. 18. in Matthew.
unto others.

When Paul was a Saul, who but he against others with neglect of himself,
binding and delivering into Prisons both men and women, for Christ, and
persecuting this way to the death. Act. 22.4.
But when Saul was a Paul, then he lays the train to his own heart, and
gives fire chiefly to the Canon planted against himself: judging himself the
greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and the least Ephesians. 3.8.
of Saints.

Zeal will make a man tie himself to as much or more strictness, then he
requires of another. Paul did not enjoin Timothy to beat down his body,
while himself drunk wine; but allowed Timothy the 1 Timothy 5.23.
wine, and took the blows 1 Cor. 9.27. (...). Trial.
himself.

If then we can be like Bedlams at other men's sins, and defend or suffer the
same, or as bad, in our selves: pull moates out of other men's eyes, and never
complain of beams, in our own: take liberty from others, and give it to our
selves: Gal. 2.4.
force others to circumcision, whiles we break the Law: Gal. 6.13.
be in a rage at that man that eats our sheep, but never take offense at the
sheep that eats up the man: Depopulators executing Laws against sheep
stealers.
let us blush to say we aim at Gods Glory be we never so hot against other
men's sins.

If the Apostle espy such fire breaking out, he will soon suppress it with
that cold water; Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou
that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a
man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Romans 2.21, 22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

Can thou lash another man's back, and not think to be lashed thy self, when
thou layest thy back open unto him, and put a whip in his hand? Either be
sure to be more righteous then Judah, or else forbear to sit in judgment on
Tamar, least she though bad enough, be the better of the two; thine own
conscience drag thee to the Bar, lift her to the Bench; and thou prove the
Felon; she, the Judge.

7. True Zeal is constant. 7. Rule. Zeal is constant.
No estate, persons, places, or time can either put it out, or abate it. True
Zeal will not only show it self in a zealous beginning either to preach or
profess the Gospel, while Ministers want Livings, and the People somewhat,
that a zealous profession may bring them in; but also when they are at the topp
of preferment, and the greatest glut of outward prosperity.

Look upon David, and you shall find him no less zealous with the Crown on
his head, then when God humbled and kept him low, by the Persecution of Saul:
no less frequent and fervent in religious duties, at Court, then any where
else. Good old Samuel, as free from Bribes and neglect of duty when he was
Primate of all Israel, as when he was but an inferior Minister at Jerusalem.

Behold Daniel a Favorite in an Idolaters Court, when all the Grandees of
Babylon had vowed and plotted his ruin for observing the Law of his God; yet
even then and there, when Daniel knew that the writing was signed which would
cost him his life, he went into his house; and his windows being open in his
chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and
prayed, Dan. 6.10.
and gau^ thanks before God, as he did before time. Yea true Zeal the higher
it is listed, the more it will flame, the brighter it shines, and the further
it will be discerned. No fire is seen so far as that of the Beacon.

If then we can be religigious Trial.
and zealous when we are young or poor; and think Zeal a cumber, when we
are grown wealthy and great: if we can be good only during the life and
government of some Iehoiadah; Kindle a great fire when a Minister comes, and
put it out in whole or in part so soon as he is gone; reprove a swearer when
he that abhorres it is present, and swear (like Devils) our selves, when he
is away: If a crammed belly will allay our heat for God; and like those cursed
Priests, we can cry, Peace; so long as men give us whereon to gnawe: Mic. 3.5.
And if some preferment can stop our mouths, and we can be content to be
silent, out of Policy to keep that, and hope to get more: If we can tune our
fidles to the Base of the Time: and just like Fiddlers, who are said to have
Psalms for Puritans and obscene Songs for Good fellows, and resolve to play
nothing but what the company call for: Be Protestants in the Morning, and
Papists at Euen-Songe: If we carry this candle in a dark Lantern so as with
the turn of a hand it may be quite shut in, if any approach to whom we would
not be known by our light, or are loath to be observed to have any such about
us; All this is but horrible Parasiticall baseness that holds a candle to the
Time; no fire, to kindle a Sacrifice for God.

The fire of the Sanctuary never went out: that, therefore, which the most have
in their Censers, is no better then that of Nadab and Abihu, who, offering
strange fire before the Lord, by a fire that went out from the Lord, Leuit.
10.1, 2.
were devoured.

Sect. 2. Sect. 2. Showing the subordinate end of Zeal, Reformation.
Thus far the Principal end of Zeal, the advancement of Gods Glory; and the
Rules to try if our Level be right. I come now to point at the other which is
subordinate, the Reformation of what is amiss.

To be on fire at disorder is a commendable temper, if our aim be as right, as
our passion is strong. It is not our heat but our end that commends the
Action.

When the God of Israel and his Worship were forsaken, and the flames of
Idolatry horribly breaking out in all parts of the Church; some bringing fire;
some, fuel; others, laying it on; and all the rest repairing thither to warm
themselves at it; unless some that could not Go, for halting between two
opinions, whether God or Baal were the better: 1 King. 18
Eliah then bestirred himself, and bestowed the fire balls of Zeal upon such
as had been Principal Actors in this disorder.

But that which justified his action, was his end, the removing of Idolatry,
and re-establishing the truth and true worship of God. This appears by his
own words unto God himself, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of
Hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down
thine Alters, 1 Kin. 19.10.
and slain thy Prophets with the sword.

When Nehemiah saw the Jews that had taken wives of Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab,
and their children speak half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak
in the Jews Language, but according to the Language of each people, (A
hodg-potch of both;) he contended with them, and cursed them, and smote
certain of them, and plucked of their hair, and made them swear by God
saying, ye shall not give your daughters to their sons, Neh. 13.23, 24, 25.
nor take their daughters for your sons or your selves.

A strong and strange heat; yet no other then Seraphicall: for Zeal was his
Line; a lawful calling, his circumference; and reformation, his Center.

Paul was not afraid sometimes to use the dreadful Axe of Excommunication, to
cut off scandalous sinners from the Visible body of Christ, for a time: but he
never durst meddle with that edge-toole, but for Reformation.

Writing to the Church of Corinth he coniured them in the name of the Lord
Jesus to deliver unto Satan the Incestuous Malefactor. He meant, by a solemn
Excommunication publicly denounced in the face of the whole Congregation: But
to what end? for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the 1 Cor. 5.5.
Lord Jesus. Thus also he handled Hymeneus and Alexander, that they might
learn 1 Timothy 1.20.
not to blaspheme.

To Parents also the Wisdom of God says, Prou.
correct thy son while there is hope. Therefore he must do it in hope of
his childs amendment; not only for preventing his own grief or shame, but
Gods dishonor, and his child's destruction. And if this be his aim, Let not his
soul spare for his crying.

Magistrates then both may and must punish; Parents, and Masters chastise
delinquents under their Charge. And a zealous punishment of sin (so he that
undertakes it, thirst not after reueng, but profitable correction) Ansel. in
Mat. 18. Non cupidus vindi^tae, sed correctionis fraternae. Alex. Hales. par.
3. q. 59. m. 5. ar. 3. Bonus magis cupitinimicum corrigi quam puniri.
is not only a needful but a pious, yea a merciful work of him to whom that
Power is committed of God.

When discipline sleeps, sin plays Rex. Aust. de verb. domini Ser. 15. Si
seueritas disciplinae dormiat, repressa disciplina saeuit impunita iniquitia.
What can be more merciful in a Chyrurgian then to Lance a tumorous soar,
or to search a festered wound to the bottom? He angers the wound to cure the
man, who would otherwise perish by sparing his Quid tam ^ium quam n^dicus
fere^s ferramentu^? plorat secan d^s and secatur. Pl^rat vren^us and vitur. Non
e^t illa crud^litas, absit vt s^tutia (...) dicatu^ Saeuit in vu^^^s vt h^mo
s^n^tur, qu^a si vuln^^ pal^^tur homo ^e^ditur. Jdem ibid.
wound.

But if they shall abuse their Authority, only to show their Masterhood, to
vent their frantique passions, and and to revenge themselves, not aiming at the
reformation of such as they punish; this is not Zeal, but tyranny and
oppression which God will never put up at their hands, but owe them a shame for
it, and at one time or other, early or late will be sure to pay them home in
their own coin.

God has often in all Ages sold his People into the hands of cruel Tyrants
whom he has used as rodds in his hand to scourge them. Yet when these
Executioners have undertaken to do execution upon them, aymeing at their own
Ends, he has ever plagued the Tormentors with greater Wrath.

Israel had few Neighbors whose hands at one time or other were not heavy upon
them but mark the Conclusion, and we shall ever find the rod cast into the
fire.

Ashur had a large Commission to make havoc of Judah. The Prophet Isaiah sets
out to life the Power which God gave the Assirian, over his people; his abuse
of that power; and the woeful Catastrophe of that Isay 10.5.6
abuse.

O Assirian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine
indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil and the prey,
and to tread them down like the mire in the streets.

Here is a Commission as firm as might be, which, no doubt, he would be
careful to execute to the utmost. But observe his aim; Howbeit he means not
so, neither does his heart think so: that is he means not to go against
Gods People in Gods strength, but his own; nor to Gods end which was to refine
them from the dross of their sin; but it is in his heart only to destroy,
and to cut off Nations not Ver. 7.
a few, to make himself the Catholic King, and the only Monarch of the World.

But behold the event; wherefore it shall come to pass that when the Lord has
performed his whole work on Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, he will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assiria, Ver. 12.
and the glory of his high Looks, etc. The Lord takes revenge upon the
revenger, and destroys the destroyer. And so let all the Churches enemies
perish, O Lord.

Yea, which is more remarkable, consider the hand of God upon furious Iehu. How
fierce he was against the house of wicked Ahab, his master, we know. How God
had a purpose to cut off every branch of Ahabs house, and to root him out as
an enemy, we cannot be ignorant; that he meant to do all this by the sword of
Iehu, whom he had anointed for this very purpose the Scripture 2. Chron. 22 7.
2. Kin 9.7.
declares.

After he had done it, the Lord commends and rewards him for it to the fourth
generation, though Iehu were otherwise a most wicked man; Because thou have
done well, and executed that which was right in mine eyes, and have done unto
the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the
fourth generation shall sit upon the throne of 2. Kin. 10.30.
Israel.

Would any man imagine there were any flaw in this piece; and that Iehu, or any
of his, should ever hear ill for this act? yet lo, above sixty years after,
even in the days of Jeroboam, his great Grandchild, and the last but one of
his race that swayed the Scepter; God calls Iehu to the bar, indites him of
murder, and vows to avenge upon Iehues house the blood of Hos. 1.4.
Iezreel: that is, as Expositors interpret, that very stock of Ahab which God
had put in his hand to pluck up by the roots: and that very house which he
was to sweep with the besome of destruction.

Why was this, but because Iehu though he did Gods work, yet he did it with a
bloody and ambitious mind, not desiring or seeking either Ahabs repentance, or
the reformation of the people, who were as gross Idolaters under Iehu, as ever
they were under Ahab? When he had the kingdom his work was at an end, save
only that he changed Iezabels Baal, for Ieroboams 2. Kin. 10.28.29.
Calves.

Thus does God turn the point of his sword in the Magistrates hand, into his
own bowels, when he directs it against others, not for God, but for himself.

And as the case stands thus with Magistrates, so, in proportion, with Parents
and Masters; they may chastise, but not for their pleasure, as fathers of the
flesh use to Heb. 12.9.
do, (and therefore shall pay dear for their Nabal-like 1. Sam 25.16.
carriage,) but they must do it, as God does it to them, for the profit of those
they Ibid. ver. 10
correct.

And that their corrections may prove (...).
instructions, they must lay aside all thoughts of revenge and furious passion;
doing it in zeal for God, and as performing his work, not their Alex. Hales,
p. 3 q. 59. m. 5. ar. 3. Aliud est dimittere rancorem qui comitatur vindictam:
aliud dimittere p^nitionem qua^ comitatur zelus iustitiae.
own: adding withal, instructions to their corrections, and prayers to all
their reproves; as Samuel, for Saul even after he had resolved to see his face
no more all the days of his 1. Sam. 15.35.
life.

Thus if they do, they shall break the hearts of their children more with one
blow, then otherwise with a thousand. Then shall men discern it to be an holy
zeal that makes them so sharp; if notwithstanding their passion of anger,
they can express so much bowels of compassion, as to teach them to mourn, and
to pray for them, when their hands are most heavy upon them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Qualification of Zeal.
IN every created being there is a Substance, and there are Accidents: among
which, the chief are, Qualities: Every thing is accounted excellent, or base,
by these. Man's Substance, and Faculties of his soul are not so much esteemed
of God, as good Qualities in those faculties: when these were lost, God
abhorred him, though the other remained.

Thus is it in Zeal: the substance I mean, Analogicall.
whereof I have showed in the Definition; the Use, in the rest. But the
Qualification which is the chief thing in it, without which zeal is worth
nothing, is yet untouched. And this task, as it is most necessary, so most
difficult; and therefore will take up more time, and require more labor then
all the rest.

Zeal is like a blade, which though it be made of never so good mettle, yet if
the workman want skill to give it a right temper, will never be good. The
Qualification of zeal is therefore our next work: The expression of zeal
must be with 1. Boldness. 2. Discretion. 3. Compassion.

and this is nothing else but the due seasoning and tempering of it with these
three things; Boldness, Discretion, and Compassion, in the manifestation of it.

Sect. 1. The first thing requisite in the manner of expressing our zeal is
Boldness, Of Boldness.
free from cowardice and lukewarmnesse. If there be fire within, there will be
boldness without. Fire will be feared, but cannot be fearful. It is never
in jest, or disposed to a lukewarm temper; but where ever it comes it
burns, unless it be quite extinguished.

Of Boldness I spoke somewhat before in the former Chapter: but there, only
upon the By, and briefly, showing what a true Zealot will do, in case of
difficulty: Here I must treat of it more largely, and show what he must do in
all cases; and the reasons why.

This courage and boldness of spirit is requisite in All, but most eminent in
Magistrates and Ministers, who being public persons have most use of zeal:
and for this cause is boldness most necessary in them. Howbeit, (the
Magistrates sword being able enough of it self to sharpen and make him as bold
as a Lion,) I will apply my self chiefly to the heartening and emboldening of
the Minister; not excluding others that exclude not themselves.

Princes when they send forth Ambassadors, intend they should deliver their
message to greatest Potentates, like Princes, not slaves, Ministers are
Ambassadors for 2 Cor. 5.20.
Christ: they therefore must take upon them all that boldness which becomes
the servants of so Great a Lord, so often as they have audience: especially
considering that he sends them not to his Superiors or Equals; but to his
Inferiors, yea to his subjects or slaves.

When God sent Ezekiel to Rebellious Judah, with a sharp message, this was
part of his instruction; Be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their
words, though briars and thorns be with thee, and thou dwell among Scorpions:
be not afraid of their words, neither be dismayed at their Ezeck. 1.6.
looks.

Impudent sinners think to outface Gods Ambassadors, sometimes by their power
and multitude, sometimes by their threats, and sometimes with their fierce and
furious looks. God arms his Prophet against all, making his face strong
against their faces, and his forehead against their foreheads; yea as an
Adamant harder then Ezekiel 3.8.9
flint.

God does not only charge his servants to be stout and bold in his service,
but also works an holy boldness in them when he sends them Greg. Mag. hom.
10. in Ezekiel. Ille enim esse veritatis defensor debet, qui quod recte sentit,
loqui nec metuit, nec erubescit.
out. He only is meet to be a Champion of Truth, that neither fears nor
blusheth to speak any thing for it, which on good ground he judges
convenient. To Erubescere malum sapientiae est; bonum, fatuitatis, idem ibid.
blush at sin is wisdom; but to be shamefac't when we are doing of good,
is the trick of a fool, and God never sent message by the hand of a fool.

When the Lord sent the Prophet Isaiah to rebuke hypocrites, the beginning of
his Commission runs thus; Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a
Isay 58.1.
trumpet.

He does not only bid him speak, but cry, cry out aloud, even with a full
throat, as the Hebrew word (...).
signifies; (And he had need of a wide throat indeed, that shall undertake
some men:) He must go boldly to work, fearing no Aperte abiecto omni timore
Gloss. Interlin.
colors. He must cry with all his might. He must not spare either himself by
not straining; or them by not reproving. He must be the shrill and loud voice
of a Trumpet, summoning them to battle with terror. He Cyril. Alex. Com. in
Isai. lib. 5. tom. 3. Non occulte nec in abscon. dito loquere aliquibus: sed
intensa and elata voce, potius vtere, and omni liberate redargue delinquentes.
must not whisper his message, or speak it in a corner; but he must deliver
it with great extension and elevation of voice, with all freedom reproouing
transgressors in public; as speaks S. Cyril.

Nor is this meant alone, says Quanquam non de sola comentione vocis loquitur,
sed vehementiam verbi and seueritatem intelligit, ac si Deus fulmina e coelo
ciacula retur. Call in hunc locum.
Calvin, of a loud and thundering tone, but of the sharpness of the matter, so
vehemently uttered, as if God himself with his mighty arm should dart
thunderbolts from heaven, to wound the hairie scalpe of all hypocrites that go
on in their iniquity.

And this latter he must do, that cannot do the former. Every man cannot speak
like thunder; but every faithful Minister must be, for the subject of his
discourse, a Boanarges to refractary sinners.

Nor lastly, is it any peculiar charge given to this Prophet Quod autem Isaiae
hic dicitur, sciamus Apostolis Episcopis omnibus ac ministris verbi esse
dictum, etc.
alone; but it reaches also to all Apostles, Bishops, and Ministers of the
word, who must cry aloud with a full throat; not coldly, but with sharpness
and severity, reproouing such as flatter themselves in their own devices; not
obscurely, and in riddles, but so plainly as all may understand: as
Oecolompadius notes upon this place.

Paul's charge to Titus is in effect no less, when he bids him rebuke with
all Tit. 2.15.
authority. It behoues a Minister to do his duty, not sluggishly and remisly,
or with any fear; but to teach, and thunder out reproves freely, when need
requires, says Theod. in hunc loc Oportet eum no ignaue ac remiss nec cum
vlla timiditate hoc facere; sed cum liberate docere and increpare vbi opus est.
Theodoret.

There are some sins quoth Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Tit. (...), etc. (...).
Chrysostom, which must be expressed, even with a kind of commanding
authority? The Adulterer, the Fornicator, the covetous Mammonist must thus be
handled. Nor does the Apostle say simply, rebuke with authority, but, with all
authority: to show that he would have Titus to exercise authority over these,
with liberty and freedom.

To Precepts of this kind, we may add a cloud of witnesses. The time would
fail me to tell of Phinehas, Eliah, Michaiah, Nehemiah, Jeremiah, and all the
servants of God of old, of whose service in this kind done upon rebellious
sinners, himself says, Hos. 6.5.
I have hewn them by the Prophets: I have slain them by the words of my mouth.

What boldness our Lord himself used toward the Pharisees and others, when
need required, the holy Evangelists plentifully show. How often did he rebuke
the Pharisees to their heads, charging them with dunsticall blindness, deep
and cursed hypocrisy; denouncing many woes against them; calling them,
hypocrites, a generation of Vipers, children of hell, and of the Devil.

Zealous Paul was never more mad in persecuting the Church from Christ, then
after his conversion, he was bold and fierce in a godly manner, against all
that would seek to turn men from Christ. Observe his carriage toward Elimas
the Sorcerer, laboring to turn Sergius Paulus, Deputy of Paphos, from the
Acts 13.
faith.

The Text notes of Paul that he was filled with the holy Ghost; Verse 9.
(meaning with zeal, even as a vessel filled with strong liquor, till it be
ready to burst again:) that he set his eyes upon him, with so much
fierceness, (as if he meant to run through him.) And then after this
lightning he adds that terrible thunder; Verse 10.
O full of all subtlety and mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy
of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the
Lord?

Nor was he thus full of the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, to declare
unto cursed Elimas his transgressions only, but even to reprove Peter
himself; withstanding him to the face, and blaming him before a great
multitude of Peter's own Disciples, when he saw and found that he walked not
uprightly according to the truth of the Gal. 2.10. Baronius withstands Paul as
stiffly, as Paul does Peter: and dares maintain that Peter was not to be
blamed. Annal. tom. 1. Anno Chri. 51 number 39. And in his Index to that Tome, it
is said of Peter, Ab omni culpa redditur immunu in contentione quam habuit cum
Paulo. Meaning in that discourse in the place before cited.
Gospel.

Indeed I confess that S. Paul did cunningly watch his time to do it, when
none of the College of Cardinals could be by to resist him. But yet for all
this, it was well for Paul that he died before Baronius lived; or else the
Cardinal would have schooled him, and taught him better manners; although it
should have been with putting the lie upon the holy Ghost himself, for being
so bold with their god Peter.

It was the resolution of an Heathen Divine; Seneca. Audebo peccanti mala sua
ostendere; vitia eius, si non excidero, inhibebe.
I will be so bold to tell an offender his faults; if I lop not his vices, I
will yet inhihite them. And shall this be thought too much for a Christian,
and a Divine too, to attempt?

If thou love the Lord Jesus with all thine heart, says devout S. Bernard Sup.
Cant. Ser. 44 Etenim si amas Dominum Iesum toto cord, nunquid si videris eius
iniurias contemptumque far vllatenus aequo animo poteru^ etc.
; can thou possibly bear the injuries and contempts put upon him with any
patience? will thou not rather, as one rapt with the spirit of revenge and
heat, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine, bestirre thy
self, and say with David; Psalm. 119.139
My zeal has consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy word.

Good David, if he espied any that were enemies to God, he would never make
dainty upon any politic respects to proclaim himself an enemy to them. Do
not I, says he, hate them, o Lord, that hate thee, Psalm. 139.
and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? Yea I hate them
with a perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.

As if he should say, says Hom. 9. in Ezekiel. Pensa quantum te diligo, qui
tuorum hostiu^ contra me excitare inimicitias non pertimesco, etc.
Gregory; Consider o Lord how much I love thee, that am not afraid for thy
sake to stir up all the emnitie of thine enemies against my self, by hating
them for hating thee. And is it now the part of a fool to do the like?

If we more seriously think on this duty, Who, or what should hinder any
servant of God from such a boldness? Good men, they will not dislike, but
praise him for it. Wicked men themselves love to see the whip cling close to
other men's backs: and can applaud, often times, that boldness which draws
blood at every stroke, so themselves be not touched.

This conuinceth the world that boldness of it self is good, and would be
relished of all, if some were not too bad. It is only men's badnesse that
makes boldness bad. Corrupt stomachs turn the best meat into ill humors.
The Cook cannot help this, but the Physician.

As for such as without cause take offense hereat, why should they be feared?
What, for their power of hurting? Nay: God will protect his servants, till they
have done their work, from all the fat bulls of Basan, be their necks never so
strong; their rage and fury, never so great. Witness his protection of Eliah
from Iezabel; of Christ, and the Apostles, from the bloody Pharisees, and so
of all his servants, till his counsel was fulfilled, and their task performed.

Till then, there is no way to let in enemies upon a man, but by his own
cowardice. If he stand it out, he is safe; if he yield, he perishes. That of
the Lord to Ier. 1.
Jeremy is a pregnant proof of this seeming Paradox.

When the Lord sent him to thunder out heavy plagues against a rebellious
people that were come to that height of impiety, that they durst oppose the
Prophets, and persecute them for telling them of their sins, and denouncing
judgments against them; God forewarnes and arms him thus.

Verse 17.
Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise and speak unto them all that I
command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.

Verse 18.
For behold I have made thee this day a defenced City, and an iron pillar and
brazen walls against the whole land, against the Kings of Judah, against the
Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, and against the people of the
land.

And they shall fight against thee, Verse 19.
but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee, says the Lord,
to deliver thee.

It is a certain truth that never fails; all the malice of men can never
stop the mouth of any servant of God, till God himself conclude him; and till
the event make it appear that God bids him leave work. Then, Act. 18.9.10.
malice may remove him, when God has discharged him; but yet then also God
rewards his service out of the very malice of his enemies. Their malice shall
be made his stirrope, by which he gets up to a greater good, then they
took away from him.

Should the Lords servant refrain from boldness, to please men? Nay, if he
once seek to please men, farewell the service of Christ. And it is a most
foolish part to go about to please them, who please not Greg. ibid. vt supra,
val. de est stultum si illis placere quaerimus, quos non placere domino scimus.
God. Nor does he pay so dear commonly for any indiscretion, as for his
affecting and study to please men, by blanching their faults, and soothing
them up.

Is a man afraid of purchasing their ill opinion and displeasure? It is indeed
an undeniable truth, that Truth begets hatred: but if we therefore refrain
reproving, because we fear the rising of men's passions and hatred to scoff,
and deride us, we seek only our selves, not God. Greg. moral. lib. 2^. Si ab
increpatione idcirco reticemus, quia contra nos insurgere derisionis odia
formidamus; non iam lucra dei, sed nostra quaerimus.
Such toys as these are no more able to move a true Zealot, then the barking
of every curre, the Lion-like Mastiue as he passes the street.

It was one special Indictment of Jerusalem, that they bent their tongues like
bows for lies; but they were not valiant for the truth; Ier. 9.3.
And well it might. Men commend boldness in a Soldier, mettle in a horse,
eagerness in dogs, spirit in any thing; and shall they themselves be
commended for Cowards? Cowards for the truth? Cowards for Gods truth? O
damnable sheepishnesse! Such dull Asses Exodus 13.13.
deserve rather to have their necks broken, then to be consecrated as holy to
the Lord.

Fearfulness, Bashfulnesse, and Luke-warmnesse the opposites to true
boldness are all most odious to God. How has he forbidden and threatened
fearfulness in his cause even in case of life it self, Luke 12.4.
and vowed to turn such white-liuer'd Christians out among dogs and Reu. 21 8.
helhounds!

Bashfulnesse is condemned as a detestable offense, for which the Savior of
the world will then be ashamed of such as are now ashamed of him, when they
expect greatest Grace and Luk 9.26.
honor from him.

And more over this, such Vespertilian Professors (in the mean time) commonly
sustain most shame on all sides: and such night-birds do more provoke others
to wonder at, and chatter against, and prey upon them. None receive more
discouragements from others, then they that are most timorous themselves. None
in more danger; none more liable to what they fear, then they who step back
and give ground to their fears.

And as for Lukewarm Gospellers let Laodicea speak for all, what entertainment
they are like to find at the hands of Christ, they are sure to be Reu 3 15.16.
spewed out of his mouth, as too loathsome a morsel for his stomach to bear.

I know that it is hard for a man truly bold not to be censured for a
peevish, cholerique, harsh, intolerable fellow scarce well in his wits. But if
this may deter him, Christ should have left work when the Pharisees thought
he stood in need of an exorcist or Diuel-Catcher, accounting him mad, and that
he spoke in his fury he knew not what; and were so confident in their mad
opinion that they thought they dealt wisely in appealing to himself; Say we
not well that thou art a Samaritane, Ioh. 8.^8.
and have a Devil.

For Good men to be called mad, and their doctrine, madness, among mad men,
is no strange thing. He that is giddy thinks every thing runs round. And they
that have changed piety for policy, God for gould, can easily give sentence
that a zealous reprouer is out of his wits; least the world conclude them
guilty of what they are as loath to be known, as they are unwilling to forgo.

It becomes Gods Servants not to think what wicked men will say, if they be
bold; as what God will say, if they be cold. Mad men's tongues are no slander.
With me it is a small matter to be judged of you, or of man's judgment; says
one that was accused of this disgraced 1 Cor. 4.3.
Grace.

To such let us answer with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.13, 14.
whether we be beside our selves it is to God: or whether we be sober, it is
for your cause: for the love of Christ constreyneth us. A true zealot is never
in his perfect temper, till mad men and fools, Omnes mali, stulti; Omnes
stulti insaniunt.
(that is, all wicked men) say of him, he is mad.

If any think sharpness naught, because it makes bad men worse: I answer,
that indeed it sometimes falls out that the Anuile-like hearts of hypocrites
and desperate sinners grow harder by the blows of reproof; so that we may
say of them in this respect, as the Lord of his people, Esaias 1.5.
why should ye be smitten any more? ye will revolt more and more. But yet in
the mean time, others are kept in awe, while these are soundly whipped before
their eyes; and the mischief of taking heart from a lewd example, prevented.

Severe executions are as much for terror to beholders, as for smart to the
Malefactors on whom they are done. And there is a necessity of thundering
against such sinners as are outragiously wicked, and aptest by their contagious
breath to infect more, 1 Timothy 5.20
that others may fear.

The fear of making a young thief, a complete rogue, deterres not the
Magistrate from sending him to the Goal: nor from whipping or burning him
before the face of the country, when he is there. And shall that which is
thought wisdom in the Magistrate, be counted madness in the Minister, when
in his way and kind he takes the same course?

Our account shall be heavy if we shall forbear to apply Causticks to a soar
that needs it, till some foolish Patient of himself call for them. And woe to
that forbearance and remissness, whereby others are tainted by the bad
examples of him whom we fear to reprove.

Touching us that are men, says Saint Austin, De Correp. and Grae. cap. vlt.
vi^e Locum.
who cannot distinguish between Elect and Reprobates, we ought to desire the
salvation of each person alike. And least any should perish, or cause others to
perish; a sharp reprehension must be applied to all offenders promiscuously,
leaving the issue to God, who can make it proprofitable to his own. And Si
enim aliquando timore non corripimus, ne aliquis inde pe reat: cur non etiam
timore non corripimus, ne aliquis inde plus pereat? Idem Ibid.
if sometimes through fear, we reprove not, lest some one become worse; why
should we not much more fear, not to reprove, least another should, by his
example, more fearfully perish?

And yet least any should think that any kind of boldness may hence be
thought warrantable, 2. Cautions touching Boldness.
I must bound this point with two limits or Cautions.

The first is this; 1. Caution.
Boldness must not spring from a spirit of ostentation and popularity to be
observed and praised by men, for a very boldman, and that they may point after
him, and say, this is he. Iehu was troubled much with this itch: 2 King. 10.16.
so also the Pharisees: they did all their works to be seen Mat. 23.5.
of men, and therefore this is all they have for their works.

The End commends or condemns our boldness. If our end be the Glory of
God, not our own praise; then, not more bold, then welcome. He that said, Let
your light so shine among men that they may see your good Mat. 5.16.
works, allows the public performance of good duties; and so to do them
that men may see them if they will: but he condemns the doing of them for this
end that they may see them Mat. 5.16. Videri ab hominibus non est nefas; sed
ideo agere vt ab hominibus videaris. August. de Ser. Dom. lib 2 cap. 16. 2.
Caution.
as the trick of an hypocritical Pharisie.

The other Caution is, that Boldness be free from distempered choler, and
raueing passion. A Bishop must not be self willed: not soon Tit. 1.7.
angry. He must not be so suddenly overcome of his passions, as to neglect
due ear of all circumstances perteyning to the success of that good action he
is laboring in.

We count those motions of the mind most safe and useful, which are disposed
at our pleasure, and not as Senec. de tra lib. 2. cap. 35.
they list. When a man is tossed like a Pinnace in a tempest by his passion, if
he perform any more, then to save himself, we may write it down for a
miracle. Such Anger ever dwells at the Sign of the Fool, and a good zealot
must refrain that Ordinary.

But, as Fiery dispositions must not mistake cholerike passions for zeal? so
on the other side, a holy and just indignation against sin must not be
censured and condemned as an unseemly passion.

Moses though a meek man could yet be angry and very wroth when Israel had
sinned. Exodus 32.19. Number. 16.15
Saint Paul, ye will think, was moved indeed, when he called the unjust
hypocritical high Priest, a painted Act. 23.3. Vide Calvin in hunc locum.
wall. Yea Christ himself was angry at the Jews, when he saw the Mar. 3.5.
hardness of their hearts. And such anger at wrong done unto God well becomes
zealous boldness either in speaking or preaching.

He that gave Titus an Item against hasty anger, does yet in the same
Chapter, not only allow, but strictly charge him to rebuke some persons Tit.
2.13.
sharply.

A man may love when he seems to be angry; as well as hate when he seems to
love. And August. de v^rb. dom. ser, 16 Vsque adeo non omnis qui irascitur
o^it; vt aliquando magis odisse conuincatur qui non irascitur. Idem. Epist. 48.
vincentio. Non omnis qui partit amicus est: nec omnis qui verberat inimicus.
so far should we be from judging anger in some men, to be hatred, that we
should rather convince them of hatred, if they should not be angry.

The Austerity of Phinehas, says a Father, Hierom. ad Ripar. aduersus
Vigilantium.
the fiery temper of Eliah the Severity of Peter against Ananias and Saphira:
the fury of Paul against Elimas, is not to be thought cruelty, but piety for
God.

When that worthy Nazianzene, pressing to moderation in disputation, had cast
some water upon the tumultuous feruor of some contentious spirits, he withal
solemnly protested, that he was never of that number Greg. Naz. Orat. de
moderat. in disp^^t. Seruand^. (...).
which account vigor of spirit and and sharpness, a fault; for as much as no
man, without this, can easily undertake any action with any great praise, or
virtue. He therefore condemned only such fiery te^pers as with the show of a
generous spirit had also temerity and imprudence the mother of impudence joined
with it.

And now because rash Passion, and holy fury are so like one another in the
face, it is a very difficult and peremptory task for any beholder to
distinguish them by that; and therefore very uncharitable it were to be hasty
in censuring such as are bold, and stout, and in some degree passionate in the
Service of God, to be choleric men, having no other show of ground to co^demn
them. In istis, quae vtrum bono an malo animo fiant scire non possumus, melius
est vt ad partem dextram nostrum animum declinemus: quia tollerabilius est nos
in hoc praefiniri, and eos qui mali sunt bonos esse credamus quam ex
const^tudine in dicandi etiam de bonis quod malum est suspicemur. Aug. Ser. de
Temp 202. Calian in Job. 32.2. conc. ^ 119. Quid primu^ nobis ex hoc loco
discendu^ est? Primum non omnem iram conde^nandam esse: Quum vide mus aliquem
irasci* and exca^descere, id non semper vitio imputandum esse; vt videas
contemptores dei qui dicant, Numquid vero sic tumu tu an^u^? Numquid sic
irascen^u^ est? nonne placida and quicta ratione agi potest? etc. vide locum.


If their outward heat proceed from any false fire, God and their own hearts
only are privy to that; and they stand or fall to their own Master. In this
case it is safest to judge nothing before the time, If we observe in such men
a constancy of temper against all sin, as well as against any, especialy in
themselves, as well as in others: it were breach of justice to deny them the
praise of true zealous men.

To conclu^e this caution, and this point. We may be angry, so we sin not.
And if our anger be only against sin, we sin not to be angry. The rule of
Gregory Greg. Mag. moral 6. In correctione vitiorum subesse debet tracundia no^
praesse, vt executionem iustitiae do minando non praeueniat, sed stimulan do
subsequatur.
in this case is excellent. In the punishment of sin, anger must not rule,
but serve; that it may not run before Justice as a furious Lord to prevent it;
but come behind as an humble Servant to excite and stir it up to a due
execution.

CHAP. VII. Of Discretion.
Sect. 2. THe second Particular wherewith Zeal must be perfectly tempered, is
Discretion, Of Discretion.
the safest Chariot for a man to ride in through the rough ways of this
dangerous world.

The praise of it.
A Grace transcendent, and more fitly styled the Sovereign of Virtues, then a
private Virtue. Discretio non tam virtus est quam moderatrix virtutumitolle
hanc and virtui vitiu^ erit. Bern. Sup Cant Ser. 24.
Take away this, and virtue will turn vice; as the best flesh without Salt
will soon putrify and stink. What we do with discretion is a virtuous
action: but indiscretion ever sends Virtue away with a scratcht face, Virtus
enim indiscreta pro vitio deputatur Isador.
and a blot.

Laws in general give bounds to actions to make them good, but Discretion
gives Laws even to good actions to make them better. Our Passions be like wild
horses; discretion, is a Minerua's bridle for her winged Pegasus, to curb and
guide them.

Without this, sorrow would turn into despair, fear into terror, love into
blindness, hope into presumption, anger into fury, mirth into madness; and
the whole houses of our souls would be nothing else but kennells of disorder
and confusion.

And as this is of use in all graces, so in Zeal especially. Calvin. in Job
32. Conc. 119. Quamuis zelus dei in nobis dominetur, possemus tamen peccare
modum excedentes, nisi Deus nos inhiberet. Prude^tia igitur and moderatio in eo
Zelo adsit oportet.
Our crasty Adversary, when our Zeal would make war upon him, has no better
stratagem then to bereave us of this little Ulysses, of whom he is more afraid
then of the Greatest Cyclops that we can employ against him.

Understand this of Discretion mingled with Zeal. Discretion and Zeal do
well, together; but ill, asunder. Zeal without discretion, is but frantic
fury. Discretion without zeal is but moathy-pollicy that eats out the heart
of all true piety. An example of the former we have in S^neon and Leui: of the
latter, in wretched Gallio, who took it to be a high point of discretion to
make light of Act. 18.14, 15.10.
Religion.

And to say truth, in their natures they are both so bad, as it is hard to say,
which of the two is the worse. Yet, (if we desire to compare two bad things
together) in event, discretion without Zeal, proves the greatest Cut-throate
to Religion.

This, carries a show of wisdom, The counterfeit of Discretion
moderat^on and an admirable temper; and sailing under these Colors, it
secretly conueyes away all life and power of Godliness out of the Land, faster
then some crasty Dutch men, our Gold and Silver.

Ahabs Chaplains were very discreet in this kind. They, seeing him a
passionate violent man apt to war and cumbustion, held it a very discreet
part to speak nothing that might distaste or cross his humor. Michaiah, they
thought, was book enough to instruct them, and teach them more wit then to vex
their Master. They easily discerned Michaiahs plainness never did good: but
ever pulled the Kings displeasure and hatred upon himself.

Of this mealy-mouthed temper was the Messenger, sent to call Michaiah to the
King. He thought he had taught him a trim piece of Wisdom, when he said
unto him 1 King. 22 13.
The words of the Prophets declare good unto the King with one mouth: Let thy
word, I pray thee, be like theirs, and speak that which is good: meaning that
which might please.

But Michaiah knew well that this self-love discretion tended to the ruin of
Ahab and his Kingdom, and therefore he earnestly protested against it, and
resolved to speak that, and that only which the Lord should command him;
Verse 14.
let the King take it as he would.

Such gentleness seems for a time to be without teeth: but in the conclusion
it will bite like a Serpent. This discreet indiscretion cost Ahab his life; and
many, their blood. Michaiahs downright counsel and indiscreet discretion
would have saved all.

Such a mess of Discretion was that also of temporizing Amaziah the Priest of
Bethel. When Amos began to Prophecy there, against the high places of Amos 7.9.
Isaak, the Sanctuaries of Israel, and the house of Jeroboam great Grandchilde
to Iehu; Amaziah accused Amos to the King of no less then high treason, and
that he had spoken such words as the Land was not able to bear them. Verse 10.


In his opinion, doubtless, it was great indiscretion in Amos to choose such a
Theme for the Court: and therefore thought he used him kindly when he gave him
this counsel; Verse 12.
O thou ^ee^, go, flee thee away into the Land of Judah, and there eat bread,
and Prophecy there, But Prophecy not any more at Bethel for it is the Kings
Chapel, Verse 13.
and it is the Kings Court.

It seems by Amaziah that Amos his fault was a great one indeed; that it was
not safe to exercise his ministry any more, nor so much as to abide within any
of the Kings Dominions.

But I pray, what was it? Why, Amos had said, Jeroboam shall die by the sword,
and Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their Land. A great
ouer-sight I promise you. What had Amos so little discretion as in the Kings
own Court to tell wicked Jeroboam what was coming upon himself and his
Kingdom, and so trouble him with a puleing Tragedy of repentance and
humiliation to prevent the mischief? Nay thrust such a mad man out at the
Gates by head and shoulders, and exile him for ever.

More discreet, in their own opinions, was Jolly Amaziah, and the rest of
Ieroboams Trencher-Chaplaines, who would have suffered this gulf to have
swallowed up both Prince and State, without giving them the least inckling of
any such danger, until it were too late to auert, or avoid it.

Such Temperate men, or rather spaniel-like Parasites are but secret Traitors,
that so they may get into the Chair of preferment, they can be content to
betray their Masters into the hands of the Devil, whose Agents they are, to
strengthen the hand of iniquity, and to lead Princes blindfold to hell. It
is a wonder, if a flatterers Sermon have no Treason in it.

This is as far from the discretion ere while commended, as the foulest vice
from the fairest virtue: as the basest pibble, from the choycest jewel. It is
separated from zeal, this is enough to disgrace it to all good men, since it
can be no other, Romans 8.7.
but the wisdom of the world which is emnitie against God.

Gravely, Ser. 23. in Cant. Virtus discretionis absque charitatis feruore
tacet: and feruor vehemens absque discretionis tempe ramento praecipitat:
ideoque laudabilis est, cui neutrum deest; qu^tenus and feruor discretionem
erigat, and discretio feruorem regat.
Bernard. Discretion without the feruor of love, lies still without action,
and vehement heat without the temper of discretion, tumbleth Phaethon
headlong. Therefore he only deserves praise that possesses both; to the end
his heat may stir up discretion; and discretion moderate heat.

But this, I confess, is a bird that sits not on every bush: it is rara auis,
as rare as a Phoenix. This is it which makes the world such a Buzzard that it
cannot know it, when it sees it, but takes all for gold that glisters; worldly
policy, for holy discretion; which differ as much, as hell and heaven.

But after all this, what is that discretion What Discretion is.
so much admired? The same in effect with that which Philosophers and Schoolmen
call Prudence. And this, 6. Ethic. c. 5
Aristotle describes to be a skill rightly to perform and manage all actions.

I cannot discern wherein Prudence and Discretion differ; unless in the
extent. For whereas two things concur to the exact performance of a good
action (viz. a good end, first intended; and an applicatiue knowledge of means
aptly conducing thereto;) Prudence does equally look at both: but Discretion
is but the (...), or that piece of Prudence which respects the means and
method of our actions, and makes us Prou. 23.19.
wise to guide our heart in the way.

The want of this cost Moses dear at the waters of Meribah, where though he
were zealous for God, yet his passion stirred up by the rebels of Israel, made
him speak unadvisedly with his Psalm. 106.32.33.
lips.

It is the wisdom of a man to understand his Prou 14.8.
way. And one of the chiefest praises of a virtuous woman was this; She opens
her mouth with Prou. 31.26.
discretion. This therefore is that which is chiefly required in zeal, to
regulate and govern that holy fire so often as it flames.

The use of discretion in zeal, which is to respect the circumstances of
Person, Place, and Time.
This Discretion is nothing else but that rule and temper which a Christian in
showing of his zeal must ever observe. It tempereth zeal; as leaven the
meal: and it rules zeal, as a plumbe line the building.

Prudence and discretion is a rule that properly has for it Object the
circumstances of Action. And the circumstances of all voluntary and deliberate
actions are usually three; Person, Place, and Time. All these Discretion
considers, and accordingly guides our zeal.

The first circumstance which Discretion directs zeal to regard, 1.
Circumstance of Persons, who are considered Morally and Ciuilly.
is that of the Persons we meddle with.

And these, Discretion looks upon with a twofold respect: the one Moral; the
other Civil.

By the first, she considers them as Good or Bad; and the bad, again, as
Private or Public offenders; and both these sorts, as they offend, e^ther of
infirmity, or resolution and malice.

By the second, she regards them as they are ranged in their several and
different Ranks: some being Public, and some Private: some above us, some
below us, and some equals: some rich, some poor; some elder, some younger: and
according to all these respects she directs zeal to handle and use them.

The first consideration of Persons is moral; 1. Of the moral consideration
of Persons.
that if they be good, zeal may wisely defend them: if they be evil, zeal
may wisely reprove and seek to reform them.

Defending the good.
Touching the defense of good men, I shall not need to speak more then that I
have spoken already in the third Chapter, where I have largely showed,
wherein, and how far, they must be maintained.

The principal piece of my Project remaining is, to show how Discretion should
manage our zeal in dealing with such as be bad; especially in the point of
reproof, for this is most useful, and most hard to be done.

In reproving a vicious Person, Reproving the bad. And herein
Discretion would teach a Zealot two things. First, to be sure that the fault
he would reprove is committed by him, to whom he directs a reproof. Secondly,
to make a difference between a Private and a Public offense.

In the first place, Be sure the fault be indeed committed 1. Be sure the fault
be committed.
before we begin to Quando it is s^is quia peccauit. Ansel. in 1. Tim. 5. Aegid
Carler. in Orat. Tria ex part corripientis debent esse, etc. prima est certa
peccati cognitio, etc.
reprove. Otherwise, as we reprove without ground, so without fruit; unless
this, that we find the arrow sticking in our own faces.

A wicked man who deserves reprofe for many things, will yet beat off all, if
he be charged with any thing unjustly. How will he fly in a man's face, and
cry out, you wrong me. And as glad of the occasion to be put out of his
Patience; with incessant clamors, how will he stop your mouth, that you shall
not possibly fasten any reproof upon him for other things, whereof he cannot
deny himself to be guilty? How will he insult and rail after he is gone? How
will he trample upon the face of all zeal and religious rebukes?

Nor will it enrage wicked men only, but vex good men also to be thus used.
When Jacob privily stole away by night from Laban; upon which occasion Labans
Idols were missing, (for Rachel had stolen them away:) Laban had some cause to
guess that Jacob was privy to, if not guilty of this horrible sacrilege (as
Laban esteemed it) because he was the contriuer of the plot, and first in the
fact of running away in so unkind and unnatural a manner.

When servants run away, we presently look up our things. If any thing be
missing, we lay it to the runawayes charge. Laban did no more in a case which
most nearely concerned him, as he foolishly thought. Jacob confident of his
innocence, allows Laban a seuerer Inquisition then would have stood with the
safety of his fairest Jewel, if she had not been more subtle then innocent.

But when through Rachels cunning, the fault objected could not be proved,
though done; what a heat Jacob was in, toward his father in Law, the story
declares. Jacob was so wroth, that he chode with Laban Genesis 31.36
himself.

I deny not, but we may upon some strong presumptions, charge a fault on him
we suspect. But then we must be sure that the party be very ingenious to
confess it, if guilty, and not to deny with a lie. If they be brazen face
sinners, or otherwise cunning, and do know or suspect that we do but suspect
them, they will make no bones to add more sins to the first; and desperately
fault in swearing, to swear out a fault; be they guilty or not.

And further, we must also then be very wary and mild, dealing by way of
question, or supposition, and compassionate grief to hear, or fear such
things by them, as we charge them with; and applying admonitions and counsels
in stead of reproves.

Let us seriously think with our selves, how we could possibly brook it from
any man living, that he should be so light of belief, as by and by to kill us
in his heart upon the hearing of every flimflam tale brought unto him by some
malicious Doeg, or backbiting Ziba.

Would it not enrage our spirits to see our good names hanged up in chains in
the places where we live, and as malefactors rotting before our eyes; when many
times the thing objected and believed, is either utterly untrue in whole, or in
part, or (though perhaps true,) insufficiently proved? That, then, which we
would not have done, let us not do.

2. Make a difference between offenses.
In the second place, Discretion requires that a difference be put between
that offense which is private, and that which is public.

Private offenses how handled.
In Private offenses the Rule is; Go, and tell thy brother his fault between
him and thee Mat. 18.15
alone. If thy brother offend; hate him not so much, as not to reprove him
Leuit. 19.17.
: but show thy self a brother in rebuking him plainly, and covering his shame.

He that forbad thee the blazing of thy brothers nakedness, did not leave to
thy choice the duty of private admonition, if thou know he has failed: He
only directed thee to the manner, and enjoined thee to do it as he bad thee.
If thou neglect it, thou art worse then he; if S. Austin Ser. 16. de verb. Dom
Si neglexeris, peior es. Jlle iniuriam fecit* and graui se ipsum vulnere
percussit, tu vulnus fratris tui contemn^^? Tu eum vides perire and negligis?
Peior es tacendo quam ille conuitiando.
can judge.

Thy brother by sinning has wounded himself, and will thou despise to put thy
hand to the cure? He perishes before thine eyes, and can thou neglect him?
If thou can; thou art more in fault by thy silence, then he by that fault
which should have opened thy mouth. Reuiling is bad, but silence is worse.

But yet remember the rule: it must be as the fault was, Secret. And as it is
done in secret, so it must be kept, without blazing after it be done. A man
were as good to reprove publicly, as publish a private reproof.

The same Father August. ibid
brings for instance the dealing of Joseph with the blessed Virgin Marie, his
espoused wife. He suspected her of uncleanness, because he saw her with child;
and yet because he only suspected her (at that time) he would not proclaim
her shame to the world, But was minded privily to put her Mat. 1.19.
away.

It is true, that Adultery by the Law of God, was death. And as true, that
Joseph did not thus favor his wife, as seeking to abuse the Law, or allow of
her supposed transgression: for the holy Ghost bears him witness, that he was
a just man.

What was it then which moved him to study so secret a course? many things: his
Love, that he would not be the first that should proclaim her shame, whom he
had prized at so dear a rate; his moderation, that he would not put her to the
utmost extremity, though she abused his love; his wisdom, that he would not
for taking revenge on her private fault, be occasion of opening the mouths of
such as would be too apt, for her sake, to disgrace Religion which they both
zealously professed.

But the chief cause (as I conceive) was, that as yet the fault was not
diuulged, nor taken notice of abroad; and if it did come afterward to public
observation, the discovery should be not from him, but from the fault it self,
which would disclose it self, though he concealed it.

The reproving or revealing of a sin, to, or before more then such as are
privy to it as Actors, patients, or abettors in it, is not only uncharitable,
but unsafe.

For, first if thou only know thy brothers fault, and yet shall seek to
rebuke him before others, thou do not so much reprove his sin as betray his
u fame. Aug. ibid. Si solus nosti, and eum vis coram alijs arguere; non es
corrector, sed proditor.


Secondly, if he have only civility of nature, and no work of grace to force
a pardon from him, this is enough to make an irreparable breach betwixt him and
thee. Vpbraiding and disclosing of secrets, are of those things for which every
friend will Ecclus. 22.22.
depart. Nothing but grace will fetch them back again.

Thirdly, often times by making a fault known, the scandal proves greater to
the delinquent party, then the wrong to thee; and sometimes greater then thy
self did mean Aegid. Carler. Orat. in Council. Basil. de punitione peccat
publ. Si culpa est leuis, and timetur ne turba grauior sequatur, non tenetur
corrigere quia peius subsequetur. Extat haec oration tom. 4. Council. vlt. Edit.
Binij.
it. Faults will run further then repentance, in the mouths of men. Every
man will take notice of the offense; but few, of his satisfaction made.

Fourthly, if the party be eminent for a zealous profession of religion, then
to proclaim his private slips and failings, would not so much stop his course
of sin, as open the mouths of drunkards, ungodly raylers and scoffers to
peale upon all careful and studious of holy life: and so Religion it self
shall bear the greatest blow.

Fifthly, and Lastly, It most usually happens, that a Person thus shamed
studies defense to impudence; Aug. ibid. Corripe inter te and ipsum solum,
intuens correctioni, parcens pudori: forte enim prae verecundia incipit
defendere peccatum suum, and quem vis correctiorem, facis petorem.
and now that he thinks himself irrecouerably wounded in his reputation (the
only bounds which keep many in) he becomes desperate. And so, he that before
was badd, by this means will be worse: Shame once found is ever lost.

Five Cases wherein faults must be discovered.
We see the Rule of Discretion touching private offenses, and the reasons on
which it is grounded. We shall do well to observe it; but with these exceptions.

practices, against either Prince or State, be they never so closely kept and
carried, must be discovered, although we be sure the revealing of it will cost
the offender his life. Better one perish then many.

That God who is so tender of the honor and safety of his anointed, that
rather then so much as a cursing or reuiling speech uttered against him, or any
in authority under him, shall escape unpunished, will cause the very birds of
the air to carry the voice, and that which has wings to tell the Eccles.
10.20.
matter; will never allow it unto men, to subjects, especially Christian
subjects, to conceal higher offenses against their Sovereign, without severe
revenge.

He that can be content to conceal a Traitor, though but under pretense of a
vow, or keeping secret a private Confession, is one of hels-Commonwealth, and
by his profession a Butcher to the Pope.

Paul's kins-man, to him, and as Paul by his kins-man to the chief Captain
Act. 23.16.17.
in the same case.

Howbeit if we can reclaim the offender by private counsel and instructions,
and be sure we have drawn him from his bloody resolution, and into charity
again; by S. Austins rule we should conceal him, because we have won him,
and prevented the mischief intended.

Otherwise we must disclose him, or be guilty of blood. He that said, Thou
shall not kill, will arraigne thee at his Bar as a murderer, if thou
endeavor not to prevent it in others to the utmost of thy power.



Eliah would never vouchsafe Iezabel (for ought we can find) a private
admonition; because he knew too well her pride and hatred against him.

It was wise Salomons observation; He that reproves a scorner gets to
himself shame: and he that rebukes a wicked man gets himself a Prou. 9.7.
In correctione frater ia requiritur ex part peccantis spes de correctione,
alias non oblig^tur qui^ tale^ corripere. Aegid. Carlerius in Orat. ante cita^a.
blot. Scorners will be sure to abuse him to his face that undertakes to
reform them: and behind his back will extremely traduce and belie him to
others, as if he had offered them some great abuse, or otherwise carried
himself ridiculously toward them.

This is all that Swine will return him that casts pearls before them.
Therefore the holy Ghosts counsel is, Not to reprove a scorn lest he hate
Verse 8.
thee. And Christ forbids to cast pearls before such a swine. Nevertheless we
shall do well to complain of his rooting, to him that is able to put a ring in
his nose.

Joseph knew well the hatred of his brethren against him, and how much they
would have scorned a reproof at his hand. Therefore, (though he omitted that
which he had wisdom enough to foresee would have been in vain, yet) when he
saw them disordered, he brought unto his father their evil Genesis 37.2.
report.

Take with thee one, or two more: And if he shall neglect to hear them, to
tell it to the Mat. 18.16.17.
Church.

In a desperate disease, when one Physician has tried his skill, we commonly
join one, or more with him: So here. He Qui admonitus secret de peccato
corrigi negligit, public arguendus est* and vulnus quod occulte sanari nescit,
manifest debeat emendari Isador.
that has been secretly admonished and neglects to reform, is to be
rebuked in public; that so that wound which could not be closed up in secret,
may be more publicly handled and healed.



None so fit to admonish the wife as the husband; therefore Eliah goes to Ahab,
not Iezabel. And though the woman were first in the 1. Tim 3 14
transgression, yet God began to reckon first with the Genesis 3.9.
man.

None so proper to chastise a child as the father; therefore God sends Samuel
unto Ely, not to his Sons. Nor is any so meet to reprove a Servant, as the
Governor of the family; and therefore Abraham repaires to Lot, Genesis 13 8.
and not to his Servants.

It is no backbiting to reveal to a man (if he be wise, religious, and
loving) the errors of his nearest and dearest friends; nor of a Servant, to his
Master; nor of children, to their father; if there be need of reformation, and
that there be either no opportunity, or else no hope of doing them so much good
by our selves, as might be done by taking this course.

These cases excepted, we may bound the taxation and shame of a private fault
within the circle of a private reproof.

I have yet one thing more to add, before I leave this point. As offenses of
these kinds must not be concealed; so the least peccadillo's, the smallest
aberrations must not be suffered without secret rebuke.

The least faults must be reproved.
It is an error in that discretion which thinks men shall do well to wink at
small faults. And it is a great fault in him that will not bear a reproof for
the smallest offense.

It is common with men to think themselves jolly fellows, if they be free
from the gross outrages of the world, which civil men cry shame on: and as
common, to think him very busy and malepert that shall tax them for such
small matters as are lesser oaths, rash speeches, wanton talk, lascivious
embraces, idleness, vanity, carelessness in frequenting Gods house so often as
they might, slacknesse in coming with the first when they come at all,
unprofitableness in hearing when they are there, and a thousand such little
bodkins that yet will kill Caesar as surely, though perhaps not so suddenly, as
the Sword or Pistol.

Men are ready to cast water in the zealots face as being in these over busy,
strict, and precise, and no way for their turn, Wisd. 2.
because he vpbraideth them with offending the law in such petty matters.
Every one almost is of Lots mind; though Sodom be burned, yet think they
Zoar may be spared, because it is a little one: And when a man follows them
with a reproof for such trifles, they are ready to say as Abner to Asahel,
turn thee aside from following me, let me and my sin alone. 2 Samuel 2.22.
Wherefore should Ismite thee to the ground?

The reasons why.
But let such men know that the Law of God admits not the least imperfection,
nor tolerates the least disobedieence, but makes the least tra^sgression of the
least Commandment, death; yea eternal death, unless upon our unfeigned
confession and repentance we sue out our Pardon.

And though a spark of fire, in a strong chimney would be contemned, yet, in
straw, no wise man would neglect it, because the matter in which it is, is so
apt to kindle: therefore we quench it in have, and are afraid of the least
delay; nor can we be quiet until it be thoroughly extinct.

Now there is no dry straw so apt to take fire from a flaming firebrand, as
our hearts are to be all in a flame with the least coal of sin that
sparkles on it. And what dangerous proceedings small beginnings have had, too
woeful experience has taught even the best of men too often to know, and
bewail.

Small sins grow great ones almost in an instant: And like Ionahs gourd, will
be able to shadow and cover them all over in a night. Such sorry weeds grow a
pace. Though no man be at his worst presently; yet on the sudden, he grows
too bad.

Nor is it so easy to beat a thief out of doors, as to keep him out of the
house; nor to defend a breach, as to maintain the City after the Enemy has
entered; nor to shake off sin, as to prevent it. Greg. Naz. in Orat. de mother.
in disput. (...).
Brute Cattle will with more difficulty be kept in their own pasture,
after they have once broken the hedge.

An easy Bull will toss the strongest dog so high that he will be in danger
to break his bones in the fall, so long as the dog is loose, and has taken
no hold; but let the dog once come within him and fasten on his lip or nose,
then (though the dog were none of the strongest) he will easily hold the
fiercest Bull that he shall not be able to stir. And a weak Christian may
with more ease keep his heart in order, then the strongest Champion with
greatest labor can recover his heart from the least disorder.

The wildest horses after some use to the stable and saddle will seem so tame,
as if they mea^t not to stir though you should not tie them or hold them. But
let them once out of your hand, and you will find work more then enough to
take, and tame them again; whereas before you let them loose, a little child
might have ledd them.

Yet this is nothing to the danger and difficulty which the best man alive
shall find in mastering his passions and affections a second time, if after
once subduing them, he shall adventure to pull the bridle off their heads to
let them fetch but a Careir or two either in their old or new pastures of sin:

Yea he shall find it an Herculean Labor, to lay hold on his heart and to
take it up from the grossest sin, if he happen but unawares to let the
reins fall out of his hand, though never so little, and he strive instantly to
catch them again, before one would think his heart could possibly feel it
self loose.

Again, motes in the eyes of a zealous Professor of piety appear as beams in
the Worlds Perspectiue glass. Men will be ready to let fly a great volly of
scoffs and bitterreuilings at a godly man's smallest frailties: Why then should
the Gallant, the swearer, the scoffer think much to be reproved himself? But
especially why should the godly man take it ill to be told of his lesser
faults?

The least slip of such a man as takes upon him to be a guide to the blind,
and a light to them which are in darkness, will open the mouths of Gods
enemies to blaspheme his Name. A vain word, a little passion, a little
covetousness, a little niggardliness, a little lightness, a little liberty
in him, will weigh heavier in the profane man's balance then his own impieties
of the largest size.

And though it be true that such as have greatest beams in their own eyes
will make the least mote, a beam in another man's; yet our Savior counsels
to Mat. 7.5.
pull out the mote, as well as the beam.

Public offenses.
Having thus declared the task which Discretion sets out unto Zeal touching
private offenses; come, now, to the handling of those that are public. To
this belong two things. An Assurance that the fault be public: A Direction
how to handle it when we know it to be such.

1. Be sure that they be such.
First, be sure the fault be public. Be not too hasty in thy decision, make
a diligent inquisition, and when it is manifest unto thee that the fault is
indeed such as it seems; then reprove, and spare not, says Chrisost. in 1 Timothy 5.20. hom. 15. (...) etc.
Chrysostom.

There are four ways by which an Offense may be made public, and so
accounted:

First, by the evidence of the fact, either when the offender is taken in the
very act, or when otherwise the fault proclaims it self after it is done,
because it cannot be hidd.

Secondly, by a common rumor and public fame raised by Persons of credit,
either out of knowledge, or some strong presumptions.

Thirdly, by the Confession, or impudent boasting of the offender himself.
Many such shameless beasts unfit and unworthy to live among men, there are,
who like the the Devil himself, Job 1.7.
glory in their shame.

Fourthly, by the entering and prosecuting of it in any public Court of
Justice.

2. How such an offense must be handled.
When a fault by any of these ways becomes public, Zeal may safely proceed
in a public manner against it, so as others who have taken notice of the
fault, and taken offense at it, may also be witnesses of the reproof, and
receive satisfaction.

This is Saint Paul's own rule to Timothy: Those that sin, 1. Tim. 5.20.
rebuke before all, that others may fear That is, those that sin before all,
rebuke before all, as Saint De verb. dom. Ser. 15. Si peccatum, publicum est
and apertum, public corripe, etc.
Austin, Chrisost. hom. 15 in 1 Timothy
Chrysostom, and others expound the place.

In what Place and form this is to be done shall be declared hereafter. Mean
while, for the thing it self, Public reproves must be directed to public
offenses for these Reasons:

First, Justice wills that sin should there receive death, where it received
life, August. de verb. de. Ser. 16. Vbi contingi^.
and gave offense. Notorious Malefactors do usually suffer in the place they
offended, that so the People wronged may ^^ceiue more ample satisfaction.

Secondly, the humiliation of the offender requires it too. He whom no man
checks for his offense, will hardly blame himself, or think he has deserved
Non enim sibi videtur peccare qua^ do a nullo corrip^tur. Idem.
it.

Thirdly, the preventing of greater and more outrageous sins. He that
reproues not open faults, opens a gapp to more desperate attempts. Chrisost.
Ibid. vt supra (...).
And he that when he may, forbids not sin, commands Senec. Trag. Qui non
vetat peccare, cum possit, iubet.
it.

Upon these grounds the Apostle charge, and even coniureth Timothy before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, to observe (among, other
things) this, without prejudice or 1 Timothy 5.11
partiality.

But it will be objected, says Ibid. vt supra.
Chrysostom, that Christ bids us to go and tell our brother between him and
our selves alone. Yea but he permits him also to be rebuked in tho Church
Idem. Ibid. (...).
too. If need require.

But is not that a greater scandal to reprove him so openly? No surely. If the
fault be public, It were a greater offense to the beholders that such a sin
should escape away without any blow at all. Indulgence to the bad, is
oppression to the Bonu nocet qu^ malis par^it. Senec. Philos. Vide ^tia Aquin.
2. 2. quest. 33. artic. 7. in corpore.
Good.

Zeal then is warranted by discretion her self to give reproves in public.
Howbeit that Zeal may make no error in a lawful thing, Discretion requires a
man to consider the dispositions of the Parties offending, whether they did
offend out of infirmity and by occasion of some sudden tentation; or rather out
of purpose and settled resolution: and accordingly to temper his Greg. moral.
lib. 25. ca. 11. Aliud est precipitatione, aliud deliberatione peccare. Sape
enim peccatum pr^cipitatione commutitur, quod tamen concilio and deliberatione
damnatur. Ex infirmitate enim plerumque solet accidere amare bonis; sed implere
non posse. Ex st^^^to v^ro peccare, est bonum nec sacere nec amare.
reproves.

If it be a sin of infirmity, the party must be handled with all compassion.
If any, says the Apostle, Gal. 6.1.
be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the
spirit of meekness, considering thy self least thou also be tempted.

The same fault may be far worse in one man then in another, by reason of their
different dispositions; Sicut nonunquam grauius est diligere qua^
perpetraretita nequius est odisse iustitiam, quam non fecisse. Greg. Ibid. vt
supra.
the one offending of weakness; the other of malice. It is therefore a point
of Justice to temper the reproof of a weak brother, with all lenity and
moderation.

He is unmeet to undertake a Cure that knows not to distinguish between the
anguish of a wound, and proud flesh growing up in it. To apply corroding Alum
or other corrosiues, when a soar has need of healing plasters, may make the
orifice bigger, and put the patient to greater torture; but cannot heal it up.

A man shall meet with some poor sinners that will whippe themselves so much,
I speak not of hypocritical popish whipping of the body.
that they need no help, unless to hold their hands, and power in oil. There
are, who will aggrauate their own failings so far, that they rather want a
staff to stay them up, then a club to beat them down. To these, a wise
Physician will administer Cordials, not strong purging medicines. Consolations,
not tart rebukes; least they should be swallowed up of sorrow, and strangled
in the bloody tears which plentifully issue from that inward wound.

Such as either out of want of judgment to discern, or bowels of mercy to
commiserate the unwilling falls of weak Christians; and that make no
difference of offenders, are like some furious Stepdame laying on a poor
child as much for falling in the dirt against his will, going in her errand,
as if he purposely should run out of the house when she forbids him, and
wilfully wallow in the mire.

Such unmerciful and unnatural Satyrs are fit for no employment, but to
whipp mad men in Bedlam: or rather they deserve to be so served themselves.
Yea many times God lets them fall into as deep a mire, as others unpitied by
them, have done before them: And then, with what measure they measured to
others, shall surely be measured to them again; yea good measure, pressed
down, and shaken together shall men give into their bosoms. Then shall they
know the equity of Iudes instruction; Jude. 22.
Of some have compassion, making a difference.

But if on the otherside it shall appear that the fault proceeds from
Obstinate offenses willingly committed how to be handled.
a deliberate purpose of one that makes a trade of sin, refractarily breaking
down and trampling upon all rules and bounds of Piety; then the rule is,
rebuke them Tit. 1.13.
sharply. Thus Peter dealt with Act. 8.20, 21, ^c.
Simon Magus; And Paul, with Elimas, and many more.

Wisely Greg. mag (...) Pa^t^cur. ^i. ^. adm^on^ 8. Aliter admonend sa^t (...)
dura co^p scit: i^tos autem plerumque ad melius exhortatio modesta compo^it:
illos melius corrigit qui inuehendo reprehendit, istos qui ex latere redarguit.
Gregory. Impudent persons must be handled in one manner; and such as are more
bashful, in another. Nothing but a severe thundering reproof will work on
those; but a modest gentle exhortation will be enough to these: He best
corrects those that makes inuectiues (he means, against their sins;) but
these, he that mildly and covertly touches them upon the By, and aloof off,
that so they may rather smell, then feel him.

Thus may a Minister use the rod, as well as the spirit of 1 Cor 1.2^. (...)
^^^^ions (...) sharp reproof^s.
meekness: always provided that in his sharpnes too Cautions be observed.

rather then of their shame.

At first we must gently warn those that are 1 These. 5.1^
unruly. Afterward, if need require, we may proceed to sharpnes according to
the power which the Lord has given us to edification and not to 2 Cor 13.10.
destruction.

To this effect, Ad Eugen. de consid. lib. 3. Qui blando verbo castigatus non
corrigitur, a^rius necess^ est vt arguatur. Cum dolor sint abscindenda quae
l^citer s^n^ri non po^si^^.
Bernard: He that is not reformed with a mild reproof, must be shaken up more
roughly. He whose wounds will not with gentle lenitiues be healed, must
endure the sharp Lance, and causticks with more pain and torture.

Greg. Mag. moral. lib. 23. cap. 20. Charitatis Zelus mala que corrigere non
valet, increpare non desinat.
Private rebukes and admonitions may be forborne, when they produce not their
expected fruit. A Scorner must not always look to be used to this friendly
course.

If this Wild Ass so long used to the wilderness of Sin shall in scorn of
him that comes to take him, snuff up the wind at his pleasure, disdaining to
be turned out of his way and course: All they that seek him will not weary
themselves; in his month they shall find Ier. 2.24.
him.

But in discharge of public duty, no obstinacy must tire us out In this we
must go on, whether men reform or not. Son of man, says the Lord to
Ezekiel, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto
them. Ezekiel. 3 4.
But will they hear them? Noe. The house of Israel will not harken unto thee,
for they will not harken unto me. Ibid. ver. 7.
The Prophet must preach, whether the people will hear, or whether they will
forbear. Yea though the Lord tell him before hand that they will not hear.

We must not says Saint Hierome Hieron. in Ezekiel. Non est cessandum, licet
mali sunt quibus loquimur, quia, secundum Apostolum oportu^ importune verbum
praedicem^^. Potesi enim fieri vt and durus corrigatur ad molit^^m.
give over preaching though they be wicked to whom we preach; but according to
that of the Apostle we should preach the word in season and out of season. It
may so fall out at length that the hardiest sinner may be mollified. In the
morning sow thy seed, and in the evening slack not thine hand: for thou
know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both
shall be alike Eccles. 11.6.
good.

Zealous Jeremy notes it as a blemish in himself; that, seeing his labors
took contrary effect to his desire, he resolved not to make mention of the
Lord, nor to speak any more in his Ier. 20 9.
name. Howbeit at length, for all this passionate resolution he found the word
as fire in his bones, and that it would have vent again, so that he was weary
with forbearing, and he could not stay.

Paul after he had preached Jesus to the Jews at Corinth, and they opposing
and blaspheming; he shook his garment as a witness against Act. 18.5, 6.
them, and in a passion, resolved to preach no more in that place. Yet for all
that, the Lord set him to work again in the very same place, telling him that
(notwithstanding all their frowardness) He had much people in that Ibid. ver.
9.10.
City.

If the husbandman have but a thin harvest this year, he must not despair;
but sow again in hope of a better, another time. Public reprofes often
iterated for four reasons.
And so must we, for these ensuing Reasons.

blow upon his garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. If men hearken not
yet, it is because the time appointed by God, wherein they that are dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God and live, is not yet come. As this wind
blows where it lists, so when it lists.

The servant of the Lord must not 2 Timothy 2.24.25. etc.
strive: he must not be on fire if all be not instantly of his mind, though he
be sure that he is in the right, and they in the wrong: But he must be gentle
unto all, apt to teach, patient. Gentle in dealing with them; (...)
apt, in regard of stooping to their capacities, doubling and redoubling his
instructions on them, and patient in forbearing rage, and resolution to leave
work, if they be not presently such as he would have them.

And thus in all meekness must he instruct those that for the present oppose
themselves, if God peradventure at any time will give them repentance from
their double error of judgment, and of life; as worthy In 2. Tim. hom. 6.
(...).
Chrysostom expounds the place.

Although we cannot fasten any thing on common sinners, so often as we desire,
yet our labors do more often take hold of their hearts, then they will be
known of. And when we have taken some pains, we may loose all, for want of a
little Idem ibid. (...), etc
more, which we refuse to add, because we see no fruit appearing yet.

This is as if an unskillful husbandman should bestow great cost and pains to
plant and dress a vineyard, and if it yield no fruit the first, second or
third year, then to pluck up the hedge and lay it wast, the fourth. And thus
he loses all his labor and cost before bestowed for want of patience, and
some further pains until his vines be grown.

Fishers when they have spent the day and taken nothing, will yet with patience
tarry it out a little longer, till they have gotten something: they can say;
now I have been abroad all this while, I will not home till I have taken
somewhat.

Much more should we that are fishers of men do thus. What though we have
fished all night and caught nothing; yet if Christ requires us to make another
draught, let us not refuse the labor at his command, and we shall find it was
not labor lost, though we were out of hope.

net, the servant of the Lord must hold out with patient diligence, that they
may recover themselves out of the snare.

It is an hard thing to persuade them that they are in the snare, and that it
is so good to be loosed from it. It is with sinners as with some bankrupts in
Ludgate, or the Kings Bench, who choose rather to lie in durance all their
days, then take a course to redeem their liberty. And if they can be induced
to think of freedom, yet then shall they find it a long and tedious work to
wind themselves out, or break through Satan's toils.

Sodom, that till the Lord himself thrust us out by head and shoulders, we
would not depart.

Does this make us unwilling to take further pains, because we see others
unwilling and wilful? what then had become of us, if God had not stirred up
some to have followed us, when we our selves were like a Job 11.12.
wild Ass Colt.

How long did we continue foolish, disobedient, deceived, and serving diverse
lusts and Tit. 3.3.
pleasures. How many admonitions, reproves, excellent instructions, and
fervent prayers did we neglect, contemn, deride, and cast at our heels, till
the Lord by the power of his might subdued us and our strong corruptions! yet
after all this rebellion, how marvelous and miraculous have we seen his grace
effecting our conversion!

Why then may we not hope the like of others, if we continue unwearied in our
duty toward their poor souls, so strongly chained to the Devils block?

We are a sweet savor unto God, even in them that 2. Cor. 2.15
perish. He likes well the odor of that service, which we thought had been
cast quite away. They to whom we preached, repented not; therefore they
perish. We that preached to them, did our duty; therefore God accepts and
rewards our pains.

Every faithful Minister in his proportion, may say with Christ, in regard of
the greater part of such as hear him: Isay 49.4.5
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain:
yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God: And though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my
God shall be my strength.

I will wind up this point with that of Bernard to De consid. lib. 4 c. 2. Noli
dissidere; curam exigeris, non curationom.
Eugenius. Despair not; God requires thy care, not the cure; this is his
work; that, thine. The good Samaritan desires no more but careful looking to
the wounded man, which he will recompense, and heal the wounds himself. It
was a Poets speech.

It Is not in the Physicians skill,
To cure a Patient, when he Non est in medico semper releuetur vt ager.
will.
Saint Paul was not so arrogant to say, he had profited more then all: yet he
had been so diligent as without arrogancy he might well say, he had labored
more abundantly then they all. And in his labor he rejoiced, and comforted
himself, knowing well that every one Vnusquisque secundum suum labo rem
accipiet, non secundu^ prouentum. Bern. ibid. 2. Of the Civil consideration of
persons.
shall receive, according to his pains, not the success.

Thus of the Office of Discretion toward men considering them Morally as Good
or Bad. In the next place it teaches Zeal to look upon them in a Civil
respect as they are marshalled into their several ranks among men.

In this consideration of men, Discretion teaches us to divide all into two
maine sorts and companies; the one consisting of Public Persons; and the
other of Private; and accordingly it directs and governs Zeal in dealing
with them, duly observing every man's Place.

Public Persons are such as are of eminent Place and Respect, in the
Commonwealth, or in the Church.

In the Commonwealth, Public Persons may again be distinguished into
Supreme, and Subordinate Magistrates.

How Princes may be dealt with.
The Supreme and Sovereign Prince who has none between him and God,
representing the Person of God, executing his office, and in this respect
bearing his Exodus 22.28. Psalm 82.6. Ioh 10.34.35
Name, to whom only he is accountable for all his actions, Psalm. 51.4.
by way of Summons and command; this Person, I say, must in all things and at
all times be handled with all humility and due respect of that high place he
holds, so as all may be taught, not to despise, but to honor him the more by
the carriage of those that are, in case of necessity, to treat with him in
the name and business of his God.

If such a person, should by occasion, transgres the Laws of his Maker, to
which he is as subject as his Subjects, for so much thereof as concerns him
in common with all others as Christians; Discretion will allow zeal humbly to
admonish him, so it contain it self within these bounds, which must be to
all, as the rayles about Mount Sinai.

lawful calling, to deal with persons of that Quality, in the general, that
so his authority from God may both warrant, and countenance the action, with
hope of good success.

Such a calling, a private man has not. The Lord ever employed Prophets in
this service; as Samuel to treat with Saul; Nathan with David; Eliah with
Ahab; Isaiah with Ahaz: and so generally throughout the Scripture.

Since the Prophets, the Ministers of the Gospel who^ God employeth to bear
his Name, and perform his service before Kings, are the only men in
Commission, ex officio, to perform this duty unto their Sovereign. In their
hands are those spiritual weapons which are mighty through God to pull down
the strong holds of sin, even in the greatest, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of 2. Cor. 10.4.5.
God; which Calvin. in Job 34.18. Idque non solu Prophetis dictum fuit, sed D
Paulus ostendit nos idem obseruare d^bere in praedicando Euangelio, vt nimirum
omnem sublimi tatem, quae, inquit, aduers^^ Dominum nestrum Jesum Christum,
vol^t ins^rgere, depr^namu^. Qui igitur, qui^ authorit^t su^t praediti, volunt
sibi parci, nec su^ vitia attingi, sibi nouum Euangelium quaerant. Thus he also
interprets that place of Paul, in his 120. Ser^on upon Job.
Calvin applies to this present purpose.

The Minister has the office of an Ambassador of 2. Cor 5.20.
God: and such we know are meetest to treat with Princes in affairs of high
importance from other Potentates equal, or superior to themselves.

If a King should be challenged for breach of faith unto his Confederates, he
would disdain to brook it from any man alive, but their Ambassadors: them he
would with patience hear, because he knows their Commission from the^r
Masters, require it of them. I need not to apply.

Howbeit I doubt not but persons near in place, and favor to great Princes,
may adventure, at times seasonable, to speak unto them by way of humble advice
and prayers, as Jonathan to 1. Sam. 19.4.5.
Saul; and the grave Counselors of Solomon, to young King 1. Kin. 12.7.8.
Rehoboam.

Yea further, they may if need be, testify their dislike of any evil the
Prince should live in, or drive at, (so far forth as it sauoureth not in them
of sedition, malepertnesse, or forgetfulness of their own obedience and his
Supremacy) when he administers a fair occasion and opportunity.

Thus Ioab, being required by David to number the people, and no doubt,
discerning the pride of his heart in this project; durst not deny the service,
because commanded; yet so f^rre as was meet, he showed his dislike in an
humble prayer, and submissiue expostulation: The Lord make his people an
hundred times so many more as they be: but my Lord the King, are they not all my
Lords servants? Why then does my Lord require this thing? Why will he be a
cause of trespass unto 1. Chro 21.3.
Israel?

When Mordecay discerned the intended ruin of the Jews, by a trick of Haman
abusing the king to ratify the plot; he ran not rudely to the King, nor yet
transgressed any private orders or customs of his Court, so much as by entering
within the gates in sackcloth, Ester 4.2.
although in a case of such importance.

But this he did: He came even before the Kings gate with his sackcloth and
ashes, approaching so near that he might well be taken notice of, as
perplexed, and yet obedient; and as the business might at length be brought
unto the King himself by Her that was in all likelihood meetest to break with
him about it, for the prevention of that Massacre.

Yea Hester her self, although the King loved her above all women, and she
obtained grace and favor in his sight, more then all the Virgins, so that he
set the Royal Crown upon her head, and made her Queen in stead of Ester 2.17.
Vasti. Yet in all her treaties with the King her husband, she used the
greatest humility she could Ester 5.4. and ver. 8. cap 7.3 4.
express: Insomuch that after she had received ample testimony of his
extraordinary grace and favor, yet she grows not insolent or saucie; but
being to continue her suite for her people, She fell down at his feet, and
besought him with tears, to put away the mischief of Haman the Ester 8.3.
Agagite.

Thus, true loyalty, religion, and wisdom will deal with Majesty, not by
way of challenge or seditious daring; but with thrice humble Petition and
submissiue carriage; knowing well, that greatness yeel^s to none that yield
not first to it.

special calling and Commission to treat with this or that Prince in
special. Every one that is a Minister may not fly upon his Sovereigns face,
or back, when his supposed zeal would egg him to it.

Eliah stayed till God had set the time, and bad him go to 1. King. 21 17.18.
Ahab. And it is like that some special word of the Lord ever directed all the
Prophets thus employed. By this, Amos excused himself to Amaziah for preaching
so sharply Ieroboams Court: The Lord said unto me, Go Prophecy unto my people
Amos 7.15
Israel.

And in these latter times, wherein those extraordinary and immediate warrants
from heaven come no more abroad: Then a man may account himself to be
specially called to this service, when such as are in authority about Princes
do orderly appoint him to wait at Court, for the service of God and his
Gospel. If Ahab give order that Michaiah should be sent for, it is as much to
Michaiah as if God himself had bid him go.

To these, if to any, it specially pertaines to apply themselves with all
faithfulness, according as their place and opportunity will admit, to procure
the reformation (if need be) and salvation of their Lord and Master. And woe
unto them if they then neglect it.

If God send Jeremiah to the Kings of Judah, and to the Princes thereof, he
must not fail to do his errand, but boldly speak all that the Lord
commands, upon pain of confusion before Ier. 1.17.18
them.

It must not be with checks, nor any harsh and contumelious language.

God made a Law to all, Not to revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of the
people Exodus 22.28.
. Which Law, not only prohibiteth imprecations, and seditious railings, (which
is a hellish impiety, Vide Tosta^. in Exodus 22. quest. 17. in calce.
though it be but in word only, be the Prince never so impious) but even all
rude, bitter, and unseemly speeches, although in secret to himself alone,
much more in public, or in other places behind his back.

It is not lawful thus to use a Prince, so much as in our thoughts; and rather
then transgressors of this Law should go unpunished, The birds of the air
shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell out the Eccles.
10.20.
matter.

Is it meet for a child to snap up his natural Parents, although they should
deserve a sharp reproof? Does not the Apostle forbid servants so much as
saucily to answer their master again, although provoked? Says he it only to
such as have good and gentle masters? Doubtless he says it to such also as
are under froward 1. Pet. 2.18.
and wicked tyrants. And is it fit, then to say to a King, thou art wicked; and
to Princes, ye are Job 34.18.
ungodly?

Princes may not, before others, be discovered to be so wicked, as perhaps they
be. Care must be had of their honor and fame, says wise and judicious
Calvin. in Job 34.18. Conc. 131. Principes vero and Gubernatores quum improbi
sunt, and pessime suo officio funguntur, nihilominus tamen propter dignit^tem
qua praediti sunt, ipsorum nomini, and famae parcitur, etc.
Calvin, what ever their conversation be, their place requires it, though
their actions should not deserve it.

God has engraven so large and fair a Character of his imperial Image Aug.
in lib. Quest. v^t and noui Test. Dei imaginem habet rex sicut Epis^opus
Christi, etc.
in their foreheads, as must be sacred in the hearts of all, and bind not their
hands only, but tongues also to the good behavior, and that for ever. Nor is
this carriage only due to good Princes, but universally to all.

What then? must Ministers be mealy-mouthed? No neither. This is as evil as
the other. If Princes grow sick of sin, they must abide a vomit, what ever
become of him that gives it. There is no reason Physicians of their bodies
should take more liberty then the Physicians of their souls, when cases be
alike.

Yet this must so be done, that they may see the faithful religious observance
of an humble servant, and a loyal subject that studies their honor, next to
their salvation. And though his message be from his Princes Master, yet still
he must remember that himself who brings it, is servant unto Albert. magnus in
4. Sent. Si status altus est person^, cum reuerentia and excusatione delicti
debet potius admonere quam corripere, and rogare quam increpare.
both.

Fauning flattery is an occupation fitter for a dog then a man: and Princes
have no Traitors like to flatterers, if treachery against the soul be more
perilous, then that against the body. No sin in the Prophet has greater
woes attending it then Job 32.21.22. Ier. 23.14.15 Eze. 13. and alibi.
this.

But yet there is a difference between base flattery and Christian policy
which closely winds up, and secretly conueyes an admonition, so as (if
possible) no creature may be able to discern it, but he to whom it was
intended. If he apprehend it, it is enough; if more, too much.

When Saul had sinned a sin as bad, in Gods account, as witchcraft, or
idolatry, so that God sent him this heavy message by the Prophet Samuel;
because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he also has rejected thee
from being 1 Samuel 15.23.
King: yet even then Samuel judged it but a reasonable request of Saul, to
honor him before the Elders of his people, and before Ibid. ver. 30.
Israel; least they observing Samuels sleighting of him, should happen to
despise him while he held the Throne.

Inuectiues (though but against an Equal, or Inferior) are ever odious; but
against a Prince, intolerable.

The man of God who prophesied grievous things against Ieroboams Alter at
Bethel, no doubt intended a reproof to Jeroboam himself: yet only cried out
against the Alter in Ieroboams presence, without directing one word at all to
him that set it up. 1 King. 13.2.
An indefinite reproof of sin, in public is enough: if this serve not to
reform a Prince, forbear: more, will make him worse.

And though Nathan grappled more closly with 2 Samuel 12.7.
David; and Eliah, with 1 King 18.18.
Ahab: yet all Circumstances of the Texts euince, that this was done in
private, so as in all probability, none did take notice of it, but themselves.
And in secret, some men may do so still.

And although further, some Prophets have publicly reproved Kings by name,
yet we must observe a difference between special extraordinary messages upon
extraordinary occasions, and the ordinary public Sermons of the Prophets.

The former were most what Personal, as Ambassages directed only to a Prince
himself, though others, (waiting) stand by, and hear it: and the Scripture
records the special Commission of every Prophet, to go, and carry them to
such or such a Person.

But the latter, though they contain sharp, and heavy tidings for particular
sins of Priests, Prophets, Rulers, or Princes, yet they are for the most part
(if not all) indefinitely v^tered; at most, but against men of such or such
Callings, without instance or denotation of indiuidual Persons, so as it might
be applicable to many, as well as unto any.

If then we would from the Prophets take out a copy for our ordinary use, it
must not be out of one of their extraordinary Ambassages, but out of their
usual Sermons to, or before the People.

If this become not a Minister, no not him that has a special Calling to
deal with Princes; how ill will it become those that have no Calling at all!

What shall they answer unto God, who, being but private Persons discontented,
shall take upon them Shemei-like to revile and traduce their Sovereign,
behind his back; and presume to make every Tavern, and Ale-bench, a
Tribunal whereat to accuse, araigne, and condemn the Sacred and dreadful
Person of the Lords Anointed (whom they ought not to mention without a holy
reverence;) and to censure all his Actions before their Companions as
confidently, as if he were the Vassal, and they the Monarch! Has not former
experience told us, this is the highway to all Treasons and Rebellions?

It is not lawful for such as may in secret admonish Princes, to speak
thereof to any Creature, after they have done it. If God made a Statute against
Tale-bearing, (yet in force) that none should go up and down as a talebearer
among his people: Leuit. 19.16
to prevent carrying of tales even of Ordinary Persons; because such offenders
commit that unpardonable sin against humane society; to wit, the revealing
Pro. 11.13.
of secrets: How much more did he or^aine that this Law should for ever bind
all, employed about Princes, above all to keep secret even the faylings of a
Prince, the discovery, and blabbing whereof will but make worse both Prince,
and Subject.

If Good people should discern some errors, and those not small, in Princes,
the best pattern they can propound to themselves, is that of Samuel mourning
and praying for 1 Samuel 15.35.
Saul; not for form only, but heartily and fervently indeed: and the worst
they can pitch upon (unless they proceed to open Treason) is that of common
Newse-mongers and seditious spirits, who cannot make a meal, spen^ a fire,
drink a pint, or drive away one hour, without some pragmaticall discourse
and censure of Princes and their State affairs.

Let such Prying busy people go learn what that means; 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
study to be quiet and meddle with your own business: and again, 2 Thessalonians.
3.11.
we hear that there be some which walk disorderly, working not at all, but
are busy bodies; and again, 1 Pet. 4.15.
let no man suffer as a busy body in another man's matters. Learn these; and
Proclamations need not: these from heaven, would serve the turn.

As for such as will not take out this Lesson, let their eyes, their tongues,
their tears, their coats, their sighs, their Prayers be what they will be;
Their carriage sauoreth not of Zeal for God, which thus casts dirt and mire
in his Vicegerents face, and tends to the taking away of the life of his
life in his subjects hearts, in which al good princes desire as much to live,
as to enjoy their Crowns.

And if it be not lawful thus to smite at their Persons with the tongue only;
shall that be thought Zeal for God, which seeks their Deposition from that
Crown which once a just, free, and absolute title of inheritance has set upon
their Heads? Aegid. Carler. in Orat. de Punit Peccat. public. Caesar erat
iniustus iniustitia fidei, tamen Dominus Dominium suum confirmauit, ^um ait,
reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari


A thing which holy David would never suffer against wicked Saul himself.
David knew the wickedness of Saul against the Lord; h^s malice against
himself; and long felt his bloodthirsty persecution. He knew withal, that
the Lord had rejected Saul from being King; and that God had anointed him in
his room.

And yet for all this, when Saul cruelly hunted him as a Partridge upon the
mountains, and that, though he were anointed by the same hand that Saul was,
he was sure to die, if he fell into Saul's Power; and even then, when Saul was
in his power, so that he could as easily have slain Saul, as Saul was willing
to slay him; yet even then but for cutting off a skirt of Saul's garment,
although it were only to this end that Saul might afterward see David's
fidelity and loya^ty, in that he took no more but a skirt, when he might as
well have taken life, and all away; his heart smote him. And he said unto his
men the Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords
anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, SEEING HE IS THE ANOINTED
OF THE 1 Samuel 24.5, 6.
LORD.

To this must be added, that so long as God suffered Saul on earth, David never
^ttempted to pull the Crown off his head, nor suffered others to do it for
Ibid. ver. 7.
him.

Yea when Saul in a pitched Battle against the Philistines received such a
deadly wound as he was neither able to live, or escape with honor untaken by
the Enemy, so that he required an Amalakite that was next him, (as he
reported) to fall upon him and slay him, even out of point of honor: 2 Samuel
1.9.
David was so far from approving this fact, that he and all that were with
him rent their clothes, and mourned, and fasted and wept until Even.

And then, (supposing that Nature it se fe had taught this lesson unto all,
that the very name, or sight, or thought of the LORDS ANOINTED, had been such
an eternal Prohibition to the whole world, as would make the most bloody
butcher tremble, and abhor from touching him;) he thus expostulates with his
pretended executioner; How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to
destroy the LORDS ANOINTED?

In fine, David thought him worthy of no reward but death; and of this, so
worthy, that instantly he gave order for his execution; with this sharp
sentence uttered, Thy blood be upon thine own head; for thine own mouth has
testified against thee, saying, I HAVE SLAIN THE LORDS ANOINTED. Ibid. Ver^e
16.
A memorable example and an Argument unanswerable against all King-killers, and
Deposers of Absolute Princes absolutely anointed, by just Title, as here with
us.

How Subordinate Magistrates should be handled.
From Supreme Magistrates descend we to Subordinate, who are, so, men of
Authority, as yet with the Centurion, they are under Authority too.

Discretion teaches all due respect to these also, in their places: and
although so much be not due to them, as to him they serve, (which gave the
Prophets occasion to use the greater liberty in speaking to, or of Isay 1.10.
Hos 4.18. Et alibi passim.
them;) yet they must be honored as much, in their proportion, for their
Sovereigns sake: Nor may any man take liberty to take them down in the way of
contempt and scorn.

Care therefore must be used to distinguish their Office from their Person;
and their sins, from both; as also their Personal faults as men, from their
corruptions and errors in matter of Justice as they are Magistrates.

Authority is ever one of Enuies eye-soares; Subjection, a yoke that humane
nature loathes, although inferiors cannot help it, nor durst complain.
Liberty, liberty is every man's desire; though, most men's ruin.

Hereupon it is that people are tickled to see Magistrates squib'd, controuled
and lasht, whether men know them to deserve it, or not. Either they are guilty,
or men would have them so, when the whip lies by; And if they be not whipped,
some people be not pleased.

But, what good comes of it? Superiors are despised; Authority it self,
brought into as base esteem as tyranny; Inferiors cast off the yoke of due
subjection from their hearts, even when they wear it (but, as a clogg) about
their necks; and open their mouths to scoff, revile, and curse the Rulers of
the people, whom they ought only to reverence, bless, and pray for, from
their hearts.

For this cause, These must be gently handled; and yet more plainly, then a
Sovereign Prince; they being often times more imperious, sour, unmerciful,
partial in their affections, preiudicate in their opinions, more oppressing,
more corrupt in particular cases, then Princes be, and many times for their
own ends, persuading, entising and even enforcing Princes to be far worse,
then of themselves they would be.

Yea sometimes also abusing the Princes Name to his Subjects, and exacting that
on his behalf which he neither commanded nor shall be one penny better for;
but in his reputation shall loose much with his Subjects for all that
oppression, which unknown and vnliked by him, passes under his name, as
Tacitus, in his life.
Galba did, by means of Vinius and Laco, and Icelus his man, whereby a way was
opened to his own destruction.

Now because this often happens in the World; and that some, who are in place
of Government, behave themselves cruelly and proudly, trusting by this means
to hold men in awe of them, as though Authority were their Phil. de Comin. lib.
3. cap. 18.
inheritance; these may well brook a more special tax of corrupt Magistrates
(indefinitely) even under that very Title.

For though a man fall upon the reproof of particular sins sometimes
committed by some men in that Calling, and call it the Magistrates sin, not
naming any Person, or applying it to any present; (the number of them being so
great, and so many of that number sometimes thought so guilty;) this can be no
more then a dish of Vinegar in common, wherein every one may dipp his sopp
indifferently. It cannot hurt any particular man's mawe or stomach, whose guilt
does not enforce him to take the dish, unbidden, and drink off all.

This, for the general. But if a speech in public should be directed to some
particular Magistrate about things touching his Office, it ought rather to be
done by way of exhortation, then reprehension; of insinuation, then accusation,
so as by forcing upon them the name and fame of Grave, Religious, Vigilant and
able Governors, their very commendation may even force from them a faithful
execution of Justice beyond expectation of the Common People.

Good King Iehoshaphat, who used to make a Speech unto his Judges before they
went their Circuites, would not frown upon them, nor snapp them up like
Slaves; but in a grave, fatherly, wise, mild and godly manner, speak only by
way of gracious exhortation, and holy admonition: 2 Chronicles. 19 6.7.
Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is
with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord, be upon
you: take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of Persons, nor taking of Bribes.

Shall so great a King think it wisdom to speak, not with bitterness, but
with entreaties rather, to his inferiors, his Servants; and shall inferior
subjects count it zeal and discretion to shake up their superiors, their
Governors, and rub their ears with bitter taunts and checkes?

Fie on that Zeal that takes pleasure in such discoueries of the Political
Fathers nakedness, as may provoke laughter, derision, and contempt in those
that stand and hear it. Saint Paul would never have endured such a practice,
much less have practiced it himself: for his Rule is, 1 Timothy 5 1.
Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father.

And yet when Magistrates stand in the Crowd of Common Christians, under this
name of Christians they may be indefinitely handled together with the meanest,
as their life and conversation (considered as men) deserves.

Ministers are not to spare reproof of ordinary and common sins, whereof
Magistrates as well as others may be known, or suspected to be eminently
guilty, because they are present so they be not denoted by their special
Calling or by personal description.

The Minister has equal Care and charge of All, within his own Division; as
the Magistrate, of those, in his. And if he must answer for all that perish by
his default of silence, shall he be though to fault because he gives warning;
and after admonition which has done no good, does add reproves?

The Prophets, we know, in their ordinary Sermons, did no more spare
Magistrates then other men; and though they played with no man's name or Person,
yet they sharply taxed Magistrates by the name of Hos. 4.18.
Rulers, say 1.0.
Princes, Ier. 5.5.
Great men, etc. nor was this, then thought a fault by any but the faulty.

When the Man of God was to prophecy against the 1 King. 13. Before alleged.
Alter at Bethel, he spared not, for Ieroboams presence. And yet there was no
man so silly in that assembly, but knew well enough that Jeroboam who set the
Alter up, was more deeply touched then any of the company, although he were
not named.

That Congregation might safely swear that they believed the man of God aimed
at Jeroboam: but how? not because his words in, and of themselves, either did,
or could paint out Ieroboams Person; but because Ieroboams hand was so deep in
the Action then condemned, that all, or most of the hearers could not but apply
the accusation to Ieroboams sin, and consequently unto his person also, as he
was a sinner.

So then, Jeroboam was observed to be reproved, and yet the Prophet in no
fault, but only Jeroboam: his guilt drew him within the reach of this
reprehension, which otherwise had never touched him.

Thus, that Prophet did, and did no more then duty, as appeared by the
countenance which God himself gave to that action, when Jeroboam stormed.
Angry he was, but who could help it? and smitten he was: his fury did deserve
it.

And, me thinks, the judgment following him upon his rage at the hearing of
his sin reproved, should be warning enough to all Persons, for ever to beware
of being angry with Gods Messengers, upon so weak a ground. For although the
same doom do not instantly seize on them, which did on him; yet it is a debt,
as sure as if 'twere paid. God truly paies his debts, though men go hence
unpaid.

Wherefore, if any such there be (and Calvin. in Job. concio. 131. It qui nihil
sunt, vt ita dicam, si exigua aliqua dignitate sunt praedus, vide^tu^ sibi
Idola esse, and seipsos adorant, etc.
Calvin says, there be,) who being mounted a Region or two, above the Vulgar,
(and yet, God wot, as far below the Highest, as Luna under Saturn;) begin,
for want of help, to Idolize themselves, and further think that now the Gn^t,
being gotten up to sit upon the wheel, makes such a noise, and raises such a
dust, as shall be able to fright or choke him up that dares adventure near it
with an admonition; or else, to drive the wheel it self upon his face: Let
such, says Calvin, know, that for as much as this snuffing insultation is an
insurrection against God himself, and denies due honor to our greatest King;
that liberty which the Lord has given his servants to be sharp against them,
must and shall be put in execution.

Thus of Public persons Public persons in the Church.
in the Common wealth. There is yet another sort Public, and they are
Ecclesiastical; as Bishops, Pastors, and other Ministers. In dealing with
these, zeal must be directed by Discretion, to observe three rules.

1. Rule touching ministers.
1. A man must be able to judge what especially deserves reproof in a
Minister. A Bishop must be 1. Tim. 3.2.
blameless, says Saint Paul: that is, he must give no just occasion of
reprehension; says Nullam dare occasionem iusta reprehensionis. Illud enim
irreprehensibile^, non idem dicit quod calumnia non obnoxium, aut in quem non
potest intendi calumnia: nam ipse etiam Apostolus omnis, etc. Theodor. in 1.
Tim. 3.
Theodoret. The Apostle does not require a Bishop to be without reproach: for
no man can so behave himself, as not to be obnoxious to the sharp and
venomous teeth of that Serpent, Calumny. This Apostle himself could not
escape any kind of reproach. But such must be despised, not fled from.

And when he names Bishops, he means all the Clergy should be so too,
although they be not Bishops. Yet with all it is clear, that this chiefly
Theod. ibid. Clarum est quod has leges oportet primos seruare Episcopos, vt qui
sunt maiorem dignitatem assequ^ti.
concerns Bishops, because their dignity, as it makes them more eminent, so
it causes expectation of exemplary circumspection, and pious Ephesians 5.15 (...).
conversation.

If he, or any Minister shall make a notorious fault, they must not think to
slip away without an admonition. But many times it happens that the best men
are hardly taxed, and sharply censured for things which are no faults, but
virtues in them.

It is fault enough in some that they are no good fellows: In others, that
they sharply reprove their hearers sins; that they denounce judgments to
the rebellious; that they tell the staring gallants and impenitent sinners of
hell and damnation, they taking it for certain, that the word Damnation, or
Hell, cannot become a pulpit; though Christ himself did use Math. 23.14.15.
and ver. 33.
them.

If Amos prophecy against the sins of Jeroboam, Amaziah will cry Amos 7.10.
Treason: if he prophecy of grievous plagues approaching for outrageous
transgressions; then he has spoken such words as the land is not able to bear
them.

If Paul preach Jesus truly, and anger the Jews; they will have a Tertullus
for their money that shall paint him out in Folio, for sedition against the
State, heresy against the Truth, and profanation of the very Act 24 5.6.
Temple.

If Stephen Act. 7.
tell the stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, of their
continual resisting of the holy Ghost. This will so cut them to the very
heart, that they will gnash upon him with their teeth, and with a loud voice
stopping their ears, run upon him and stone him with one accord.

If our Lord himself tell the Pharisees, they are not of God, because they
hear not his word; and that they are the children of the Devil, because his
lusts they do: they will not fear to retort the Devil upon Ioh. 8.48.
himself, and think it meet to provide him a place in Bedlam.

Yea, let him but speak any thing, be it never so true and necessary, if they
distaste it, he has made fault enough to have his neck broken from a Luke
4.29.
mountain, or his brains beaten out with Ioh. 8.59.
stones.

What Prophet had a tomb erected in his honor, by the son, whose father or
ancestors did not persecute him with deadly malice, as a pernicious
intolerable malefactor in his life? And why? for having no more discretion
then to tread upon the Waspes nest, although built so right in his way that he
could not avoid it.

Nay, sometimes, though a Minister do not preach Vinegar and Gaul, but oil
and butter; at least tolerable matter, yet his more then ordinary diligence
and painfulnesse in his place, shall be ill thought of by some, who are loath
to wear out their ploughes in tilling their own ground.

Christ indeed called his house, the house of prayer; yes. But let me tell you,
that he preached, when he said so. And when he sent out his Apostles and
Disciples, he bad them go Preach. The same charge was given by the Apostles to
Ministers whom they ordained and set over particular Mat. 10 6.28.19.20. Mar.
16.15. Luke 10. Ioh. 21.15.16 17. 1 Cor. 9.14 and ver 16. Gal. 6.6. 1. These.
5.12. 2. Tim 4.12. Tit 1.9. 1. Pet. 5.2.
Churches.

For my part, I am so far from taking away prayer, for preaching; that I
could wish not only more Preaching in some places, but more prayer also in
other places; and I mean only that prayer which is allowed too: In
performance whereof (if the fault be not in them who undertake it) much more
good might be done then will be acknowledged by some, who magnify preaching
rather the^ adorn it; yea, I will add, more then by some men's preaching
admired by too many.

But yet I desire leave to maintain the honor of the one as well as of the
other, and to observe that though our Lord came often to the Temple, yet he
never came but when he preached there. So, also the Apostles.

This stands upon Record, and I can prove it. Now let any man show me any
evidence, to prove that either Christ or his Apostles, after their entrance
into their offices, did ever go and only pray in the Temple. To me then it is
clear, that diligent preaching is one principal duty inseparably annexed to
our calling, and therefore was worthily called for and enjoined by express
iniunction of Supreme authority, for the great good of our Church, and to the
high honor of our late gracious The late Kings Majesty thought not
catecheticall preaching (which for one part of the day is simply the best) too
much to be used every Sunday and Holy day, beside the morning Sermon, but
enjoined it, to his perpetual honor.
Sovereign.

Is it then credible that any, especially of our own calling should condemn
the diligence of others thereby to palliate or excuse their own negligence?

Is not this because some (who are otherwise censorious Critticks) will not
distinguish between men and men. If they can pick out some bold-faced
mercinarie Empericke, that by the help of a Polyanthea, or some English
Treatise, can make a shift five or six times a week, with his tongue and his
teeth to throw over the Pulpit a pack of stolen wares, which sometimes the
Judicious hearer knows by the mark, and sends it home to the right owner
again:

If an Angel appear at a Christning, Funeral, or wedding, for a Sermon
preached at an hours warning, if need be, every day:

Or if the man have been a drinking, feasting, or a riding, that so, no time is
left him to search so far as a naked Commentary, Postil, or some Catechism,
yet adventures on the sacred business of preaching, carrying to the pulpit a
bold face in stead of sauoury provision, and thinks it sufficient that the
people hear thunder, though they see no rain, and that loudness will serve
for once, in stead of matter; because if he be earnest, silly women and some
ninnies more will count him a very zealous Preacher; and impute his want of
matter to his wisdom and desire of edifying, not to his want of study or
ability; and say, He preaches to the conscience, He stands not upon deep
learning, He reproves sin boldly; that is to say, other men's, (therefore
they love him;) not theirs, for then they would abhor him.

If I say, such as desire to abate the number of Sermons, can produce some such
Wildfowle, this shall be enough for them, to cry down the Judicious and
profitable often preaching of godly, learned, experienced Ministers, who can
hardly fall upon that point of moment, which they have not long before
thoroughly studied, for the substance of it.

Have we not young Artists in the Universities that read learned Lectures
twice or thrice a week? Have we not Lawyers that are able with praise to plead
at the Bar in ordinary Cases every day, after some experience added to their
learning?

Did not judicious Calvin, and Beza after him, read Divinity Lecture (which
is more painful then vulgar preaching,) more often then any man in England
preaches? Did not Saint Austin and diverse of the Fathers preach every See the
Deane of Paul's Sermon at the Cross, preached on Judge. 5.20.
day?

Did not many godly men in England (though not half so well furnished, as many
now) in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, do so here?

Is there no difference between a child and a man; a Nouice, and an old
standard? Because some men have a mind to play, must all men leave work?
Because some cannot do so much work, must another that can do it forbear?

Gregory complains that he was troubled with some such evil beasts, for all
the world like Aesops dog, by his description.

There are, says he, in the Moral. lib. 25. cap. 11. Sunt e^go nonnulli in
Ecclesia qui non solum no bona faciunt, sed etiam per sequuntur: and quae ipsi
facere negligunt, etiam in alijs detestantur. Horum peccatum scilicet non ex
infirmitate vel ignorantia, sed ex solo studio perpetratu^: quia videlicet si
vell^m implere bona, nec tamen possent, ea quae in se negligunt, saltem in
alijs amarent. Si enim e^ ipsi vel solo voto appeterent, facta ab a^ijs n^n
odissent: s^^ quia bona eadem audiendo cognoscunt, viuendo despiciunt,
animaduertendo persequuntur, recte dicitur: Qui ex industria recesserunt ab eo.
Vnde and apt subiungitur: Et omnes vias eius intell^gere noluerant Non enim
auinfirmit^te non intelligunt; sed intelligere noluerunt; quia s^pe quae facere
despiciunt, ^escire contemnunt.
Church, who not only do no good, but persecu^e it: and those things which
they neglect themselves, they detest it in others: for if they did but only
desire to do good, they could not thus hate it, being done by others.

But after all this, what be the faults indeed for which a Clergy man deserves
taxing? Let us but read Saint Paul's Character of a good Bishop, and we shall
soon by the Rule of Contraries, find out the faults of a bad, that deserves
reproof. What nearer way to search a dark room then to open the windows,
and let in the light? What better course to try such light silver then to
carry it to the balance of the Sanctuary?

In the general, A Bishop, says Saint Paul, must be 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit 1.7.
blameless; yea (...).
unblameable. Do you ask wherein? The same Apostle shows. He must be the
husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to But then he
must have wherwithall.
hospitality, ^pt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of
filthy lucre; but patient, not a brauler, nor covetous; one that rules well
his own house, having his children in subjection, with all gravity; For if a
man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take c^re of the Church
of God? Not ^ Nouice, A nouice in Christianity, a plant ^et but yesterday,
Theod.
lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the Devil.

Moreover, he must have a good report of them which are without, lest he fall
into reproach, and into the snare of the Devil.

Afterward he adds, in the Character of a Deacon, (which also agrees unto
all) that he must not be double tongued, but grave. The same Apostle writing to
Tit. 1.7.
Titus touching the same argument, besides mention of diverse of the former, he
speaks of more, requiring that He be not accused of riot, or unruly, not
self willed, not soon angry, a lover of good men, (...).
and good things. Just, holy, temperate; holding fast the faithful word, as he
has been taught; that so he may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and
to convince the gaine-sayers.

In his preaching, he uses not entising words of man's 1. Cor. 2.4.
wisdom; that is, though he may make use of humane learning or eloquence; yet
he does not set Hagar in Sarahs place. Hagar may be in the house with her
mistress, so long as she insult not against her mistress. (Quotations of Fathers
and other authors may stand in his Sermon, as well as of Poets, in Saint Paul's
Act. 17.28. Tit. 1.12.
Sermons and Epistles.) He must preach the word, and be instant in season, and
out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and 2. Tim. 4.2.
doctrine.

His aim is not to corrupt the word of God, but as of God, in the sight of
God, he speaks in 2. Cor. 2.17.
Christ. He renounceth the hidden things of dishonestie, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by the manifestation
of the truth commends himself to every man's 2. Cor. 4.2.
conscience in the sight of God.

He does not beguile with any hypocritical show of zeal, or desire to please
men, further then to edification, not seeking his own profit, but the profit
of many that they may be 1. Cor. 10.33.
saved. As he is allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so he
speaks, not as pleasing men, but God which tries the 1. These. 4.2
heart.

Finally, in all things he must show himself a pattern of good works: in
doctrine, showing vncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity, sound speech, that
cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed,
having no evil thing to say of Tit. 2.8.9.
him.

Now take this rule, and lay it to a Clergy man, and if he be not according
hereunto, but crooked and sweruing from it, then he that has authority, and a
calling to it, may justly blame him, if he were Saint Peter Gal. 2.11.
himself, because he walks not uprightly, according to the truth of the
Gospel.

2. A man that will accuse a Minister, 2. Rule touching ministers.
or reprove him upon another man's accusation, must be certain that the fault
not only be committed, but also that it is or may be soundly proved.

God made a Law that every word of an accusation should be established by two
or three Deuteronomy. 17.
witnesses. This Law is revived by the Apostle in the Gospel, and applied to
the case of Ministers. Against an Elder receive not an accusation but under two
or three 1. Tim. 5.19
witnesses: by Elder, meaning a Minister as Saint Ambros. in hunc locum.
Ambrose, Epiphan. Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, and others rightly do expound it.

And great reason such a Law should be in force, says Theod. in 1. Tim. 5. Vel
maxim inquit hoc facere in Presbytero^ accidit enim vt cum Ecclesiae ei sit
praefectura credita, nonnullos ex ijs qui peccant, offendat, illique infesto
sint animo, and calumniam in eum machinentur; est ergo numerus testium
exigendus.
Theodoret, especially in the case of Ministers: for it often happens that a
Pastor offends some persons that are offenders, who thereupon grow into an
hatred of him, and stick not to load him with lies and slanders: therefore a
competent number of witnesses against him, is very requisite.

No faithful Minister ever was so clean throughout, that no spot could be
found about him, or cast upon his clothes by malicious tongs. Which of the
Prophets, which of the Apostles, which of the Fathers has not been laden with
false reports? yea could Christ himself escape? and what? were all to blame?
what, Christ himself too?

The experience of former ages has therefore caused many Laws and
Constitutions against the common accusations of Ministers in public Courts,
as also for disabling of their accusers and witnesses; for requiring a great
number of witnesses that might be admitted for sufficient persons; yea for the
quality and number of their Judges also, even unto too much.

My purpose is not to tumble all the Decretals and Ancient Canons; which is the
profession of Ciuilians; yet something I will observe out of the Councels to
satisfy my Readers.

Eutichianus an ancient Circa annu^. 276.
Bishop gravely admonished his Sicilian Eutich. Epist. 2. Episco. Syciliae. Si
quis Clericorum in crimine impeditur, etc. extat tom 1. Council. par. 1.
brethren, that if any Clergy man should be accused, he should not presently
be condemned in their hearts as guilty, because accused, lest innocence should
suffer by unjust suspicions. And indeed, as a very bad man ( Julian by name)
once spoke very well, and like a good Governor, If accusations alone, would
make any man guilty, who should be innocent?

The former Bishop religiously Idem ibid.
adds; No^ enim passim vageque sacerdotum accusatio debet fieri: nam si
facile admitteretur, per pauci nimis inuenirentur: quia omnes qui pie volunt
viuere in Christo persequutionem patiu^^or.
the accusations of Ministers ought not to be common, and at random admitted
of; for if they should, there would very few be found to show their heads,
because all that will live godly in Christ, must suffer persecution.

He further charge, Simi^iter prohibemus vt nullae causae a Iudi^ibus
Ecclesiasticis audiaudiantur, quae legib^s ^on continent^r, vel qua prohib tae
^sse noscunt^^.
that no Judges admit of trifles, and things upon the by, which are not
expressly against some precept, or which are known to be prohibited.

He also goes on to show what witnesses are not to be admitted, as namely all
heretics, or suspect of heresy, excommunicate persons, manslayers,
malefactors, thieves, sacrilegians, adulterers, false accusers of other men,
all that seek to any Witches or Coniurers, all infamous persons, whose
testimony shall not only not be admitted against a Minister, but also not so
much as against the meanest Christian. Yea license of accusing or witnessing
against a Minister, shall be utterly denied to all, who in any degree neglect
the dignity of Christian religion, or of their own good name, or of any thing
else required of them by their Extat etiam in Epist. 1. Clem. ad Jacob. nec non
in Epist. 1. Anacleti. Council. tom. 1. par. 1.
profession.

In a Council holden at Carthage, Council. Carthag. 7. Vt vocatur a Gratiano,
celebrat. circa annum 419.
(commonly called the seventh Council of Carthage,) it was ordained, that
besides exclusion of the former sorts of insufficient witnesses, all servants,
all that wander up and down as libertines, all that are stained with any brand
of infamy, as Players and persons prostituted to uncleanness, Cap. 2. vide
locum.
all that come unforced, all that the accuser brings from home with him; and
all under 14. years of age shall be rejected in the case of Cap. 4.
Ministers.

The same Council, Cap. 3. Item placuit, quotiescunque clericis ab
accusatoribus mu^ta crimina obijciu^tur, and vnum ex his, de quo prius egeris,
probare non valuerit, ad caetera iam non admittantur.
decreed that when so ever many crimes are objected against a Minister, and the
accuser fail in his proof of any one of them, he shall not be admitted to
object the rest.

The same is repeated again in the Council of Africa Cap 95.
; and so in the book of Canons of the Africane Church, in Can 130. Tit. (...).
Greek.

Another Decree Decret. Anaclet.
prohibiteth the accuser himself to be a witness, as also all that are, or
lately have been enemies, least being angry they desire the undoing of him
that is accused, or being wronged, they should seek by this means to be
revenged: yea the accuser himself should not be such; and the affection of the
witnesses must be enquired after, and found without Suspicion.

And as the Fathers were careful of the Quality, so of the number of witnesses
they were even too curious. In so much that in a Synod holden at Rome, Synod.
Romans 2. Sub Syluest. inquit Bonius, Concel Tom 1. par. 1. page 258. vlt edit.
about the time of Constantines Reign, it was ordained, that no Bishop should
be condemned under 72. witnesses; no Priest, under 44. no Deacon under 36. no
Subdeacon or inferior officer about the Church, under 7. witnesses of good
account.

Hadrianus 1. made 72. Canons C^ncil. ^^m. 3.
for the preventing of molestations and accusations of the Clergy, mentioning
and ratifying all the former Constitutions. The same also were again confirmed
by another Council of Mentz Council. Mogu^t cir^a. an 888 extat Tom. 3. Council.
above 700. years now past, and gone.

When afterward the testimonies of a lesser number, were accepted, yet they
required 20. or 16. at least.

In the Third Council of Laterane Vide Ape^d. Council. Lat. 3. par. 50. ca. 67.
it was decreed, that if any accusation brought against a Clerick, did fail in
proof, the single oath of the accused, should set him free.

Lastly, for the Quality and Number of the Judges, it was agreed in the 2.
Council of Carthage, Council Carthag. 2. cap. 10 extat. Tom. 1. Council par. 1.
page 570.
that a Bishop should not be condemned by any, under the number of 12. Bishops:
6. Priests; 3. Deacons, together with his own The word is, Episcopu^, which
therefore must so be understood, that the Bishop to be tried was any Minister,
or e se that he that was to judge him with the rest was some Bishop above him
that way accused.
Bishop: and this number was only admitted in case of necessity for quick
dispatch: otherwise his trial was to be more solemn, as this Decree implies.

What should I heap up more? I allege not these Canons, as disliking the
Laws in force among our selves, or to bring in the use of all these again,
though some of them be very convenient, and some of these we do also retain.

I only mention them to let the world see how tender our Fathers were of
Ministers, knowing well how much honor is ever due unto that Sacred Function,
and how ill such as have bin faithful, have ever bin brooked by corrupt men;
which has occasioned those many favorable Constitutions in behalf of
Ministers, for the preventing of often causeless molestations.

It were therefore, a most uncharitable and unchristian course, upon a bare
accusation of an Enemy to condemn a Minister before himself be heard, and a
competent number of witnesses of worth produced against him.

So long as any wicked man remains alive, a faithful Minister shall never
want an enemy. The execution of his office will make offenders hate him; Ier.
15.10. Mat. 10.22. Mat 24.9.
and, if they may be suffered, they will soon undo him, under pretense of
Zeal against a Act. 24.5, 6
Malefactor.

3. Rule touching ministers.
3. Consideration must be had of the Quality and Authority of the Persons that
undertake a Minister; as also of the manner how they do perform a Zealous
office to him.

It is not for every one to reprove a Minister, (no not in private) though he
may be faulty. This is no Lay-mans work, but a Bishops office. It is for
Timothy to rebuke, and punish Elders: 1 Timothy 5.15, 20.
Saint Paul appropriates this task to him.

Nay an Elder himself, single, may not undertake the office of a Judge against
his fellow Elder of equal rank; unless he be deputed by Authority. Among
Equals there is no Power says the Inter pares non est potestas.
Law. They may admonish, but not reprove: entreat, as Brethren; but not rebuke,
as Judges.

Much less then will this become a Private Persons Zeal. I deny not but
Private Persons may by way of modest admonition, and respective exhortation,
advise, admonish, and excite a Min^ster, in private, unto his d^ty, and (due
respect observed) tell him of his saylings; especially if many of them join
together lovingly and discreetly, as Paul appointed the Church of Colosse to
do in stirring up Col 4.17. ^ult ipsum Paul^^ totius Eccl^siae cohortatione
anima^i in meliu^. Calvin.
Archippus.

Which place does not allow every siery spirit, and humorous darer to fly upon
the Minister, how, and when, and where they please. They may speak unto him,
not saucily traduce him; or shake him up as if he were their servant, or their
fellow. Irreverently to reprove him, or dispraise him is unlawful, as Aquin.
in Col. 4 Irreuerenter arguere, and viti^perare prohibitum est; sed monere
charitatiue potest.
Aquinas notes.

Israel no doubt was bad enough, and somewhat the worse for this, that they
presumed to Hos. 4.4.
rebuke the Priest. Which the Lord observes in them, not without a kind of
holy sarcasme at such intolerable pride.

He means it, I confess, of such as rebuked good Ministers for doing of their
duty. But what, is every Talking Basketmaker, or Butcher, or mincing She, a
sit judge of his Doctrine, and meet to reprove, and confute him for it? Is
that Zeal, which catches at pieces of Sentences, and then runs away, and
gives out that he preaches false Doctrine, contradictions or inuectiues; to
shame him to his flock?

Saucy Pride, pluck off thy Vizar, look in the glass of true Discretion, and
be ashamed. Is this, to try the spirits? is this, to show thy Zeal? Has
cursed Cham no sport to make, no tales to tell, but that of Noah's nakedness?
was he cursed for speaking but the truth of his drunken Father, to none but to
his own sons, who presently did the duty of good children by covering him,
going backward; And shall they be blessed, who maliciously traduce and load
with lies their spiritual Fathers, and that to those that upon the newse will
make them naked, though they were not so, and seek their utmost disgrace?

Saint Ambrose would have disdained that such vpstarting Mushromes should dare
to censure him in matters of his office: And so would these busy spirits
themselves, to see a Minister offer to control or direct them in their
Mechanic Trades.

That Father made this a matter worthy hooting at, even in his writing to an
Epist. 31. ad Valenti nian. Quando audisti Cleme^tissime Imperator, in causa
fidei Laicos de Epis^^po iudicasse? etc. Si docendus est Episcopus a Lai^o,
quid sequatur? Laicus disputet, Episcopus au^iat: Episcopus d^scata Laico, etc.
Ibid.
Emperor. Nor is he abashed to appeal unto him, whether ever he heard Laics
to judge of Bishops in the point of Faith. And if Bishops must once be taught
of them; what must follow next? Why, the Layman must dispute, and the Bishop
sit by and hear: The Layman should be the Master, an^ the Bishop, the boy to
go to school.

I neither envy nor disparage abilities in private men; I know there be some
whose knowledge and wisdom joined with it, deserves admiration: And all good
Ministers will love them, and bless God for them, and so do I. Such as these
will never smite a Minister, to break his head: their very blows are healing
Plasters to Psalm 141.5.
him.

But I write this to clip the wings of those Batts and Reremice, that are ready
to fly in the Ministers face, upon all occasions with false accusations, saucy
reproves, and proud censures of his Ministry, desiring to be teachers of the
Law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they 1 Timothy 1.7.
affirm.

Wherefore, to draw this point to a Period; let all those that undertake this
office take that advice of a Learned Aegid. Carler. Orat. habit. in Council.
Basil. de punitione pecc.
man, which he once delivered to the Council of Basil, touching this very
case.

A Minister may be told of his failing, by an Inferior; but always remember
that it be a brotherly admonition, with all due circumstances observed in it;
as namely that he is a Public Person, a Brother, a Father, and a Superior,
all, in one.

Because he is a Public Person and a Superior, an Inferior owes him
reverence and honor; because a Father, owes him Love; and because a Brother,
he owes him a helping hand, and in case of any failing, his admonition too;
which must so be given that his honor may be preserved, as well as his fault
amended. The Alex. de Hales. p. 3. q. 33. mem. 4. ar. 5 Malo Praelato qua diu
ab Ecclesia tolleratur, debetur honor, etc.
Personal failings of such a Person is no warrant for Inferiors to despise
him; so long as the Church allows him, the people must do him honor, for his
Place and Calling.

Thus far the Rules to be observed by our Zeal in dealing with Public
Persons. I am now come to the other maine company, which in the Civil
consideration of men, Discretion accounts Private Persons, and teaches Zeal
accordingly to use them.

In dealing with a Private Person, Discretion does first require the Zealot to
consider what he is himself, whether a Private Person, or a Minister.

If a Private Person, then he must consider whether the Party he would deal
withal, be one under his special Charge, as he is a Father, a Master of a
Family, or has otherwise some special interest in the Party as a friend, or
Tutor; or not under his Charge.

Those under his Charge, he must divide into three ranks; Elders, Equals,
Inferiors.

First, if they be Elders Elders.
by age only, as old Persons indefinitely, or with some further addition of
natural relation, as Parents, or other kindred; toward these he must
reverently and humbly behave himself Aegid. Carler. Orat. ante cit. Ex parto
increpantis distinguendum est. Aut enim increpates sunt iuuenes, aut senes. Si
iuuenes debent corripere aut monere humiliter.
and speak with Prayers.

It is the Apostles rule to Timothy himself, Rebuke not an Elder but entreat
him as a 1 Timothy 5.1.
Father: by an Elder, meaning an aged Person, not a Minister, as Non dicit hic
sacerdotem, sed cum qui cosenuit: hoc enim ea sign^ficant quae subiun^untur,
lut^^nes and fratres, etc.
Theodoret observes. And this Elder, he must even beseech, (...)
or speak comfortably to him, and as it were with a holy flattery seek to win
him from his errors, as Saint Tract. 10. in Ioh. quibus potes, blandire.
Austin, and Pastor. curli. 3. blanda deprecatione.
Gregory do well advise.

Age is crabbed, and must be flattered rather then struggled with. The
Gray-haire will (and well may) look for honor, though he be poor that wears
it, yea though his folly make it never so dishonorable.

Reproof is grievous and harsh to any that have nothing but nature in them;
especially to Age; and then most of all, when youth does undertake it.
Chrysostom. hom. 13. in 1 Timothy 5. (...).
Therefore youth must be very careful in such a business. Old men and
children may well be served with the same spoone. Checks and threatenings will
but make them froward, and more intractable.

Secondly, if they be Equals, Equals.
as a friend, or Brother, Gods own rule is, rebuke them plainly, and not
suffer sin upon Leuit. 19.16.
them. Howbeit, Love and moderation must evidently appear in all reproves and
admonitions given them, not without expression of thy grief that thou
should be forced to entertain them with such discourse.

If he be a friend, says Austin, Ibid. tract. 10. Si frater, prolube, moan,
contristare, etc. Si amicus est admoneatur leuiter.
handle him gently: And Paul does warrant it; entreat the younger men as 1 Timothy 5.1.
Brethren. Where note withal; He must be a Brother, not only in regard of
Common Profession, but of Civil behauior at least, if not of any particular
and entire affection also to him that does admonish, that so he may hope to do
some good upon him.

If he be a Scorner let him go. Solomon Prou 9.8.
and Christ Mat. 7.6.
himself shall be thy warrant. Give not that which is holy unto dogs. They
will not be taken by the ears by strangers: therefore beware of dogs, Phil
3.2.
beware of evil workers. Mourn with Jeremy, in secret for their sins; let
them have thy Prayers for their reformation; and go thy way.

Thirdly, if they be Inferiors Inseriors.
within thy family; they are either thy Wife, thy Children, or thy Servants.

First, touching the Wife, The wife.
she must not take it ill, in difference from her husband, to be set among
Inferiors: for God himself has put her there, Genesis 3.16.
and bound her to subjection unto her husband as unto her 1 Cor. 11 3 1 Cor.
14.34
head, and that in every thing as to the Ephesians. 5.22 and ver. 24
Lord, so it be no sin: and all this, not sullenly, or with a careless
scorn of his Authority, but even with fear and awful Ephesians. 5.33 1 Pet.
3.5.6.
reverence.

These pills she must swallow willingly; If they seem to bigg or bitter; take
them in some of that Syrup in the Margent, and they will down with ease.

If she offend, ( and in many things we offend, Iam. 3.2.
all) she must even out of the love her husband owes her, be reproved in a
loving manner, that she may reform. And if it be in Gods account, an hating of
our Brother, not to reprove Leuit. 19.17
him: can it be a fruit of love to her that is so near, to let her alone in
sin? O Cruel husband for his doting silence! O wretched woman, having such a
husband, that will let his shoulders grow above his head!

But yet I dare not say with Austin, Aust. tract. 10. in Joan. vxor seuerissime
refrenetur.
let her withal severity be curbed if she do offend; because Saint Paul
himself gives a better rule; Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter
against Colos. 3.29
them.

Chrisost. in Col. 3. hom. 10
And this he urges to prevent all rigide, uncivil, unchristian, and unnatural
scorning, controling, beating of them, even when they have offended. Rebuke
her, after entreaties and admonitions the husband may, in love; but not in
Passion, or before the family, so long as she is tractable to hear in secret,
and amend in public

She is no otherwise inferior then a part of thy self, O husband; not as thy
Servant, Says Worthy Chrysostom, Hom. 20. in Ephesians. 5. Speaking of the wives
fear or reverence due to the husband; he says, (...), etc
but as a free Princess within thy Empire. She is thine own body; If thou
make her thy slave, thou dishonourest and abasest, not so much thy wife, as
thine own self.

Her subjection consists in this that she contradict not, insult not, nor
usurp authority over the man; Chrisost. Jbid.
not in this, that she should be a trembling slave subject to taunts and
blows.

The maine duty of the wife is not love, but Subjection. The maine duty of the
husband, is not rule, but love. Though he must rule as well as love; and she
must love, as well as yield subjection.

Let not the husband think he has pre-eminence to domineere tyrannously,
because his wife is subject: Chrisost. in Coloss. 3. hom 10. (...), etc.
nor must the wife think she may usurp, because her husbands duty is to show
such love. Let not the love of the husband lift up the wife; nor her subjection
puff up the husband.

Therefore did God subject the wife, that she might more be loved; advance the
husband, that he might more be feared; yet bound his hands from soldiers
Logic, and his heart to Love, that she might perform with ease and
readiness the law of her subjection.

Subjection to him we love is thought no yoke; and love unto a Subject can
yield no cause of fear.

Therefore in this point I say unto all husbands, She who is the companion of
thy life to help thee bear the yoke in all estates: she who bare the so^row
of bearing all thy Children: she whom God ordained to be thine eyes delight,
the cheifest matter of all thy earthly joys, the fairest Jewel of thy
happiest life: and she who now is made thy self, and thou made her in all, but
bearing children, (the greatest sorrow;) and loosing thine authority, (her
greatest yoke:) she, I say, who is all these things, and many more in one,
must not be forced and subdued by slavish fear and threats, but compassed
with love, and taken in the Toils of dear affection.

Oh hellish Commonwealth where tyranny makes nothing so much abhorred by the
wife as her husban^s presence! Oh hellish pleasure to content a husband in
seeing his wife dwell with him as a boughten slave!

Therefore let not the husband be on fire for every straw the wife lets fall
before him; The kindling of one small mote, often endangers the burning of the
house. Nor let the wife delight in shattering; especially when she knows that
wildfire is at hand. If the house be burnt through her default: she cannot
hope for comfort, if she be burned with it.

Let wives beware how they iostle their husbands beside the Kings high way. If
an Action of trespass be entered against the husband for it: What gets the wife
by that? Wisdom finds it better to prevent a Trespass, then to recover
trebble damage and the greatest costs.

2. The next inferior object of a Zealots zeal within his family are children
and servants. Children and Servants.
Of this I will not write much, because it is a subject more easy and less
difficult, then that which went before. Nor is there any controversy that I
know in it.

Children must be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Ephesians. 6 4.
Lord. Servants must also walk in the same trade and way. Both these offending
must abide rebuke from him who is above them as a father or as a master,
because he is a Governor equally to both.

If a brother offending must be reproved; a child and a servant must not think
to escape. These are not only under the tongue, but the hand of correction too.
Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod he
shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul from
Prou 23.13 14.
hell.

Nor is this, hatred, and want of natural affection: but cockering is. He that
spares the rod, hates his son, but he that loves him chasteneth him Prou.
13.24.
betimes Zeal therefore must set upon this irksome office, although the
father be as unwilling to it, as ever Zippora to circumcise her son.

Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Prou 22.15
child, and the rod of correction is the only Bezoar to drive it out. Nor must
he be let alone till he be grown up: or till he will accept it, without an
out-crie. Weeds will easily come up, if they be taken young: but let them grow a
while, and we know what follows. Therefore as this work must be done; so it
requires have. Chasten thy son while there is hope: and let not thy soul
spare for his Prou. 19.18.
crying.

The mother also may do this work, although the father has the charge
immediately given him. That God bids him do it, and not the mother; is not to
forbid her, but to double his diligence. If all were left to her, she would do
too little.

The father is, or should be wiser of the two, therefore fittest to take the
charge upon him. The mothers tenderness may be too much: the fathers
wisdom must supply that failing. And though he may forbear the execution,
when the mothers moderation will serve the turn: yet when she bestows too
little, his duty is, with more severity to make it up.

Servants are under the yoke as much as children; yea more, unless they will
be men of Vnyoked.
Belial. Their stubbornes and lewdness is not to be endured if it were but for
the bad example. Children learn more evil from their ill carriage, then they
will get good, from their parents goodness.

Fodder, a wand and a burden are for the Ass; and bread, correction and work
for a Eccl. 33.24
servant. Not that all need all these, but only evil servants. Let not them
think this counsel to be only Apocryphal. The sacred Canon will allow a rod
for the backs of fools.

Nor does this allow masters to be tyrants, as often they be. Many masters
think they may do any thing unto a servant: but Paul says no. As masters
look for service and obedience, so they must give love, as well as wages:
forbearing, Ephesians. 6.9.
(that is to say, moderating, (...).
) threatenings; knowing that they also have a master in heaven, neither is
there respect of persons with him.

When thy servant works truly, entreat him not evil: nor the hireling that
bestows himself wholly upon thee: let thy soul love a good servant, and
defraud him not of Ecclus. 7.20.21.
liberty. Make him not a slave: but give him some encouragement, if he do not
abuse it.

And even in his failings, he must not be too much looked after; if they be but
failings of an honest heart. As a master must not make a servant his fellow,
for this is the way to let him at length to become his Prou. 29.21
son: that is, to wrong his son in carrying away that, which should be the
sons inheritance: So he must not stand and hearken at every door and corner,
to tyrannize over a faithful servant; and to take notice of every word that is
spoken; lest he get a curse for his labor.

Although God has given the master power to correct the servant, when he
has made a wilful fault yet he must know, that if he wrong his servant, God
will set it up in skore: and he himself will avenge the servant on his master
for Col. 3.25.
him.

Men must not fight, nor women neither, for every fault of infirmity, when we
take servants, we do not take Angels, but men and women as bad our selves, and
that for the most part is bad enough. Do we look God should bear with us for
all faults, even of the highest nature; and yet think that under pretense of
zeal, we should bear with no faults at all in a servant?

I dare boldly say, no man has more sins upon the skore then a dogged
master, or cursed mistress: They will forgive nothing; if they do, they will
nose a poor servant (that makes more faults out of fear then purpose) with
their mercy a week after. Now can they look to speed better at the hands of
God? Christ Mat. 18.35.
I am sure said, that his Father has another purpose.

Not that I mean to restrain just severity; but only tyranny: and that
Governors should wisely consider and distinguish between fault and fault,
servant and servant.

I know some servants make show of much religion: but look upon them better,
and you shall find that this is taken up to become more saucie, to get unto
themselves a greater liberty, and to serve as a buckler to bear off all
blows, and all reproves. As if Religion brought some privilege to servants,
not only to be indocible, (for they must be taught nothing, crossed in
nothing;) but incorrigible; for they must not have a blow, or a sharp word
offered to them.

Such Religion would be brusht off the coat; and some better beaten into the
heart, in stead of that which only hung without. Such servants are of all
others the worst to be endured, and most dangerous in any family. For a while
they will be devout in a religious house: for none else will fit them, but
give them liberty, and they often put all their Religion into a Babie.

I did not urge the former moderation, to plead the cause of such proud
selfe-willed hypocrites, (who have nothing to boast of, but a demure look, and
carrying of a Bible; being otherwise neither good servants; nor willing to be
better;) no more then I would teach profane scoffers, and persecuting Ishmaels
to call good evil; and light darkness.

I know there be many gracious and worthy men and maids, that bring in more
blessings to the family, then all the house besides. Genesis 39.5.
Joseph was diligent in his masters service; but his hands were nothing to his
heart, his labor nothing to his grace, for the advancement of his masters
gain.

Such a servant would be entreated as a Ecclus 33.31.
brother: loved above gold, and praised to the heavens, and for nothing so
much, as for his Religion expressed in his diligence and humble duty.

But some may take advantage from my former words, and make his conclusion
larger then my premises. And when they see a servant zealous in Religion,
begin to say; Here is one of those hypocrites I read of the other day* you are
so bookish, so holy, and so pure, that I doubt all will prove stark naught
ere long, etc.

To stop their mouths; I must inform them, that Religion is not to blame, if
hypocrites abuse it. The wine is not in fault, because the drunkard reeles.
Therefore beware how you blaspheme religion and religious duties.

If he that seems religious, will yet be idle, false, undutiful, and
stubborn, rail at Ceremonies, Bishops, and Common Prayer; disdain to be
corrected, and maintain his faults; that man or woman will never have any true
Religion in him, till with a cudgel all these counterfeits be beaten off.

But if he read, and pray, fall into good discourses to his fellows, talk of
what he reads and hears, to edify himself and others: And to this devotion,
and humble diligence and care to please: this man or woman is a precious
Jewel. What though he sometimes fault: was it with his will? did he study for
it? and now it is made, does he m^intaine himself or it? does he not confess
it? does he not bewail it? does he not submit to checkes and blows, if they
be given? does he not endeavor to do better? does not his former fault make
him to double his future diligence? Let no man think Religion can keep back
all faults, that none shall pass her bay: but this she does; those that by
force leap through her hands, she fetches back again.

If thus they do; He is a true Israelite in whom there is no guile. Blessed
that family who does enjoy him. Blessed that Master that has such a Treasure.

If such a Jacob meet with a hoggish Laban, he has a hard condition: but
Laban shall have a harder, if Jacob go away. And though Laban cannot frame his
tongue to give him one good word; yet he were better mend his wages, then loose
his servant, since he cannot but learn by experience that the Lord has blessed
him for that Servants Genesis 30.27
sake.

So then; if men delight in fighting, it must not be with those that seek to
please, although they sometimes fail: but those that seek to sin, although
they sometimes please.

And yet with these, Zeal must not be a Bedlam always. Though they provoke
his passion, his passion must not fight. His wisdom must do this, when that
is over: And execution days must have their euenings, and their prorogations.

If thou have a bad Servant, said a wise man, set him to work that is fit for
him: if he be not obedient put on more heavy fetters: But be not excessive
toward any: and without discretion do Ecclus 33.28.29.
nothing. The Magistrate must put in mercy to his song, as well as Psalm. 101.2.
judgment: and thou much more.

There is a kind of sowernes in some fathers and masters, which makes them
unable to frame themselves to kindness, even when their children and servants
do deserve it.

Such a sour piece was Laban unto Jacob, and such are many now, who think
their frowning brows, and looks as sour as meal a week in leaven, should
be interpreted their gravity, and fatherly authority: but this the world
expounds another way: and they must mend their look, or look for little love.
They may be feared, because they will enforce it: but never loved, because they
love to fear.

There is another wind-gaule, worse then this: and that is Nabals
boysterous-furious -- chiding -- roaring -- tone.

Nabal himself may count his loudness zeal: but none about him are of his
opinion. He may make a shift to charm his tongue abroad: because if he
neglect it, others would do it for him. But ask his servants how they would
describe him: and they with readiness will give him this description; 1. Sam.
25 17.
He is such a son of Belial that a man cannot speak to him.

If we shall doubt his servants were partial to themselves, and spoke in
passion what he deserved not: yet let the holy Ghost himself be heard to
speak, and he will give this censure of him, The man was churlish and evil in
his 1. Sam 25.3
doings. Therefore evil because churlish.

Find me a bedlam furious man that is always chiding, skoulding, finding
fault, or fighting; and prove that man to be no wicked person, and he may well
be called the wonder of his age.

Never tell me, thy people are too bad, and that with all thy stir thou can
not make them good: this I will believe without thy telling: and tell thee
back again; if they were good, thou would but make them bad.

He was no fool that said, Be not as a Lion in thine house, nor frantic
among thy Ecclus 4.30.
servants: therefore take his counsel; and be assured, He that troubles his
own house, shall inherit the Prou 11 29
wind. How can he look for more, who blows so strongly every time he
breathes, that with his very breath he blows the rest away?

His rage is such as sets his wife on fire; and if she be not moved, his rage
is much the more. Let children and servants do what they can to tame him by
their music; their best reward from him is but the Fiddlers liuerie, which he
may claim by Rogues 39. Elizab. cap. 4
Statute.

But now me thinks the Grumbol comes to parle Why, what would you have me do?
I cannot turn my back but all is out of order, children and servants are so
idle, and so false that I cannot trust them with a straw. One lies a bed,
another runs to the Alehouse; a third keeps idle company, a fourth spends
my estate; and she that should look to them, cares for nothing but to help
wast my goods, and to maintain the rest in all their villainy? What, should
not a man speak? Should he not give his children due correction? Does not God
himself require him to use severity, when gentle means suffice not? Why then
do you tax me as if I did amiss?

And is this so indeed? Then search the cause; when this is found, I will help
thee to some remedy.

Do children and servants thus abuse thee when thou turnest thy back? What
then do thou make from them? Have thou a calling here, and will no place hold
thee but some Ale-bench, Tavern, Bowling-alley, Cockpit, or worse then all
these?

And do thou wonder that others look not to thy business, when thou thy
self so often leauest all? Thou will run abroad and spend a months revenue
in an afternoon; or by occasion of some Usurers lime-twig set to catch the
Gallant, bring thy self in snares that none but fools go into, and hazard the
greatest part of thine estate by thine own Act and deed, at half an hours
warning.

And when thou feel the gin begin to gird thee, can thou have the face to
run home with the snare at thy heels, and chide, chide, chide, for half an
inch of candle, that one of thy children, thy servants, or thy wife did burn
too much; and cry out on them. Oh! these wastfull spend-thrifts will never
leave me till they have undone me?

Thy family be bad: when did thou teach them better? Or if thou did in
anger thunder out their duty, once in seven years; did thou not imagine thy
thunder would but maze them? where was thy good example to drive home thy
instruction?

Can thou imagine how they should believe that they have better beer at
home, then any Ale-wife has; when thou drinkest not a drop, but in an
Alehouse? Can thou blame them for following, when thou did lead the way?

And if they be unwilling to stay within, when thou art in the house; can
thou be angry that they run from the Bear? Will any beasts be in the Lions
den when he approaches?

Can thou blame them, if they be wild abroad? If thou do make thy house a
Bridewell, or a Bedlam; can thou imagine thy people will not be willing and
study to break thy prison?

But all this while my purpose is not to plead for them, but against thee, to
show the cause of this heavy plague of God upon thee and thy family. Let them
for ever lay their hand upon their mouth; and never say, The father has eaten
sower grapes and the childrens teeth are set on edge.

Thy negligence has caused this judgment to thy self; and occasioned that
sin in them. The cause of this, as sin, was in themselves: but this occasion
did set abroach that cause. They had the liquor in them, thou did pull out
the tap: And so, both are deep in fault that so much gaul is now drawn out
unto thee: thou, for giving vent; and they, for giving issue of no better
liquor. If God give not repentance, they shall die for their own sins; but
thou for both.

If after all, thou ask a remedy: accept of this. Leave thy gaming and thy
gadding, and with them thy madness: get thee home; confess thy fault, reform
thy self; and then set thy house in better order.

Be no more as a Bird that forsakes her nest to let her young ones perish.
Dwell with thy wife as a man of knowledge: Love her yet at last, and be no more
bitter, now, bring up thy children in the fear and nurture of the Lord, though
thou have neglected it: do that which is equal unto thy servants: show the
love of a Father, as well as the severity of a Master.

Then may thou begin to chastise the unruly, if they will not reform: and
because thou did it so ill before; take with thee some Cautions to do it
better now.

First, ever join some good instruction with it: or rather, let instruction
go before. There are two ways, says Clem. Alex. strom. 4. (...).
Clement, unto Reformation, instruction and chastisement: and he that will
reform another must walk in both these paths. Both must be used; both must be
knit in one another.

By this the peccant party is made to know his fault, and better prepared to
accept the punishment of his iniquity; and taught his duty better for the time
to come.

Secondly, to both these, he must add Love; this golden leaf must lap the
pill about. His fury and his passion must not bear the sway in his
corrections, but love must moderate his angry Passions.

Love must not take them quite away, but guide them in an even pace; and stop
them, when they would, run out too far. We know who said, let all your things
be done in 1 Cor. 16.14.
Charity.

These three, Instruction, Correction, and Love, make the best rod to beat a
child or servant. If either of these twiggs, be wanting the rod is naught.
Love without instruction does make but Clownes: instruction without correction
does make but saucy wantons: correction without instruction, makes fools, or
desperate dullards: and instruction without love does make but tired Iades.

David showed Love, but added no instruction, or correction: 1 King. 1.6
Adoniah to requite him, usurped his Throne. Eli showed love and gave
instruction too; 1 Samuel 2.23, 24, 25.
but used no correction: therefore his Sons went on till God destroyed them,
and brake his neck, upon the sudden news of loosing Gods own Arc in
judgment for their sins, which he by seasonable severity prevented not.
Nabal showed severity too much; but neither instruction nor love, at all:
therefore his whole household were in some contention whether they should hate
him, or despise him most.

Wherefore in all thy rods let these three spriggs be found, and then lay on
the stubborn, whether child, or servant: these two must be unto thee
indifferent in chastisements. Galat. 4.1.
The child must not be beaten, and the servant escape when both are guilty.
Nor must the servant suffer for that fault, wherein the child is suffered.

Allow thy child thy love above thy servant: but if thou shall allow him in
the smallest fault; he will prick thee more with that small thorn, then any
servant could, with a greater weapon.

If any difference be; let children feel the rod more often then thy
servants; for that will better these besides the good to those. Examples of
severity on them we love, do terrify and teach them most who are further off.

And though the root do yield more sapp and sweetness unto the several
branches that do issue from it; then to the stakes or props that stand about
it; yet these must be preserved, or else the tree and branches too, will
suffer.

Servants are stakes and props to families, (though sometimes very rotten:)
therefore, if of use, they must be well maintained. And though they may not
look for so much inward or outward love, as children have: yet some, they must
have: or thou do them wrong.

Yea, I dare to add; in case of reformation, as love should show it self to
benefit their souls, and bring them unto heaven (where is no difference of
Master, Servant, Husband, child, or wife;) a Master must express as much
affection to a hired Servant within his roof and care, as to his dearest child.

Touching those within our Charge Zeal has his Lesson; and longer then I
meant it, when I did begin it. Now if a Zealot will meddle any further; he must
be further guided by Discretion how to handle Persons beyond his Government.
Persons without our Charge.


If cause of admonition be administered, by any without his Charge; and, if he
will give it, he must observe two Rules.

if any Elder, Better, Fitter, then himself be present, Elihu must hold his
peace till they have done, or till he does perceive they will do nothing.

It was a Wise man's Counsel: Speak thou that art Elder for it becomes thee;
but with sound judgment, and hinder not the Ecclus. 32.3
music of a better discourse, (he means) if any be on foot: and this, he
comes over again, to make the Elder careful. Power not out words where there
is a Ibid. ver 4.
Musician: He does not mean a Fiddler, but a Wiser Speaker.

To the young man he adds; Ibid. ver. 7, 8, 9.
Speak young man if there be need of thee; and yet scarcely when thou art
twice asked. Let thy speech be short, comprehend much in a little: be as one
that knows, and yet holds his tongue. But when comes his turn about? When
ancient men are in place use not many Ibid. ver. 9.
words.

These Rules, I know, are general; and being so, they may be well applied to
the point in hand. Elihu may be a pattern of the former precept, without
exception or more ado.

When humbled Job had long handled a good cause ill, and his three cruel and
censorious friends (void of all compassion) has handled a bad, as well; and
after running of themselves quite out of breath, so that they answered no more,
but left off speaking: and Job continuing in his error (of justifying himself
rather then Job 32.2.
God,) vnconuinced, Elihu begins to speak; but with a long Apology to them,
and for himself, before his speech to Job: because they were his Ibid. ver. 4.
Elders.

I am young, and ye are old, wherefore I was afraid and durst not show you mine
opinion. I said, days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom. But there is a Spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty
gives understanding. Great men are not always wise, neither does the aged
understand judgment. Therefore I said, harken unto me, I will also show you my
opinion, etc.

Now from this humility and modesty (not Arrogancy, as Gregory wrongly judged)
of Elihu, Judicious Calvin would have all young men take out this Calvin in Job
conc. 120 Notemus igitur vbi non adsit modestia, illic Zelum esse praecipitem
quique spiritu dei no regatur.
lesson. Where Modesty is wanting, there Zeal is rash and foole-hardy,
refusing to be governed by the spirit of God.

Secondly, 2. Rule.
when a man does speak in his order, he must do it wisely, gently, and even
with submissiue entreaties though they to whom he speaks should be his
Inferiors.

It was a Grave observation, He that uses many words shall be hated; and he
that takes to himself authority therein shall be Ecclus. 20.8.
abhorred.

When holy Lot had suffered much and long among the Sodomites, so that his
righteous soul was daily vexed with their ungodly deeds: yet he did not in
heat of passion with a commanding accent check their rudeness, even when in
barbarous manner they did abuse him most: but rather with friendly entreaties
and humble prayers he thus bespeaks them, I pray you brethren do not so Genesis
19 7.
wickedly.

When Paul directed his Instructions to Titus an aged Minister, touching
rebuking of some in Creete with sharpness; Tit. 1.3.
he only meant the Persons within the Charge of Titus. As Hic aut^m non
alienos sed proprios adeoque domesticos oportere adserit arguere, Theophil.
Theophilact, and, before him, Chrisost in Tit. hom. 3. (...).
Chrysostom expound the place. For well he knew that others must be won
with prayers, not with threats.

If then a Minister (whose Function seems to back him, yet) has no authority
to use such freedom beyond his Cure: Much less have Private Persons; their
Language must be entreaties, not commands. They must serve in no vinegar with
butter, unto a stranger: least he distaste the sauce, and him that brought it
to him.

Even boys disdain a check from him that has no power: and yet the stoutest
stateliest heart will bend with an entreaty; or if they do not, it is beyond
the reach of any Private Persons to do them any good.

Zeal must be wary always, because it is distasteful when it has best
Commission: but then, most cautious when it enters, only upon sufferance, into
a house, or any company.

A Zealous Reproouer (what ever he may promise of, or to himself) shall
hardly meet with such a fool as will not find, or at least pretend some flaw
or other in his Zeal, do he what he can. And if he hap to spy a fault
indeed; woe to the Reproouer.

The other may be faulty, but will not be amended; nor did he ever mean it.
He huggs himself in private for such a good occasion to beat off the Zealot
from his beloved Sin. Yet ask him a Reason, why he is incorrigible? his
answer will be ready, he knows none but one; the Zealots indiscretion. The
Ministers duty; not so much taught, as rendered to satisfy the world that do
mistake it.


The Private Person, (with whom, for this time, I have done) may now be gone.
The Task of Ministers about Private Persons comes next to hand.

A Minister, dealing with any of his Charge, knows how, I hope, without my
help, to do it. And yet of him, rather then to him I must say something (as
those men use to do that go for Orders or a Benefice,) not so much to teach,
as give account.

The Patients this Physician has in Cure are most commonly affected with the
Migram, or the Hectic Fever. He is to deal with erroneous persons, and such
are corrupt in life.
They have either giddy brains in point of judgment; or else the very
substance of their immortal hearts are taken, less or more, with a consuming
heat of sin that shows it self in hands, and face, and all their
conversation. And according to the Quality of the Disease must be his Physic.

When he is to deal with Hemicranicall Persons to cure them of their
giddiness, How with erroneous.
two rules are needful, for the manner of it. The one, for those that yet are
not transformed quite into a Windmill; yet somewhat touched; but capeable, and
glad, of Cure. The other for such as need some Dutch-dull-house, and will not
take their Physic without a horn. I mean plainly, the Ingenious, and the
Refractary; the one, unwittingly led into; the other gladly dancing in dark
errors Labyrinth.

With the Ingenious other then ingenuous dealing is most Uncivil and Pernicious.

Uncivil, first, because he has not in his hand, a stubborn rugged dogged
disposition that runs out of the way, of malice; but a free capacious,
yielding Nature that by love and sweetness would be drawn too far, if one
would put him to it.

Now, to tear a Lamb that prostitutes himself, a Lion would disdain. What
need he be tied to a Bed, or chair that lies down of himself and bids you cut
and Lance, or what you will, and spare not, so you mean to Cure him?

Pernicious too: for commonly when a gentle Nature is wildly handled, it makes
him fearful not only of the Satyr, but of all others in his likeness. It
puts also a kind of fierceness in Him, by accident, that had it not by
nature; but being there it is like to prove as bad, yea aduentitious heates are
worse then Natural.

He willingly embraced the Apostles 1 Cor. 3.18.
Counsel, and was content to yield himself a fool that thou might make him
wise. But if two fools, the one tame, the other mad meet together, they are
like to make a mad meeting. The tame fool is like to get but little; and the
mad one, less. This may make the other as mad as himself, but cannot hope to
make him what himself is not.

That Preaching King makes this observation touching Preachers. The more wise
the Preacher was, the more he taught the people Eccles. 12.9.
knowledge. And if you ask wherein his wisdom lay? he says, in this. The
Preacher sought to find out acceptable Ibid. Verse 10.
words, or words that might (...) Verba volu^tatis.
please.

He means not easy Cradles to rock their sins asleep, nor soothing Pillowes
to lay those Bratts upon; but gentle familiar friendly plain expressions of
himself, with love and kindness, in points of Instruction whereof his Flock
was ignorant, yet willing to be informed.

To this especially is that to be applied; 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to
teach, patient, in meeknes instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth.

If a Fore-horse lead, and pull the rest that follow out of the common tracke,
should he that guides them, beat and pound the Thiller, whose back is almost
broken by being led aside? would not any man think that hare-brained Bedlam
fitter for the Lash-horse, then a Carter. The comparison is homely, but it fits
my purpose.

If a man should see a poor seduced Papist, Brownist, or other ill sodered
Separatist in England, London, or in Paul's it self; and could no sooner see
him, but flies upon him like a Tigar, and (even in private betwixt them two
alone) cry out, What you? Is It possible? Can this Age yield a damned Papist or
foul-mouthed Schismatic in such a Sunshine of the Gospel as we have now?
What, live under such a Ministry, and be so ignorant? nay worse; a very Sea of
hellish errors? Ah miserable wretch! can thou escape damnation? Away to Hell:
thy Pope is gone before, and thou will after, as sure as God's in Heaven.

Would you imagine, thunder could persuade trembling Caligula to creep out
from his Bed? Or that this poor seduced worm is not ere this, distracted; or
else begins to feel about for holes to creep into from such an heavy foot?

If he had met some White-Booted, guilt-spurrd Jesuits skulking for their
Prey; then he might well have cried, Oh the Froggs! the Revel. 16.13, 14.
Froggs that creep out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the
Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, the spirits of Devils, etc.

This would have been but well, unless the Holy Ghost did ill, in giving
these names to such Arch-seducers.

But he mistook, 'twas not the Froggs, he met; but only the Snaile that those
foul Froggs had sucked. This silly Snaile might have been won, if he had had
the patience to let her creep her own pace: she was offering her self to
come upon his hand; but he, most cruelly, shook her off again, and lifts up
his foot to crush her all to pieces.

Why; here is Mad Tom indeed; give him but a Clubb, you need not add a Horn;
his Throat will serve the turn. He that ever knew He denied all pardon and
repentance for sins committed after Baptism: e^pecially to such as once
forsook the True faith, though with tears they returned to it. Therefore was
condemned for an Heretic. Eusebius. lib. 6. ca. 35. Epiph. haeres. 59.
Nouatus, would almost swear He held that the souls of me^ passed out of one
body into another at death. Vide Aug. de Trin. lib. 12. Cap. 15. Zanch. de
oper. dei lib. 1. cap 3.
Pythagoras said true; and that Nouatus soul had entered this man's Body.

When this man makes a Proselyte, we may all turn Papists: and I had almost
wished any man, He meets, to be of any Religion rather then of his, were it not
his Religion, and his Raueing, are two things.

A Lamb will hardly take meat from a Lion, be his meat, and meaning what it
will. Truth is ill attended when it borrowes Errors Usher, Violence, to man her
Inn.

To such as are refractary, sharpness does best agree. Knotty blocks require
more Wedges, and harder blows to drive them. If he that undertakes them shall
dally, and not stricke home with all his might, he shall find the Wedge about
his shinnes. Bodies whom gentle Physic will not move, must have stronger.

The same Apostle who, ere while, taught Timothy to be so gentle, bids Titus to
be more sharp to obstinate offenders; Rebuke them sharply that they may be
sound in the Tit. 1.13.
Faith. Hard hearts, heavy Dura eoru^ corda penetret in crepatio. dura. Anselm.
in Tit.
Hammers. Theoph. in Tit. 1. Nam apud eos ma^s^etudo nihil promouet. Qu^mad
modum enim qui initem and moderatum acrius feriat, perdit eum; sic qui
impudenit adulatur eum corrumpit, ne se ipsum agnoscat.
Theophilact gives the reason: Impudent men will not be moved by mildness,
unless to laughter, and scorn. As he that smites a tender disposition with
heavy blows destroies him: so he that strokes a brazen-face, marres him,
that he will never come to know himself.

Wilfulness does usually wait on erro^r; especially when it grows to the
scab of heresy. Heresy is but a great error translated into obstinacy. An
Heretic is but a doting tree set on fire. When an erroneous opinion is once
taken up, a corrupt heart will hold that faster, and struggle more for it, then
for the truth: because like to like best agrees.

Heresy is like a Leprosy, it frets as it spreads, and spreads as it frets;
and at length spoils all, and infects others. Hence it is that Saint Paul
wills Timothy and Titus his Scholars, to shun heresy, and re^ect
Heretics with as much detestation as speed.

First Heresy, because it will eat like a Canker, or 2. Tim. 2.17
Gangrene, let Physicians squabble Vide Marlor. in hunc locum.
whether these two words signify one, or two things, I care not. Sure I am the
best is naught; and heresy as bad as the worst. Theod. ibid. Cancer est morb^s
serpens, etc.
Theodoret and Chrysostom Chrysostom. ib. (...), etc.
call it a Canker: which is a poisonous and horrible disease, that unless it
be taken suddendy, and cut off sharply, no Physic can cure it, therefore the
Apostle wills him to shun such babbling: that is, to lop off those twigs, and
with all vehemency to cut them down, as Chrysostom expoundes it.

Secondly Heretics, who are always stiff as a Cable: so that a man had need
throw himself upon them with all his might to make them bow; and yet all will
not do, they must be casheired with all severity. Their error is like pitch in
a Cable, there is no getting of it out, but with casting them often into the
sea, or into a fire. Therefore, a man that is an Heretic, after the first and
second admonition Tit. 3.11. Hugo de sci. viol. in Tit. Elucid. haereticum
vocat qui per legem logem impugnat: scienter peccat and veritatem nouit: and
tamen errorem laudat and veritatem vituper^t.
reject.

An Heretic he calls him, that under color of law, becomes lawless; sinning
and knowing well enough what he does: he is no babe; he knows truth when he
sees it: yet commends error with truths praise, and besmeares truth with
errors filth: such a Viper is not a play-game for Christians, but to be shook
off in haste into the fire; and kept there-too, or else he will leap in your
face.

Now if a man should meet with such an Elephant that would not bow without a
cudgel about his leg-posts; does he amiss that lends him a sound blow to
force him to it? Must we do nothing but fill his trunk with Cherries, and
think that this will do it?

A man shall meet with some persons even in every Parish, who though they be
far enough from heresy; as gaul from rats-bane, yet are of such a sullen
stubborn disposition, that unless he pull out that stubbornness with Paul's
rod, he shall never drop one scruple of living waters into these
narrow-mouth-stiffe -- leather -- thick -- furred-bottels.

But once master them, and they will prove good Proficients quickly. Softness
would harden these, as water does the stone: and hardness will only make them
soft, as fire does the iron.

They that know this, will not always count severity, tyranny; nor
mildness, mercy. Discretion calls for both, and does apply them as the
persons with whom we are to deal shall need them.

It is Gregory's Greg Mag. de Past. cur. par 2 cap. 6.
observation of Peter. Act. 20.25.
When Cornelius out of ignorant or superstitious humility made a fault by
offering him Divine worship, Peter did not nail him to the ground while he
had him down, for such a sin; but gently took him up; as we would, a great
person casually stumbling, rather then as a shrewd boy, to whip him. Stand up,
says he, I my self also am a man: here was no harshnesse and bitterness
under pretense of zeal, he knew well, Cornelius was no obstinate
man-worshiper.

But when demure Ananias, the charitable Hypocrite, seemed to make a far less
fault; yet because he did it with a far worse heart, Peter of a Lamb turned
Lion, and smote him dead with a word. In both he did well, and we must imitate
him.

It is not enough to say, he is severe and terrible; therefore harsh; unless
the parties disposition be duly weighed and found of a gentle temper, and he
know it too. If nothing can persuade the sullen Patient to take his physic,
(which he must take or perish,) is that cruelty not to be borne, which wrings
him by the throat, till the halfe-mad-man gape, and he power it down whether
he will or not?

I think it hardly possible for a man, now to thunder with more terror, then
Peter did at Act 8.20. etc
Simon Magus; or Paul at Act. 13.9.10.11.
Elimas. Yet Paul gives other counsel. 2. Tim. 2.24
What then? Did Paul teach others, and not himself? prescribe a Cordial, and
give a Vomit? nothing less. He prescribed both the one and the other: and if
men had a will as well as eyes they might see it plain Tit. 1.13.15.
enough.

If he had not prescribed both; yet enioyning the one, and doing the other,
would teach reasonable men that both must be done. One rule serves not all
cases: for then, what need two? He that must be gentle to the Lamb, should be
much to blame to be so to the sly Fox; and he as much, who thinks in doing
more, he does too much.

Thus the Cure of error, which is commonly in the Physicians study, not the
College Hall: Now to that of manners.

How a Minister must cure bad lives.
In matters of conversation he is to deal with his flock either in Private, or
in Public.

Of Private admonitions I have said enough before. I could add more, but I
need not. Worthy In Apologetico.
Gregory Nazianzene, and after him Gregory the In Past. cur. par. 5. per
totum.
Great, have done this so fully, and so excellently, that any man would laugh
at my candle, when their sun shines so gloriously.

The latter of the two has done so excellently, that one Council. Toletan.
Council enjoined all Bishops to read it as a Disciplinarie Catechism, and
another Synod. Aquisgran.
Council made it their only Law to guide them in matters of this nature. This
is enough to commend that, and save me a labor.

In Public, he must be able to turn his hand to any Cure, to speak
pertinently to the condition of many Patients at once, whose constitutions and
degrees of sickness, as well as diseases, do often vary. He must have
Purges, Vomits, (strong and gentle,) Cordials, Electuaries, Iuleps,
Fomentations, an instrument to let some Patients blood, and all in readiness.

Nor must he spare (indefinitely) to open the nature of any disease, the state
of any sick person, the often Paroxismes and returns of feauourish fits. He
must read a Lecture, not out of Galen, but the Physician of Israel; wherein he
must speak of health too, as well as sickness.

And touching sickness he must lay down some Aphorisms to be observed, after
those general rules, he must descend to the Names, Nature, Symptoms, Causes,
Cures of each disease. Nor can he discontent a wise hearer more, then not to
go to the bottom of each Disease he handles; especially if he be troubled
with the same himself that hears.

When Paul had charged Timothy to Preach the Word; he also tells him, how. Be
instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke exhort with all
long-suffering and 2. Tim. 4.2.
doctrine. Reprove the stubborn that being convinced by sound reason they may
yield. Rebuke the disobedient, that they being made ashamed, may reform
themselves, and exhort or entreat such as do well that they go on, and strive
unto perfection, says Anselm. in 2. Tim. 4. Argue resistentes vt rationibus
conuicti cedant. increpa delinquentes vt confusi se corrigant: obsecra been
agentes vt in melius proficiant.
Anselmus.

The same Apostle gives the same instruction to Titus; Tit. 2 15.
These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Tit. 2.15.
authority: that is, says Ansel ibid. in Tit id est, imp^riosa authoritate,
imperij nomine, non dominationem potentiae, sed authoritatem sua dei vitae.
Anselme, with imperious authority, not out of a desire of dominering, but of
necessary power to press men to good life. And so De past. cur. par. 2. cap.
6.
Gregory.

If any obstinate sinners should long to have these Precepts of reproving and
rebuking, pulld out of the Bible as Puritanicall: As poor Aristoph. de Nub.
Strepsiades who would hire a Witch to pull the Moon out of heaven, that so
the Usurers months might never come about; for my part, let them; so he
repeal the Statutes who did first enact them. But until then, we that are
Gods Ministers are bound to execute all Laws within Gods Statute Book.

If any man do well, he need not be afraid: we will do no more but praise and
comfort him. But if ill, then fear: for we bear not the Spiritual sword in
vain: We also are the Ministers of God, Reuengers, to execute wrath upon him
that does Hos. 6.5.
evil.

The 2. Cor. 10.4 5.6.
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds; casting down imaginations with every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ; and having in readiness to revenge
all disobedience.

We must sometimes wound deep where we love dearly; yea wound them (not with
the wounds of an enemy) because we love them; although for our love they
become our enemies: yea though our enemies should be they of our own household.

If any should attempt to beat the sword about our ears who bear it, because
without mercy we hew and wound their sins to death, we must bear that too,
rather then smite one blow the less. So long as we are in Commission, we must
endure afflictions (if any come) do the work of Evangelists, and make full
proof of the 2. Tim 4.5.
ministry.

But yet let all men know, when Christ's servants are abused, he himself
accounts himself despised also. If Saul persecute the Body here on earth, the
Head will cry out in heaven, Why persecutest thou Act. 9.
me? The foot cannot be pricked, but the head complains. And if Kings make it
Treason to abuse or hinder Justices in their place and doing their 23 Edw. 3
cap. 2.
offices; The King of heaven will count it more then Pettie-larcenie, to abuse
his servants for execution of their place and office which he sets them in.

Gods Prophets, though they be Olive Reu. 11.4.
trees that have no corroding quality, if yet they be his faithful Ibid 3.
witnesses, they shall be thought Tormentors of them that dwell in the Ibid.
ver. 10
earth. And it is no marvel: even oil smarts in a ^aw angry wound.

Therefore the world will never be quiet so long as any of that pack remain,
but will be making war upon them, till they have overcome and killed them.
This done; they that dwell on the earth will rejoice over them, and make
merry, and send gifts one to another, because those Prophets are now gone,
that did vex them that dwell on the earth.

Howbeit, the end of that mirth will be bitter griese, the shot will come to
more then they can pay with ease. If any man will hurt the faithful witnesses,
fire proceeds out of their mouths, and deuoureth their Ibid. ver. 5.
enemies. What fire, but that of the Ier. 23.29.
Word. This fire will enter into their souls, not as it did into Ieremies
bones, only to come forth with greater force again, without doing any hurt
within; but a fire that does devour them, says the Text.

Happily it does not make such speed (although Celestial) as the fire from
heaven which lickt up Ahabs Captains and their fifties, two companies one
after another, when they came to attach Eliah to carry him before enraged 2.
Kin. 1.
Ahab. Or as it did Ananias and Act. 5.
Saphira: but most usually as it did Act. 8.
Simon Magus, who at first made some profession of Religion.

When he discovered himself by seeking a Patent to make a Mart of the holy
Ghost, that so the Devil might have the buying and selling of God Almighty;
then Peter cast a fire-ball at him that entered, scorched and quite dried up all
radical moisture of his seeming graces, and set all on fire.

From that time forth he began to waste; he left off all profession, set
abroach heresies, Epiphan haeres. 20.
lived leudly, kept a strumpet, persecuted good men, and (because belike he
kept the country in awe by coniuring) sought to be worshipped as a God, at
Rome and other places. And at length he received the wages of his iniquit^e.

Thus is it with many, who abuse the Prophets. If any man will hurt them, he
may fear in this manner to be Reu. 11.5.
killed. Though they may yet live, and laugh, sure they will never be fat, I
mean in soul. It is a poor comfort that they are alive.

The Bucke may stand a while with the arrow in his side, and while he is hot
not feel it much: but yet ere long, if he be wounded and well hunted he will
surely fall.

If there be a fire that has taken the inside of the house, what gets the
owner by keeping down the flame that others may not see it yet?

These men are no better then walking firebrarnds, if yet the wood be green,
the fire will dry up the sap at last, and then it must burn them up as well as
others. They never go but with a fire about them; they burn, though they do
not complain.

It is a poor choice to him that must die, to choose Saint Anthonies fire
rather then gunpowder; though this has more terror, that has longer smart,
and proves more loathsome, and kills as surely, though not on such a sudden.

How far a minister may go in reproving.
If any ask, how far may a Minister go with warrant in public reproving? I
will not answer much; but some thing must be said to make the work complete.
And because my years and parts may rather learn then teach, I will take my
Rules from grave Antiquity, and show you what the Fathers, and some others
speak to this point. Public sins may be publicly particularized by the
names of the sins, but not by the name or any personal circumstances of the
sinner. If it come to handy-gripes with his person, this is a fault. He is thus
only to be rebuked alone: unless Law passed on him, do otherwise authorize
the reprouer.

The person of the sinner must be spared in public, lest being there thus
shamed, he become desperate and leave his shame behind with the reproof, and
so cleave to his sins for ever, says Saint Hieron. in Mat. 18. Can. 54.
Corripiendus est enim scorsum frater, ne si semel pudorem at^ verecundiam
amiserit, semper r^m^neat in pec^ato.
Hierome.

A man does then best perform his duty, when he that is in authority
domineires over his brethrens sins, rather then their persons, says Past.
Cur. par. 2. cap. 6. Summus ita locus been regitur, ^um is qui pr^est, vit^js
potius quam frat^ibus dominatu^.
Gregory: Among hypocrites it is taken for a law, to turn the authority of
reproving into the power of domineiring: and yet sometimes (says he) Ibid.
Paulo post, etc. Et tamen non. nunquam grauius de linquitur, si inter
peruersos, plus aequalit^s quae disciplina. custoditur.
on the other side he offends more, that among obstinate sinners, studies more
for such an equal balance that none be offended, then to keep necessary
sharpness on foot.

He afterward Ibid. cap. 10. I forbear to set his words in the margent,
because I only take the sum of his speech; and not his words at large, which
would prove too tedious.
adds. Some men's sins are to be dissembled and cunningly insinuated: and
even then he would have it so done too, that the party offending may have some
signs and tokens to guess that a reproof was meant him: and that the
Preacher could say more to him, if the place would bear it.

In this there is no Personal Inuectiue, yet a personal reproof; that is, an
aim and a meaning that such a person should apply it to himself. And thus the
Preacher meant him, and wished in his heart that the other would take it to
himself.

In Gregory's learning, if I understand him, this is no fault to have such a
particular man in his mind, when he reproved sin, because that man is such a
sinner as deserves a reproof.

If upon his indefinite speech, the guilt of the party be such, as like a
loadstone drew the reproof unto him: and all men knowing his guilt, and the
reproof fitted to it (as such a sin, though not as this man's sin,) should
swear they verily believe that this man was meant and shot at: shall this be
an Inuectiue deserving reproof? That Father thought no.

It was the hitting of his sin so right, that made the people say, the
Preacher took his aim at that man. The bullet going point-blanke into the
very heart of his sin, in killing the sin her the man by chance; which
could not be helped, because this sin and this man stood so near together.

When Amphialus laid on with such might upon a supposed Knight that gave him
the encounter: and lent him a great wound upon the neck, closed with him,
overthrew him, and in the fall thrust him mortally into the body, he thought
he had done as became his valor.

But when he came to view his Conquest, it proved Parthenia Argalus his Wife.
If any present, had known what treasure that Armor enclosed, would he not
have said, look how cruelly he lays on Parthenia: when all this while hewist
not of her, save only that he fought with her as with a Knight of the Tomb
that had sent him the Challenge (which he could not refuse;) and not as the
fair desolate Palace of late-slaine Argalus? was he too blame for fighting;
or she, for coming under his weapons, in a place of Combat? Wise men can
apply.

Yea further, to return to Greg. Ibid. cap. 10. Non nu^la autem sunt
v^hem^nter increpanda: vt cum cu^pa ab aut^re non cognoscitur quanti sit
p^nd^ris, ab increpantis ore seruiatur: and cum sibi quis malum quod
perpet^auit leuigat, hoc contra se grauiter ex corris^^ntu asperit^^
pertim^scat.
Gregory, some men's sins are with vehemence to be reproved: as namely theirs
who take no notice of the greatness of their offense, but by such a reproof;
and theirs, who seek to lessen their faults. These would be made to tremble by
the thunder of reproof.

But what is this only in Generals, not naming the particular sins of such
Persons, as sinners; for fear the very naming of the sins would bewray the
Persons, and make the Congregation point at them, and say, Such Persons were
paid to day?

Nay, says the Greg. Ibid. Sed cuncta haec licet subtiliter rector insin^et,
nisi cotra delicta singulorum, aemulationis spiritu ferueat, nullam sibi in
perpetuum absolutionem parat.
Father. For although a man should insinuate never so subtilely and closely,
yet unless by the spirit of Zeal he wax hot against the sins of every person,
God would never forgive him for this neglect. And Gregory speaks now, not of
private admonitions, but of Preaching.

Voluminous Tostatus makes a Question, how this should be done; And demands,
Whether it be lawful, after the Example of Christ, for a Preacher to tax any
man's Person personally in public reproving of ^l^hon. T^^^at. in M^tth. 15.
quest. 30.
sins?

The Sum of his Answer amounts to this much. It is not lawful in p^blick to
reprove any but public faults; nor yet these, by adding any personal
description of the Party to whom it is intended, so much as by his Particular
Trade: as if one should say, there is a man of such a State or Calling has
made such a a fault; thinking that no man being nominated in express terms,
al are reproved, no man particularized but he that deserves it; This he seems
to dislike.

Howbeit he afterward grants that Christ did thus, and he alleges his
example as a President. When Christ Preached, says he, he expressed no one
man's sin in particular: but those sins which many of the same Profession
might be guilty of. As, Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites.
Meaning men of that calling; not you, or you of this company present.

His Conclusion is yet larger; Notwithstanding if any man's sins should be so
notorious, that it is impossible to baulke, palliate or excuse them, it seems
not inconvenient to name them, if he judge it profitable for the reformation
either of them or others, unless some scandal should happen by it. Si tamen
peccata alicuius ita essent notoria quod nulla tergiu^rsatione occultari, aut
palliari possunt, nec excusari* non vid^tur inconueniens quod illa praedicando
diceret, etc.
Scandal not (as I conceive) to the Persons; for theirs cannot be greater then
it is, when their sins are so notorious, as he supposes them to be: but he
means the Scandal of Religion it self as I interpret.

For my part, I would restrain reproves somewhat more then he does. I do
not think that if a Preacher should take liberty to play with any man's Per on
in any other kind, then by using his Name, or his Profession, he should be
free from blame.

But I willingly grant that if a Preacher should attempt to point the
Congregation to any man's Person by his Complexion, clothes, stature, gate in
going, special mark of his habitation, allusions to his name though but a
far off: this were a Personal Inuectiue, and an indiscreet part.

But still by personal description, I mean a resolved purpose and endeavor to
let the Congregation see, not that such a sin is committed by some in the
Church, but that this man, and not that, this man or this woman only is now
reproved, and that he would insinuate at least, unto the People; Now I will pay
this particular Person.

Howbeit as the rules of Gregory and Tostatus run, a man may in reproof of
sin give instance in any special public sin of any man present, so he stay
there without going about to let the people know that such a sin is committed
and This man has done it.

Suppose a man were to preach upon that Text; Wherefore putting away lying,
speak every man truth with his neighbor: for we are members one of Ephesians. 4.25
another. On this Text he must needs show and aggrauate the sin of lying in
General Terms: Then, because all Scripture is not only profitable for
doctrine, but also for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in 2 Timothy
3.16
righteousness; if he should by way of deduction or application, infer, that
then it is a foul shame for any man bearing the name of a Christian, so
grossly to stain that holy profession, as to make a trade of lying in his
ordinary discourse, especially when he would seem to be more then ordinarily
devout and precise.

But if such a man should do it when he takes occasion to speak of good men;
of his Pastor, whom he should reverence as his Father, and whose nakedness he
should rather cover, then discover; this were such an impiety as God would
never put Revel. 21.8 22.^5.
up.

To this if he should add; therefore if there be any here that yet make a
great show of Religion who are not ashamed thus to traduce their neighbors and
busy themselves to invent and utter disgraceful reports and slanders of them
even to drunkards, and pot companions who make no other use hereof but to
scandalize Religion, to rejoice in the faylings of the Godly; and to condemn
the Generation of the righteous, for hypocrites, etc. how do such men remember
and observe the Apostles precept? how can they have any hope that they be of
the fellowship and society of the Saints?

Now suppose further, that though many may be to blame herein, yet, some Person
in the Congregation should be known to the rest to be more eminently guilty of
this sin, then any of the rest; so that as soon as ever such a speech is
uttered, they begin to look toward such a man, or otherwise think in their
hearts that he was now whipped, because they know him so guilty; does this speech
come within the compass of a Personal Inuectiue? Q^aere.

If he had been no more guilty then the rest, no man could possibly have said,
this man was more pointed at, then the most innocent party in all the Church:
Nor could they possibly apply it to him, no more then to themselves; nor he
distaste it, because the reproof was general, and necessarily warranted from
the Text in hand.

This doctrine is not mine, but Saint Austins: and if it be an error, Aetatem
habet. That Father was taken for a wise man in his days; and he that does not
reverence him now, deserves the Cap, and the Babble to boot. His course in
preaching was De verb. Dom. Ser. 16 Palam loquor and in secreto arguo. Aures
omnium pulso, sed conscientias quoru^dam couenio. Non dico Tu adulter, corrige
te; sed dico quisquis in hoc populo adulter es, corrige te. Publica est
correctio, sed secreta correptio.
this.

I speak openly, says he, but reprove secretly. I strick all men's ears
alike, but I convent the consciences of some more particularly.

If there be an Adulterer in the Congregation, I do not single him out, and
say, THOU Adulterer reform thy self: but yet this I say; who ever thou be in
this Company that art an Adulterer, reform thy self. This reproof is
public, because all hear it: and yet secret, because none but thine own sin
can apply it.

If a man diuulge himself first by his sin, is the Preacher in fault for
taking up what the other had laid in his Saluian. de Gubern. dei lib 4. Non
long a principio. post reprehensionem Diuitum, haec habet verba, viz. Neque
ego nunc de vllo dico, nisi de eo tantum, qui in se id quod dico esse
cognoscit. Si enim extra conscientiam suam sunt quecunque dico, nequaqua^ ad
iniurian^ eius spectant cuncta quae dico. Si autem in se esse nou^t que loquor,
non a mea sibi hoc lingua dici aestimet, sed a conscientia sua.
way? Because thou have made thy self public by thy fault: is that a
prohibition to him not to meddle with that sin by way of use and reproof?

Blame not the Preacher, if thy neighbors lay thee under his Bucket which
might have washed any man there as well as thee, if thy sin had not brought
thee so near while he was pouring out the water.

If a Physician should read a Lecture in Physic touching the nature and
Symptoms of the Neopolitan Morbus Italico-hispaenico-gallico-anglico cosmicus.
in plain English the G. Pox.
Buttons (as they use to speak) which the French got from the Italians at the
Seige of Naples; and some English, from them: and should withal bewail the
looseness of the times, and cry shame on such as trade in that ware; would any
man but he that were buttoned with them take snuff in the nose?

So in case of Adultery reproved, would any man but the guilty, go challenge
the Preacher, and say; Sir, you Preached against me, because you speak so much
and so particularly of the sin of Adultery? This were, as if a True man
standing near a Thief at the Bar when Sentence of Death is pronounced,
should presently provide himself of an Halter, because he was sure that some
of the company were condemned.

I deny not but (as Gregory Ibid. past. cur. par. 2. cap. 10.
speaks) it may happen that in a reproof Zeal may go too far: but such
faults are pardonable when it is certain the fault reproved deserved as much,
although the manner of doing it cannot be defended.

A man may by chance let fall a bitter word too many, as he that went to the
wood to cut down a bow, let fall his hatchet and killed his neighbor. But
there were Deuteronomy. 19.
Cities of refuge for such an offender, whether flying he was not only not
killed, but not touched. I will not apply, but Gregory does.

When such a fault is made; who is offended? most commonly the guilty. And it
often happens, the deeper pit he is fallen into, the louder he hallowes. The
more peccant the more querelous.

But what gets he? He is content to be guilty that the other may not be
thought innocent. For if there be no guilt, it is a Slander, not an Inuectiue.
And if he prove it to be an inuectiue, the other shall be punished, but yet in
the mean time he also is recorded for a Sinner: whereas, not taking notice of
the reproof, would serve some men in steed of innocence.

This is, in proportion, as if one Malefactor should think it no disgrace to
stand upon record for a thief, so he escape without punishment; if by that
means he can procure his fellow to be hanged.

His fault is not expiated by the others suffering, but rather increased, in
that he can draw another to execution for a bare indiscretion, and yet remain
impenitent himself in a greater transgression. He displayed thee to the
company, that was his fault. But thou gave occasion: was not this thine?

Does his mistake of the dublet in steed of the shirt, prove there was nothing
in the dublet, when thou had it on? He has made a sin by mistaking thy
Person for thy sin (because they were so near he knew not well how to
distinguish) does that sin of his, acquit thee from thine?

Well, well; there is nothing gotten by throwing stones in at thine enemies
window, when thine own children look out at the Casement.

I speak not this to deny any man that is really wronged, a course of
proceeding against him that has done it. Laws were made to make crooked
things straight, and it is meet they should be executed as offenses wittingly
committed, and wilfully continued, deserve.

But yet I advise, that the accuser be innocent, And then, too; if he think
meet to shoot a huge Dunghill upon a frog, for hopping too near him; he may
do well to consider, whether the smell may not happen to annoy him more, then
the frogg could have hurt him.

Men often fear Salt, but never, Honey: and yet Wisdom says; to eat much
Honey is not Prou. 25.27.
good. Men that love their sins will think the bluntest teeth bite too
deep: But when they come to hate them, they change nature and opinion
together: supposing the sharpest teeth to be too blunt.

Worthy inuitation is that honorable Sir A. C. K. and B. Mr. R H. in Epist. to
the Reader, before his Sermon of Sam. Fun.
Knight, who as he much respected, and greatly countenanced, every learned and
vnscandalous Preacher; so most of al those that least favored his corruptions:
often blessing God for such Teachers as would give him no rest in his sins,
and not seldom provoking them, (especially his own Pastor) with such like
words: Go on, spare us not; though corruption may bustle awhile, yet God will
give us hearts to come in at length; and to submit to the Scepter of his Word:
Howsoever, it shall be a Preachers Crown to be faithful, and to balke none.

I have now at length run through the first maine part of Discretion in Zeal,
as it teaches men to consider and observe the Circumstance of Persons.

The Second, Follows which is the Circumstance of Place: 2. Circumstances of
Place.
I spoke before, of Private, and Public Reproves; yet that discourse
differs from that I am now upon. There, I showed what faults deserve a
private rebuke; and what, a Public. Here, I declare what place is to be
chosen either private, or public to do it in. There, of the quality of the
offense, and nature of the reproof; here, of the definite place fittest for
the performance of such a work.

Wisdom teaches that all places are not meet for all Actions that are
lawful, yea necessary. And Discretion will instruct us that very few places
are meet to be witnesses of a Reproof. Great choice must be made of a
convenient place to administer such a strong Purge to a Patient, least that
follow, which may annoy both.

I will not, I need not be long in this point. Suffices to set down a few
rules to direct the Simple who have more affection then Discretion herein.

All Places to be taken up in this Service are to be chosen according to the
quality of the Persons that undertake this Work.

Private men as Private men are restrained only to private Places when they
give a Reproof.

I deny not but a Private Person in his own family may rebuke and reprove
sharply, and before the Family too, if need require, and the person rebuked be
under his power. But here he does it as a public person. In his own house,
he is a Lord and a Magistrate.

He may also do it in public when any Authority is derived unto him from a
public person, in this or that place, at this, or that time: for in this case
he executes the office of a public person, although he be none himself,
but only a Substitute for this special occasion, and time.

I grant further that in any company where a man sees or hears the dishonors
of God, he may testify his dislike; not as a Lion tearing the offender in
pieces with his pawe; but as a wise Subject would do to his Prince, using
entreaties and prayers, to prevent further and greater rage, and transgression.

And this also is allowable only then, when a man is to deal with a Person
hopeful and tractable. If he be a Scorner, the way is to forsake his company,
or exclude him thine, so soon as thou can fairly and without just offense
given, lest not only he, but others fall upon thee for indiscretion.

Even Fiddlers when they are derided will scarce stay for their Wages, but put
up their Pipes and be gone. They well know that if the company begins to tune
discords to their Music, the last strain of the lesson is like to prove
harsh: and perhaps the Fidles may prove but fidle-stickes, and and their pates
the instruments for their roaring Masters to practice upon.

One objection presents it self, craving audience and answer; but it shall
stand by and wait for a while; afterward it shall be admitted, and receive
satisfaction.

places are to be accounted Public or Private not according to their prime
institution, and ordinary use, but according to their fulness or vacancy of
company when a reproof is given. It is not the Street, or the Church, or the
Feilds that make a reproof to be public, but the company that were witnesses
of it. Nor is it the house, the chamber, the closet, that argues a reproof to
be private; unless all other company were out of the hearing when the rebuke
is uttered.

Fourthly, places for reproof must so be chosen that the very choice of the
place, as well as the manner of doing it, may argue the good affection of the
Reprouer.

There is a reproof that is not seasonable, said a wise man; and some man
holds his tongue, and is wise, because he does it till he see an
opportunity of place, as well as of time.

To a soole all places and companies are alike, and there is nothing that
discovers an indiscreete Zealot, more then this indiscretion. This thing
alone may well make all wise men to yield him the gay coat for his hire. The
heart of a fool is in his mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in his heart.

In reproving and admonishing our aim must be reformation, (as before has
been said,) which cannot be hoped but much hindered when the party reproved
is put to any needless shame and disgrace.

The Spirit of Wisdom gives this for a rule; Debate thy cause with thy
neighbor himself, and discover not a secret to another, lest he that hear
it, put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn not Prou. 25 9.10.
away. Never do that before a multitude, which would as well be done without
any witness.

An vpbraider is like a dashing horse, that casts some spots on his
neighbor, but most dirt on himself and his rider: And although fools may
take him for a wise man, because he has tongue at will; yet all wise men will
account him a perfidious fool, because his tongue is so free.

If his neighbor had been wisely dealt withal in a place convenient, happly
he had been gained; but now by occasion of his public disgrace, it is a
thousand to one but that his faults already made, be defended, and more mitted.

The nature of man is such, that being despised it grows obstinate, and
studies defenses of that for which it is trampled upon; and proceeds to worse,
even unto contention and heresy, as Lib. 6. cap. 25. eccl. hist.
Zozomen observes in the case of Apollinarius the Heretic, who in all
likelihood had never run out so far, had not he been so shamefully and
scornefully entreated by one George an Arrian Bishop only, for companying with
Athanasius the mirror of his time.

Whether it be to friend or foe talk not of other men's lives, and if thou
can without offense, reveal them not: for he heard and observed thee, and
when time comes he will hate Ecclus 19.8.9.
thee. Rebuking in Public, by private persons is counted but railing; and
such unfaithfulness, a greater offense then the greatest in him that is thus
ripped up.

If any object that of Paul to Timothy; Them that sin rebuke before all,
that they also may 1. Tim. 5.20
fear; the answer is easy, if we understand the place. The meaning is, that
persons publicly offending should be publicly rebuked by public persons in
places appointed for public reproves.

To make it appear that this place makes not for public reproves given by
private persons, will not be difficult, if we consider to what person the
Apostle gives this Commission. It was to Timothy a Minister, not to a private
man.

Timothy was to reprove publicly by virtue of his office; so were none else,
if private persons. The Apostle herein instructs him as a Minister, not as a
private Christian in common with others: and it is direction peculiar to the
Ministry, not common to all professing Christianity.

I know no example in Scripture of any private man's public reproof which is
warranted and commended by the Spirit of God. God says indeed; Rebuke thy
brother Leuit. 19.17.
plainly; but take with you Christ's exposition; let it first be done between
him and thee Mat. 18.
alone: then if he will not hear thee, call witnesses; otherwise not.

No discretion therefore can warrant that zeal in a private person that
chooses or uses such a place to give a reproof to his brother (especially at
first) so as others may hear and observe it. This is well termed a Pastoral
necessity, De correp. and gra. cap. 13.
as is also the power of excommunicating scandalous and obstinate sinners.

All places are not fit for public reproves when offenders deserve them, and
persons in authority ready at hand to reprove.

If the sinner be taken in his sin, the place of his sin should be the
place of his shame, and they who either took him in the manner, or bear a
share in the wrong should be witnesses of it. And thi^ is to be done when a man
is particularly singled out in case of some special offense.

In common sins, a man, yea a Minister is not so bound to reprove, as that he
should openly rebuke any man at a table so often as he swears, or otherwise
offends. Let him show what dislike he can, (civility observed) so he keep
his lips together. If he should not testify his dislike he were guilty of the
other man's sin; if he should express it at an unseasonable time by a sharp
reproof, he wants discretion, unless his power* and command be such as may
not only give countenance to the action, but also gain good acceptance from
the whole company present.

If a man will rebuke to do good and not hurt, he must observe the wise man's
rule; Rebuke not thy neighbor at the wine, and despise him not in his Ecclus
31.31.
mirth.

Nor is a Minister tied to run up and down the streets to rebuke wheresoever
he may (in likelihood) meet with offenders. The Church is his proper place to
reprove in, where it is granted to all to censure men's actions as in a Court,
says De serendis reprehens. and conuers. Pauli.
Chrysostom, that is, to reprove all sorts of sins indefinitely, without
pointing men out by personal description, as is before showed.

And yet in this case it cannot be denied, that the Discipline of old, even for
ordinary offenses, was, first Math. 18.15.16.17.
an admonition in private: then, the same was repeated before witnesses; at
length, if the party persisted, he was reproved by name in the Church, by the
Minister, and after all excommunicated; if the Gloss Glass. interlin and
Ordin. in Math. 18.
deceive not.

Thus Theodotus Bishop of Zozom. lib. 6. hist eccl. cap. 25.
Laodicea, first publicly reprehended the two Apollinarij, the father, and the
son for the only hearing of an Hymn which Epiphanius a Sophister had
curiously composed in the honor of Bacchus; and then afterward excommunicated
them both for the same offense.

To this custom Saint Hierome Epist. ad Demetriad. de virginit. seruanda. Quos
Ecclesia ipsa reprehen^it, quos interdum abiecit; in quos nonnumqua^
Episcoporum, and Presbyterorum censurae desaeuiit.
has reference, speaking of some loose Monks that had been too bold with
wanton Virgins, and saying; whom the Church her self reprehends, whom
sometimes she excludes (meaning by suspension,) and whom now and then the
censure of the Bishops and Priests has been sharp against, etc.

By this it appears, that notorious offenders were first shamed in the
Congregation, before the Bishops and others in authority, exercised their
power in casting him out of the Church by the sentence of excommunication.

And this is yet more evident by that of the same Father Hieron. in Math. 18.
can. 54. Sin autem audire noluerit, adhibeatur frater. quod si nec illum
audierit, adhibeatur and tertius, vel corrigendi studio, vel conueniendi sub
testibus. porro si nec illos audire volueru, hunc multu dicendum est, vt
detestationi eum habeant, and qui non potuit pudore saluari, saluetur
opprobrijs, etc.
on the words of our Savior; If thy brother will not hear thee, then take
with thee one or two more, etc. If he will not hear thee, then, let another
brother be taken, says he; if yet he will not hear, add a third, either
out of desire to reform him yet, without further trouble; or otherwise to make
them witnesses for his conuention. If further, he will hear none of these,
then his fault is to be published to many, that he may be had in detestation,
and that he whom private shame could not cure, might be cured with open
reproach. And if all this serve not, then let him be unto thee as an Heathen
or a Publican, etc.

Sozomen Eccl. hist. lib 7. cap 16. Quoniam paenitentibus Deus etiamsi
saepenumero deliquerint ignos^i praecepit, and illu qui peccata sua detrecta^t,
delicta, vt credibile est, aggrauantur: inde ab initio sacerdotibus placuit vt
velut in Theatro, test multitudine Ecclesiae, peccata manifestarentur, etc
also relates an ancient form of Penance and Absolution, observed in most
Churches, especially in those of the West, and it is this; because, says he,
God has commanded Absolution to be pronounced to sinners so often as they
repent, although they sin often; and because also they who shift off, and
delay the confession of sin, do augment their offense, therefore from the
beginning it pleased the Ministers that men's sins should be laid open as
upon a stage, the whole multitude of the Church being witnesses of it, etc.

And although this seem to cross that of Saint Austin, formerly cited,
wherein he washes his hands of personal denotations of men in the public;
yet indeed it does not; for he speaks of such as have privately sinned, so as
none but the Minister and the offender is privy to the Vide August. ser. de
verbalom 16.
offense, (although it seems by Saint Amb. de Paenitent lib. 1. cap. 16.
Ambrose, that the severity of Discipline even against pri^ate offenses was
very great.)

But in case of public faults, Ministers handled the delinquents in another
manner, in those ancient times whiles the Primitive Discipline was not yet
extinct, although in Saint Austins days it lay a bleeding.

I speak not this in a Puritan Pett, as disliking the Constitutions of our
own Church, but only to let the world (especially that part of it which
knows not experimentally what belongs to a Pastoral necessity) see that the
pulpit is the proper place of reproof given by a Minister to offenders under
his charge.

And if he should proceed to a personal taxation of some obstinate sinners, I
think he should not exceed the practice of the Primitive Church.

Notwithstanding I willingly grant that, as things now stand, it would argue a
shameful indiscretion in him that would think the same liberty in all
respects may be taken now, which once was allowed in the Primitive Church,
when both Bishops, Pastors, and people were, generally better; and when Pagans
swarmed among Christians like the flies of Egypt, to observe their actions, and
vpbraide their Religion.

The third and last Circumstance 3. Circumstance of Time.
which zeal governed by Discretion, considers, is that of Time. Good meat
served up at an unseasonable time, is not only unsavory, but to a queasie
stomach intolerable. A wise sentence shall be rejected when it comes out of
the mouth of a fool, for he will not speak it in a due Ecclus 20.20.
season.

Therefore Discretion is as choice of the Time, as of the Place, and Wisedo^e
teaches, not to show wisdom out of his due time. Howbeit two rules will be
sufficient to guide us herein: the one directing us in private occasions; the
other in public rebukes.

Sins notoriously shameful, wherein the passions and affections of the mind
are set deeper in the mire then the body it self, will not be reproved with
profit when they are acting, and the offenders taken in the manner. It is no
time to reprove a furious man when he rayles; nor a drunken beast when he
reeles.

When Abigal returned from pacifying David whom that noddie her husband had
highly incensed, and found Nabal drunk with his guests, 1. Sam. 25.
although she had now double cause to play the very woman, yet she said nothing
unto him, less or more until the morning light.

But when the wine was out, and he come to himself, she begins to tell him
his own, as became his offense. The issue was, he was pierced to the heart,
as covetous Cowards usually are at ill news; whereas before in his wine, her
speeches would not have penetrated the utmost room of his ears.

When men's passions exceed their own reason, and trample upon it, so that it
dare not to hold up a finger against them, they are in ill case to hear reason
from others. They are then like a vessel turned vpside-downe, whatsoever you
power on them is spilt on the ground, or in your shoes.

The best time to give a private reproof, is when men are most free and calm
in their minds from passion, and somewhat disposed to a pensive fit; then they
begin to soften and relent, as the earth after a frost: then if ever a word of
reproof will run upon wheels and come in due Prou. 25.11
time.

In Public reproves, some respect must be had to the violent sway of the
Times: not to temporize, as the word is usually taken; but to walk with more
wisdom and moderation, that the times which will not be bettered by vehement
opposition, may not for our violence swallow us up.

When a man rows with the Tide, he will go in the channel to choose: but
when Tide is against him, he will not struggle with the strength of the
stream, but let that go by him, and make toward the shore, that so he may yet
creep up the River by the banks, when both Tide and wind are against him.

He that attempts to stop the proud passage of a flood by a bay, the harder he
labors, the sooner he will be weary, and when all is done, the water will
carry away both him and his Bay, in spite of his heart.

Eliah, a zealous man, (as al men will grant me) thought it no wisdom too
long to contest with Iezabels Chaplains against Idolatry, when once he saw
that she had prevailed to procure an establishment of it by Ahabs authority.

It is true, that when God gave him special command and Commission, he cut
off four hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal at a 1. King. 18.
time. Howbeit, afterward when Iezabel vowed his death, his wisdom told him,
that although he had done but well; yet then was no time to stay and justify
the act to Iezabels head.

We read of Paul, who though he abode two years at Act. 19.10
Ephesus, where Diana was worshipped of most by public Ibid. ver. 27.28.
allowance; yet he did not openly oppose that Idol, in Pulpits, or Theaters:
only in general he spoke against false gods, Saying they are no gods which
are made with hands. Demetrius was not able to charge him with more, when he
vomited up the very bottom of his stomach into his Ibid. ver. 26.
face.

And when the people would have laid violent hands on him and his companions,
the Town Clerk publicly clears him of speaking against Diana, and
confidently defended him and his company, as being innocent of blaspheming
their Ibid. ver. 37.
goddess.

He well saw what strong footing Idolatry had taken in that City; that he was
not to proceed by open battery against it, but by prudent policy; that his
violent and furious pealing at that devilish Idol at that time, would but
exasperate the Idolaters to raze up the foundation which he had begun to lay;
that in steed of gaining more, he should see those whom he had already won,
persecuted or lost before his eyes.

We know further how the same Paul was at another time put to his shifts, and
forced to shave himself to save himself Act. 21.26.
: and yet he was in times more convenient, to preach against such Jewish
rites, and vehemently to cry down those beggarly elements, as afterward he
also Gal. 4.9. Col. 2.16. etc
did. But at the present, when it was come to this, that he must give way to
the weakness of his brethren, or by withstanding impeach the course of the
Gospel, the choice of shauing was at that time easy, though irksome enough in
it self.

The like he did in circumcising of Timothy for fear of the Jews; and yet no
wise man is ignorant, that from the time wherein our Lord was baptized,
Circumcision was to be abolished with as much speed as might stand with safety
of the Gospel, and such as professed the same.

I mention these instances not to make any man meale-mouthed, but to allay the
heat of such tongues as are troubled with inflammations, and to stop their
mouths who think that he is but a base temporizer, that forbeares to be
violent in some things, wherein authority enioyneth silence for a time, for
some causes and secrets of State, which must not be known, or disputed, till
the effects discover them.

If it be not lawful to strike the top-saile, and (sometimes) maine sail and
all, and lie at hull, when a storm is up that in all probability would
endanger the lading, the ship, or the men, what mean those Items of God to his
Prophets when Israel was quite out of frame, and bent against all that were
bold and diligent to set them in order again?

Mark what God says by Hos. 4.4.
Hosea; Let no man strive nor reprove another; for this people are as they that
strive with the Priest. When a people begin to turn head against a Minister,
and that with the strength of authority to bear him down; It is time for him
to abate of his former vehemency, and somewhat to give way to their violence
which else would blow him away before it.

In evil times, to be violent for, or against smaller matters, when struggling
will not better, but make things worse, and blow up the fire to a greater
flame; is a great indiscretion, and an error in Zeal; especial^y when sundry
Precedents of bad success in like attempts, daily present themselves to teach
us more wisdom.

There is a mean, and way of tollerating evil men, at sometimes, in the
Church; as there is, of correcting, eiecting, and removing them thence at other
times more convenient and safe, as Saint De fid and operib. cap. 3. Est ratio
dissimulandi and tollerandi malos in Ecclesi^, and est rursus ratio castigandi,
and corripiendi, non admittendi vel a communione remou^ndi, etc.
Austin wisely affirms.

Therefore they err, says the same Jbid. cap. 4.
Father, who observing no mean but running headlong in one extreme, consider
not the Authorities of Scripture which may mittigate that rigor, and lead them
in a middle way between both, with more comfort, and better success. An error
usual among men, and in no one thing more then in turbulent Zeal.

Some, daring only upon such Scriptures as call for severity, to correct the
unruly; not to give holy things to dogs; to excommunicate the refractary, and
contemptuous; and to separate from Christ's body every scandalous member; does
so disturb the peace of the Church that endeavoring to pluck up the tares too
soon, themselves being blind with error, they separate from the unity of
Christ.

Thus, as he shows, it fell out in the case of rigid Donatus and his peevish
Disciples. And thus may I say it has happened to our hot headed Brownists,
dreaming Anabaptists, and to all the crew of Schismatic Seperatists, who are
in this point the right heirs of Donatus, and in whom he lives again, as if
he had never been dead.

To these I may say with Saint Austin; although they be wicked for whose sakes
you separated, yet ye ought by enduring those whom you were not able to
reform or cast out of the Church, to have continued in the church your Ibid
Etiam si mal^ fuisse^ propter quos in Ecclesia non est^; vo^ tamen eo^ sorendo,
quos eme^dare aut segregare minime poserati^, in Ecclesiae permanere debuistis
selves.

On the other hand, as pernicious is their opinion, says he, Jbid. vide locum;
and etiam cap. 5.
who from some other Scriptures which in case of danger, allow some temporary
tolleration of dangerous spirits, think no severity at all to be needful;
leading those in Authority to a most perverse security, as if they need do no
more but tell men their duty, without further care what any man does.

The middle way, in his opinion, is simply the best; which is, sometimes to
tolerate some snarling dogs, for the peace of the Church, when the beating of
them out would make them fly on the throat of Religion: and again, sometimes
to give no holy things to them, when we are able to master and drive them out
of doors without danger to the Church.

It is a difficult task (as he well shows in another August. de Ciuit. dei.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
place,) for a man to carry himself. Zealously, and discreetly too, among
profane men that thirst for the last drop of blood in the power of Godliness.

And though it must needs be confessed to be unlawful, out of fear to offend,
or out of hope to mount the chair of preferment, to forbear reproouing, and
to sooth men up in their sins: yet if a man therefore forbear, for a time,
because either he seeks for a better season, or otherwise fears that severity
would make them worse, who are too bad already, or hinder such weaklings as
have a mind to be good, or oppress and turn back such as are coming on to
the faith; this cannot be thought to spring from covetousness, or base
intents, but from a wise consideration of charity for a greater good.

Some man holds his tongue, because he has not to answer: and some keeps
silence, knowing his time. A wise man will hold his tongue, till he see
opportunity; but a babbler and a fool will regard no Ecclus. 20.6, 7.
time.

In cases of danger Aug. Epist, 50. ad Benif. Com. Verum in huiusmodi causis,
vbi per graves disse^tionum scissuras, non huius aut illius hominis est
periculum; sed populorum strages iace^t, detrahendum est aliquid seueritati, vt
maioribus malu sanandis sincera charitas subueniat.
by rents and dissentions, (whereby not only particulars, but whole multitudes
are endamaged,) somewhat of severity must be abated, and sincere love must
interpose her self for the preventing of greater mischeefes likely to follow
the extremity of Discipline.

Evil men are sometimes to be winked at for quietness sake, nor may they be
corporally separated from at all times, but only spiritually. And to go out
from them spiritually is to do all may be for their reformation, so far
forth as every man's degree, and peace will August. de verb dom. ser. 18.
Toll^randi sum mali pro pace, nec corporaliter ab eis recedatur, s^d
spiritualiter. Spiritualiter autem exire est fac^re quod pertinet ad
correctionem malorum, quantum licet pro gradu cuiusque salua pace.
admit.

To this Saint Amb in Luke 9. Non enim semp^r in eo^ qui peccauerum est
vindicandum, quia nonnunqua^ amplius prodest clementia tibi ad patientiam;
lapso ad correctionem.
Ambrose accords, for he, commenting on that speech of our Savior; ye know
not of what spirit ye are: teaches that revenge must not always be taken on
offenders, because sometimes clemency may prove more profitable to thy self
for exercise of thy patience, and sometimes to the offe^dor also for his
reformation.

Again, if (says he) Amb. in 1 Cor. 5. Si quis P^testatem non habet, quem
scit reu^ abijcere, vel probare non valet, immunis est, and iudicis non est
sine accusatore damnare sicut nec Christus Iudam abieci^
a man want power to cast him out of the Church, whom he knows to deserve it;
or other wise, is not able to prove the offense by sufficient testimony, he is
free from blame, though he let the guilty alone. It is not the part of a Judge
to condemn without an accuser though he know him guilty whom he would
sentence. Christ did not excommunicate Judas whom he knew to be a notorious
hypocrite, and a reprobate.

I might be almost infinite in Quotations out of Saint De vnic. bapt. sermon. de
verb. Apost. ser. 24. Item cont. Epist. Parme^. lib. 2. cap. 11. Tract. 33 in
Joan Epist. 64. ad Aurel.
Austin, Hieron. in Mat. 13 and Epist. ad Dardai^.
Hierom, Chrisost. in Mat. 13.
Chrysostom, Amb ad Studium Epist. 76.
Ambrose, Greg. mag Hom. 11. in Euang.
Gregory, Bed in Luke 9.
Bid, and others to prove this to be no new Doctrine: but a word to wise men
is enough: and a thousand arguments and testimonies, to a fool, will not
suffice.

I will therefore conclude these with that of the Canon Li. di. 1. q. 6. cap
Quotiens di^it Innoce^ti^^. Epist 22. Quoti^ns a po^ulu aut a turb^ peccati^
quia, in omnes propter m^ ^^^d^ne^ vindicar^^ ^ po^^st, ^^ultum sol^t t^asire:
priora ergo d^m^te^d^ dico dei iudicio, and de reliquo maxima sollicitudine
praecauendu^.
Law. So often as a whole multitude offend, because revenge cannot be taken on
all, by reason of the multitude of offenders, they usually escape without
punishment: those faults must be left to God to punish, and such as are in
place of Authority must with all care prevent the like for the time to come.

Men shall in all ages meet with some Leuiathans that will break through the
Net; some, whom they cannot reform in all things by the spirit of Zeal: but
they must of necessity bewail them with grief in secret, and bear them with
patience: least striving over hastily to make them exactly good, they grow out
of love with all goodness, and become persecutors of it, as malt too hastily
dried, is often fiered.

There is no man but may, and does, sometimes, fail in his choice of times;
and that not so much out of headlong passion, as want of experience.

And in this case, a wise man will rather make a submissiue satisfaction upon
discovery of his error, then undertake the defense of such indiscretion: Which
Submission must be accepted, and the party offending must be no longer
accounted an offender.

He that in this case will not forgive, gets nothing but the translation of the
fault to himself. Herein Aug. de Ser. dom in monte lib. 2. cap. 30. Facile
re^rehe^du^t, qui magis amant vituperare and d^mnare, quam emendare atque
corrigere, quod v^titum vel superbi^e est, vel inuidenti^e.
he shows a proud, merciless heart, and gives men cause to believe that he is
more glad of the occasion to vpbraid his brother, then grieved at the wrong
which is done to himself. To prosecute a man with railing, is an easy, but
poor revenge. He that cannot do this, can do little: and he that does this,
is no better then a horse-fly sucking a dungehill.

CHAP. VIII. Of Compassion.
I Am now come at length to the last particular wherewith Zeal must be
tempered: to wit, Compassion. This, says Bern. de resur. dom. Ser. 2. Quaerat
igitur men's aromata sua, ante omnia, comp^ssionis affectum, etc.
Bernard, is one of the sweetest perfumes, or precious ointments of the Soul.
Therefore above all, let the soul seek to shore her self with this affection.

So often as thou see thy Brother offend, thy compassion should presently
discover it self, measuring him by thy self, as the Apostle wills; Gal. 6.1.
If any man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such
an one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be
tempted.

The same Father sends us to that Good old Man, who hearing that one of his
brethren was fallen into a sin, fell into a bitter passion of weeping, and
uttered these words; He is fallen to day; and I may, tomor^ow The iniquity of
the other made him to shed tears over his own frailty: And his own frailty
made him condole his brothers iniquity.

This affection is of great use: it cannot but wound an ingenious mind, and
make him ashamed to see another mourn over his sin, though happily before, he
did not bewail it himself.

Much better is a sweet and brotherly compassion, then a sour and stern
affection of a passionate mind, says Gilb. sup. Cant ser. 32. Metior est d^^
is and fraterna c^mpassio, quam indignantis animi durus and immitis affectus.
Gilbert in his continuation of Bernard upon Salomons Song.

Compassion shows that a man knows himself, he that shows no compassion
makes no acknowledgement of his own sinful condition: but proudly carries
himself as if sin and he had never been acquainted: where as, in truth,
none commonly, is more intimate with that strumpet, then himself.

And yet with all, let men beware of false compassion. There are (as some say)
in the the Sea, fishes of so many different shapes, as may parallel, for outward
resemblance, all the beasts upon earth. Sure I am, there are in the hearts of
hypocrites so many counterfeit graces as may match, in show, all that are true
in the Godly.

Among other, they have (some of them) a counterfeit of true Compassion,
whereby they seem to condole with others, and to extenuate their faults to any
that speak of them, not out of love to their brethren whom they seem to
bewail; but out of dear affection to the like sins in themselves, which
hereby they would palliate and defend from blows.

When a man falls into discourse of such or such a man's faults, and begins to
aggrauate them, perhaps with a mind bad enough, these co^passionate
selfe-louers will be ready to say; Oh Sir, be not too rash, and cruel; it was
but a fruit of humane weakness; the best may offend; and it is not good to
judge too hardly; we are all men; you show little compassion, etc. whereas all
this fluttering and crying of the crafty Lap-wing, is but to draw you from her
own nest.

He has a hellish brood of the same kind: and that you may favor him, and
his sin, he will stoutly plead his fellow offenders cause without a Fee.

Do you not think, that, if the judge should be as pitiful to the thief at
the Bar, as another would be that is guilty of the same offense, the
Country would soon swarm with thieves like Bees in summer; and the Hangman
might go practice upon himself, if he should stand in need of using his
Trade?

This therefore is, of al other, the most cunning defense of a man's own
iniquity, which while it goes masked under the name of Compassion to others,
doubles his own transgressions.

Compassion is like to Ieremies figgs, whereof some were good; and some,
naught: both sorts excelled; Ier. 24.3.
the good figgs, very good; and the evil very evil, that they could not be
eaten, they were so evil.

Compassion, says Hugo. de sc vict erud. Theol. Libello de 4. volunt in
Christo. Triplex compassionis modus est. Alia ex natura, alia ex virtute, etc.
Hugo, is of three sorts: the one is from Vice, the other from Nature; and the
third from Grace. The first is when a man is touched with an evil grief,
because he is touched in that wherewith he was formerly held by the bonds of an
unlawful love.

The second is that whereby a man out of natural piety (which is all one with
natural affection to superiors) condoleth the miseries of such as are near
him, when he sees nature afflicted and oppressed with evils, beyond the
bounds of humane strength, and contrary to natural piety.

The third is that whereby, for Gods sake we sympathize, with others in their
greefes, when we see righteousness oppressed, and innocence suffer. The first
of these he pronounces, culpable; the second unblameable; and the third
commendable.

He might well have added, that compassion which comes from grace, extends it
self to the falls of our brethren into sin, who ought to be restored with
bowels of compassion yearning upon them, and forcing us to give them the best
help we can, to set them again on their feet.

This is more then a common love: it is indeed the Quintessence of it, which
makes our very hearts to drop at the sins of our brethren, as marble with
rain, though it lie in the dry.

Compassion makes a man to put his brothers soul into his own body; and his
own soul, into his brother, (as Greg. mor. cap 26. Afflicti in se animum
sumit, vt prius in se dolentis passionem trauiserat, nunc contra dolorem illius
ministerium concurrat.
Gregory speaks in another case) and to make it his own case; and so to deal
with his brother as with himself: which if he do, he will not exceed nor
yet omit any thing to recover the other.

He that bestows tears of compassion upon his neighbor, gives him somewhat
of himself, as well as of his goodness: and it is impossible that he who has
this, should be wanting in any thing to his power for his neighbors good.

Then do we show compassion indeed, when we bewail his fall, as if we had
fallen our selves, and seek to wash away his sin (if it were possible) by
our own tears.

This, if we do, though we do much for him, yet more for our selves. He that
has such a tender heart for the offenses of others, shall find it more
tender, and more ready to mourn when himself offends.

Compassion therefore must declare it self whenever we declare our Zeal
for God. Hugo de S. Vict. in Joel. 2 Zelus est feruor animi ad co^passionem
natura pronus, etc.
Hugo says well that Zeal is such a heat as is prone to compassion of nature.

The Lord when he sharply reproved, and justly disinherited Adam did yet make
him Genesis 3.21.
a coat of skins to cover his nakedness which sin made shameful.

When Christ denounced woes unto Jerusalem, he Luk 19 41.
wept over it. When Samuel in Zeal departed from Saul, and saw him no more all
the days of his life; yet he mourned 1 Samuel 15.
for him.

Saint Paul calls for meekness to such as by sudden temptation are overtaken
with a Gal. 6.1.
fault. Saint Jude requires us, of some to have compassion, making a Jude 20.
difference. And Saint Paul pronouncing a curse on inordinate walkers, he did
it Phil. 3 18.
weeping.

The ground of Compassion is love, which, being expressed, will temper the
sharpnes of reproof, and make it more medicinable. Reprehension of it self is
hardly tolerable, unless mixed with friendly entreaties; even as the launcing
of a wound though it be necessary, yet will not be endured by the Patient,
unless all means to mitigate the pain be applied to Chrisost in 2 Timothy 4.2.
hom. 9. (...)
him.

Whatsoever a man does with a heart rent in pieces by Passion, is rather an
effect of violence seeking revenge, then a fruit of charity studying
reformation. He that can rejoice and be glad and take pleasure to torture his
brother by turning his finger in his wounds is a cruel tyrant, no true Zealot.

It is impossible that any soul needing instruction, should receive any
benefit, if he be taught in a brawling and a chiding tone, although the
lesson be never so needful, let him apply himself to learn with all his
might, yet he will carry away nothing but grief and sorrow, as Chrysostom
Chrisost. in 2 Timothy 2.24. hom. 6. (...).
speaks.

Howbeit he speaks this of such as he supposes to be ingenious and
tractable; not of obstinate stiff-necked bulls that will not be tamed but by
the fiercest Mastiues, and upon whom mildnes will work no other effect, but
scorn and contempt of him that is so mild.

This observed a man may take all liberty he can in reproouing, as occasion is
offered, and his calling admits. And when this course is taken, such as are
reproved must not with Plutarcks Parasite think to jest or laugh out any thing
that is pressed on them: they must not grow angry without a cause, or neglect
amendment when need requires.

See Calvin upon Job 31.1 Sermon. 123.
Then shall we find by experience the truth and benefit of that heavenly
Proverb; Prou. 25.12.
As an earering of Gold, and as an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise
reproouer on obedient ears.

It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. Gal. 4.18.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 9. read a sono literae z. p. 15. for state, read, seat. p. 21. line 1.
for or r. ^f line. 4. r. commended it. p 59. l. 1. r. yet it was. p. 63. l. 17.
r. equalize some small. p. 27^. l. 19. blot out, it is like that p. 309. l. 4,
5. blot out, and enjoined. p. 321. l. 5. r. tongues. p. 355. l. 19. r as bad as
out. p. 361. l. 3. for and, r. adds p 395 for Inn, r. in p. 430 dele, Quere.
p. 438 for inuitation, r. imitation. p. 447. for mitted r committed. p. 470. l.
19. for does r. do. p. 480. for shore, r. store.


