THE DISPVTATION CONCERNING THE CONTROVERSIT HEADDIS of Religion, haldin in the
Realm of Scotland, the zeir of God ane thousand, five hundredth fourscoir
zeiris. Betuix. The praetendit Ministeris of the deformed Kirk in Scotland.
And, Nicol Burn Professor of philosophy in S. Leonardis college, in the City
of Sanctandrois, brocht up from his tender eage in the peruersit sect of the
Caluinistis, and nou be ane special grace of God, ane membre of the halie and
Catholic kirk. Dedicat To his Souerane the kingis M. of Scotland, King James
the Saxt.

Nisi conuersi fueritis, gladium suum vibrabit: arcum suum tetendit, and
parauit illum. 1.

Unless ze be converted, God vil drau his suord: he hes bendit his bovv, and
preparit it

Psalm. 7. Imprented at Parise the first day of October. 1581.

NEmo est qui reliquerit domum, aut Fratres, aut Sorores, aut Patrem, aut
Matrem, aut filios, aut agros propter me, aut propter Euangelium, qui non
accipiet centies tantum nunc in tempore hoc, domos, and Fratres, and Sorores,
and Filios, and agros cum persecutio^ibus, and in saeculo futuro vitam
aeternam. 1.

Their sal na man leif his house, his brethrene, or sisteris, or father, or
mother, or sonis, or possessionis for my saik, and for profession of the
Euangel, bot he sal resaue ane hundredth times als many ma housis, and
brethrene, and sisteris, and motheris and sonis, and possessionis vith the
persecutionis quhilk he thoillis, and in the varld to cum life aeternal.

Marc. 10 Omnis ergo qui confitebitur me coram hominibus, confitebor and ego
eum coram patre meo qui in caelis est, qui autem negauerit me coram hominibus,
negabo and ego eum coram Patre meo, qui in caelis est. 1.

Quhair for quhasouer vil confefs me befoir me^, I will confess him also befoir
my father in heauin: bot him quha vil deny me befoir men, I will deny also
befoir my father of heauin.

Math. 10 Vna vocis confessio, perpetua Christi confessione honoratur.

Cyprianus de laud Martyrij. TO THE MAY NOBIL, POTENT, AND GRACIOUS king of
Scotland king James the saxt.
SIndrie and vechtie reasonis (My Sonerane) mouis me not only to have Zour M.
in good remembrance in my daily prayeris, bot also to confess my very erneast
affectione in offering my humil service bayth be vord and vritt salang as the
aeternal God sal prolong my dayis in this vail of misery: This I am bund to do
alsueil be command of the aeternal God, quha inioynis to inferiore subiectis al
deu obedience touardis their Souerane pouaris and Magistratis: as be the
inaestimable benefeit quhilk I receauit of zour hienes clemency aganis the
traitorous dealing of sik malicious personis, as cruelly socht the schedding
of my innocent blude: For being impresoned first in the Castle of Sanctandrois,
and nixt in the tolbuith of Edinburgh, nocht for onie evil doing, bot for oppin
professione of the treu and Catholic Religion, quhilk nocht only al kingis and
Quenis hes ever mentenit in zour hienes impyre, bot thairin also zour M. (be
the may solicit cair of zour darrest mother our Souerane the Queuis grace,
ane may constant mentenar of the treuth) vas maid participant of the
sacramentis of Baptism and Confirmation: And quhairof lykuyse God of his
infinite gudnes granted me knaulege to my aeternal saluatione, delivering me out
of the thraldom and bondage of that idolatrous Caluinisme, vith the quhilk
(alace) many be ane blind zeal ar fraudfullie deceauit to the lamentabil
perdition of their auin saulis, except be earnest repentance speedily they
return to their spiritual mother the halie Catholic kirk. This I makand oppin
profession, and sustenand the same be plane disputation bayth at liberty, and
in presone, to the oppin confusion of the Ministeris coniurit ennimeis to the
immaculat spous of our head, and saluiour Christ Jesus: They conspyrit may
cruelly aganis my life first accusing me be zour g. aduocat and my lord Justice
clerk, as thocht I had been guilty of lose majesty: Bot quhen the Essyis var
tuyse summondit, the protectore of al innocence, quha delyuerit Susanna from
the false accusatione of her ennimeis, scheu the richteousnes of my cause, and be
his halie Spirit sua mouit zour M. hairt, that zour hienes vith ane kingly
fauore of aequitabil justice receauit my letter of humil supplication, having
very good remembrance hou thairin I prayit our gracious God to perserue zour
M. From the schedding of innocent bluid. The quhilk the king of al kingis sua
infixit in zour merciful hairt, that incontinent zour grace commandit
straightly, that na injustice sold be exerceised aganis zour M. auin scholar:
This vas the kingly voce, and cleme^cie proceiding of Justice and godliness,
quhilk preseruit my life from the bludie handis of tha cruel tygres: zit their
persecutaris of Christis me^bris being may offendit, that by their
expectatione, I had obtenit sik fauore of zour hienes, and being brint vith ane
insatiabil thrist of my bluid, inuentit ane neu stratagem, proposing by zour M.
vil and intelligence, to have hungered me to death, be debarring al access of
freindis quha var villing to supply my necessity. And quhen extreme danger of
famine constrainit me to hing over ane purse at the tolbuith vindo, to craif
almous for Christis saik, they persauing the reuth and compassion of Godly and
cheritable people, quha bestouit their almous on me may liberalie, causit cut
down the purse: And althocht they commandit the Iay Vler to impesch my letteris
of supplicatione, quhairin I micht have requirit that quhilk vas conform to
aequitie, zit God sua mouit his hairt, that he praesentit ane requeist of mine
to the Prouoste and honorable Concile of Edinburgh for license to beg almous,
quhairbie I micht be sustenit: The quhilk albeit it vas grantit be the
discretion of the Prouoste and Honorable Concile, zit the Ministeris obtenit
ane discharge forbidding that I sold ask support in the name of ane scholar,
or affix onie letter upon the purse for signification of my indigence: bot
nochtuithstanding al their raige conceived aganis me, and inuie quhilk they
bure aganis my fauoraris: Cheritabil personis gaif me of their almous may
largely, for declaration of the erneast desire quhilk they had of the
extirpation of their seditious haeresie, and the imbraceing of the treu
Catholic religion agane, quhom I pray the Lord to recompa^se, quhen he sal
distribut to al men according to their doingis in this varld. Nou because their
capital ennimeis, and cruel persecutaris of Christian and Catholic men, var
frustrat of my death, feiring that I vald have disclosed their erroneous
doctrine gif I had remanit in the country, nocht only procurit my unnatural
banishment, causing me find souertie under the pane of five hundredth pu^dis,
nocht to return, bot also in my absence they have declairit their malice and
inquensibil hetret aganis my schaddou, laboring to bring me in contempt be
their falls and sklanderous accusationis, as they do al vtheris, quha may schau
hou they have collectit ane co^fusit mass of the haereseis quhilk hes been
condemnit be the Catholic kirk sen Christ and his Apostles dayis: And to bring
me in farther contempt they have spread the brute throuch the popularis, that in
sik conference as I had vith them in presone they var altogidder victorious,
and be this and siclyk fraudful menis, detracting vtheris, they labor to
mentene them selfis, and their erroneous doctrine amang the rude people: Bot
to the effect that zour M. and al zour G. treu subiectis, may knau hou friuole
and impertinent their reasonis var, I have breiflie collectit my hail discourse
and disputation vith the Ministeris, and other Protestaons in Scotland, and
taken the hardines to dedicat the same unto zour M. as ane Scholaris taikin and
signification of the perpetual remembrance of the benefeit quhilk I have
receauit of Zour Royal humanity, Beseiking zour M. and al zour loving
subiectis to reid the same vith sik attentive consideration that the reasonis
of the ane, and the other being considerit vithout al inordinat affection, zour
G. may planelie persaue their haeretical, and may pernicious doctrine to be
the cause of the loss and tynsal of many thousand saulis in zour M. realm. In
consideratione quhairof zour M. sold be mair occupeit than in inlargeing zour
temporal kingdom and dominione, as that is the only moyen quhairbie zour g.
may attene to aeternal faelicie: And I hoip that God hes praeseruit zour hienes
out of sa money dangeris, euin sen zour infancy to make zour M. ane instrument
(as he maid Josias) to repair the ruin and destructione of the kirk of
Scotland, be just correctione of them, quha, as vithout onie lauchful calling
they var intrudit be violence, sua laboris be the sam mean vithout repentance
to arrogat unto them felfis the Authority of spiritual Pastores, may
viuelie representing to us the tyranny of Mahomet, and his posterity the
Turkis, quha obstinatlie defendis his diabolical and barbarous inuentione: for
euin as they knaui^g al poyntis of their superstition to be contrare nocht
only to al Godly authority of halie scripture, bot als aganis al honesty of
good maneris, and civility, aganis al natural reason, and lauis of men veil
constitute, vil in nauyse suffer onie man to disput, or preach aganis the
same, makand oppin profession that they vil defend it only be the suord and
force of armore: Euin sua the Ministeris of mirknes, knauing in their auin
consciencis that their may ungodly professione is contrare not only to the
authority of the halie scripture, and definitionis of the General conciles,
bot also to the judgment and aggreance of al Catholic doctoris that ever hes
been sen the dayis of our saluiour: they labor vith al diligence, that their
doctrine cum never in discussion, just trial, and examination, suppressand sa
far as they may, al bukes quhilk ar vryttin for confutarione of sik erroris.
Bot albeit may Gracious Souerane, that they sua do and do according to their
profession, using proceidingis, and making progress very convenient to their
beginning, vrangouslie defending ane vickit cause, and evidently schauing them
selfis the very natural and treu offspring of Mahomet: zit it vil nauyse becum
zour M. to imitat the Turk in mentening their vickitnes be zour kingly
authority, bot contrare to employ the same to the deliverance of many
thousand saulis of zour M. subiectis, from the may vnuorthie servitude and
captivity of their consciencis, causing al quhilk hes been may iniustlie
decreted be force and violence in praeiudice of the verity during zour
minority to be call it agane to the just trial, and examination of the
verity: for nou time is that zour g. enter in deip consideration as the
importance and vecht of the matter requyris, and nocht to believe that Craig,
Du^cansone, Lausone, and sik other periurit Apostatis, hes mair vndirstanding
of the scripturis, nor all the learned men quha in onie age sen Christis dayis
hes been estemit Christianis, or that the hail varld hes been vithout the treu
religione not imbraceing the faith of the Catholic ki^k, befoir Calui^e maid
defection thairfra: Quhilk gif zour G. do, as I craif may earnestly of the
gudnes of God, I doubt not bot zour hienes vil have ane special desire to se
the praetendit Ministeris in zour Realm confrontit vith sum of zour G. auin
subiectis, quha ar nou dispersit only for conscience cause almaist throuch al
Europ, and ar may villing to offer their quik bodeis to the fire, or quhat
sumeuer other torment, unless they prove may evidently (as they have alreddie
offerit) that the Ministeris ar falls and traittorous deceaueris of the People:
God of his infinite gudnes move zour hieneshairt not o^lie to tak on this godly
i^terpryse, bot also to outred the same, to the veilfare of zour M. Realm, to
the glory of the eternal God, And zour hienes greit merit at the handis of
our only saluiour Christ Jesus, quha vil recompans every good vork upon the
day of his just judgment.

At Parise the.24. day of Iulij. 1581. Zour M. May humil, faithful subject,
and daily Orator. NICOL BVRNE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN REIDAR.
I Thocht good to aduerteis the Christian reidar, that in the beginning of my
conference, being only examinat be Master Andro Meluine, gif I had been
groundit in the Catholic religion or nocht, I ansuerit according to his
interrogationis, and sua I have put the matter in vritt rather in manner of ane
Catechism, nor disputatione, euin as it proceidit in very deid: In the
progress of my conference I have brocht all the argumentis of the Ministeris
vithout onie dissimulatione, detracting nathing from the force and strenth of
the same: As to my auin Ansueris, albeit I have retenit the substance of them,
zit find and greitar commodity of buikes heir nor in Scotland, I have sumpairt
amplifeit and inlargeit them, to accommodat my self to the capacity of the
ruid people, quha could not be abil to comprehend sua vechtie materis in sua
feu vordis, as I vas constrainit to use in my conference: As to the Names of
the Ministeris and vtheris quha disputed aganis me, I have expressit the names
of them quhom I kneu, and quhen I kneu them not, I have vryttin in general
Minister, or Protestaon: Concerning my auin person, I vas brochtup from my
tender eage in the doctrine of Calvin, quhilk of lait dayis hes been receauit
in the realm of Scotland be the preaching of Schir Ioann kmnox, and did follou
it vith na les affectione and zeal nor did the rest, quhil the time it pleased
God throuch reiding of sum Catholic vryttaris to illuminat my hairt, and let me
planelie understand that sik doctrine vas nocht that, quhilk vas preachit be
Christ and his Apostlis, and hes ever been mentened, be al Christianis sen
their dayis: bot only ane collectit Mass of auld and condemnit haereseis,
quhilk quhen I vas their present, I obleised me to defend, and prove befoir the
General Assembly of Scotland, declairing my self may villing to suffer
puneishment, unless be the grace of God I performed that quhilk I had taken in
hand, Ask and of ane Minister callit Smeton, in Paislay, that I micht have fry
access to their general Assembly to be conuenit in Edinburgh schortlie
thaireftir: To the quhilk petition (as he him self can not deny) he could
ansuere na thing bot that it vas may just, and p^omeist to me upon his faith
and treuth, that I sold have fry access thairto: In the mentyme ve
condescendit to stand at the judgment of thrie may learned of the Nobility,
and thrie of the Ministeris chosin be him, vith thrie Bischopis, and thrie men
of lau chosin be me: The headdis of doctrine quhairupone ve sold have reasoned
var their, 1. of the Calling of the Ministeris of Scotland. 2. Of the
Sacramentis, and verteu thairof. 3. Of the inaequalitie of Pastores, and judge
lauchful in debait of Religion. 4. Of the definitione and causis of
Iustificatione. 5. Of the definitione of Grace quhilk ve receive be the merit
of Christ. 6. Quhidder gif ane man being in grace in very deid be inuart
renouatione of his hairt, may loss the same agane or nocht? The may
honorables the Master of Ross, The lairdis of Calduole, Blakhal, and
Ihonestone quha var praesent, can beir record, that having confidence in
Goddis halie spirit, I tuik in hand, that unless, be the the judgment of tha
tuelf, (being suorne to judge according to the reasonis of bayth the pairteis
vithout feir, fead, or fauore) I prouit the Ministeris haeretikis and
deceaueris of the people, I sold nocht refuse quhat puneishment they pleased
to deuyse aganis me, requiring na thing of the Ministeris, bot recantation: And
for security that for my pairt I sold abyd at this apoyntme^t, I subscriuit
their headdis vith my hand at Paislay, in presence of the Noble men befoir
mentionat: Bot my aduersare Smeton be his traittorous dealing aggrea^d to his
profession, eftir that I had depairted fra him in peax unto the time apoyntit,
vithout onie varning proceidit vith excommunication aganis me, albeit I vas not
subject to his jurisdiction, and thaireftir send to Edinburgh and procurit
letteris of captione, quhairbie I vas socht throuch the hail country, and at
the last being apprehendit, vas vayrdit in the tolbuith of Edinburgh fra the
fourtene of October in the zeir of God ane thousand five hundredth and
fourscoir, to the penult of Ianuar. Quhair I had sik confort and consolation,
be reason I sufferit for confession of the name of Christ, that I had never
gretar in my life, and thocht my self happy gif I had obtened that grace to
have deed in the action: Sua the Ministeris in place to have granted me
audience at their general assembly, detenit me in strate presone: Aluyse God
turnit al to the best, and gaif me grace to ganestand and refel quhatsumeuer
they could object unto me, as the Christian reidar may esilie persaue of this
our conference, quhilk I beseik every man to reid vithout al affectione of
pairteis, and vith ane erneast desire to knau the treuth concerning every
controversy: Considering that na Minister in Scotland vil ansuer for him in
the day of Goddis dreidful judgment, bot that every man vil ansuer for him
self, and have na excuse gif he have adhaerit to onie falls Prophetis, the
quhilkis the scripture commandis every man to avoid under the pane of aeternal
damnatione: And mekilles vil the follouaris of this neu doctrine in Scotland
have onie excuse, be reasone Master Iohne Hamiltone ane learned man and very
zealous defendar of the Catholic faith, in name of all the Catholic Scottis me^
(be their auyse and requeist) in France and other cu^treyis, offered that they
sold cum to Scotland on their auin expensis, and disput vith the praetendit
Ministeris, offering their bodeis to the fire, unless they conuictit them to be
Haeretikis, quhilk offer (as I vndirstude of their private co^municationis) the
Ministeris dar not accept: Lyk as they durst never make onie ansuere to the
quaestionis proponit be Master Iohne Hay Concerning their doctrine,
Ecclesiastical ordore, and discipline: feiring that thairbie their erroris
sold have been dissit to the people. Bot not to trouble zou, good reidar, vith
farther declaratione of the vilful malice, and affectat ignorance of the
Ministeris, albeit I have good hoip of sum of the zou^g me^ quha var nocht the
beginnaris of this mischief in Scotland, bot be simplicity and over facil
credulity var deceauit be sum mischant Apostatis: And praying may humelie
the eternal God, that he assist zou vith his halie spirit to the treu
vndirstanding of the verity I will nou vith goddis grace enter unto our
conference.

Fairueil, At Parsie the 24. day of Iulij. 1581.
THE time vil cum quhen they vil nocht suffer healthsum doctrine, bot having
their earis zuikand, S. Paul. 2. Tim. 4.
vil get unto them selfis ane heap of teacharis to satisfy their lust and
pleasouris, and vil turn auay their earis, that they vil not gif audience to
the treuth, 2. Tim. 2.
bot gif credit to fables: Their ar they quha albeit they be ay learnand, zit
they cum never to the knauledge of the verity, 2. These. 2.
because they resauit not the treu cheritie, that they micht be saif. Thairfoir
God vil send them ane effectuous, and strange delusion of error, that they vil
gif credit unto leis.

Quhair S. Paul menis be zuikand earis, thais quha vil heir na thing of the
thretning of the panes of hell, the asperitie of repe^ta^ce and mortificatio^ of
the flesh, bot tha thingis only quhilk tendis to liberty, and security of
Goddis fauore, quhat sumeuer synnis, they commit: Sua ve may be assurit that
their ar the latter dayis quhairof S. Paul speakis, sen ve se sua money mennis
earis zuikand to heir of licentious leuing, and cairles security, and sik ane
heap of fleshly teacharis, quhilk they have chosin unto them selfis,
vithdrauing their obedience from lauchful Bischopis, and pastoris, be forgit
leis and inuentionis: And as experience teachis, albeit they be ay learnand,
they can never cu^ to the verity: bot euerilk zeir bringis in sum neu
fantasy, because they vil not learn at the spous of Christ, that is the
Catholic kirk, bot only at their auin brayn and imagination: And thairfoir, as
sayis S. Ierom: Quia noluerunt esse discipuli veritatis, facti sunt Magistri
erroris, because they vald not be schollaris of the verity, they ar maid
Maisteris of Error.

OF JUSTIFICATION.
CHAP. I.
Meluine. QVhat callis thou justification? Burn. Before I cum to the
definition thairof, I think it expedient to considder the diverse estaitis of
mankind.


M. Quhat be they?


B. The first is man creatit in perfyt eage, Gene. 1.
as Adam before his fall: the secund is the estait of mankind after the fall of
Adam: the third, is the estait of childrene conceauit in original syn: the
fourt, is the estait of them quha cu^ming to perfyt eage, after the
restitution of grace be baptism, fallis in deidlie syn.


M. Quhat is Justification in the first estait of mankind?


B. It is ane operation of God, creating of nathing in the mind of man original
justice, vithout onie mereit of mannis pouar.


M. Quhat callis thou original Justice?


B. It is ane supernatural gift, creatit be God of his auin gudnes, frelie
vithout any deserving of man, quhairby the saul of man is perfytlie subject
unto God, and the body unto the Saul, quhairby also he is abil to do thai
varkis, that leidis to life eternal.


M. Vas Adam abil to have fulfillit the commandiment, quhilk he reccauit in
Paradise?


B. It is manifest that he micht: sen God co^mandit not that quhilk vas
impossibil.


M. It lay not in his possibility to keip the commandment. For gif he had
keipit the same, our Saluiour CHRIST vald not have cu^mit in the flesch to make
satisfaction for sin. And it vas necessar that he sold cum in the flesch as he
did, thairfore conclude I, that the fall of Adam vas necessar, and that it vas
impossible, that he micht have keipit the commandiment.


B. Quhair ze allege, that it vas necessar that he sold cum in the flesch to
make satisfactione for sin I. ansuer, that it vas not absolutely necessar, bot
under condition only, to vit gif Adam synnit, and adame synnit nocht of
necessity bot of his avin fre vill and electione.


M. Let us than cum to that secund estait of mankind, after the fall of Adam,
that I may persane quhat thou callis his justification.


B. It is ane operation proceiding of Goddis fry mearcie, quhairby the syn is
forgeuin, and grace (lost be breaking of the command) restorit vithout the
mereit of any varkis preceding according to the saying of S. Paul. ve ar
instefeit frelie be his grace. Rou^. 3.



M. Be their na varkis requyrit before the restitution of this grace?


B. Zea: to vit varkis of Repentance, proceeding of the grace of God, preparing
the hairt of man thairto, Bot their are not meritorious of the restorit justice:
this justice efteruart brustis forth in vark quhairby the fry vil being
cooperant to the halie spreit, obeyis Goddis co^mandementis as it is vrittin:
Euang. S. Joan. 15.
He quha hes my commandementis and keipis them, S. Joan. 3.
it is he quha louis me: And he that is borne of God synnis not, because the
seid of God abydis in him, and he may not syn, berea son he is borne of God. In
this respect that same Justice, quhilk is mere grace, becu^mis the fontayne of
meritorious varkis. Because grace quhilk is in us, thruch the mereit of Christ
is the cause of al mereit, ins afar as it vorkis, or bringis forth operations as
it is vrittin: Zea se thairfore that ane man is iustefeit be varkis and not be
faith only: S. Iam. 2.
And in Jesus Christ nather circuncision, S. Paul. 5. ^gal.
nather the fores kyn or gentelisme auaillis onie thing, bot faith quhilk
producis good varkis be cheritie,


M. Quhat callis thou that secund Justification?


B. It is ane augmentation of justice be verteu of the grace of God, Apocal. 22
and cooperation of fry vil, as it is vrittin: he that is just, let him be zit
iustefeit.


M. The scripture sayis that ve ar Iustefeit be the meritis of Christ and not
be any that are in us.


B. Ve ar iustefeit be the meretis of Christ, Because he be verteu of his blude
hes mereit unto us his grace, be the quhilk ve ar iustifeit before God, and
quhairfra al our meritis do proceid as from the original fontayne. And
thairfore our meritis (as vryttis S. August.) at the very giftis of God: 9.
Confess. c. 13.
And quhair ze allege that the scripture affirmis, that ve are not iustifeit be
our meritis: it is may falls, zea the scripture affirmis the contrar,
considdering it attributis our Justification unto our good varkis, quhilkis ar
na other thing bot our meritis.


M. Dois thou than think that the syn contractit thruch the inobedience of
Adam, is remouit in very deid, and in place thairof, justice inhaerent in
every ma^nis mind creatit, quhairby he may compeir before the tribunal seat of
God?


B. Euin sa I mean, Because insafar as Christ hes maid satisfaction for syn of
infinite valeur, Romans 5.
the grace geuin be him not only makis the mind abil to obey Goddis
commandimentis, bot also expellis the evil disposition quhilk it receauit be
propagation of Adam, 1. Epist. 3.
as testifeis S. Iohne^ that Christ hes cu^mit for the destruction of the vark
of the Devil, that is of syn.


M. The scripture testefeis that the syn contractit of Ada^ abydis continually
in our mind, and be faith in Christ is only not imputit, S. Paul. 3.
or laid to our charge, Their is not samekle as ane just man, their is nane
quha a hes understanding, their is nane quha searchis God, al men hes past
astray, they ar altogether improffitable their is nane quha exercesis justice,
their is not samekle as one: hou then sayis thou that the syn is remouit in
very deid, and justice inhaerent in our myndis acceptabil unto God?


B. This zour testimony of scripture, and diuerss vthers lyk unto this is to
be understand of man before his restitution to grace, thruch the merit of
Christ, quhil as our conference sold be of them quha ar alreddie restorit,
and to grant all that quhilk, ze desire Gif na man be just, bot be the
imputation of the justice of Christ, the prophet vald not have affirmit
universally that na man vas just, cheiflie according to zou^ auin meaning,
quha grantis that money ar just be the imputation of Christis justice. Then
quhither ze vil or not ze ar constranit to grant that S. Paul meanis of ane
treu and inhaere^t justice, quhilk because it could not be obtenit nather be the
lau of nature, nor the vritt in lau, as he prouis him self in the epistle to
the Romany, bot on lie be the faith of Christ. It follouis necessar^^e that
quhasoeuer ar iustifeit be Christ, ress^uis in them selfis treu and inhaerent
justice.


M. Quhat than sayis thou to the testimony of S. Iohne. 1* Joan. ^.
Gif ve say that ve have not syn ve deceive our selfis, and the treuth is not
in us?


B. Our controversy co^sistis not in this heid, quhither gif ane man restorit
to justice have onie syn or not, because euin the godly committis venial
synnis, quhairof the Apostle speikis in this place. Bot the difference
consistis in this point, quhither gif ane man restorit to justice thruch the
mereit of Christ, remanis in the formar vickednes, or gif their be onie stay
quhy he sold not properly be callit just: Considering 1. Ioh. 3.
S. Iohne testifeis, that quhasoeuer dois justice, he is just. And I believe ze
dar not be sa bauld to deny that S. Iohne and the rest of the Apostlis did
justice: quhairfore they var treulie just before God. And gif ane man be ever
ennemie to God, as ze allege ze ar in the vrang to exhort any to vithdrau him
self from syn, considering it is impossible, and also auailis na thing, sen our
synnis quhilk ar in us impeschis not that the justice of Christ be impute to us
as ze zour seluis afferme.


M. Be quhat testimoneis of scripture may thou prove that the syn remanis not
in very deid?


B. In special be the testimony of S. Paul: ve quha ar deid to syn, Romans 6.
hou may ve leave in the same heirefter? sua that gif Christ deit in very deid
and not be i^putation only as certane heretickis affermit, ve de to syn in
very deid, and not be imputation only being baptisit in Christ* for the
apostle subionis: knau ze not that quhasoeuer ar baptesit in Jesus Christ they
ar baptesit to de in him? and a litill after he quha is deid is iustefeit from
syn: and in the beginning of the aucht chap. Their abydis na comdemnation to
them quha being ingraft in Jesus Christ, leuis not after the flesch, bot ester
the spreit.


M. Concupiscence abydis in them quhae ar regenerat, Romans 7.
quhilk be S. Paul is callit syn thaifore syn abydis in them quha ar iustifeit
be Christ.


B. Concupiscence is sumtyme interpreit ane inordinat desire of the flesch
aganis the spreit of man, Gal. 5.
hauand fry vil agreing thairto quhilk is syn, and abydis not in the iustefeit
man. Because S. Paul testifeis that they quha pertenis to Christ, hes crucefeit
the flesch vith the concupiscencis thairof. 2. ep. 2.
In lyk manner S. Petir. Abstene from carnal concupiscencis quhilkis fecht
aganis the Saul. In another signification it is taken for the inferior pairt of
the mind repugnant unto reason quhilk is na syn except the reason consent
thairto as vryttis S. James. S. Iam. cap. 1.
Concupiscence after it hes conceauit bringis forth syn: and also: Let not syn
rigne in zour mortal bodeis to obey the concupiscencis thairof. Quhair ze say
that in the scripturis it is callit syn: August. de nup, and conc. c. 23. and
contra Iulianu^. l. 6. c. 5.
S. August. gave ansuer to the pelagianis tuelf hundredth zeris syne, that it is
callit syn, because it proceidis of syn, and is the cause of syn, gif ve resist
not to it, lyk as the hand is callit the vrit that is vrittin be the hand: And
Christ him self is callit syn because he is ane sacrifice for our synnis, And
thairfore it is not callit syn properly, bot be ane sigurat speich according
to S. Paulis auin interpretation.


M. have ve any other Justice nor that quhilk is in Christ only repute to be
ouris?


B. The justice quhilk is in Christ is the meritorious cause of our justice,
Romans 5.
according to the testimony of S. Paul, as be the syn of ane man vickitnes
come unto al men to comdemnation, euin sua al men ressauis gudnes to
justification be the gudnes of ane man. Sua as be the syn of Adam not only be
imputation bot treulie ve ar al borne in syn, sua necessarlie be the justice of
Christ, not only ve man be repute just before God, bot also ve man be just in
very deid: And thairfore zour doctrine of justification agreis vith the
heresy of Pelagius: Because as affirmis S. Paul, the justice of Christ is
co^municat unto us, euin as the syn of Adam is co^municat. And ze subsume that
the justice of Christ is not treulie co^municat unto us, bot only be
imputation, sua necessarlie it follouis that the syn of Adam is only impute to
us and that ve are not treulie borne in syn, quhilk vas the blasphemous us
heresy of Pelag.


M. Thou art aluyse ignorant of the scripturis, quhilk gif thou understood thou
vald find na testimony to prove justice inhaerent in us.


B. Albeit the authority before alleagit be sufficient, zit I may esilie prove
the same be may. Romans 5.
For S. Pavl vryttand to the Romans testifeis that the cheritie of God is pourit
in our hairtis be the halie spreit quhilk is geuin unto us. And to the Corinth:
2. epst. c. 12.
my grace is sufficient unto the. Quhairfore I will may glaidlie glore of my
auin vaiknes that the pouar and strenth of Christ may abyd in me. In the quhilk
testemonie it is evident that the grace of God quhilk is ane thing vith our
justice signifeis ane inhaerent strenth, and pouar, quhairby ve may obey the
desyris of the spreit and concur to the operations thairof. Quhair fore ze
blindit Protestantis ar grettumlie deseauit, quha vil acknaulege na other
signification of grace, bot that quhilk is definit be the orateur Cicero,
especially in sik forms of speking: Rediit cum illo in gratia^: 1. Colos. 6.
Gal.
for the Apostle S. Paul callis it ane vork and strenth, pouar, efficacy, and
ane neu creature.


M. Quhat than sayis thou is requyrit to the justification of zoung children
conceauit and borne in original syn, quhilk thou comprehendit under the third
estait of mankind?


B. Euin as the zung childrene be the first Adam, hes contractit original syn,
sua be the secund Adam, that is be Christ, they ar purgit fra it be the lauer
of regeneration, as testifeis S. Paul, Tit. 3.
be the quhilk they ressaue the grace of God, quhairby they ar iustifeit: And
quhen they cum to the zeris of discretion, producis varkis that meritis eternal
life.


M. Let us then cum to that fourt estait of mankind quha as thou sayis fallis
in deid lie syn after restitution to grace thruch Christ. Bot first let me
understand, quhat thou callis deidlie syn, Because I knau na sik distinction of
sin in the halie scripture.


B. The distinction of mortal synnis, from venial quhilk ar spiritual diseisis
of the Saul may be understand be comparation vith bodelie infirmeteis: for as
of them sum ar sa far ennemie to nature, that in ane moment they prouok
suddane and haistie death: vthers quhairby our natural temperature of body is
vitiat, may the mair eselie be curit: Siclyk their is ane kind of syn that
expellis grace quhilk is the life of the Saul, and the other kind albeit it
fyllis the Saul, zit it may consist vith grace: This includis not manifest
contempt of God, bot is only ane inordinat behavior in loving of the creature
proceeding of negligence, ignorance, and infirmity. This distinction of synmis
is declarit in the euangel of S. Mat. S. Mat. 5.
Bot I say unto zou quhatsu^euir he be quha is offendit vith his brother
raschlie is oblest to judgment: he quha sayis to his brother Raha, is subject
to the co^cile: and he quha callis his brother fule, is vorthie of the fire of
hell. Be the quhilk is vordis Christ him self declairis, that al synnis
deseruis not eternal damnation: and sua co^sequentlie that al syn nis are not
mortal or deidlie: By that it is cleir in the scripture, that quhair deidlie
syn is, the cheritie and love of God can not be, be rason he quha is in deidlie
syn, is in the estait of da^tion: and quha is in cheritie, he is heriture of
the life euerlesting, and zit he quha is in cheritie is not vithout al syn as
testifeis S. Iohne. 1. Joan. 3.
quha sayis he is vithout syn he is ane lear. Than of necessity ve man gather
that al synnis are not mortal or repugnant to cheritie, bot sum venial that may
consist vith cheritie as according to the vord of God the kirk hes ever beleuit.


M. hou than is the fourt estait of manknd restorit to the justice quhilk they
ressauit be Baptism?


B. Insafar as they lossit the grace ressauit be the abuse of their auin fry
vil, restitution man be maid be the Sacrament of penitence quhair of Christ did
speik to his Apostlis quhen he said: 1. Joan. 20
Quhatsu^euir synnis ze remit, they salbe remittit.


M. To make ane end then of my question, rehearse schorlie the causis of
Justification?


B. The efficient cause is God the glorious trinity quha creatis justice in the
hairt of man. The meritorious cause: is Christis death and passion. The formal
cause: is grace inherent in the mind, as the health of the Saul restorit. The
fenal cause is glorification, to the quhilk God hes predestinat his elect before
the beginning of the varld.


OF PRAEDESTINATION
CHAP. 2.
M. OVhair in consistis predestination: and quhat be the degreis thairof?


B. Predestination consistis in the appointment of the end, for the quhilk men
and angellis var creatit, and in prouyding the meynis and cause quhairby they
may attene according to the property of their nature to the end foresene in
goddis eternal counsal. Sua first he dois call them quhom he hes predestinat:
tharefter iustefeis them, and last of al indeuis them vith glore and
immortality.


M. Is not God the only vorkar of ma^nis salvation in all their degreis?


B. God is only the vork ar as the chief and principal cause, zit be reason
that be his infinite sapience he dois govern and dispone upon his creaturis,
according to the nature of every ane of them, sen he hes maid man to be man
and not to be ane stok or stane, Ap^c. 3.
he requyris the cooperatione of man as testefeis S. Iohne: I stand knokking at
the dur gif onie man vil heir my voce, and opin the zet, I will enter. and of
infinite vtherplaces of the scripture, Exodus 10.
be the quhilk ve ar exhortit not to resist to the calli^g of god bot to obey
unto him. Act. 7.
Be the quhilk Esaiae 65.
testimoneis the cooperation of the fry vil of man is may cleirlie declarit.
Matt. 23.



OF FRY VILL
CHAP. III.
M. VAld ze afferme that after the fall of Adam, man hes fry vil?


B. Sen ane man after the fall of Adam is not ane beist, he man have fry vil,
sua that nather is he constranit, nor zit mouit of necessity to do good or
evil, no^uithstanding his fry vil man be helpit vith the grace of God gif he
vald do any thing that deserves euerlesting life, althocht in moral actions he
neid not ane special assistance of God, as to big ane house or not: to laubour
his grund or not. Iren. l. 4. c. 72. clemens Alexand. l. 1. poeda. c. 9.
Justin. mart. apol. 1. D. Hiero. 2. co^tra (...). August. de fide and operibus
ca. 9. 10. lib. 3. prog. l^^. 1. contra. 2. ep. pelag. c. 2. and de vera rel.
c. 14.
And in other siclyk actions, quhilk appertenis to the natural liberty of man.
Quhairfore I acknaulege vith the halie Doctors exponand the scripturis thrie
kindis of liberty, Ane natural, in all men regenerat and unregenerate, for as al
men hes reason and vil, sua in all actions quhilk ar properly callit thairs
they have election and fredome, quhairby they may ather do the contrar gif they
pleis, or leave that quhilk they do, undone. Of this liberty spekis S. Paul:
have I not pouar to carry about vith me ane sister as vthers quhilk pouar as he
schauis in that place he vsit not, bot villinglie refusit to have onie. The
secund is callit the liberty of grace, quhilk every man after the fall of Adam
hes not, bot only quha being purgit from their synnis be the blude of Jesus
Christ, resauis that gift of goddis benevolence, quhairby vithout any
compulsio^ or necessity they ar frelie mouit vith feir and dredure to vork
their auin salvation, be assistance of this grace and Christis halie spreit. Of
this liberty our saluiour spekis in the euangel of S. Iohne: S. Joan. 8. 1.
Cor. ^.
Gif the sone put zou to liberty ze ar fry in very deid. And S. Paul: Quhair
the spreit of the lord is, their is fredome and liberty. albeit they quha ar
in this liberty, may do good varkis vithout syn, zit be infirmity of nature
they quha standis in it, be their auin default may fall from the same. The third
is the liberty of glore, quhilk is in good angellis and sanctis nou glorifeit,
quhilk hes adionit vith it assurance of good doing vithout al syn.


Louson. I will prove that man after the fall of Adam hes na fry vil, Because the
hail scripture testefeis that men unregenerate ar altogether bent unto: syn
nather may they de onie good thing according to the saying of our master
Christ: vithout me ze may do na thing.


B. Gif zour allegiance var maid in form of argument, the reason alleagit
sold in very deid be knauin may sophistical, and impertinent. Because I
demand not quhidder gif a man unregenerate may do thaj varkis be the pouar of
his fry vill vithout special grace qukilk leidis to life eternal, bot only gif
the vil in ane unregenerate man be fry or not.


L. Be reason the vil of man unregenerate is abill to do evil only, I can not
understand hou it may have fredome, sense fry vil hes pouar to do ather good
or evil.


B. Ze ar deceaui^t be ane vicious definition of fry vill to vit quhilk may
ather do good or evil: for gif ze grant this definition sufficient ze salbe
co^pellit to deny that god or the good an gelles have fry vil because nather god
nor the good a^gellis ca^ do evil. The vil thairfore is fry, Because quhen al
thingis requesit to the operation thairof, ar present it may ceis from vorking
gif it pleis him quha sold perform the vark. And thairfore I am assurit, that
as satan is anthor of al evil, sua hes he craftelie sauin in zour hairtis
this erroneous opinion to clok zour vickednes quhairby ze refuse all kind of
reprehension. For being rebukit according to zour doctrine ze may ansuer I
micht not do vtheruyse: sua consequently ze transfer the cause of zour
transgression to God making him the author of syn and affirming that al thing
cu^mis of absolut necessity.

Farther the grund quhilk ze have laid, to vit that ane unregenerate man may do
evil only, is not sure, because ze acknaulege not ane distinction of good
varkis to vit in good varkis, quhilk by reason they proceid from grace thruch
Christ Jesus thaj deserve life eternal. And in good varkis moral quhilk may be
in the unregenerate, as quhen they honor their parentis, quhen they do their
deutie touart their nichtbour, or their co^monveil, quhen they give almous unto
the pure, and in other siclyk actions he the quhilk varkis ze vil not say that
they deserve eternal damnation, by that because that be the help and special
assistance of god they may repent of their synnis, and turn them selfis unto
god they have fry vil, and remanis in their former life, not be necessity as
ze may falsely allege, bot may frelie of their auin election, Because they
vil not follou the motion and instinction of the halie spreit be the quhilk
they ar valknit and callit to Repentance. Thairfore zour argument is vicious in all pointis in denying ane thing quhilk is may cleir and evident in the self
quhair in ze follou the futesteppis of Simon Magus and the Manicheans, Clemens
li. 3. recog. Aug. de fide contra ^anichae cap. 9. and (...) insit. lib. 2. c.
2. sect. 4.
opponing zour selfis to al ancient vryttaris quha ever in any eage hes
florishit in the kirk as zour master and Idol Iohne Calvin is constranit to
grant.


M. thou maruellis that ve afferme that al thingis cu^mis of necessity, sen
thou can not escaip to grant the same. Considering God hes the foresicht of al
thingis before they cum, the quhilk foresicht being infallibill, It is ne^essar
that all thingis cum euin sua as they ar foresene be god.


B. This zour argument is sufficient to deceive the pure ignorant people. bot
quhen it is examinat as it aucht to be, it is fund may vane and sophistical,
zea repugnant to zour seluis. Because ze confess that Adam quhen he vas creatit
be God had fre vill and zi^ ze can nocht deny bot god had the foresicht of al
thingis quhilk Adam vas to do, then the fry vil of man and foresicht of god are not repugnant to them selfis, zea gif zour argument var good god him self vald
not have fry vil, bo^ vald be constranit of necessity to do al thing that he
dois, Justin. in dial. cum tryph. hyeron. in 26. cap. ^ere. Athanas. in libr.
de pass. Christi Chr^so. hom. 60
for ze can not deny bot god foreseis al thingis quhilk he is to do: sua
according to zour argument he dois all thingis of necessity, quhilk is ane
blasphemy. Gif ze had imployit zour time better in the schullis, ze vald have
learnit that quhilk S. Auhalie Doctors vryttis: that ane man is not to be evil,
because god hes forekuanin that, Bot because he vas to be evil god forekneu the
same quha can mifknau na thing to cum. And the proper cause quhairfore he vas to
be evil is his auin fry vil, Because he vald not obey the vil and commandment
of god. Thairfore ane man sold not reject the cause of his auin evil and
vickednes to the prescience of god, bot to him self and his auin inobedience,
Bot ze in this follou the futsteppis of all the vicked men quha ever hes been
in the varld, quha to defend them self castis the cause of their vickednes on
god and upon ane fatal necessity.


OF THE VERTEV OF THE SASACRAMENTIS.
CHAP. IIII.
M. QVhat is a Sacrament of the Chr^stian and eua^gelical lau?


B. It is ane sign institute and ordenit be Christ, quhilk be his institution
is ane instrument quhairby his grace is co^municat unto us.


M. Thinkis thou then the doctrein of the scolastik theologiens treu, quha
teachis that in the administration of the Sacramentis of the evangelical lau
grace is geuin ex Opere operato, as they speik, unless the ressauer be
incredulite make impediment.


B. I think I aucht to give alsmekle credeit to the scholastik Doctors as to
zou and zit that the sacramentis geuis grace ex opere operato is not only
their Doctrene as ze appeir to say, bot the doctrein of Christ him self, quhilk
because peradventure ze understand not I will declair it: I afferme then vith the
hail catholic kirk, that the Sacramentis ar the cause of grace not be verteu of
the resauer, nor be verteu of the geuar, bot be the verteu of the blude of
Christ quhilk vorkis be them in us, Ephesians. 5.
to our sanctification, sua that quhen ze deny that the sacramentis hes their
strenth ex opere operato, ze deny the strenth and efficacy of Christis
institution and blude and denyis his eternal preistheid, sense it pertenis to
it not only to have payit our ranson, or to have sched his blude for us, bot
also to apply the said ranson unto us, quhilk cheiflie he dois beverte^ of ye
Sacramentis.


Of the number of the Sacramentis.
M. hou money Sacramentis be their?


B. Seuin: to vit Baptism, Confirmation, Penitence, The Sacrament of the
altar, Extreme unction. Marriage, and Ordour.


M. Quhat grund hes thou to estableis seuin sacramentis, sense ve acknaulege
bot tuay?


B. It is na great matter that ze acknaulege bot tua, Calu in li. 4. cap. 9.
sect. 18 instit.
sense the Catholic kirk hes acknaulegit seuin, ever sen the dayis of the
Apostlis, and zour master Calvin acknaulegis three.


Of Baptism.
M. Quhat sayis thou is requyrit in the sacrament of Baptism?


B. As in all other sacramentis ane lauchful minister having the authority of
Christ upon the face of the earth is requyrit, quha ioning to the element as
the material cause the formal cause, to vit the deu form of uordis requesit,
quhairby the grace signefeit be the sacrament is geuin, sua in Baptism is
requyrit valter, quhilk according to the use of the kirk sold be hallouit,
representing that quhilk vith blude sprang forth of the voundit syd of our
saluiour Christ upon the croce, S. Iohne 5. chap. ep. 1.
according to the saying of S. Iohne Their be three thi^gis quhilk geuis vitnes
in earth, the spreit, the valter, and the blude, and their three ar bot ane
thing. Sua that the administration of Baptism is proper lie callit the
vesching of the saul contenand the caussis of the purification of the same, and
is groundit upon this promeis of Christ: he quha sal believe, S. Mare. 16.
and be baptesit, salbe saif. the necesitie thairof unto all mankind is
denuncit be the threatening of Jesus Christ: Except ane man be borne of valter
and the spreit, he may not enter in the kingdom of God.


M. Baptism is not necessar, S. Joan. 3.
because Paul. vryttis that the childrene of the faithful ar sanctefeit. 1. Cor.
7.



B. Gif ze understand be their sanctification that they ar borne vithout syn,
ze repugne to S. Paull quha sayis that v^ ar al borne the so^nis of vraith.
Ephesians. 1.
and ze fall in the heresy of Pelagius afferming vith him that the infantis are not borne in original syn. Attour, S. Paul in that same place quhilk ze allege
for zou sayis that the unfaithful voma^ is sanctefeit be the faithful man, and
zit ze vil not say, that scho obtenis thairby remission of her synnis, sua zour
objection is of na strenth. The same argument vas proponit be the Pelagianis^
aganis S. Augustine, Aug. lib. 2 de ^upt. et concup.
quha ansuerit that sanctefication in the scripture is taken sindrie vayisand
that their it sold not be taken for remission of synnis as ze vald afferme, Bot
that the infantis ar sanctefeit, because they ar in the vay of sanctefication,
euin as the unfaithful ar sanctefeit be the faithful. And S. Jerome aganis
Iouianinus, Hier. co^tra Iouin. lib. 1.
ansueris in the same manner, And lang before them both Tertullian quha sayis
that S. Paul could not understand their be sanctification that the infantis ar
sua sanctifeit that they ar deliuerit from syn, sen he could not misk nau the
vordis of Christ: Except ane man be regenerat vith valter and the halie spreit,
he may not enter in the Kingdom of heauin Quhairfore ze se that this
interpretation proceidis of zour auin brain aganis the meaning of S. Paul and
all the ancient fathers vryttand on this place.


OF HALIE VALTER
CHAP. V.
M. VAld thou make distinction of valteris, calling the ane Hallouit the other
common, as gif they had diuerss operations, sense ze have na grund for sik
distinction in the vrittin vord?


B. The crafty invention of the Devil, having pouar of the elementis, Ephesians. 2.
lyk as S. Paul callis him prence of the air, hes raisit up falls prophettis to
deny all hallouing quhairby his pouar is aboleist, S. Ioh. 19.
for na good Christian doubtis, bot the valter quhilk vith blude sprang forth
of the syd of Christ upon the croce hes mair excellent verteu, nor common
valteris, 4. Reg. c. 5.
and farther the example of Naaman quha vas curit of his leprosy be vesching
him self seuin times in the valter of Iordane at the command of Elisaeus prouis
manifest distinction of valteris, quhilk proceidis of the institution of God,
and his vord in them quha ar lauch fully promouit to be preistis in his kirk.
1. Tim. 4.
And gif the meat quhilk ve eit as S. Paul sayis, be sanctefeit be the vord of
God, quhat doubt can their be bot be verteu of the invocation of the name of
Christ upon the valter, the craft and subtelitie of the Devil is vinqueist and
ouercum? Matt. 10. Ephesians. 4.
as Christ gave to his apostolis pouar over the deuillis quhilk pouar vil ever
remane i^to his kirk unto the end of the varld, as the Devil unto the end of
the varld vil not desist to trubill and molest his kirk, sua ve aucht to be
assurit that the prayers of the kirk, Clemens lib. 8. constit. apost.
and invocation of Chtistis name upon the valter hes sik stre^th that thairby
the craft of the devil is esilie brokin, and be verteu of this invocation that
he is chassit out of they places quhair before he vas, sua that he can not abyd
the valter, on the quhilk the name of Christ is inuocat to aboleis his vicked
operationes and thairfore the greik vord quhilk S. Paul vsis, quhen he sayis
that our meat is Sanctifeit be oreson (...) signifeis ane imploration of help
aganis thaj thingis quhilk may hurt, quharby ve ar instructit, that be the
sanctification of the valter the help of god is implorit aganis the pouar of
the vicked spreittis. Bot as the doggis fei^ the batons quhairby they use to be
dung, sua the devil and his follouaris be reason that be halie valter they ar
oftymes stayit from their vicked operations, sua do they may grettu^lie feir
it and lauboris to aboleis the use thairof sua far as they may, quhairof it is
may esie to produce unto zou sindtie examplis of the may learnit and
ancient vrytters. Epiph. li. 1. tom. 2. in haeresi ebio ^itarum.
Epiphanius v^yttis hou that Co^stantinus magnus had geuin charge to ane Ieu
quha vas baptesit to beild and erect sum kirkis, qu'ha villing to fulfill his
charge did prepare ane great quantity of lyme. Bot be the vorking of the devil
the natural operation of the valter quhilk vas cassin on the lyme vas impeschit
on sik manner that it could not be v^ocht, the quhilk being persauit be this
christian man, for ane may souerane remeid did hallou valter, and make the
sign of the croce upon it, S. Paull Gal. 6. Coloss. 2*
and strinkle it upon the lyme, quhairby the pouar of the Devil vas incontinent
impeschit, and the lyme thairefter in ane may esie vay vas vrocht In the
ecclesiastical history I reid of the lyk exampil, Theodoret. li. 5. ca. 21.
hou quhen Theodosius the empriour commandit to burn ane temple of Apollo, the
devil did impesch the operation of the fire, quhil the time that the halie man
Marcellus Bischop of Apamaea did make halie valter, and cast it in the fire,
quhairby the vorking of the Devil vas alluterlie stayit, Hieron. in vita
hylarionus.
and the said temple of Apollo vas incontinent turnit into ass. S. Jerome
descriuand the life of Hila^ion vryttis hou that the devil did molest ane
certane stabil quhairin vas ane number of horss be horribil, spectaclis and
visions, sua that the horss did becum inrageit: And hou the godly man hylarion
did make halie valter, Theodoret. in vita Aphratis.
and strinkle it over the stabil, and thairefter the devil had na pouar to
molest onie mair. And the may learnit vrytter Theodoret, vrittis in lik manner
in the life of the halie man Aphrates, hou that the devil did induce sterilitie
in certane landis, and impesch them alluterlie to produce fruict, quhilk being
sign feit to this halie man for ane may souerane remedy aganis the vark of
the devil, he did make halie valter and strinkle it over the landis, and
thairefter they var restorit to the same* fertility quhilk they had before.
And to cum to our auin I Will, quhen S. Germain the Biscop of Auser vas send to
confute the heresy of pelagius in Ingland the deuillis to hinder his may
godly interpryse raisit ane vehement storm upon the sea, sua that he vas
brocht to extreme dainger, quha as he vas ane halie man, understanding sik ane
hydeous tempest to be raisit be the inuy of satan had recourse to the ordinar
remedy of the halie kirk aganis the pouar of the ennemie, that is the haly
valter, quhilk being cassin in the sea, the storm cessit, and the sea become
calm as it vas before. And quhen he come to land the devil be the mouth of ane
possessit person confessit that he vas the cause of that tempest, as vitnessis
the venerable and godly Beda. Of their exemplis except ze be blind, Bedae li.
1. historiae Anglorum cap. 17.
ze may se the force and strenth of the benediction of God, and hou the valter
is sanctefeit and hallouit thairby. I will vith silence pretermit money other
lyk examplis, bot this I can not pretermit, hou that ze tak the baldnes upon
zou, to reprove the hallouing and sanctification of valter, quhilk ever hes
been obseruit in the kirk sen the Apostlis dayis, And ze zour selfis confess
that Alexander the first, Bischop of Rome quhilk vas fourscore zeris only
immediately after the death of our saluiour, makis mention thairof, quhom ze
confess also to have bein ane martye, and aue treu member of Christ. sua that ze
sold be es^hamit to be sa bauld as to condemn ane haly martyr in this point,
and all Christian men that ever, sen his day^^, h^s agree it vith him, as he did
na thing (...) he had learnit of them quha (...).


OF CONFIRMATION.
CHAP. VI.
M QVhat is Confirmation, and the effect thairof?


B. It is ane sacrament nixt follouing the sacrament of Baptism in ordor, Be
the quhilk the grace that ve have ressauit be baptism is augme^tit in us, and
ane special force and strenth, for the me^tenance and defense of our faith,
geuin: sua co^uenie^tlie thairto. The element of this sacrament is oil and
baulme mixed together, to signify that thairby ve becum campions of Christ. The
fotme of this sacrament consistis in the vordis, quhairby the exhibition of the
graces, and giftis, of the halie ghaist is signefeit, quhilk be their seuin in
special sapience, intelligence, science, counsall, strenth, feir, and piete,
heirof ve reid in the haly scriptute: Mairouer it is God quha conferma^d us
vith zou to attene unto Christ, S. Paul. 2. Cor. 1.
quha hes anointit us, quha also hes markit us, and geuin to us the arlis
penny of the halie spreit in our hairtis. And, Bot quhe^ the apostis^emana^din
jerusalem hard that samaria had receauit the vord of God, Act. 8.
they se^d Petir and Iohne^ to them, quha after they had passit down, they
prayit for them that they micht ressaue the halie spreit, for nane of them
had ressauit the same as zit, bot they var only baptesit in the name of Jesus:
Then they laid their ha^dis upon them, Eusebius. lib. 6. hist. cap. 35.
and they ressauit the halie spreit. Quhair of it is manifest, that in the
premitiue kirk this vas ane sacrament may necessar, the administrator heirof
being ane Bischop sik as var S. Petir and S. Iohne. Eusebius vryttis that the
heresiarche Nouatus vas possessit vith the devil, and did fall in heresy,
Theodoret. in libr. haeret. fab.
Because he had not resauit this sacrament. And Theodoretus testefeis that he
vas the first quha denyit Confirmation, quhais futsteppis ze appeir to follou,
Ambro. 2. de sacram. cap. 7.
opposing zour selfis to the hail ancient doctors, quha ever hes flurischit in
the halie kirk, sen the dayis of our saluior Jesus Christ. Aug. li. 2. co^tra
petilianu^. cap. 104.


Aemil. cateches. 3. Basil. de spir. sancto. cap. 21. Hieron. contra
luciferianos. Ambros. de his qui mist. init. Orig. ho. 9. in leuit. Cyprian ep.
70. and de unction char^s. and aliis sacram. Theodo. in camp. haer. fab.
and lib. 1. de spiritu sancto. cap. 6. August. lib. 5. de Baptis. contra
Donat. cap. 19. and 20. tract. 6. in epist. D. Joan. Leo magnus epist. 88.


OF PAENITENCE.
CHAP. VII.
M. Quhat good testemonies hes thou to prove that Penitence is ane sacrament?


B It is prouin may cleirlie be the vordis of S. Mattheu: Quhatsumeuir ze
bind upon earth salbe bund in heauin, S. Mat. 18. S. Ioh. 20. Ambro. in lib. de
poenit.
and quhatsumeuir ze louse upon the earth, salbe lousit in heauin, and quhais
synnis ze remit ar forgeuin to them etc. according to the meaning and
understanding of all ancient vrytters, Aug. de Ciui. Dei li. 20. c. 9.
quha have florischit in any eage sen the dayis of the Apostlis unto this
present. And gif ze have red the antiquity, ze can not misknau this, and in
special hou that Nouatus vas con damnit as ane heretik because he denyit this
sacrament as ze do. Cyprianus lib. 1. ep. 2.
And gif Christ hes institute ane sacrament for the remission of original syn,
and other synnis quhilk ve may commit before ve be regenerat: it is na les
assurit bot he hes institute ane sacrament, Hyero^. episto. ad (...).
quhairby ve may obtene the remission of thai synnis, that ve commit after that
ve be maid members of Christis body: or ellis our estait and condition var
may miserabill. Sua that ze quha denyis this sacrament, and consequently
substractis the benefeit thairof from the people, have largely amplefeit the
kingdom of satan, and taken auay a may souerane remedy for all spiritual
diseasis from the members of Christ Jesus.


M. Their apperis na outuard sign in that Zour sacrament of Repentence.


B. Ze appeir to misknau quhat is ane outuard sign, considdering ze persaue
cleirlie hou in the administration of this sacrament the absolutio^ of the
preisthis is ane sign that is persanit be our earis; and signefeis the inuart
absolutio^ quhairby our saulis ar absoluit and deliuerit from the burding of
syn. And siclyk on the pairt of the penitent, the confession and satisfaction
ar taiknis of the vorking of the halie spreit thruch the mereit of Christis
passion in the hairt of the absoluit sinner.


M. Nou have I curage to lauch sense thou art not eschamit to pronunce that
opin blasphemy, saying that ane priest may give absolution of synnis.


B. Sir it is na marvel, for zour manner and custume is to lauch at al thing
that ze understand not: Bot praysit be god, my faith is not groundit von zour
lauchter, bot upon Christis vord quha said to his Disciplis, as the father hes
send me, S. Ioa^. 20.
sua send I zou, quhais sinnis ze forgive ar forgeuin to them. Gif Christ come
in the varld for remission of synnis, he schauis, that he hes geuin pouar to
his Apostlis, Ambros. in lib de poenitent.
and their successors to remit syn also. Quhilk he declaris in thaj vordis:
Quhais synnis ze forgive ar forgeuin to them, thairfore ze ar may ingrait to
the benefeitis of Christ, quha vald substract that pouar fra his apostlis
quhilk he confessis vith his auin mouth to have geuin them sua lauch alsmekle
as ze pleis, I will ansuer to zou as did S. Ambros. Lib. 1. de poeni. ca. 2. and
3.
Ambroise to the Nouatians The preistis (sayis he) quhen they give remission of
synnis be the sacrament of paenitence they vsurp na authority unto them self,
bot vsis only the authority that god hes grantit unto them, and addis: Gif
they give remission of synnis be the sacrament of Baptism, Quhy blaspheme ze
to say that they have not pouar to remit synnis in the Sacrament of Penitence.


M. Bot I can not understand be quhat testimony of the vritten vord thou may
prove the Auricular confession.


B. Their be money other thingis attour that, quhilk ze understand not, aluise
the matter is may cleir: Because it is aganis reason that absolutio^ be geuin,
and paenitence inioynit, unless the Judge, to vit the Priest, Matt. 18. Joan. 20.
quha is in the place of Christ have knaulege of the si^nis co^mittit, quhilk
he may not vndirstand vithout auricular confession, quhairby the priest may
vndirstand all the sinnis of the paenite^t, Clemens epist. 1.
ather in publik or ellis in private, sua that Clemens disciple of S. Petir in
his epistle direct to S. James the Apostle vitnessis planelie this to be the
treu tradition of S. Petir, Diony. ad Demoph. Cyprianus lib. 4. ep. 2. Pacianus
epist. 3. ad Symphor^amum. Epiphan. haeres. 69.
that it behouis al Christian men villiug to be absoluit to confess their evil
tho chtis before the preistis of our saluiour Christ. And S. Dionise Disciple
to S. Paull testifeis the same to have been practisit in his dayis, And sik hes
been the custom euir sen the beginning of Christis kirk, unto this present.
And ze zour selfis experimentis houmonie kind of abhominabill synnis ar regnand
in this cuntrie sen the time that ze have dispensit vith the consciencis of men
that they neid not to make confession of their synnis quhilk vas ane may chief
stay and brydil to vithdrau men thairfra.


M. Quby affirmit thou before that satisfaction is ane pairt of Paenitence
considering the satisfaction quhilk our master Christ hes maid is sufficient
for all our offencis.


B. The satisfaction of our saluiour Christ is sufficient indeid for the synnis
of the hail varld, Bot zit it is applyit to them only quha thruch the grace
of his satisfaction ressauit, dois the varkis of Paenitence, Romans 8.
as testife^s S. Paull. ve suffer vith him that ve may be glorifeit together
vith him that the temporal pane quhilk vevillinglie sustein for our synnis
committit, is in this respect callit satisfaction to the judgment of God.
Because heirby the passion of Christ is maid ouris be assistance of his grace
and halie spreit, quha performis this satisfaction in us. Of the quilk S. Paul
vryttis to the Corinth. 2. Cor. 7.
This that for the offense of god ze have been sorifull, hou gretcairfulneshes
it ingenerit in zou zea hou great satisfaction, hou great indignation, hou great
feir, hou great desire, hou great aemulatione, hou great reue^gement? And this I.
reid to have been the mening of the universal kirk sen the beginning as Calvin
zour master himself ca^ not dissimble: Calvin instit. lib. 3. cap. 4.
And thairfore sayis in plane vordis that the hail ancient fathers, hes been
deceauit in this point. Bot because as apperis al zour felicity consistis in
delicat cheir and treating of zour selfis, and zour fair vyffis, this doctrine
of satisfaction or Paenitence can nocht enter in zour hairtis.


M. Is it necessar that every man, quha hes committit syn sustene temporal
pane that heirby he may have participation of the satisfaction quhilk Christ
hes maid for sin?


B. I. marvel of zou quha callis zour self a master in Israel, hou ze can
doubt that after the remission of syn ve aucht to underly sum temporal pain:
2. Reg. 12.
sen ze reid that David the halie prophet notuithstanding he had gottin
remission of his syn zit he vas very hauelie puneist be god. Gene. 3.
And Adam him self after god had forgeuin him the giltenes of his syn, zit he
said unto him: maledicta terra in opere tuo: Cursit be the earth in thy vark.
And ve unto this present thole diverse trublis for the syn of Adam. The lyk may
be confirmit be innumerabill testimoneis of the hail scripture. Sua I ansuer
unto zou may resolutlie vith the universal kirk that the satisfaction of
Christ is not applyit unto us, except that ve endure sik temporal pain ather
in this varld, or in the varld to cum. And I let zour self consider, gif it be
according to reason, that Christ quha vas our heid vas crounit vith the croun
of thorn, and drank the bitter coup of the croce: And ve quha professis our
selfis to be his members sold be ever in ryattousnes and plesours of this
varld: 2. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
sen the hail scripture exhortis us ^aoft to conform our seluis to our heid,
and to thole and endure vith him gif ve vald be partakaris of his glory.


OF PVRGATORIE.
CHAP. VIII.
M. BE this thy meaning I collect, that thou vald approve the auld papisticall
purgatory.


B. Their is na doubt bot sindrie depairtis out of this varld quha enterris not
in heauin immediatie, nather zit, ar they conde^nit to euerlesting pane as
prouis the example of Lazarus quha had lyin four days in the graif, S. Mat. 25
S. Joan. 11.
for gif he had been in joy eternal, he ressauit na benefeit to have been
brocht thairfra to this vale of misery: and gif ze vil afferme that he vas in
hell, ze ar conde^nit be the manifest vordis of the scripture out of hell their
is na redemption. S. August. in 103. Psalm. Basil. de spir. sanct. cap. 15.
Ambros. in Psalm. 117. Orig. hom 6. in Exodus 1. Cor. 3.
Quhairfore I agrie to the determination of the halie kirk, and doctrine of the
may god lie teachers thairof, exponing sindrie passagis in the halie
scripture of purgatory, as in special the third chap. of the first epistle of
S. Paull to the Corinth Every mannis vark salbe maid manifest, for the day of
the lord fall schau it quhilk is reuelit in fire, and the fire sall try every
mannis vark, for of the vordis follouing, it is manifest, that he meanis not
samekle of the Doctrine of the teachers, as of the manners of them quha ar
teachit saying: knau ze not that ze ar the temple of god, and the spreit of god
duellis in zou. Gif any man profane the temple of god, god sall destroy him,
siclyk our lord him self sayis: S. marc. 9.
Al man salbe seasonit vith fire, and all sacrifice salbe seasonit vith salt,
quhairby he meanis that lyk as the salt is appointit to conserve any thing from
corruption, sua god hes appointit ane sire quhairby the corruption quhilk the
Saul contractis of the body is consumit, Apoc. 21.
and sen na inquination can enter in the kingdom of heauin. S. Ioh. cp. 1.
chap. 1. S. Iam. 3.
And according to the common fragilitie of man their is feu bot hes sum spot sa
lang as they leave in this varld, hou dar ze deny that their is sum purgation
after this life, unless ze debar al men from the kingdom of heauin? and quha
of zou ar sabauld that dar say that quhen zour Saul depairt is* from zour body,
it is aluterlie clean vithont al spot of syn, cheiflie sen in the confession of
zour auin faith ze profes may planelie that sa lang as ze leave in this varld
their is na thing into zou bot syn? sua sen their is na purgation after this
varld ze remaning perpetually in zour synnis, ar conde^nit for ever. And quhat
can be mair cleir nor that quhilk is in the buikis of the machabaeis quhair
Judas Machabaeus causit offer sacrifice for the 2. Mac. 12.
synnis of them quha var dead? Augu. li. 2. de doctr. Christ. c. 8.
the quhilkis buikis their tuelf hundredth zeris and mair hesbene ressauit for
Canonikis as vitness S. August. And sik hes been ever the custume of the Ieuis,
from the beginning of the synagogue, and is zit kepit to this day: sua that I
marvel amang the rest that in zour neu bible in zour note upon this place of
the Machabeis ze have sua impudent a leising as to say that ^ionis. c. 7. eccl.
hierar. Tertul. de cor. mil. Chrysostom. 3 ad Philip. Aug. in li. de cura promort
again.
the synagogue of the Ieuis vsis not to pray for the dead. As to the use of the
christian and Catholic kirk, gif ze have red any thing of the antiquity, ze
can not misknau hou this custume ever hes been Keipit as vitness Dionisius
Areopagita disciple to S. Paul Ter^ullian, Chrysostom Augustine, Calvin instit
libr. 3. c. 5. sect. 10
and the rest. I knau zour master Calvin sayis that the haill ancient Doctors
their threttene humdreth zeris hes errit, and been deceauit in this point Bot I
think it als liklie that M. Iohne Calvin sold have been deceauit as sua money
learnit godly vrytters, quha their threttene hundredth zeris hes floreist in
Christis kirk.


OF THE INDVLGENCIS.
CHAP. 9.
M. ARE not Zour indulgencis the invention of the Pape, quairby he may vin
silver?


B. Ze sirris quha raillis sua often aganis the Paip and papistis as ze call them
use to tribute the invention of money thingis to the Pape, bot quhen ze ar
demandit in particular from quhat Pape sik inventions did proceid ze becum al
dum, and hes na thing to speik. As quhen ve demand zou quhat Pape inuentit the
sacrifice of the Mess, the Invocation of sanctis, Praying for the deid, and
other heidis of religion quhilk ze have callit in doubt. Sua I desire that ze
prove that thing quhilk ze say, and schau quhat Pape vas he that inuentit the
indulgencis, quhilk ze vil never be abil to do. Nou because ze say that the
indulgencis at na thing bot the invention of man, I will declare that ze ar
manifest impostors before tha me all quha ar heir present. Genes. 3. 2. Reg.
12. S. Mat. 18 S. Ioh. 20.
I scheu before be goddis vord that quhen the syn is remittit ve aucht to
underly sum temporal pane the quhilk vsis to be inionit after a man have maid
confession of his synnis. Nou sen Christ hes geuin pouar to his kirk to bind
and louse, euin as pastors hes pouar to inioyne penance to men for their
synnis, sua they have pouar to relax their penance unto them, vtheruyse the
pastoris vald have gretar pouar to bind nor to louse, quhilk is co^trare to the
mearcie and gudnes of God. Ambros. in lib. 1. de poe nit. ca. 2.
And thairfore S. Ambroise money hundredth zeiris syne in his buikis de
poenitentia aganis the Nouatians, did object unto them, that they did only
bind men, and na vayis lousit, aganis the ordinance and institution of Christ.
2. Cor. 2.
Zea S. Paul him self as is manifest in the secund to the Corinth, did give sik
indulgence to him, quha had committit the horrible crime of incest, saying:
Give I have pardonit zou onie thing, I have appardonit zou bering the person
of Christ Jesus. Be the quhilkis vordis he testifeis may cleirlie that be the
pouar and authority grantit unto him be Christ he did relax sum pairt of that
Paenitence quhilk before vas inionit for the said crime of incest. And gif ze
had plesit to have red the ancient vrittaris ze vald have persauit may
cleirlie hou in the time of the persecution of the Roman emperoris as Decius,
and vtheris, this use and custume vas keipit in the kirk, that be the
intercession of the Christianis quha var impresonit for their faith, and
religione the bischopis and pastoris of the kirk vsit to relax the paenite^ce
quhilk they had inioynit for any great and vechtie crime. Cyprian. li. 3. ep.
15. and 16.
Of this ve have money epistlis in S. Cyprian, threttene hundredth zeris syne
and mair: zea they quha follouit the heresy of Mo^tanus did reprove the the
Papis of Rome that they did grant sik indulgencis to adulteraris, and other
siclyk sinners thruch the intercession of martyrs impresonit. Tertul. li. de
pudicitia.
Quhair of I produce to zou as ane sufficient vitnes Tertullian quha vrait
before fourtene hundredth zeiris. Sua the indulgencis is na Papis invention as
ze may falsely preach to the people. Bot the ordinance of Christ Jesus
(practesit be his Apostlis and the universal kirk ever unto this present)
groundit upon the meritis of his may ptecious death and passion quhilk a^
applyit vntovs, for the satisfaction of our synnis and to supply our vaiknes
and imbecillitie in that pairt: for quhat thing can be thocht mair according to
reason, nor that the full and perfyt satisfaction of the head supply the
vaiknes and imbecillitie of the members, S. Paul Gal. 6.
zea euin the satisfaction of ane member may supply the satisfaction of ane
other, conform to our belief I believe the communion of sanctis. Bot ze sirris,
as ze have na thing ama^g zou bot syn according to zour auin confession, It is
na marvel that ze deny the communion of sanctis.


M. The Apostlis and Martirs ressauis glore above the merit of al their
temporal afflictionis, Romans 8.
Because as vrittis S. Paul: I esteem not the afflictiou of this present time
equal to the glore quhilk salbe reuelit in us. And farther their is na truble
quhilk man after the fall of Adam may sustine bot his syn hes deseruit the same
and rather mair, sua that the sanctis ar scarcely suffi^ient or abill to
dispone them selfis that they may have participation of that satisfaction
quhilk Christ hes maid.


B. The good varkis, and paynis quhilk the Apostlis, and martyrs have tholit ar
considerit in ane vay, as meritorious, proceiding from grace thruch Christ be
the operation of the halie ghaist. And in this respect the Apostlis and Martyrs
hes ressauit glore according to their vark is: vtheruyse ve co^sidder the
trublis quhilk they sustinit, as satisfaction for syn, In the quhilk respect
their meritis may be applyit to other membris of the kirk, Hier. 1.
seeing sindrie of them (as Jeremy quha vas sanctifeit fra his mothers vambe)
sustinit money maj temporal paynis in this life, nor vas requyrit to make
satisfaction for any synnis be them co^mittit. Syclyk S. Iohne the Baptist,
and Innumerable other martyrs, quha thoillit great paynis in their life quhilk
vas aluyse vithout great syn, Job. 6.
as the halie and pacient Job in his vexatio^ sayis: vald god my synnis quhair
by I have deseruit goddis vraith var veyit in ane balance vith the calamity
that I suffer, for my truble in compareson of them is hauiar as the sand of
the sea. And insafar as their paynis and pacient suffering of aduersite for
goddis cause being varkis may acceptable unto god, vrocht be the halie ghaist,
thruch the grace of Christis satisfaction, can not be in vane, It is necessar
that they be applyit to other membris of the kirk quha hes mister of the same:
sua that heirby the grace thruch Christ co^municat unto the faithful is
co^mendit insafar as be the same that quhilk inlaik is in ane member, may be
suppleit be another, for unto this do is appertine the communion of sanctis,
quhairby the gude^ varkis of ane ar proffitable to vthers, according to the
may expres vordis of S. Paull: that zour abundance may snpplie their
indigence, 2. Cor. 8.
and their abundance may supply zour pouertie^ as he vald say, euin as ze be
zour riches do supply their pouartie in vardlie guddis, sua they quha arrache
in good va^kis may supply zour pouartie thairin, sua that according to the
may expres vord of God, ve sold navyis doubt, bot that the paneful enduring
of the martyrs and other halie men may be applyit unto us, and fulfill that
quhilk inlakis of our satisfaction. For euin as the Eey dois se not only to
the self bot the hail body as it is ane member of the same, sua as ve ar all
members of the ki^k, the varkis of every ane, ar proff^able to vthers. As to
zour last objection, I marvel grettumlie hou ze ar sa forzetfull of zour self
as to admit manifest co^rradiction, for at sum time ze deny altogether that
after the syn is remittit, their be any temporal pain quhilk sold be sustinit
for it, and nou ze affirm that ve sustine al trublis and pane for the Original
syn, quhilk ve contract of Adam. I ansuer thaifore, that seeing be baptism,
thruch the merit of Christ al our synnis ar allurerlie aboleist, sua that be
the justice of god, ve ar obleist to na satisfaction for the same, and very
money sustinis gretar pane temporal, nor their synnis deseruit after grace
ressauit in Baptism, as is manifest in the halie martirs quha for confession
of the name of Christ sufferit al kind of tormentis that could be deuysit be
infidel Princis: heirof it is euideut that their paneful enduring of troubillis
may be applyit to supply the satisfactione of vtheris.


OF THE VARKIS OF SVPEREROGATION.
CHAP. X.
M. QVhat dois thou call ane vark of Supererogation?


B. It is that quhairto ane man is not obleist and gif he leave it undone he
incurris not the syn of omission, or neglecting his bund deutie, S. Matthew. 19.
as the vark quhilk Christ gave the zung man counsal to do, saying: Gif thou
vald be perfect, sell al thaj thing is that thou hes, give them unto the pure.
Cum follou me, and thou sall have ane threasor in heauin. And the passionis
quhair of S. Paul vryttis in this manner. 1. Coloss.
Nou I reiose in my afflictions for zou and I supply in my flesch that quhilk
inlaikis of the afflictons of Christ, for his body quhilk is the kirk. And it
is may certane, that the Sanctis and martyrs suffe rit money and great
afflictions to the quhilk they var nocht obleist as S. Paul testifeis of him
self: that he vas not obleist to endure the paynis, and laubour to vyn his meat
be the vark of his auin handis, quhilk notuithstanding he did villinglie
endure. Sua quhither ze vil or not ze man confess sum varkis of supererogation:
I agrie indeid in that, that amang zou, quha callis zonr selfis ministers of
goddis vord, their is na varkis of supererogation, except it be to vissie all
the bancattis that are maid in the tounis, quhair ze ar, to the quhilk ze ar,
not obleist be the command of god. Albeit the p^re people that in the mean time
deis of hungar hes litill vantage of siclyk supererogation.


M. Is it not blasphemy to say that Christis passion is not sufficient for the
synnis of the varld, and that it inlaikis perfection?


B. Quhen hard ze ever any Catholic man say that the passion of Christ is not
sufficient? This is zour manner quhairby ze use to deceive the people. Heb. 5.
Thairfore I say unto zou that the passion of Christ is sufficient, not only
for ane varld bot for ane thousand: zea not only his passion bot the leist
drop of his blude. zit I say lykuyse vith S. Paul that he is only the cause of
salvation to them quha obeyis his commandimentis, and quha conformis them
unto him, sua that his passion auaillis not bot to them, to quhom it is
applyit be sik meanis as he hes appointed. As to the present matter his
satisfactione is applyit unto us, and maid ouris quhen ve conform our selff to
him, to thoill and endure vith him, to the end, 2. T^n. 2.
as sayis S. Paull that ve may in lik manner be glorifeit vith him. Prosper in
sent.
Thairfoir sayis the halie Doctore prosper mening of the passione of Christ the
coup of immortality is preparit to al men, bot it is profitabile to them
only quha drinkis of the same.


OF THE FASTINGIS OF THE KIRK.
CHAP. XI.
M. ZE that are Papistis forbiddis meattis quhilk God hes created for the
sustentatione of man, aganis the expres vordis of Christ, Matt. 19.
quha says that na thing, quhilk enteris in the mouth fylis the saull, and of
S. Paull quha affirms that na thing aucht to be refused quhilk is tanevith
thankis giving, 1. Tom. 4.
and thairfoir he propheceis of zou may cleirlie, that in the latter days
their sall rise up men, quha sall forbid meattis quhilk God hes created, quhais
doctriue he callis, the doctrine of the deuillis.


B. I meruall that ze ar noth eschamed to follou the futstoppis of Iouinianus,
and vtheris co^demnit heretics: Hier. lib. 1. contra Iouinian.
sen Iouinianus as vitnessis S. Hierom vreittand aganis him did object that sam
argument to the Catholics in tha days quhilk presently ze object unto me,
ze the Manichaeanis to color their auin peruersed and vicked doctrine, Aug.
Lib. 30. contra faust. cap. 5 and 6.
used also aganis S. Augustine and other Catholics that sam self argument as
vitnessis S. Augustine aganis faustus the Manichaeane. I will thairfoir ansuer
to zou na other thing bot that quhilk Augustine, Hierom, Amb. in 4 cap. preoris
ad timot. Chrysostom ibidem.
Ambrose, Chrysostom, and other ancient doctoris hes ansuered befoir me, that,
that place of S. Paul aucht to be vndirsta^d aganis the Marcionitis, Tationitis
Manicheanis and other heretikis, quha did forbid meattis because they var
unclean of their auin nature, and created nocht be God bot be the devil as
they affirmeid. And thairfoir S. Paull callis this the doctrine of the devil,
and affirms that God hes created all meattis, and that all the creaturis of
God ar good, and vreittand to the Romany I knau and am persuadit be the lord
Jesus, Romans 14.
that their is nathing unclean of it self, and vretand to Titus, all thingis ar
clean to them that are clean. Tit. 1.
Sua that the mening of S. Paul is that it is ane peruersed and vicked doctrine
to abstene from meattis as gif they var unclean, or defylit in them seluis, or
created be the devil, as the Marcionitis and Manichaeanis may planelie
affirmed. Bot to abstene from certane meattis noth because they ar evil of
them selfis, bot for fasting penitence and dantoning of the flesh it is
nauyse condemnit be S. Paull, bot gretumlie approved be him, and be all the
prophetis and halie men quha ever hes flourished in the kirk of Christ. 2. Co^.
r.
Of the quhilk S. Paull sayis that ve should behave our selfis as seruandis of
God in mekill patience, and afflictionis, in fasting, Act. 15.
and sua forth. And in the actis of the Apostlis, it is commandit be the
Apostlis them selfis that the gentiles quha var converted to the faith should
abstene fra certane kyndis of meatis. Thairfoir sayis S. Augustine, Aug. lib.
3^. Contra faust cap. 5^
Christiani no^ here tici sed Catholici, edomandi corporis causa, propter
animam ab irrationalibus motibus amplius humiliandam, non solum a carnibus,
verumetiam a quibusdam terrae fructibus abstinent, vel semper sicut pauci, vel
certis diebus, arque temporibus sicut per quadragesimam fere omnes, vos autem
Manichaei ipsam creaturam negatis bonam, and immundam dicitis, and quod
diabolus carnes operetur ex foeculentiore materia mali. The Christianis sayis
he, nocht the heretikis, bot the Catholikis to dantone their body, and to
vithdrau their mind from vnressonabill motionis, abstenis noth only from
flesh, bot from sum fructis of the erd also, ather ay, as ane feu number, or
a^ certane times and vpone set dayis, as almaist all men in he time of
lenterne, bot ze quha ar Manichaeanis denyis that the creature is good, and
sayis that it is unclean, Aug. ibi.
and that the flesh is maid be the devil of the grosest pairt of the matter of
evil. And a lytill eftir he sayis, ^hair is ane greit difference betuix them
quha abstenis from meattis for ane halie significatione, or the chastising of
the body, and them quha abstenis from meattis quhilk God hes created, saying
that God hes noth created them, for the quhilk cause, that is the doctrine of
the prophetis and Apostlis, bot this is the doctrine of leing deuillis. Heirof
every man may persaue that this place of scripture is alluterlie perverted be
zou, and falsely applyit to the Catholic kirk, quhilk never did forbid onie
kind of meat as gif it had been evil, and defylit of the self. Considering
that quhilk is forbiddin vpone ane day vsis to be eattin vpone ane vthir, bot
forbiddis certane meattis for the da^toning of the flesh, that ve may be mair
abill to prayeris and other godly exerceisis. For the quhilk cause as vreittis
S. Basil quha ever hes excellit in onie kind of verteu, Basil hom. de leiunio.
they have been mekill geuin to prayer, fasti^g, and da^toning of their flesh.
Experience prouis the same of S. Iohne the baptiste and innumerabill vtheris,
Petr. mar. in 7. Iud.
albeit zour halie Prophet Petrus Martyr is nocht eschamed to condem Basile,
Gregorius Nazianzenus, and other halie men because they var mekill geuin to
fasting, and dantoning of the flesh, and var nocht of the flock of Epicurus
vith him and money of zou, ministeris this day in scotland. ze may thane esilie
persaue houvranguslie ze object this place of S. Paull aganis me. And hou I for
my defense have all the learned and halie men that ever hes flourished in
Christis kirk. Zour other obiectione that quhilk e^teris in the mouth fylis
nocht the saul hes the lyk vanity, and calu^nie co^ioynit vith it, sen na
catholic hes ever teached that the flesh dois defyle the saull, bot that the
inobedience and breiking of the command quhilk proceidis out of the hairt, dois
defyl the saull. As quhen Adame eated the Apill in paradise, Gene. 2.
it vas nocht the apill quhilk defylit his saull, bot the breking of the
command. Thairfoir S. Augustine sayis ansuering to heretikis lyk zou.
Memineruut Catholici omnia munda mundis, and non quod intrat per os coinquinat
animam, itaque non reiiciendis generibns ciborum quasi pollutis, sed
concupiscentiae doma^dae inuigilat omnis industria. The Catholics rememberis
veill that all thi^gis ar clean to them quha ar clean, quhair for they bestou
nocht their travel on rejecting of kyndis of meatis as gif they var unclean bot
only abstenes fra certane meattis to dantone and subdeu the flesh and
concupiscence of the sam.


OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE altar, and real presence of Christis body, and blude
in the same under the forms of braid and vine.
CHAP. XII.
M. QVhat is contined in that quhilk thou callis the sacrament of the altar?


B. In very deid and reallie the precious and glorious body of Jesus Christ
our saluiour, vindir the form of braid, and his blude quhilk vas sched vpone
the Croce under the form of vine, after the vordis of co^secratione deulie
pronunced, quhilk noth only signifeis as the vordis of man, bot hes vorking
pouar, insafar as they var pronunced be our saluiour him self, and ar, or salbe
deulie pronunced bethame quha hes lauchfull authority of him.


M. Thou appeirs to grond thy faith vpone they vordis ^hoc est corpus meum) and
dois nocht vndirsta^d that they should be taken figuratiuelie, S. Mat. 26
as quhen Christ callis him self ane dur, S. Ioh. 10.
or ane vay, S. Ioh. 14.
and Paull callis Christ ane rok. 1. Cor. 10.
And the paschall lamb is callit Phase or the pasouer, Exdo. 12.
quhilk maneris of speiking may nocht be taken, Matt. 26.
bot be ane figurat and sacramental loquutione, euin sua (hoc est corpus meum)
should be interpret figuratiuelie as ve do in our reformit Kirkis.


B. I am sorry to se the pepill deceauit be sik vane argume^tis as ze use, for
the force of zour argument consistis in this, Christ is callit impropirlie ane
dur, Thairfoir quhe^ he sayis this is mybodi^ thirvordis should be taken
impropirlie. The quhilk argument as onie man may esilie vndirstand, is of na
strenth. Because vith^ lyk probability the Arrian micht have said, Christ is
callit ane Rok impropirlie, thairfoir he is callit God impropirlie, and the
Nestoriane micht have argumented in lyk manner Christ is callit the vay
impropirlie, thairfoir their vo^dis. The vord is maid flesche, should be taken
impropirlie. S. Ioh. 1.
Ze should be eschamed to propone sik ane sophistical argument in ane matter of
sua great consequence, considering that for our pairt ve have the may cleir
and express vordis of God This is my body: Matthew. 2^
Sua gif ze may not schau be als cleir and evident scripture that they vordis
should be taken in aue impropi^ significatione, it is ane thing aganis all reasone
to mistrust the vord of God, and gru^d our faith vpone the consuit, and brain
of ane mortal man, as Zuinglius, or Calvin quha hes inuentit this neu gloss
and interpretatione. Mairatour gif ze vill considder all the circu^stancis of
the text bayth befoir and behind, quhairof the treu mening of tha vordis should
be gathered, their is na thing at all, quhairof onie sik motive is offered unto
us. For first Christ did abrogat the paschal lamb quhilk vas the figure of his
body, and fulfilled that thing quhilk vas praefigurat Sua necessarlie
according to his auin vordis, that quhilk he gave to his disciples vas nocht
the figure of his body as vas the paschall lamb bot his auin very body. In
lyk manner he did ^abrogat the figure of his blude quhilk vas in the auld
testament, and institute the coup of the neu testament, quhilk he could not
have done giff in the coup that he gave to his discipillis, na thing had been
contened bot vine Chief liesen the blude of brutall beistis, that ^as in the
auld testament did mair perfytlie represent the blude of Christ nor vine can
represent the same. Secundlie this vas the last thing quhilk Christ befoir his
death vas villling to recommend unto his best boloued discipilles, and quhilk
he vald they did in remembrance of his death and Passion quhil his cumming agane
to judge the hail varld, sua he did speik may cleirlie and planelie unto them
as al men vsis to do, quhen they ar to declare their latter vill, quhilk Christ
as he forkneu all thingis to cum, and louit his disciples may tenderly,
vithout al doubt hes done at his depairting, to the effect that the Apostlis
micht mair evident lie knau his latter vil, and na contention nor stryf rise
amang them thairanent, quhairby any of them micht misknau the same, The matter
being of sa great importance to all men as it is: for experience it self teachis
quhat debait is rissin sen ze have begun to interpreit his latter vil of zour
auin brain, be ane figurative loquntion, and hes put the varld in sik
perplexite, that ane great pairt their of is in doubt of the same. And it is
impossible that ever any resolution may be taken thairin, except that it be laid
for ane ground that the vordis may not be taken bot in the proper signification,
for vtheruyse it vil ever be doubtsum gif^ they sold be taken properly or
improperlie, And sua ve vill never have any assurit resolution thairof, quhilk
is aganis both the prome^ is of Christ, and the love and cheritie quhilk he
bearis to his kirk. Thridlie Christ in the latter suppar, did institute ane of
the may che, if and principal mystereis of our faith and religion bot the
mistereis of our faith, as they sold be beleuit be al men, sua aucht they to
be declarit in may cleir and plane vordis vtheruyse the vordis being obscure
(as they use to be in figurative loquutions, ve vald ever be in doubt quhat ve
sold believe, considering thruch the obscurity of the vordis every man vald
drau them to his auin pha^tasie and opinion. And thairfore as obseruis S.
Augustine, Aug^^de doc, christ. lib. 3.
quhe^ any mystery of our faith is proponit be ane figurative loquution, in
other places of the scripture it vsis to be declarit in may cleir and plane
terms. Zit as concerning this mystery ve find na sik declaration bot sa often
as the scripture makis mention thairof, ve find it ever callit the body of
Christ, Math.' 26. Marc. 14.
and never ane figure or bare sign of his body. Luc. 22.
Fourtlie, quhensoeuer any command is geuin in the scripture as Augustine,
Joan. 6.
and other vrytters obseruis, it vsis ever to be declarit in plane and proper
terms: for gif it var obscure, Augu. de doct. Christi libr. 3.
that thing quhilk is commandit could not eselie be knauin, and consequently
vald not be fulfill it: Bot Christ in his latter suppar, Matt. 26.
gave command to his Disciples to do that thing quhilk he did, sua it behouit
them to understand the vordis of Christ, according to the proper sense and
signification of them. I pretermit many other thing is that seruis grettumlie
to the same purpose: as that our saluiour Christ did lift up his eyis to the
heauin and gave thankis to his father for the great benefeit that he vas to give
unto the varld. Bot gif he had not geuin his body, it had been na vnaccustumat
benefeit: zea Manna, quhilk vas geuin to the fathers of the auld testament,
Exodus 16.
vas ane gretar benefeit, nor ane piece bread, gif he gave navther thing to his
Apostlis as ze allege: zea he had abrogat ane may excellent and perfyt figure
as vas manna and the paschal lamb, and in place thaitof had ordanit ane other
figure mair obscure, S. Paul.
and of les perfection, quhilk is aganis the nature, 2. Cor. 3.
quality, and co^dit^o of the neu testament, S. ^aul.
it beand the verity, and the au^d testament the vmbre and schaddou onhe. Heb.
10.
And thairfore that ve sold have na doubt in this heauinlie mystery, as tha^
thingis quhilkis of them seluis apperit to be very hard and incredible, and
var of gretest consequence, vsit to be promesit before to dispose men to faith
and to the resauing of them, quhen they sold be offerit, sua Christ promeist
to his Disciples that he sold give them his body to eat, and his blude to
drink. quhilk promeis he fulfillit in his latter suppa^, S. Joan. 6.
quhen he said (This is my body quhilk is geuin for zou) Declairing thairby
that it vas not ane figure of his body bot his treu body, as it vas not the
figure of his body that deit on the croce for us, for this pronoume, hoc, or,
hic, quhen it follouis upon ane promeis of God, it declairis the Real
exhibition, and representation of the thing promeist be God, As quhen the
father of heauin said: (Hic est filius meus dilectus: quhilk signifeis the treu
exhibition of the sone of God as he vas promeist to the fathers. And sua be
reason. S. Ioh. 6.
Christ promeist that he sold give his body to be eatin, quhen he sayis. (Hoc
est corpus meum) He declaris the Real exhibition of his body. Considder ze
vith zour selfis, gif he had geuin only ane mo^sel of bread to his Disciples,
gif it had been necessar to have promeist this before hand, or gif it had been
any g^et mystery, quhilk he had left unto us in the latter suppar: To conclude
for my pairt I have not only the plane vordis of Christ, bot also the
universal consent of all ancient vrytters, quha being mair nar to Christ and
his Disciples, nor ze, hes understand the meaning of his vordis better nor ze
may be abill to do, as they quha ar neirar the sone, resauis greatar influence
thairof, nor they quha ar farther fra the same.


M. Thou leis in that point, and thou can not be abill to schau any Doctor
before Thomas, and Scotus that ever defendit that opinion.


B. Iustine martyr, quha vas before Thomas and Scotus ane thousand zeris and
mair teachis in may plane termis, Justin. apol. 2. ad Anton.
that euin as Christ had flesch and blude, Iren li. 4. contra haeres. ca. 32.
sua he gave his flesch and blude to his Disciples. And Irenaeus in lyk manner:
that be the conjunction of the body and blude of Christ, vith our bodeis, the
same rysis to immortality according to Christis vord in the 6. of S. Iohne: he
that eittis me sall leave be me and I sall raise him up on the latter day: In
the quhilkis vordis he attributis the force of the vprysing of our bodeis to
immortality, to his body quhilk ve eit. Tertul. li. 4. contra marcion.
And Tertullian aganis the marcionitis prouis that Christ had ane treu body,
and treu blude, because according to his auin vord he gave his body and his
blude to his disciplis in the latter suppar. Cyprian. sermon. 5. de lapsis.
And S. Cyprian sayis that not only our saulis, bot euin our mouthis ar
sanctifeit be the body and blude of Christ. And Optatus Mileuitanus for that
cause, callis the altaris the seat of the body and blude of Christ. And
Gregorius Nyssen. Gregorius nyss. in cauach.
Euin as the meat quhilk ve eit is chaingeit in our flesch thruch our natural
operation, Sua be the vord and operation of God the breid is chaingeit in his
body. And Cyrillus Bischop of Jerusalem, Cyril. catach. 4. mysta.
under the form of Breid the body of Christ is geuin, And under the form of
vine his blude. S. Ambrose: Ambro. de i^ qui mist. init^. c. 9. Hyla. 8. de
trini.
the body that ve co^secrat in the sacrament is the body that is borne of the
vergin, And that same flesch quhilk vas crucifeit for us and bureit. S. Hylare,
of the verity of the body and blude of Christ their can be na doubt sen he hes
said, It is his flesch and his blude. And thairfore be the participation of
this sacrament, ve ar conionit vith Christ not only be faith and cheritie, bot
also naturally and corporally. And Cyrill Bischop of Alexandria vryttand
aganis Nestorius, quha affermit that Christ vas only man and not God, be this
sacrament prouis that he is both God and man, Because his flesch quhilk is
geuin to us to be eatin, could not quickin us gif it var only the flesch of
ane man, not conionit vith the divinity, S. Joan. 6.
according to Christis auin saying The flesch proffetis na thing, it is the
spreit that geuis life. And concludis as before did Hylarius, that ve ar
naturally and corporally co^ionit vith Christ, Chrysostom. libr. 3. de sacerd.
And thairfore Chrysostom. cryis vith a great exclamation, O miracle! O gudenes of
God! he that sittis at the richt hand of the father in that self same moment is
tuichit be the handis of men, and geuis him self to be eitin be al them that
vil resaue him. The rest of the doctors confermis the same, quhairof ze may
reid Garetius ane Catholic vryttar, quha hes collectit the testemoneis of chief
Catholic vrytters quha hes florishit sen Christ unto their dayis.


M. As to Zour doctoris ve man examine them be the tuiche stain quhilk is the
vord of god, Thairfoir let us not depairt from goddis vord, Nou thou may noth
deny bot their vordis quh airbie Christ spoke of his blude saying This coup is
the neu testament, in my blude, should be taken as ane figurat loquutione, for
thou may notht say, that the coup is propirlie the neu testament, sua euin in
lik manner, their vordis this is my body, ar to be vndirstand as ane figurat
loquutione.


B. giff ze vill examine the vrittinis of the fatheris be the tuichestane, ze
man prove zour selfis to be fineuris, lapideris, and goldsmythis, and declair
at quhat maisteris ze learned zour craft, for every man hes not that skill
suppose he have the ruichestane to examine the treu gold, bot he quha maid zou
gouldsmithis in this case, maidly kuyse souters schipmen, Attout gifze vil tak
upon zou to examine the v^^ttingis of the fathers be the tuichestane, Do ze not
think it als reasonable that the Fathers examine zour opinions be the
tuichestane, quhilk they have done before ze var borne, and conde^nit zou all
for heretikis. Bot to cum to zour objection ze sold have schaui^ that Christ
^allit that quhilk vas in the chalice, his blude be ane figurat loquution, and
then ze vald have p^ouin sum thing: Bot sen ze can not schau this of any place
in the hail scripture, zour reason is impe^ti^eu^: because albeit the chalice is
taken imp^operlie for that thing quhilk is contenit thairin, zit the blude is
taken properly, and according to that quhilk I spak before, this figurat
loquution (This coup is the neu testament in my blude) is declarit be ane
proper, and plane loquution both be S. Marc, and S. Mattheu, Marc. 14*
this is my blude quhilk salbe sched for zou and for many. Matt. 26.
And sua the chal^is is callit the neu testament in Christis blude, because it
contenis in it the blude of Christ, quhilk is the blude of the neu testament.
And thairfore of that figurative loquution ze sold rather have gatherit that
the treu blude of Christ is in the chalice* my reason is because that na other
reason maj be geuin quhy the chalice sold be callit the neu testament in the
blude of Christ, bot that it contenis in it the blude of the neu testament, for
gif it contene na other thing bot vine, as zeallege, it could not be callit the
coup of the neu testament, mair nor the coup quhairin vas contenit the blude of
beistis that vas ane figure of Christis blude could be callit the coup of the
neu testament, quhilk is ane great blasphemy, and makis Christ inferior unto
Moses, and derogatis to the ^stait and pe^fectio^ of the neu testament: zea
quhilk is may horribill of all, makis Christis vord to be falls, quha in place
of the blude of the auld testament and of the coup quhilk co^tenit the same,
assurit his Disciples that he did give them his auin blude in confirmation of
the neu testament. And this may be may cleirlie prouin of thevordis
follouing. Because he sayis that this coup quhilk he gave, sold be sched for
us, and in na other meaning the coup maj be sched for us, bot because that
quhilk is in the coup is sched for our synnis, sua gif that quhilk vas sched
for the remission of synnis vas his auin blude, it follouis necessarlie that it
vas his auin blude quhilk vas inthe chalice: Beza in com. in lucae 2. 2.
the quhilk argument is sa cleir and manifest that zour paraclet Theodore Beze
is constranit to deny this pairt of the scripture, and to say that it vas eikit
to the text.


M. Quhill as thou grantis the Real presence of Christis body in the sacrament
thou vilbe compellit to deny the article of the belief anent our masters
sitting at the richt hand of the father, quhilk of their then vil thou afferme
sense they may not bayth be treu.


B. Insafar as ze refer the sitting of our halie saluioris body at the richt
hand of his father, to ane disposition of place, and corporal situatio^ as ve
have in the earth, zour blind imagination in that behalf proceidis of zour
stupeid ignorance, as thocht god the father, quha is ane may simple spreit,
had ane richt or left syd, or any fleschlie hand lyk unto mortal men.
Quhairfore gif ze vil to avoid this incommodite, expone the article of the
belief concerning his sitting at the richt hand of the father, of the honor
quhairunto Christ Jesus in his manly nature is exaltit, It is ane better
argument: Christ is at the richt hand of the father, thairfore he is reallie
present vith men, norisching them be participation of his glorious body to
immortality, nor be the vrangus exposition of this article to collect the
co^trar. Bot because ze have brocht me in rememberance of the belief, I sall
schortlie be inductio^ prove that the false prophettis of zour deformit kirk,
denyis all the articlis heirof. And first of all quhill as ze giu^; na credeit
to the faithful men, quha have vrittin the miraclis that god hes vrocht be his
halie sanctis for confirmation of the treu faith sen the first fundation of the
Christian religion: And siclyk quhil as ze doubt, hou may our halie saluioris
precious body be reallie present in the sacrament, and in heauin at anis, or
the accidentis consist vithout actual inherence, quhilkis ar als credible, as
that god hes maid the heauin and earth of na thing, quhat do ze other bot deny
god to be almichtie, makar of heauin, and earth?

As to the secund person in divinity concerning his assumption of manly
nature, quhil as ze believe not the halie kirk saying: that our saluior vas
borne upon the tuentie five day of December, I vald glaidlie vit at zou, give
ze believe he be borne or not, and gif ze vald say that he is borne, Be quhat
moyen knau ze or may knau the same, bot be them quha sayis that he vas borne
on sik ane day, quha as they give testimony that the bu^kis of the neu, and
auld testament at canonik, quhairin it is vrittin that he vas borne: siclyk
they afferme constanlie as they have resauit of their fathers, that he vas
borne upon the tuentie five of december, sua quhil as ze dout on this, and lyk
infidel paganis callis in controversy, quhither he vas borne in symmer or
vynter, geuand the people occasion to suspect, that they at bot fablis quhilk
ar spokin of his Nativity, thairby taking auay the memory of the same from
zour miserable Disciples and voful flock, ze deny altogether the secund article
of the belief.

Theodore Beze quhais sayingis ze resaue as oraclis of the halie ghaist, Bez* a
contra Brent.
affermis planelie that Christ vas borne of his mother as other childrene ar
borne of their mothers quha at na virgenis, sua that in his birth the
integrity of his mothers virginite vas not conseruit. Quhat is this other bot
to deny that Christ vas borne of the virgin Marie?

Q^hair as the visdome of the halie ghaist in the K^^k, appointit four chief
f^stual dayis quhairby the people of god micht be retenit in obedience, and
confession of their faith anent Christis Nativity, Passion, Resurrection and
Asce^sion, ze brekers of al good and godly constitutions refusand the
observation of their dayis makis plane protestation that ze believe not their
articlis, be reason all Christians sen the Apostlis dayis quha beleuit the
same, neglectit not the observation of their halie dayis, as vitnessis the halie
martyr Ignatius Disciple of S. Iohne the Evangelist, vryttand to the Christian
people in ane of his epistlis: [Festiuitates ne spernite,] Ignatius epist 4. ad
Philipp.
neglect not the ke^ping of the halie dayis.

Zour Idol Iohne Calvin in his catechism, quhilk ze read out of zour pulpittis
for canon^k scripture, denyis planelie that Christ after his death past down
unto hell, bot referris this article to signefie the agony of death quhairin
Christ vas quhe^ he said: May god, my god quhy hes thou left me?

As to judgment on the latter day, quhil as ze deny both meritorious varkis,
and fry vill ze have left na place thairto atall: Because the form of Judgment
pronu^cit be our saluiour aganis the vicked for their demeretis vilbe: Depairt
from me unto the fire of hell, that is preparit for the Devil and his angellis.
Matt. 25.
Quhilk sentence could not justly be pronu^cit gif sinners had not fry vil,
quhairby vith the assistance of grace thruch Christ, frelie offerit to every
man, and vilfullie reiectit be every condamnit person, they micht have
escheuit the synnis, for the quhilk they demereit to heir this feirful sentence
of comdemnation.

To cum to the last pairt concerning the halie ghaist and Catholic kirk, ze
deny the same may impudentlie, quhil as ze spulzie the halie ghaist of his
principal operation, quhilk consistis in the government of the kirk, and
instruction of the general conceilis of the kirk, in making definition of the
treuth and declaration of falls doctrene, sua that they maj not err, for ze
teach that the general conceillis hes errit, And siclyk denyis, that the kirk
of our saluiour Christ is Catholic halie and visible upon the face of the earth.

As to the communion of Sanctis, and life eternal, quhil as ze teach that the
prayers of the blissit vergin Marie, of Sanct Michael, of S. Petir. S. Paul,
and all the glorious Angellis, and sanctis proffittis us nathing quhat place
have ze left to the communion of sanctis, o^ any life after this?

Ze deny inlyk manner the remission of synnis quhil as ze obstinatlie defend
that the syn is never remouit in very deid be grace thruch Christ apply it to
us be administration of the sacramentis, bot only not imput it.

And last of all infafar as ze deny the Real presence of the glorious body of
Christ Jesus in the sacrament, and Consequently the real coniu^ction of our
mortal flesch vith the immortal body of our saluior, be taking auay this
ordinar mean appointit be god, quhairby our bodeis may rise agane, nather may
ze believe the resurrection of the bodeis to immortality, nor hoip for any sik
benefeit. Quhairfore it is may manifest that in very deid ze deny all the
articlis of our belief, to zour auin comdemnation, albeit ze vald appeir to
confess them in vord.


Blacuod. Zour doctore Augustine exponing the drame of Pharao quhairof mentione
is maid in Genesis vitnessis that their tua places of scripture (septem spicae,
Gen^. 17. Matt. 26.
septem anni sunt) and (hoc est corpus meum) ar figurative loquutionis, hou
than may thou defend the real presence of Christis body in the sacrament,
gif, as heir planelie vitnessis Augustine, quhais doctrine Ze embrace, the
vordis be nocht taken in the propir significatione.


B. Ze cite S. Augustine may falsely, because na sik thing is to be fund in
him as ze allege. The first that ever exponit their vordis of the scripture
(this is my body) be the vthir ^place (the seuin stalk is ar seuin Zeiris) vas
zuinglius quha sayis that having ane greit desire to expone tha vordis (hoc
est) this signifies, Matt. 26. Gene. 17.
and finding this expositione to be very hard, that ane Angel appeirit unto
him, bot he kneu not quhidder he vas quhyt or blak, Zuingl^ (...) subsidi^ de
coena domi^ni.
and said to him, feir not, and proposed the other place of scripture (the
seuin stalk is ar seuin zeiris) that is, signifeis: sua in lyk manner (this is
my body) aucht to be interpreit this signifeis my body: And thaireftir he had
na feir, bot proposed bauldlie unto all men this neu gloss, that he had resaued
from the hand of the angel, euin as Mahomet ressauit his Alcoran from the hand
of God. I remember that S. August vreittis of ane callit Vincentius ane
Ptiscillianist quha affirmir in lyk manner that ane Angel had apeirit unto him,
August contra vincent.
and learnit him the richt interpretatione of the scripture, to quhom he
ansuerit vitht S. Paull, S. Paul. gal. 1.
that albeit ane Angel of heuin reueill onie thing attour that quhilk is
preched, ve aucht not to believe the sam. Bot that ze be eschamit to eite S.
Augustine in times cumming, I will propose unto zou three, or four places may
cleir, and manifest for the confirmatione of the treu, and Catholic doctrine.
The first is, out of his expositione of the threttie three Psalm, quhair he
sayis that suppose it be impossibill that onie mortal man beir him self in his
auin handis, Aug. in ps^ 33
that Christ notuithstanding buir him self in his auin handis, quhen he said
(this is my body:) gif he bure only ane figure of his body as ze allege,
every man micht have done alsmekill as he: The secund is vpone the nyntie
aucht Psalm, quhair he sayis that Christ left us that same self flesche,
August in psalm. 98.
quhairin he valkit in this varld, and that na man eitis of that flesche except
first he adore the same. The third, is in the third buik of the Trinity,
quhair he vryttis in this manner: Aug. lib. 3 de trinit. cap. 10
gif it vat proponit to ane child be sik authority as he behouit to believe,
quhais body and quhais blude ve rak in the Sacrament, gif the child had never
vndirstand in quhat manner and liknes Christ had apperit in the earth, he vald
believe assuritlie that Christ had appeirit in sik form as he is schauin in be
the handis of the priest, and that it quhilk is in the chalice, had sprung out
from the vound of sik ane body. The fourt is in the tuentie buke of the City
of God, Aug. lib. 20 de cinit. Dei. cap. 17.
quhair he sayis that the body of Christ, quhilk is nou offerit in the
sacrifice of the kirk, and geuin in the sacrament to all quha resauis it, vas
praefigurat be all the sacrifices of the auld lau. Considder vith zour self gif
the sacrifices of the auld lau, var figuris of ane figure, and nocht of the
treu body of Christ, I micht cite money vtheris gif I pleised, bot their ar
sufficient to schau zour impudence: that albeit ze never red S. Augustine, zit
ze ar nocht eschamit to cite him in zour praechingis, and impose tha thingis
unto him quhilk he never thocht.


M. Their is na point of our belief contrare the conclusione of ane
demonstratione lyk unto this, All natural body is in ane propir place, and may
not at anis be in ma nor ane, bot Christis glorious body is ane natural body,
thairfoir it is in ane propir place, and may not be in ma at anis, and
consequently Christis body can nocht be in heuin, and reallie present in the
sacrament at ane time.


B. Heirby al men may persaue zour deceat, that albeit ze allege that ze teach
na thing, bot the pure vord of God, and also that zour doctrine is not grou^dit
vpone natural reasonis, bot vpone the omnipotent pouar of God zit zour
practicque is aluterlie contrare, for nou to vithdrau men from their faith, ze
produce not the plane vord of god, bot as all men may se ane natural reasone,
inuentit be zour auin brain, quhilk ze call ane demonstratione, albeit in very
deid it be name at al: sense the first and chief propirtie of ane
demonstratione is, that the propositionis thairof be sua treu, cleir, and
evident that na man indeuit vith the natural licht of vndirstanding, may deny
the same, quhilk inlaikis in this zour demonstration: Because Aristotil him self
prouis that zour proposition in this zour praetendit demonstration is false,
seeing that the heauin quhilk is ane very natural body is not contined in ane
propir place. And it is als liklie that ane body be in diuerss places, as that
maj bodeis be in ane propir place, Bot ze ar compellit to grant that ma
bodies^^ may be in ane propir place, unless vith the he^etik Iouinianus ze deny
that Christ vas bor^ne of his mother as of ane virgin. Unless ze deny lykuyse
that Christ come in, quhair his discippillis var, S. Ioh. 20
the durris being close, as sum of zour brethrene dois, quha affirmis that
Christ com in at the chimnay heid: And sua ze ar constranit alsua to grant,
that be the omnipotent pouar of god, ane body may be in ma places, this being
na mair repugnant at the lest to the groundis of natural philososophie:
Considering euin as the philosophouris teachis that every body should be in ane
place, sua they teach that every body aucht to have ane place aequall unto
it self in sik manner that the place be nather of les, nor mair capacity, nor
the body quhilk is contined thairin: Bot be the omnipotent pouar of god above
nature ane body may be in ane les place nor the natural dimensionis of it
requiris, as quhen tua bodeis occupeis ane propir place, S. Ioh. 20.
they requirand of their auin nature ane mair place, quhairin they may be
comprehendit. Than be the lik pouar ane body may occupy ane far greittar
place nor the nature of the dimensionis their of requiris, quhilk is na thing
else, bot that ane body may be in money places. Bot suppoise I vald grant zou
the propositione treu that every natural body as natural, is in ane place,
sua that it may not be in money, it seruis na thing for zour purpose: Because
Christis body is substa^tiallie present, not contined in the sacrament as in
ane place, bot in ane incomprehensibill manner, insafa^ as it is glorious, Joan.
6.
and conioynit vith the divinity, quhairbie it surpassis the manner and
co^ditione of pure, and natural bodeis: for sen the occupatione of ane place,
euin according to the meni^g of the philosophoris, is nocht of the nature or
substance of ane body, unless ze be infidelis, ze can nocht deny, bot God be
his omnipote^t pouar may separat Christis body from the occupatione of ane
place, it being only ane accident of the same. And gif ze ground all zour
faith on natural reasonis, I feir that ze dout not only of this mystery of
the real presence of Christis body in the sacrament of the altar, bot also of
the Nativity of Christ of ane virgin: of the Resurrectione of their sam self
bodeis eftir they ar resolved in dust: of the Trinity of distinguised personis
in ane indiuisibill substance of the Godheid, Because the lyk, ze strenthiar
demonstrationis may be brocht aganis the treuth of their mystereis: And this I
can nocht praetermit that ze gif me greit occasion to suspect, that be siclyk
other reasonis ze ar mouit pairtlie to dout of the mystery of the Trinity.
Because I never hard zou in onie of zour sermonis speik onie thing of that
mystery: sua that gif this verse Glore to the father, and to the sone, and to
the halie gaist var abstracted from the end of the psalms, quhilk aucht to be
done according to zour doctrine, sen ze admit na thing bot that quhilk is
expreslie vreittin in sa money bukis of the auld and neu restame^t as ze pleise
to admit: And this verse vas nocht adiected be the vtryittar of the psalms,
Platina in vitis pontificum.
bot be the paip Damasus sensyne, I dout not bot ze should altogidder glaidlie
forzet this mystery.


OF THE TRANSVBSTANTIAtione of the breid, and vine in the body and blude of
Christ Jesus.
CHAP. XIII.
M. THe scripture callis that quhilk is geuin in the lordis suppar breid, as
quhen Paull sayis, the breid, S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10.
quhilk ve brek, is it nocht the participatione of Christis body? And in the
actis of the Apostlis it is vrittin, Act. 2.
that the faithful did perseueir in the brei-King of breid, and in other sik
places, quhy than affirmis thou vith the papistis, that the breid remanis not,
bot is changit in the body of Christ?


B. Gifze had conferred their places vith other places of the scripture, zevald
have fund may esilie ane solutione to zour obiectione, Joan. 6.
Christ him self in the saxt of S. Iohne declairis in quhat sens the name of
breid should be taken in their places alleged be zou, sayand, I am the breid quhilk
is cummit out of heauin, and the breid quhilk I sall give zou is my flesh,
that salbe geuin for the life of the varld: for as the may commone and
principal nuriture is breid, sua the flesh of Christ being the nuritur of our
saulis, and bodeis to immortality, is callit breid be him self. After the
quhilk manner of speiking his Apostlis, and the Eua^gelistis callis also his
flesh, breid. And thairfoir, as quhen Christ said I am the breid, quhilk is
desce^dit from heauin, it follouis nocht that he vas corruptibill or material
breid, 1. Cor. 10. Act. 2.
sua quhen in the scripture his flesh is callit breid, as in the places
alleged be zou, it follouis not, that the vord signifeis corruptibill or
material breid, because after the manner of speiking of the hebreuis, quhilk
Christ and his discipiles follouit, quhatsumeuer nuriture, in the hebreu tongue
is callit generalie (...), that is breid, sua, as ze may esilie persaue, zour
argument is of na strenth, ze the scripture it self geuis us ane sufficient
argument that thaj zour alleged places should nocht be understand of material
breid, seeing S. Paull sayis that the breid quhilk ve brek is the communication
of Christis body, gif it be material breid, it may not be the communicatione
of Christis body, And in that same place ve ar all ane breid, and ane body,
quhasoeuer ar maid participant of ane breid, and ane body. Quhair of it
follouis that the self same breid and body is geuin to us all, vtheruyse ve
could not be ane breid and ane body mair be the participation of this
sacrament, nor be the eitting of commone breid, quhilk is expres aganis the
mening of S. Paull. sua gif it var ane material breid that same self could not
be geui^ to us all, as ze that are heir in Edi^burgh ressaues not that self same
breid in zour communion, quhilk they ressaue that are in Sancta^drois ze amang
zour selfis every ane of zou ressauis his auin morsel of breid, Bot ve quha
ar Catholikis according to sanct Paulis doctrine ressauis all that same self
breid, that is that same flesch of Christ quhilk vas offerit on the Croce to
make satisfaction for the synnis of the varld, and sua ve ar all ane breid be
the conjunction quhilk ve have vith the heavenly breid quhilk is the body of
Christ: for the quhilk cause vreittis the godly and learned doctor. Chr^s
h^^m^l. 8. in 2. cor.
Chrysostom (Non sicut in vetere lege partem quidem populus, parte^ sacerdos
comedebat, verum omnibus vnum corpus proponitur and vnum poculum) not sayis he
as in the auld lau the pepill eated ane pairt of the sacrifice, and the priest
ane other, bot every man ressauis ane hail body, and ane coup or chalice:
Mairouer because Christ vas to give his flesch in the place of Manna, quhilk
ama^g the Ieuis vas callit breid, he affermit that he vil gif them another
breid, not that he vas to give them ane material breid, bot according to the
common manner of speiking that he vald give them ane nuriture mair perfyt ad
excellent nor vas Ma^na, quhilk he declaris to be his auin flesch. Nou suppose
I vald grant zou that thai places of the scripture sold be understand of the
material breid, zit ze var not nerar zour purpose, because according to the
phrase of the scripture, quhen ane substance is chainge it in another, it vsis
to keip the name of the formar substance, as quhen the vand vas turnit in ane
serpent, the serpent nevertheless is callit ane vand in Exodus quhair it is
vrittin, Exodus 7.
that the vand of Moses deuorit the vandis of the Magicie^s. And Adam because
he vas formit of the dust of the earth, is callit dust in the scripture, Genes.
3.
sua be the lyk phrase the body of Christ is call it breid, because the breid is
chainge it their in. Thairfore both the scripture and the fathers of the
primitive kirk, to the effect that this sublime and heich mystery sold not be
prophanit be the Gentilis, in quhais handis their vritting is micht fall, vsis
sindrie times to call this sacrament breid, quhairby they var understand be the
faithful, and their mistereis vat keipit hid and secreit from the infidellis
according to Christis command. Cast not precious stanis before suyne. S. Mat. 7.
For the quhilk cause S. Augustine oftymes in his sermons vsis this
circumloquution. S. August. in psalm. 33.
(Sacramentum quod no^unt fideles, the sacrament quhilk the faithful knauis.
(Et Christus accepit in manibus, quod noru^t fideles etc.) And Christ tuke it
in his handis, quhilk the faithful knauis, And sik other manners of speiking.
Ze the gentilis them selfis be reason of this mystery quhilk they understood
to be amang the Christians, Tertul. Apolo. aduersus ge^tes.
albeit they atteinit not to the perfyt intelligence thairof, zit they vsit to
object unto them that they eat mennis flesch, Justin mart.
as amang Vthers vitnesis Tertullian, and Justin martyr, Apol. 2 ad Antonin.
Vthers did object that they vorschippit Ceres and Bacchus, that is the goddis
of breid and vine, Augu. 18. co^tra Faustum.
as vitness S. Augustine vryttand aganis Faustus Manichaeus: vthers as vitness
also Augustine for this cause vsit to demand at the Christians, Aug. epist. 13.
quhat ane God vas that, quhilk they feinzeit them self to se in their
sacrificis and assembleis? zea the Manichaea^s obiectit in plane terms to the
Christianis, that they did vorschip breid andvyne. And other siclyk objections
var vsit, be reason of the great profunditie of this mystery, quhilk not only
vas not maid manifest unto the gentilis, bot vas hid also euin fra them quha
var callit Catechumeni, that is quha var techit and instructit in the rest of
the mistereis of the Christian religion, bot zit had not ressauit the sacrament
of baptism, for the quhilk cause it vas not lesum to them, Augu. de symbol. ad
cathec.
as vitnessis S. Augustine, Basile, Chrysostom, and other ancient vrytters to
be present in the kirk during the time of the sacrifice, bot incontinent after
the Euangel vas red, Basil. lib. de spiritusa^ct. c. 37. Chryso. in liturgia.
before the priest did cum to the consecration of the sacrament, the Deacon
vsit to cry vith ane loud voce, (Exeant Catechumeni.) And S. August. for the
same cause spek and of this sacrament sayis: [nesciunt Catechumeni quid
accipiant Christiani:] They quha ar callit cathechumeni, knauis not quhat the
Christians do ressaue. Gif that quhilk Christ gave to his disciples var na
thing bot breid and vine as ze allege, aganis his auin expres vord, the
Christians vald not have trauellit samekle to have hid the matter from the
gentilis, and infidellis, and from them quha var instructit euin of the
mystery of the Trinity, and incarnation of Christ, as var thaj quha var
callit catechumeni, nor zit vald not have geuin occasion to the gentilis to
have maid sik objections to them as they did make, nor zit vald have tholit
death, because quhe^ they bure the sacrament vith them they vald not discover
it unto the gentilis, Venerabilis Beda in martyr^ logio.
considering it vald have been na mystery at all. For quhat mystery is it to
believe that Christ gave breid and vine to his disciples, sen that is esilie
done be every man, and ane thing sua esie of it self, that na man hes mister
of great faith to believe it, bot to believe that he hes geuin his auin body
under the forms of breid and vine, that is ane very sublime and heich
mystery, quhilk requyris ane great subjection, faith and obedience unto God, to
believe that thing quhair of ve have na argument nor sensible persuasion, bot
rather apperis to be repugnant to our sensis, and natural vit, only because God
hes spokin it. For the quhilk cause. S. Chrisosto. Ciril, Ambroise, and vthers
exhorting us to believe the vord of god in this mystery albeit it appeir
repugnant to our sensis, because our sensis and vit may deceive us, say they,
bot his vord may not deceive us. sua sayis the halie vryttar Chrysostom. Sen
Christ hes said, This is my body, Chryso. homil. 83. i^ Matthew.
let us on na vyse dout, Cyril. lib. 4. in Ioa^ cap. 15.
bot vith ane may certane and assurit faith believe that it is euin as he hes
spokin. And Ciril sayis: sense he hes said. This is my blude, quha dar be sa
bauld, as to doubt heirof, Ambr. li. 6 de sacram. cap. 1.
and say, that it is not his blude? hou, maj ze then purge zour seluis of plane
infidelity and atheism, sen ze give na credeit unto goddis vord, bot in place
thairof hes setfurth ane neu vord of zour auin, quhilk vas never acknaulegeit
for the vord of god before zou? And thou maj ze purge zour seluis to be may
miserable and unhappy men, quha perseuis me sa rigorously, because I Believe
the vordis of Christ to be treu, That is because he said (This is my body) I
believe that it is his body And euin as he did nurissh Helias the space of
forty dayis vith ane breid baik in under the Assis, Of the kingis 3. chap. 19.
quhil he come to the montane of god Horeb, Exodus 16.
And the Israelitis vith the may precious Manna, that raynit out of heauin,
quhil they come to the land of promission, sua I believe may surely that he
dois nurishe the treu Christians vith his auin precious body quhilk vas
prefigurat be Manna, quhill they cum to the land of promission, to vit the
assurance of the life euerlesting. This vas also prefigurat be the brunt
offering of the Israelitis in the auld testament, quair of na thing reman it
except the skin, to signefie that the hail substance of the breid is chaingeit
in Christis body, and that the skin only, that is, the exterior form and
accidentis of the breid remanis. S. Iohne. 2
And euin as the first miracle quhilk Christ did vas the chaingeing and
conversion of valter into vine, sua the last quhilk he did before he vas
betraisit, vas the chaingeing and conversion of breid in his auin body as be
his auin vord, and the universal consent of the hail kirk is may manifest and
cleir.


M. Be quhat testimony of scripture may thou prove the transmutation of the
nature of the breid, in the substance of Christis glorious body?


B. I will produce their invincible argumentis quhilk Satan zour master and ze
sall never be abil to refel. The first dois consist in their vordis: My flesch
is very meat, S. Joan. 6.
and my blude is very drink. This flesch and blude quhairof he speak is in
their vordis ar reallie geuin to vsin this sacrament, or ellis they maj not be
the very fude of our saulis. Bot they may not be reallie geuin in the
sacrament, gif the substance of the bread, quhilk is bot corporal fude and maj
not nurish the Saul, remane vnchaingeit, Quhairfore transubstantiation in this
sacrament is necessar. The secund argument consist is in their vordis: As the
leuing father hes s^nd, me and I leave be the father, S. Joan. 6.
euin sua he quha eatis me, Sal leave be me also. Bot the sone in divinity
proceidis of his father in sik sort that he ressauis his hail substance of him,
and is of ane indivisible substance vith his father: Quhairfore necessar it is,
that be eating of this sacrament according to the meaning of Christ, ve ar maid
ane substance vith his manly nature, having our hail substance of him insafar
as it is immortal. The third argument is contenit in their vordis, Not as zour
fathers eatit Manna, S. Joan. 6.
and deit, for the difference assignit in this place consistis ather in the
distinction of the nature of that quhilk is geuin in the sacrament of the
altar, and the substance of ma^na that the ane hes pouar to aboleis death,
quickin, and give life: The other had not the same: or ellis this difference is
nane, Because gif the substance and nature of the sacrament be corruptible, lyk
as the vnbeleuaris in the auld lau deit after they had eatin Manna, and the
beleuaris leuit be faith only, and not be verteu of eating of Manna, sua sal
ve say of them quha eitis Christis body, quhil as the contrar heirof is
manifestly prouin be this testimony. The fourt is, that Christ quhen he tuk
bread in his handis, he blissit it be their vordis: S. Matthew. 26.
(This is my body,) the quhilk blissing not being in vane, bot having efficacy
and strenth to do that thing quhilk it signifeis, it behouis of necessity that
the breid be chaingeit in his body: Bot ze quha acknaulegis na thing in this
sacrament bot only breid, ar may injurious unto Christ, taking auay the
verteu and strenth of his benediction. The fyft is that their vordis. [hoc est
Corpus meum] being taken in their proper sense and fignification as they sold
be, conuictis necessarlie the transubstantiation of the breid in Christis
body, because that this pronoune (hoc) quhilk is demonstratiue of ane
substance, sold necessarlie be referrit to that substance, quhilk Christ gave
to his disciplis, that can not be the substance of breid, Considering it can
not be treu: This breid is my body, Than it vas not breid quhilk Christ gave to
his Disciples, bot his auin body, and sua consequently, the substance of the
breid remanit not. Quhairfore zour master Calvin prouis necessarlie aganis
Vestphalus the Lutheria^, Calvin. co^tra Vesph.
that gif the body of Christ be in the sacrament, It can not be bot be
trransubstantiation. And the same is prouin be zour paraclet Beze aganis
Hessusius, Beza contra Hessus.
Mairouer I propose the universal consent of thaj godly Doctors quha ar
resauit be all Christians sen the Ascension of Christ unto this day, that this
is the treu exposition of the vordis of Christ. Justinius: Euin as Christ had
flesch and blude, Justin. Apol. 2 ad Antonin.
sua be his vord the breid and vine ar chaingit in his body and blude S.
Cyprian: Cypria^ de de coena domini.
The breid be the omnipotency of god is changeit in the flesch. Cyrillus
hierosolomitanus: Cyrill. cach. 3.
Gif Christ being in Cana of galilie turnit the valter in vine,hou can ve doubt
bot in the latter suppar, he turnit the vine in his blude, sen he said him self
in his latter supper, This is my blude quhilk is sched for zou S. Ambrose:
Ambros. ca. 9. de iis qui mist. initia^tur.
Gif god hes creatit all thingis of na thing, quhy maj he not turn ane
substance in another, and change the breid and vine in his body and blude?
Quhairfore ve aucht fermelie to believe, that albeit our sensis persaue the
accidentis of ane corruptibill creature, Zit under the couerture thairof is
contenit the heauinlie, spiritual, immortal, and impassibil body of Christ
Jesus, preferring his vord to our sensual Judgment quhilk may not attein to
the profunditie of sik hid mistereis.


M. Our masters body at the suppar vas mortal and passibil, hou then sayis
thou that he could give the same to his Disciplis under the form of breid, as
immortal and impassibil?


B. Because our lord and saluiour Christ forek nauing all thingis that he vas to
suffer for mankind, Luc. 22.
and having a feiling thairof as testefeis thaj droppis of sueat lyk blude
quhilk issuith from him quhe^ he prayit, villinglie, and may glaidlie
acceptit all paynis before he sufferit, he had the mereit equal vith that,
quhairuith he raze upon the third day out of the graif: Quhairfore at his
latter supper giving tha^kis unto God, he gave after consecration, his body, in
ane impassibil and glorious manner under the form of breid. This is confermit
be the transfiguration of his body before his death above the natural estait
of ane passibil body, Matt. 17.
schauin to his Disciplis in the montayne, quhen his face schynit lyk the sone,
and his clething vas quhyt lyk licht: Sua it vas may esie unto Christ, to
give his body in ane impassibil and glorefeit manner, euin as in ane glorefeit
manner he apperit unto his Disciplis before his passion: And quha of zou ar sa
bauld to deny that Christ micht do it? or produce me onie scripture gif ze ca^
that he micht not do the same. Sua it apperis ze are not content to limitat the
pouar of kingis, Quenis, Bischoppis, and all estaitis, bor ze vil limitat the
pouar of god him self. And in all this disputation ze have proposit na vthet
argumentis aganis me, except it be, hou can god do this, or that? euin as ze
var on the secreit counsal of god, and had co^passit al thingis in zour
fantastical braynis, quhilk ar in the incomprehensibil pouar of the infinite
visdome and sapience of god. As to me I am content vith his vord, not sekand
any farther assurance. And thairfore sen he hes said, (This is my body) I will
beleaue him and search na farther. And vil give mair credeit to his simpil
vord, then to al zour reasons and probations, thai being only sophistical,
captious, and inuentit be zour auin braynis.


M. I will prove be ane Inuincibill argument that in the lordis suppar the
substance of the breid and vine remanis aluyse vnchangeit, because the
accidentis as the color, quantity, and taist of the breid and vine ar per
sauit be our sensis quhilk deceauis us not, and their may not consist vithout
the substance quhairin they have inhaerence, hou than sayis thou that Christis
body is present in the sacrament be transubstantiatione?


B. Albeit Luther, as he confessis in his diabolical buke de Angulari Missa,
(...)
be the strenth of this argument propo^it be his father Satan vas ouercummit.
Zit ane faithful man vill esilie believe, that transmutatione being maid of ane
corruptibill creature in ane supernatural and immortal body, the accidentis
tholand na corruptione ressauis verteu active and passive in them selfis
quhairbie they may consist euin as give they var inhaerent in their auin
substance: And this benefeit is granted unto us of the greit mearcie of god,
because ve ar vnabil to abyd the presence of Christis real body in proper form
as it is nou glorifeit, As amang vtheris vreittis the halie doctoris Ambrose,
Ambro. li. 4. de sacra men.
Damascen, and Theophilactus, bot ze ar manifest blasphemaris aganis goddis
omnipotent pouar, quhil as ze ^say that god may not cause the accidentis have
existence vithout the auin proper inherence: Damasc. lib. 4. c. 14. Theoph. in
Luc. c. 14.
Considering that god, quha is the cause of conservation of al thing is, and
misteris not the concurrence of his creaturis, euin as he co^seruis the
accidentis be the substance as ane ordinar mean, sua he maj conserve the
accident be his omnipotent pouar vithout the substance, or ellis it behouit him
necessarlie to have mister of ane creature for conservation of another, quhilk
is ane may horrible blasphemy. Mairattour the philosopheurs them selfis
teathis that the substance and accident ar tua thingis Reallie distingueist:
Quhat then maj be mair esie to god, nor that he be his omnipotent pouar separat
the ane from the other? especially sense it is als necessar according to the
ordinar course of nature, that ane substance, have the auin subsistence, as
that the accidentis have their inherence. Bot ze ar constranit to grant: that
ane substance maj be vithout the natural subsistence thairof, as in the
incarnation of Christ, their vas treulie the humane nature, and zit it vas
denudit of the proper subsistence, unless ze grant vith Nestorius that in
Christ, lyk as their is tua naturis, sua their is tua subsistencis or
personagis. Quhairfore the accidentis in lyk manner may be vithout inherence,
sen as teachis the may learnit scolemen: the nature of the accident consistis
not in this, that it hes actual inherence, bot that it may have inherence in
ane substance. As the accident is oftymes definit vithout the actual inherence
thairof, quhilk could not be gif it var of the nature of the same: As quhen the
mathematicians definis their quantiteis and figuris, as Aristotle him self
teachis, they make ane abstraction from al inherence, and zit nevertheless they
cumpas the nature of the accident quhilk they define. And I meruel of zou, quha
professis Zour seluis philosophors, that ze vil not grant that thing to the
omnipotency of god, quhilk many learnit philosophors grantis sum time to be
agreeable to the natural ordour of thingis appoint it be god, as amang vthers
many of the quhilkis Aristotle make is mention in the fourt buik of the
phisikis quhais opinion Philoponus that vas ane Christian man and ane may
learn it philosophour follouis, Philoponus in 4. Phys. Basil. homil. 2. in
hexam.
and S. Basile in the secund homily of his hexameron affermis: that the licht
quhilk vas first creatit be god, had na substance quhairin it had inherence,
and adionis thairto that god may mair eselie separat reallie the licht from the
substance quhairin it hes inhaerence, nor ve may separat the ane from the other
in thocht and cogitation. Simplicius also, and Ammonius quha var great
philosophors, in the declaration of Aristotle sayis: that ane accident may pas
out of ane substance to another, quhilk is al alyk according to the grund of
Metaphisik, as to be seperat from ane substance. And suppose I could not
atteine to the vay hou the accident may be separat from the substance, zit I
vald grund my faith upon the speiking of god him self, quha is infallible
treuth, and vork is for the confort of man thai thing is, that he is unable to
conceive, not regairding zour diffidence, proceeding as ze think of natural
reasons, quhilk being veil tryit, ar fund in na other thing bot fantastical
captions and illusions. For gif Abraham had been mouit be natural reason,
Genes. 22.
quhen he vas commandit be the Angel to offer his only sone Isaac in quhom god
had maid unto him the promeis of the benediction of all nations, Genes. 17.
and mnltiplication of his seid, he vald have collectit that it vas
impos^sible, give Isaac var offerit in ane brunt sacrifice, that the promeis of
god sold be treu, And sua vald have becum inobedient, Zit be faith that ever
leadis reason captive, S. Paul.
and brin^gis it in obedience, 2. Cor. 10.
quhen it apperis to improve the votd of god, he collectit the contrare, that
it vas good to obey the commandiment of god vith al reverence, sen he vas abil
to raze up Isaac agane quik out of the ass of his body after he var consumit
vith fire: And unless men follou this example of Abraham in the hie mistereis of
our faith, they vil never have tranquillity of mind.


OF THE SACRIFICE OF THE MESS.
CHAP. XIIII.
M. APprouis thou the institution of that Idolatry, quhilk the Papistis callis
the Mess, seeing their is na mention maid thairof in the vrittin vord?


B. I acknaulege the offering of Christis body under the form of breid and of
his blude under the form of vine, Luc. 22
as ane propiciator sacrifice for the quick and the deid, Romans 14
as he deit for salvation of them bayth, quhilk is callit the Mess, for this
vord Missah signifeing ane voluntar offering as ve reid in the 16 of Deuteronomy is
retenit be the Christian Doctors, Deuteronomy. 16
lyk as sindrie vthers, Alleluia, osanna, Amen. etc.


M. Hou prouis thou that Christ offer it his body in the latter suppar?


B. It is manifest be the Evangelist S. Luc. quhair our saluiour commandit S.
Petir and S. Iohne his Disciplis to prepare ane house quhait he sold eit the
Paschal lamb, S. Luc. 22.
quhilk [as is is their testefeit] vas offerit before it vas eitin, Exodus 12
according to the institution of god as ve reid in the tuelf chap of exodus
Quhair^ore it behouit our saluiour Jesus Christ to eat the Paschal lamb upon
ane Altar, insafar as it vas ane figure, may lyuelie representing the
offering of his body and eiting of the same, that the treuth micht be
correspondent to the figure, it vas necessar that Christis body (als realle
eitin in the latter suppar under the form of breid, as the body of the lamb)
sold be first offerit under the same form upon the Altar quhair upon before
vas offerit the body of the lamb, being the figure nou aboleist be
substitution of the treuth. Insafar then as their foisaidis be manifest, It is
necessar that the euangelical preistis having the Authority of Christ, and
assistance of the halie ghaist, upon altaris offer Christis body and blude,
quhilk vas sched upon the Croce for the synnis of money. Hebr. 13.
for as vryttis S. Paul, ve have ane altar of the quhilk it is not leisum to
them to eit quha seruis in the tabernacle meaning of this sacrifice,
considering their is na other sacrifice except this quhair of it is not lesum
to them to eit quha seruis in the tabernacle. In lyk manner ve reid hou
Melchisedec the heich priest of God did offer breid and vine as ane figure of
this sacrifice, Genes. 14.
sua Christ being ane priest after the ordore of Melchisedec, Psalm. 109.
it behouit that he offerit ane clean and vnbludie sacrifice or ellis the
figure had not been fulfillit be the verity. Nou schau me quhen he did offer
ane vnbludie sacrifice after the ordor of Melchisedec, gif he did not offer it
in the latter suppar. Sua ze denying this tak auay the eternal preistheid of
Christ after the ordour of Melchisedec, and co^sequentlie makis the vord of
God, and prophecy spokin of him to be alluterlie falls. For confirmation heirof
I may produce to zou the hail ancient fathers as, Iraeneus lib. 4. co^tr.
Valent. cap. 32.
Iraene quha sayis that Christ in his latter supper did institute the sacrifice
of the neu testament, the quhilk the kirk having ressauit from the Apostlis
offeris every quhair unto God. Arnobius vryttand upon the hundredth nine psalm
say is that the sacrifice after the ordor of Melchisedec, Arnob. in psalm. 109.
quhilk vas institute be Christ i^ the suppar is nou offer it thruch the hail
vard. And. S. Cyprian, Melchisedec sayis he, offerit breid and vine, Cypprian.
ep. 1. c. 9.
quhilk sacrifice our saluiour did fulfill in his latter supper, quhen he offer
it that quhilk vas prefigurat be Melchisedec, to vit, his body and blude. And.
S. Hierom in his epistle to Marcella: S. Hieron. ad Marcel.
Gif thou vil cum (sayis he) to Jerusalem, their vil thou se the City of
Melchisedec, quha in prefiguration of the sacrificie quhilk is nou offerit be
the Christianis in the body and blude of the Lord, August. in psalm. 33.
did offer breid and vine. S. Augustine vryttand upon the threttie ^hrie
psalm: The preisteid (say is he) after the ordor of Aaron is taken auay, and
nou every quhair their is ane sacrifice offerit after the ordor of
Melchisedec. Malachie 1.
In lik manner the Prophet Malachie did forespeik of this sacrifice saying: In
every place fra the sone rising to the going to of the same, their salbe
offerit to my name ane clean sacrifice, The quhilk according to the
interpretatione of the hail ancient fathers is understand of the sacrifice of
the body and blude of Jesus Christ, quhilk is offerit every quhair. And I
vald desire zou to schau me of quhat other sacrifice the prophet could mean:
he could not mean of the sacrifice of prayer, because that sacrifice vas before
in the auld testament, sua that it could not be ane sacrifice of the neu
testament: And the sacrifice of payer to pretermit that it is not properly
callit ane sacrifice: according to the lau of nature, it man be necessarlie in all religion, sua it had been na prophecy to have forespokin that sik ane
sacrifice sold have been amang the Christians. And ze zour seluis teachis that
al our prayers, and quhatsumeuir varkis ve do, ar syn in the sicht of God and
unclean in them selfis, sua the prophet could not forespeik euin according to
zour meaning, of payers or any other varkis quhilk sold proceid of us, nor zit
could he mean of the sacrifice of Christon the Croce, because that sacrifice vas
offerit only in ane place, and this sold be offerit every quhair: Then
necessarlie ar ze constranit to acknaulege ane other sacrifice after the ordor
of Melchisedec, both according to the Doctors of the synagogue of the auld
testament before the cumming of Christ, and al them that hes flurischit in any
eage, sen Christ, Iustine
as Iustine martyr, Mart. di^ lo. cu^ tryphone.
Iraene, Tertullian, Arnob. Basile, Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Hylare, Jerome,
Ambrose, Augustine and the rest, the quhilk is sacleir and evident, Irene li.
4. co^tra Valent. ca. 32. Tertul. d^ corona mil arnob. in psalm. 109. Basil de
spiritusancto. Nazia^zen in carminib. Calu. li. do reform. eccles.
that zour master and Idol Iohne Calvin confessis that the hail ancient
Doctors ar aganis him, and that they interpreit the prophecy euin as ve do,
gif ze have red him ze can not misknau his vordis. [Arripiunt tritam istam
Malachiae sententiam, In omni loco offeretur nomini meo oblatio mu^da,
obiiciunt locum istum sic exponi ab Iraenaeo: oblationem Melchisedec sic
tractari ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino, and Arnobio: Breuiter responsum
sit, veteres istos scriptores tam ridicule per panem interpretari corpus
Christi, Chrysostom. in 9. ad heb. Hyl, 8. de Trin. Ierom ad Marcel, Ambrose de
sacram. lib. 6. Aug. lib. 17. de ciuit. cap. 20.
vt ratio and veri^as cogat nos dissentire] They tak for their defense this often
used sentence of Malachie, In all place their salbe ane clean sacrifice offered
to me, They object that this place is sua exponit be Irenaeus, They say that
the oblatione of Melchisedec is straitted in sik manner (that is apply it to the
esta blishing of the mess) be Athanasius, Ambrosius, Augustinus, and Arnobius,
lat them have this ansuer in feu vordis, That the ancient vreittaris sua
fulishlie interpreitis the breid to be the body of Christ, that reason and the
treuth compellis us to disagrie from them. And a litil after he addis: that
they var al injurious to the Passion of Christ, and concludis on this manner.
[Quod ad veteres attinet, non est quod in eorum gratiam ab inflexibili Dei
verbo recedamus.] As tuiching the ancient Doctors, their is na cause quhai^fore
ve sold pas from the inflexibil vord of God for their pleasure. Considder the
proudnes and arrogance of this unhappy and ignorant man, quha dar prefer his
auin daft judgment in interpretation of goddis vord, to sa money learnit and
halie men, zea to the interpretation of the universal kirk of god. Zea sirris
quha assistis I desire zou to judge, gif ze think that I sold rather follou the
vordis of the scripture, interpreit be sa money learnit and goddie fathers
before, and after the cu^ming of Christ, to the interpretation of ane filthy
Sodomeit, quha in the hail progres of his life hes never schauin any sign or
demonstration that he vas mouit be the spreit of god, bot manifestly hes ever
declarit that the spreit of Satan did rigne into him, as being the author of
bludeschedding, of breking of all halie lauis and ordonnancis, pulling down of
kirkis, and other halie placis, buyldit to the honor of god, of inducing
subiectis to oppres and dou^thrau their masters and sik other horribil crimes.


M. Gif I vald grant for disputations cause, that our master Christ offerit his
body at his latter suppar, hou vil thou prove, that the pastores succeiding
sold offer the same inlykuyse? Because in the epistle to the hebreuis ve reid,
Paul heb. 10.
that he hes maid them perfyt for ever, be ane oblation quha ar sanctifeit,
for gif every pr^^st offerit Christis body, it is necessar to grant
plurality of sacrificis.


B. That the preistis of the Eua^gel succeiding to the Apostlis sold offer
Christis glorious body, it is manifest be his expres co^mandime^t: Do ze this
in reme^berance of me. Quhairin is includit the hail institution of this
sacrifice to be continuit in his kirk to his cu^ming to judgment, S. Matthew. 26.
as S. Paul him self, interpreitis their vordis: hou often ze sal eit this breid,
and drink this coup, S. Paull. 1.
ze sal declare the death of the lord unto his cu^ming. As to the testimony of
the scripture quhilk ze cite aganis me, ze appeir to misknau the meaning of S.
Paul in his epistle to the Hebreuis, Cor. 11.
quha from the end of the sacrificis of the auld lau, and the imperfection of
the same, prouis that the benefeit of the Messiah co^sistis cheiflie in that,
that Christ being God and man, as ane perfyt mediator hes reconcelit the varld
be his death, and destroyit the varkis of the devil, to vit syn and iniquity,
quhilk is sa perfyt of the self that the force and strenth heirof abydis
continually vithout onie iteration of his death, vtheruyse it behouit him to
de ofter nor anis, and his bludie sacrifice to be iterat, lyk as var the
sacrifecis of the auld lau, quhilk proceidit of their imperfection and in this
mening sayis S. Paul, That Christ be ane oblation hes maid them perfyt for
ever quha ar sanctifeit, S. Paul Heb. 10
the quhilk is gatherit both of the expres vordis of S. Paul him self, and of
the interpretation of the universal kirk of God.

Nou to cu^ to zon^ objection, I ansuer may directly that be the only
sacrifice of the Croce, the ranson for our synnis is sufficiently payit, that
ye mister na other oblation, or sacrifice to pay the ra^son of our synnis to
God. And gif the sacrifice of the Mess var offerit to that end, it vald be
injurious to the death and passion of Christ, Bot suppose our ranson be
sufficiently payit be the said sacrifice of the Croce, zit it is necessar,
that it be applyit unto us, or ellis as I have said, it vald auail us na thing:
thairfoir the sacrifice of the mess is na thing ellis bot ane lyuelie and
perfyt representation of the sacrifice of the Croce, thruch the quhilk the
strenth and verteu thairof is zet and pourit in our Saulis, as testefeis S.
Paul hou often ze eit this breid, Chrysostom. in cap. 10. epi. ad Heb.
and drink this coup* ze sal declare the death of the Lord unto his cu^ming.
And Chryso. exponing that same place quhilk ze have allegeit for zou, makis ane
objection to him self in this manner: Quhat then (sayis he) have ve na
sacrifice? he ansueris, That ve offer that same self thing quhilk Christ
offerit: Bot ve offer it not as he did, bot in rememberance or commemoration of
his death and passion: I in lykmaner do, is speik the hail ancient fathers, as
I have schauin before, Q^hairof ve may se, that this place of scripture
allegeit be zou seruis na thing at al to zour purpose, and that al zour
reasonis and argument is tendis to na other end, bot to aboleis al rememberance
of the passion of Christ. And this cheiflie quhilk is may perfyt and
proffitabill of al. Quhairin ze declare zour seluis the Disciplis of the
Antichrist quhais chief laubor, as is propheceit be Daniel, Daniel. 12
salbe to aboleis the continual sacrifice of the kirk: quhy ar ze sa ingrait
unto Christ that ze vil not represent his death in offering of this sacrifice
commemoratiue, as he commandit in the latter suppar, and as the kirk hes ever
done to this day for ane may certane confirmatione of the treu faith in the
Messiah and saluiour of the hail varld, and oppin protestatione befoir the
haill varld that Christ deed, and sched his blud for the redemptione of
fynnaris, and thairfoir as vreittis the halie doctor Prosper vpone that passage
of scripture [Vox sanguinis fratris tui clamat ad me de terra, Prosper de
praedictio onibus part 1. cap. 6.
the voce of the bluid of thy brother cryis to me out of the earhe. Cayn
figurabat Iudaicum populum terrenis desideriis inhiantem: Abel Christum
pastorem ouium ab eo populo occisum: nullus iam ambigit Christianus cuius
sacrum sanguinem omnis terra excipiens clamet Amen, hoc est verum: vt neganti
Iudaeo quod occiderit Christu^, recte a Deo dicatur, vox sanguinis fratris tui
clamat ad me de terra] Cayn prae figurat the people of the Ieuis, hauand their
hairtis intent on vardlie desyris. Abel praefigurat Christ the pastore of the
scheip slane be that people: Nou na Christian man douttis quhais halie blude
all the earth resauand Cryis Amen, that is treu, sua that to ane Ieu denyand
that he hes slane Christ, it may be ansuerit be God may instlie, the blud of
thy brother cryis to me out of the earth, quhy spulzie ze the Christianis of
this may strenthie argument aganis the Ieuis and the Antichrist, that Christ
hes deed, Because he hes lest us in his testament his blude quhilk vas sched
vpone the earth, for ane infallibill argument of his death, and bitter passion?
And quhy aboleis ze ane great part of the office of ane perfyt mediator from
Christ, considering the deutie of ane perfyt reconciliator and peax makar is
not only to pay the ranson of them that are in captivity, bot mairouer to
apply the said payment, and reconciliation unto them? Bot ze vil that Christ
have only payit the ranson, and not applyit the same unto us. The universal
kirk hes ever acknaulegit Christ as ane perfyt mediator, that not only he hes
payit the ranson for us, bot also that he hes applyit the said ranson to us,
cheiflie be the sacramentis and halie sacrifice of the Mess, for the preistis
in this behalf ar only his ministers, and he the chief priest and sacrificator
him self, as amang vthers vryttis the may learnit Doctor Chrysostom:
Chrysosto. hom. 83. in Matthae.
Qui sanctificat and transmutat ipse est, nos ministrorum tenemus ordinem, that
is, he (mening Christ) quha sanctefeis and chaingeis to vit the elementis, ve
ar in the rank of his ministers and seruandis. And in this respect he is callit
ane priest for ever after the ordor of Melchisedec. sua that the sacrifice of
the Mess makis us participant of the fructis and benefetis of the great pouar
and efficacy of the sacrifice of the Croce. Quhairfore ze sold be eschamit to
deceive the people sa rudely saying that this sacrifice dois obscure the
benefeit of the sacrifice of the Croce. Bot as al zour doctrein proceidis of
ignorance, sua dois this pairt of it. Quharfore I pray zou opin zour eyis in
time cu^ming, or at the leist desist to leadvthers the vay quhilk ze knau not
zour seluis, incace ze being blind, fall both together in the pit of
condemnation.


M. Gif the Mess be ane sacrifice propiciator for the quik and the dead
institute be Christ, quhat is the cause that the Euangelistis, and Apostlis
makis not als often mention of Christis sacrifice vith his Disciplis, under the
forms of breid and vine, as of his suppar?


B. They not only make als often mention of his sacrifice as of his suppar, bot
far ofter. For the institution of Christ at his latter suppar contenis the
forms of speiking, quhilk properly pertenis to ane sacrifice, Luc. 22.
as (This is my body quhilk is geuin or offerit for zou. This is my blude
quhilk is sched for zou) Mairouer it is manifest be the Doctrene of S. Paull,
Heb. 7.
that both the sacrifice according to the ordor of Aaron, and according to the
ordor of Melchisedec quhilk vas diverse, for the ane had beistis that var slane,
the other breid and vine, var figuris of Christis sacrifice. Quhairfore be
reason he substitute the treuth, and aboleist all figuris, he behouit in his
sacrifice be the omnipotent pouar of the halie ghaist, turn the breid and vine
in his body and blude: vtheruyse it had been bot the same figure, quhilk vas
before quhen Melchisedec maid oblation. For na religion, nor lau can be vithout
sacrifice it being the chief vorschipping of God, sua that the auld being
chaingeit in the neu, it is necessar that in the place of the auld sacrificis,
ane neu sacrifice sold succeid, quhilk sold lest sa lang as the lau lestis.
Aug. li. 17 de Ciuit. Dei c. 20.
Thairfore S. Augustine sayis that in place of all the sacrificis of the auld
testament this sacrifice of the body and blude of Christ after the ordor of
Melchisedec succeidis. And the halie vryttar Cyprian, Cyprian. de coen. d^.
The Capernaitis (sayis he) beleuit that they sold have eitin the body of
Christ in sik manner that they sold have consumit the same, quhilk vas ane
thing impossibill. Because it vas necessar, that as the lau of Christ sold
endure to the end of the varld, sua it sold have ane perpetual sacrifice
quhilk could not be, gif his body and blude had been anis consumit. Leo. s^rm.
^. de pass. dom.
And Leo vryttis that Christ in the meantyme quhen the Ieuis var thinking to
betray him, did ordane the sacrifice of his body and blude, to the end that
the Christian religion sold have ane perpetual sacrifice, quhilk it micht
offer to God. I micht cite zou many vthers gif I pleisit of the ancient
vryttaris to the same purpose, var not I feir it sold turn to zour damnation,
quha vil trou na thing bot that quhilk ze find in zour master and idol Iohne
Calvin. Quhairfore it is necessar that the successors of Christis halie
Apostlis have ane outuart sacrifice vith ceremoneis, contenand the treuth and
licht for the schaddouis of the auld lau. Because as ve reid in the Actis of the
Apostlis, the primitive kirk had their liturg^a, quhilk Erasmus (quhais
interpretation ze embrace) exponis to be ane sacrifice, Act. 13
for their it is vrittin (...): That is quhen they var making sacrifice to the
Lord.

And S. Augustine exponing the beginning of the secund chap. of the first epist.
of Paul to Timothy, Augu. ep*
sayis that the vordis, deprecatio^s, obsecrations, interpellations, and
thankisgeuing ar referrit to the diverse thingis quhilk ar done in the sacrifice
of the Mess. As to the prayers quhilk precedis the consecration of Christis
body and blude, to the prayers quhilk follouis thairefter, and the Benediction
quhilk is geuin to the people: I knau that zour master Calvin callis the
interpretation of S. Augustine, Calvin in 2. ca. and 1. ad Timoth
ane bairnlie exposition. Bot I ^eleue Calvin vas als great ane barn as S.
Augustine. Chrysostom, Basile, and other ancient ^rytters hes left unto us the
formis of the auld ^iturgeis quhilk var vsit amang the greikis, Leiturg.
Chrysostom. Leiturg. Basil.
and arvsit this day in the Catholic kirk, quha^^in al thingis ar to be fundin
that pettenis ^o the sacrifice of the Mess, alsueill concer^ing the nature and
substance of the sacrifice, ^s concerning the ceremoneis quhilk ar or^anit to
the reverence of the same, and to ex^itat the deu devotion of the people
thairto, ^uhilk are not of lait dayis inuenti^ be the Catholic and Roman kirk,
bot ever sen the beginning hes been vsit be all treu Christianis: 1. Cor. 11.
Quhairorf S. Paul him self makis mention: Caetera cum venero disponam. The
rest I fall put to ordor at my cu^ming, upon the quhilk place S. Augustine
vryttis in this manner: August. Episto. 18.
Because it vas over lang to have vrittin al thingis that sold be in the
ministration of this sacrifice, the Apostle S. Paul differis that to his auin
cu^ing to the Corinthianis. Zour master Calvin vill say that S. August in this
point did rave, as before he said he vas ane bairne, Bot I because I am ane
fule, vil hald me daft vith S. Augustine, and sa money halie Doctors of the kirk
of Christ Jesus.


M. Hou can thou deny bot the Ceremoneis of the Mess ar taken from the
Idolatry of the gentelis, for euin as ze say, Ite Missa est, sua the Greikis
concludit their sacaifice uith their vordis (...) quhilk is al ane thing, to
pretermit many vthers quhairof sum of our faithful brethren hes vrittin at
gretar lenth.


B. In this objection as in many vthers, ze declair zour auin ignorance, for
it follouis not that because siclyk thingis hes been vsurpit be the Gentelis,
the Christien men thairfore hes borrouit them fra their use and accustume,
Justin Martyr dialo cum Tryphon. Tertul. de cor. mil.
for as vryttis Iustime Martyr, Tertullian, and other ancient fathers, the
gentilis vsit to baptize them quha come to their mistereis and to mark them
in the forret, And also to make ane sacrifice of breid and vine, zi^ I believe ze
vil not say that the Christianis hes ressauit their baptism or sacrifice
quhilk they offer in their kirkis, from them. The greikis feinzeit, Campos
Eliseos, for the good after this life, and loca ta^tarea, for the vickit: sall
ve say thairfore that the Christianis hes learnit of them they thingis quhilk
they believe of the glore of Paradise, and paynis of hell: The Gentilis had
templis, preistis, and sacrificeis, and zit their vil na man be sa fulish as to
think that the Christianis hes learnit to have sik thingis at them. Ze se to
quhat end and impiety this zour argument dois tend, that is, that not only ve
reject the ceremoneis of the Mess, bot ve refuse lykuyse to believe they
thingis quhilk the Christianis teichis of Baptism, of heauin and hell, to the
quhilk infidelity ze have bro^ht many in Scotland alreddie be the preaching
of zour neu Eua^gel: Gif ze had red the ancient vrytters ze vald have learnit,
hou that the Devil, quha aspyris ever to be lyk unto God, desyris may
cheiflie to be vorschippit in that sam self manner, quhairin he seis god
vorschippit, that is vith lyk ceremoneis and sacrificis, as may cleirlie
testefeis Tertullian. [Diabolus res sacramentorum in Idolorum mysteriis
aemulatur, Tertul. de scrip. haere
tingit ipse quosdam vtique credentes and fideles suos, signat in frontibus
milites suos, celebrat panis oblationem, habet and virgins, habet and
continentes, Denique in Romany illis Sacerdotalibus officiis, insignibus, and
priuilegiis morositatem illam Iudeae imitatus est.] The devil sayis he lauboris
to have tha; thingis quhilk ar contenit in the sacramentis, In the mystereis of
the Idollis, he veschis or baptesis sum as his beleuaris and faithful
Disciplis, he markis his s^ldartis in the forret, he celebratis the offering of
breid and vine, he hes virginis, he hes continent personis: to beschoit he hes
follouit that cummersum number of the Iudical ceremoneis, in thaj officeis,
bages, and priuilegis of the Roman preistis, meaning of them quha var
^nstitute be Numa Pompilius. And S. Augustine may learnitlie ansueris to zour
objection that the Ceremony or sacrifice is not evil, because it is vsurpit be
the gentelis and infidellis, bot because it is vsurpit be them to ane vrang and
peruersit end, to vit for the honoring of their Idollis, sua that the self same
thing being applyit to the honor and service of god, is good and louabill, [Qui
Christianas literas vtriusque testamenti legunt, non hoc culpant in sacrilegis
ritibus paganorum quod construant templa, and instituant sacerdotia, and
faciant sacrificia, August. epist. 49
sed quod haec Idolis and daemonibus exhibent]. They quha reidis the Christian
vryttingis of the neu and auld testament, reprouis not this in the sacrilegious
ritis of the paganis, that they big kirkis and institutis preistis, and makis
sacrificis, bot because they do all their thingis to honor Idollis and the
Deueillis. And in the same place. [Cum haec exhibentur Deo secundum eius
inspirationem atque Doctrina^, vera religio est: Cum autem demonibns secundum
eorum impia^ constitutionem, noxia superstitio.] Quhen their thingis ar geuin to
god, or dedicat to his service, according to his inspiration and doctrine, it
is treu religion, Bot quhen they ar dedicat to the Deuillis according to their
vicked constitution, it is very hurtful superstition. And S. Jerome, Hiero.
lib. 2. contra Iouin.
[Sicut ergo virginitati verae no^ preaiudicat imitatio virginu^ diabolicaru^,
nec veris Ieiuniis, Cossorum, Isidis, and Cybeles, and sicut signa quae
faciebat Moses imitabantur signa Aegyptiorum, sed non era^t in veritate, ita
per omnia quae in aemulationem Dei facit diabolus, non nostrae Religionis
superstitio, sed nostra arguitur negligentia id facere nolentium, quod bonum
esse etiam saeculi homines non ignorant:] Thairfoir as the Imitatione of the
Virginis of the Devil, preiudges na thing treu virginity, nor zit the
fastingis quhilk var institute in the names of the Idolis Cossi, Isis, and
Cybele, And as the miraclis of the Aegiptianis, var lyk the miraclis that
Moysesvrocht, bot var not miraclis in very deid, Euin sua our religione is not
convict as superstitious be all they thingis quhilk the Devil dois throuche
aemulatione of God, bot rather our negligence is rebuked because ve vill not do
that quhilk the men of this varld misknauisnocht to be good: Sua ze may persaue
hou vane this zour obiectione is quhilk ze serfurth to the pure pepill as ane
maistsure and infallibil argument to vithdrau them from the halie sacrifice of
the Mess.


OF THE PRAYING IN LATIN.
CHAP. XV.
M. Giff the Mess in substance and ceremoneis contene the manner hou God should be
vorshipped institut be Christ, as the Papistis sayis, quhy say they not their
Messis in the vulgar tongue that the simpil pepill quha vnderstandis not latin
may be edifeit thairbie: for it vas bot ane moc King of God that ignorant
pepill sat done befoir god babbling in ane strange langage tha thingis quhilk
they vndirstud not, seeing it is vreittin, gif I pray vith my tongue, my spreit
pray^s, S. Paul. 1. Cor. 14.
bot my mind vantis the fruit: quhat than? sal I pray in spreit? bot I sall
pray in my mind also: And hou sall he quha suppleis the place of the Idiot,
ansuer Amen to thy benedictioue, gif he vndirstand the not?


B. Their be tua Kind of prayeris in the kirk, the ane is private, quhilk every
man sayis be him self: the vthir is publik quhilk the preistis sayis in name of
the hail kirk: As to the private prayeris, na Catholic denyis, bot it is very
expedient that every man pray in his auin tongue, to the end he vndirstand that
quhilk he sayis, and that thairbie the interior prayer of the hairt may be the
mair valk in nit, and conseruit the bettir, and gif onie man pray in ane other
tongue, it is also expedient that he understand the mening of the vordis at the
lest. For the quhilk cause in the Catholic kirk the parentis or godfatheris ar
obleist, to learn them quhom they hald in baptism the forms of prayeris,
and Belief, and instruct them sufficiently thairin, sua that they vndirsta^d
the same: Albeit the principal thing quhilk god requiris is the hai^t, that
suppois he quha prayis vndirstand nocht perfytlie the vordis quhilk he speikis,
zit god quha lukis in the hairt, vill nocht lat his prayer be in vane. As to
the publik prayeris of the kirk, it is not necessar that the pepill vndirstand
them, because it is nocht the pepill quha prayis, bot the preistis in the name
of the hail kirk, and it is aneuche that they assist be deuotione liftand up
their myndis to god or saying their auin private oraesonis, and that be their
deuotione they may be maid participant of the kirk: As in the synagogue of the
Ieuis, the peopill kneu not, quhat all they cerimoneis signifeit, quhilk vas
keipit be the preistis and vtheris in offering of their sacrifices, and other
vorshipping of God, and zit they did assist unto them, ze sum of the preistis
them selfis miskneu the significatione of their cerimoneis: Than gif it vas
aneuche to the pepill to vndirstand that in sik ane sacrifice consisted the
vorshipping of god, suppois they had not sua cleir ane vndirstanding of every
thing that vas done thairin, sua in the catholic kirk, quhen the people
assistis to the sacrifice of the Mess, they acknaulege that thairbie god is
vorshippit, and that it is institute for the remembrance of Christis death, and
passione, Albeit they vndirsta^d nocht the Latin tongue zit they are not
destitut of the utility and fruit thairof: And it is nocht vithout greit cause
that as in the inscriptione and titil quhilk Pilat fixed vpone the croce of
Christ Jesus, their three toungis var vrittin latin, Greik, and Hebreu, sua in
the sacrifice, and publik prayeris of the kirk, they ar cheiflie retenit, for
the conseruatione of unity in the kirk, and nationis ama^g them selfis: for
gif al thingis var turnit in the propir la^gage of every country, na man vald
study to the latin tongue, and thairbie al communicatione amangis Christian
pepil vald schortlie be taken auay, and thaireftir greit barbaritie inseu.
Mairatour sik public prayeris and service ar keipit mair perfytlie in their
auin integrity vithout al corruptione: for gif ane natione vald eik, or pair
onie thing, that vald be incontinent remarkit, and reprouit be other nationis,
quhilk culd not be, gif every natione had al thai thingis turnit in the auin
propir langage, as ze may se be experience, gif ze vald confer the prayeris of
zour deformit ki^kis, togidder vith the innumerabil tra^slationis of the
psalms, quhilk ar chaingit according to every la^gage in the quhilk they ar
turnit. It is not than vithout greit cause, and ane special instinctione of the
halie Ghaist that their toungis foirspokin hes been retened as they vil be
retenit to the end of the varld. And quhen the Ieuis sall embrace the Eua^gel,
than sal the sacrifice, and other publik prayeris be in the hebreu tongue,
according to that quhilk I said befoir, that on the Croce of Christ thaj thrie
toungis only var vrittin, to signify that the kirk of Christ should use they
three toungis cheiflie in his vorshipping, as the neu, and auld testament ar in
their three toungis in greitast authority amangis al pepill. Nou to cu^ to the
first pairt of zour objection, ze prove na thing except only that he quha
prayis should nocht be aluterlie rude or ignorant of that tongue in the quhilk he
prayis, quhilk I do alreddie grant to zou, As to thevthir pairt of zour
argument, I confess indeid that that place aucht to be vndirstand of the
public prayeris of the kirk, bot zit it seruis nathing to zour purpose, bot
is rather repugnant to the same, and prouis that the common service of the kirk
vas nocht than in the vulgar langage quhilk every man vndirstude, bot in ane
vthir langage quhilk vas nocht sua commone to every man. For the vndirstanding
of this I reid in Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 14. prio. ad cor.
and other ancient vryttaris that amangis other giftis quhilk vas in the
primitive kirk, their vas also the gift of prayer, quhilk co^sisted in this,
that quhen the Christianis var gathered togidder, they quha ^ar indeued vith
this gift kneu quhat thing ^as may expedient to be asked at God, quhilk they
craved in name of the haill kirk. Nou because it vas expedient to the haill kirk
to vndirstand that quhilk they prayed for, S. Paul desyris him quha ressauis
this gift, to crave at God the grace of the interpretatio^e of the same, for
the quhilk cause he sayis that he quha spekis vith ane tongue, S. Paull. 1. Cor.
14.
he spekis to God, and nocht to men, and eftiruart, He quha propheceis is
gretar nor he quha spekisvith toungis except that he interpreit him self, that
the kirk may be edifeit. Nou sen this gift of prayer remanis nocht zit in the
kirk, bot all thingis quhilk ve crave of God ar put in certane forms of
oraisonis, it is nocht necessar that he quha prayis in name of the kirk,
declair his prayer at that time to the pepil, Bot it is aneuche that it be
declairit be ordinar sermonis and exhortationis, and other sik menis, to the
effect that the pepill be instructed quhat ar they thingis quhilk the kirk in
her public and ordinar prayeris crauis at God, quhilk is done at all times in
the Catholic ki^k. As in the time of Pasche the pepill knauis that all the
prayeris tendis to loving and thankesgeuing to god for the benefeit of the
redemptione of the varld. At Vitsonday, that the praying ^e^dis to the
inuocatione of the halie spirit, and sua forth of the rest of the seasonis of
the hail zeir. Nou that S. Paul forbiddis nocht the public service of the
k^^k to be done in ane tongue quhilk is nocht vulgar to the haill pepill, ze
vill esilie vndirstand gif ze pleis to note diligently this distinctione that
almaist in every natione their vsis to be ane vulgar tou^g quhilk every man
speikis, and ane other tongue quhilk is nocht commone to all bot to the may
learned, as testifeis S. Hierom in his commentaris on the epistle to the
Galatianis that the Galatianis had their auin vulgar tongue, S. Hierom cont. in
ep. ad Gal.
and by that the greik tongue, and throuche the haill Orient albeit their vas
ane greit number of vulgar toungis, zit the greik tongue vas commone to them
all. Beda in desc* Brit.
And Beda in the descriptione of Britanie vryttis that their is five toungis in
it, the Inglishe tongue, The Britonis tongue, the Scottis tongue, the pichtis
tongue, and the latin tongue, not that the latene tongue vas vulgar to onie
pepill of Britanie, bot because it vas commone to them all: and for that cause
it is callit their tongue: Sua Sanct Paull quhe^ he vill that the service of the
kirk should nocht be in ane strange tongue, he menis that it should nocht be in ane
tongue quhilk is alluterlie strange and barbar, bot in ane tongue quhilk is nocht
aluyse vnknauin to the pepill, as throuche the haill Orient vas the greik
tongue, and the hail Occide^t the latene tongue: The quhilk interpretatione is
gathered may cleirlie, because that euin in S. Paulis days throuche all the
Orient the public prayeris and service of the kirk, vas in the greik tou^g
Albeit their vas innumerabill vulgar toungis amangis sa money pepill, and their
is na probability that euerilk country did thane turn the scripture quhilk
used to be red in the publik service of the kirk in their auin vulgar tongue,
not zit can their be onie argument produced that sua hes been done. In lyk
manner in the Occident sen the faith vas first planted, ve find na other tongue
to have been used in the public prayeris of the kirk bot the latene tongue,
Albeit every natione by the latene tongue quhilk is commone to all, have their
auin vulgar toungis. And S. Augustine testifeis that in his days throuch al
Afrik the commone service of the kirk vas in the latene tongue, August. epist.
11.
and hou be the changeing of ane vord quhilk befoi^ vas accustumed ane greit
sklander, and tumult of the pepill did vpryse. Mairatour quhen S. Paull sayis,
he that suppleis the place of the Idiot hou sall he ansuer Amen to thy
benedictione, gif he vndirstand the nocht, he schauis that sic benedictio^s vas
not accustumed to be in the vulgar tou^g considering S Paul callis him ane
Idiot quha vnderstandis only his auin vulgar tongue, And requiris, or rather
supponis that in the service of the kirk their should be ane vthir to supply the
place of the Idiote, that is that should have farther vndirstanding and
intelligence of that tongue in the quhilk the service of the kirk is said. Bot
giff the service had been done in the vulgar tongue, their mistered na man to
have suppleed the place of the Idiot: Than Sanct Paull schauis may cleirlie
that sic service vas not exercised in ane vulgar tongue, bo^ in ane other quhilk
vas not commone to the haill pepil, sik as is the latin tongue, as said is, in
Scotland, and throuch the hail Occident: Albeit it vas not in the contrare
extremity strange, or barbaruse. Bot sen ze have ever mair this place in zour
mouth, and dissauis thairbie the pure peopil, I am constranit to schau that in
zour neu deformed kirk it is alluterlie perverted be zou, and the rest of the
minister is, because quhair the greik and latene text hes, He quha suppleis the
place of ane Idiote hou sall he say Amen, zour ministeris of Geneua in money of
their By bilis, hes turnit it may deceatfullie and malitiouslie, he that is
ane Idiott hou sall he say Amen: euin as gif their var na difference betuix ane
Idiot and him quha suppleis the place of ane Idiot. Mairouer the benediction to
the quhilk S. Paull sayis Amen, should be ansuered, is nauyse practiced in zour
deformet kirkis and nather zour Idiotis, nor they that suppleis the place of
zour Idiotis Ansueris Amen, as Sanct Paul vill have ansuered, bot ze hane
turnit Amen in So be it, quhilk is plane repugnant to his mening, and the
practeise of the haill kirk, sen ze can not excuse zour selfis to say that S.
Paul vrait to them quha spak the Hebreu tongue, as Amen is Hebreu considering
he vraitt to the Corinth. quha had their public service in greik, and not in
hebreu, giving us ane sufficient argument, that that vord Amen aucht to be
retened in all langages, as it hes ever been retenet befoir zou amang all
Christian men. And as the Euangelistis quha vreit in greek and they quha turned
the Euangelis out of grek in latene hes in lyk manner retened it, zea, ze zour
selffis in zour bybillis sumtymes persauing that vtheruyse ze vald be mockit be
all men, ar compellit to retene it, as in the versione of the fourtene chaptour
of the first to the Cor. He quha suppleis the room of the unlearned hou sall
he ansuere Amen, giff ze had turned hou sall he ansuere Sobeit all the varld
vald have lachin at zou, And quhat thing can be thocht mair vane nor to turn
tha vordis of Christ Amen Amen dico vobis, Sobeit Sobeit I say unto zou:
Thairfoir ze aucht to believe that it is nocht vithout ane greit mystery that
S. Paul and the Euangelistis hes ever retened this vord Amen, and that nane
other sen their days hes been sua bauld as to turn it in onie other langage,
Insafar that the may learnet S. Augustine vryttis that it is nocht lesum to
turn Amen in onie other vulgar langage vithout the sklander of the hail kirk.
Aug. epist. 188. and 2. de doctrina Christ. cap. 10.
Hou may ze than purge zour selfis, bot in the turning of Amen in zour neu
[Sobeit] ze vald appeir to have been vysar nor S. Paull and the Euangelistis,
and that ze have sklanderit the haill kirk, nocht being mouit thairto be onie
ressone, except only to make professione that ze ar schismakis, and vill have
na thing commone vith Christis kirk: For as concerning the vndirsta^ding of the
pepill quhilk ze allege for zour defense, They vnderst^d [Amen] als veill as
nou they do sobeit, and albeit they had nocht vndirstand it, zit they var nocht
of sua gross ane spirit, bot they micht have learned it in les not half ane
zeir. Bot to co^clud the matter I will discover the craft of Sathane be the
quhilk he hes induced zou to turn, Ame^ in zour Sobeit. In all the prayeris of
the universal kirk in quhatsumeuer pairt of the varld to our days, at the end
of all oraisonis and benedictionis used ever to be ansuered Amen, quhilk is ane
hebreu vord, to signify that the Ieuis at the end sall embrace the Christian
religione, and that in them the militant kirk in ane certane manner sall be
concludit, and endit: quhair of ve make ane daily professioone, quhen for the
conclusione of all our prayeris ve use ever to say Amen, And protestis that the
prophecy of Christ salbe accomplished of ane scheipfald and ane pastore: And
that the Ieuis albeit they be rejected for ane time as vrytis S. Paul, ad Romans
11
zit they sal nocht be rejected for ever, bot at the last salbe gathered in the
scheipfald of Christ: Bot ze, as ze have denied the fulfilling of the
prophecies of the calling of the gentiles, and the universality, and
visibilitie of the ki^k and kingdom of Christ, sua be the turning of, Amen, in
Sobeit ze protest that the prophecy sall not be compleit of the calling of the
Ieuis, and conuersione of them to the Christian faith this is the craft of
Satan in zou, quhairbie he laboris to make all thingis falls, quhilk hes been
foirspok in of Christ and his eternal kingdom, that he may thairbie estableis
the kingdom of the Antichrist. God grant zou grace to acknaulege zour
blindness, and to deliver zour self out of the snare of satan be vnfenzeit
repentance. Amen.


M. Bot quhairfoir reseruit the Papistis the Bybil in ane langage vnknauin to
the people, quhairbie they var defraudit of their saluatione, and of the
confort quhilk they micht have had be reiding of the sam, and turnit it not in
their auin Mother tongue, as ve have done in our reformit kirkis?


B. I se in zour deformit kirkis the Bybil, be private men not having
commissione of the kirk nor knaulege of the scripturis, turnit in the inglishe
tongue, peruertit in infinite places: Albeit it aucht to be referrit to the
deliberatione of the hail kirk Catholic, and advise of the halie ghaist,
quhidder it should be translated in all langages or not? be ressone three only, to
vit hebreu, greik, and latin var vreittin vpone the Croce of Christ Jesus be
instinction of the halie ghaist. Their ar lykuyse money forms of speiking
may propir and sententious in the hebreu, greik, and latin toungis, quhilk
ather tynis the grace, or ane greit pairt of the strenth, gif they be
translated in vthir mair rude langages, or ellis requitis lang
circumscriptionis, quhilk be diuerss interpretoris vil ever be changeit vith
greit danger of the lossing of the treu mening of the halie spirit: Bot the vay
quhairbie ze have deceived the people drauing them from obedience of Christis
halie kirk, saying that scho hid from them the buke of life, quhilk gif they
red, they should be als learned as ather the Preistis, or Freiris, vas may lyk
the first tentatione of Eua in Paradise, Gene. 3.
quhairbie scho vas puffed up vith desire of knaulege to brek goddis
commandiment: Because lyk as ane vnlichted candel schauis not to onie man in ane
mirk nicht the danger of the vay, albeit he beir it in his hand, sua the
vryttin buke in his hand quha hes not the special grace of god to expone the
same vithout errore, makis not the vay manifest quhilk leidis to saluatione:
And do ze not think that it is als vnseimlie ane thing, that ane vyf quha should
be occupeit vith the Rok, or ane Soutar, or Skynnar should reasone quhidder the
general Concile of the universal kirk, and hail Clergy of Christianity hes
interpreit the vord of god treulie, as that Sardanapalus sat amang vemen doing
tha thingis quhilk apertenit to their vocation only, sua the greit
abhominationis committit be the gentilis in sensibil erroris, ar nou committit
spiritualie be zou last rissin up Hetetikis. And it is knauin hou in Almanie
sum be the exemple of Lot, vald have committed incest, vith their auin
dochteris, because they fand that vryttin in the bybil: And Lauter him self
published, that every man eftir the exemple of Abrahame, as they red in the
scripture micht ly vith their auin hyre vemen in place of their vyfis,
pronuncing his may notabil sentence agreeable to the liberty of his neu
Euangel [si non vult vxo^, veniat ancilla] Reid Staphylus, Lauterlib. de voto
and continent.
and ze vil find, quhat abusis hes cu^mit in the country of Almanie, sen every
man had liberty to reid the Bybil in his auin vulgar langage: As quhair ze say
that the people vas defraudit of the vord of life, and t^eu fude and nuriture of
their saulis, zea abuse zour auditoris, because the mystereis of our faith, and
the commandis of God var declair it, and maid manifest unto them mair esilie
be preaching and teaching, nor be reiding of the Bible: Vtheruyse they quha can
not reid culd not attene to saluatione: And gif it var necessar that al men
should reid the Bible, they should not reid it in the Inglis^e or onie vulgar
tongue, bot rather in the Hebreu, or Greik tongue in the quhilk it vas vreittin:
because in the reading of it in another tongue they man repose them felfis vpone
the fidelity of him quha hes turnit it in sik ane tongue, and sua can never
have onie certane assurance, considering he quha hes turnit it, hes been bot
ane man, and micht have faillit: Q^hairof necessarlie I conclude that ather the
people man repose them selfis on the instructione of their pastoris, or ellis
gif they vil not be content vith the instructione of their Pastoris, except
they reid the Bible, they man al begin to study to Hebreu, and Greik, to the
effect that they may reid the Bible in thaj toungis, quhairin, they ar assurit,
they var vryttin vithout onie errore.


OF THE APPAREILL AND ORNAMENTIS OF THE KIRK.
CHAP XVI.
M. BOt quhair reidis thou that it is lesum to the Papistis to adorn their
altaris sa sumptuously vith precious stanes, vith sa money touallis, and to
have sic consecrat chalices of Gold and silver, quhilk vas abused be the
preistis and freris to the greit hurt of the commoneveill, And hou can thou
deny bot the Papis of Rome hes borrouit from the gentiles the superstitious
manner of adorning kirkis vith gold silver and precious stanes, quhilk God hes
not co^mandit nor appointed in the vrittin vord.


B. Suppois in the Days of the Apostlis, and during the greit persecutione of
the Emperoris of Rome, the Christianis conld nocht have time to buyld sua
notabill kirkis as they vald have desyrit, nor zit to adorn their altaris vith
ornamentis of gold and precious stanis, being oftymes constrainit to fle out of
ane place to another, and to lurk in couis under the erd, and their to use the
exerceis of their religione, zit quhen it pleased God to tak auay the
persecutione, and illuminat the heart of the Emperore Co^stantinus Magnus to
embrace the Christian religione and to be ane instrument of the furthsetting of
it, than as the Christianis began to big may magnifict templis, sua began
they to adorn their altaris vith gold and precious stanes, and to cleyth them
may richly and to make Chalices of gold and silver in mair quantity and
abundance nor befoir. For lang afoir Constantinus Magnus the Christianis in
their sacrifices used to have Chalices of gold as amangis vtheris vitnessis the
learnet Poet Prudentius descryuand the persecutione of Decius, [Soletis
(inquit) conqueri, saeuire nos iusto amplius, Prudent in Laurent.
quum Christiana corpora, plus quam cruente scindimus: abest atrocioribus
censura feruens motibus, blande and quiet efflagito, quod sponte obire debeas:
hanc esse vestris orgiis, moremque and artem proditum est, hanc disciplinam
faederis, libent vt auro Antistes, argenteis scyphis ferunt fumare sacrum
sanguinem, auroque nocturnis sacris adstare fixos cereos] ze use sayis the
cruel Emperore Decius to complane that ve ar mair cruel than becummis us,
quhen ve cause ryue and destroy the bodeis of Christian men vithout mercy, ve
vil nocht use sa exorbita^t and horribil cruelty, ve crave vith plesandnes and
tranquillity, that quhilk ze should do villinglie: They say that this is the
manner and fassone of zour sacrifices they say this is the discipline of zour
covenant, that the Bischopis makis sacrifice in veschelis of gold, that the
halie and consecrat blude is offerit in coupis of silver, and that in the
evening or nichtlie service the torchis ar set in chandeleris of gold. Ruff.
lib. 9
Reid gif ze pleis Ruffinus, and their ze vill find hou Constantinus Magnus did
erect sa money notabill templis and adorn them vith all kind of rich and
precious ornamentis, ze vill find hou that the halie voman Helena his mother
did decore the Altaris vith may rich touallis and precious stanes, and
chalices of gold and silver. Reid S. Chrysostom, and their ze vil find also
hou that the altaris vas vont to be ornit vith veluot, Chrisost homil. 51 in
Math. opt. lib. 2. contra parme.
and silkis and vith touallis of clayth of gold and vith chandelaris of gold:
And Optatus Mileuitanus vritand aganis the heretik Parmenianus the kirk sayis
he, hesmonie orname^tis of gold and silver: Opt. lib. 6.
and obiectis to the donatistis, that they had committed ane may horribill
crime that they had brokin the chalices quhilk did co^tene in them the blude
of Christ and dissoluit them in pieces, sua that the gentiles did by them to
make veschellis in the quhilk they micht offer sacrifice to their Idolis, o i
sayis he, ane crime quhilk vas never hard befoir, to tak from God, and to giff
to ane Idol.

And S. Augustine vrittis that ve have money veschellis, August in ps. 113.
and instrumentis quhilk ve use in the administratione of the sacramentis, S.
Ambros. 2. de offic. cap. 28.
the quhilkis ar consecrat and halie, because of the halie ministry to the
quhilk they serve: Ambros. lib. 2. de of ficiuc. 28.
And S. Ambrose vrittis that in sum caices ve may break and sell euin the halie
veschellis quhilkis ar co^secrat and hallouit: The kirk hes gold sayis he,
nocht to keip it, bot for the necessity of the pure (Tunc enim vas Dominici
sanguinis nosco, cum in vtroque video redemptionem vt calix ab host redimat,
quem sanguis ab host redemit) that is than I acknauledge the veschell that
contenis the blud of the lord, quhen in them bayth I behald the price of
redemptione, that the Chalice may redeem him from the ennimie, quhom the blude
hes redemit from the ennimie. And Athanasius vryttand of the persecution of the
Arrianis, Athana. in epist. ad Marcum.
vitnessis that the Arrianis had taken auay all the vestimentis, and other
ornamentis of the kirk: Athanae. in vita An tonii.
And that their persecutione and violence vas sua greit that they profaned the
halie veschelis and Chalicis be the polluted handis of the gentiles: And
Gregorius Nazia^zenus being accused be the Arrianis, Nazian. in oratione de
Arrianis and seipso.
schau me sayis he, quhais blude I have mixed vith the blude of Christ? mening
of the Arrianis quha in the time of the sacrifice vas the cause of sa money
murtheris in the kirk, and of the spilling of Christis blude out of the
Chalices, in the quhilk it vas offerit sua that the blude of them quha var
slain vas mixed vith the blude of Christ be their persecutione, schau me sayis
he, quhair I have exposed the Chalices quhilk at depute to the sacrifices,
quhilk, it is nochr lesum, to the pepill to tuiche, to be tuiched and
contaminat be the handis of the infidelis, as ze have done? ze quha callis zour
selfis Protestantis ze se quhais futstoppis ze follou in breiking of the
Chalices, and spulzeing of the kirkis. And unless ze cum to repentance, ze may
be assured of na other reuard, nor the Arrianis, and infidelis hes gottin
befoir, quhilk is the inquenshibill fire of hell. And in this varld ze vill
nocht eschaip the vraith and just judgment of God mair nor vtheris quhais
futstoppis ze follou. Victorvti. lib. 1. de per secutione vandal.
Victor Vticensis descryuand the persecutione of the Vandalis vrittis that
Ginsericus king of the Vandalis did send ane callit Proclus to spulzie the
kirkis, quha obeying his masteris comma^diment tuke the coueringis of the
altaris, and maid unto him self of them sarkis and hoise: bot a lytill eftir
he did eat out his auin tongue, and de be ane may filthy and horribil death.
Theod. li. 3. cap. 37.
Theodoretus vrittis in lyk manner of ane callit Phymelicus ane danser quha had
bocht ane halie vestiment of gold and silk, the quhilk Constantinus had geuin
to the kirk of Jerusalem, and did put this vestime^t vpone him and danse in
it, quha did fall incontinent to the erd and de may miserabillie be the just
judgment and punitione of God: quhairof I counsal zou to tak exemple in time:
And sen the Ieuis in the auld testament be the command of God, had sua coistlie
and rich apparellis in the tempill of Jerusalem quhilk vas bot ane schaddou
and vmbre, hou can ze eschaip to be iniureous unto Christ, sen ze vill that the
kirkis quhilk ar dedicat to his honor be alluterlie destitute of all precious
and rich apparel, and that zour auin private housis be mair magnifict nor the
house quhilk is dedicat to the honoring and vorshipping of god. Ve have nocht
learned the manner of the apparelling of our kirk is of the infidel Gentiles as
ze say, bot rather the infidelis hes learned that from the pepill of god, as
Numa Pompilius did learn ane greit pairt of tha thingis quhilk he ordinit in
the City of Rome for the vorshipping of the Idolis out of the bukis of Moses.
Ze of the lau of nature it self, all nationis hes vniuersalie learned that the
tempillis quhilk ar dedicat to the vorschipping of god, aucht to be decored
vith greit magnificence, and exterior apparel, nocht that god hes mister of
onie sic thing, bot for declaratione and testificatione of our deuitie and
subiectione unto him, and als to excitate, and valkin our dull nature be sik
exteriore thingis as ar subject to our eis to deuotione and piety, And euin as
the kirk militant is ane certane image and liknes of the kirk triumphant, sua
according to our vaiknes and imbecillitie, be the exteriore orname^tis of gold,
precious stanes, and other thingis, quhilkis ar in our kirkis ve do declair the
greit affluence and abou^dance of all Joy and consolatione quhilk is ar amang
the halie sanctis, and angellis of heuin, quha triumphis in glory, sua ze
appeir to me, mair rude and barbare, nor ar the gentiles them selfis,
considering ze vill that their be na difference betuix zour kirkis, and als
money noult faldis, as experience it self dois teach. Nou that this decoring
and apparelling of kirkis, hes ever been accustumed be all Christian pepill,
it is may cleir and manifest to all them quha pleisis to reid the ancient
vrittaris as Ruffinus quha vritttis as said is that Constantinus Magnus,
Ruffin. l^. 9 cap. 10.
having obtened victory over the tyrane Mace^tius did employ him self to buyld
may su^ptuous and magnifict kirkis exorna^d thamevith al kind of apparel as
also his mother Helena quha gave sindrie veschellis of gold decored may
richly vith precious stanis. Reid Theodoret, Theod. li. 8 de curandis
graecanicis affectionibus.
and ze vill find hou richly the tempillis in that aige vas accustumed to be
apparelled. The sam is testifeit be S. Hierom vrittand to Heliodorus. Be
Paulinus, be S. Chrysostom, S. Hieroad heliodo. Paulinus i^ not ali foelicis.
be Optatus, be Ambrose, be Gregorius Nissenus, be Athanasius, be Gregorius
Nazianzenus, be Prude^tius, and all other ancient vrittaris. And, as is
manifest of their said authoris, Chryso. ho. 51. in Mat. Nissenus in laudibus
Theodori martyris, Athana. in episto. ad Marcum de Arrianis, Nazianzenus in
orat. de Arrianis and seipso Prudentius in Laurentio.
ze in spulzeing, and taiking auay the ornamentis of the kirk, follou the
futstoppis of Iulianus the Apostat, of the Arrianis, and of the Donatistis,
quha did tak auay the veschellis of gold, and other precious ornamentis of the
kirkis euin as ze do, albeit ze surpas them sumparte in sic impiety, hauand
maid gretar prophanatione of all sic thingis nor ever they did, as is cleir to
all them quha plesis to co^pair their vorkis vith zouris: I desire that ze
schau me of onie ancient history, that in onie aige the Christian men hes had
sik kirkis, as ze have nou in the realm of Scotland, That is the bair vallis
destitute of all kind of ornament, vithout dure, vindo, or ruff. I am assurit
ze vill never be abill to schau onie sic thing: hou can ze thane profes zour
selfis treu vorshipparis of god, quha uses sua manifest contempt of thaj places
quhilk at cheiflie dedicat to his honor and vorshipping.


OF THE DEDICATIONE of kirkis and altaris.
CAP. XVII.
M. ARE not the Papistis may lyk the idolatrous na^iones quha dedicatis their
Kirkis to men, and vemen, euin as the gentilis did thairis to Diana, Apollo,
and Jupiter.


B. As in zour formar obiectionis ze have declarit zour selfis to be Gentiles
follouing the exemple of Iulianus the Apostate, Porphytius, and vtheris, sua in
this ze declair zour selfis to be Manichaeanis: Aug. li. 20 co^tra Faustum.
for as restifeis S. Augustine, the Manichaeanis did object the samyn argument
to the Catholics in tha day is, and that they had maid goddis of their
Martyris and erected templis unto them, To quhom S. Augustine did ausuer that
our tempillis and kirkis ar only co^secrat to god, as to god only sacrifice
aucht to be offered, albeit they be consecrat in memory of the Martyris, to
the effect as he says, that ve thank God of the victory, quhilk he hes
granted to them, and that throuch the remembrance of sic places, our cheritie
may be kendilled touard god, and his halie Martyris and that ve may be helpit
be their prayeris, and be maid pairtakaris of their merits: vtheruyse ve vald
be Judged ingrate giff ve did nocht thank god of the greit benefeittis quhilk
he hes granted to them, they being membirris of ane body vith us: cheiflie
sen their victory dois proceid from the strenth and efficacy of Christis
blude: Thairfore quhen ve dedicat tempilles unto god in the quhilk the memory
of Martyris, and sanctis should be obseruit and keipit, ve do ane may special
honor unto god, extolling the victory of the croce, quhairthrouche the
Martyris and Sanctis hes triumphed over their ennemeis: As ze be the contrare
in taking auay all sic memory, vill not acknaulege the victory of the Croce,
and obscuris it sua mekill as ze may: Sua ve call nocht the kirk of Paull or of
Petir, because that it is dedicat to Petir or Paul, bot because it is dedicat
unto god for memory and honor of Petir and Paull, as ve call not ane altar of
Petir or Paul, Aug. lib. 20. contra Faustum.
as Augustine teachis in the same place because that ve offer onie sacrifice to
them, for as he sayis to Faustus the Manichaeane, quhen hard thou onie priest
sayand I offer unto the Petir or Paull? bot ve offer only unto god, albeit ve
offer unto him for the memory and honor of S. Petir and Paull: sua zour
obiectione proceidis of plane ignorance, sen ze impugn the Catholic
religione befoir ze vndirstand it, This this use and custume hes ever been
keipit sen the beginning of the kirk, Aurelia. in vita martialis.
it is may cleir and manifest of all historeis, Aurelianns Discipill of
Martial, ane of the seuintie tua Discipillis vrittis that he did cause buyld
ane kirk to the honor of S. Stephane the first Martyr, in Limoges ane town of
France, quhilk kirk standis unto their days: Abdias in vita S. loannis.
Abdias in the lyff of S. Iohne the Apostle testifeis hou that in the town of
Ephesus their vas ane kirk buyldit to the honor and memory of S. Iohne: And
Anacletus quha vas neir the Apostlis days testifeis that Marcus in the town
of Alexandria caused buyld an tempile dedicat to the honor and memory of S.
Petir: And clemens S Petirris scollar vitnessis hou that ane nobill man in the
town of Rome callit Theodosius did make ane kirk of his anin house to the honor
also of S. Petir: Damasus ^n vitispo^^ificum.
And Damasus testifeis hou that Calixtus quha vas in the aige of Tertulliane
did erect ane kirk in the town of Rome to the honor of our Lady: And
Co^stantinus the Emperor as vitnessis Sozomenus did the lyk in
Constantinopill. Sozome^us lib. 7. ca. 5.
And hou that be the help of our Lady that town at sindrie times hes been
deliuerit from dangeris. I micht produce other innumerabill exemplis gif I
plaised as of Helena, Pulcheria, Iustinianus and vtheris: Sua ze should be
eschamed to impugn that quhilk according to goddis vord hes been established
be all Christian and godly men befoir zou. And zit zour Centuriatoris of
Almanie ar nocht eschamed to say, Centur. 7. cap. 6.
that in place of the goddis, quhilk vas vorshipped be the Ethnictis, ve do
bring in in our kirkis our Lady and the Sa^ctis to be vorshipped be the
Christianis, Euin as the Gentiles and Manichaeanis vas vont to object: Ze Beza
zour paraclete pronou^cis bauldlie his sentence, quhilk I am assurit all
Christian mennis eiris vill abhore, Beza co^. in Act. 19.
That the kirk of our Lady of Lauret is euin^ lik the tempill of Diana
Ephesiorum, And that the lyk superstitione is used in them bayth, sua gif zour
Paraclet Beza had been in the days of the primitive kirk, quhen the gentiles
obiectit unto the Christianis, that in place of Diana and the rest of the
goddis, they brocht in our Lady and the Sanctis: he vith the rest of his
ministeris of Geneua vald haif been may fauorabill unto them and vald have
approuit their may blasphemous calu^ nie to the quhilk the Christia^is did
a^suer may constantly as amangis vtheris Theodoret, that our Martyris and
Sanctis ar of gretar puissance and strenthe nor ar their goddis, Theodoret lib.
8. de cura^dis graecanicis affectionibus.
because our Martyris, and Sanctis albeit they be nocht goddis, hes eiected
their goddis out of their tempillis, and for Jupiter, Bacchus, and other
goddis, ve have Petir, Paul, and Thomas, be quhais names the tempillis ar
named, quhair befoir they var named be the names of Jupiter, and Bacchus: And
thairfoir giff ze pleis to reid the ancient vrittaris as Augustine, Hierom, and
vtheris, ze vill find that they use to call the kirkis be the names of Petir,
Aug. lib. 1. de Ciuita. Dei, Aug. libr. 22. de ciuit. Dei.
Paul, James, and vtheris, As Augustine in his first buke of the City of God
quhen he vrittis, that the Gothis did forgive al them quha used to fly to the
kirk of S. Petir for girth: And in the tuentie tua buke he callis the kirk of
his auin town, the kirk of S. Stephane: Hierom. de viris illustribus.
And S. Hierome de viris illustribus makis mentione of the kirk of S. Clement
in the town of Rome: and all other ancient vrittaris geuis in lyk manner
testimony to this use of dedicatione of kirkis to the glory of god, for
memory of Christis halie sanctis and martyris. Zour Centuriatores says that
this manner of the buyldi^g of kirkis begane at Co^stantinus Magnus, Ce^turia 1.
lib. 2. c. 10.
bot they ar convict to be learis of that quhilk is said befoir: And the
universal consent of all nationis vill ever be ane sufficient argument for the
condemnatione of zour impiety: For to pretermit other cuntreyis als lang as
the memory of Christ sall lest in the Realm of Scotland, salang their salbe
the memory of sum sanctis, for quhais memory sindrie of the kirkis vas
dedicat to the service of God, As S. Petirris kirk (in the town of Megill) The
kirkis of S. Geill, S. Duthes, S. Ringane, S. Mongo, S. Padie, S. Leonard in S.
Leonardis college, and vtheris: Quhilk names it vill pas zour pouar ever to
abolishe, except that as ze ar deliberat to cast down the third part of all
the kirkis in scotland as I heir reported, sua vith process of tymeze be
resolut to cast them all down, and aboleise alluterlie the name of Christ
Jesus out of the realm of Scotland.


OF EXTREME UNCTION
CHAP. XVIII.
M. BE quhat testimony of scripture may thou prove extreme unction to be ane
sacrament?


B. Nocht only in the Euangel of S. Marc, Marc. 6.
quhair it is said that the Apostlis obeying the command of Christ eiectit
deuillis, and oyntit money seik vith oil, and haillit them: bot also in the
epistle of S. James all thingis requirit to ane sacrament, ar may lyuelie
descryuit, to vit ane lauchfullie callit Pastore, ane Priest of the kirk, be
quhais administratione it is geuin, the external element to vit oil,
representing the inuart grace of consolatione geuin be the halie Gaist, vith
expres mentione of the effect of ane sacrament, to vit remissione of synnis,
vith the form of vordis pertening to ane sacrament, S. James 5.
to vit, prayer in the name of the lord (For their it is vryttin gif, their be
onie seik amangis zou, lat him call for the Preistis of the kirk, and lat them
pray vpone him, oyntand him vith oil in the name of the lord, and the
obsecratione of faith sall haill him quha is seik, and the lord sal raise him,
and gif he be in synnis, they salbe remitted unto him): Bot ze, because ze have
rejected this sacrament, and refusis the consolatione of the halie Ghaist,
quhilk be the verteu of it, he vsis to gif to the faithful, aganis the may
horribil tentationis of Satan, in the extreme hour of zour lyff, Calvin in
lib. de refor ma. eccles.
ze de for the greitast pairt, in desperatione: Iohne Calvin confessis him
self that in the time of the Apostlis it vas ane treu sacrament, bot that nou
it is na sacrament: Be the lyk ressone he micht have taken auay Baptism, and
zour Suppar from zou. Friar Martine Lauter zour foirgrandschir passed mair
cannelie to vorke and did deny that ever S. James vrait ane epistle, or maid
mentione of this sacrament, bot he micht have denyit alsueil the Euangell of S.
Iohne: hou can ze than purge zour selfis of may intolerabill ingratitude to
Christ, that vil nocht ressaue sua healthsum and profitabil ane sacrament, as
he hes left unto treu Christianis?


M. Thou he^ alledgit in thy Ansuere tua thingis, quhilk in my judgment ar
disagreand from the spirit of god, first that Presbyter, in the primiture kirk,
vas ane priest, and leuit as ane kirk man, quhill as according to the
signification of the greik vord, it is callit ane elder, sik as ve choose
zeirlie in our reformit Kirkis. The secund is, that ze vald retene that
unction, quhairof the Apostle spekis, the verteu thairof to vit corporal
health, nou ceissing.


B. As to the first, it is manifest that in the primitive kirk (Presbyter) vas
nocht taken for ane Soutar, Tailzeour, or Merchand hauand ane mechanik
vocatione, zeirlie chosin, as ze do in zour deformit kirk, Tim. 1. epi. chap. 5.
bot for ane Pastore being anoyntit. For S. Paul vryttis to Timothy [qui been
praesunt Presbyteri duplici honor digni habeantur, maxim ij qui labora^t in
sermon and doctrina] Lat the Preistis quha reulis veill, be estemit vorthie of
doubill honor, cheiflie they quha trauellis in preching of the vord and
teching, quhilk in nauyse can agrie to zour idiot Eldaris: And in the first
chapter of the epistle to Titus, he callis the Bischop Presbyter, quhair he
sayis, for this cause I left zou in Creta, that ze may amend tha thingis quhilk
inlaikis, and apoynt in every town, Presbyteros, that is, Tit. 1.
Bischopis, as I have ordinit zou to do, gif their be onie giltles: for unless
Sanct Paull be [Presbyter] and (Episcopus) vndirstude ane thing he vald nocht
subioyne as ane cause of the former sentence, [Oporte^ enim Episcopum
irreprehensibilem esse] It is necessar that ane Bischop be vithout falt, etc.
And gif ze vil reid bayth the greik, and latin vryttaris in Christis kirk, ze
vil find that, presbyter, amangis the greikis is callit [(...)] quhilk
signifeis ane priest or sacrificatore, and amangis the latinis is callit
(sacerdos) and that na man befoir zou did acknaulege sic Eldaris, as ze do, or
that onie sic office at onie time hes been in the kirk of god: sua I vald
inquire of zou the cause, quhy in zour vrytingis in lating, ze use nocht this
vord, Sacerdos, to signify him that ministeris the sacramentis, as ever al
vryttaris and latinistis hes done befoir zou, quha ever hes taken, presbyter,
and (sacerdos) for ane thing? As to the secund I meruel gretumlie of zour
vilful ignorance, quha confundis the external mirakil, vith the effect of this
sacrament, quhilk is inuisibil and spiritual. For in the primitive kirk to
confirm the faith of them quha ressauit this sacrament, their vas at the
administratione thairof ane mirakil schauin, lyk as in the rest of the
sacrame^tis: because they quha al men kneu to be neirast approchand to death,
vithout reparatione of health be onie kind of natural medicine, vas restorit to
bodelie health, quhilk vas lytil les miraculous, nor gif they had been raised
fra deed to lyff: Quh airfoir gif ze deny the verteu of this sacrament, because
the mirakil hes ceissit, ze sal deny inlyuyse that Baptism is ane sactament:
For as ve reid in the Euangel of S. Marc. Marc. 16.
They quha beleuit and var baptized in the primitive kirk ressauit sic pouar
that be the name of Christ they e^ectit Deuillis, they spak vith sindrie
tou^gis, they handillit serpentis vithout onie hurt, quhilk verteu, as
experience prouis, every baptized person dois nocht ressaue in their days,


OF MARRIAGE.
CHAP. XIX.
M. MAy thou lauchfullie allege onie testimony of the vritten vord to prove
Marriage to be ane sacrament?


B. Sen Marriage contenis ane outuart sing of the inuart grace, quhilk God
omnipotent creatis in the hartis of them quha ar mareit for the procreatione
and educatione of Childrene, and is apoyntit, and ordinit be god thairto:
Ephesians. 5.
I meruel hou ze deny it to be ane sacrament, cheiflie sen S. Paull mening of
Marriage, sayis, It is ane great Sacrament: or hou can ze believe that Marriage hes
na grace nor prerogative amangis the Christianis: the quhilk it hes nocht
amangis the Ieuis and ge^tilis, or that the Christianis ar nocht sanctifeit be
the halie band of Marriage to produce Childrene unto Christ, August. Lib. de
bono con. cap. 24.
aganis the mening of S. Paul in his epistle to the Ephesianis? Thairfoir S.
Augustine sayis that Marriage in the halie city of god, may in nauyse be
dissoluit, because it is ane sacrament: and as Christ can nocht be separat from
his kirk, bot is conioynit vith her be ane insolubil band, sua the band of
Marriage can not be dissolved: Calu. li. 4. i^st. ca. 16. sect. 34.
Of this ze may persaue the lesing of zour master Calvin quhair he sayis,
that na man acknauledgit Marriage to be ane sacrament before Gregoris days, sen
ane la^g time befoir S. Augustine acknauledgit the sam: Bot nou I vndirstand
quhat hes mouit zou to deny that Marriage is ane Sacrament, because ze nocht
only grant that our halie saluiours spous the kirk hes errit, as diuorcit from
her housband, bot ze celebrat also the ba^d of Marriage betuix men andvemen
diuorcit, And sua approuis adulterous Childrene for them that are begottin in
the honorabil band of Matrimony expres aganis the testimony of our saluiour
Jesus Christ, quha nather permittis the man, nor the voman diuorcit to contract
agane under the pane of breking the lau quhair it is vrittin: Thou sall nocht
commit adultery: for albeit diuorcemeut may be maid from bed speech, and
burde, zit as to the dissolutione of the band of Marriage, they may na mair be
separat, nor the Saul from the body vithout death, S. Paul. 1. Cor. 7.
As vitnessis S. Paul to the Cor. Bot them quha ar mareit I command nocht I
bot the lord, lat nocht the vyf be separat from her housba^d, bot gif scho be
separat, lat her abyd vnmareit, or ellis be^ reconcilit vith her housband, and
lat nocht the housband put auay his vyff, quhair it is to b^ vnstand lykuyse,
gif he leave his vyf, he aucht ather to be reconcilit vith her agane, or ellis
abyd vnmareit.


M. As to the testimony of Paul, Ephe. 5.
it seruis not to zour purpose because he callis nocht Marriage [Sacramentum.]
bot (...).


B. Do ze nocht think that S. Hierom, quha vas author of the vulgar
translatione, ressaued be the Kirk, and as zit embraced every quhair, had
sufficient knauledge to expone the verse of the greik text, in latin or nocht?
Bot ze appeir to desire that S. Paul vryttand in greik should haif spokin latin,
and callit it (sacrame^tum) zea the name (sacrame^tum) amang the latinistis
signefeis mair impropirlie that quhilk ve call ane sacrament, nor dois the vord
((...)) amangis the Greikis.


OF THE VOV OF CHASTITY
CHAP. XVIII.
M. ZE that are Papistis albeit ze can nocht Keip the commandis of God, zit as
thocht the keiping of them var nocht sufficient, ze charge zour selfis vith
the vou of chastity, aganis the expres vordis of Paul lat eue^ie man have his
auin vyf to avoid fornicatione, 1. Cor. 7.
zea Paul dois planelie foirspek of zou saying that in the latter days their
sall vpryse sum quha sall forbid men to marie quhilk is may planelie
fulfillet 1. Tim. 4.
amangis zou, sen ze vill nocht that it be lesum to zour Preistis Freris Monkis
and Nonnis to marie.


B. Zour argument is full of calumny and deprauatione of goddis vord, sen ze
can nocht be abill to schau that ever onie Catholic teached that the
fulfilling of the commandimentis vas nocht sufficient to atteine to the life
everlasting, quhilk ar no^ht impossibill, as ze allege, sen the scripture
teachis us, that they ar may esie saying, his commandimentis ar nocht hauie.
Joan. epi. cap. 5.
Bot to cum to zour obiectione the vou of chastity is nocht aganis the
scripture as ze allege, bot may conform thairto, ze consaled be Christ him
self, quhen he sayis their be sum quha hes chastifeit them s^luis for the
kingdom of heauin, quhairbie he declaris that they astrict them seluis to
perpetual contine^cie and chastity. Matt. 19.
And S. Paul vryttand to Timothy sayis, that the vidouis quha eftir they ar
dedicat to the service of the kirk dois marie incurris damnatione, 1. Tim. 5.
because they have brokin their first promeis quhilk vordis can not be
vndirstand bot of the promeis and vou of chastity, Calu. libr. i^st. 4. cap.
13. sec. 18.
sen vtheruyse be marriage they vald nocht have incurrit damnatione. The quhilk
place is sua cleir that Calvin him self albeit he labor mekil to interptei^
it in ane other sense and mening, zit he is const^ainit to grant that it vas
nocht lesum to they vidouis to marie, and that they quha vald marie did incur
damnatione, quhairbie also he is constrainit to confess that they had sum vov
and obligatione of chastity, vtheruyse marriage had nocht been vnlesum to
them, sua the vou of chastity is nocht aganis goddis vord as ze may falsely
allege, bot very conform thairto, and may acceptabil unto God. As sanct
Paul testifeis may planlie he quha is mareit is cairfull for the thingis of
the varld, 1. Cor. 7.
hou he may pleise his vyf, and he quha is vnmareit is cairful for the thingis
of the lord, hou he may pleis the lord: teachand us thairbie that as they quha
ar consecrat to the service of God, Ba^^^. in lib. de virg^^it. Amb. ad virg.
lapsa^ ca. 5. hiero. ^. contra Ioui^^.
and ministry of the kirk aucht to be only cairful hou they should please God,
sua they should nocht be mareit, according to that quhilk ever hes been practiced
sen the beginning of the kirk to their days, as is may manifest of all
ancient vryttaris: And I meruel of zou that ze do nocht reid zour master
Calvin mair diligently in this point, quha spekand of the vidouis that var
dedicat to the service of the kirk sayis [Ego vero illis minime nego viduas
quae se suasque Call. inst. 4. cap. 13. sec. 18.
Ecclesiae operas addicere^t, perpetui coelibatus legem simul suscepisse, non
quia in eo religionem aliqua^ statuerent, vt postea fieri coeptum est, sed
quonia^ nisi sui iuris, iugo maritali solutae, functionem illam sustinere non
possent] I deny nocht to them that the vidouis quha addicted them selfis and
their haill travel to the service of the kirk, to have subiectit them self to
the lau of perpetual chastity, nocht making onie religione in doing of that,
as eftiruart began to be done, bot because they micht nocht fulfill that charge,
unless having full pouar of them selfis, they var fre from the zok of marriage.
Gif the vidouis quha hes bot lytil, or na thing ado in the kirk in co^paresone
of the ministeris, can nocht fulfill their charge except they remane vnmareit,
as Calvin sayis, hou can it be possibil that the Ministeris being mareit can
fulfill their charges? hou can ze than clenge zour selfis bot ze repugne to S.
Paul, and to the practeise of the universal kirk ze to zour auin master Iohne
Calvin, and that ze all, for the may pairt sen ze have professed chastity,
incur the sentence of condemnatione pronunced be S. Paul aganis the Vidouis, S.
Paul. 1. Tim. 5.
quha after the promeis of chastity did marie? As to the places of scripture
quhilk ze allege for zou, The first is sinistrouslie interpreted, for the
mening of S. Paul is nocht that every man should be mareit, 1. Cor. 7.
vtheruyse he vald be repugnant to him self quha being vnmareit desyris al men
to be lyk unto him, and in the beginning of the chaptoure sayis, It is good to
ane man nocht to tuiche ane voman, Hiero. lib. 1. contra Iouin^a.
bot as vryttis S. Hierom amangis other quaestionis quhilk vas proposed to S.
Paul be the Corint. this vas ane, quhidder gif they quha var mareit, to vaick
on oraisone and prayer, should leave their vyfis or nocht? he ansueris that they
should nocht leave them, bot every man should keip his auin vyf, quhilk is the
mening of tha vordis nevertheless to avoid fornicatione lat every man have his
a^in vyf, 1. Timo. 4. Clem^ns libr. 6. constit. apoct. ca. 8. Aug. here is. 25.
epipha. 46.
and every voman her auin housband.

The secund place aucht to be vndirstand of the Tatianitis, Marcionitis, and
the Manichaeanis quha co^demnit Marriage as vnlesum, and affermit that their vas
na difference betuix Marriage and fornicatione, the Catholics affirms na sic
thing, ze they afferme the contrare, that Marriage is ane honorabil ba^d, and
halie sacrament ordinit be Christ for the procreatione and educatione of
childrene: They afferme that it is nocht lesum to marie eftir the vou of
chastity, quhairin they condem nocht marriage bot condemnis them quha brekis
their ^ou, and promeis maid unto God, Basil. de virg. Ambros. ad virg. la psam
ca. 5.
as S. Paul dois the Vidouis quhairof I have spokin befoir. Thairfoir S. Basil
sayis that gif ane Virgin marie eftir the vou of chastity scho committis
adultery, because her housba^d is zit on life that is Christ. And S. Ambrose
vrytand to ane Virgin that had fallin, Hierony. lib. 1. co^tra Iouini^nu^.
sayis that scho had committed adultery. And S. Hierom callis it nocht only
adultery bot also incest. Aug. hares. 82. a^ quoduult deum.
And ze can nocht misknau hou that Iouinianus vas condemnit for ane haeretike
be ressone he vas the cause that Monkis and Nonis did Marie as vryttis S.
Augustine, sua ze should be eschamet of sua manifest prophanatione and
deprauatione of goddis vord,: Bot as ze ar destitute of all spiritual
consolatione, and delyttis only in the sensual pleasoris of the flesh, sua
almaist quhat ever ze reid in the scripture, ze vreist it to zour fleshly
liberty, and hes na other places of scripture in zour mouthis, bot thai quhilk
be zour corruptit Judgment appeiris to cloik zour se nsualitie. As [crescite
and multiplicamini: Melius est nubere qua^ vri: Vnusquisque propter
fotnicationem vxorem suam habeat, vir vxori debitum reddat, non est bonum
homini esse solum, faciamus ei adiutorium simile sibi: volo iuniores viduas
nubere, filios procreare, an non habemus potestatem mulierem sororem
circumducendi? oportet Episcopum esse vnius vxoris virum: vtere modico vino
propter stomachum: vinu^ exhilarat cor hominis, spiritus tristis exiccat ossa:
nihil quod intrat per os coinquinat hominem, omne quod in macello vaenit
ma^ducate, nihil interrogantes propter conscientiam: omnia munda mundis:
exercitatio corporalis ad modicum vtilis est] and sua furht of the rest, deny
gif ze can bot their and siclyk places of the scripture ar ever in zour mouthis,
bayth in zour prechingis and familiar conuersatione. And as to the places
quhilk tendis to mortificatione and dantoning of the flesh ze make na mentione
at al, bot vald have al sic places forzet and aluterlie vnknauin to the peopil,
persauing may cleirlie that gif they kneu them they vald incontinent abhore
zour may sensual and adhominabil life, and vald knau perfytlie that it is
nocht conform to godis vord. For exemple I micht produce money siclyk places
quhilk I never hard zit cited be zou nor zit as I believe, onie of the peopill,
unless by zour intent they had chancit in zour otdinar textis, 1. Cor. 7.
as for example, [It is good for ane man nocht to tuiche ane voman: Their ar sum
quha hes maid them self chaste for the kingdom of heuin. Matt. 19.
Art thou loused from ane vyf? seik nocht ane vyf, I vald have zou vithout
cair: the vnmareit cairis for the thingis of the lord, hou he may please the
lord: bot he quha is mareit cairis for the thingis of thevarld hou he may
please his vyf: He quhageuis his virgin to marriage dois veil, bot he quha geuis
her nocht dois bettir. 1. Timo. 5
Refuse the zou^gar vidouis for quhen they begin to vax vantone aganis Christ,
they vil marie incurrand damnatione, Tobie. 12.
because they have brokin their first promeis: It is bettir to vaik on oraesone
vith fasting and praying than lay vpthreasoris of gold: Joel.
Nou thairfoir sayis the lord turn to me in all zour hairtis, Matt. 6.
in fasting, in yeiping and murning: Bot quhen thou fastis, oynt thy head and
vesch thy face, Mare. 2.
that thou appeir not unto men to be fastand, bot to the father of heuin in
secreit, 1. Cor. 7.
The dayis sall cum quhe^ the brydgrome salbe rane from them and than they sal
fast. Lat not ane of zou substract the deuitie of Marriage from the other except
for ane time that ze vaik on fasting and praying: 1. Cor. 9.
I chastise, my body, and bring it under obedience, lest quhen I have praeched
the Eua^gel to vtheris, I my self be fund in the number of the reprobat: It var
raedious to cite the third pairt of the placis of the scripture quhairin ve ar
exhortit to fasting and al kind of dantoning of the flesh, and zit in all zour
sermonis and conference, their is nane of their mair hard, nor gif they had
never been vryttin.


OF ORDOVR
CHAP. XIX.
M. Vil thou ly Kuise approve the seuint Papistical Sacrament quhilk is callit
Ordour?


B. It is nocht vithout great cause that Haeretikis lyk zou, at al times hes been
may offendit that Ordour, quhairbie is geuin the grace of lauchfull calling,
and administratione of the sacramentis, should be reverenced as ane sacrament:
Because this being granted it vil evidently appeir, that they ar na Pastoris,
bot Volfis, and Toddis, quha hes nocht cu^ in at the dur, bot as ze, have
violently done brokin the dyk of the scheipfald: zit all the treu Doctoris in
the kirk of god hes acknauledgit Ordour to be ane Sacrament, of the quhilk S.
Paul makis mentione vrittand to Timothy Neglect nocht the gift of prophecy,
1. Timo. 4.
quhilk is geuin to the be the onlayi^g of the ha^dis of the preistheid: in the
quhilk testimony they quha ar nocht villinglie blind, may collect al thingis
requesit to the definitione of ane sacrament. Caelu. li. 4. cap. 19. sect 31.
Zea Calvin zour master convict be the stre^th and evidence of the verity,
quhilk is sua expreslie contenit in goddis vord, is constranit to grant that
Ordour is ane treu and lau^hful sacrament, vith the quhilk al they aucht to be
indeuit, quha exerceisis the p^eaching of the vord, and administratione of the
sacramentis: albeit in their feu vordis he cuttis his auin throt, and declaris
may cleirlie that he being destitute of the said sacrament, is na minister of
goddis vord, bot ane falls Prophet, quha vithout al calling hes start up at his
auin hand: And as to zou quha denyis this sacrament, ze nocht only contravene
the manifest vord of god, the practice of the universal kirk ever sen the
Apostlis unto this present: and zour master Iohne Calvin: Bot mairouer ze
induce sic ane confusione amang zour selfis (sen ze make it lesum but onie
lauchful calling to vsurp the office of ane minister) that the lyk vas never
hard nor seen in the varld befoir: and gif I vald say that I var ane Minister,
and had als great pouar to preach, and administrat the sacramentis as ze have,
quhat argument can ze have aganis me? For I am als abil to schau quha gaif me
pouar, as Iohne knox vas abil to schau, quhen he vas demandit of his
authority: sua ze may se be taking auay of this sacrament, hou ze put the pure
flok of Christ in perpetual vauering, having na reul to discern betuix the
lauchful scheipherd, and the volf.


M. Vil thou approve all the d^greis of Ordore in the Papisticcal Kirk, as
thocht that var institute be our Master and Apostlis, sense our reformatione
allouis nane of the sam?


B. Gif ze can propone onie scripture, or determinatione of onie general
Concile, or zit the practeise of the universal kirk, aganis sik distinctione of
ordoris, I will do good vil to ansuere zou: bot I am assurit ze can do na sik
thing: As to zour reformationes it is hard to me to ground my faith vpone
them, because they consist cheiflie in pulling down, and denying of tha^
thingis quhilk befoir hes been vniuersalie established, and thairfoir I tak
lytill head of zour argument, quhilk leanis only vpone zour deformationis: For
I think for my auin part, I have als great authority as ze or onie minister of
Scotland, and am mair assurit of the assistance of the halie spirit nor ze ar:
Bot to conclude I meruel na thing that ze grant nocht the distinctione of the
degreis, and offices of kirk men, quha hes their ordinance of the halie Ghaist
speika^d in the halie kirk, 1. Tim. 3.
quhilk is the pillar and ground of treuthe: For gif ze grant the same, as al
good Christian man dois: ze se manifestly zour auin arrogance and
condemnatione: Because the last general Concile conuocat be the authority of
Christ our saluioure, as Heiche Priest in the Pape, hes denuncit al zour
venomous doctrine may pestiferus, and haeretical.


OF THE PAIPIS AVTHORITIE.
CHAP. XXI.
BAlcanqual. Quhat authority grantis thou unto the Paip?


B. Gifonie controversy of religione sal arise betuix Christian men being of
learning and estimatione, being abil to make ane greit diuisione, unless the
Concile of the general kirk be conuoca^: The biscop of Rome quha is Paip, hes
pouar and authority to assembil his Concile of the quhilk he is President as
Vicar of our saluiour Christ upon the earth, and vithout quhais co^firmatione
the same hes na effect.


Bal. Our master Christ is only head of the kirk, quhairfoir the authority
of the Paip is vsurpit, and tyrannical.


B. Zour proudnes lattis zou nocht vndirstand the verity: for Christ indeid is
only head of the kirk fra quhom all grace and spiritual giftis dois proceid
throuche the haill body of it, lyk as from the head, the moving and vital
strenth proceidis in the rest of the body. And in this manner nather the Paip,
nather zit onie mortal man can be head of the kirk: bot as to the exterioure
government and administratione thairof Christ, nocht being vith us in ane
corporal and sensibil manner, to quhom ve may have our recours in all materis and
difficulteis, he hes left us ane Vicare in his place, quhom in this respect ve
call the heid of the kirk as subordinat unto Christ, and depending on him:
quhairin he hes schauin his great lufe and Cheritie touardis his spous the kirk,
and touardis her pure flok, ^euing them in his place ane to quhom they mycht
ever have recurse, quhatsumeuer difficulty micht occur: And thaifoir sayis S.
Ambrose, speking of S. Petir (Christus reliquit nobis Petrum, tanquam vicatium
amoris sui) that is, Christ hes left us Petir in his place as vicare of his
lufe touardis us, quhom he constitute chief pastore under him selff, saying
Satan desyrit to riddil zou as quheit, Luc. 22.
bot I prayit for the Petir, that thy faith inlaik nocht: Of the quhilk ze may
vndirsta^d esilie, that suppose Christ be head of the kirk, zit that it is na
vyse repugnant that he have ane Vicar in his place for the exteriore
government as said is: lyk as the king is head of his realm, suppoise he have
ane lieutene^t under him: zour argument than as ze may persaue, is of na
strenth, for in ane manner Christ is callit head of the kirk, and in ane vthir
manner the Paip is callit head of the sam, lyk as ze zour selfis do call zour
ministeris, Pastoris of four kirkis (suppoise they feid them very evil) and
zit ze vill nocht deny bot Christ is Pastore of them: For it is all ane thing
to be callit pastore of the kirk, and head of the kirk, considering the
pastore man gyde and govern his floke: quhilk is the propir office and devtie
of the head in respect of the rest of the body.


Bal. Is nocht this ane sufficient argument to say, Christ only vas head of
the kirk, thairfoir Petir in nauyse micht be heid of the sam, nor be
consequence his successoris?


B. Gif this be ane sufficient argument, if follouis alsueil Christ is only
Pastore of zour four kirkis, thairfoir ze ar nocht pastoris of them: gif be
this argument ze prove that the Paip is nocht head of the kirk, ze may prove
lykuyse that ze ar nocht pastoris of zour four kirkis, quhilk I trou be very
treu: Because ze can schau na authority of goddis vord, apoyntand ane minister
to four kirkis.


Bal. Our Master Christ in the Euangell of Luc. Denyis, that their should be
onie head or Prince amang the Apostlis, Luc. 22.
as is in civil policy. For their it is vryttin. Their arase ane contentione
amang the Discipiles quhilk of them appeirit to be greitast, bot he said unto
them, The kingis of the nationis hes dominione over them, and they quha hes
pouar over them ar callit beneficent, zit ze ar nocht suae: Bot he quha is
gretar amang zou lat him be as he quha is les, and he quha is Prince lat him be
seruand to the rest.


B. This is ane commone place, quhairfra ze souke sophistical argumentis to
dissaue the ignorant pepill: to vit quhen as in onie place of scripture, the
abuse of ane good thing, (sic as is the authority of he preistheid quhairbie
unity is conseruit in the kirk of Christ) is reprouit, to collect that the
good thing, is altogidder denyit to have onie profitabil use in the society of
mankind, as in this place ze do may manifestly. For our may halie
saluioure Jesus Christ denyis nocht in this place, that their should be ane amang
the rest of the Apostlis, eftir his departing, of gretar Authority nor ane
vthir, bot only instructis him quha sal ressaue this praeeminent Authority,
that he Join nocht thairuith pride, ambitio^e, and lifting up of his heart,
thinkand that throuche nature, merit, or operatione of his auin, he is mekil
mair vorthie, nor the rest of his brethene: for saying [he quha vald be Prince
amang zou, lat him be as he quha seruis] it is necessar that ve grant sum of
the Apostlis to have been Prince, or ellis the instructione var superfluous,
quhil as na man is instructit: This is mair manifest be the exe^ple taken from
his auin humility, because their is na dout bot he vas Prince amang his
discipillis, zit he did vesche their feit, and ressonis in this place, quhilk
of the tua is gretar, quhidder he that sittis down, or he quha standis, and
makis service? bot I am in the middis of zou as he quha makis service: Sua as
he vas head of the Apostlis and did serve unto them, in lyk manner he requiris
that his Vicar and lieutene^t should be ane seruand to the rest, And that his
superiority should nocht tend to his auin propir glore, and vantage: bot only
to the profit and utility of his flok: abiding his reuard nocht fra his flok,
bot fra Christ, quha did apoynt him thairto: And thairfoir gif ze vil considder
the stylis of Emperouris, and kingis of the earth, and of the Papis of Rome
Vicaris to Christ, ze vil find them mekil discrepant: As the style of the
Emperoris is na thing, bot titillis of honor, Imperator, Dominator,
Triumphator: The Paip stylis him self may humlie Seruus seruorum Dei, having
good remembrance of the vordis of Christ quhilk ze have may faslie cited for
zour purpose.


Bal. Gif thou thinK that Petir vas Prince of the Apostlis, eftir the
ascensione of our Master Christ, thou art convict be manifest scripturis,
quhairin ve reid that Paul reprouit Petir at Anttochia, and says that he vas
na thing inferiore to the Cheifast Apostlis.


B. Zour argument is of na strenth, Sanct Paul reprouit S. Petir, tharfore
Sa^ct Petir vas nocht head of the Apostlis, Because the reproving of Sanct
Petir, apertenis nocht to his office quhidder it vas mair heich and excellent
in dignity, nor Sanct Paulis or nocht: bot only to his person ins^^ar as ane
particular membir of the kirk, bu^nd to the obseruatione of the Christian Ia^s
quharin he micht als sone fail as onie of the rest of the Apostlis, and sonar,
because Satan is may reddie to procure the fall of them, quhilk may be
gretast sklander and cause of ^uing to money: Siclyk ane singular and simpil
priest may reprove the maneris of the person, quha is lau^hfullie promouit to
be head of the kirk, having the authority of Christ vpone the face of the
earth. For the command of fraternal correctione is general and dois comprehend
al men in quhatsumeuer estait or deg^ie they be: For euin as men may failzie:
sua aucht they to be subject to correctione, Hiero. in 2. ad Galatas.
and admonition^ Porphyrius (as testifeis S. Hiero^ in this place) suppois he
vas ane Apostat from the Christian religione, zit vas nocht sua blind as ze,
bot gatherit albeit vra^gustlie, that S. Paul vas ane arroga^t man, because he
interprysit to reprove S. Petir quha vas his head: The matter of the supreme
Authority of S. Petir vas tha^ so cleir and manifest in the self, that euin
amang the Apostatis from the Christian religion, it could nocht be denyit: As
to the vthir part of zour obiectione, quhair ze say that S. Paul thocht him na
thing inferiore to the may great Apostlis: ^. cer. 11.
That testimony seruis na thing for zour purpose, because as the Ancient
vrittaris interpretis that place, Sum vald haif persuadit the Corinthianis,
that S. Paul vas only ane discipil, or scholar of the Apostlis, and nocht of
the sam rank vith the rest: For the quhilk cause he vrittis, that he vas ane
Apostil alsueil as they var, chosin their to be god immediately, and having
pouar to preach throuch the hail varld as they had, and that he had laborit
alsmekil for the setting forth, and pla^ting the Eua^gel as they had: and zit
nothuithsta^ding he acknauledgit S. Petir as principal, Gal. 2.
and chief head of the rest: Zea in the epistle to the Galatianis he testifeis
him self, that he passit up to Jerusalem to confer vith S. Petir, vthervyse al
his preaching had been in vain the quhilk sanct Hierom exponand sayis that the
preaching of sanct Paul had been of na authority, except it had been confirmit
be the authority of sanct. Petir: And S. Aug* vrittis in plane vordis that gif
S. Paul had nocht fund the Apostlis in lyff, vith quhom he micht haif conferrit
his Euangel, the kirk vald have geuin him na credeit at al: quhairof ze may
persaue that S. Paul acknauledgit the Authority of S. Petir, vtheruyse it had
nocht been necessar, for to get authority to his doctrine, to have conferrit
vith S Petir.


Bal. Thou that prete^dis the vndirstanding of Dialectik make me ane form of
necessar co^clusione groundit vpone onie place of the vrittin vord, quhairbie
thou may prove that S. Petir vas head, and ground of the kirk quhilk thou
callis bayth ane thing.


B. Quhat misteris me to make onie argument to prove that Petir vas the ground
of the kirk, sen Christ him self, callis him the ground, saying: (vpone this
rok I will buyld my kirk)? Gif ze culd schau the lyk testimony of scripture
that the kirk should be groundit vpone Iohne Calvin, or that Iohne Calvin should
have been callit the rok, vpone the quhilk Christ should buyld his kirk, I trou
ze vald cry loudar for the defense of the kirk of Geneua nor ve do for the ki^k
of Rome: Bot tha^kis to god their is na vord in the scripture nather of
Calvin, nor zit of knox.


Bal. Christ him self vas the rok, as vitnessis Paul, thairfoir Petir vas nocht
the rok vpone the quhilk the kirk should be buyldit.


B. Ze beir greit inuie to S. Petir, For sen Christ him self, callis him the
Rok vpone the quhilk his kirk should be buildit, ze may persaue ^^ur argument to
be may vane: euin as (...) man should say: Math. 5
Christ vas the licht of the (...) according to that testimony of scriptu^^
(...) the licht of the varld, thairfore the Apostlis vas nocht the licht of the
varld quhilk (...) expreslie to the scripturis [Ze ar the (...) of the varld:]
Christ is callit Petra because is the principal ground on the quhik the hail
kirk dependis, and ressauis (...) Petir is callit be Christ the rok, nocht as
the principal ground, bo^ as dependent from Christ, to quhom all the membirris
of the kirk aucht to be conioynit, gif they (...) be membirris of Christ, as I
have (...) cleirlie be goddis vord, and all the (...) vrittaris dois testify:
As amangis the rest, S. Hiero^ vrytand to Damasus Pa^^ of Rome, Quha ever sayis
he, Hiero^ in epistola ad damasum.
is nocht conioynit vith the, he is separat from Christ: And Optatus
Mileuitanus vrittand aganis the haeretik Parmenianus, Optat 2. co^tra Parmenia.
thou can nocht misknau sayis he that Petir vas head of the kirk: and sua
making ane enumeratione of all the Papis of Rome unto Siricius, quhilk vas in
his days: vith Siricius sayis he, ve ar co^ioynit in unity of doctrine:
producing that as ane infallibil argument of the co^iunctione vith Christ, and
befoir them bayth the ancient vrytar Tertullian in his buke, Tertul. de.
prescriptio
quhilk he callis de Praescriptionibus Hereticorum, quhair he callis Petir the
Rok of the kirk and confermes them to be in treu doctrine quha ar conioynit
vith the treu successors of Petir: And befoir him also Ireneus speking of the
kirk of Rome aganis the Valentinianis, To this kirk sayis he it is necessar
that all other kirk aggrie, because of the authority quhilk it hes above the
rest: And to be schort vith zou, zea can nocht be abil to schau in onie eage
sen Christ that ever they quha hes been conioynit vith the kirk of Rome hes
been estemit for haeretik is, or ^hay quha hes been separat from it, for (...)
Christianis, or Catholics: And sua be ane sufficient inductione, I may
conclude that ze quha hes separat zour seluis from it, ar heretikis, as ever al
ancient doctoris hes concludit befoir their days. And as ze aggrie not vith the
successoris of Petir, sua ze ar nocht conioynit vith the Rok vpone the quhilk
Christ did buyld his kirk saying: (Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.) Thou art ane rok and upon this rok I sal buyld my
kirk, for the Hebreu text of Sanct Mattheu hes tuyse Cephas vithoutsic
cha^geing as is in (...) and (...)


Dene. Durie. Thou knauis nocht quhat our master Christ understood be the roke
in that place, for it is the faith and confessione of Petir, suae that al
faithful Brethrene, confessand Christ to be the sone of the leuing god, is
equal to Petir be verteu of this testimony, and ground of the kirk na les nor
he.


B. I vat nocht in quhat scripture ze haif fund that the rok is callit the
confessione of the faith of S. Petir: And suppois it var callit sua, it seruis
nocht sua mekil to zour purpose as ze believe, because the confessione of the
faith of S. Petir aucht nocht to be separat from Petir, bot that the kirk should
be grou^dit on Petir as ane faithful membir of Christ, vith quhais faith the
rest of the membirris should aggrie: Nou schir that al Christianes ar nocht equal
to S. Petir be verteu of this testimony, of the vordis immediately follouing
it is may manifest. Because our may halie salu^our sayis unto him (to the I
sal gif the keyis of the kingdo me of heuin) quhilk ze vil nocht grant to
appertene to every man indifferently: And gif al Christianis in safar as they
confess Christ to be the sone of the leuing God, be the ground of the kirk: than
vald I dema^d of zou, quhair in dois consist the rest of the buylding?


D D. Thou art ane obstinat, stifnekkit Papist, and it var almous to hang the false theif knaif.


B. Schir gif al papistis merits to be hangit ze vald have been hanged lang
syne, and zour Coule upon zour head.


Bal. Quhy geuis thou nocht credit to Gregore ane Bischop of Rome, quha
refused the name of ane universal Bischop, saying, gif onie man vald be callit
ane universal Bischop, he is the foirrunnar of the Antich.


B. I meruel that ze ar nocht eschamit to cite S. Gregore, sen in his hail
Epistles he schauis may cleirlie hou he dois succeid to S. Petir, and hes
Authority above al other Bischopis, as amang the rest, reid the epistle to
Augustine quha vas send to Ingland for conuersione of the country, in the
quhilk he geuis dispensatione to contract marriage in certane degreis forbiddin
be the kirk: and in ane Epistle vryttin to Scotland concerning the observation
of Pasche day, amangis other thingis, he sayis, he meruellis hou that Scotland
being bot ane nuke of the varld, dar vsurp to celebrat pasche day, at ane other
time nor the universal kirk dois? Reid his Epistlis to the Bischopis bayth of
the Orient, and Occident: And I am assurit that ze vil be confundit of zour
impudency, as to tha vordis quhilk ze cite for zou, ze have never red nor
considerit the mening of them: Because he callis him ane universal Bischope,
that dois sua vsurp to him the name of ane Bischop, that he vil na man be
bischop by him, in the quhilk manner quhasoeuer callis him self ane universal
Bischop he is ane foirru^nar of the Antichrist suppoise in ane other manner ane
universal Bischop may be callit he quha hes authority over the universal kirk
and hes pouar to gather the universal kirk togidder, as in the general
Co^cilis, the quhilk pouar S. Petir, and al Bisch. of Rome, ever had, and
practiced sen the beginning to their days.


Bal. Ze lay ever for ane ground, that Petir vas bis^hop of Rome, bot I
afferme that he vas never in Rome, and thairfoir he culd nocht be Bischop of it.


B. And I affirm, he vas in Rome, Egesip de excidio Hierosoly.
bringand for me al ancient vryttaris, that ever hes v^yttin of this matter,
quha testifeis that he vas nocht only in Rome, Egesip. de excidio hierosoly*
Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
bot sched his blude in it, as Egesippus: Irenaeus lib. 3. contra Valentinos.
cap. 3. Tertullian de praescriptionibus Hae reticorum: Optatus lib. 2. contra
Parmenianu^ Augustine in ane thousand places, Tertu. lib. de praescri.
haeretici. Opta 2. co^tra Parm.
as aganis the Donatistis, Cresconius grammaticus, Parmenianus, and in his 165.
Epistle: S. Hierom de viris illustribus, quhair he testifeis that in the secund
zeir of Claudius, he did cum to Rome: This sam testifeis Eusebius, Aug.
epistol. 63. Hiero. de viris illust.
and all the rest. Nou schau me samekil as ane, of onie Authority, quha
testifeis that S. Petir vas never in Rome. Bot indeid I man lauch at zour greit
subtilitie: Sanct Petir vas never in Rome, thairfoir he had nocht Authority
over the kirk of Rome: for suppoise the antecedent var treu, the conclusione
dou na thing, as gif ze should say, the Q^ene of Ingland vas never in Ireland,
thairfoir s^ho vas never Queen of it, or as ze vald say, to cum neirar to zour
purpose, the minister hes nocht viseit ane of his four kirkis, thairfoir he hes
na authority above ^hame.


Bal. Petir vas Bischop at Antiochia, thairfoir he vas nocht Bischop of Rome.


B. Egesippus the ancient vryttar testifeis that be ane revelation maid unto
him, Egesipp. de excidio hierosoly.
he chan git his seat out of Antiochia to Rome, sua he did constitute Rome his
seat, in the quhilk he did sit as heid of the hail kirk, and in the quhilk he
did sched his blude for the Euangel.


OF THE PAPIS IVRISDICTION.
CHAP. XXI.
M. ThOu hes never seen na thing of the antiquity, quhilk gif thou had done,
thou vald have red hou that the fatheris of the saxt Concile of Carthage quhair
Augustine also vas present opposed them selfis to the Paip Bonifacius, And
quhen Faustinus quha vas the Paipis legate, for to defend his maisteris vsurpit
authority did produce ane decreit of the Concile of Nice, Council. Carthag. 6.
that it should be lesu^ in all ecclesiastical materis to make appellatione fra all
other bischopis and ordinar judges to the bischop of Rome, The fatheris of the
said Concile did convict him to be ane lear, and did schau cleirlie that na sic
thing vas to be fund in that Concile, having conferred sindrie exemplaris of
it, quhilkis they had gottin pairtlie out of Alexandria, partly out of
Constantinopil, sua thou may se that it is nocht ve only, that hes ganestand
the tyranny of zour Paip, bot Augustine also him self, and all the fatheris
quhilk vas in the Concile of Carthage.


B. Zour obiectione to gather it in feu vordis consistis in tua poyntis, the
ane is that the Bischopis of the saxt Concile of Carthage vald nocht permit
that onie appellatio^e should be maid out of Aphrik to the Bischop of Rome, The
other is that Faustinus the Papis legate did falsely allege the Concile of Nice
for his pairt. As to the first, befoir, I cum to the ansuere of zour argument,
I will schau hou in all aiges bayth befoir, and eftir that Concile, it hes been
practiced to make appellatione to the seat of Rome, As in the zeir of God ane
hundredth forty and tua Marcio^ in Po^tus, Epiph. haeres. 42.
being excommunicat be his Bischop com to Rome to be absoluit. And in the zeir
of God tua hundredth fyftie tua Fortunatus and faelix being deposed be S.
Cypriane did saill to Rome that they micht be absoluit be Cornelius. Cyp. lib.
1. epi. 3.
And a lytil eftir Basilides and Martialis Bischopis of Spanzie being deposed,
maid their appellatione to Stephanus than Bischop of Rome, and desyrit to be
restored be him. And in the zeir of God three hundredth and forty, Athanasius
being deposed be the Bischopis of the Orient, maid his appellatione to Julius
than Bischop of Rome, Theod. li. 2. cap. 4.
zea Julius keipand the ordinar discipline of the kirk commandit, that tha
Bischopis quha had deposed Athanasius should cum unto Rome, and that their the
hail cause should be intraitted. Sulp. lib. 2. hist.
And nocht lang eftir Priscillianus being deposed be the Bischopis of France
appelled to Damasus Paip of Rome. And in the four hundredth zeir of God, Greg.
turon. de rebus gest. Fra^c. Lib. 10.
Brixius the Bischop of Touris being deposed be the Bischopis of France also,
maid his appellatione to the Bischop of Rome, be quhom he vas restored agane.
Chrisost. ep. 1. ct 2. ad Innocent.
And about the sam aige Chrysostom being deposed from the sear of
Co^stantinopil be Theophilus and vtheris, maid his appellatione to Innocentius
than Bischop of Rome, and be him vas restored to his dignity agane. In the
zeir of God four hundredth fourscoir or thairbie, Theo ^epi. 1. ad Leon. S. Bas.
epi. 52.
Theodoretus being deposed, maid his appellatione to Leo, be quhom he vas also
restored agane. S. Basil vryttis to Athanas. that letteris be directed to the
Bischop of Rome that he may Judge of the hail controversy quhilk vas amang
their ha^dis, and for that cause that the Bischop of Rome deput sum to vissie
the hail kirkis of the Orient. Atha^^ apol 2.
And Athanasius him self vryttis that the bischopis of Greece passed to Julius,
and desyrit to be absolved be him. And Epiphanius, that Vrsatius, and Valens
passed to Rome for the lyk cause. Epi. here. 68.
And Theodoretus testifeis that Damasus Paip of Rome deposed Flauianus the
patriarche of Antiochia, Theo. li. 5. cap. 27.
and albeit Theodosius the Emperor, did defend Flauianus pairt, zit he send
him to Rome to trait and defend his auin cause. Socra. li. 5 cap. 15.
And Socrates vitnessis hou that Theophilus Bischop of Alexandria send his
legate unto the Bischop of Rome to make intercessione for Flauianus. And this
manner of Appellation vas sua commone that euin the infidelis acknauledgit the
same, quhairof I produce to zou the exempil of Paulus Samosatenus quha being
justly condemnit for heresy, and being commandit to depairt out of the seat
of Antiochia vald nocht obey, Eusebius. lib. 7. hist. ecclesiast. cap. 24*
bot had recourse to Aurelianus the Emperore, quha vald nocht tak the judgment
vpone him, bot co^ma^dit him to pas to the Bischop of Rome, quhom he kneu veil
aneuche, albeit he vas ane infidel to be his ordinar Judge. And eftiruart quhen
the Donatistis var co^demnit in Afrik they maid their appellatione to
Constantinus Magnus, quha vald nocht judge in the matter, bot commandit them to
pas to Melchiades Bischop of Rome, that he as lauchfull judge micht discern
vpone their cause, the quhilk matter being fully intracted be S. Augustine,
August. epis. 162.
he declairis planelie that Melchiades had pouar to Judge on them albeit they
had been iudgit befoir be the Bischopis of Aphrik. Of their and other lyk
exe^plis, quhilk I micht produce, Socr. lib. 3. cap. 7. Syn. calcedone^. act. 7
It may be may cleirlie persaued, hou bayth befoir and eftir the Concile of
Carthage the authority of the Bischop of Rome, hes been acknauledged to the
hail varld. Victor that vas neir the Apostlis days, ^useb. li. 5. eccles.
hist. cap. 4.
ane Bischop of Rome, ane may halie man, and martyr for the treu faith of
Christ, for confirmatione of his jurisdiction did excommunicat all the kirkis
of Asia, because they aggreit nocht vith the Roman kirk in the keiping of
Pasche day. And na man reproved him of onie vsurpit iurisdictio^e in that
point. Tertul. co^trapraxea^.
Tertull. aganis Praxeas testifeis that Zephyrinus did excommunicat the kirkis
of Asia, be ressone they folloued the heresy of Montanus. Zonaras in vita
Justinian.
Zonaras in the lyff of Iustiniane vryttis hou that the Bischop of Rome did
excommunicat the Bischopis of Dardania, And Innocentius excommunicat them quha
had iniustlie condemnit Chrysostom. Celestinus lykuyse excommunicat Nestorius:
finalie al other haeretikis almaist hes been excommunicat, and condemnit be the
bischop of Rome, Irenae. li. 3. contra Valent. cap. 3. Tertul. contra Praxea^
Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. cap. 25. 26. 27.
as Simon Magus be S. Petir. Valentinus and his discipillis be Higinus and
Pius. Cerdon and Marcion be Anicetus. The Montanistis be Zephirinus, Blastus
and his factione be Victor. The Nouatianis be Cornelius. The Sabellianis be the
Paip Dionysius. The Donatistis be Melchiades. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 36.
The Arrianis be Syluester. The Macedonianis be Damasus: The Pelagianis be
Innocentius, In Council. Nicen. In Council. Constant.
Zozimus, and Bonifacius, and sua forth of the rest, to Leo the ^ent quha
condemnit Lauter and all his of spring as Caluinistis, August. epist. 162.
Zuinglianis, Anabaptistis, and vtheris. Farther for acknauledgeing of this
iurisdictio^e, ve reid hou that the bischoppis of Rome had their ordinar
lieutennentis in the Orient, and in Afrik, Leo ep. 84.
in France, and other pairtis, as Leo the first had Anastasius bischop of
Thessalonica his lieute^nent throuche the haill Orie^t. Leo ep. 78.
And in the cu^trey of Aphrik he had for his lieutennent ane bischop callit
Potentius. Hormisda ad Salust.
And Hormisda maid Salustius the bischop of Suilzie his lieutennent in Spanzie.
Gregor. li. 4. epist. 52.
And Gregorius the first had the bischop of Arlis his lieutennent into France,
aluyse they reserved ever the gretast and may difficile materis to them
selfis, for the quhilk reasone they used ever to have the may learned men
about them, As in the time of Damasus S. Hier. vas callit for that cause unto
Rome to help the said Paip Damasus in resolutione of al materis bayth
concerning the Orie^t, Hierony. ep. ad Gerontiam de Monogamia.
and Occide^t, as he testifeis him self. And S. Augustine vas employed to help
the Paip Zozimus in resolutione of the Ecclesiastical materis in Afrik, and had
command of the Paip for that cause, to pas to Caesarea, as vryttis Possidius his
discipill: Possidius in vita Augustini.
Nou albeit aganis sua money plane testimoneis of their may learned and halie
vryttaris quha hes flourished in diverse aigis, be the quhilk the Paipis
Authority is may manifestly declarit, ze micht produce for zour part in the
contrare the opinione of sum certane bischopis gathered togidder in that
prouincial Co^cile of Carthage, al men of richt judgment vald think vith them
selfis, that zour cause should nocht be gretu^lie thairbie auanced, sen the private
opinione of sum bischopis can nocht preiudge the universal consent of the haill
kirk. Zit that ze have na occasion to gloir, I will schau that euin the
Fatheris of that Concile ar alluterlie repugnant to zou, and all zour
proceidingis: first, they bischopis callit not the Paip the Roman Antichrist,
nor zit separat them selfis from the co^munione vith the kirk of Rome, as ze
do, nor zit denied that the bischop of Rome had authority and Jurisdiction
above al other bischopis, as is cleir of S. August. quha vas their present as
deput be all the bischoppis of Numidia, quhen he vryttis in this manner. (In
ecclesia Romana semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit principatus] In the Roman
Kirk sayis he, August. ep. 162.
the supreme Chyre and Authority hes ever been keipit, And vrittand to
Innocentius vith the fatheris of the Mileuitane Concile (quia dominus te
gratiae suae praecipuo munere in sede Apostolica collocauit etc. August. epis.
102.
Pastoralem diligentiam quaesumus adhibere digneris:) That is because that god
be ane special gift of his gudnes, hes placed the in the Apostolik chyre, ve
beseik the to bestou the deutie, and diligence of ane pastore touard us, Heir
S. August. vith sa money other fatheris acknauledges the bischop of Rome for
their pastore, they being in Afrik and he in Italy. And vrittand to Bonifacius
he declairis planelie, August. li. 1. ad Bonifac. cap. 1.
that the cure of the universal kirk apertenis unto him, and that he is put as
in the vatche, to aualk over the hail kirk: Sua the quaestione vas nocht
amangis them of the authority of the bischop of Rome, Bot because ane priest
of Afrik callit Appiarius being justly condemnit be the bischopis of Aphrik,
had passed to Rome to Paip Zozimus, and geuin him vrang informationis, the said
bischopis thocht it nauyse profitabil for the ordour, and discipline of ^he
kirk, that sik appellationis should be maid in times cumming, Bot they beleuit,
that the authority of the bischop of Rome being ever granted to him, it vas
nocht profitabil for the kirk that the preistis and inferior clergy after they
var condemnit justly be their ordinar judges should be permitted to make
appellatione to Rome, be reasone their causes micht be mair perfytlie decernit
in their auin country, as having in it their vitnes present, and money having
inspectione of the haill cause, quhairbie all fraud and deceptione micht esilie
be auoydit, and that the grace of the halie Spreit, vald nocht be denied to the
Bischopis, and ordinar iuges to decerne sufficiently in sik causis: As amangis
the Romany it vas nocht lesum to make appellatione fra them quha var callit
Praefecti praetorio to the Emperor, because that they quha var put in sik
offices var iudgit to be indeuit vith sik qualiteis, that they vald nocht judge
vtheruyse nor the matter requyrit, And zit it var ane very evil argument to
prove heirfoir that the Emperoris had na iurisdictio^e above them quha var
callit Praefecti praetorio: the quhilk manner of ressoning ze use presently.
Mairatour to cloise all zour mouthis they beleuit nocht generally that na
appellatione should be maid to Rome as ze vald falsely allege, bot only that the
preistis and inferior clergy should not use onie sic appellatione: As to the
Bischopis Archebischopis and vtheris it vas nocht callit in dout bot it should be
lesum unto them to have recurse, and make appellatione to the seat of Rome.
For probatione of this, I produce unto zou the Actis of the Concile it self,
and the may plane vordis of S. Augustine, August. epis. 101.
and the hail Concile to Bonifacius [tuae venerationi insinuare debemus quae
vtrorumque concordia terminata sunt, vt Romam liceat episcopis prouocare, and
vt clericorum causae apud suarum prouinciarum episcopos finiantur] that is, Ve
aucht to make intimatione to zour vorship of tha thingis quhilk ar decernit and
aggreit on be bayth the parteis, that the bischopis may make their appellationis
to Rome, and that the causes of the inferiore clergy be finalie decidit be
their aui^ Bischopis: quhat thing can be mair cleir and manifest aganis zou for
the acknauledging of the Papis authority? Gif ze follou the fut stoppis of the
fatheris of this Concile, as ze vald appeir to do, quhy suffer ze not zour
bischopis quhom ze condem iniustlie, make appellatione to the Paip of Rome, as
did the fatheris of this Concile? Last of al, gif they bischopis of Aphrik did
onie thing quhilk micht do praeiudice in quhatsumeuer point to the Authority
of the seat of Rome, efteruart they changed their opinione, and condemnit
quhatsumeuer had been done quhilk did derogat to the priuilegis of that seat,
as is manifest of the Epistle of Bonifacius the secund to Eulalius. And this
far concerning the first part of zour obiectione. As to the secund pairt of it,
Bonifa. ep. ad Eulalium.
quhair ze say that Faustinus quha vas Bonifacius legate, did produce for his
part ane canon of the Concile of Nice, that appellatione should be granted from
al bischopis to the bischop of Rome, and that he vas convicted to be ane lear,
ze schau zour self to have lytil regard unto the verity, sua that ze may say
onie thing quhilk may derogate to the Authority of the Paip of Rome: first
Faustinus vas nocht convicted to be ane lear, bot the fatheris of that Concile
ansuerit to him vith all modesty, that they did find na sik thing in the
Concile of Nice. And in that sam form vreit to the Paip of Rome desyring the
matter to be inquirit, and schauand them selfis villing to obey thairto, gif it
culd be fund in the said Concile: Aluyse the quaestione being as said is, nocht
general of all appellatione, bot only of the appellatione of the inferiore
clergy. Farther I say unto zou, that the Paipis legate Faustinus vas nocht
dis^auit norzit producit onie thing falsely, bot that the fatheris of that
Prouincial Concile, because they had nocht perfyt exemplaris of the Co^cile of
Nice, Athanas. Apol. 2.
var begylit because that the exe^plaris of the kirk of Co^sta^tinopil and
Alexandria var corrupted be the Arrianis, Theod. lib. 2. cap. 4.
as is manifest of Athanas. in his secu^d Apology, Sozom. li. 3. cap. 8.
and of Theodoret. Socrates, Sozom. And Julius, quha vas bot tuentie zeiris
eftir the Concile of Nice, Iul. epi. ad Orien. 1
vreitand to the bischopis of the Orient dois cite that self sam decreit of the
Concile of Nice, that in all great materis, appellatione may be maid to the
seat of Rome, Athanasius epis. ad Mar.
the quhilk Canon, Zozimus efteruart did allege vrytand to the bischopis of
Aphrik: and Athanasius lamentis gretumlie that the Canonis of the Concile of
Nice var corrupted be the Arrianis, and desyris the Paip to send him ane treu
exemplar of them quhairof it is may cleir that the haill Concile of Nice vas
better keipit in Rome nor in Alexandria or Constantinopil, and that Julius quha
vas tuentie zeiris eftir, kne^ better the decreis of the said concile nor the
bischopis of Aphrik quha vas money zeiris efer it, kneu the same: It being
nauyse liklie that Julius vald have cited falsely onie decreit of that Concile,
cheiflie sen Athanasius, and money vtheris var zit leuand quha had been their
present, and be quhom he vald have been esilie convicted, sua Faustinus vas
nauyse deceauit, as ze falsely allege, hauand in reddines to produce the Canon
of the Concile of Nice, in the quhilk the Paip of Rome is acknauledged for
successor of Petir, and to have authority, to dispone upon quhatsumeuer
materis that apertenis to the discipline, and ordour of the kirk, and to change
al thingis quhilk be not veil constitute be inferioris. Co^c. Nic. Cano^. 39.
The vordis of the concile ar their [Consideret Patriarcha ea quae
archiepiscopi, and episcopi in suis prouincijs faciunt, and si quid reperiat
secus quam oportet, immutet and disponat prout sibi videatur, siquidem ipse est
Pater omninm, and illi Filij eius, sicut ille qui tenet sedem Romae, caput est,
and princeps omnium Patriacharum, and illi data est potestas in vniuersam
Ecclesiam Christianam, and quicunque contradixerit, a synodo excommunicetur]
Lat the Patriache considder tha thingis quhilk the Archebischopis And Bischopis
dois in their prouincis, and gif he find onie thing vtheruyse done than
becummis, lat him change, and dispone it as he thinkis good, because he is the
father of them al, and they ar his sonis, as he quha occupeis the seat of
Rome, is head and prince of all the Patriarchis, and pouar is geuin him over the
hail kirk of Christ, and quhatsumeuer he be that ganesayis lat him be
excommunicat be this assembly: Sua ze should be eschamed ofzour Master Calvin,
quha throuch plane ignorance, and malice, hes brocht zou in sua greit, darkness
of volful ignorance that nou being convicted ze vat not quhat to say, quhairof
I meruel not mekil sen zour Master him self being brocht in vauering be his
auin proud and arrogant judgment, vas na les perplex in this matter nor ze ar:
Calvin. ca. 7. lib. 4. Institut.
As is manifest to them al quha reidis the seuint chapture of the fourt buk of
his institutions, for they vil persaue cleirlie that he vattis not quhat he
sayis, because in the nynt sectione he vrittis that Zozimus Paip of Rome quha
send Faustinus to that Concile of Aphrik to defend his vsurpit Sect. 9.
authority may mischantlie, and impudentlie cited the Concile of Sardis, for
the Concile of Nice, quhairin first he leis and secundlie he vald maliciously
deceive the reidar, I have schauin his lesing afoir be produceing the vordis of
the Concile of Nice quhilk Zozimus did allege: he deceauis the reidar because
hevald appeir to make the Concile of Sardis of na Authority, quhill as the self
sam fatheris, quhilk vas at the Concile of Nice, var present in the concile of
Sardis, insafar that they ^ua conciles ar esteemed as ane, because at it their
vas na neu decreit maid, bot the decreittis of the Concile of Nice only
confirmed be the sam fatheris quha var at the Concile of Nice: Sua Calvin
geuis sufficient testimony aganis him self that the fatheris of the Concile of
Nice acknauleaged the Authority of the seat of Rome, and that appellatione
should be maid to that seat from al other bischopis, Canon. 3. and 4.
the vordis of the Concile ar their [Si episcopus Iudicatus fuerit, and
putauerit se habere bonam causam, vt scribatur ab his qui causam examinauerunt
Romano pontifici, vt si indicauerit renouandum esse iudicium, renouetur, and
det iudices, and vt alter episcopus ante determinationem litis in illius
Cathedra non constituatur]. 1. Gif ane bischop be co^demnit, and believe that he
hes ane richteous cause that vrittingis be direct be them quha hes tryit the
cause to the bischop of Rome, that gif he think that the judgment be reneuit, it
may be reneuit, and he may apoynt judges, and that na other bischop be placit
in his chyre, befoir the decisione of the pley: Deny nougif ze can, bot zour
Master Calvin is ane manifest deceauer, and that ze, and he bayth opposes
zour selfis to the determinatione of they Fatheris quha var first gathered at
the Concile of Nice, And thaireftir at the Co^cile of Sardis quhilk as Calvin
him self gra^tis did acknaulege the Authority of the Bischop of Rome above al
other bischopis. Call. lib. 4. inslit. cap. 7. sect. 17.
In his seui^tein sectione, he affirms that Phocas the Emperor did make
Bonifacius the third, head of the kirk, quhilk authority Gregorius his
praedicessor vald nocht desire, considder hou this aggreis vith that quhilk he
said befoir that the Concile of Sardis aknauledgit the bischop of Rome to be
head of the kitk or to have authority above al other bischopis, and nou that
his authority did begi^ at Phocas the Emperor, quha vas a lang time eftir the
said concile: Their ar the Oracles of zour neu spirit quha inspyrit Iohne
Calvin to repugne sua manifestly unto him self, and unto the may manifest
verity. For money Emperoris befoir Phocas acknauledget the kirk of Rome to
have authority above alvthir kirkis, Eusebius. li. 7 ecc^ss. hist. cap. 24.
As Aurelianus and Co^stantinus as I have schauin befoir: Lib. 1. de summa
Triuitate, and fide catholica.
And Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius qua declaris in their lauis, that
they vil al men embrace that religione, quhilk is embraced be Damasus bischop
of Rome (Omnes quos clementiae nostrae regit imperium in religione Damasi esse
volumus) Ve vil al them quha ar gouernit be the impyre of our clemency to be
of that religione quhilk Damasus professis. Justin. in ep. ad Ioa^nem I'ont.
And Justinian the Emperor vrittand to the bischop of Rome, Romans and in
principio auth^nt.
[Omnes sacerdotes, and Episcopos orientis vestrae sanctitati vnire, and
subiicere properamus, quae caput est omnium sanctarum Ecclesiarum] ve ar
haistand us to Join in union and subiectione all the preistis and bischopis of
the orient to zour halines quhilk is head of all the halie kirkis. And in ane
other place, (su^mi po^tificis apicem apud Romanam Ecclesiam esse nemo est qui
dubitet) Their is na man quha douttis bot the supreme authority of the hie
priest abydis in the kirk of Rome. And Vale^tinianus, Vale^tinianus and
Martianus epist. ad Leonem.
and Martianus vryttand to leo than Biscop of Rome (tuam sanctitatem
principatum in Episcopatu diuinae fidei possidentem literis in principio iustum
credimus esse alloquendam.) Ve think it just in the beginning tovrit to zour
halines quha hes the principality in the estait of bischopisquha makis
professione of the treu faith: It vas nocht Phocas than, quha maid the Bischop
of Rome head of the kirk as Calvin may impudentlie affermes. Mairatour quhen
Calvin sayis, that the bischop Gregorius quha vas befoir Bonifacius desyrit
not sik authority to be granted unto him, he leis nales impude^tlie nor he did
befoir, it being may certane that he professed him self to have pouar, and
authority above al vthir bischopis, as is manifest of his seuintie nynt
epistle, (Quae sine Episcopo Romano in Conciliis decernuntur irrita sunt,) I.
Greg. ep. 79.
Al thingis quhilk ar decernit be the Concilis vithout the bischop of Rome, ar
vithout effect. And (omnes arduae quaestiones ad sedem* Apostolicam sunt
referendae] al difficil quaestionis aucht to be referrit to the Apostolik seat:
Greg. li. 2. epist. 46.
And he threatnes the pane of excommunicatione, gif onie do vtheruyse. And
agane, (Nescio quis Episcopus non sit subiectus sedi Apostolicae vbi culpa
inuenitur.) I. I knau not quhat bischop is not subject to the Apostolik seat,
Lib. 2. ep. 64.
gif onie fault be fund in him. And Petrus Martyr him self vas co^stranit to
grant that as concerning Jurisdiction, Petrus Martyr in cap. 8. lud.
Gregorius had pouar and authority above al other bischopis, albeit he vald
not tak to him self the name of ane universal bischop: Quhairof ze may
vndirstand hou zour Prophetis aggreis amang them selfis, and hou impudentlie
zour master Calvin leis, quhen he sayis that the Authority of the bischop of
Rome began at Phocas the Emperore, and that Gregorius ascryuit not to him self
authority above al other bischopis: to be scho^t vith zou I praetermit money
other thingis of the discourse of zour master Calvin concerning this matter,
quhairbie I micht csilie schau may manifestly his proudnes, malice, and
ignorance, as quhen he sayis that the Concile of Nice vas haldin under the Pape
Julius, quhilk is ane manifest lesing, and repugnant to al treu historeis, se^
it vas haldin under Syluester, as is cleir of the Concile it self, and of the
letteris of Athanasius to Marcus bischop of Rome, and of the Concile of Rome,
quhilk vas haldin be Siluester eftir the Concile of Nice, sua gif Siluester
quha praeceidit Julius leuit eftir the Concile of Nice, the Co^cile of Nice
could not be haldin under Julius, as he affermes. In lyk manner quhen he vryttis
that Athanasius vas praesident in the Concile of Nice, Call. lib. 4. inst. cap.
7. sect. 1.
he leis na les than befoir, because as is manifest of the actis of the Concile,
Hosius vas praesident of it in the name of Siluester, hauand vith him Vitus,
and Vincentius. And Athanasius vas not bischop at that time, bot ane feu zeiris
thaireftir succeidit to Alexander Bischop of Alexandria: Quhen he affermes that
the Concile of Nice did not acknaulege the authority of the bischop of Rome,
Calvin ibid.
nor zit the Concile of Constantinopil, he leis also, because of the actis of
bayth the Conciles the contrare is manifest: for the fatheris of the Concile of
Nice desyris confirmatione of Siluester, and the Concile of Co^sta^tinople
acknauleged Damasus for the head of the kirk. Quhen he sayis that the Conciles
of Calcedon, and Ephesus acknauleged the authority of the bischop of Rome
above al other bischopis, bot that the bischopis of Rome did obtene that be
ambitione or ane certane privilege, he affirms that quhilk he can not be abil
to prove, and repugnis to al historeis: And albeit the bischopis of Rome had
been ambitious as he alleagis, zit it vald have been very hard to them to
persuade the hail Orient to acknaulege their authority except it had been
lauchful, and ever acknauleged befoir: To pretermit that Leo Magnus quha vas
acknauleged in the Concile of Calcedon vas ane may learned, and halie man, as
his vrytingis testifeis, and all the vryttaris of that aige, quhais halines God
him self did miraculouslie confirm, as quhen Atila, quha callit him self
(flagellum Dei) did exerceise may horribil cruelty in sindrie pairtis, and
vas deliberat to come to the town of Rome to destroy it, Leo Magnus than
bischop cled in his Pontifical vithout onie kind of armore, albeit the tyrane
vas aluterlie enraged did meit him at the valter of Po, and comma^dit him to
gang abak, quhilk incontinent he did becu^ming forzetful of his accustumed rage
and cruelty, quha estiruart being asked of ane of his company quhat moved
him, quha had dantoned sa money people to feir samekil ane unarmed priest, he
ausuered that he sau vith Leo Magnus ane Angel, and ane suerd in his hand quha
bosted to slay him gif he myndit to pas onie farther, sua na man ever befoir
Iohne Calvin accused Leo of ambitione. And as to Celestinus under quhom the
Concile of Ephesus vas haldin, hou learned, and halie ane man he vas it may be
knauin of sanct Augustine, quha vrait unto him, and of Cyrillus Alexandrinus
quha vas praesident of the Concile in his name, And of Prosper Aquitaneus quha
vas his secreitar: and ve for our pairt have ane sufficient testimony of the
cair, and solicitude quhilk he had of us that ve should not be corrupted be the
heresy of Pelagius, for the quhilk cause he send to us the may halie and
learned Palladius, as prosper vitnessis: Prosper co^tra collat.
And zit Iohne Calvin takis on him the bauldnes to accuse him of ambitione,
quhilk na man ever did befoir him: Not being content to have falsely accused
the halie men Leo and Celestinus of ambitione, he taxis also of the lyk crime
the may godly man Innocentius quha preceidit them bayth, Calvin li. 4.
instit. cap. 7. sect. 15.
Albeit S. Augustine, and all the fatheris of that aige did honor him vith al
reverence, and desyrit that he should confirm the decreis, quhilk they had
established in their Conciles. And gif Innocentius var leuand this day, he vald
meruel mekil to se zou, quha ar his native country men, he being ane Scottisman
borne as ze ar, to be sua addicted to the private judgment, and opinione of
Iohne Calvin, and to have left that religione quhilk vas taucht in the Realm
of Scotland quhen he vas borne in it, and quhilk he mentened as chief pastore,
and head of the universal kirk, being chosin thairto not be ambition, he being
borne sua far from the town of Rome, bot be his singular verteu, and halines
of life. And this far I have spokin being constranit be the importunity of zour
Prophet, and master Iohne Calvin: gif ze have onie other thing to say aganis
the Jurisdiction of the Paip of Rome, produce it.


M. Thou art sua addicted to the Pape, that it is bot tint time to use ^nie
farther ressone aganis the, zit sense thou speikis sua bauldlie I will propose
ane cleir, and manifest argument aganis the Jurisdiction of the Pape: Quhen
the Donatistis maid their appellatione from the Bischopis of Afrik to the
Emperore Constantinus Magnus, and being remitted be him to Melc^iades Bischop
of Rome, albeit the bischop of Rome had pronunced the sentence aganis them,
zit they maid ane neu appellatione to the bischop of Arlis in France, quhilk
they vald not have done, gif the Bischop of Rome had had supreme authority
above al other Bischopis.


B. This is ane of the great gunnis of zour Master Iohne Calvin, Call. lib. 4.
cap. 7. sect. 10.
To the quhilk S. Augustine, Optatus Mileuitanus, and other ancient vryttaris
hes ansuered money hundredth zeiris se^syne, Aug. ^pi. 162. Optatus Mileuitanus
lib. I. and 2. co^tra Parme nianum.
that the Donatistis did pervert the ordore and discipline of the kirk be their
importunity, And that eftir the decreit of Melchiades their vas na farther
judgment on the earth to be lukit for: sua as vryttis S. August. the Emperor
being ouercummit be their importunity, and having ane greit desire of their
returning to the kirk agane, grantit to them that the bischop of Arlis vith
other bischopis of France micht judge of their cause. Gif they had maid their
appellatione to onie reformed kirk lyk zouris quhilk at that time had not
acknauleged the authority of the bischop of Rome above al other Bischopis,
zour argument vald have appeired perchance of sum probability, botve reid of
na sik thing in onie historiographore: Nou as to the bischop of Arlis, he
arrogat not unto him self to Judge of that thing, quhilk had been decreited
befoir in Rome, bot only be command of the bischop of Rome, and having hoip of
the conuersione of the Donatistis, zit they var not content of his judgment bot
maid ane neu appellatione to the Emperore: Sua gif zour argument hes onie
force, The Emperore should be supreme judge to al controversy of Religione,
quhilk is repugnant to al scripturis, to al antiquity, and to al reasone, zea
to zour doctrine also, quha vil have na other Judge bot only the vryttin vord,
quhilk can nather heir nor speik.


OF THE CONTINVAL SVCcessione of the Paipis.
CHAP. XXII.
BRand. Quhat sayis thou than of the scho Paip Ioanna quha buir ane child being
in processione of the quhilk Platina quha vrait the Paipis lyuis makis
mentione, had scho lauchfull authority and jurisdiction over the universal
Kirk,


B. I. persaue it is treu quhilk the ancient vryttar Nazia^zenus testifeis,
that haeretik is ar lyk the Fleis, quha vsis to pas by all tha partis quhilk ar
healthsum, and quhair they find onie corruptione their they use to repose
them, euin sua do ze, that in all thing quhilk Platina hes vryttin, ze trou na
other thing, bot only that quhilk is vryttin of the scho Paip: And suppose it
had been sua, ze should nocht skar at the matter, because ze have ane scho Paip
besyd zou for head of the kirk of Ingland: Nou suppois that it var treu quilk
ze allege, I vat nocht quhat ze vald gather thairof: Because it is may esie
to ansuere that during that time, the seat of Rome hes vakit be ressone that
ane voman is nocht capabill of ordore, nor government of the Kirk: Zit I
ansuere to zou that is may falls, that ever sik ane voman sat in the seat of
Rome, quhilk I will schau to zou be manifest demonstratione: first because he
quha vas author of that fabil callit Martinus Polonus, quhom Platina did
follou, vryttis the history in sik manner, that in it self it contenis may
manifest contrarieteis, sua the history it self seruis for ane sufficient
prove of the vanity thairof, first he vryttis (Ioanna Angla natione, nata
moguntij,) that is as ze vald say in scottis, Ionet ane ingleiss voman of
natione, borne in heiche Almanie, in ane town callit Moguntium hou could scho
be ane Ingliss voman and borne in Almanie? he passis forduart that scho studeit
in Athenis, and become ane very lernit voman, In the quhilk time their vas na
professione of letteris their at al, the town of Athenis being alluterlie
destroyit: thaireftir he vrittis that scho come to Rome, and vas chosin, Paip,
Euin as the Italianis had been sua blait, that they culd nocht discern betuix
ane man and ane voman: And that the Papis var chosin sua esilie vithout
inquisitione of their cuntreyis, and vithout great experience of their maneris,
and behavior in all thingis: And to pretermit all their thingis Considering the
bischop of Rome vsis to consecrate bischopis to dispense in sum lauis, and
exerceise sik vthir actis of jurisdiction, gif ever their had been ane voman
in that seat, eftir her death, the matter being discouerit, their had follouit
ane greit confusione in the kirk, and al thingis had been annullit, quhilk scho
had done: Be ressone that ane voman hes nocht pouar to exerceise onie sik
jurisdiction, bot of this ve find na mentione at all, sua the hail matter is
prouin to be falls: And to put zou to ^ilence in times cumming, Platina and
vtheris q^ha vryttis of this, sayis, that scho vas in the zeir of God 850, or
thairby betuix Leo the fourt and Benedictus the third. Bot Anastasius
Bibliothecar of the kirk of Rome, quha vas than present, vryttis that eftir the
death of Leo the fourt, ane greit conuention being maid, Benedictus the third
vas chosin immediately ^ftir him, sua thar zour Ionet hes na place quhair scho
may sit. And I remember I red in sum Catholic vryttaris, that in sum
bibliothekis, as in the bibliothec of the duke of Florence, quhair their is
auld vryttin bukis of the succession of the Paipis of Rome, that in them after
Leo the fourt, immediately is fund Benedictus the third: This appeirandlie is
sufficient to the refutatione of zour scho Paip: And zit I meruel of zou that are ministeris, quha ar sua rigorus in this part, For ze micht have vsit this
argument to prove that the ministeris should have vyssis, because their could
nocht ane voman have place in the kirk of Rome, unless scho had been the Papis
vyff, Bot nou gif ze sal heir patiently ^ vill make ane Catalog of all the
Paipis, quhilk hes been in Rome, desyring zou to schau me the interruptione of
the continual successione of ane to another, they all being men: sua that zour
impudent leing may be knauin to the varld, quha alvayis laboris to bring zour
miserabill floke in hetret of the Authority of the bischop of Rome, quha hes
condemnit al hereseis unto this day including zouris vith the rest.


PONTIFICES SVMMI, THE PAPIS
Jesus Christ the only head of the kirk.
S. Petir, Apostle and martyr, the vicar of Jesus Christ. S. Cleme^s martyr the
lanchful successor to sanct Petir. S. Linus mart. S. Cletus, mart. S.
Anacletus, mart. S. Euaristus, mart.
Anno Domini. 100.
S. Alexander. I. mart. S. Sixtus. I. mart. S. Thelesphorus, mar. S. Higinus,
mart. S. Pius. I. mart. S. Anicetus, mart. S. Soter, mart. S. Eleutherius,
mart. S. Victor. I. mart. S. Zephirinus, mart.
Anno Domini. 200.
S. Calixtus. I. mart. S. Vrbanus. I. mart. S. Pontianus, mart. S. Antherus,
mart. S. Fabianus, mart. S. Cornelius, mart. S. Lucius. I. mart. S. Stephanus.
I. mart. S. Sixtus. 2. mart. S. Dionysius. I. mart. S. Faelix. I. mart. S.
Eutychianus, mart. S. Caius, mart. S. Marcellus, mart.
Anno Domini. 300.
S. Eusebius, mart. S. Melchiades, mart. S. Siluester. I. S. Marcus. S. Julius,
I. S. Liberius. S. Faelix. 2. S. Damasus. S. Siricius. S. Anastasius.
Anno Domini. 400.
S. Innocentius. I. S. Zozimus. S. Bonifacius. I. S. Celestinus. I. S. sixtus.
3. S. Leo magnus. S. Hilarious. s. Simplicius. S. Felix. 3. S. Gelasius. I. S.
Anastasius. 2. S. Symmachus.
Anno Domini. 500.
S. Ioannes. I. mart. S. Faelix. 4. Bonifacius 2. S. Ioannes 2. s. Agapetus. s.
Syluerius mart. Vigilius. s. Pelagius I. s. Ioannes 3. s. Benedictus I. s.
Pelagius 2. s. Gregorius magnus.
Anno Domini. 600.
Sabinianus. s. Bonifacius 3. s. Bonifacius 4. s. Deusdedit 2. Bonifacius. 5.
Honorius I. seuerinus. Ioannes. 4. Theodorus. I. s. Martinus. I. s. Eugenius.
I. Vitalianus. Adeodatus. Domnus Agatho. s. Leo. 2. Benedictus. 2. Ioannes 5.
canon Sergius. I.
Amno Domini. 700.
Ioannes. 6. Ioannes. 7. sisinnius. Constantinus. s. Gregorius. 2. s.
Gregorius. 3. Zacharias. I. stephanus. 2. stephanus. 3. Paulus. I. stephanus.
4. Adrianus. I. Leo. 3.
Anno Domini. 800.
Stephanus. 5. Paschalis. I. Eugenius. 2. Valentinus. Gregorius. 4. Sergius. 2.
Leo. 4. Benedictus. 3. Nicolaus. I. Adrianus. 2. Ioannes. 8. Martinus. 2.
Adrianus. 3. stephanus. 6. Formosus. Bonifacius. 6. stephanus. 7. Theodorus. 2.
Ioannes. 9. Benedictus. 4.
Anno Domini. 900.
Leo. 5. Christophorus. I. Sergius. 3. Anastasius. 2. Lando. Ioannes. 10. Leo.
6. Stephanus. 8. Ioannes. 11. Leo. 7. Stephans. 9. Marrinus. 3. Agapetus. 2.
Ioannes. 12. Leo. 8. Ioannes. 13. Domnus. Benedictus, 5. Bonifacius, 7.
Benedictus, 6. Ioannes, 14. Ioannes, 15. Ioannes, 16. Gregorius, 5. Siluester,
2.
Anno Domini. 1000.
Ioannes, 17. Ioannes, 18. Sergius, 4. Benedictus, 7. Ioannes, 19. Benedictus,
8. Gregorius, 6. Clemens, 2. Damasus, 2. Leo, 9. Victor, 2. Stephanus, 10.
Nicolaus, 2. Alexander, 2. Gregorius, 7. Victor, 3. Vrbanus, 2. Paschalis, 2.
Anno Domini. 1100.
s. Gelasius, 2. s. Calixtus. s. Honorius, 2. s. Innocentius, 2. Celestinus. 2.
Lucius, 2. Eugenius, 3. Anastasius, 3. Adrianus, 4. Alexander 3. Lucius, 3.
Vrbanus, 3. Gregorius, 8. Clemens, 4. Celestinus, 3. Innocentius, 3.
Anno Domini. 1200
Honorius, 3. Gregorius, 9. Celestinus, 4. Innocentius, 4. Alexander, 4.
Vrbanus, 4. Clemens, 4. Gregorius, 10. Innocentius 9. Adrianus 5. Ioannes, 20.
Nicolaus, 3. Martinus, 4. Honorius, 4. Nicolaus, 4. s. Celestinus, 5.
Bonifacius, 8.
Anno domini. 1300.
Benedictus, 9. Clemens, 5. Ioannes, 21. Benedictus, 10. Clemens. 6. Vrbanus,
5. Gregorius II. Vrbanus, 6. Bonifacius, 9.
Anno Domini. 1400.
Innocentius, 7. Gregorius, 12. Alexander, 5. Ioannes, 22. Eugenius, 4.
Nicolaus, 5. Calixtus, 3. Pius, 2. Paulus, 2. Sixtus, 4. Innocentius, 8.
Alexander, 6.
Anno Domini, 1500.
Pius, 3. Julius. 2. Leo, 10. Adrianus, 6. Clemens, 7. Paulus, 3. Julius, 3.
Marcellus, 2. Paulus, 4. Pius, 4. Pius, 5. Gregorius 13.
Quha is Paip this day. And this is the continual successione of the bischopis
of Rome from S. Petir to our days, quhilk as vryttis S. Augustine, August. de
vt ilitate crede^di.
and other ancient Doctoris, al haeretikis notvithstanding they have ever been
barking aganis it, culd never ouercum it in onie vay: Bot be the contrare they
have ever been vincused and suppressed, as ze vith the rest vil be sum day, and
no^hwithsta^ding al zour railling and crying out aganis the Roman Antichrist,
zit the Paip remanis ever still in Rome, and hes als great, ze gretar
jurisdiction nor he had the first day that Lauter begane to preach: Quhat gif
zeculd schau the lyk successione in the kirk of Geneua? Bot thank is to God al
zour successione ather in the kirk of Geneua, or vthir kirkis hes ever been
inuisibil to our days: And I hoip in God that vithin ane schort space of time,
it sal be maid als inuisibil agane, as gif it var in the ground of the loche
of Geneua.

B. It beheuit the nocht only to have schauin the continual successione of ane
Paip unto another, bot also that ane succeidit to another in lyk purity of
doctrine, and halines of life vith his predicessore, quhil as be the contrare
they have al been vickit men, sum magicianis, sum adulteraris and polluted vith
al kind of vices.


B. As to the purity of doctrine it is manifest to al them quha are not
altogidder ignorant of the Ecclesiastical historeis that, the continuance
thairof hes been conioynit vith the continual succession of Pa^pis lauchfullie
ordiuit and promouit be vert^^ of Christis promeis to S. Petir, and his
successione in name of the hail kirk: Farther the successione of lauchful
pastoris, according to the custume and use of the Roman Kirk, and other
ancient kirkis, hes necessarlie conioynit vith it the succession of doctrine in
lyk manner, because that this vas ane ancient custume may diligently obseruit,
that the names of them only quha had constantly to the end remanit in the
profession of the faith, had their names keipit in the commone tabillis of the
kirk (quhilk be the greikis var callit (...)) bot as the experience teachis us,
all the names of the bischopis of Rome hes been inrollit in the said com moan
tabillis of the kirk of Rome, quhairof it is necessarlie gatherit, that they
have al professit ane doctrine, and that quha ever hes been chosin in that
kirk, hes approuit the doctrine and religione of his predicessore: vtheruyse he
vald nocht have consentit that the name of his predicessore should have been
inrollit in the said manner, nor zitvald have acknauled git him self as
successor to him, quha had maid professione of falls doctrine: As be exempil
Master Iohne douglas vald nocht say that he succeidit to the bischop of
Sanctandrois, quhilk vas befoir him, nor vald nocht acknauledge him as ane
lauchful bischop: Nor zit Master James Boyd vil say that he succeidis to the
bischop of Glasgou: Nor Master David Cunynghame to the Bischop of Abirdene,
bot they vil say that every ane of them is the first lauchful bischop that
ever sat in tha feattis: quhairbie ze may persaue may cleirlie that the
successione of personis can nocht be keipit in sik manner, as it hes been keipit
in the Roman kirk. vithout successione in doctrine: gif ze have red the ancient
vryttaris, ze can nocht misknau, hou that in the kirk of Consta^tinopil, he
quha follouit Macedonius, vald nocht acknauledge him self as successore to him,
and hou that in the tabil of the kirk of Constantinopil, the name of Macedonius
can nocht be fund amang the bischoppis of that seat, nor the name of Paulus
Samosatenus in the tabillis of the kirk of Antiochia, nor the name of Dioscorus
amangis the bischoppis of Alexandria: and in sindrie vthir kirkis of the
Orient, in the quhilk the Arrianis, and other haeretikis did sit, their names
var never put in the commone tabillis of the kirk. I remember of the history
of Chrysostom quhais name his ennimeis throuch inuie vald nocht permit to be
inrollit in the foirsaid tabillis of the kirk of Co^stantinopil, and quhat
stryf and contentione vas for that cause, and zit the verity did preuail, for
his name vas vrytti^ vith the names of the rest of the bischopis miraculuslie:
Quhairof ze may vndirsta^d quhat stryf vald have been in the Roman kirk for the
inrolling of the Bischopis, gif they had nocht al ever perseuerit in ane
doctrine of faith: Mairouer ze speak very bauldlie that the bischopis of Rome
hes corrupted the treu doctrine, bot in particular nather schau ze, nor can ze
be abil to schau onie Paip that ever inuentit ane particular head of Religione,
or ever maid defectione from that faith quhilk his predicessoris had professed
befoir him: And nou I desire the may learned of zou to schau me this in
particular gif ze can, and considering I have proposed to zou all the bischopis
of Rome, to name me ane of them quha ever maid defectione from his
predicessoris, or that ever inuen^it ane particular head of religione, and
gifze can nocht, for my pairt I will esteem zou to be may impudent learis and
impostoris: And to make zour pane schortar, because ze use to plenzie that the
cair of zour Childrene and family, lattis zou nocht luke over zour bukes as ze
vald, I will tak ane pa^^t of the pain on me. C^luin zour Master in the secund
chapter of his fourt buke, confessis, that quhil Augustinis days, their vas
nathing changit of the Religione of the Apostlis, euin in the kirk of Rome:
Schau me that after S. Augustinis days onie thing hes been cha^git, or that
Gregorius the threttent quha is nou bischop of Rome, professis onie other faith
bot that quhilk Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, Celestinus quha var bischopis
in S. Augustinis days, professed? I am assurit ze vil bleir out al zour eis,
or ever ze can be abil to schau onie sik thing: Cheiflie sen the Catholics in
France hes offerir zou be vryttin bukes, to stand at the religione quhilk
vniuersalie vas professed throuche the hail varld in Augustinis days, and ze
durst never zit accept the offer, sua that ze condemn zour master Calvin, and
geuis ane sufficient prove, that the doctrine quhilk is professed nou in the
kirk of Rome, is that sam self quhilk vas professed in Augustinis days, and
vas ever professed befoir him. As to the maneris of the Paipis, sense the first
xxxij. almaist vithout exception vas may cruelly martyrit for confessione of
the name of Christ, by exceid^ng great number of them quha succeidit eftir,
(...) godly and learnit men resista^d al haeresie and vicious leui^g: suppois
sum of the number as particular me^birris of the kirk, hes been viciou^, zit it
folouis nocht that their authority vas ^^her vnlauchful, or inlaikit deu
execution: v^heruyse I vald demand of zou, quhidder ze think that the minister
kelloche eftir he had murdreist his vyf, tint his authority or nocht? or that
the bairnis quhilk he baptized, should be baptized agane? Quhair as ze allege
thatsindrie vas Magicianis and adulteraris, quhilk ze aucht nocht to believe,
because it is nocht expreslie vryttin in the Bible, albeit I vald grant it treu,
I ansuer to zou vith S. Augustine in his 165. August. epist. 165.
epistle, that albeit in the seat of Rome, their hes been sum evil men, zit
that dois nocht prejudice to the verity, considering God commandis us, to do
according to that quhilk the pastoris teachis us, and nocht as they do them
seluis: Bot I meruel that ze should nocht be eschamit to object sic crimes unto
us, ze zour seluis in sa feu zeiris being contaminat vith siclyk, ze and mair
horribil crimes, quhilkis nocht to offend the reidaris earis, I will pretermit
vith silence: As for the practeis of magict I micht object unto zou willox,
quhais sone raised the devil. zour doctor, in Arthuris seat, quhair ze maid
zour first preachingis, And lohne Kmnox zour first Apostil, quha caused ane
zoung voma^ in my lord Ochiltreis place, fall almaist dead, because scho sau his
master Satan in ane blak mannis liknese vith him, throuche ane bore of the
dure: quha vas also ane manifest adulterare, bring and forth of Ingland bayth
the mother and the dochter, quhom he persuadit, that it vas lesum to leave her
housband, and adhere unto him, making ane flesh of him self, the mother, and
the dochter, as gif he vald conioyne in ane religione, the auld synagoge of the
Ieuis, vith the neu fundat kirk of the Gentiles: I leave Paul Mephuen that
Palliard Apostle, quha vas conuoyit throuche the country on horsbak (in ane
viddie veil) armit vith pistolattis, to slay the pure folkis hennis, to make good
cheir on frydayes: As for the practeise of bougrie and sodomitical syn, I remit
zou to the verse of zour Para^et Theodore de Beze, quhilk he makis prefer^^g
the zoung man Audebertus, to Candida another mannis vyf, having gretar pleasure
in satisfeing the inquensibil fy^e of his concupis^ence vith ane man aganis
nature, no^ vith ane yoman: for (...) he^^ of I produce not ane v^hir mannis
spe^king quha vas of the number of his aduersaris, bot his auin verse out of
the buk of epigrammes quhilk he him self maid.


THEODORUS BEZA DE SVA in Candidam and Audebertum beneuolentia.
ABest Candida, Theodorus Beza lib. epigramm.
Beza quid moraris?
Audebertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent Parisij tuos amores,
Habent Aurelij tuos lepores,
Et tu Vezeliis manner pergis
Procul Candidula, amoribusque,
Et leporibus, Audebertuloque:
Immo Vezelij procul valete
Et vale pater and valete fratres,
Namque Vezeliis carere possum
Et carere parente, and his, and illis,
At non Candidula, Audebertuloque.
Sed vtrum rogo preferam duorum?
Vtrum inuisere me decet priorem?
An quemquam tibi Candida anteponam?
An quenquam anteferam tibi Audeberte?
Quid si me in geminas secem ipse parts?
Harum vt altera Candidam reuisat,
Currat altera versus Audebertum.
At est Candida sic auara, noui,
vt totum cupiat tenere Bezam,
Sic Bezae est cupidus sui Audebertus,
Beza vt gestiat integro potiri:
Amplector quoque sic and hunc and illam
vt ^otus cupiam videre vtrumque,
Integrisque frui integer duobus,
Praeferre attamen alterum necesse est,
O duram nimium necessitatem!
Sed postquam tamen alterum necesse est,
Priores tibi defero Audeberte,
Quod si Candida forte conqueratur,
Quid tum? Basiolo tacebit im^.
THE TESTIMONY OF THEOdore Beze the neu Pseudoprophet and pretendit reformator
of the varld concerning his Sodomitical Bougorie vith the zoung man Audebertus,
And adultery vith Candida, ane vthir ma^nis vyf, quha is his harlet zit for
the present, composit be him self in Latin.
BEza quhy bydis thou, quhy dois thou stay?
Sen Candida and Audebert at both auay?
Thy love is in Pareis, in Orleanis thy mirth,
Zit thou vald vezel keip to thy girth,
Far from Candida lust of thy cor^s
Far from Audebert thy great plea-sors
Fair veil vezel veil mot ze fair,
Fair veil my brethering quha du-ellis their
I may spair vezel, my father, and Zou,
Bot nather Audebert, nor Candidais mu.
Then quhilk of their prefer sold I?
Quhilk sold I vissie first or espy?
Candida may-onie he deirar, nor thou?
Or Audebert any preferrit to Zou?
Quhat gif I cuttit my body in tuay?
And give the ane half to Candida gay?
The other to Audebert: zit Candida nei-die
Vald Beza have hail sch^ is so gre-die:
And Aude-bert vald Beze have hail
So covetous is he for to pre-uail.
Bot I vald so them both embrace
To be al hail vith both in a place
Her vith her cunt, him vith his erss,
And I betuix vith ane stif terss:
Zit th'ane sold I prefer indeid
Bot o hou hard a thing is neid!
And sen the ane man be preferred
My fore-quarters sal be con-ferd
To Aude-bert for Bou go-rie
The chiefest of my vo-luptie
Bot Candida gif scho com-plaine
I sal her cunt Kiss laich a-gane.
Siclyk Calvin vas markit vith the flour delise vpone his schuldi^ for the
horribill syn of Sodomie: And this is the halines of zour kirk, quhairin ze
gloir, reproving ever the auld Roman kirk (in the quhilk sa money halie me^
and Martyris hes flourished) of sik cry mes quhilk ze can nocht be abill to
prove: and albeit zour accusatione var treu, it seruis na thing to zour purpose.

OF THE AVTHORITIE OF THE GENERAL CONCILES.
CHAP. XXIII.
M. THe Papistis makis ane Idol of the Paip, saying that he may nocht err,
quhilk is proper to god only: vil thou defend this error vith the rest?


B. Gif ze think it strange to believe that ane man may nocht err, ze vil be
compellit to grant that Sanct Paulis epistlis ar nocht treu, because he vas bot
ane man: Bot the mening of that propositione is, that the Paip insafar as he
sit and in his Chyre in place of Christ in the flesch adherent to his Concile,
lauchfullie conuocat, agreand in unity of spirit, be the band of pace (as
spekis S. Paul) erris nocht in making definitione of treuth, and condemning
heresy: because the halie Ghaist promised be Christ at his departing spekis in
them representing the Catholic ki^k, quhilk is the pillar of treuth: sua that
the definitione of treuth promulgat be the general Co^cile in the name of the
Paip, as Christis vicar, is nocht the inue^tion of the brayn of man, bot ane
declaratione of the mening of the halie Ghaist: zit insafar as the particular
person quha hes the Authority of the Paip, having conuersatione vith men, is
separat from his Concile, he may syn, and siclyk synnis in him have been, and
should be reprouit vith cheritie and aedification, he may also as ane particular
member of the kirk, have ane falls sentence concerning onie head of Religione,
and zit be the first, quha ^all condem the sam errore, quhen he sittis in
judgment for examinatione of the sam: Quhair ze call us Papistis ze justify
our cause, that ve ar no heretikis, because that the Paip signifeis no ane
particular man, that hes inuentit onie religione, bot is the name of him, quha
hes ane publict office and authority in the kirk, on quhom Christ promised to
buyld his kirk, and to quhom he promised the keyis of the ki^gdome of heauin:
bot ze ar callit Caluinistis, from Iohne Calvin quha vas the first inuentar of
zour doctrine and religione, as befoir him ze can schau na man, that ever
professed it in all poyntis.


Protestant. Paphnutius resistit unto the decreit of ane general Concile, maid
concerning the Chastity of Preistis: thairfoir the general Concilis may err.


B. ze schau that ze have never co^siderit that history, quhilk gif ze had
done, ze vald nocht have spokin sua impudenlie as ze do, for first the
quaestione vas nocht, quhidder gif preistis sold marie or nocht? it being
may certane amangis al Christianis, that eftir they var anis preistis, they
sold nocht marie, to the end they sold nocht bevith drauin vith the cair of
the varld fra the service of god, to the quhilk they ar consecrat: bot gif they
quha var mareit befoir they var preistis, should remane still vith their vy^^is,
or nocht? It vas sumpart mai^ doutsum: and zit the hail Concile of Nice
decernit, that they sold abstene fra their vyues: Paphnutius, quhom ze allege
for zou scheu him self to be in the contrare opinione and proposed it to be
embraced be the Concile: bot the Concile did nocht follou his opinione thairin
nocht esteming his authority of greit valor, considering he vas of the sect
of the Miletianis, and ane schismatik, suppoise zevald appeir to make him ane
great man: Reid Epiphanius quha vas nocht lang eftir the concile of Nice, and
their ze vil find quhou it is aganis the Canonis, and ordinances of the Kirk,
that they quha var mareit befoir they var preistis, have onie company vith
their vyuis in ^ymes cumming, and testifeis that gif in onie part they do
vtheruyse, they do planlie aganis the Canonis, and ordinancis of the kirk: Bot
ze, and zour ministeris vil be subject to na reul, and thinkis it lesum to do
quhat ze pleis.


M. Quhy may nocht the kirk err alsueil nou, as befoir in the Concile of the
Ieuis, quha concludit that our Master being innocent should nochtuithstanding
dea: saying, It is expedient that ane dea for the Peopil and the hail natione
perise nocht.


B. Quhat subioynis S. Iohne of his sentence pronounced?


M. He spak nocht this of him self, bot be instinction of the halie spirit,
because he vas the hie priest of that zeir.


B. Quhidder than do ze think that the sentence vas erroneus or treu?


M. He kneu nocht that quhilk he pronounced to be the mening of the halie
Ghaist.


B. Ze se thairfoir, hou sure the kirk is, for albeit the person be never so
vicious and ignorant, zit having lauchfull authority the halie Ghaist vil
nocht suffer the propir functione, and executione thairof to inlaik: By that,
their vas nocht sua greit promises maid to the synagoge of the Ieuis, as to the
ki^k and kingdom of Christ, ze it vas foirspokin that the synagoge should be
utterly abolished, sua that suppois befoir the abolitione of it, God had
permitted su^ erroris to creip in, it had nocht been aganis the promeis of God:
Bot to the kingdom, or ki^k of Christ, the halie Ghaist is promised ever to
assist, unto the end of the varld, Ion. 16.
and that it ^al never be ouercummit be heresy, or onie falls doctrine:
vtheruyse the kirk vald nocht be the treu spous of Christ, having brokin the
treuth and covenant maid vith him: And thairfoir ze blaspheme, aganis the grace
of the neu testament, quha vil acknauledge na prerogative granted unto the kirk
of Christ quhilk befoir vas nocht granted to the synagoge of the Ieuis: By that
ze derogat aluter^lie zour hail doctrine, gif it be tre^ as ze teach that the
kirk may err, because na man vil have assurance to follou zour neu kirk of
Scotland, considdering as ze confess zour selfis, it may er: And sua ze have na
just ressone to cause onie man subscryue the confessione of zour faith: And all that quhilk ze teach is in vain, considdering zour kirk can gif na assurance
of the verity to onie man, zea in zour kirk ze tak auay all the authority of
bischopis, quha ever hes been iudgit to have had the principal government of
the kirk in times bypast, and thairfoir gif the kirk may err as ze say, it is
may liclie that zour neu erectit kirk, as being destitute of chief praelattis
may may esilie err, above allvther heretik is that ever hes been befoir zou.


OF THE ESTAIT OF BISCHOPPIS.
CHAP. XXIIII.
PRotest. Gif the Authority of bischopis var grou^dit on the vord of God, and
had been approuit in the primitive kirk, the bischopis quha ar this day in
scotland and namlie the bischoppis of Sanctandrois, Glasgou, and Abirdene vald
mentene their Authority, and correct the insolence of our ministeris,
misknauand their deuitie touard them as Magistratit, and because they do it
nocht, it appeiris that the bischoppis hes na lauchful authority.


B, Albeit the Authority of bischopis (having jurisdiction over inferiore
Pastoris, quha hes na lauchful calling, bot be biscoppis) be sufficiently
prouin be the vord of God, as testifeis S. Paul. Act. 20.
[Tak tent to zour selfis, and the hail flok over the quhilk the halie Ghaist
hes apoyntit zou Bischopis to govern the kirk of God, quhilk he hes conquesed
vith his blude] And in the 5. chap. to Timothy spekand of and Bischopis
jurisdiction, Admit nocht ane accusation aganis ane priest, 1. Ad Tim. 5.
exceptvndir tua, or threvitnes: And of their pouar to call pastoris: Lay nocht
thy ha^dis haistelie upon onie man, and have na communicatione vith other
me^nis synnis: and to Titus: Tit. 1.
For this cause have I left the in Creta, that thou may mend tha thingis quhilk
hes mister of correctione, and appoint preistis in every town as I have
ordanit zou to do: zit the Bischopis of Scotland as ze call them, because they
love rather varldlie commodity, and liberty of the flesh to marie, than the
gloir of God in keiping the constitutionis of the halie kirk, be quhais
ministerial head they aucht to have their calling, it is na meruel that God of
his just judgment sufferis their idiot inferioris callit Ministeris, to be
maisteris over them vithout defense of their dignity, be ressone it is bot
vsurpit: sua that sense they ar al enterit in the scheipfauld of Christ, nocht
be the dur, bot be the midsyd of the house, it is nou cummit to pas that the
ane labor for the schameful exterminion of the other: for euin as the
Ministeris ar na lauchful pastoris, 1. Ad Tim. 5.
and hes never ressauit the imposition of ha^dis of Bischopis quhairof S. Paul
makis mentione: sua the intrudit Bischopis, as they ar na bischopis bot falls
hypocritis, hes na lauchful authority above the ministeris, and the Ministeris
mekil les above them.


Pr. vald thou than say that the bischopis, gif they var lauchfullie callit,
should conuocat the ministeris to al assembleis be their authority, and be chief
praesidentis thairin, being lykuyse ordinar judges in deciding al controuerseis
in religione?


B. Ze verelie: And vald thairfoir have resolutione of ane dout: gif God sal
raise up in Scotland ane man desyrand disputatione vith onie minister,
concerning ane or ma heiddis of religione, quha is abil to cite the testimoneis
of the scripture, and sentences of the doctoris to confirm his part of the
controversy: Than I demand gif their be vithin the realm of Scotland onie
Judge, quha heiring the ressonis of bayth the pairteis, may say to the ane,
thou art richt: to the other, thou defendis ane erroneus opinione, Thairfoir
ather of zou man stand at this decreit, and definitione of the treuth: And
incaice of disobedience be authority of the halie Ghaist, granted unto me,
quhairbie I am constitut judge in this controversy, I denunce the disobeyar
ane haeretike.


Heir. Smeton tuik on him the disputatione in Paislay, in audience of the may
honorabil the Master of Ross, the lairdis of Caldual, blakhal, Ihonestone,
Quhytfurd, and sindrie vtheris.


OF THE IVDGE TO MAKE DEcision of onie controuerseis of religion, quhilk may
arise in the kirk of Scotland, and of the judgment of the ^o^d vrytin.
CHAP. XXV.
Smeton. Their is ane Judge vithin this realm to vit the vrittin vord and buke
of God.


B. I say it is may falls that the vryttin vord can be Judge of al
controuerseis, because ane judge man bayth heir and speak, bot the vryttin vord
is bay^h deaf and dume, sua that it may nather heir the pairteis, nor pronunce
the sentence, quhilk tua thingis apertenis necessarlie to the office of ane
lauchful judge: By that, the office of ane judge is that nocht only he pronunce
the sentence, bot put it also to executione, that is, that he puneis according
to the lauis them quha be condemnit of onie crime, as be death, banisment, or
sik punitione, bot the vryttin vord hes nocht sik pouar or strenth, as is may
cleir: Thairfoir of necessity at her haeretikis man be vnpunised according to
the lauis that are maid aganis them, or ellis their man be sum vthir judge, by
the vryttin vord: Bot because that ze and al other haeretikis ar condemnit be
zour auin consciencis, and zit vald abstract zour selfis from the lauchful
sentence of ane judge, ze do veil quhen ze reject al other judge by the vryttin
vord, because that the vryttin vord vil nather hang zou, nor burn zou. In the
actis of the Apostlis I reid that sum controversy of religione did rise
amangis the Christianes in tha days, quha for resolution of the verity, did
nocht constitute the vryttin vord as Judge, bot send up to Jerusalem, Act. 15.
to Sanct Petir and the rest of the Apostlis as pastoris of the flok, and quik
judges appointed be God to gif deu and lauchful resolutione, be quhais exempil
ve ar sufficiently instructed that in all our controuerseis, quhilk ever should
occur, for establishing our conscience, ve should have recourse to the
successoris of the Apostlis, as the lauchful judge to quhom Christ hes promised
the assistance of the halie Ghaist to the end of the varld: Ephesians. 4.
and S. Paul to the Ephesianis testifeis (that doctoris and pastoris ar
appointed be god to his kirk, to the effect that ve be nocht careit auay vith
every vind of doctrine) Quhair he apoyntis nocht the vryttin vord judge, bot
the doctoris and pastoris of the kirk: Deuteronomy. 17.
And in Deuterono^, the Hie priest vas constitute judge of al controuerseis of
the lau, that micht fall amang the Ieuis, suppois they had al thingis in vryt,
that concernit the sinagoge, als perfytlie at the lest, as ve have: And I
meruel that ze, quha estemis zour self to be learned, considder nocht, that the
Lauterianis Zuinglianis, Caluinistis, and Anabaptistis admittis the vryttin
vord as only judge, and zit ze can nocht aggrie ama^g zour selfis, every ane
of zou aledging the vryttin vord for his pairt, persuading him self that the
vryttin vord aggreis vith that opinione, quhilk he hes alreddie forgit befoir
in his auin brayn, euin as gif tua men quha var in controversy about onie
matter, vald pas to the greit bellis of the kirk, and decerne that to be treu
quhilk the bell sold sou^de to their earis, every ane of them being addictit
to his auin opinione, vald say, that the bell did sound according to his
imagination: And sua vald be na mair resolut be the judgment of the bellis,
nor they var befoir: euin sua do ze vith the scripturis: As for exempil, the
Lauterian vil say may constantly, that the scripture judges for his pairt,
that the treu body of Christ is in the sacrament ioynit vith the breid and
vine. The Zuingliane vil constantly afferme, that their is na thing in the
sacrament bot breid, and vyn, quhilk ar signs of the body and blude of Jesus
Christ: The Cauuinist may bauld of al vil afferme, that the vord of god is
for him, that the body of Christ is treulie in the lordis suppar, and that ve
be certane pill^is, or ingeynis ar liftit up to heauin be ane inco^prehensibil
manner: quhat vald ze nou that ane pure man, quha can nather reid nor vryt, and
suppoise he could, hes nocht sufficient literatur to vndirstand the scripture
sold do in this caice? I dout nocht bot gif ze be nocht aluter^ie obstinat, ze
may persaue that he vald be in ane very greit perplexity: and that he hes na
sure moyen quhairbie he may resolve him self, and consequently gif their be na
vthir judge by the vryttin vord that Christ hes nocht sufficie^tlie prouydit
for his kirk, nocht leuing in it ane esie and infallibil reul, quhairbie every
ane quha plesis may discern the treu religione from the false, as every man in
the day of judgment man gif count in particular of his auin religione and
faith. Than my argument is this, that ve ancht to have ane judge, quha sold
pronu^ce the sentence in sik manner, that he may put end to al controuerseis,
and quhais sentence euer^lk ane of the flok of Christ, hou simple that ever
they be, may cleirlie vndirstand: bot the vryttin vord hes never zit put end to
onie controversy, every haeretik allegeand it for him self, as said is, nor
zit pronunced the sentence sa cleirlie that it micht have been persauit be
every ane: Thairfoir by the vryttin vord, necessarlie their man be sum other
judge, as in all commoneveil by the lauis that are vryttin, their is sum iudgis
appointed, quha sold have pouar to interpret the lauis, and in all
controuerseis of them, pronunce their sentence, and declair the treu mening
thairof: vtheruyse na controversy could euerbe endit: as in the realm of
Scotland gif their var na Judge appointed for civil actionis, and it var
permittit to every man of lau to interpret the lauis, and ordinances of the
country according to his auin fantasy, their vald never ane process be endit
befoir the day of judgment. And zit ze vil be sua ingrate to Christ, as to
think that he had les providence of his kirk and saluatione of saul^s, for the
quhilk he sched his may precious bluid, nocht prouyding ane sufficient judge,
for the controuerseis that micht vpryse, nor ane secular king or prince hes of
the Civil administratione of his co^moneueil. And for conclusione, ze can
nocht deny, bot the vtyttin vord it self, may be callit in dout be heretikis:
As the Marcionitis, and Manichaeanis denyit the hail auld testament, vtheris
the tua hinmaist epistlis of S. Iohne, vtheris the Apocalypse: and vtheris,
other pairtis of the scripture: Nou I dema^d of zou, quha sal be judge in this
controversy? For the vryttin vord can nocht be judge, as ze persaue zour self:
than necessarlie ze man acknauledge sum other judge: And to enter in
particular, Lauter denyis the epistle of S. James, quhat argument have ze, and
all the ministeris of Scotland, to convict him? For be the vryttin vord ze vil
never prove that sanct James vrait ane epistle. Castalio denyis the buik quhilk
is callit [Ca^tica canticorum] saying that it is ane buke contenand ballatis of
luf. Gif onie in Scotland defendit this opinione, zevald never get tham convict
be the vryttin vord? zea zour paraclet Theodore Beze, sayis that the History
of the adulteres in the aucht chaptore of S. Iohne vas eikit to the text, and
in the Euangel of S. Luc. their vordis [quhilk salbe sched for zou] is eikit to
the text, quhais sentence gif ze follou nocht, quhou vil ze get him conde^nit
be the vryttin vord? I mycht schau hou Calvin zour master hes eikit and paired
framonie places of the scripture, and zit be the vryttin vord it is hard to
convict him of sik eiking and pairing: sua I will gather my argument in feu
vordis: The judge quhilk is appointed be Christ to his kirk, may judge of
quhatsumeuer controversy dois occurr, and condem for haeretikis, quhasoeuer
aucht to be condemnit, bot this can nocht be done be the vryttin vord, as is
prouin: thairfoir the vryttin vord is nocht the judge quhilk Christ hes left to
his kirk.


Sm. I persaue of thy ansuer, thou vald refer this Authority of decision to
the general Concilis, over quhom the Paip is praesident as Christis vicar, as
the Papistis sayis: Zit the varld is nocht in sik ignorance nou as befoir: for
the langagis and diverse toungis, the philosophy, and al sciencis, ar
accuratlie teached, quhairfor their is na doubt bot ane man natural veil
instructed in philosophy, having knauledge of the langages, quha hes studeit
lang to the text of the scripturis, and red the vorkis of the doctoris, is abil
to expone onie passage of scripture contening onie quaestione or heid of
Doctrine necessar for our saluatione.


B. Than supponand zour self to be sik ane man: gif ane vthir man instructed in
tha sam schuillis, quhair ze learned, als perfyt i^ al they thingis as ze ar,
vald cum in Scotland, and sustene disputatione aganis zou, mentening ane
sentence contrare to zouris, concerning onie chief head of religione, according
to zour reul, he vilbe als abil to interpret the scripture as ze, and al men
should gif als greit credit to him as to zou: and sua his sentence being
repugnant to zouris, it is necessar that tua contrare and repugnant sentencis
in interpretation of Goddis vord be embraced togidder: This is zour neu
Theology, quhilk ze have brocht in, in the kirk of Scotland: To pas forduart,
gif ane private man, being indeuit vith tha thingis quhilk ze prescryue, may
vith assurance, vithout onie error or deception interpret goddis vord, quhy
deny ze that sam self pouar to the universal Conciles, in the quhilkis their is
sindrie at al times, quha ar adornit vith sic giftis? or schau me gif ze can,
that ever on^e haeresie hes been finalie extuinguished, bot at her be the
authority of the Bischop of Rome, or be the general Concilis, gathered and
assembled be him? I remember that S. Augustine vryttis, hou that Pelagius the
haeretike vas condemnit in the Concile of Palaestina be sindrie bischopis, bot
at the last quhen he vas condemnit be Innocentius bischop of Rome, August.
epist. 104.
he sayis that na farther judgment aucht to be abiddin: Hou var the Arrianis
condemnit, bot be the general Concile of Nice? hou vas Macedonius condemnit bot
be the general Concile of Constantinopil? hou vas the Nestorianis condemnit bot
be the Concile of Ephesus? hou vas the Euty chianis co^de^nit, bot be the
Co^cile of Chalchedo^? and siclyk of all other haeretikis: Vil ze be sua bauld
as to say that all their halie fatheris, quha var assembled in the foirsaid
Concilis for the extirpatione of erroris var blindir? ze man appardone me gif I
say that ze ar rather blindit than they: Ze I am assurit, quhatsumeuer opinione
ze have of zour self, that ze ar bayth ignorant and blind, as I haif pairtlie
schauin befoir, and vil nou schau at mair lenth, ze say that ane man instructed
in Hebreu, greik, latene and philosophy, quha hes red the ancient vrittaris,
may surely interpreit the scripture: I deny it may planelie to zou, and ze
and al zour ministeris vil never be abil to prove it, or to schau me in goddis
vord, that onie sik thing is promised to every particular man quha is indeuit
vith sic giftis, and thairfoir all that quhilk ze ground vpone this vaik
fundament, man fall altogidder: Sabellius, Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius and
vtheris var may learned men, and had red the scriptures very diligently,
and zit because they gave our greit place to their auin curiosity, they did
fall in haeresie, and var Haeresiarchis: Zea generalie almaist al they quha hes
be^e the beginnaris of haeresie var very learned men and of great spirit:
vtheruyse they could nocht have defendit their falls opinionis, nor inducit
vtheris to follou them: Bot their haeretikis according to zour saying, did
may surly interpret goddis vord, being indeuit vith all tha thingis quhilk
ze esteem necessare for the interpretatio^e of the scripture: Nou quhat vil ze
do vith ane man that hes nather greik nor hebreu, as sindrie of zour faithful
brethrene? quhat reull sall they have for their assurance? or quhou dar they
enter in the office of the ministry? or quhat assurance can their flok have to
follou them? sen they have nather hebreu, greik, nor latene, and never red the
ancient vryttaris, never studeit ane vord of Philosophy, bot neu cummit fra
keiping of the scheip or the geise, as did Brebbenner and Paul Mephuen: Ansuer
unto me, quhat assurance can sic ministeris have or their flok quhilk follouis
them, sen they ar destitute of al they thingis, quhilk ze praescryue as
necessar for the interpretation of goddis vord? and to make a^e e^d to my hail
discourse, suppois they thingis quhilk ze prescry ue, help mekil for the
interpretatione of the scripture, zit as I have schauin, they can nocht gif
assurance to onie man that albeit he be indeuit vith them he may nocht err: I
say farther that suppois ane man helpit be the spirit of god, being indeuit vith
sic giftis may attene to the richt interpretatione of the scripture, zit that
he hes nocht pouar to command all the varld under the pane of syn and
damnatione to follou sik ane interpretatione, because this only appertenis to
them, quha hes jurisdiction in the kirk, and ar send be god as his
messingeris vith sik authority and pouar that vtheris ar obleist to obey unto
them, Joan. 20.
as Christ said to his discipillis: As the father hes send me sua send I zou,
that is vith pouar and authority: Thairfoir all zour greik and hebreu is in
vain, ze quhatsumeuer intelligence ze have of the scripture na man is obleist
to trou zou or to embrace zour interpretation except that first ze declair zour
self to be ane messinger of God send be his authority and pouar. Ze vil vith
patience heir this vord only, that al tha thingis quhilk ze praescryue except
they be conioynit vith humility and cheritie, auaillis lytil or nathing for
the intelligence of goddis vord, and zit ze have praetermittit them bayth
quhilk ar principal, and hes the promeis of the assistance of god, quhilk I
believe ze have done of set propose, because ze se that ze and zour Ministeris
hes nather cheritie, nor humility amangis zou, bot as ze teach zour self
may treulie, their is na thing in zou bot syn, sua that ze can not be the
veschellis of the spirit and visdome of god: as it is vryttin [in maleuolam
animam non introibit sapientia] In ane evil villie mind or vickit man visdome
sal not enter: This is sufficient for the refutatione of zour ansuere, and
albeit I vald grant al thing to be treu quhilk ze say, zit ze do bot conde^n
zour selfis: For ze can not deny bot befoir Iohne Calvin and Martin Lauter
their hes been ane infinite number of doctoris in the kirk quha hes had the
vndirsta^ding of the toungis, studeit perfytlie in philosophy, studeit the
scriptures very diligently, and red other ancient vryttaris quhilk preceidit
them, and zit ze say that never ane of their vndirstude the scriptures, bot
that they var al dissauit: Reid zour Master Calvin in his buke de reforma^da
ecclesia: (The ancient vryttaris, sayis he as Irene. Tertul. Arnob. August. and
vheris, sua fulishlie be the breid hes interpret the body of Christ, that
ressone and the treuth compellis us to disagrie from them): Is their any in
Scotland that dar say he is better versit in the hebreu, greik, and latin
tungis, nor vas S. Hierom? or red the scripturis mair diligently? he having
turnit them out of Hebreu in latin, and sum partis out of greik in latin? or
red mair perfytlie the ancient v^yttatis quhilk had been befoir him? Augu. 6.
contra lulian^m,
of quhom S. August. geuis ane testimony vryttand aganis Iuliane the
Pelagiane, that almaist their vas na Ecclesiastical vrytar nather greik, nor
latin quhilk he had nocht red* As to the studeis of Philosophy, and other
humane sciencis hou veil he hes been versit in them, it is cleir to al men,
quha reidis his vorkis: and zit ze zour selfis, sayis that he vas alluterlie
dissauit in the interpretation of the scripture, and reiectis it alluterlie: ze
zour Paraclet Beze, Beza in 13. Acto.
vrittand vpone the actis of the Apostlis pronuncis this sentence vith ane
greit solennitie and aith saying, I tak god to vitnes and his Angellis, that
the bauldnes of Hierom in thrauing the scripturis is intolerabil, as in tha
thingis quhilk he vrait aganis Iouinianus, and Vigila^tius: Sua ze may persaue
that ze condem zour self, gif the reul of the interpretatione of scripture,
quhilk ze have geuin be sure: and gif it be nocht sure ze condem zour self in
lyk manner: Sik is the nature of falset that it aggreis nocht vith the self: Nou
gif tua Ministeris, quha var learnit according to that reul quhilk ze
prescryue, be in controversy, as for exempil Master Patrik Constant and ze ar
in quaestione, quhidder gif the estait of bischopis should be in the kirk or
nocht? euerilk ane of zou, citing the scripture for his pairt, quha salbe judge
betuix zou? For as to the vryttin Judge, euerilk ane of zou sayis, he hes him
for his pairt.


Sm. Ane of the tua quhilk disagreis vilbe vorthie of condemnatione, and after
ressoning, he vilbe convict of errore.


B. Bot I pray zou, vil he consent to condemnatione of his auin errore, unless
he be mouit be the Authority of ane Judge, by the vryttin vord, or the
ressonis of his aduersare?


S. I will esilie grant, that gif onie Minister sal ressone vith zou, or ane
aganis ane other, the rest of the brethrene be moniest voittis, may interpreit
the buk for bayth the pairteis.


B. ze appeir to forzet that quhilk ze said a lytil befoir, that the varld is
nocht sua blindit as to follou the decreis of general Concilis, and nou ze vald
constrain men to follou the decreis of three or four of zour vain Ministeris,
and that their voittis sold be accetit as ane certane reul for the definitione
of the verity, By that ze condem ane other thing also quhilk ze affermit
befoir, that is, that ane Minister being indeuit vith sik qualiteis, as ze
prescryuit may esilie vithout all error vndirstand the scripture, quhilk gif
it be treu, sic ane Minister can never justly be co^demnit, he hauand the
verity for him: and zit it behouis that the ane part be condemnit: Bot gif
Master Patrik Constant, suppois he var co^demnit be the gretast part of the
voittis of zour ministeris, vald nocht obey alleging ever for him the vryttin
vord, quhat than vald ze do, quha vill have na other Judge of controversy by
the vryttinvord? And quhat gif he have als money bischopis, ad bischop
ministeris for him, as ze have ministeris inuyaris of the dignity of
bischopis, for zou? their is na ressone quhy he sold follou rather the voittis
of zour ministeris, nor ze the voittis of his bischopis, and sua gif ze justly
condem him, he als justly condemnis zou: And as vsis to be said in ane commone
proverb, Ane devil dois ding another: Bot nocht villing to spend time in farther
refelling of zour vanity, I vald propone ane quaestione to zou, quhidder gif
Christ had ane kirk in Scotland quhe^ Iohne kmnox vas maid ane priest, quha had
pouar to consecrat him, or nocht?


S. He had ane Kirk having sic pouar, bot it abusit the same.


B. I put the caice than, that ze had been at that time, as ze ar nou, ze vald
have said to that kirk, ze have pouar to consecrat Iohne kmnox ane priest, bot
ze haif abusit the same, hou vald ze have prouin zour alledgeance?


S. Be the expres vryttin vord.


B. Onie of them vald have ansuerit, that ze peruertit the text, as other like
haeretikis had done befoir, the controversy than rising betuix zou and onie of
them, vas their nocht brethrene quha at that time be moniest voittis, micht
have reconcilit zou tua in ane sentence, and exponit the vord treulie for zou
bayth?


Sm. I dout gif their vas onie at that time, quha could treulie expone the vord
of God.


B. Sen ze confess zour self, that than their var treu pastoris in the kirk of
Scotland, vthe ruyse ze should nocht have confessed that Christ had his kirk in
Scotland at that time, quhne Johan kmnox vas maid ane priest: and affermit also
a lytill befoir, that in controversy vp^ysing, be the gretast pairt of the
voittis theveritie aucht to be established: Co^sidderi^g that all they pastoris
being assembled vald have pronunced their sentence aganis zou, as they did
aganis other haeretikis, and vald have said that ze had nochtvndirstand the
vry^tin vord, bot thrauin it fra the treu mening and vndirstanding: hou can ze
defend zour selff bot according to zour auin definitione ze ar condemnit as ane
haeretik? As quhair in zour ansuere ze say that ze doubt, gif thairvas onie
quha could expone thevord of god treulie quhen Iohne kmnox vas maid ane priest,
gif ze doubt quhidder gif in the kirk of Scotland quhilk vas befoir zou, quhilk
ze confess to have been the treu kirk of Christ, their vas onie man that could
haif interpret the scripturis, quhy is it nocht lesum to me to doubt gif their
be onie man in zour neu startup kirk, quha hes pouar to interpret the
scripturis? or quhy dout ze nocht in lyk manner, quhidder gif that vas the
scripture, quhilk the kirk of Scotland befoir zou appointed for the scripture?
or schau me onie ressone, gif ze can quhy ze doubt rather of the
interpretatione of the scripture, nor of the scripture it self? Gif ze var veil
examinat I feir ze vald dout of al: bot that ze have na subterfuge, I propone
to to zou that sam quaestione quhilk I proposed befoir, gif ze had than callit
in controversy quhidder gif their had been onie in the kirk of Scotland, quha
had pouar to interpret the vord of God vithout errore? ze defending the ane
part, and the kirk it self the vthir: And condemning zou be plurality of
voittis, ze ar constranit euin according to zour formar definitione, to confess
that zear justly condemnit: or quhat bauldnes is it to zou to say that the
spous of Christ, quhilk ze confessed than to have been in the Realm of
scotland, S. Ioh. 16 Ephesians. 4.
to the quhilk the assistance of the halie Ghaist is promised, and doctoris and
Pastoris for establishing the verity, hes nocht pouar to interpret the
scripture? or that ze, quhais vanity and inco^stancie is knauin to all men
have ane sure and infallibil reul thairof in zour fantastical brayin? ze should
be eschamit of zour^ impudency: And gif it be lesum to zou to doubt, gif the
kirk of Scotland had pouar to interpret the vord of God, quhy is it nocht lesu^
to me to doubt gif ze be baptized, and gif ze aucht to be compted in the number
of Christian men? Cheiflie sen ze make the treu interpretatione of the vord,
and lauchful administratione of the sacramentis tua inseperabil nottis of the
kirk: gif ze dout of the ane quhy may I nocht dout of the other? Ze they bayth
being requesed according to zour doctrine, the ane being taken auay, the kirk in
nauyse can consist.


SM. Thou Knauis be decreit of the general Concile of the kirk, quhilk
retracted S. Cyprianis sentence of the Rebaptizing of haeretikis, that
haeretikis may baptize.


B. Ze should nocht have cited ane general Co^cile aganis me, sen the varld is na
mair in blindness, as ze said befoir, that it misteris to depend on the decreis
of the general Concilis, bot sum plain testimony of the vryttinvord: Or gif
ze ressauit that quhilk hes been established be the general Concile, quhy
ressaue ze nocht al other thingis quhilk hes been established be them in lyk
manner? Zit I am nocht sua illuminat, bot I will embrace vith good vil the
determinationis of general Concilis, and that haeretikis may bapteise: Bot I
can nocht vndirstand hou this dois aggrie vith that quhilk ze said a lytil
befoir, that the kirk quhilk co^secrat kmnox ane priest vas the treu kirk of
Christ, and that it vas haeretical: except that ane man may be ane treu
Christian, and ane haeretik togidder: Mairouer ze knau that the sam kirk
quhilk hes determinat that haeretikis may baptize, hes determinat in lyk manner,
that unless they quha ar sua baptized, be reconciled vith the treu kirk, the
baptism sal not be valabil to bring them to salvation: Nou thairfoir I dema^d
of zou, Quhat treu kirk vas their, vith quhom ze micht have been reconcilit, by
that quhilk ressauit Iohne kmnox to be ane priest?


OF THE VISIBILITIE OF THE KIRK.
CHAP. XXVI.
Smeton. Their is na dout bot Christ had his kirk at that time, albeit it vas
nocht Knauin to every man.


B. Ze cu^ nou asvther haeretikis, specially the Donatistis did befoir, to ane
inuisibil kirk, quhilk errore is sufficiently refuted be S. Augustine vrytand
aganis them: And siclyk be our saluiour in the Eua^gel of S. Mattheu: S. Mat.
18
[Bot gif he heir zou nocht declair it unto the kirk] quhilk command na man
could obey, gif the kirk var inuisibil. And gif it had been than inuisibil as
ze allege, it had seruit na thing at al to them, quha had been baptized be
haeretikis: because they could nocht adioyne them seluis to ane inuisibil kirk:
and sua could nocht attene to saluatione, nocht being incorporat in the bosum
of the kirk. As gif ane Ieu or ane Turk, had been mouit to embrace the
religione of Christ, and tobe incorporat into his kirk, gif his kirk had been
inuisibil vpone the face of the earth, hou could he have adioynit him self to
it? I meruel gretumlie of zour blindness, hou ze persaue nocht that the hail
prophecies of the kingdom of Christ, vald have been in vain, gif his kingdom
had been inuisibil: for ane prophecy man be of tha thingis, quhilk may be seen
and persauit be our sensis and experience, vtheruyse every man micht be ane
Prophet, and foirspeke of ane thing to cum: and git it cum nocht to pas, he
micht say that it hes cummit to pas in very deid as he prophesied, bot that it
vas inuisibil, and vnknauin to the varld: thairfoir ze se in quhat absurditeis
ze rin zour selfis in, be this zour inuisibil kirk: I vald glaidlie be resolute
of ane quaestionvith zou, quha vas it to quho^ this inuisibil kirk vas first
reveled? and quha vas he that first maid it visibil to the eais of the varld?
Gif ze say, to Martin Lauter, or Iohne Calvin, ze condem zour selfis, because
that they var bayth Apostatis fra the Catholic kirk, and that kirk quhilk quhen
Lauter began vas inuisibil, remanis zit als inuisibil as ever it vas, and nocht
only as ze say hes been knauin to feu men, bot to na man at al. Gif ze have
red the ancient vryttaris, ze micht have seen hou S. Augustine prouis aganis
the Donatistis, that it is impossibil that the kirk at onie time be inuisibil,
ze euin in the time of the may seueir and cruel persecutione of the
Antichrist, it sal remain visibil, vtheruyse it could thoil na persecutione.
Bot ze vil make the devil starkar nor god, and vil that the devil hes occupeit
to him self al visibil kingdoms, tounis, citeis, and that he hes left only
ane inuisibil kingdom unto Christ.


Sm. Quhy may nocht our Master Christis Kirk be inuisibil nou, as it vas in
the days of Elias?


B. zour argument is very vain, the kirk may be inuisibil, thairfoir it is
inuisibil, as gif ze vald say, Smeton may be bischop of Sancta^drois alsueil as
Master Patrik Constant, thairfoir he is Bischop of Sanctandrois: I desire zou
to prove that the kirk vas inuisibil indeid, and nocht that it may be
inuisibil: for ze knau, as in the schuillis they say comonlie, [a posse ad esse
non valet consequentia,] this is the first fault in zour argument. Nou gif for
disputationis cause I vald grant, that in the time of the particular synagoge of
the Ieuis, the kirk had been inuisibil, zit Christis kirk may nocht be at onie
time inuisibil, fra the time he gave his Apostlis command, Act. 1.
as ve reid in the actis of the Apostlis, that they beginnand at Jerusalem
sold preach in all Iudaea, Samaria, and the far pairtis of the earth: for
lykas the coue na^t of God maid vith ma^kynd eftir the flude of Noe, geuand for
ane taikin thairof the rain bou, sal stay ane universal destructione of the
hail varld nochtuithsta^ding their salbe als grievous synnis co^mittet be
ma^kynd vniuersalie in the latter age, as vas befoir the flude: Eui^sua albeit
for the greit synnis of the preistis of the sinagoge, God had sufferit his kirk
aluterlie to be destroyed in the sicht of men, zit the promise of Christ Jesus
saying, S. Matt. 28.
(And behald I am vith zou at al time unto the end of the varld] geua^d them
anesuir taik in of his assistance the ordinar calling of pastoris be the
onlaying of the handis of the preistheid, quhairbie the halie Ghaist is
ressauit: This promeise sal nocht suffer Christis universal kirk to be at onie
time inuisibil, quhatsumeuer crimes be admittit be the pastoris thairof, as is
propheceit be Esaias, Esai. 60.
The portis of the kirk sal be oppin bayth day and nicht. Psalm. 80.
And be the prophet David. Gif thy sonis leave my lau, I sal nocht tak auay my
mercy from them, bot they salbe as the bricht sone in my sicht: Nou gif ze
pleis schau be quhat argument ze may prove the kirk of God to have been
inuisibil in the days of Elias.


S. Because as ve reid in the bukis of the kingis, 3. Of the kingis, 19. chap.
Elias sayis lord, they have slain thy Prophetis, they have brokin down thy
altaris, and I am left alane, quhais life they lay vait for.


B. Lyk as ze propone the doubt of Elias, quha being out of mennis society,
micht nocht vndirstand, bot be reuelatione quha vorshippit God treulie, and
quha var idolatouris follouing Baal: sua I gif zou for ane ansuer, that quhilk
god him self subioynis, 3. Reg. 19.
saying (I have left unto my self seuin thousand me^, quhahes nocht bouitthair
kne to Baal) quhavald nocht have been co^mendit be ane divine oracle, gif they
had been negligent in goddis service. Then I demand of zou quhidder gif seuin
thousand be ane sufficient number to represent ane visibil kirk, Act. 1.
seeing the elleuin Apostlis, electing Matthias in place of Judas represented
the kirk visibil and Catholic? And gif zour kirk vas inuisibil, as vas the
synagoge in the time of Elias, ze sold have schauin seuin thousand, quha had
nocht bouit their kneis to Baal, or at the lest ane hundredth, or seuinscoir or
seuin, or at the lest, ze should have schauin ane. For gif the Catholic religion
be falls, ze have al bouit zour kneis to Baal, and God hes reseruit na man to
him self at al. Gif ze had brocht out of the darkness and vildernes sum men quha
had professed that religione quhilk ze profes, and quha never had onie
communicatione vith us, than zour sayingis vald have appeired to have sum
probability, bot sen ze can do na sic thing, ze gif plane testimony of zour
selfis, that zour inuisibil kirk is na thing else bot ane Pha^tastical dream:
And gif onie man vald start up euin nou in Scotland and teach onie neu
haeresie of his auin brayn, gif he var demandit of zou of his kirk, in the
quhilk he hes learnit his doctrine, he micht ansuere vith als great probability
as ze do, that his kirk hes ever been, bot that it hes been inuisibil: quhat
argument can ze be abil to produce aganis him to prove that their hes nocht
been sik ane inuisibil kirk as he allegis, quhilk ve can nocht be abil to
produce aganis zou? And gif it hes been inuisibil hou have ze knauin it sua
veil? And quhy micht nocht other men knau it alsueil as ze? And quhy have ze
been sua inuyous that ze vald nocht schau it to the rest of the varld? Nou to
cum to Elias, ze can nocht deny bot Elias him self vas visibil, quhen he maid
the complaint. And in Iudaea at that time, 3. Reg. 22.
their vas the may godly king Iosaphat, quha neglected nocht goddis service,
and Elias complaint vas only aganis Samaria, as is manifest in the text*
quhairfoir zour argument prouis na thing at al, because it is may manifest
falls, that the sinagoge of the Ieuis vas inuisibil in the t^me of Elias: Bot to
zou it is al alyk gif ze dissaue the peopil vith ane appeirance and color of
the verity, quhidder ze have the verity for zou or nocht.


Sm. Gif ve believe the Catholic kirk as ve profes in our belief ve can nocht se
it, because our belief is of tha thingis quhilk are not subject to our sensis.


B. Be this argument zea believe not the Bible, because ze vil not deny bot it is
in lyk manner subject to our sensis, ze se thairfoir that zour argument is of na
strenth: For ansuer, Ve se the Congregatione of them of the quhilk the Kirk is
maid and composed, and zit ve do not persaue bot be faith that sik ane
congregatione is callit be god to the inheritance of the life euerlesting,
governed be the halie spirit in the deu preaching of his vord, and purgit from
syn be the blude of Christ throuche the mereit of his passione quhilk is
applyit to the membris thairof be the lauchful administratione of the
sacramentis: Thairfoir as in the Bible ve se the buke quhilk is vryttin, bot be
faith ve man believe that it is the vord of God quhilk is vryttin in it: Euin
sua ve se the Pastores of the kirk, and their flok quhilk is nurished be them,
bot ve persaue be faith only that they ar the co^gregatione quhilk is callit
be god to the inheriritance of life euerlesting as said is. And thairfoir the
visibilitie of the kirk is not repugnant to the article of our belief, or ellis
ather zour ki^k man be zit Inuisibil, or ze va^t ane of the chief articlis of
zour belief, And in very deid gif that be the treu ki^k quhilk z^ have in
Scotland, ze deny the article of zour belief, because it is not Catholic
according to the mening of the article of the belief, bot only in ane small
nuke of the varld.


OF THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE KIRK.
CHAP. XXVII.
Smeton THou vndirstandis not in quhat sens the kirk is callit Catholic, for
gif thou vndirstand it as thou vald appeir, that it sold be spread throuch the
hail varld, zour Roman kirk is not Catholic, because their be ma Paganis, and
Gentiles, nor quha professis the faith of the Roman kirk.


B. The kirk is callit Catholic for money reasonis, quhilk for the schortnes of
time nou I will supersed, assignand to zou ane in special, because it dois
comprehend the hail varld, as the hail varld vas promised to Christ for his
kingdom, and inheritance (Dabo tibi gentes hereditatem tuam, Ps. 2. Lucae. 24.
and possessionem, tuam terminos terrae. Oportebat Christum pati, and resurgere
a mortuis, Ps. 71.
and praedicari in nomineeius poenitentiam, and remissionem peccatorum per
omnes gentes. Dominabitur a mari vsque ad mare, and a Flumine vsque ad terminos
orbis terrarum.) i. I sal give to zou the nationis in heretage, and the extreme
bordoris of the varld in possession: It behouit Christ to dea, and rise from
the dead, and paenitence and remissione of synnis to be praeched in his name
throch al na^tionis: And his dominione salbe extendit from the ane sea to the
other, and from the flude (to vit Iordanis) to the utter borderis of the hail
earth: And siclykvther places infinite of the scripture quhairin the obedience
of the hail varld is promished to Christ be his omnipotent father of heauin:
sua that the Apostlis, and their successoris ar send to subdeu the hail earth
unto the obedience of Christis kirk, beginnand at Jerusalem unto the extreme
pairtis of the varld, as he commandit them to do: Not that the hail varld
sold be al at ane time subdeuit to him: bot because his impyre and kingdom
being anes established, it sal never decay, bot incresch, a^ddilat it self
continualie to the time that it have occupeit the hail varld as vas spokin lang
befoir be all the Prophetis, and as ve se fulfilled alreddie and passand
forduart fra day to day, because the Apostlis as they var commandit be Christ,
began to preach the Euangel at Jerusalem, and thaireftir it did incress and
dilate it self throuch inumerabil pairtis of the hail varld: And eftir the
Apostlis had endit their course, and seallit the treuth of the Euangel vith
their blude, their successoris in lyk manner did employ their labor for the
farther amplificatione of his kingdom: And eftir them the Pastores quha
succedit in their places trauellit in lyk manner to enlarge his kingdom, and
hes contiuuet euin unto our days, in the quhilk ve se the kirk of Christ
largely amplifeit in the greit cuntreyis of the Indis, quhair his name vas not
acknauleged befoir: And euin sua it vil incresch to the tym the hail varld be
subdeuit to him, according to his auinvord: This is ane cleir and manifest
declaratione of the universality of the kirk, and in quhat sens and mening the
kirk of Christ is callit Catholic, or universal confirmed be al ancient
doctoris of the halie kirk collectit of the Prophetis, and gathered of Christis
auin vordis. Sua sense zour neu Kirk of Scotland laitlie erected be Iohne kmnox
is not that quhilk began at Jerusalem, and ever continuand from time to time
dilated it self throuch the hail varld, as is cleir of al historeis, it is
manifest that it can nocht be Catholic: The matter is sua cleir that I mister
not onie farther demonstratione, ze being constrainit ather to schau that zour
kirk is that self sam quhilk ever hes continuet vpone the face of the earth sen
Christ, quhilk is impossibil to zou to do: or ellis that it is not Catholic: Of
this al they quha ar heir present may vndirstand hou lytil strenth zour
argument hes to prove zour intent: S. August. de vi^it Ecclesiae
for the kirk is not callit Catholic because that in ane time it is spread
throche the hailvarld bot in the manner quhilk I have declairit befoir. Albeit
as S. Augustine, Hierome, Hieron. co^tra Lucifer^a^os.
and other ancient vrytraris declaris according to goddis vord: It is universal
at al time in sik manner that it dois comprehend ane greitar pairt of the varld,
nor onie ane sect of heraetikis dois, or the synagogue of the Ieuis, albeit at
al times it be nocht sua large as the infidelis and Paganis: And in this mening
also ze se that the Roman kirk as it is only Catholic, this day comprehendis
ane greitar pairt of the varld, nor dois all the synagogis of the Ieuis, Aug.
lib. 3. contra Donatist. cap. 1.
or quhatsumeuer sect of haeretikis: Thairfoir Sayis S. Augustine that the
Sectis of Haeretikis ar obscure, and only in Corneris of the varld, in
comparesone of the universal and Catholic kirk, As ze quha follouis kmnox in
Scotland, and the follouaris of Calvin and Beze in Geneua.


S. Our reformed kirk is Catholic in that manner quhilk thou hes declairit and
having taken the beginning from the Apostlis hes ever continued in the varld,
and dilated it self, sua that it hes been spread throche the face of the hail
earth, albeit it hes not been ever manifest to the eais of men, bot in quhat
sumeuer pairt of the varld the treu professoris of the name of Christ hes been,
their I say our kirk hes been also, and is not only this day in Scotland, bot
throuche innumerabil pairtis of thevarld, quhair I doubt not bot their is money
quha hes not boued their knees to Baal.


B. Ze ansuere to me euin as the Donatistis did to S. Augustine, sua I will use
na^^ther argumentis to refel the vanity of zour ansuer, Aug. lib. de unit ate
Eccles.
nor thai quhilk S. Aug. used to refel the Donatistis: first the propheceis
quhilkis var foirspokin of the kirk that it sold be dilated throuch the hail
varld, vald have been in vain gif they had meanit of ane kirk quhilk could not
be manifeslie knauin to the Eeis of men: Because ve could never have assurance
of the fulfilling of onie sik Prophecy, Daniel 2.
As quhen Daniel sayis that the God of heauin sal steir up to him self sik ane
kingdom quhilk sal never be destroyit. And that the kingdom of Christ sal
occupy the hail earth: quhat assurance can ve have of this except ve may
persaue vith our eis that Christ hes erectit sik ane kingdom unto him self?
And zit ve can never persaue the same gif ve say that his kingdom comprehendis
only ane certan number of vnknauin men dispersit on the face of the earth, as
ze say: And hou can ze be abil to convict the Ieuis that this prophecy
foirspokin of the kingdom of Christ is fulfilled in zour kirk? for gif ze say
to them that zour kirk hes ever been throuch the varld as vas foirspokin of
the kingdom of Christ: They vil desire zou to schau that, quhilk gif ze can
nocht do, as ze profes zour selfis ze can nocht: They vil justly lauch at zour
fulishnes: As quhen Daniel foirspake of the impyre of the Greikis, and the
RomaneImpyre quhilk sold be befoir the kingdom of Christ, gif the Roman
impyre had never been mair knauin to the Eeis of the varld, nor zour kirk hes
been, quha vald ever have said that the Prophecy of the Roman impyre had been
fulfilled? or gif onie man had said it, think ze not that he vald have been
justly scornit be the hail varld? Hou than can ze eschaip bot ze expose zour
selfis to be may justly mockit bayth be the Ieuis and Gentiles? and that ze
make all the propheceis of the kingdom of Christ to have been in vain, gif he
had nane other bot ane fantastical kingdom quhilk ze imagine to zour selfis?
This is not my argument, bot the argument of S. August. aganis the Donatistis,
be the quhilk as they var convicted, sua ze, and al haeretikis in the varld ar
convicted: And to enter in farther consideratione of this matter, sen ze esteem
the Roman kirk to be the seat of the Antichrist as ze blaspheme, suppo^ vith
zour selfis that their had not been sik ane thing in the varld as the Roman
kirk quhen Martin Lauter begane, and imagine vith zour self that give ane Ieu
had been present, and requirit of Lauter to schau the Propheceis of Christis
kirk be the quhilk it vas foirspoki^ that it should occupy the hail varld: Ps.
2. and 71. and 102
That the portis of the kirk sold be oppin bayth day and nicht: Esai. 60 and
49.
That the princes and Monarcheis of the earth should be subdeuit unto it: Daniel.
2.
zea the Roman impyre it self: Mal. 1.
that his name sold be louit and glorifeit in it to the end of the varld:
Daniel. 2.
That it sold never be ouercummit be onie vthir kingdome] to co^uene to that
kirk quhilk he vas to erect I^ Almanie: quhat vald he have be ne abil to have
ansuered? quhat testimony could he have geui^ that that kirk had continued
ever sen Christ? that the kingis and Monarchis of the earth hes been subdeuit
unto it? Or that the impyre of Rome at onie time hes been obedient unto it? or
that the portis of it hes been oppin bayth day and nicht to resaue every man
at al time? or that in it the name of Christ hes ever been glorifeit? Al men
may esilie persaue that he vald have been vnabil to have maid onie ansuere: As
to us quha ar propirlie callit Catholics, ve have na difficulty in the matter,
because ve may sehau may cleirlie that all the Prophecies foirspokin of the
kingdom of Christ conuenis unto us, and that ve ar his inhaeritance: ve schau
hou that the kingdom of Christ began at Jerusalem according to Christis auin
command: hou that in ane schort space it vas embraced may zelouslie in
innumerabil pairtis of the varld, and ever continualie knauin and spokin of
vith greit admiration of the hail varld, hes incresced unto their dayis: hou
that it did may constantly ganesta^d the cruel, and blud thristie Emperoris
of Rome, as Nero, Domitian, Diocletian, and vtheris: Hou that in the middis of
thaj persecutionis it did grou and incresch miraculouslie, and at the last
brocl^t in obedience, and subiectione the Roman Emperoris as Constantinus, and
the rest of the Emperoris: hou it culd never be ouercummit be onie heresy or
schism: hou the portis of it hes been oppin bayth day and nicht to ressaue al
men: hou in it the name of Christ hes ever been louit, and honorir. S. Aug.
epist. 166.
Thairfoir as vryttis sanct Augustine aganis the Donatistis ve make it manifest
unto al men that the kingdom of Christ pertenis unto us, sen ve schau that the
propheceis quhilk var foirspokin of it, ar fulfillit in our kirk: As to zou (as
he said in lyk manner aganis the Donatistis) sen ze can nocht schau that their
prophecies ar fulfillit in zour synagogue, ze declair may cleirlie to the
hail varld, that it is not the kingdom, and inhaeritance of Christ: And quhen
the Donatistis ansuerit to him, that they had communicatione vith money quha
var spread throche the hail varld, S. Augustine desyrit them to produce
[literas communicatorias] that is, their letteris quhairbie they micht schau
that they aggreit vith sik other kirkis as they said var spread throche the hail
varld, quhilk because they could not do, they var convicted to be haeretikis,
and learis: be the quhilk argument ze ar convicted in lyk manner, for gif ze vil
se^d throch Spa^zie, throch Italy, throuch al Afrik, throuch al Asia, throuch
the hail Indis, throuch al Germany, throuch al France, and the rest of the
varld, excep it be in sum lytil nuke, ze vil not get onie sik letteris of
communicatione. And by that, they fra quhom ze vil obtene sik letteris, ar bot
neu intrudit men, and Apostatis from the Catholic religion, lyk unto zour
selfis. And hes na schau of the face of ane kirk, sen as sayis S. Cyprian
(Ecclesia est plebs sacerdoti adunata, and pastori suo grex adhaere^s,) the
kirk co^sistis of the peopil unit unto the priest, and ane flok adhaerent to
the auin pastore, bot ama^gis zou their ar na preistis, and they vith quho^ ze
vald seik communication, are not gatherit under ane pastore, bot dispersit lyk
vauering scheip vithout onie pastore: ze albeit ze micht schau this day
communicatione vith money pretendit kirkis laitlie erectit, zit zour kirk vald
be proui^ esilie not Catholic, be reassone Martin Lauter, and Iohne Calvin
quhen they began could not schau communication vith onie kind of kirk upon the
face of the earth. As to us ze se hou esie it is to schau that ve have
communication vith that kirk quhilk is spread throuche the hail varld: Gif ve
vil send to France, to Germany, to Spanzie, to Italy, to Pole, to the
innumerabil cuntreyis of the Indis bayth oriental, and occidental, ve vil find
that all the bischopis and Pastoris aggreis in ane doctrine of religion vith us,
and quhasoeuer hes been acknaulegit for lauchful bischopis, and Pastoris bayth
in Asia, and Afrik hes maid professione of that sam doctrine: Zea in our days
in the time of Adrianus the s^xt, bischop of Rome, the Patriarche of Alexandria
did send to Rome, and make professione of ane faith vith him. And the Patriarche
of Armenia com to Rome him self vith ane Archebischop, and tua bischopis to
acknaulege the bischop of Rome, and to profes unity of doctrine vith him: And
in the time of Julius the third the great Emperore of Ethiopia send in lyk manner
to Julius the third to have communicatione vith the kirk of Rome: and Pius the
fourt did constitut ane Patriarch their, quha vithin their feu zeiris only is
discessit: The greit Patriarche of Assyria quha hes ane greit number of
bischopis under him did cum to Rome for the lyk cause: And in the time of Pius
the fourt Abdisu the Patriarche of the kirkis quhilk ar bezond Euphrates unto
Ind, did cum in lyk manner: And to praetermit that in the general Concile of
Florence bayth the Greikis, and Armenianis did al aggrie in the professione of
ane faith vith the bischop of Rome: Nou presently the greit Emperore of the
Moscouitis intraittis vith Gregorius the threttent, quha is nou leuand, to haif
communicatione vith him in faith and religione: And thairfoir ze se zour selfis
that amangis them al quha professis the name of Christ ve only ar callit
Catholikis, not only be our selfis, bot euin be zou and al schismatikis: And
quhen onie of zou speikis of ane Catholic, he vndirstandis ane of them quha
professis our doctrine: For the quhilk cause sayis S. Augustine, that euin the
name [Catholik] did hald him in the kirk because that kirk euin be the
Haeretikis them selfis used ever to be callit the Catholic kirk, and gif they
had sepokin vtheruyse, na man vald have vndirstandin them: And the ancient
father Pacianus vrytand aganis the Nouatianis sayis (Christianus mihi nomen
est, Catholicus cognome^:) that is my name is ane Christian, and my surename
is ane Catholic, be the ane sayis he, I am discernit from the Ieuis, and
Paganis, be the other from the Haeretikis: Bot as to zou ze have na name
quhairbie ze may be discernit from haeretikis, sen ze ar content o^lie to be
callit faithful or Christianis, quhilk al haeretikis dois vsurp unto them, sua
ze vant ane surname except ze be callit Caluinistis: or Protestao^s: for ze ca^
nocht vithout extreme impudency call zour selfis Catholics: And thairfoir all the time that ever I vas amang zou nather red I, nor hard I of onie man, the
name Catholic: quhil I chanced to reid ane Catholic vryttar Dominicus Soto, and
thairfoir in zour belief, for Catholic ze say commo^lie universal kirk, as the
head of all the Protestaons Martin Lauter, for the kirk Catholic maid in his
Catechesme the Christian kirk, quhilk ze do only because convicted in zour auin
consciencis, nather may ze be callit Catholikis, nather zour neu erectit
synagoge the kirk Catholic or universal.


S. Thou may nocht be hard to have onie reassoning in this country aganis that
Religion, quhilk is confermit be act of parliament.


B. I abaid sum other ansuer of zou, at the lest their gentil men, quha ar heir
present, I believe salbe skarslie satisfeit: Bot because ze se zour self convict
and can gif na ansuer, the verity being sua cleir for my pairt, ze ar
constranit to sklent and make the act of Parliament ane buclar for zour defense
aganis al argumentis: Bot to cum to zour act of Parliament, Iohne kmnox, quha
vas na pastore bot intrudit him selff in the scheipfauld of Christ, About the
space of xxi zeiris bygane, schuke louse all the actis of Paipis, and
Emperoris, of Praelattis and king is maid be continual success of time, the
space of ane thousand five hundredth and threscoir zeiris, and zit ze for ane
act of parliament, maid nocht be ane king bot ane particular fauorar of zour
sect vsurpand the authority be zour moyen, vil stay disputation of onie head
of religione at this time. Quhairfoir I will fully resolve zou of this doubt be
the grace of God: I demandit the Erll of Mortone in Dalkeith, quha vas vpone
the Co^cile, at the making of the act: Quhat vas confirmit thairby, concerning
the religione? For ather it behouit to be (said I) the treuth of the Bybil, as
it is vrittin in the text, or sum certan expositione thairof, or generally
that, quhatsumeuer the ministeris preachis, or var to preach efteruart, sold
be ratifeit, as Goddis vord? gif it vas the treuth of the Bybil, as it is
contenit in the text, the act is superfluous, because they quha ar callit
Papistis never denyit the sam, Albeit the act vas maid to bring them to ane
neu religion, quhilk their foirfatheres miskneu: Giff it vas onie expositione
of the sam, it aucht ather to have been vryttin or prentit: Bot, their is
nather expositione vryttin, nor prented, except sum friuol negatiues, quhilk ar
embraced nocht only be the Ministeris of Scotland, bot be the Ieuis and
Paganis, as that, Christis body is nocht under the forms of breid and vine,
That their is noch seuin sacramentis etc. For the affirmatiuis ioynit heirvith
ar al thifteoulie stollin from the Catholic kirk, Quhairfor said I, it restis
that al quhatsumeuer the Ministeris sal speak in the pulpit is ratifeit be that
Act of parliament, quhilk is ane ungodly thing: For gif the general Conciles
of the hail kirk hes errit, as they falsely allege, quhy may nocht onie
particular man of them, preach erroneus doctrine for the treuth? Nor it is
nocht aneuche that ane minister, being justly reprouit be onie of his
brethrene, make ansuer, and say: Brother quhatsumeuir I teach in the pulpit, is
confermit treu be the act of parliament, quhairbie ze aucht to dea, as ane
transgressore thairof, because ze say that to be falls, quhilk the act of
parliament confermes to be treu: My lord Morton ansuerit, that Sanct Augustine
vas als vyse ane man, as onie of them, quha var on the Concile at the making
of that Act. Quhairfoir like as he vrait bukes of retractation, sua quhen ve
find onie act of parliament sayis he, vranguslie maid aganis God, and good
reassone, ve vil annul the sam, and estableis the contrare: And thairfoir zour
actis of parliament euin according to the judgment of the vittiast of them
that vas the diuy saris thairof, can nocht be ane sure ground quhairon onie man
may lean his faith considering the materis of faith ar nocht subject to onie
retractatione, as ar the actis of zour parliament.


OF THE CALLING OF KMNOX and the false ministeris of Scotland.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Sm. THou art very blasphemous aganis that treu pastore of God Iohne Kmnox,
saying that he intrudit him in the kirk of God vithout al calling.


B. Gif he had onie calling, it vas ather extraordinar, lyk as had the
prophetis befoir the cu^ming of Christ, or ellis ordinar, quhairbie ane
lauchfullie callit pastore, callis another be the sacrament of Ordour, and
onlaying of handis: gif he allege the first kind, it is necessar that he s^hau
the vision of the Angel, vith the circumstancis, and have miracles, lest the
peopil be seducit, or ellis na man is obleist to believe him: gif he had onie
ordinar vocation I pray zou declair the same.


S. He vas ordinarlie callit be the peopil.


B. The peopil is to be commendit, qua geuis obedient audience to ane pastore
lauchfullie promouit, bot quhair reid ze in the scripture, that ever ane
pastore vas callit be the multitude? or quha gave the multitude sic authority?
For I reid that S. Paul and nocht the peopil callit Titus and Timotheus, 1.
Tim. 4.
quha ressauit authority be the onlayng of his ha^dis: 1. Tit. 1.
and that he left Titus in Creta, that in every town he sold apoynt
Bischopis and preistis. And Christ in the Euangel of S. Iohne, S. Ioh. 20.
sayis, As the leuing father hes send me, sua send I zou, that is, as the
father send mevith pouar and authority to send vtheris, sua I send zou: that
nocht only ze may exerceise the office zour selfis, bot also ordane vtheris
thairto. This pouar is geuin be Christ to the Apostlis only, and to their
successoris, and in nauyse to the peopil, lyk as ever hes been practiced unto
this day. By that, the pouar quhilk is granted to the Ministeris of the kirk,
is nocht ane civil or politik pouar, bot heauinlie and divine, bot the peopil
hes na other pouar bot civil or politik as is may manifest and cleir: Zea
Calvin zour Master co^fessis that the peopil hes nocht pouar to administrat
the sacrament of Ordour, Calvin li. 4. institut. cap. 3. sect. 16.
bot that it appertenis only to the pastoris of the kirk, and the ressone of
this is may cleir, because it is ane thing may propirlie apertenand to the
government of the kirk to appoint good and lauchful pastoris: Bot the
government of the kirk appertenis nocht to the peopil, bot to the pastore, as
ye government of the scheipfauld apertenis not to the scheip bot to the
pastore: Quhairfoir gif Iohne kmnox be nocht callit, bot be the peopil, he hes
ingyrit him self in the scheipfauld aganis the ordinance of God. And albeit I
vald grant to zou that the peopil had pouar to call onie man, quhilk is may
falls, zit Iohann kmnox vald be destitute of al lauchful vocation, quhilk that
it may be may manifestly knauin to the gentil men, quha ar heir present, I will demand of zou tua quaestionis:

The ane is to schau me ane lauchful Magistrate, or authority, that appointed
Iohann kmnox for ane minister? For the peopil aganis the vil of the supreme
magistrate hes na pouar nor authority to estableis onie thing, mekil les, to
estableis ane thing of sua greit importance: to this quaestione ze can nocht
ansuer, Because the Quenis Majesty of Scotland, quha vas than Queen of France,
and our souerane lady her mother, than regent of Scotland, did bayth ganestand
the vsurpit authority of Ioha^nk mnox, and vald never approve that he sold
preach in the realm of Scotland: And he violently did oppose him self unto
them bayth: sua he is nocht callit be onie temporal authority quhilk is
lauchful, bot intrudit be the peopil agains the lauis, and ordinances of the
lauchful magistrate: The secund is, quhat religione professed they, quha
apoyntit Iohne kmnox ane minister? Gif they had been of our religion, they vald
never have apoyntit him: gif they var of that sam religion, quhilk he preached,
than it is necessar that sum vtheris sold have preched that religione unto
them, or he him self befoir he vas callit, and sua he could nocht be callit be
the peopil, or at the lest the first precharis of that doctrine could nocht be
callit be the peopil, quhilk is aueuch for my purpose.


Sm. Quhair thou sayis that Paul left Titus to appoint Bischopis and preistis,
thou art ignorant of the greik langage, quha turnis (Presbyter) to be ane
priest, for it is callit, ane eldar.


B. Albeit the native significatione of Presbyter be, that it is callit ane
eldar, zit as ve reid i^ the Epistles of Ignatius discipil, to the Evangelist
S. Iohne, Presbyter and Sacerdos in the primitive kirk signifeit ane thing.
Because gravity of maneris, quhilk is specially conioynit vith aige, vas
requirit in them quha var consecrat preistis. Siclyk, Erasmus quhom ze vil
grant nocht to have been ignorant of the greik, translaittis, (...), be
Sacerdotiu^. All the greik authoris, quha vndirstude very veil quhat (...) vas
callit, callis (...) and (...) bayth ane thing: And S. Hierom quha vndirstude
in lyk manner the greik tung, takis for ane thing Presbyter, and Sacerdos, as
Cyprian, Augustine, and the rest quha hes vryttin in latin, Hierom co^t.
lucife. Cypria. li. 1. epist. 9. August. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
never makand mentione of ane Minister. Gif ze sal seik the native
significatione of every vord, onie man may object be als good reassone to zou,
that (Minister verbi Dei) sold nocht be callit ane of zour pastoris, bot ane
gentil mannis seruand, quha reidis the chapture of the Bybil at hame, because
the propir significatione of (Minister) is ane seruand. And (verbum Dei) is
callit the Bible. Bot nou I pray zou schau me quhat pouar the peopil hes to to
choose ane pastore?


S. Ve reid in the Actis of the Apostlis that they commandit the multitud of
their disciples to espy out seuin men of good life full of the halie Ghaist and
visdome quhom they micht apoynt draconis to serve the tabillis. Act. 6.



B. Sua may ane Minister desire the people to search out ane good and godly
scholar quha may be presented unto them, and zit this presentation makis him
not ane Minister: Act. 6.
Ze may reid in the same Chapture ane lytil eftir, That their seuin men chosin
be the multitude resauit not authority of administratione in the kirk, bot be
the sacrament of Ordore, and onlaying of the handis of the Apostlis for it is
their vryttin, They brocht them in presence of the Apostlis, and eftir they
had prayit, they laid their handis upon them.


S. Gif thou require ane ordinar calling be onlaying of handis, Iohann kmnox
resauit it from zour Roman kirk.


B. Than ze man grant zour Master Iohann kmnox ane heretik, and Apostat quha
maid defectione thairfra, and thaireftir denyit his vocation: Attour that, The
pouar of Ordore is not sufficient to ane man to preach bot he man have also
jurisdiction over them to quhom he preachis, Iohann kmnox resauit never sic
jurisdiction fra the Roman kirk to preach in the Realm of Scotland,
thairfoir suppoise he receauit from it the Ordore of preisthead, zit he had na
pouar to preach nor to lauchfullie administrat the sacramentis, finalie ze ar
iniureous to Kmnox, affirming that he hes enterit anothir vay nor he confessit
him self, for he preachit in the town of Edinburgh, that gif Esaias,,
Hieremias and vtheris var prophetis, he vas ane prophet lykuyse, and mair nor
ane Prophet, sua that being demandit of the reverend father Master Niniane
Vingzet nou Abbot of Ratinsburgh of his authority, he ansuerit that he vas
extraordinarlie callit euin as vas S. Iohne the Baptist, And this he ansuerit
in publik befoir the people: Bot priuatlie he scheu him self to be callit in
ane other manner, that is be gunnis, and pistolis, for in ane conuention haldin
be him, Villox, and vtheris of their sect, as I vndirstude of ane nobil and
honorabil man quha can zit beir vitnes gif I lea or not, Villox proposed as ane
may vechtie matter to considder, be quhat vay they sold admit their
ministeris, for said he, gif ve admit them be the impositione of handis or
onie other ceremony vsit in ordinar calling, the lyk vil be ask it of us, that
ye schau that ve var admittit to the ministry vith sik ane cerimonie, be
pastoris quha teached in the kirk of Scotland befoir us: Iohann kmnox ansuerit
may resolutlie, buf, baf, man ve ar anes entered, lat se quha dar put us out
agane, mening that their vas not sa money gunnis and pistollis in the country
to put him out, as vas to intrud him vith violence: sua Iohann kmnox be his
auin confession entered not in the kirk be ordinar vocatione, or impositione of
handis, bot be impositione of bullatis and poulder in culringis and lang
gunnis, sua ze mister not to troubil zou farther in seiking out of Iohann kmnox
vocatione.


Minister. Their is na dout bot extraordinarlie Ioha^n kmnox vas raised up to
ruit out idolatry out of this country, sua as obseruit ane of our faithful
brethrene he vas may justly callit kmnox (pepulit quia voce locustas) and be
him as be Martin Lauter lykuyse, Apoc. 19.
that man of syn the Antichrist vas reuelit, quha sittis vpone the seauin
hillis in the town quhilk hes dominione over the hail varld, Apoc. 17.
quhairbie na other may be vndirstand except the Paip of Rome, sic is the
ambitione and corruptione of the maneris of the hail town of Rome that it is
direct repugnant to the life of treu Christianis. I knau zour Germane Papistis
var offendit that be the providence of God that halie man sold be callit (...)
ane lauar for this name is dreuin from the greik verb (...) quhilk signifeis I
vesche, be reasone he reneuit the treu doctrine of the lauar of regeneration,
quhilk befoir vas obscruit be the Papistis.


B. Lyk as the Devil callit Lucifer ane berar of licht transfiguris him self in
ane Angel of licht, and playis the Aip to god, his Apostlis dois lykuyse
counterfute the may excellent of goddis Elect taking to them selfis names of
excellency, sua Simon Magus vas callit the verteu of god: and Manichaeus
callit him self the Apostle of Christ make and sum alteraratione in his name
Ma^nichaeus, quasi funderet manna, siclyk I micht speik of the Eunomianis,
Luciferianis, them quha var callit (...) and vtheris innumerabil, As to the
mystery of zour Master and prophet kmnox, quhair ze apply his name to the
reuelatione of the Antichrist, I think ze micht mair justly have callit him
kmnox quasi nox, a nocendo: for he hes been very noy sum to Christis kirk quha
vas his mother, sua that for the desolatione quilk he hes maid in Scotland he
may be callit (...), Apoc. 9.
perdens: For in respect of his vil quha had ever in his mouth, [Ruit out, Ruit
out] their vas never ane gretar destroyar of policy, lauis, and al thingis
befoir buyldit, erectit, ordinit and established the space of threttene
hundredth zeiris, lik as the name of Mahometis hes the sam signification a (...)
destruere, Deuteronomy. 29.
perdere because he destroyit the Christian religion throuch out al tha pairtis
quhilk nou ar under the ditio^ of the Turk, As to zour other germane prophet I
knau he vrait his name not only Martin Luter fra the greik verb (...) after
the custume of other Germane prophetis Melanchton, Dryander, Hosiander, quhais
fatheris names var blak earth, Aikman, Halieman: bot to declair his
singularity in the bukis quhilk he vrait in his germane vulgar tongue he callit
him self Lauter a lauo quasi, lautor, ane clengear of the people from the
filthenes quhilk they contracted in the captivity of Babylon, for it pleased
him sua to term the humil obedience of al nationis to the kirk of Christ, zea
he delytit mair to be callit Lauter nor (...) because in the germane tongue it
signifeis pure and clean: Nou albeit he hes chosin unto him self this surname
of excellency his father being callit luder quhilk signefeis dirt in the
Germane tou^g, or Lutear quasi Luteus, zit lauter sal have na cause to complane
that I inuie the excellency of his name, for sense I have this conference in
my vulgar tongue I sal ever unless I forzet my self call him eftir that name
quhilk he tuk to him self vryttand in his vulgar tongue, because I knau perfytlie
sic is the providence of God, that he turnis they thingis to the ignominy of
the vickit quhilk they think may glorious: for fra the theme to the quhilk he
referris the deductione of this name cummis also (diluuium) quhairbie the varld
vas anes destroyit, sua that as the name (...) aggreit very veil to Iohann
kmnox, Apoc. 9.
it may lykuise may justly pertene to Martin Lauter quha hes destroyit the
C^tholik religion sua far as lay in his pouar throuch the hail latin impyre.
Nou to cum to zour obiectione, quhair ze say that nane vthir may be vndirstand
be him quha sittis on the seuin hillis in the town quhilk hes dominion over the
hailvarld except the Paip of Rome be resone of the ambitione and corruptit
maneris of that town, and that S. Iohne speakis of the Antichrist in tha
vordis: This obiectione seruis zou for ane commone place in zour preachingis to
vithdrau the people from the obedience of Christis vicar in the earth,
quhairbie ze schau may manifestly zour malice and ignorance, Apoc. 17.
for albeit that place of S. Iohne be in very deid vndirstand of the town of
Rome, zit it seruis na thing to zour propose, because bayth according to the
plane vordis of the text, and the interpretation of ancient vryttaris it aucht
to be referrit to the Emperoris of Ro^e quha may cruelly did persecute the
kirk of god, and in special the Paipis and hie preistis of the same bischopis
of Rome, the space of thrie hundredth zeiris fra Nero to Co^stantinus Magnus,
during the quhilk time al kind of Idolatry did ring cheiflie in the town of
Rome above al other nationis of the varld, Apoc. cap. 17. and 18.
for the quhilk cause S. Iohne sayis (That the kingis of the earth hes playit
the harlat vith her, and hes drunkin of the coup of her fornication) because
that the hail varld vas contaminat vith her Idolatry: And as vitnessis S. Leo
bischop of Rome that scho vas the mother and maistres of al error in sic manner,
that scho had ane temple callit (...).i. quhairin vas all the Idolis of the
varld, for as they subdeuit every natione to their impyre sua they brocht the
innumerabil Idolis of sua money diuerss nationis of the hail varld to the
foirsaid kirk of Rome their to be vorshipped: He sayis also that the town of
Rome vas drunkin vith the blude of Martyris, Apoc. 17.
declairing the cruel persecution of the Roman Emperoris, be the quhilk sua
exceiding ane greit number of Martyris var put to may cruel and horribil
death, that skarslie burreois could be fundin to satisfy their inquensibil
thrist of the innocent blude of the Christianis, as is manifest of al
historeis, and of the louabil memory of their names quhilk ar zit keipit in
the town of Rome, and of the covis in the quhilk is they sumtyme did lurk to
escheu a lytil the furious rage of persecutione and of their may halie
relics, that almaist the hail town of Rome is sanctifeit be the blude of the
Martyris: for the quhilk cause S. Paul vryttand to the Thessalonianis, 2 Thessalonians.
2.
sayis (Iam enim mysterium operatur iniquitatis) for nou the hid mystery of
iniquity dois vork, Mening of Nero and other cruel Emperoris quha mouit be the
spirit of the Antichrist, quhilk he callis the mystery of iniquity, vas to
persecute the kirk of Christ: 1. Pet. 5.
And S. Petir him self be reassone of the great confusion of idolatry of al
nationis quha resortit into Rome callis it Babylon, saying the kirk quhilk is
in Babylon salutis zou, mening of the kirk of Rome, as amangis vtheris
interpreitis S. Hierom: quhairof zour malice may esilie be knauin to the hail
varld, because ze deny that S. Petir be Babylon in this place vndirstandis the
town of Rome, to the effect ze be not co^stranit be express testimony of
scripture to grant that S. Petir vas in Rome, bot in the revelation of S. Iohne
be Babylon ze vil have na thing vndirstand bot the town of Rome, albeit ze
have na reasone for zou quhy it sold be vndirstand vtheruyse in the epistle of
S Petir nor in the revelation of S. Iohne: Apoc. 17.
Heir I have declarit to zou the treu mening of that place of S. Iohne quhilk
ze abuse. And I say farther mouit be good reasone that it can nocht be
vndirstandin of the kirk of Rome because S. Paul him self louit gretu^lie the
Romany quha had than embraced the Christian Religion, and it vas not the kirk
of Rome quhilk did persecute the Martyris of the quhilk S. Iohne speikis, bot
be the contrare it vas the kirk of Rome quhilk thoillit the persecutione of the
cruel Emperoris, and in special the Papis, quha var almaist al Martyris, befoir
the dayis of Constantinus Magnus: Mairatour al Christian Catholic men hes ever
honorit the kirk of Rome from the first fundation of it in the dayis of the
Apostlis, to this present for their spiritual mother, as I have schauin to zou
befoir in my last conference, quhilk they vald never have done gif they had
been of zour opinione, or estemit her to be the hure of Babylon as ze may
impudentlie blaspheme: Quhair as ze conclud zour obiectione be reasone of the
ambition and corrupted maneris of the town of Ro^e, I ansuere to zou according
to our Scottis proverb, He sold have ane hail pow, quha callis his inchtbour
neitie now: And gif I do not content zou vith this ansuer, S. Hierom quha
vndirstud the Apocalypse of S. Iohne alsueil as ze, vil make zou ansuer for me:
quha speikand of the town of Rome vryttis in this manner (Est quidem ibi sancta
Ecclesia, sunt trophaea Apostolorum and Martyrum, est Christi vera confessio,
est Apostolorum praedicata fides, and gentilitate calcata in sublime quotidie
erigitur vocabulum Christianum, sed ambitio, potentia, magnitudo vrbis, videri,
and videre, salutari, and salutare, laudare and detrahere, and tantam hominum
frequentiam videre a proposito Monachorum, and quiet aliena sunt.).i. The treu
and halie kirk is in the town of Rome, their ar the taikinnis and triumphis of
the victory of the Apostlis and Martyris, their is the treu confession of
Christ, their is the faith quhilk vas preachit be the Apostlis, and the name of
tha^ quha professis Christ is daily exalted, gentilisme being trampit under
fute, bot ambition, potentnes, the greitnes of the town, the desire to se and
to be seen, to gif, and tak guddayis, to love and lak vtheris, and to se sik
ane multitud of men are not convenient to the purpose of ane Monk, or the
tra^quillitie of ane religious man: Ze se thairfoir that ze ar mair skar nor
vas S. Hierom, quha vald not separat him self from communion vith the kirk of
Rome, quhatsumeuer corruption of maneris he did persaue in sum private personis:
Bot ze, lyk the Donatistis, vil have na thing ado vith the kirk of Rome, because
as ze allege their is in it sum corruption of maneris, albeit ze zour selfis
euin according to zour auin confession be replenished vith al kind of vickitnes.


OF THE ANTICHRIST.
CHAP. XXIX.
Minister. VEar not sua ignorant bot ve knau perfytlie that S. Iohne in his
reuelatione speakis not only of thingis passed, bot also of thingis quhilk var
beginn and to be compleit quhen he vrait his prophecy, and of thingis to be
completit lang thaireftir, and lykuyse that money thingis quhilk var spokin of
Rome var fulfillit in the cruel Emperoris: zit ve affirm may constantly
that S. Iohne speakis of ane other Antichrist quhilk vas to invade the treu
kirk of God ane lang time eftir the cruelty of the infidel Emperoris sold
ceise, quhairbie gif ve considder his propirteis aricht, nane other may be
vndirstand except the Paip of Rome:


B. I grant that by the Emperoris quha ar zit cummit S. Iohne menis of ane
vthir Antichrist quhilk sal invade the treu kirk, bot qunair ze allege that
nane other may be vndirstand except the Paip of Rome, I desire zou to produce
ane solid reasone to conferme zour assertione, vtheruyse al men of good
judgment may persaue hou esie it is to me to reject the sam, as may falls and
vnuorthie of onie farther improbation. Bot nou to the end that al me^ may
vndirsta^d quha may justly be callit the Antichrist, I will propone sum of his
chief markis quhilk ar setfurth in Goddis vord, that thairbie ve may knau him
and keip our selfis that ve be not seducit be his vickit doctrine: his
propirteis contrare unto them 2 Thessalonians.
that he be ane man hauand assistance of the devil in all operation: Esaiae. 11.
lyk as the seuin giftis of the halie Spirit restit vpone the manly nature of
Jesus, Mat. 16.
that the sone of the leuing God is cu^mit in the flesh, sua sal the principal
but quhairat he sal schut be to deny Christis cu^ming in the flesh, 1. Ioh. 2.
and the hail vorkis done 1. Pet. 2.
Sua in the Antichrist sal be ane denial of al doctrine befoir established, and
ane Mass of al erroris befoir co^de^nit may impude^tlie teached for treuth,
and contempt of al good commandimentis and godly life, S. Mat. 19.
zea ane provocation to al impiety: Lyk as be the Consil of Christ his
disciples they micht endeavor them selfis haillelie to the service of God, Euin
sua the Antichristis disciples be his consile sal think them selfis may
unhappy gif they have not vyfis, not uithstanding their estait and aige sal be
repugnant to sik mariageis as they sal desire, For Daniel testifeis that the
heart of him and his disciples sal be brunt vith the lust of vemen: Daniel. 11
Lyk as Christ began his preaching in the treu 2 Thessalonians. 2.
quhilk befoir acknauleging the lauchful pastore vas the treu Jerusalem or
kirk of God, and nou be defectio^ is maid the seat of the Antichrist, quhair of
vil inseu great desolatio^ and ane suddane ruin: Lyk Matt. 16.
bot his halie spirit sold gyde her i^ al treuth to the end of the varld, sua
sal the Antichrist teach the plane contrare, to the e^d it may be collectit
that Christ vas ane deceauer makand ane falls promeiss, for he sal preach that
the hail kirk hes embraced money headis, of erroneous doctrine: Lyk as Act. 1.
and thaireftir grouis quhil it have occupeit the hail varld, Euin sua the
Antichrist vil may impudentlie affirm that the hail varld vas in blindness
befoir his cumming, and persuade his disciples that obstinatlie they thoil the
dead for mentenance of his erroris, quhilk obstinatnes paintit vith the color
of patience vil seduce money, and be thocht falsely miraculous proceiding of
the Spirit of God, and make them quha vil be seducit, S. Paul
be ane blind and inordinat zeal becum enraged to persecute the treu
Christianis may extremlie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
quhil he have dilated his poysone vniuersalie, that is quhil he have in all
pairtis quhair the kirk is, professed ennimeis to the same, laboring for her
destruction: bot quhen it is at the heicht it vil lest only three zeir and ane
half, Apoc. 11.
quhil as be the contrare to the great comfort of the treu Catholics, Christis
kingdom being anes at the heicht sal lest for euermair: Daniel. 7.
Gene. 49.
Euin sua the last Antichrist be operation of the devil sal be generat of the
seid of Dan, quhen the Impyre of Rome salbe sua imminished that it sal skarslie
have the majesty of ane impyre, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
quhilk be the preaching of the Antichrist vil resaue great hurt: for he and his
disciples vil be may desirous to eiect lauchful kingis, Princes Dukis, Lordis
and have them selfis placed in their roumes albeit be hypocrisy they vil
labor to clok the same and appeir to seik na les: first under pretense of
liberty bring and kingis and princes subject to the Impyre of Rome from
obedience to the same, to the effect that thaireftir every ane of them may be
the mair esilie ouerthraui^: Lyk as Christ vas praefigurat in the auld lau be
tua beastis commonly, sua S. Iohne in his revelation bringis in tua beastis
for compleitting of the body of the Antichrist, calling ane of them ane
blasphemous beist absolutely, quhairbie is signifeit ane professit Apostat and
infidel, Apoc. 13.
the other ane beast having tua hornis lyk the lamb, and zit notuithstanding
spekand as dois the dragon, quhairbie he signifeis ane Patriarche of Haeretikis
quha albeit he praetend the mantenance of faith and lauchful calling zit in
effect he aggreis vith the formar beast, quhilk S. Iohne callis the vorshipping
of the other beast: Apoc. 13.
And that quhilk is spokin be S. Iohne of the beast vith the seuin headdis and
ten hornis, may be vndirstandin not only of the vicious Emperoris of Rome quha
did persecut the primitive kirk, bot also of the last Antichrist: for the
headis signifeis diuerss Haeresiarchis and Maisteris of falls doctrine. The
hornis signifeis the assistance of temporal pouaris quhairbie their impiety is
defendit: And their as S. Iohne sayis, Apoc. 17
resauis pouar at ane hour vith the beast: for lyk as they quha ar Ministeris
deput to preach in the kingdom of the Antichrist dispossessis lauchful
preistis and Bischopis: Euin sua temporal men infectit vith their pernicious
doctrine vil think them selfis inferior in spirit and courage to their
brethrene, unless they lykuyse eiect temporal Magistratis me^tenaris of the treu
religion, as Kingis, Quenis, Dukis and Erlis, occupeand violently their
roumes, for the quhilk cause S. Iohne callis them not kingis, bot having pouar
as kingis: Ibid.
Lyk as S. Iohne declairis his cumming be the lousing of ane vyld beast, sua he
vil not be eschamit to call him self ane vnda^tonit beast quhilk may not be
ouercu^mit: And his kingdom vilbe at the heicht quhen the devil sal be loused,
quhilk laxation vil be knauin be universal vitkitnes, and infidelity almaist
throuch the hail varld, Mat. 24. Dan. 12.
vith exceiding great feir to profes Christis doctrine, and the sacrifice of his
body and blud callit the Mess: Sik as is this day in Scotland, and Ingland
quhairin is ane viue image of the kingdom of the Antichrist, quhairin great
desolation may be seen in the halie places, Matt. 24. Apoc. 11.
and great persecution of the treu Catholics: For in the Antichristis kingdom
abhominabil hurdome vil be placed in the kirk for he preasthead, and
Sodomitical syn as bougrie, incest, and adultery vilbe honorit as Marriage: He
is callit the beast upon quhom the hure sittis, that is be quhais doctrine the
Authority of the hure above the kirk is approved: 2. Tim 2.
For as Christis doctrine admittis nane of the feminine kind to beir reul in
the kirk, sua the disciplis of the Antichrist vil promoue not only Bairnis,
and Idiotis bot V^me^ also in place of bischopisa^d hie preistis: for of ane in
tha cu^treyis quhair the Antichrist sal be best obeyit Sanct Iohne spekis may
planelie in his revelation [Permittis mulierem Hiezabel quae se dicit
prophetissam, Apoc. 2.
docere, and seducere seruos meos, scortari, and edere ex iis quae simulachris
immolantur, and dedi illi tempus vt resipisceret a fornicatione sua, and no^
resipuit,]. i. Thou sufferis the voman Hiezabel quha sayis that scho is ane
prophetiss beri^g office in the kirk, to teach and deceive my seruandis, and
play the harlat and eat of tha thingis quhilk ar offerit to Idolis, and I have
geuin her time to repent from her fornication and harlatrie, bot scho hes not
done poenitence: And agane (Quantum glorificauit se and in deliciis fuit,
ta^tum date illi and tormentum, Apoc. 18.
quia dicit in cord suo, consideo Regina, and vidua non sum, and luctum
neutiquam videbo). i. Sua far as scho hes exaltit her self and leuit in
ryattousnes, give her als great torment and murning, because scho sayis in her
hairt, I sit ane Queen in my throne, and I sal not se murning or lamentation:
Apoc. 13.
for he vil teach that notuithstanding the grace of Christ it is impossibil to
resist the suggestionis of the Devil, or that onie man hes pouar to do
vtheruyse nor he dois: he vil may blasphemouslie affirm that all the vorkis
quhilk the treu Christianis dois mouit be the spirit of God ar the vorkis of
the Devil, and that God dois all the mischief quhilk is vrocht be him and his
disciples, this is the vorshipping of the dragon quhairof S. Iohne speikis in
his revelation: As Christ is considerit in propir person 2. Tim. 4. Iudae ep.
Apoc. 21.
or Ioynis their tua togidder vithout repentance: for the quhilk cause not only
aucht they thingis to be attribut to the great Antichrist quhilk he in propir
person performis, bot they thi^gis also quhilk ar performet be his disciples
in his name and be imitation of him eftir his death, euin to the aucht
generation: As S. Augustine vrait of Arrius that his pane in hell vas not definit
befoir the time that his haeresie come to the heicht, Apoc. 17.
and vas alluterlie extinguished: This menis S. Iohne vryttand, in this manner,
[Videntes bestiam quae erat and non est, etsi est). i. seand the beast that vas
and is not, albeit he be: and, (Quinque ceciderunt, vnus est, alius nondum
venit, and cum venerit, oportet ipsum breue tempus manner, and bestia quae erat
and non est, and ipse 8. est, and de nu^ero 7 est, and in in^eritu^ vadit:). I.
^yue ar destroyi^, pres^^lie their is ane, anevthir is not zit cu^mit, and
quhen he cummis, he man bid ane schort time, and the beast quha vas and is not,
is the aucht, and zit nothuithstanding he is of the number of the seuin
headdis: 1. Cor. 8. 1. Timo. 2. Apoc. 13. Apoc. 16. Apoc. 9. 2. These. 2.
for this difference and opposition is to be markit cheiflie, that quhair
Christ is only ane head: In the kingdom of the Antichrist their sal be money,
quhilk ar signifeit quhylis be the number of tua, quhylis of thrie quhylis of
ten, and sik other numbris quhilk ar expressit in the revelation of S. Iohne:
For ane great number of Deuillis sal adioyn them selfis in separabillie in all
operation vith men of vain, curious and ambitious spiritis quhairbie they vil
make them abil to do they thingis to the great admiration of ignorantis quhilk
passis the nature of man: Their ar lykuyse the false miraclis quhairbie simple
people geuin to the liberty of the flesh, and fleing travel vil be seducit and
may miserabillie deceauit: Sua that the cumming of the Antichrist vil be at
that time quhen be the negligence and slugagenes of the lauchful Pastoris, al
kind of iniquity abou^dis, Zacha. 11. Matt. 24.
and the deuillis sal possess men vith sik force and vehemency as in the
primitive kirk the Apostlis var possessit be the halie spirit: Zit
nothuithstanding the multitude of sa money contrarious headdis amang the
disciples of the Antichrist, he vil find out and choose ane Name quhairbie he
vill distinguish his disciplis from al vtheris, common to them al, quhais
signification gif it be veil obsernetvil be directly repugnant to the
signification of this vord (Christ) as it is the name of our saluiour, and as
from it al treu vorshipparis of God ar namit Christianis: ^Hippolit in orat de
consum. mundi.
And albeit at the beginning he vil praetend ane great humility and luf of
goddis honor, zea have participatio^ of tha sacramentis quhilk var institut be
God, and reverence the vord of god, and declair him self ane may vehement
ennimie to al Idolatry, Matt. 24.
to the effect that as Christ him self hes foiruarnit us, he may seduce, gif it
be possibil, euin the elect, and them quha as their consciences dytis them
feitis God vnfe^zeitlie: Zit in hairt he vil be sua proud that he vil not only
conte^n al supre^ pouaris and Magistratis 2. Petr. 2. Judas epi. canon.
bot also craif they thi^gis to be attributit unto him, quhilk ar propir to God
only: for S Paul vryttis to the Thessalonianis (as I said befoir) that ane
greit defection from the Roman impyre sal be befoir the cumming of the
Antichrist, saying, unless first their be ane defection (mening not only from
the faith bot from the impyre of Ro^e also) And that man of syn be reueilet
quha is ane Aduersar exaltand him self aganis al them quha ar callit God, 2.
These. 2.
or vorshippit as having Divine pouar, sua that he sal sit in the kirk of God
vantand him self as gif he var God: Nocht that he sal erect ane kirk of neu,
and dedicat it to the service of God, for his trauelvil be bestouit mair on
dou^e casting nor erecting: Bot because be eiecting lauchful Pastoris (quhilk S.
Iohne me^is be the seaging of the halie city) he vil place his auin
abominatio^ in Jerusalem that is in that kirk quhilk befoir the imbraceing of
the pernicious doctrine of the Antichrist, vas the temple of God quhen the
people acknauledgit for their Pastor him quha had lauchful vocation: He is
callit may justly ane aduersar because as obseruis Tertullian: Tertul. de
praescript. Haeret.
Al Haeretikis in quhom the spirit of the Antichrist dois regnevsis ever to
destroy and not to buyld, to improve and not to confirm, to doubt and not to
gif credit, to ganesay and not to aggrie vith vtheris quha praeceidit them,
and finalie to propone na doctrine propir to them selfis insafar as they
disagrie from the Catholic kirk, except it be negative: And as testifeis the
ancient and Godly father Hippolitus the only defense of the disciples of the
Antichrist quhen they fall in disputation vith the treu Christianis vil be,
Hippolitus orat. de consum. mundi.
that mouit be sik praetencis as he vil forge to obscure the verity, they deny
al thingis quhilk ar brocht aganis them: for the quhilk cause in the letteris
of the name of the last Antichrist not only may ve find the number sax
hundredth, saxtie sax, Apoc. 13.
as vitnessis S. Iohne: bot also as Hippolitus supponis money vthir names
expressand sindrie of his condicionis, and contenand lykuyse the foirsaid
number: Amangis the rest ve may find expressit be the letteris of his name his
great seal quhilk is the verb ((...).) and fra it ane propir name also deducit
contenand the foirsaid number exactlie asit is reuelit be S. Iohne quhilk may
be (...) for sua it aucht to be vryttin and pronunced (...), A 1 P 100 N 50 O
70 (...) Y 400 M 40 E 5. su^ma (...) 666.
or (...) sua that the sound of ((...)) and ((...)) be skairslie persauit: For
declaration he^rof the halie father Hippolitus vryttis in this manner [Sigillum
illius tam in front, quam in dextera manu est Calculus (...). At vt opinor,
neque enim certo scio permulta reperiuntur nomina quae numerum illum habeant,
sed dicimus fortasse scriptura^ illius sigilli esse ((...)). I. Nego: Nam antea
quoque hostis ille, nobis aduersarius opera ministrorum suorum. I.
idololattaru^ Christi Martyrs hortantium, Negato aiebat Deum tuum crucifixum:
Tale erit, tempore illius honestatis omnis osoris sigillum, dicens, Nego
creatorem caeli and terrae. Nego baptisma, Nego adoratione^ a me Deo praestari
solitam] I. The seal of the Antichrist quhilk his discipillis sal ressaue bayth
in the foirhead and richt hand, is signifeit be the letteris of his name,
quhais number be calculatio^ extendis to sax hundredth saxtie sax: Bot as I
suppon, nather knau I perfytlie, their be money names composit of the letteris
of the name of the Antichrist quhilk contenis the number sax hundredth saxtie
sax:

Bot peradventure ve may say that his great seal is signifeit be ane vord
composed of the letteris of his name quhilk is ((...)) and signifeis I deny:
For befoir this time also, this our auld ennimie be the travel and diligence of
his ministeris to vit the Idolateris exhorting Christis martyris, said may
impudentlie, Deny that thy God vas crucifeit: Siclyk at that time quhen the
Antichrist in propir person ane haittar of al honesty sal appeir, this sal be
ane singular taikin quhairbie he may be knauin, because he and every ane of his
disciples sal ever have in their mouth ane stif denial of al verity, saying, I
deny that God hes sik pouar that he micht have created the heauin and earth: I
deny that Baptism hes onie strenth to purge men from their synnis: I deny the
manner and custume quhairbie befoir I vsit to serve god: Zea not only, (...)
bot (...) also the verb, is in ane certan manner the name of the Antichrist
expressand that infidelity quhilk be operation of the Devil sal be impre^ted
in the hairt of him and al his Disciples, lyk as he ingrauit it in the heart of
Eua seduceand her in Paradise, Genes. 3.
saying, Non moriemini.i. Ze sal not dea. As be the contrare Amen, quhais
signification is plane repugnant to (...), is in ane certan manner ane of the
names of our saluiour Jesus Christ, as vitnessis S. Iohne in his revelation,
Haec dicit Amen testis fidelis et verus, Apoc. 3.
principium omnis creaturae: This sayis (Amen) the faithful and treu vitnes,
the beginning of al thingis created: And as in the kirk of Christ al Prayeris,
al Benedictionis, al Tha^kisgeui^g, al Articlis of faith al Propheceis
concerning goddis promises, al treu interpretationis, and leaso^nis of halie
scripturis al apoyntment al couenantes of God vith his people, ar concludit,
confermit, and seall it be Amen, signefeand Est, Veru^ Est, etiam. S. Paul 2.
Cor. 1.
As S. Paul interprettis this mystery vrytand to the Cor. (Na^ Dei filius
Jesus Christus qui intervos per nos praedicatus est per me et Syluanum, ac
Timotheum, non fuit, (Etiam, and Non) sed (Etiam) per ipsum fuit: quotquot enim
promissiones Dei, per ipsum sunt (Etiam), and per ipsum (Amen) Deo ad gloriam
per nos). 1. For Christ the sone of god quha vas preachit amangis zou be me and
Syluanus, and Timotheus vas not (Zea and na] bot vas (Zea) only, For all the
promises quhilk God hes maid be him ar (Zea) that is be him they ar ratifeit,
and be him they ar (Amen) that is they ar confirmed be Goddis great seal (Amen)
that be us the gloir may redound unto God. Be the co^trare the Antichrist vil
end all the mystereis of his iniquity vith (...) Nego, Non, Non est verum:.1.
Na, It is not sua, I deny that ever onie sik thing hes been.] And his
Ministeris vil conclude al their sermonis vith denial of tha thingis quhilk
befoir be the spirit of God hes been approuit, and confirmit: As all the propir
articlis of their belief vil be negative contenand plane contradiction to al
treu faith: And finalie they vil deny the fulfilli^g of goddis promishes maid
unto his kirk Catholic, Zea euin that quhilk vith ane aith God the father maid
unto his sone Jesus Christ, Psalm. 109.
that the preisthead and offering of Christis body and blude under the forms
of breid and vine, quhilk be the kirk is callit the Mess, sal not cease upon
the face of the earth unto the end of the varld: Because the Antichrist and his
disciples vil indeuoir their hail travel to the abolishing of this sacrifice,
as vitnessis the halie prophet Daniel: Daniel. 12
Q^hairfoir in the name of the last and great Antichist ve sold may
diligently observe gif ve find be the letteris tha^rof not only his number
666. expressed bot also his great seal (...). Nou to make application of tha
thingis quhilk I have spokin of the Antichrist in general: The number of the
name of Mahometis the first of the tua beastis.
lyk as s. Iohne inducis ^ua beastis to compleit the body of the Antichrist,
Euin sua their ar tua horribil beastis acknavledgit be the kirk Catholic
throu^h the hail varld for notabil persecutaris of Ch^istis kirk: The ane is
Mahometis in the gr^^k impyre, the other Martin Lauter in the latin impyre:
(...) 40 (...) 1 (...) 70 (...) 40 (...) 5 (...) 300 (...) 10 (...) 200 Su^ma
(...) or 666.
For lyk as the letteris of every ane of the names of their compleittis
exactlie the number of the Antichrist, euin sua it is may esie to apply to
every ane of them all the propirteis of the Antichrist quhilk I have befoir
rehersit: For their is na doubt bot Mahometis hes been, and is ane very
notabil ennimie to the kingdom of Christ, quha had for ane of his parentis ane
Ieu as treu and faithful men reportis, Apoc. 13.
and asc^yuit unto him self tha thingis quhilk ar propir to the halie Ghaist,
lyk as all the rest of the propirteis of the Antichrist may be may esilie
acco^modat unto him. Martin Lauter is the other beast in quhais name also this
number is compleit, The number of the name of the other beast Martin Lauter.
And that ve sold nocht doubt bot he is the other beast, be the providence of
God in his auin vrytingis he callis him self ane beast, Saying. M 30 A 1 R 80 T
100 I 9 N 40 L 20 A 1 V 200 T 100 E 5 R 80 Summa (...) or 666.
Vos Papistae ab anteriori part, vos tumultuosi a posteriori, vos Diaboli ab
omni part incitate, venamini, exagitate alacriter, vera^ habe^is fera^ ante
vos, iace^te Lutero salui estis and victoria^ obtinuistis.i. Ze Papistis, ze
troubilsu^ men, ze deuillis befoir me, behind me, and on al syd set on me, call
me forduart, and hunt me, ze have befoir zou ane very beast, gif luter be
ouercummit ze ar saif and have obtenit the victory: Quhat beast meanit Lauter
of in this place, except of that serpent be the quhilk the Antichrist is
signifeit in the scripture? As he declairit may planelie of him self quhen he
first begane to impugn the faith, that the Catholic kirk sold find him Ane
edder in the hie vay, Apoc. 13. Genes. 49
and serpent in the rod byta^d the horse houis that the rydar may fall bakuart:
Quhair of I can collect na other thing bot as God mouit Cayphas to speik
prophecy quhilk he vndirstude not, Ioann. 11.
sua he hes mouir Martin Lauter albeit in general termis, and obscu^lie to
apply this prophecy to him self as descendit of the tryb of Dan, lyk as very
money Ieuis mareis vith the Germanis, quhilk mystery unless be instinction of
God he had confessed it him self, vald have been vtheruyse vnknauin to the
varld. He vitnessis be manifest vryt that he exaltit him self above al diui^
pouar, saying, Rectum permanere oportet quicquid ego scripsi, aut docui, etiam
si per hoc totus mundus in ruinam abire debeat. 1. It is necessar, that, that
thing be estemit richt quhatsumeuer I have vryttin or teachit, albeit it sold
be the cause of ruin to the hail varld: And, Ego vero neque Papae, Lauter in
lib. contra statum Ecclesiae.
neque Imperatori, sed ne Angelo quidem de caelo doctrina^ meam amplius
submittere iudicandam volo, sed quoniam de ea certus sum, per eam iudex esse
volo non modo hominum, verumetiam cunctorum Angelorum: Vt si quis doctrinam
meam non acceptauerit, saluus esse non possit, quia Dei est, non mea, idcirco
and iudicium meum Dei quoque est non meum:.1. I will nather submit my doctrine
to be iudgit be the Paip, nor be the Emperor, nor be onie Angel of heauin, bot
because I am assurit of it: be it I will be judge not only to men, bot to all the
Angellis of heauin, sua that gif onie man resaue not my doctrine, he may not be
saif, because my doctrine is goddis doctrine, and my judgment is also Goddis
judgment: And agane. Ea autem certitudine and fiducia tentandum nobis est quod
praestituimus, vt non modo totius mundi iudicia pro foliis leuibus, and summis
aristis habeamus, sed and armati simus in morte contra portas inferi, Lauter de
abroganda Missa.
quinetiam aduersus iudicium tentantis Dei pugnare, and cum Jacob contra Deum
praeualere, mundi enim voces occlusis auribus vtcumque etiam infirmiores
contemnere possunt, at conscientiam quis occludet, ne Sathanam, ne Dei iudicium
sentiat?.1. Ve man essay to perform that quhilk ve have taken in hand vith sik
assurance and confidence that ve not only esteem all the iudgementis of the
hail varld als licht as the leuis of the treis, or caff quhilk is blauin auay
vith the vind, bot that ve inarme our selfis also aganis the feir of Death and
hell quhilk god threatnes for transgression, and that ve may preuail euin aganis
the judgment of God quhen he temptis us as did Jacob: For as to the commone
sayingis of the varld, they quha ar bot sumpart mair vaik, may be closing their
earis, neglect the same: bot hou bauld man he be quha closis his conscience
that he nather persaue the accusationis of the Devil, nor judgment of God
aganis evil doing? Quhair (be abusing the place of scripture in the quhilk to
declair ane hid mystery of the victory of the seid of Jacob, it is said that
Jacob did preuail aganis God, as he abusit the exemple of Abraham to prove his
Euangelical sentence, Si non vult vxor veniat ancilla) he schauis may
planelie that he vil essay gif he may to cause leasingis preuail aganis the
treuth, haeresie aganis the Catholic faith and the Devil aganis God. Martin
Lauter (quhilk is requyrit in the Antichrist) vas conceived of the Devil not
only as tuiching his carnal generation, Vide Lindani dialogum.
sense as money faithful men testifeis of him, he vas gottin be ane devil in
ane zoung mannis liknes, bot also concerning his spiritual generation be
cooperation of his auin fre vil, Laut. libr. de Missa angulari.
he confessis him self that be giving place to the argumentis of the Devil
brocht aganis the Mess, quha oftymes valkinnit him, and gave him consale to
vryt for abolishing of the same: and proponit unto him the titil of his buke de
abroga^da Missa (quhilk Daniel foirprophecied to be the chief but quhairat the
Antichrist sal schuit) He become sua great ane Prophet, Dan. 12.
as efteruart he vas estemit to be amangis the Germanis, and conceived ane
exceiding great het^et aganis the Roman kirk: For gif the may blessed Virgin
Marie be ear and faith, giving credit to ane good Angel, vithout conjunction
vith m^n, conceived Christ Jesus, quha become the father of money sonis
spiritual: Quhy micht not Martin Lauter lykuyse vithout co^iunctio^ vith voma^,
be giving credit to the Devil his father, becum the Antichrist? quha hes
begottin the Zuinglianis, Oecolampadianis, Anabaptistis, Suenkfeldianis,
Amsdorfianis, Caluinistis, Puritanis, kmnoxistis, all the Antichristis, and
Protestaons of our dayis vith innumerabil sik other viperis, and fyrie
serpe^tis quha be instruction of their father Martin Lauter, hes oppinit up the
hid mystereis of his neu Eua^gel, obtruda^d for Goddis vord al pestilent,
haereseis befoir condemnit be the kirk, As of Simon Magus, Marcionitis,
Blastus, Arrius, Macedonius, Manichaeus, and al vtheris quhilk S. Iohne
signifeis in his revelation quhen he sayis that the head of the beast quhilk
befoir vas cuttit of, Apoc. 13.
vas hailled agane, and his vound curit: For their haeretikis quhill as they
condem al general Conciles, of necessity they man approve al haereseis
condemnit be them: Staphy. de Iauteran. concordia.
Zea sum of this great Antichristis disciples as Dauidgeorgius ane Glaisin
vricht, said That he vas the tteu Messiah promised to the Ieuis: Rotman. art 5.
Rotma^nus ane vthir of his disciples denyit that Christ vas borne or resauit
humane nature of the Virgin Marie: And Leidan ane vthir Minister, to counterfut
David, vas chosin king be his follouaris. And albeit their be ma nor threscoir
of chief Maistris of Sectis quhilk var disciples to Martin Lauter, zit for the
name (Catholic) be the election of their Master they have ane common name,
quhais signification is directly repugnant to the name of Christ: for they ar
callit Protestaons from making Protesta^ n^ aganis the Decreittis of the Paip
and Emperor of Rome, deschargeing onie disputation or imbraceing of onie
doctrine concerning the verteu of indulgencis befoir ane day, quhilk be them
vas apoyntit for disputation of the verteu their of, eftir that be Martin
Lauter, Legatus indulge^tiarum vas send agane to Rome out of Germany, vithout
the silver quhilk he com for, quhairuith the kirk of S. Petir in Rome micht
have been repairit. As the historeis of the beginning of the troublis of
Germany bearis record: For insafar as the vord Christ signifeis anointed to
vit king, Priest, and Prophet, quhilk aggreit not only to Christ Jesus in
propir person, bot also to al them quha var, or is to be lauchfullie promouit
to sik offices, sua that thayvar in plenitude in the Paip and Emperor
representa^d Christis hieast dignity upon the face of the earth, It follouis
necessarlie that they quha receauit their name because they maid Protesta^n
aganis the decreitis proceidi^g from the lauchful authority of Kingdom
Presthead and Prophecy enjoy the name of the Antichrist, and that all the
Protestaons ar Antichristianis: For confirmation, Martin Lauter intitulat ane
of his bukes (Contra duo caesaris mandata) and ane other (contra statum
ecclesiae): And ane of his disciples in the I Will of Britannie, kmnox intitulat
lykuyse the blast of his seditious trumpat, (Aganis the regiment of vemen:) It
is mair nor manifest hou the Protestaons hes reiectit al kind of anointing or
Chrisme, for hetret of the vord Christ quhilk is the name of our saluiour* and
sold be lykuyse abolished according to the principal groundis of their
doctrine: For gif the Protestaons in Scotland var mouit be good reason to turn
[kyrie eleyson in lord have mearcie on me] and, Amen, in Sobeit, they had als
good reason to have Changit (Jesus in saluiour, and Christ or Christus in
anoyntit) And it sold have lykuyse been changit in other vulgar toungis and
la^gages: Marti^ Laut. be his auin judgment also is convict to have fochtin
directly aganis Christ: Because in all his disputationis, vrytingis, and
preachingis aganis the bischop of Rome, he laborit for na other thing, bot for
the abolishing of the Authority of the Paip in quhais person and authority
he acknauledgit Christ Jesus as head and reular of the kirk: As is manifest of
his auin vordis, euin eftir he had maid defection from the kirk of Rome: Laute^
epistola 2. ad leonem 10. Papa^.
[Quare beatissime pater prostratum me pedibus tuae beatitudinis offero, cum
omnibus quae sum, and habeo, viuifica, occide, voca, reuoca, approba, reproba
vt placuerit: vocem tuam, vocem Christi in te praesidentis agnoscam, si mortem
merui, mori non recusabo. 1. Quhairfoir may blessed father I cast my self
befoir the feit of zour halines vith al quhatsumeuer I am, or have, quickin me,
slay me, call on me, bring me from the propose quhilk I vas at as ze pleis, I
acknaulege zour vord for the vord of Christ, quha speakis and beris reul over
the kirk in zou: Gif I have deseruit the death, I will not refuse to dea:
Quhairfoir al men of puissance infectit vith the poysonit Antichristian
doctrine of Martin Lauter, sold feir leist the Devil having full pouar over
them, use them as instrumentis to perform the rest of the vickitnes of the
Antichrist: for gif I vald use particular application of all the rest of the
propirteis of the Antichrist they may al be may conveniently accommodat unto
him And his disciples, only except that the mesour of impiety begun be him is
nocht zit fully accomplished: And to praetermit other Antichristian
condicionis infinite as that they contemn the manner hou their foirfatheris
vorshippit God: Dani. 11.
And ar capital ennimeis to the continual sacrifice of the kirk: Dani. 12.
All the disciples of this monstrous beast Martin Lauter, dois put sik
foelicitie in the lust of the flesch that in auld men quha to the judgment of
the varld according to their vou leuit chaist to the time they var mekil mair
nor threscoir of zei^is, and had almaist the ane fut in the graif, the spirit
of fornicatione and adultery enterit vith sik inordinat lust that skarselie
could it be quenshit ather be vyf or hyre voman: I micht produce for exemple
that renegat and periurit priest schir Ioha^n kmnox, quha eftir the death of
his first harlat, quhilk he mareit incurring eternal da^natio^ be breking of
his vou and promiss of chastity: S. Paul 1. Timo^. 5.
quhe^ his age requyrit rather that vith tea^is and lamentatio^ he sold have
chastised his flesh and beuailit the breaking of his vou, as also the horribil
incest vith his gudmother in ane killogie of Hadintoun: zit notuithstanding,
heauing laid asyd al feir of the panis of hell, and regarding na thing the
honesty of the varld, as ane bund sklaue of the Devil, being kendillit vith
ane inquenshibil lust and ambition, He durst be sua bauld to interpryse the
suit of Marriage vith the may honorabil lady my lady Fleming, my lord Dukes
eldest dochter, to the end that his seid being of the blude Royal, and gydit be
their fatheris spirit, micht have aspyrit to the croun. And because he receauit
ane refusal, it is notoriously knauin hou deadly he haited the hail house of
the Hamiltonis, albeit being deceauit be him traittorouslie it vas the chief
vpsettar, and protector of his haeresie: And this may honest refusal could
nather stench his lust nor ambition, bot a lytil eftir he did perseu to have
alliance vith the honorabil house of Ochiltrie of the kingis M. auin blude,
Rydand their vith ane great court on ane trim gelding, nocht lyk ane prophet or
ane auld decrepit priest as he vas, bot lyk as he had been ane of the blude
Royal, vith his bendis of taffetie feschnit vith Goldin ringis and precious
stanes: And as is planelie reportit in the country, be sorcerie and vitchcraft
did sua allure that puir gentil voman, that scho could not leave vithout him:
quhilk appeiris to be of great probability, scho being ane Damosel of Nobil
blud, And he ane auld decrepit creatur of may bais degrie of onie that could
be found in the country: Sua that sik ane nobil house could not have degenerat
sua far, except Iohann kmnox had interposed the pouar of his Master the Devil,
quha as he transfiguris him self sumtymes in ane Angel of licht: sua he causit
Iohann kmnox appeir ane of the may nobil and lusty men that could be found
in the va^^d: Bot not to offend zour earis langar vith the filthy
abhominationis of Schir Iohann kmnox, and to return to tha thingis quhilk ar
common to the sect of the Protestaons, Apoc. 13.
lyk as S. Iohne descryuis the Antichrist to have ane blasphemous mouth aganis
god, his sanctis, and halie tabernacle quhilk is his kirk Catholic, Euin sua
the blasphemeis ar may horribil quhilk their grishopperis and may noysum
serpentis the sonis of Martin Lauter speuis out of their venomous mouthis,
may impudentlie defending the sam, as gif they var headdis and articlis of
healthsum doctrine: sik as ar their.

1. That God may do na thing by the estahlished ordor of the varld. 1. Calu
lib. 2. inst. ca. 7


2. That the secund person in the Trinity is nocht the sone of God: 2. Calu.
li. 1. inst. ca. 13 sect 23. and Bezaco^tra Hessusiu^.
because the sone taikis his substance of his father, and the secund person
takis not his substance from the first, bot hes his substance of him self and
na other person.

3. That the halie Ghaist takis nather his substance of the father, 3. Call.
lib. 1. institut. cap. 13.
nor zit of the sone.

4. That the trinity of personis in ane Godheid is bot ane Fantasy. 4.
Matthias zare^sis test. Coclaeo in Genealogia Laut.


5. That the trinity is to be estemit na other thing bot triceps Cerberus. 5.
Lucas ster^berge^sis.


6. That their is not only ane God: bot thrie. 6. Sindrie lauterianis^
prus^land vide Coc^^ngenealo (...).


7. That (...) in the beginning of the Euangel of S. Iohne signifeis nocht the
secund person in divinity. 7. Matth^^s ^^yricus.


8. That murtheraris, 8. All the protestao^s aggreis on this blasphemous head of
Antichristian doctri^e
adulteraris, theuis, and traittoris ar effectuouslie mouit be God and
constrainit to commit sik crimes, and finalie that al thingis cummis of absolut
necessity: and that God is the author of al syn.

9. That God hes created men to that end that he may puneis them for ever. 9.
Call. li. 2. inst. cap. 21. number 5. and lib. 8. de praedestinact in cap. 1. Genes.


10. That Christ vas nocht borne of the virgin Marie. 10. Rotmae^ laut.
discipulus art. 9.


11. That Christ quhen he vas ane bairne vas ignorant, 11. Smidel^nus
lauter^nus.
and gaid to the scuil to learn vith other bearnis.

12. That Christ is composed of the substance of God, 12. Michael Seruetus Call.
discip. test Calui^ lib. 2. inst. ca. 14. sec. ^
and of flesch, and of Spirit, and of thrie increated elementis.

13. That Christ vas nocht the sone of God, 13. Ide^ test. eod. Calvin ibid.
befoir he vas borne of the virgin Marie.

14. That Christ vas nather God nor man. 14. ibid.


15. That Christ vas full of Grace nocht that he had onie grace inhabitant into
him, bot because the father fauorit him gretumlie. 15. Brent. Homil. 12. in
Ioanne^.


16. That the vordis of consecration of the body, 16. Calvin lib. 4. inst. ca.
14. sect. 4. Beza in sua Antithesi.
and bluide of Christ, pronunced on the breid and vine is vitchcraft and
incantation of the Devil, quhairof consequently it follouis that Christ vas
ane vitch and inchantar, because he pronuncit their vordis first upon the breid
and vine for consecration of the sam, and comma^dit that they sold be
pronunced in lyk manner for consecration of breid and vyn in his body and blude
unto his cumming agane to judgment.

17. That Christ pronunced upon the Croce the vords of Desperatio^, 17. Calvin
lib. 2. inst. cap. 16. sec. 10. and 11. and in harmo.
and that hevas co^demnit to hell, and tormentit be the Deuillis thairin.

18, That Christ nocht only as man, 18. MuscuIus Auth. Stap. de Lauteran.
concordia.
bot in his divine nature also deed upon the Croce.

19. That in our justification ane pairt of the divine substance of Christ is
conioynit vith our substance, and thairbie ve resaue ane substantial or
essential justice throuch Christ Jesus. 19. Hosia^der lauteri discipu^us.


20. That Christ hes institute and left us ane Religion vithout al lau quhilk
ve ar obleist to obey and fulfill, 20. All the Ptotestao^s aggreis on this
blasphemy.
and vithout al sacrifice and preasthead.

21. That na Christian man is obleised, 21. Lauter sermon. de Moyse.
to keip the ten commandimentis.

22. That their aucht nocht to be onie distinction of temporal magistratis in
heichar or laichar degrie. 22. Mu^tzerus Lauteri dis^p.


23. That Christianis aucht nocht to resist or fecht aganis the Turk albeit he
be ane co^iurit ennimie to the name of Christ. 23. Lauter art. 34.


24. That al use of armore is deuilishe. 24. Rotm. art. 4.


25. That the communion of Sanctis consistis in this, 25. Quintinus pikar dus
test Call. co^tra lib. ca. 21.
that it is lesum to every man to raif his nichtbouris geir.

26. That it is lesum to every man to tak his hyre voman and ly vith her, 26.
Lauter lib. de voto and co^tine^t.
quhen his vyf refusis.

27. That it is the estait of innocence, and treu regeneration, 27. Anton.
Coppinus test Call. ^ ca. 18. co^^. lib.
nocht to make onie difference betuix good and evil, bot to embrace al thingis
alyk.

28. That al thingis quhilk ar spokin of the Devil, 28. Anton. Copp. test.
Calu. lib. con^. liber* cap. 2.
and syn, ar bot mere imaginationis and phantaseis.

29. That Christ is not our redemar in sik sort that he destroyis our syn, 29.
All the protestaons aggreis on this blasphemy.
and in very deid delyueris us from the bondage thairof, because that syn being
anes contracted, remanis in us continually.

30. That the zoung Childrene contractis not original syn be natural generation
and propagation of Adam, 30. Zuing. de Baptismo.
and that in them their is na thing vordie of condemnatione.

31. That money men var saif and attenit unto the kingdom of heauin vithout
faith in Christ quha vas to be reuelit, 31. zuing. de baptis.
as Numa, Cato, Scipio and vtheris.

32. That the mair ane man repent him of his syn, 32. Lauter art. 16.
he synnis the mair greuouslie.

33. That in every Good vark done may excellently, 33. Laut. art. 31. and
Calu. lib. 2. instit. cap. 14. sect. 19
every just man, zea euin the Martyris deing for confession of the name of
Christ, dois deserve aeternal damnation.

34. That the saul deis vith the body, or sleipis quhil the day of judgment.
34. Rotma^ test. Calu. lib. (...).


35. That their aucht nocht to be onie distinction of pastoris in heichar or
laichar degrie in the kirk of Christ Jesus. 35 All the Protestaons.


36. That the kirk of Christ may be sua ouerthrauin, 36. All the protestao^s.
that na man may be knauin throuch the hail varld for the space of money
hundredth zeiris, makand oppin profession of the name of Christ.

37. That the Euangel of Christ vas never treulie preached in Germany, 37. All the Ministeris of Geneue Germany, Scotland, and Ingland.
France, Scotland, and Ingland, quhil Martin Lauter, Calvin, and kmnox var
raised up, to publeis ane vord un knauin to the hail varld befoir them. And
the Quein of Ingland to be prophetiss, and hie schopreist or head of the kirk,
having pouar to decyd all controuerseis of Religion.

38. That the treu doctrine of Justification vas never Knauin to the hail
varld, 38. Vilga^gus in lib. de bonis, (...) malis Germaniae
unto the time Martin Lauter reveled the sam.

39. That eftir the Apostlis, 39. Beza in vita Caluini.
na man had the treu vndirstanding of the mystery of the lordis Suppar, befoir
Ioha^n Calvin.

40. That ane hyre voman may gif absolution to onie person alsueil as ather
priest, 40. Lauter de captiuitate babylonica.
or Paip.

41. That they repugne to God quha apoyntis 41. Rotma^ art. 5.
pastoris to have reul over certane places, quhil as they sold ryn
continually from ane place to another, as did the Apostlis.

42. That the people aucht to be instructed nocht to feir excommunication, 42.
Laut^r. art. 24
nor gif obedidience unto their prelatis.

43. That their is na resurrection of the bodeis to compeir in judgment. 43.
Quint pikardus. test Caluino. lib. co^tra liber. cap. 3.


Vith other impudent blasphemeis innumerabil aganis the omnipote^t pouar of
God, and the halie Angellis and Sanctis in heauin, quhilk I abhor to rehearse
trimbland quhen I think on them: For mair detestabil, and ma in number, can
nocht be deuysit be all the vickit spiritis in hell, than Martin Lauter and his
disciples proponis for healthsum doctrine.

Nou to cum to the great seal of the Antichrist (...), and (...), M a A A r
(...) t (...) i (...) n (...) L (...) a (...) u (...) t e r.
quhilkis sold be expressit be the letteris of the name of the Antichrist
contenand bis number sax hundredth, saxtie sax: Ve find the letteris of them
bayth in the name of Martin Lauter, to vit. A. r. n. u. m. a. i. or, A. r. n.
u. m. e. sua that (...) is not on lie composed of the letteris of his name bot
also co^tenis the sam number sax hundr^h saxtie sax, as I have alreddie
declarit at lenth quhen I proponit the proprieteis of the Antichrist in
general: The force and strenth of this verb (...) is lykuyse ingrauit in the
hairtis of all the protestaons, And is their only refuge, quhen they ar
preissed be the ve^ht ather of solid reasonis, or authority: For they deny all the traditionis of the Apostlis, all the custumes of the halie kirk, all the
sentencis of the doctoris quhairbie their hereseis ar convict, the force and
strenth of the sacramentis, the verteu of grace throuch Christ be the
operatione of the halie ghaist in us, the continual sacrifice of the body and
blude of Christ under the forms of breid and vine, quhilk is the chief vork of
the Antichrist, as vitnessis the halie Prophet Daniel. Daniel 12
Quha denyis that it is lesum to Christianis to have the image of Christ, and
his glorious Mother for remembrance, bot eftir the exempil of Iulianus Apostata
hes trampit them under futt, and in place thairof, hes erected Abhominatione,
substituting their auin heretical imagis, as in oppin markat the imagis of the
tua bougouraris Calvin, and Beze ar sauld in Geneua, sua that he is nocht
compted ane good Christian, that hes nocht their images at their bed headis, or
befoir their burdis: Siclyk for the Ecclesiastical history of Christis halie
sanctis, that abhominabil sodomeit, and filthy beist Beze, (quha learned his
religione at Priapus, as he confessis in his life, that his vif vas the cause,
quhy he passed out of Pareise, s^ho being mareit vith ane other housba^d) is
nocht eschamit to have dedicat to ane may nobil king, ane buke contening ane
rabil of imagis, conioyna^d vith falls traittouris to god and man, treu
Christianis, as gif their micht be communione vith the sonis of licht and
belial, thairby intysing ignorant peopil to mair gross and deuillish idolatry,
nor ever the ge^tilisvar polluted vith befoir the cu^ming of Christ, quhilk is
ane may crafty inue^tione of Sathane quha under pretense of deliverance from
idolatry, blindis the miserabil flok thairin. To this chief heid (...) or Nego
ve may call the hail articlis and confessione of their negative faith, and al
their expositionis of scripture be contrare sentencis, of the quhilk I think
expedient to subioyne certain of the principallis, quhair vpone the
Protestao^s grou^dis their saluatione: and first of al say they.

Ve deny al traditionis of the universal kirk quhilkis at onie time hes been
ressaued befoir the cumming of Lauter and Calvin.

Ve deny al lauis, and determinationis of general Concilis, quhilk the hail
varld hes ressaued befoir us. Ve deny al ordour, and policy that ever hes been
established in the kirk of god befoir the days of Iohne Calvin.

4 Ve deny that the Euangel hes been treulie prethed, or that Christ hes had
onie visibil kirk vpone the earth their money hundredth zeiris.

5 Ve deny al thingis, quhilk ar nocht expreslie vrittin in the scripture, and
ve deny money bukis, of the scripture it self, quhilk the universal kirk befoir
hes ressaued for canonikis, as the bukis of the Machabeis, of Judith, Hester,
Tobias and vtheris, and as to them quhilk ve ressaue for Canonikis, ve deny
money pairtis o^ them insafar as they ar nocht conform to our doctrine
laitlie reuelit to the varld be Lauter and Calvin: As.

6 Quhair it is vryttin in the halie scripture that na thing is impossibil to
God. Luc. 1.
Ve afferme the contrare and sayis, that money thingis ar impossibil to God,
because he may nocht be present in the sacrament of the altar, nor
transsubstantiat the breid in his body, as the Papistis says.

7 Quhair it is vryttin that Christ vas borne of ane virgin. Matthew. 1.
Ve affirm the contrare, that he vas nocht borne of ane virgin, bot that scho
vas corrupted in her birth, Beza co^tra Brentium.
as sayis our paraclet Theodore de Beze. Ephesians. 4.


8 Quhair it is vryttin that our saluiour Christ descendit into hell eftir his
death. Ve affirm the contrare that he descendit nocht into hell eftir his death,
bot only vas in desperatione befoir his death.

9 Quhair it is vryttin I believe the halie Catholic kirk. Matt. 18.
Ve affirm the contrare I believe nocht the halie Catholic kirk, because the
definitionis thairof, doctrine, and ceremoneis ar to be rejected.

10 Quhair it is vryttin that the kirk is the pillar, 1. Timo. 3.
and grou^dstaone of the treuth. Ve afferme the contrare, that the kirk is
nocht the pillar, nor groundstane of the treuth, because ve teach, that the
universal kirk may err, and embrace falls doctrine.

11 Quhair it is vryttin I sal be vith zou to the end of the varld, Matt. 28.
Ve affirm the contrare, I sal nocht be vith zou to the end of the varld, for
the Spirit of Christ hes left the hail kirk in idolatry, thi^ money hundredth
zeris bypast.

12. Quhair it is vryttin I have money thingis to tell zou, S. Ioh. 16.
quhilk ze may nocht beir at this time. Ve affirm the contrare, I have na
other thing to tell zou, because the Apostlis lernit na thing after the cu^ming
of the halie ghaist quhilk they had nocht learned befoir of Christ.

13 Quhair it is affermit, I believe the co^munione of Sanctis. 1. Cor. 8.
Ve affirm the contrare I believe na communione of sanctis, beaus the sanctis
quhilk ar in heuin hes na communicatione vith us, and can nather do us good, nor
evil, and salang as ve ar on earth ve ar na sanctis being replenished vith al
kind of vickitnes and adhominatione.

14 Quhair it is vryt^in I believe the remissio^of Sinnis. Math. 9.
Ve affirm the contrare because they ar never remitted unto us, bot abydis
continually fixed in our hairtis.

15 Quhair it is vryttin, Except ane man be regenerat be the valter and be the
spirit, S. Ioh. 3.
he may nocht enter in the kingdom of heuin. Ve affirm the contrare albeit
ane man be nocht regenerat be the valter and be the spirit, zit he may enter in
the kingdom of God: because ve teach that infantis deing vithout baptism, ar
saif be the faith of their parentis.

16 Quhair it is vryttin, that they quha var baptized be sanct Iohne, Act. 19.
res^aued efti^uart the baptism of Christ. Ve affirm the contrare vith our
Master Calvin, and says that they ressaued nocht the baptism of Christ,
because the baptism of Iohne, and Christ vas al ane, and na difference betuix
them.

17 Quhair it is vryttin that Petir and Iohne be the onlaying of handis or the
sacrament of confirmatione, Act. 8.
gave to the samaritanis baptized, the grace of the halie spirit. Ve affirm
the contrare, because ve vil nocht acknauledge Confirmatione for ane sacrament.

18 Quhair it is vryttin Ressaue the halie ghaist, S. Ioh. 20.
quhais synnis ze forgive ar forgiven to them. Ve affirm the contrare, because
the Apostlis and their successoris, hes na pouar to remit synnis.

19 Quhair it is vryttin: Do fruittis vordie of repentance. S. Mat. 3.
Ve affirm the contrare, do na fruttis vordie of repentance, vtheruyse it
behouit us to grant satisfactione vith the Papistis.

20 Quhair it is vryttin redeem thy synnis vith almous deiddis. Daniel. 4.
Ve affirm the contrare, that nather almous deiddis, nor other good vorkis
seruis onie thing for to obtene remissione of synnis.

21 Quhair it is affermit that the Angelis reioysis mair for the repentance of
ane synnar, S. Luc. 15
nor for 99. just men. Ve arffirme the contrare that the Angellis reioyses
nocht for the repentance of ane synnar, because they knau nocht quhidder it be
treu or fen zeit, nather heir they our prayeris, vtheruyse they vald have over
lang luggis.

22 Quhair it is vryttin, S. Mat. 18
quhatsumeuer ze louse in the earth, it sal be loused in heuin. Ve affirm the
contrare, because gif ve grant this, ve vilbe compellit to grant in lyk manner,
that the kirk may bayth inioyne penance, and lyk uyse relax the same, quhilk is
na other thing, bot to estableis the indulgencis.

23 Quhair it is vryttin that Judas Machabaeus causit offer Sacrifice for the
deid, Match. 2. chap. 12.
and that the prayer for the deid, to the end, they may be releued from their
synnis, is ane halie and godly exerceis. Ve affirm the contrare, and denyis
the bukis of the Machabeis to be canonikis, as is said befoir, because ve reject
praying for the deid, and purgatory as Papistical.

24 Quhair it is vryttin I propose to the life and death, Deuteronomy. 30.
good and evil, choose to thy self the ane, or other. Ve affirm the contrare,
because gif this var treu, it var necessar that man had fre vil, to choose good or
evil, quhilk is repugnant to our reformed doctrine, quhairbie ve teach that al
thingis cummis of absolute necessity.

25 Quhair it is vrytin that the zoke of Christ is licht, S. Mat. 11
and that his comma^dimentis ar nocht hauie. Ve affirm the co^trare and sayis,
that his zok is nocht licht, S. Ioh. ep. 1 chap. 5.
bot very hauie, and that it is impossibil to us, to keip his commandimentis.

26 Quhair it is vryttin, ze se thairfoir that ane man is iustifeit be vorkis,
S. Iac. 2.
and nocht be faith only. Ve affirm the contrare, that ane man is iustifeit
be faith only, and nocht be vorkis.

27 Quhair it is vryttin that God is nocht iniust that he vil forzet zour good
vorkis. Ve affirm the contrare, Heb. 6.
that it apertenis nocht to the justice of God to recompanse good vorkis, and
that nocht only he is nocht iniust, quhen he for zettis our vorkis, bot that
he dois ane benefeit to us thairbie, al our vorkis being bot syn, and vorthie
of condemnatione.

28 Quhair it is vryttin, that every man sal be presented befoir the tribunal
seat of Christ to ressaue according to that quhilk he hes done in this varld,
2. Cor. ^.
ather good or evil. Ve affirm the contrare, and sayis that na man sal ressaue
according to his vorkis, because our vorkis deseruis na thing at goddis handis
in the varld tocum:

29 Quhair it is vryttin, he quha is borne of God, S. John. 1. epist. cha. 3
synnis nocht, because the seid of God remanis in him. Ve affirm the contrare,
and sayis, that he quha is borne of God, synnis continually, ze that quhat
sumeuer he dois is syn, and iniquity.

30 Quhair it is vryttin that the cheritie and love of God, S. Paul. Romans 5.
is zet and pourit in our hairtis. Ve affirm the contrare, that their is na
cheritie in us, vtheruyse sen justice, and cheritie ar al ane thing, ve vald be
constrainit to grant inherent justice, and nocht imputative only.

31 Quhair it is vryttin vork zour saluatione vith feir, and dreddor. S. Paul.
Philip. 2.
Ve affirm the contrare, and sayis, have na feir at al, bot be als assurit of
zour saluatione, as that God is in heuin, and gif ze doubt thairof, ze can
nocht be saif.

32 Quhair it is vryttin be S. Paul, I am guilty of na thing, 1. Cor 4.
and zit for that, I have na assurance of my Iustificatione. Ve affirm the
contrare that ve ar guilty of money execrabil crimes, and zit ve ar assurit of
our iustificatione.

33 Quhair it is vryttin that god intysis na man to evil. S. Iam. 1. Calvin li.
1. institut. cap. 18.
Ve affirm the contrare vith our master Caluiue that God mouis, and impellis
men to syn, as the efficient cause thairof. 1. Tim. 2.


34 Quhair it is vryttin that god vil that every man be saif. S. Mat. 19
Ve affirm the contrare, and sayis that he vil nocht that every man be saif,
bot that he hes created almaist al men, except ane feu number, to the effect he
micht condem them eternalie.

35 Quhair it is vryttin gif thou vilbe perfyte, S. Mat. 19.
sell al quhilk thou hes and gif to the pure. Ve affirm the contrare, and says
that it apertenis nocht to the perfectione of the euangel to make professione of
pouartie.

36 Quhair it is vryttin this is my body quhilk is geuin for zou. S. Matthew. 26.
Ve affirm the contrare and sayis, that it is nocht his body.

37 Quhair it is vryttin My flesh is very meat, the breid quhilk I sal gif is
my flesh, S. Joan. 6.
quhilk salbe geuin for the varld. Ve affirm the contrare and sayis that the
breid quhilk he gave to his Apostlis, in his latter suppar, vas nocht flesh,
vtheruyse it behouit us to confess the transsubstantiatione of the breid in
Christis body.

38 Quhair it is vryttin that Melchisedec offerit breid and vine, Genes. 14.
he being the priest of the may hie God. Ve say the contrare that he offerit
never breid nor vine, vtheruyse ve vald be constrainit to grant the Mess,
quhilk is amang the Papistis, to have been praefigurat be the sacrifice of
Melchisedech.

39 Quhair it is vryttin of our may halie saluiour, and redemptor Jesus
Christ, 109 Psalm.
Thou art ane priest for ever eftir the ordore of Melchisedec. Ve affirm the
contrare thou art nocht ane priest for ever eftir the ordour of Melchisedec:
because thou hes na perpetual sacrifice eftir that ordour, quhilk may be offered
in thy kirk, to the end of the varld.

40 Quhair it is vryttin lat al thingis be done amangis zou vith ordore and
honest discipline. 1. Cor. 14.
Ve affirm the contrare, and says that in administratione of the sacramentis
na honest, and lauchful ceremoneis aucht to be keiped for the deu reverence of
the samyn, and that amangis Pastoris of the kirk their is na ordour, bot that
they ar al alyk in pouar, and authority: and that the ministeris in exteriore
apparel, sold be in na thing different from the peopil, and that our kirkis
sold have na external ornamentis, as vas amangis the Papistis, bot that they
sold be tyrred that the licht of the Euangel may enter the mair esilie in
them.

41 Quhair it is affermit gif thou be seik call for the preistis of the kirk and
be oynted vith S. Iam. 5.
oil in the name of the lord, that prayer being maid for the thou may be
releued from syn. Ve affirm the contrare, Albeit thou be seik, thou sold
nocht call for onie priest in the kirk, and that thou sold nocht be oynted vith
oil in the name of the lord, vith prayer conioynit, for heirbie thou may
obtene na remissione of synnis, vtheruyse extreme unction vald be ane
sacrament, quhilk is aganis the actis of Parliament.

42 Quhair it is vryttin that marriage is ane greit Sacrament in Christ and his
kirk. Ephesians. 5.
Ve affirm the contrare that it is na sacrament nather great, nor small, bot
only ane contract betuix man and voman, as other contractis of bying and
selling.

43 Quhair it is vrittin that the voman is subject to the lau of her housband
salang as he leuis. Romans 7.
Ve affirm the contrare and sayis that scho is nocht subject thairto, bat scho
may marie another, albeit her housband be alive: vtheruyse our diuorcementis in
our reformit kirk vald have na place.

44 Q^hair it is vryttin, he quha mareis his dochtir, 1. Cor. 7.
dois veil, bot he quha mareis her nocht dois bettir. Ve affirm the contrare,
and says, that scho quha keipis her virginity, dois nocht bettir, nor scho
quha mareis, and that marriage is als acceptabil to God as virginity, vtheruyse
ve vald nocht have brocht Virginis out of their closteris, and mareit them on
monkis.

45 Quhair it is vryttin that zoung vidouis, quha var consecrat to the service
of the kirk incurris damnatione quhen they marie, I. Timot. 5
be breking of their first promeis. Ve affirm the contrare, and sayis that sik
promises maid to keip Chastity ar superstitious, and aucht nocht to be kerpit:
And that they incur na damnatione, vtheruyse it had been unlesum to friar
Martine Lauter to have mareit ane None, and to money of our faithful brethrene
to marie in Scotland, quha befoir had maid vou of chastity, quhen they var
monks, and freris, as dene Iohne Vynrame, friar Craig, and sindrie vtheris.

46 Quhair it is vryttin that ane bischop, of superintendent sold be bot the
housband of ane vys, I. Timot. 3
or anes mareyt. Ve affirm the contrare, that albeit he be tuyse mareit he may
veil aneuche be ane superintendent, vtheruyse ve vald condem Ioha^n Kmnox, the
lord of Dun, and sindrie vtheris of our reformit kirk.

47 Quhair it is vryttin that Christ said to S. Petir, Math. 16.
Thou art ane Rok and vpone this Rok I sal buyld my kirk. Ve affirm the
contrare, Thou art nocht the Rok, and upon the I will nocht buyld my KirK,
vtheruyse he vald have been heid of the Kirk, and sua the Kirk vald have been
ane mo^ster having tua heiddis.

48 Quhair it is vryttin, I. timot. 4
Neglect nocht the gift of prophecy, quhilk thou hes ressaued be the onlaying
of the handis of the preistheid. Ve afferme the contrare, thou hes nocht the
grace or gift of prophecy be the onlaying of the handis of the preisthead,
Calvin lib. 4. instit. cap. 14. sect. 20
because ordour quhairbie it sold be ressauit is nane of our sacramentis, and
in this point ve in special Ministeris of Scotland sayis that our master
Calvin hes sklentit, quha grantis it to be ane treu sacrament.

49 Quhair it is vryttin that the halie spirit hes apoyntit bischopis to gyde
and reul the kirk of Christ. Act. 20.
Ve afferme the co^trare, because in ane reformit Kirk sic, as ouris, their
sold be na bischoppis and ve Ministres ar equal to any of the Bischopis, or
rather superioris, sua thatve may exco^municat them quhe^ve pleise.

50 Quhair it is vryttin, Ephesians. 4.
that Christ hes left doctoris and pastoris to his kirk to the end of the
varld. Ve afferme the contrair, and sayis, that, at the lest, their tuel
hundredth zeiris bygane, their hes never been ane treu doctore nor pastore in
the Kirk, quha hes been Knauin to the varld, bot that they have been al
Papistis as Augustine Hierom, Basil, and vtheris.

51 Quhair it is vryttin, 2. Pet. 3.
that S. Paul hes vryttin money thingis difficil to be vndirstand. Ve affirm
that he hes vrittin na thing difficil to be vndirsta^d, and that soutaris, tail
z^ouris, and skynnaris may vndirstand him veil aneuch.

52 Quhair it is vryttin, Romans 13.
That every man sold be subject to his magistrate. Ve especially Ministeris
of Scotland affirm the contrare, that he sold nocht be subject to his
magistrate, and thairfoir ve gave cou^sal to impresone the Quenis majesty of
Scotland in Lochleuin, and to tak armore aganis her Maiesteis mother, quhilk ve
defend to be agreabil to our Euangel, and professione.

Breiflie gif I sold make rehearsal of all the notabil sente^cis of the halie
scripture quhilk the Protestaons interpretis in this manner be manifest
contradictionis, I sall find na thing in their mouthis quhen halie scripture is
proponit to them, Bot that the contrare thairof is true, and that all their
doctrine is grou^dit vpone (...), And they deprehe^dit tobe the sonis of the
Antichrist, quhilk be S. Paul is callit ane aduersar, because his hail study
and travel consistis nocht in afferming bot denying, nocht in illustratione of
hid treuth, 2. These 2.
bot impugnatione of the manifest verity, nocht in buylding, bot destroying,
nocht in commending the godly antecessoris, and follouing their fufstoppis,
bot in proud contempt, and reiectione of their doctrine, sentencis, and manner
of leuing: Sua that to this head (...) in lyk manner pertenis al their ansueris,
quhen soever they fall in disputatione: For gif ane testimony of the expres
vrittin vord in the neu or auld testament be brocht aganis them, they thraw it
after their auin fantasy, or ellis denyis it alluterlie. Gif the universal
consent of the doctoris be allegit, they ansuer that the doctoris var bot men,
as gif they var goddis or angellis: Gif ane traditione of the Apostlis be
brocht aganis them, they deny that ve aucht to believe onie thing, as pertening
to saluatione quhilk is nocht expreslie vrittin in the neu and auld testament.


OF THE DEV OBEDIENCE quhilk treu Christian men aucht to the hie priest and
Christis vicar upon the face of the earth.
CHAP. XXX.
M. Their be ma propirteis of the Antichrist quhilk aggreis to the Pape of Rome
nor onie other, for he vil that men fall down befoir him, and kis his feit as
gif he var god quhil as Petir refusit sik honor: for quhen Cornelius as ve
reid in the Actis of the Apostlis fell down at his feit, Actt. 01.
Petir raised him up be the hand saying: I am ane man als veil as ze ar:
Mairatour he settis him self forth for god, quhil as he vil bind mennis
consciencis be his lauis and constitutionis aganis the liberty of the Euangel
quhilk ve have cleirlie reveled to the varld.


B. Sense it is may treu quhilk the poet sayis, (qu^ tacet consentire
videtur) he quha keipis his peax appeiris to confess that quhilk is spokin: I
persaue that convict be zour auin conscience ze confess my formar
demo^stratione necessar, sua that Mahometis and Martin Lauter ar the tua
beistis, quhairof mention is maid in the reuelatione of Sanct Iohne to compose
ane body of the Antichrist: Apoc. 13.
As to the obiectionis quhilk ze bring aganis the Paip, they ar very friuol:
And first ze appeir to misknau quhairin consistis honor, and the differencis
thairof: For it dois consist in humiliatione of the mind according to the
knaulege of the praeminence of him above us, to quhom it is exhibit: Sua as to
the vtuart action and cerimonie, it may be ane quhilk is exhibit to God, and
his creaturis quhilk he hes apoyntit to have praeemine^ce above us: as ve fall
done on kneis, ve discover our headis, ve bek befoir god, and onie vardlie
prince. Quhairfoir sense that outuart cerimonie hes been vsit sa money zeiris
in Rome for declaratione of the reverence quhilk al Christianis aucht to the
Paip or heich priest infafar as he is Christis vicar and legate on earth: Ze may
put zour mind to rest albeit the Italianis and auld Romany learn not the
Cerimoneis of courtasie at zou, quha ar ennimeis to al civility: And gif
Christ honorit his Apostlis and S Petir sua that he veschit their feit, S.
John. 13
quhy reprove ze them quha kissis the feit of him, quhom thayknau to be placed
be God in the Chyre of Petir? Zea the Gentiles instructed be the lau of nature
only, gave sik reverence to their heich priest, as is manifest of Plutarch
descryua^d the maneris of the ancient Romany, quhilk is sufficient to co^dem
zour inciuilitie quha refusis to do the lyk reverence to the treu vicar ane
lieutennent of Christ vpone the face of the earth, as al obedient Christianis
hes done sen the dayis of S. Petir unto this present: For the quhilk cause the
Ethnik Emperoris as Diocletianus be aemulatione of the rite and cerimonie
quhilk they persaued amangis the Christianis in honoring of their heich priest,
var mouit to promulgat ane lau that al men aknauleging the Emperoris
authority, for declaration of the obedience and honor deu unto him, sold kiss
his feit. As to the place of scripture quhilk ze allege, Dar ze reprove the
godly man Cornelius that he did cast him self at S. Petiris feit? Or gif ze
dar not reprove him, as ze dar not, quhy reprove ze us because ve do the lyk to
the treu successoris of Petir? Sanct Petir ansuered indeid that he vas ane man,
and commandit Cornelius to rise up, geuand vtheris ane exemple of humility,
and lattand Cornelius also vndirstand that the disciplis of Christ as
concerning their auin private personis, desyris na sik hon^ to be exhibit unto
them, bot that quhat^^ meuer honor be geuin unto them, it redou^d unto
Christ: And zit Cornelius did bot his deuitie, As quhen ane nobil man sittis
down on his kneis befoir the king albeit the king say that he is ane man lyk
him, and cause him rise and speik to him, zit he dois bot his deuitie in doing
sik honor and reverence to the king. As to the secund pairt of zour obiectione
gif S. Paul gave command to the Christianis to obey the lauis of infidel
pri^cis maid for civil government not only for feir, Romans 13.
bot for conscience befoir God: Hou mekil mair aucht ve as obedient sonis to
obey the constitionis of our spiritual fatheris and pastoris maid for our veil,
according to the command of S. Paul, [Obedite praepositis vestris and subiacete
eis, Heb. 13.
ipsi enim peruigila^t quasi rationem reddituti pro animabus vestris:]. i. Obey
zour reularis and pastoris, and submit zour selfis unto them, for they vatch
for zou, and ar to gif count for zour saulis? And S. Paul teachis may pla^lie
that Christianis aucht not o^lie to obey the lauis quhilk the pastoris settis
forth in the name of Christ as propirlie callit the lau of God, bot they
constitutionis in lyk manner quhilk they propone for the profeit of the
commonweil, As quhen he vsis sik ane form of speiking (Praecipio ego non
dominus) it is not the Lord quha geuis this co^ma^d, 1. Cor 7.
bot I gif this command. And gif men in hairt and conscience are not obleist to
the obseruatione of the Ecclesiastical lauis and constitutionis, quhat is the
cause that ze constrain the People to obey the inuentionis of zour headles
assembleis, and compellis them incaice they disobey, to stand bairfuttit in
sekclayth sa money sondayis in time of zour preachingis? The Anabaptistis
quhais doctrine is na thing ellis, bot sum conclusionis necessarlie inferrit of
zour groundis, because obedience to the lauis of Princis is co^trar to the
liberty of this neu Eua^gel quhilk be the Protestaons is reuelit to the varld,
collectis that in the temporal estait their sold be na kingis, sense al
christianis ar equal: And ze Ministeris in Scotland ryd als neir them as ze
may, As is manifest of the blast of the trumpet, vryttin be Ioha^n kmnox zour
first prophet, quhair he laboris to prove that vemen may have na lauchful
authority to beir government in onie common weil, quhairof it follouis
necessarlie that the king of Scotland king James the Saxt can have na titil to
the croune: sen he can have na richt to it bot only be the Quenis Majesty his
Mother: This is lykuyse may evident of Master George Buchananis buk (Of the
richt of the kingdom of Scotland) That the people sold choose him to be king
quho^ they think may vyse and abil to tak on him the government of the
cu^trey: Quhairbie, gif onie man sal enter in deu consideration of the matter,
he vil esilie vndirstand that al their thingis var done to fulfill the promeiss
of schir Iohann kmnox to the Erl of Murray, quhom he deceauit in S. Paulis kirk
in Londone, bringand him in consait, that God had chosin him extraordinarlie as
ane Josias to be king of Scotland, to ruit out Idolatry, and to plant the
licht of his neu Enangel, quhair they conuenit in this manner, That the Prior of
Sanct Androis Erl of Murray sold mentene the neu Elias aganis the Preistis of
Baal, (for sua blasphemouslie he namit the preistis of Christ lesus) And the
neu Elias, sold fortify the neu Josias, be procuring the favor of the people
aganis Iezabel, blaspheming may impudentlie lie the Quenis M. To this end
te^dit al his railling and zouris aganis the Queuis g. ever calling her
Iezabel, mening heirby that ze vald have her and her seid ruited out: quhil as
be the contrare ze stylit the Erl of Murray, the gudelosias quha vald cause the
rasch buss keip the kou: And to persuade the people that he micht be reable air
to his father, ze preachit ever unto his death that promeiss of marriage vas
lauchful marriage, supponand that his father promished to marie his mother, for
na other propose, bot that their sold be na hinderance to the promotion of him
unto the kingdom: And eftir that be zour moyen he had been chosinking, zevald
have thocht that ze had als sufficient pouar to depoise him agane, as ze had to
promoue him: sua that al zour doctrine tendis to that end, that ze acknaulege
na suprem Magistrate nather spiritual, nor temporal, bot that ze only have
pouar to command every man in the country, of quhatsu^euer degrie or estait he
be.


OF THE TRADITIONIS VNIuersalie resaued be the kirk Catholic.
CHAP. XXXI.
Minister. TO quhat propos seruis the observation of the lauis, traditionis,
and ceremoneis institute be the Paip, sense al thingis ar expreslie vryttin in
the neu and auld testament, quhilk ve sold believe as pertening to salvation?


B. I will be the grace of God prove may evidently that al thingis ar nocht
expreslie vryttin in the neu and auld testament quhilk ane Christian man sold
believe als fermlie, as the Euangel: sua that zevil be constrainit to grant that
money thi^gis aucht to be beleuit, quhilk ar nocht expreslie vryttin in the
Canonik bukis of the scripture: S. Paul.
As Sanct Paul him self teachis vrytta^d to the Thessalonianis, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Stand, Act. 16.
quhilk ar nocht expressie vryttin. Ve reid that the Apostlis Matt. 26.
Ve reid in the Euangel of S. Martheu that Christ and his disciples, eftir his
latter suppar sang ane Hymn, quhilk being proponit to us, ve aucht to belief,
albeit it be nocht vrytrin in the neu or auld testament. doctoris to make ane
buke contening ane admonitione to them, that befoir had beleuit concerning the
mystery of the incarnation of Christ, of his life, and death: Thairfoir their
ar money thingis concerning the iustificatione of man. The number of the S.
Joan. 16*
And thairfoir the halie Ghaist is promised to assist Christis kirk unto the
end of the varld, Augu. I. co^t. Cresc. cap. 33.
for the quhilk cause S. Augustine vrytta^d aganis Cresconius gra^maticus, sayis
that the scripture in ane certane manner geuis us ane resolutione of al
quaestionis, because in tha thingis quhilk it contenis nocht expreslie, it geuis
us command to pas to the kirk, quhilk vil gif us full resolutione of al: Siclyk
al antecedentis amang the gentiles befoir the vrytting of onie of the
Euangelis, and Epistles: Ioh^e. 16.
and expedient for insttuctione. In the Euangel of S. Iohne, Christ sayis unto
his discipillis: Mairatour I have money thingis to tell zou, quhilk ze may
nocht beir at this time, bot quhen the spirit of treuth salcum, he vil teach
zou al verity: Of the quhilk testimony it is manifest that money thingis
nocht vryttin expreslie, ar referrit to the secreit suggestione of the halie
spirit quhen time Ephesi. 3.
19 doubt bot the halie spirit vorking in the hartis of Pastoris, succeidand
unto S. Paul reuelis the same thingis in lyk manner. And in I Heb.
Angeli Iudae ep.
Archangeli. Ephe. I.
Virtutes Ephe. I.
Principatus, Ephesians. I.
Potestates, Ephesians. I.
Dominationes, Colos. I.
Throni, Psalm. 17.
Cherubin, Esa. 6. Iraene. co^tra Val^nt. Tertu. de corona militis.
Seraphin, of the quhilk vehaif na cleir declaration, quhilk nochtuithstanding
gif it be offerit to us, ve aucht fermlie to believe: 22. And for confirmatione
of this, I micht produce zou the testimony of the hail ancient fatheris quha
in onie aige hes flourished in the kirk of God, As Irene, in the third buk
aganis the valentinianis, Aug. epist. 180.
and third chapture: of Tertullian in his buke de corona militis, Basilius de
spiritu Sa^c. ca. 37.
of Augustine in his Epistlis to Ianuarius: of Basile in his buke de spiritu
sancto, chap. 37: Hierom. contra Lucife.
of S. Ierom in his buke aganis the Luciferianis, and vtheris: Quhairfoir it is
manifest that al thingis ar nocht expreslie vryttin in the neu, and auld
testament, quhilk ane good and obedient Christian man aucht to believe als
fermlie as the text of the scripture: And to cum to zour particular doctrine,
Sindrieheaddis of doctrine quhilk the protestaons belewis vithout the varra^d
of the express vryttin vord.
vryttin: upon sondayis in contempt of the kirk, for the quhilk ze have na
varrand in the expess vryttin vord.


M. I think the vnuorthie to quho^ I sold make ansuere, quha are not eschamit to
defend that rabil of traditionis quhilk the Papistis vsis, sen God him self hes
spokin, Deuteronomy. 12.
that quhilk I command the, do it only, nather eik onie thig, nather diminise
from the same: and in the reuelatione of S. Iohne, gif onie man eik or pare
from their vordis, Apoc. 22.
God sal bring on him all the plagis quhilk ar vryttin in this buke. And they
vorshipe me in vane teacha^d the doctrines of men: Math. 15.
Be their places and sindrie vtheris lyk unto their I find that zour traditionis
ar rejected as the inuentionis of men.


B. Their ar zour great gunnis quhairbie ze use to attonishe the simpil and
ignorant peopil, quhilk being considerit a far af, appeiris to have great
strenth, bot being neirar examinat ar fund vithout onie force at all. And to
cum to the first place of scripture allegit be zou, I knau that zour* Master
Calvin vndirstandis it of the lau of Moses, and that na thing sold be eikit
nor parit form it, quhilk expositione gif ze embrace, ze man reject al other
thing by the lau of Moses, quhilk efteruart hes been vryttin, as the Prophetis
and vthir halie bukes, euin as did the Samaritanis quha mouit be the sam
argument ressaued only the five bukes of Moses, and rejected all the rest of
the scripture: ze man reject the neu testament, and quhatsumeuer hes been
vryttin be the Euangelistis, and Apostlis, in the quhilk money thingis ar bayth
eikit to the lau of Moses, and parit from it, althocht Calvin vald dissemble
the matter, as gif nathing var in the neu testament quhilk is nocht in the auld.
For quhatsumeuer tergiuersatione he find, he vil be constranit to grant that
money thingis ar commandit in the neu testament quhilk var nocht commandit in
the auld, and money thingis forbiddin in it, quhilkis in the auld testament var
commandit, or ellis Ioha^n Calvin and al zour faithful brethrene sold be
circumcidit as var the Ieuis according to the lau of Moses. This expositione
thairfoir being rejected as may vane and repugnant to goddis vord, The mening
of this place of scripture is, that nathing aucht to be eikit or parit from
thevord of god, quhairin al Catholics aggreis vith zou, and this is nauyse
repugnant to the traditionis: because the quaestione is nocht betuix zou and
them quhidder gif onie thing sold be eikit to thevord of god or parit from
it: bot quhidder gif tha thingis only apertenis to goddis vord quhilk ar
vryttin? Sua gif ze vald have said onie thing to the purpose, zesould have
schauin sum plane testimony of the scripture, that their is nathing apertena^d
to goddis vord, bot that only quhilk is vryttin, quhilk nather have ze done,
nor can be abil to do: Zea the scripture teachis us the plain contrare, Stand
and keip the traditionis quhilk ze have ressaued ather be vord or vryt, S.
Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
be the quhilk vordis S. Paul lattis us to vndirstand that the Theslalonianis
and al vtheris quhasoeuer standis in the treu religio^e aucht to keip the
traditionis of the kirk, albeit they be nocht vryttin, and they quha reiectis
the foirsaid traditionis standis nocht in the verity bot ar fallin from it:
Hou than can ze excuse zour self, bot ze have fallin al from the verity sen ze
vil observe na traditione? The secund place of Scripture in the reuelatione of
S. Iohne aucht to be vndirstand in lyk manner that na thing aucht to be eikit or
parit from his Prophecy, and nocht that na thing aucht to be believed or
ressaued for the vord of God, bot that quhilk is in this prophecy, vtheruyse
ve vilbe constrainit to reject all the rest of the neu testament, sua al men may
esilie vndirstand hou far aganis the mening of the spirit of God, ze use sic
places of scripture in zour sermonis for to dissaue the simpil peopil. Nou to
cum to the third place quhair Christ objected to the Pharisae anis, they
vorship me in vane teachand the traditionis of men: ze pervert it in lyk manner,
sen it is may manifest of text, that tha ar callit the traditionis of men
quhilk ar repugnant to goddis vord, as quhair God commandit to honor the
pare^tis, Matt. 15.
the Pharisaeanis did command the plane contrare, to neglect their parentis and
make offeringis unto God of tha thingis quhairuith they sold have suppleed
their parentis indigence, quhairin they contrauenit expreslie Goddis
commandiment. Bot the Ieuis had sum treu traditionis a mangis them vithout the
quhilk they could not attene to the perfyte intelligence of the scripture, in
the quhilk is Moses did instruct the seuintie eldaris quhom he did apoynt to
govern the peopil quhairof ze may reid Hilarious gif ze pleis vryttand vpone
the secund Psalm, Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
and other ancient vryttaris bayth befoir Christ and eftir him. And this
traditione vas na lytil cause that the seuintie interpretoris quhilk vas send to
Ptolome the king of Egypt to translate the Bybil out of the Hebreu in Greik,
did sua perfytlie aggrie in all poyntis, that albeit they var separat ane from
another, zit as money vryttis, their vas nocht samekil as ane vord in
difference amangis them, quhairin they had ane special assistance of the halie
spirit, being helpit be the traditione quhilk from hand to hand they had
ressaued from Moses. And the cause of sa money sectis amang the Ieuis as var
the Sadduceanis, Pharisaeanis, Essianis, Hemerobaptistis, and vtheris, vas,
because they interpreit nocht the scripture according to the tradition of the
eldaris, bot according to their auin phanthasie. Matt. 23.
Thairfoir Christ gave command to obey them quha teached in the Chyre of
Moses, vndirstanding be the Chyre of Moses, the pouar of teaching according
to the may certane reul and traditio^e that vas geuin be Moses, quhilk quhen
they folloued, they teached may sound and healthsum doctrine, euin as nou
amangis the Christianis, they quha interpretis the scripturis according to the
traditione geuin be the Apostlis, and ever obseruit in the kirk, they teach
may healthsum and soleid doctrine, and they that follouis nocht the said
traditione, bot their auin pha^tasie as ze do: they teach erroneous and
peruersed doctrine, and hes never constancy nor stabilitie in onie thing, bot
fallis ordinarlie out of ane condemnit and pernicious errore, in ane vthir mair
dangerous: And thairfoir The ancient fatheris be this reul used ever to convict
haeretikes, As did Irenaeus the Valentinianis, Tertul. the Marcionitis, Sanct
Basil the Eunomianis, S. Hierom the Luciferianis, and S. Augustine the
Donatistis, because that they ressaued only the vordis of the scripture, and
vald nocht ressaue the interpretatione of them according to the traditione of
the kirk. The quhilk traditione S. Paul callis the Reul of faith, S. Paul.
Philip. 3.
saying let us nocht depairt from the Reul of faith, that ve may al say ane
thing. And to the Cor. 1. Cor. 11.
For ane final resolutione of ane controversy, he proponis as ane may
certane and infallibil vay of decisione, the manner and Custume of the kirk. And
sua quhasoeuer follouis this Reul, that is the traditione of the kirk in the
interpretatione of the scripture, he can nocht in onie vyse vauer from the
richt intelligence, and mening thairof. For the quhilk cause fayis Tertulliane
that S. Paul passed up to Jerusalem to the rest of the Apostlis, to the end
that he micht aggrie vith them in this Reul of faith: And the cause that ze,
and al they quha professis neu doctrine their days, ar fallin in sa money
erroris, and sua discrepant ane from another, is, because ze have nocht follouit
this reul in the reiding of the scripturis, and vndirstanding of them, bot
zour auin fantasy, and inuentionis of zour auin brain.


OF THE OBSERVATIONE of the festual and halie dayis.
CHAP. XXXII.
Minister. BOt the matter vil appeir mair evident gif ve sal enter in particular
consideratione of the traditionis of the Papistical kirk, for thairin
superstitiouslie ar obseruit ane greit number of halie dayis aganis the command
of God, Exodus 20.
Remember that thou keip halie the sabbath day, Sax dayis sal thou labor, sua
that gif ve labor not on every day of the oulk, except the sunday, ve brek
this commandiment: And S. Paul vryttis aganis the obseruatione of the halie
dayis may planelie: [I feir leist I have bestouit my travel on zou in vain,
Gal. 4.
for ze observe dayis and zeiris, And siclyk I micht prove vtheris zour
traditionis to be plane repugnant to Goddis vord and commandimentis, as the
Making and vorshipping of Imagis, the Invocation of Sanctis, the Honoring of
deid me^nis banes, the Ganging in pilgramagis and money vtheris quhairof ze
sold be eschamit.


B. The treu mening of the command of God quhilk ze thrau for establishing of
zour haeresie, is that they sold not labor vpone the sevint day: As to the
sax vthir dayis it is permitted to them to labor gif they pleise, bot it is
not commandit that they labor, as ze falsely allege aganis the plane vordis of
the scripture, considering the Ieuis had money festual dayis by the Sabbath,
Leuit. 23.
As the feistis of the Pasouer, Deuteronomy. 16.
of the First fruitis, of the Tabernaclis and sindrie vtheris, quhilk var lang
to rehearse, zea sum feastis they obseruit hail aucht dayis throuch out, and zit
notuithsta^ding brak not Christis commandiment concerning the keiping of the
Sabbath day: quhair of it is may evident, that ze vraist the scripture to ane
sinistrous mening: for gif the Ieuis keipit the feast of the Pasouer vith ane
great solennitie in remembrance of the temporal benefeit, quhilk they resaued,
to vit deliverance from the bodelie service and bondage of Pharao, hou mekil
mair sold ve observe Pasche day in memory of the deliverance of mankind from
hell, be the resurrectione of our saluiour Christ Jesus? sen as testifeis Sanct
Paul tha thingis quhilk var proponit to the Ieuis in ane obscure schaddou and
figure only, 1. Cor. 10.
ar offerit to us in treuth and verity, Heb. 10.
[Lex continebatvmbra^ futurorum bonorum, non ipsa^ imagine^ rerum:].i. The lau
contenit the schaddouis of tha good thingis that var to be reuelit, and not the
propir image, and form of the thingis them selfis. As to the secund reasone
quhilk ze vsit in zour obiectione, lyk as all the headdis of zour doctrine
quhairin ze disagrie from the Catholic kirk, calland it Papistical, ar auld
condemnit haereseis, sua in this point ze follou the futstoppis of the
Manichaeanis, for as testifeis Sanct August. Aug. epist. 119.
they obiectit this place of scripture aganis the Catholics of that aige,
because they keipit the halie days: to quhom he ansuerit that Sanct Paul
speakis not of the halie dayis dedicat be the hail kirk to Goddis service for
memory of his benefeittis, bot of the superstition of the Gentiles, quha
beleuit that sum dayis of their auin nature var unhappy for ane coniunctione
of noysum planetis or stars, and because this, or that planet vas in sik ane
house of the heauin, quhilk opinionis var may vain and improfitabil. The
Manichaeanis obiectit lykuyse that the Christianis eftir the custume of the
Gentiles obseruit [solstitia and Aequinoctia) because the Christianis keipit
halie the Nativity of the lord, and Pasche day, of the quhilk the ane befell in
the solstitial of vynter, and the vthir eftir the aequinoctial of the spring
time: To quhom Sanct Augustine ansuerit that the Christianis obseruit not their
seasonis mouit be the superstition of the Gentiles, bot be the command of
Christis halie kirk, quha apoyntit them halie for rememberance of the
exceiding great benefeitis quhilk redou^dit to the hail varld of Christis
Nativity and Resurrectione. For defense of this louabil custume of the
universal kirk in keiping of the halie dayis S. Ignatius quha vas S. Iohne the
Euangelistis discipil and ane halie martyr vryttis to the Christian people,
Ignat. epi. 4. ad Phil.
that they keip halie the festual dayis, and other distinctionis of times, and
meattis institute be the halie Apostlis and kirk Catholic, saying,
(Festiuitates ne spernite, quagragesimam seruate, continet enim exemplar
conuersationis Dominicae) that is to say. Lichtlie not the halie dayis, keip
the halie time of Lentern, because it contenis ane exemplar of the conversation
of the lord: And S. Cyprian in money of his epistlis commandis that the dayis
upon the quhilkis the Martyris disceissit be diligently obseruit, Cypr. epi.
69.
that their dayis anniuersar or returning be zeirlie course may be dedicat to
the service of God, and thankisgeuing for their victory: For the quhilk cause
immediately eftir the decess of the Apostlis, The kirk constitute in Rome
Notaris to collect and register the Actis of the Martyris: S. Augustine also for
defense of the treuthvrittis aganis Adima^tus the Manichaean in this manner.
Augu. co^tra Adimantum. cap. 16.
(Nam and nos quoque Dominicum diem, and Pascha celebramus, and quaslibet alias
dierum festiuitates, sed quia intelligimus quo pertineant, non tempora
obseruamus, sed quae illis significantur temporibus).i. for ve observe also the
Sunday, Pasche day, and quhatsumeuer vthir halie dayis, bot because ve
vndirsta^d to quhat end the keiping of them vas institute, ve keip not sik
times samekil, as tha thi^gis quhilk ar signifeit be sik times. August. lib.
20. co^tra Faustum.
And in ane other place (Populus Christianus memorias Martyrum religiosa
deuotione co^celebrat ad excitandum imitationem, and vt meritis eorum
consocietur, atque orationibus adiuuetur:).i. The Christian people celebratis
the memory of the Martyris vith ane Godly devotion, to move them selfis to
imitation and follouing of their good lyfis, and that they may have follouschip
and participation of their merits, and be helpit be their prayeris: And this
vniuersalie in all aiges hes been keipit be al Christianis to this day: And is
obseruit not o^lie be us quha ar Catholics, bot also be the Lauterianis in
Germany, be the Zuinglianis in Sueishland, and be zour nichtbouris in England:
sua that in this head ze disagrie from al Christian people in the varld, mouit
only be avarice as appearis, because ze think it hurtful to zour gayn and
profeit gif ze abstene from labor vpone onie day by the sunday, quhilk is
also very evil keipit amangis zou: And zit zour foirbearis quha obseruit all the halie dayis very diligently, had als great velth and abundance of al
thingis, as ze have: And euin as they did employ them selfis vith great
liberality to the honoring and service of God, sua God did bestou his giftis
the mair liberally vpone them: Bot ze think al time tint quhilk ze employ in
Goddis service, for the quhik cause God se^dis sik dearth, skairsnes, and hungar
amangis zou, quhairof vithout al doubt ze ar the chief and principal cause be
transgression of the halie dayis, quhilk calamity gif the people revenge not
upon zour selfis, they vil revenge it upon zour bairnis gif ze leif onie behind
zou: And gif they send them not to the Gailzeonis, at the lest they vil send
them to Candie, to the effect sua nobil ane country be not contaminat be sik
ane unhappy and adulterous generatione, quhilk peraduentur vil cum to pas
sonear nor ze believe, sua that Dene Iohne Durie vith his tua pistolatis, his
lang gu^n and bricht murreon may be their captane general, to the quhilk office
he is mair meit nor to disput of the hid mystereis of the Christian faith: (Ane
fuil sumtymes may be ane prophet). As to the vthir headis of treu religione
concerning the use of Images, the Invocation of Sanctis the Honoring of the
relics, and Ganging in Pilgramagis, I will distingueis them seueralie, and
speak of every ane of them apairt.


OF IMAGIS.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Protestaon. QVhat sayis thou than anent the vorshipping of Imagis, Exodus 20.
seeing the command is geuin be God him self, thou sal make na grauin image?


B. Gif every command of God var tayne eftir the outuart schau of the vordis,
and nocht in the treu mening, their vald money thingis appeir to be commandit
vnfructfullie, Math. 5.
as for exemple, Gif thy richt hand hinder the cut it of, and cast it in the
fire. Quhairfoir this commandiment concerning Imagis is nocht to be sua
vndirsta^din, as gif God disalloued images altogidder in his kirk, and the use
thairof bot that he forbiddis the Ieuis, quha var very bent to sik idolatry,
as they had seen amang the gentiles, to make imagis beleuand them to be very
leuand Goddis, or to represent God, as having the figure of onie thing ather
inheauin or earth: And thairfoir Moses, quhe^ he forbad to make onie image,
askit, in quhat liknes God had appeirit unto them? Declairing his mening to be
that they sold make na image, for the representatione of God, as gif God had
the figure of onie thing, quhilk had appeirit unto them.


P. Bot God alluterlie forbiddis to have onie images in his kirk, for he, quha
is ane incomprehensibil spirit, may nocht be represented in ane material image.


B Zour assertione is manifest falls: because gif God had alluterlie forbiddin
images, he had co^ma^dit Moses to break this co^ma^dime^t, quha be his
directione maid in the kirk of the Ieuis, Exodus 25.
the imagis of tua Cherubinis, quha ar Angellis in heuin: Number. 21.
quha maid also the brasin serpent in the vildernes: 3. Reg. 6.
Solomon lykuyse maid the images of tuel oxin, berand the braisin sea, quhilk
be thingis in the earth: ze can nocht say, that God hes been repugnant to him
self, or that he hes commandit tua contrare thingis: And thairfoir necessarlie
ze man confess that in the first command he did nocht forbid al erecting of
images in his kirk, bot only the erecting of onie image, quhilk so^ld
representgod in onie figure sik asve persaue in thingis in heauin or earth: I
a^suere to zou thairfoir, vith the ancient vrytar Tertullian aganis the
Marcionitis quha denyand the haill auld testament, Tertul. lib 2. contra Marcio.
amangis other ressonis proposed this, That the God of the auld testament vas
repugnant to him self, forbiddand Moses to make onie image, and eftir
commandand to make the braisin serpent, and the Cherubinis: He ansueris to them
that they vndirstand nocht the command, because they considder nocht the end
quhairfoir god forbad to make onie image, quhilk vas that he only sold be
vorshippit as God, and that na image sold be maid to the quhilk his honor
sold be geuin, for the quhilk e^d he co^mandit never onie image to be maid,
bot only for su^ certane sign, or representatione, as the braisin serpent vas
commandit to be maid: And he addis thairto, that gif it vas lesum to the Ieuis
to make the braisin serpent for the significatione of Christ, hou mekil mair is
it lesum to make the image of Christ? Petrus Martyr in c. 8. iudicu^.
Zea Petrus martyr ane man of zour auin sect confessis, that it is lesum to make
the images of Christ, the Virgin Marie, and other Sanctis for ane halie
representatione of them: And ama^gis the Lauterianis zour brethrene, as ze call
them, ze knau in quhat honor is the image of the Crucifix: And gif ze vil
considder the ressone quhairfore god forbad Moses to make Imagis, it vas because
their could na image be lyk unto god: bot sen the secund person of divinity
hes taken flesh lyk unto ouris, and is becummit man, ve may make ane image lyk
unto his humane nature: And thairfoir the cause for the quhilk God forbad Moses
to make onie image, Tertul. lib 2. cont. Marcio.
hes nocht place aganis us, quhen ve make the image of Christ, or of his
Sanctis, as lang afoir the learnit vrytar Tertullian did teach. And I vald
dema^d zou, gif it be aganis the lau of nature, or nocht to make imagis? Gif ze
say that it is aganis the lau of nature, ze condem zour selfis, quha makis the
imagis of Calvin, Beza, and other heretikis: gif it be nocht aganis the lau of
nature, it can nocht be evil of the self, bot only insafar as it is referrit
to sum evil end: Bot the Catholics makis al imagis for ane good and godly
end, that is for remembrance of Christ, of his bitter Death and Passion, and
that thairbie ve may vorship and honor him: Thairfoir suppois it had been
forbiddin to the Ieuis to make onie images, it follouis nocht that it is
forbiddin to us, because as concerning the commandis of the auld lau, ve ar
only obleist to that, quhilk is of the lau of nature, be the quhilk it is
nocht forbiddin to make onie image as said is, and sua Christ him self being
demandit of the Ieuis, quhilk vas the first command of the lau? Math. 22
he Ansueris nocht that the first vas, thou sal make to thy self na grauin
image, bot thou sal love thy lord God vith al thy heart, vith al thy mind, vith
al thy pouar: This is confirmit be the hail antiquity, for as testifeis money
ancient vryttaris S. Luc. Metaphra in vita lucae. Theod. lector in collecta. li.
him self maid certane images of our Lady, quhilk ar pairtlie keipit to this
day: And Nicephorus testifeis that Christ did send his auin image to Abagarus
the king of Edessa: 1. cap. 14.
and the hemor rhoissa, quha vas hailit, Niceph. li. 5. cap. 14.
quhairof their is mentione maid in the Enangel, Niceph. li. 2. c. 7. Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 14.
did erect ane image unto Christ, quhilk na man reprouet, unto the time of
Julian the Apostat, quha pullit it down and placed his auin image their,
quhilk vas strukin done vith the thundir: Sozom. li. 5. cap. 20.
Athanasius vryttis, Athanas. in lib. de passione imag. Christi.
hou that the Ieuis throuche hetret of Christ, persed his image, and hou the
blude did spring out of it, be the quhilk miracle tha Ieuis var conuertit to
the faith: Metaphrastes vryttis, hou that Siluester Bischop of Rome,
Metaphrastes in vita Siluestri.
scheu to Constantinus Magnus the imagis of Petir and Paul, quha be ane
reuelatione in liknes of sik imagis, had appeirit to Constantinus Magnus
befoir: Augu. de consensu euangelistarum.
And S. Augustine de consensu Euangelistarum testifeis, hou the custume of the
Roman kirk vas that the images of S. Petir and S. Paul vsit to be payntit besyd
the image of Christ: S. Chrysostom in ane oraeson maid of ane Martyr Miletius, is
vitnes also, Chryso. in oration. De Miletio.
hou that the image of the said Martyr, vas reverently keipit be the
Christianis: Gregorius Nicenus makis ane la^g discourse of the image of
Abrahame, and the immolatione of his sone Isaac, hou it mouit his hairt to
teiris and compassione. And Damasus in the life of Constantine vryttis, that he
did offer unto the kirk ane image of Christ maid of gold, Damasus in vita
Siluestri.
and the imagis of the tuelfe Apostlis in silver. And Theodoret Theodo. in vita
Simeonis.
descryuand the life of the halie man Simeon, testifeis that the Christianis in
that age, vsit to have his image in their housis: Nicephor. lib. 18. c. 16
Procopius, and Nicephorus testifeis also, quhen the town of Edessa vas seagit
be Cosdroas the king of Perse, and almaist taken, hou that the Christianis quha
had keipit the image of Christ quhi^^ he had se^d befoir to Abagarus the king
of Edessa being desparit of al other remedeis, did bring forth that image,
quhairbie all the interprysis of their aduersaris var ouercummit: And to cum to
our auin I Will, quhen Augustine vas send be the Bischop of Rome to convert
Ingland to the faith, as vitnessis the may learned Beda, Beda* li. 1. cap. 25.
for his baner he vsit o^lie the sign of the Croce and the image of the
Crucifixe: As the Emperor Constantinus Magnus money hundredth zeiris befoir did,
Eusebius. in vita Constantini.
as vitnessis Eusebius, to quhom the Croce did appeir in the air, quhen he vas
to fecht aganis the tyrann Macentius, vith this inscriptione, In hoc
signovinces, And this hes been the sign of al Christian men, quhairbie they
have been knauin, and discernit from the Ieuis and infidellis, and vrocht
sumtymes miraculous vorkis: Thairfoir sayis the may ancient Tertulliane,
Tertul. de corona militis.
Befoir al our actionis ve use to make the sign of the Croce vpone us: The lyk
testifeis al other an^ient vryttaris, sua ze may persaue that ve do na thing in
this point, bot that quhilk is conform to goddis vord, and to the use, and
practeise of the universal kirk befoir us.


Pr. The imagis quhilk var vsit in the KirK, var the cause of horribil
Idolatry, Reg. 4. ca. 18.
and thairfoir sold have been brokin, eftir the exempil of the good king
Ezechias, quha destroyit the braisin serpent, quhairof thou makis mentione,
quhen it vas the cause of Idolatry.


B. This is ane commone place, q^hairfra ze collect sophistical argumentis:
from the abuse of ane good thing to destroy it alluterlie, and the richt use
thairof: Be the sam argument ze may collect that the sone, and the moon sold
have been taken out of the firmament, because they var vorshippit be the gentiles
as goddis: And ze may collect that zour merchandis sold nocht pas to burdeouse
to bring hame vine, because it makis money of zour headdis dissie: And money
other siclyk collectionis micht be maid als good as zouris, quhilk vald not be
very profitabill to the commonweil: For this argument from abuse seruis mair,
to prove the contrare conclusione, because it follouis veil: Imagisvar abusit,
thairfoir they ar good in the self, for that quhilk is evil be abuse only, of
necessity man be good being veil used. As to the similitude of the braisin
serpent, it makis nathing for the mentenance of zour errore, because the richt
use of it seruit for ane time only, to vit salang as the peopil remaning in
the vildernes, var stangit bethe fyrie serpentis: Quhairfoir the richt use
thairof ceissing, after they had entered in the land of Chanaa^, It vas justly
destroyit, because the peopil offerit incens to it, follouand the exempil of the
Idolatrous nationis: quhil as be the contrare, ze never hard that onie
Christian offerit to ane image: And gif onie sik abuse had been committed, it
aucht to have been taken auay be publik authority eftir diligent inspectione
and consideratione of the matter, and nocht be the peopil, as ze have done: I
reid that ane thousand zeir syne ane Serenus Bischop of Massilia be sik ane
zeal as ze have, did brek down sum imagis: Gregor. lib. 9. epist. 9.
Bot Gregorius the first, Bischop of Rome reprouit him may scharplie that he
had done by his deutie, and that never onie bischop befoir him had interprysit
onie sik thing: Bot ze appeir to attribute les to men nor ze do to doggis quha
hes na participation of reason, for ane dog can discern betuix ane hair and the
image of ane hair: be reasson he vil rin to tak ane hair gif he se her, bot
albeit he se payntit, the may viue image of ane hair that can be deuysit, he
vil not move him out of his place: And zit ze vil that men be sua daft, that
they can nocht discern betuix ane man, and the image of ane man.


Prot. Bot quhil as the Papistis in their kirkis in time of prayeris behalding
their Idolis and images fell down on their kneis, vithout al doubt they var
Idolateris.


B. Sense ane Idol is that propirlie, quhilk being nathing, is representit to
be sum thing: or that quhilk representis the thing that is nocht: ze can not
call the Images of the Crucifix, of the Virgin Marie, of all the Apostlis and
Sanctis, Idolis, unless ze believe that their vas never sik ane thing as Christ
crucifeit, as the Virgin Marie, as the Apostlis, and Sanctis: For it follouis
necessarlie, The Image of Christ crucifeit is ane Idol, thairfoir Christ vas
never crucifeit: This is the hid vennum quhilk lurkis in the hairtis of the
blasphemous Protestaons quhen they call the imagis that are in the Christian
kirkis, Idolis. Bot to zour objection: They var na mair Idolatoris quhen
entering in the kirk of God, and be inspection of the Imagis being brocht in
memory of onie benefeit resauit of God, they fell down on kneis to gif thankis,
and craif grace in time cumming, nor ze reiding zour prayeris upon zour bukes
vryttin, hauand zour ene fixed upon the Paper ar idolatoris: Sua that they ar
may ignorant and destitut not only of supernatural grace, bot of natural wit
also quha grantisthe use of the bukis vryttin in the kirk of God* and refusis
the use of imagis, quhilk thing the Devil perfytlie foirsau quhen he mouit his
ministeris to burn all the bukis and monumentis of the Doctoris, lyk as be them
he destroyit the imagis, to bring the miserabil people in oblivion of the
thingis signifeit thairbie: The Anabaptistis ar les blindit in this point, nor
the rest of the Antichristian Protestaons, for they refuse the vord vryttin and
use thairof, lyk as they have done the images, and lukis for reuelationis out
of heauin: Because the vord vryttin and images hes sik affinity in their
substance, use, and end, that nane can be devised mair: for gif I vald compair
every thing requeset to the ane, and to the vthir, this vil appeir may
manifest. Because in the bukis vryttin, the matter quhairof they ar maid
co^monlie is paper, ane artificial thing inuentit be the brayn of man: In the
imagis correspondent to this, is ane quhyt val, biggit be ane Craftis man: To
vryt the bukis, is requirit ane scrib or craftis man learned to vryt vith pen
and ink, quha be letteris (quhais forms var also excogitat be the brayn of
man) trauelis to express the images and memorialis of thingis done, as he hes
treulie consauit them in his mind, that be representation invryt they may
eftiruart be callit to our memory, as for exemple he vryttis the hail history
of the passion of Christ: To ane scrib vith pen and ink, is correspo^dent ane
paynter vith his pinset and coloris, quha drauis the images of tha sam thingis
upon ane quhyt val correspondent to the paper, for the sam use, and end: Nou
gif ze quha ar learnet at the schuillis be nocht ane Idolater because ze behald
the Paper as requesit to bring zou in memory of Christis Passion, and all the
circumstancis thairof: Quhy sold the ignorant pleuch man, quha als perfytlie
be help of the payntrie descryuis the hail Passion of Christ, as ze descriue
the sam be zour buk vryttin, be comptit ane Idolater because he fallis down on
his kneis to rander tha^kis to God quha hes inspyrit his hairt vith remembrance
of tha thingis quhilk ar representit be the paintrie? For he vorshippis na mair
that thing quhilk he behaldis nor ze do the buke: Gif the Images hes been
abusit, sua vas, and is, the buk vryttin abusit mair miserabillie, and vith
gretar loss of ignorant saulis: Because al haeretikis thrauis the sentencis of
the buke for establishi^g of their erroneous doctrine, to their auin perdition:
Quhairfoir as the use of Imagis seruis mekil for aedification and instruction
of the unlearned people, sua they labor to bring the people to Atheism, quha
refusis to have them in their kirkis and private housis: For gif Theodor Beze
vas mouit to compassion be inspection of the imagis of his Apostat brethrene,
Beza in lib. ^ conu^.
as he restifeis of him self: think ze it not als reasonabil, that be
inspection of the image of Christ being just and Innocent put to may
schameful death for our synnis, ve be mouit to beuail our auin faultis and
rander him thankis for sua great ane benefeit? Quhat man is sua mad that vil
think that is vas lesum to Theodore Beze to paynt the Imagis of falls,
trait^orous, and deceatful haeretikis, and vnlesum to treu Catholics to have
the images of Christ representit as he vas ane bairne in the arms of his
glorious Mother the virgin Marie: And lykuyse of Christ Crucifeit, as be his
passion on the croce he triumphit over the Devil and al his Apostat Angellis,
he abolished death and reconciliat the varld to his father of heauin? Their is
na man in his richt vit quha behalding onie image trampit under fut, vil not
esilie collect that the person representit thairbie is contemnit: Bot albeit
Beze desyris rather to behald the images of Audebert quhom he bougrit, and
Candida vith quhom he committit Adultery, nor of the virgin Marie the mother
of the leuing God, quha redemit the varld, and of Christ Jesus her sone quha
deed to make satisfaction for our synnis, zit I think good to propone to zou
their images, that ze may co^sidder vith zour selfis hou lytil difference is
betuix paynting and vrytting, sense they serve bayth to ane propos.




OF THE INVOCATION. OF SANCTIS.
CHAP. XXXIIII.
Minister. BOt ze are not content to have the images of the virgin Marie and
the sanctis, unless ze call upon them for support, quhil as the invocation of
Sanctis is vnlesum: Romans 10.
because it is vryttin, they can not call upon him in quhom they believe not, Bot
Christian men beleuis not in the Sanctis: thairfoir they may not call upon them.


B. This zour argument, be abusing the halie scripture, is collectit out of ane
other sophistical place callit in the schuillis [Homony mia] to detene ignorant
people in blindness: for invocation is taken tua manner of vayis, first for the
incalling of the author of grace, quha may according to his omnipotent pouar,
make help of na thing: of the quhilk S. Paul speakis in this place be zou
allegit, and this is propir to God only: Vtheruyse it is taken for requesting
of them quha ar membris of ane kirk vith us, to make us support be praying vith
us to God, that ve may obtene our petitione in the name of Christ Jesus only
mediator betuix God and man: quhilk invocation is commandit us, insafar as
every membir of Christis kirk sold request ane another for mutual prayer, gif
it be possibil.


M. Ve may require me^ leua^d upon the face of the earth to pray for us, because
they ar membris of ane kirk vithvs, botve aucht not to require them quha ar
deid


B. Sanct Hierom tuelf hundredth zeiris sensyne ansuerit to zour argument,
Hieron co^tra vigilantum.
That gif the Martyris and halie men quhe^ they var upon the face of the earth,
and subject to the infirmity of their bodeis and syn, as other men, micht
impetrat sua money thingis from God, hou mekil mair being in heauin delyuerit
from al syn, and crounit vith gloir and immortality may they obtene
quhatsumeuer they ask? And gif Sanct Paul being in this varld did pray sua
fervently for all tha people quhilk he conuertit to the faith of Christ, is it
liklie that quhen he is in heauin, he vil cloise his mouth, and forzet them al
aluterlie?

Quhairfoir it is plane infidelity to doubt that the halie Sanctis may heir
our petitionis, sen they have the fruitione of God, and acknauledgis al thingis
quhilk they desire to knau concerning us: And hauand Cheritie, and love
touardis us, 1. Cor. 13.
as S. Paul testifeis, that sam self Cheritie man move them bayth to desire to
acknauledge our estait, and in lyk manner to help us: vtheruyse they vald have
les cair of us, nor the Rich glutone, Luc. 16.
quha vas condemnit to hell, had of his brethrene: And their Cheritie vald auail
us na thing at al, quhilk is ane blasphemy: Quhair ze say that the Sa^ctis
apertenis nocht to the body of Christ, it is ane manifest blasphemy, for
Christ hes nocht tua bodeis, bot ane: sua necessarlie the sanctis of heauin
apertenis to his body, quhilk is his kirk: Aug. de ciuitate Dei, and co^tra
Faustum.
as amangis vtheris S. Augustine in his bukis of the City of god, and aganis
Faustus Manichaeus schauis may manifestly: Sua being membris of ane body
vith us necessarlie their man be sum communicatione betuix us and them, And as
every membir is helpful, and profeitful to vtheris, sua it is necessar that
they being the may chief and principal membris, be also may profitabil and
helpful unto us: Thairfoir Christ hes declaret be money miracles that sik
prayer unto the sanctis is plesand unto him. S. Augustine in his buke de cura
pro mortuis agenda, Augu* in lib. de cura pr^mortuis agenda.
may planelie testifeis hou that quhen the town of Nola vas seagit be the
Gothis and Vandalis, Felix quha vas sumtyme bischop of that town apperit vpone
the vallis of the town, and defendit it. Nicephorus, Nicepho. lib. 12. ca. 39.
and other historiographoris vryttis hou that Theodosius the Emperore in all his
troublis vsit to have recourse to S. Iohne, and hou that in the battle, quhilk
he had aganis Maximus the tyra^n, quha inuadit his impyre, S. Iohne apperit
unto him in the nicht, and did forschau the victory quhilk he vas to obtene
aganis his eunemie. Nazian, in oratione de Cypria. et Iustina.
Gregorius Nazianzenus testifeis, hou that Iustina ane halie voman being
allurit to syn be vitchcraft, did call vpone the help of our Lady the mother of
god, and be her intercessione did ouercum all the tentatione of the devil: I
micht cite zou money other lyk testimoneis of the antiquity quhairbie ze micht
vndirstand that this hes been the Doctrine quhilk ever hes been professed in
the kirk of Scotland sen the beginning, as ze zour selfis can nocht misknau,
hou that in the time of S. Hierom, Vigilantius vas condemnit for ane Haeretik,
Hiero. ad Riparium.
because he denyit the Inuocatione of Sanctis, as is manifest in the buke of S.
Hierom aganis him: Their vas sum in the age of Tertulliane, Tertull. in
Scorpiaco.
quha defendit that sam self haeresie, aganis quhom Tertulliane for defense of
the verity vrait ane buke quhilk he callit Scorpiacum, as testifeis also S.
Hierom: sua ze, and al vtheris quha defendis this errore, var condemnit in zour
foirfatheris befoir ze var borne.


M. Gif the Angellis and Sanctis of heauin micht heir our petitionis, that
thairby they var mouit to pray for us, it var necessar that they kneu the
secreitis of our hairtis, quhilk is propir to god only.


B. Albeit God be only searchar of the secreittis of the hairt, zit it
follouis nocht that the Angellis may nocht knau the sam: Because that quhilk
aggreis to God only be nature, aggreis to the Angellis be participatione, and
special gift of God: Matt. 19.
For the quhilk cause our saluiour Christ callis God only good, albeit ze vil
nocht deny, bot the Angellis quhilk fell nocht vith Lucifer ar good also. That
the Angellis, and lykuyse the Sanctis depairted, quha ar callit be our saluiour
Christ ressonand aganis the Sadducaeis (...), Matt. 22.
knauis the secreitis of our hairtis, it is manifest in the Euangel of S. [Luc.
S. Luc. 15.
I say unto zou that their salbe gretar Joy in heaui^ for ane synnar repe^tand,
than for nyntie nine just men quha hes na mister of repentance:] gif than the
Angelis, and Sanctis reioysis for the repentance of ane synnar, they man knau
quhidder the sam be vnfenzeit or nocht: And sense the first pairt of Repentance
consistis in the dolor of the hairt, to vndirstand quhidder this be
hypocritall, or proceiding from the love of justice, they man knau the may
hid secreitis of the hairt: And gif the Propheittis be reuelatione of God kneu
tha thingis quhilk var to cum money hundredth zeiris eftir, Reg. 4. ca. 5. 6.
zea did penetrat sumtymes the hairtis, and cogitationis of men, as ze may reid
of Elias, and Elisaeus, hou can ze deny that to the Sanctis, and Angelis of
heuin quha ar indeuit vith gretar illustrationis, nor euir at onie time var the
Prophetis, or mortal men in this earth? And gift ze, quha ar miserabil men on
the earth, knau that the Angelis ar in heauin, and in faelicitie, they haua^d
ane mair perfyt cognitione, man knau in lyk manner that ze ar in misery: or
ellis ze vil attribute unto zour self farther knauledge of the estait of them
quha ar in heauin, nor they have of zour estait, quhilk is ane blasphemy: Than
sen they can nocht misknau that ve ar in misery, as they misknau nocht bot
their bodeis sal rise vpone the latter day, and that the day of judgment is not
zit cu^med, and that the number of their brethrene is nocht zit accomplished,
bot money of them stryuand in this vaill of misery, albeit it var granted to
zou, that they kneu nocht our thochtis, zit being in that place quhair they
micht help us, loving us, and vndirstanding that ve ar in misery, they vald
nocht desist to pray for us: As ze, suppoise ze be in Scotland, zit ze pray for
zour brethrene i^ France, albeit ze penetrat nocht the thochtis of their
hairtis: And gif it vas lesum to willox, kmnox, and sum vtheris of the
Ministeris quha professis vitchcraft and sorcerie, to call upon the deuillis,
and resaue their support as did Craig quha be his auin confession ressauit ane
purse full of Gold fra ane blak dog passand throuch Italy, quhilk vas ane great
occasion quhairbie he vas mouit to rejoice for licht leing of his Coule, and
tak him to the Ministry: Quhy sal it nocht be leasum to us to call upon the
halie Anglis of heauin and Sanctis of God? Sen at the lest they may alsueil
heir us and knau our desyris as the devil did ather heir willox and kmnox, or
Knau the desire of Gold and Honoris kendillit in the hairt of the Apostat
Craig, quhen he send him ane purse be ane of his Apostat Angelis in liknes of
ane blak dog: to signify that be giving obedience to the secret suggestionis
of the devil hevas to becu^ ane odious tyk barking aganis al treuth, aganis the
authority of Christis veilbelouit spous the kirk, and halie sanctis quha ar
nou in heauin, denying lykuyse the reverence quhilk treu Christianis exhibit to
their relics as the ve schellis of the halie Ghaist, for confirmation of
their faith concerning the rising agane of their sam self bodeis upon the day of
judgment.


OF THE HONOR THAT in the Catholic kirk vsis to be exhibit to the relics
of the Sanctis.
CHAP. XXXV.
Minister. THinkis thou it nocht ane superstitious thing to tuiche deid mennis
banes and to abyd thairbie onie benefeit of health, or onie sik thing, as the
Papistis ar accustumed to do in their kirkis?


B. Gif this be superstitione, the Christianis euin in the Apostlis days hes
been superstitious, as quhen they did put them selfis in the schaddou of S.
Petir, as ve reid in the actis of the Apostlis, Act. 5.
and quhen they caused the naipkinnis, Act. 19.
and mutschis of Paul to be brocht to them, that be the tuiching of them they
micht be delyuerit from their diseasis: considering their is na les force in
the relics of Petir nor vas in his schaddou, and their is na les force in the
relics of S. Paul, nor vas in his naipkinnis and mutschis. By that, gif this
had been superstitione, God vald never have approuit it be sa money miracles,
as he hes done, quhairof ze may reid S. Augustine in the tuentie tua buke of
the city of god, Augu. 22. de ciuitate Dei.
quhair amangis vtheris he schauis hou beand present in the town of Millen,
the relics of the halie Martyris Geruasius, and Protasius var fund, and hou
that ane blind man did tak his naipkin, and tuiche the said relics, and
having put it to his eyne, vas incontinent restorit to his sicht: The like he
schauis of ane blind voman quha having brocht certane flouris to the relics
of S. Stephane and having put them to her eyis, vas incontinent restored to
her sicht. Hierom. contra Vigila^tium.
S. Hierome in his buke aganis Vigilantius declairis at lenth, hou that they
quha ar possessit vith the deuillis, quhen they cum befoir the relics of the
Martyris, ar delivered: And in lyk manner ve reid of the halie bischop
Marcellus, quha passed to Ingland to refel the haeresie of Pelagius, hou quhe^
ane blind voman vas presented to him, he did tuiche her eyis vith certane
relics quhilk he bure vith him, Theod. lib. 8. de cura^dis graecanicis
affectionibus.
and scho thairbie recovered her sicht: Theodoret in his buke de curandis
graecanicis affectionibus, geuis sufficient prove thairof, and hou that the
Christianis, be the miracles quhilk ordinarlie var done be the relics of the
Martyris, used to confirm the treuthe and verity of the Christian religione,
because that euin the Martyris, quhen they appeared to be ouercummed and
vincused, var may stark, and did vork euin miraculous vorkis, to the quhilk
argument the Gentiles had na other thing to say, bot that sik vorkis var done
be the craft, and subtilitie of the devil, as amangis vtheris testifeis Sanct
Hierom aganis Vigilantius. Hieron. co^tra Vigilantium.
The Gentiles, sayis he, Por phyrius, and Eunomius, sayis that al their thingis
ar done be the illusione of the deuiles, quhais futstoppis ze ar nocht eschamed
to follou: zea Petrus Martyr Petrus Martyr in 18. Iud.
zour great Prophet testifeis that he can nocht deny that sik miracles sindrie
times hes been done, bot that God permitted them to be done for to dissaue and
begyl men be them, euin as God var ane deceauer lyk Petrus Martyr, quha, gif
he had been in the primitive kirk, vald have adjoined him self to the Gentiles,
and Infidelis aganis the Christianis, in denying the force and strenth of sik
miraclis, as the Christianis used for ane chief confirmatione of their faith.


M. Ze may cloike the matter as ze pleise, zit I se na vay quhairby ze may
eschaip the crime of Idolatry, quha vorshippis deid mennis banes.


B* Ze schau zour self to be ane Ieu, Samaritane, or ane Gentile that makis sik
ane obiectione to me, considering ze can nocht misknau the ansuere, Hieron.
co^tra Vigilantium.
quhilk S. Hierom gave to Vigilantius in the same very cause, quhen Vigilantius
callit him and al other Catholics Idolatouris, because they vorshippit deid
mennis banes: Sayis S. Hierome, daft man, quha ever ama^gis the christianis hes
vorshippit deid mennis banes? ve vorship nocht, sayis he, the relics of the
Martyris as Godis, bot ve honor them as veschellis, and tabernaclis in the
quhilk the spirit of god did vmquhyl make residence, and quhilkis ar to be
honorit be God him self vith gloir and immortality: and zit ve honor nocht
the banes of the deid, because the martyris ar nocht deid bot leuis unto God, he
nocht being the God of the deid, bot of the quik, Matt. 22.
as he sayis him self: And gif in the auld testament the Ieuis had in sua great
honor the Ark of the testament, and the propitiatoure, only because that God
in ane special manner used to declair his presence in sik places, hou mekil mair
aucht ve to have the halie relics of the Martyris, quha hes been the very
templis of God, in honor and veneratione? as ever al treu Christian men hes
had befoir us: quhairof ze may reid S. Hierome in the said place, hou that
Constantinus Magnus the Emperor, caused transport the relics of S. Andro, S.
Luke, and S. Timothy to Constantinopil: Arcadius caused translate the banes of
the Prophet Samuel out of Iudaea to Thracia: Georgius Alexadri. nus.
Theodosius zoungar commandit that the relics of S. Chrysostom. vith al honor
sold be transportit to Constantinopil: and Theodoret testifeis, hou that all the peopil of Constantinopil vith great honor did pas befoir the said relics
in Bosphorus, as gif they had been on the land, Theodoret lib. 5. ca. 36
and conuoyed them to the town of Constantinopil, vith torchis, and lampis:
S. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei.
Thairfoir S. Augustine prouokis the Gentiles to schau that the sepulture of
Romulus vas keipit in sua great honor, as Christianis schauis the sepulturis
of the Martyris to have been keipit. And S. Hierome vrittand to Marcella,
Hiero. ad Marcella^.
ve have in honor the sepultures of the Martyris, and ve tuiche our eyis vith
their halie relics, Amianus Marcellinus.
and kissis them vith our mouthis: And Amianus Marcellinus quha vas bot ane
Gentile, testifeis in his history descryuand the persecutione of the
Christianis in the town of Rome, hou that the Gentiles used to cast the bodeis
of the Martyrs in the flude of Tyber, to the end that the Christian me^ sold
nocht honor them. Basilius de 40. Martyribus.
The lyk ve reid to have been done in sindrie other places, be the infidelis as
be king Lisinius in Sebaste ane town in Armenia, and vtheris. Ze Julian the
Apostat, Cyrillus in lib. contra Iulianum.
as vitnessis Cyrillus in his bukis aganis him, objected to the Christian men,
that nocht only they vorshippit Christ, bot aganis his command, they honorit
the relics of the Martyris, quhairof ve may considder quhais futstoppis ze
follou in dishonoring and burning the halie relics of the Martyrs, that is
of the may vickit infidelis, and cruel Apostatis: Quhat gif Sanct Hierome var
leuand in their days? Quhat sadness and desolatione vald he have to se tha
thingis done be them quha callis them Christian men, quhilk he deplored sua
mekil to se done be the may ungodly and barbarus peopil in the varld,
Hieron. ad Heliodorum.
vryta^d in this manner [Capti Episcopi, interfecti Presbyteri, subuersae
Ecclesiae, ad Altaria Christi stabulant equi, Martyrum effossae reliquiae,
vbique luctus, vbique gemitus? quot monasteria capta? quot fluuiorum aquae
humano sanguine mutatae sunt? The bischopis ar taken, the Preistis ar slain,
The kirkis ouerthrauin, horse ar stabillit at the altaris of Christ, the
Relics of the Martyris ar delued up, over alquhair their is dolor, over
alquhair murning: hou money abbayes ar taken? hou money fludis of valter ar
changit in mennis blude?


M. Ze ar nocht content to honor zour relics, except that ze cleyth them
vith gold, and precious staones, and in the mentyme ze lat the pure quha ar the
quik membris of Christ dea for hungar.


B. Gif ve reid in the auld testament that the Ark and the propitiatore var sua
richly appareled, hou can ve doubt bot the relics of the Sanctis, quhilkis
ar the very tabernacles of the halie spirit, sold be esteemed vorthie of al
apparel? zea of greater nor the pouartie of man may attene to, sen God him self
is to adorn thamevith the gift of gloir and immortality? Bot ze, as ansuerit
sumtymes S. Hierom to Vigilantius, ar very soriful that they are not castin in
the middinis, or coueritvith sectclayth: as Judas the traittour vas sorry that
Christis feit var oynted vith sua precious ane unguent: Sua ve do na thing bot
that, quhilk the kirk of God hes ever done befoir us, as Sanct Hierom and other
authoris dois testify. Lib. 9. hist. cap. 11.
And Sozomenus vryttis hou that Pulcheria Augusta did cover the relics of the
forty Martyris vith ane may precious cover true. And ze zour selfis
cleythis zour vyuis vith silkis and veluot quha ar nocht sua precious
veschellis of the halie Ghaist, and zit ze esteem nocht zour selfis idolateris.
Quhair ze say that the pure in the mentyme ar naikit ze appeir to tak Judas
pairt aganis Christ, quhen he said that the ointment vith the quhilk Christ vas
oynted micht have been sellit and geuin to the pure folk: Matt. 26.
zea ze have sellit in very deid all the precious ornamentis of the relics of
the Martyris in the Realm of Scotland, bot the pure folk ar mair naikit nor
ever they var.


M. Bot thinkis thou it nocht ane vain thing to licht lampis and vax candillis
befoir the relics of the Martyrs in fair day licht, the sone schyna^d mair
cleirlie nor onie candil, and to bring flouris quhair vith they may be bus kit.


B. Theodoret in his aucht buke de curandis graecanicis affectionibus,
Theodoret lib. 8. de curandis graecantcis affectionibus.
ansueris to zour argument, quhilk vas objected to him be the Gentiles, that ve
licht the candelis befoir the relics of the Martyris, nocht that they have
mister of licht, bot for professione, and protestatione of our faith, to
testify that the sanctis ar in the eternal licht of gloir and immortality:
And S. Hierom vryttand aganis Vigilantius quha maid the lyk obiectione to him,
ansuerit also, that the Christian peopill used to licht candellis and lampis
befoir the relics of the* Martyris, for declaratione of the love and zeal
quhilk they beir unto them The quhilk zeal, he doubtis nocht, bot is
acceptabil unto God, as vas the zeal of them quha did put them selfis in the
schaddou of Sanct Petir, and vas hailled from al their diseasis: And thairfoir
for ane halie significatione and professione of faith, quhen the Euangel is
red, sayis he, ve use to licht Torchis, for to declair that the Euangel is the
licht of the varld: And in Christian me^nis buriallis as testifeis Gregorius
Nazianzenus, Gregorius Nazia^z.
Torchis and lampis used ever to be lichted, for ane demo^stratione that they
pas to that licht quhilk surpassis the vit and vndirsta^ding of man: Bot ze, as
sonis of darkness, heave na vil of licht, according to the saying of our
saluiour, [he that dois evil heattis the licht,) and thairfoir ze gloir sua
mekil, in zour inuisibil kirk, because it hes never seen the licht, their
thousand and five hundredth zeiris bypast, and depairting from this varld ze vil
nocht that at zour burialis torchis be lichted, to make protestatione that ze
pas to that place, quhair their is na licht at al, bot ane may fei^ful
horrore, darkness, and obscurity vithout confort. Quhair as ze object that the
Catholics buskis the relics of the Martyris vith flouris, ze appeir to have
consauit ane inquensibil anger aganis the halie relics, considering ze vil
that na kind of ornament at al be granted unto them, nor zit thatve do onie
thing quhairbie ve may declair our love and affectione touardis them: For the
flouris signifeis the sueit and precious sauore of their good vorkis befoir
God, quhilk ve also profes quhen ve adorn them, and valkinnis our selfis
thairbie to follou their futstoppis, and halie exemple. Hiero. ad Hel^odorum.
Thairfoir Sanct Hierome vryttand of Nepotianus, louis him that he vas
accustumed to apparel the kirkis of the Martyris vith flouris, vith the
branchis of the treis and other sik ornamentis: Aug. 21. de ciuitate Dei. ca. 8.
And Sanct Augustine vryttis of ane blind voman quha brocht flouris to the
relics of Sanct Stephane, quha after scho had tuiched his relics vith
them, be tui^hing her auin eynevith the same, vas restorit to her sicht agane:
quhairof ze may esilie vndirstand, that God vald nocht have confirmit and
approuit the deid of this voman be sua greit ane miracle, gif it had mislykit
him. Bot ze ar soriful that samekil as ane flou^e sold have been applyit to
onie (...) use, or significatione, follouing the futstoppis of zour foirfather
Judas.


OF THE PILGRAMAGIS.
CHAP. XXXVI.
Minister. THe people vas gretumlie abusit be the honoring of zour relics,
insafar as vithout onie co^me^dation of Goddis express vryttin vord,
Pilgramagis to the kirkis and grauis of zour Martyris var inioynit to the ruid
and ignorant people, as gif God var nocht alyk potent in all place, and his
pouar of virking miraclis var limitat to tha pairtis only quhair zour Sanctis
var bureit.


B. Insafar as na man can be abusit be doing of that only quhilk apertenis to
his deuitie, the people vas nauyse misusit be the reverence quhilk they buir to
the relics of the Sa^ctis, as the may precious veschellis of Goddis may
halie Spirit, to quhais honor al reverence exhibit befoir the relics of the
Martyris, did redound: And it var lang to rehearse all the testimoneis of
scripture quhairbie Pilgramagis ar gretumlie commendit, lyk as the mystery
thairof is very great, declairing hou syn is the cause quhy ve pas from God,
and that it behouis us to sustene travel and pane, Matthew. 3.
gif ve sal return to Goddis fauore agane. For the thrie kingis ar gretumlie
comme^dit in the scripture, quha come out of the far pairtis of the East, to
vissie our saluiour Christ Jesus at his nativity vith offerandis: In lyk manner
the Queen of Saba, quha viseit Jerusalem to heir the visdome of Solomon. S.
Luc. 4.
Siclyk our halie saluiour Christ commendis the Pilgrammage of Naaman the
Syrian, to Elisaeus the prophet, be quhom he vas hailed of his leprosy,
Albeit money in Jerusalem quha var neirar hand, deed in their seiknes: And all the Ieuis vsit to make ane solemn Pilgramage to the town of Jerusalem, 4.
Regu^ 5.
as is cleir in Goddis vord. Ve misknau nocht that God is over al, and that his
infinite pouar is nocht limitat to onie certane place, bot may vorke equally in all places, zit it hes pleised his infinite visdome, and sapie^ce to schau mair
singular vorkis in ane place, nor ane vthir: as ane special grace vas promised
to them quha sold pray in the kirk of Jerusalem, Regum. 3. cap. 8.
quhilk Solomon in hallouing of the same did craif of god befoir: And Daniel
being in the captivity, quhen he prayed to God, he turnit his face touart the
kirk of Jerusalem: Macha. 3. cap. 3.
And Heliodorus quhe^ he vas strickin down af his horse be the Angel of God,
vas compellit to grant to Antiochus his Master, that their vas sum special
verteu and puissance of god, quhilk did remain in that kirk. Lykuyse quhen the
Ieuis prayit befoir the ark of the testament, and the propiciatoure, God did
declair to them mair miraculous vorkis, nor he vsit to do in other places. S.
Augustine vryttand to the clergy, and peopil of Hippona, schauis hou that God
be his infinite visdome, Angust. in Ser. ad Popul. Hippo.
dois vork sum thingis in certane places, quhair the Relictes of Martyrs, and
other halie men be, that he vorkis nocht in vthir places: The quhilk thing, he
sayis, pertenis only to ane mystery of his inscrutabil visdome, sua that ve
can nocht comprehend the reassone heirof: For the quhilk cause, he schauis unto
them, hou that he had send tua of his auin house, quha var diffamed of ane
very horribil crime, in Pilgramage to Nola in Iralie, quhair the body of S.
Felix vas keipit: To the effect that God micht declair his judgment in that
place, quhidder gif they var innocent of the said crime or nocht: He addis
thairto, that being in Millen him self, ane man vas brocht befoir the relics
of the Martyris, to sueir gif he had committed ane certane thift, or nocht, quha
vas constrainit euin aganis his vil to confess his thift: And eftiruart
concludis in this manner, that euin as al giftis ar nocht geuin to every Sanct
in this varld, bot sum hes the spirit of health, sum the spirit of prophecy,
and sum, vthir giftis, sua eftir their death, God dois certane vorkis be sum,
quhilk he dois nocht be vtheris, quhairof ze may reid in the said Author at
mair lenth. Aug. 22. de ciuit dei cap. 8.
And in the tuentie tua buke of the city of God in the aucht chapteur he
vryttis, hou that ane zoung man, and zoung voman Callit Paulus and Palladia
quha had fallin in ane paralysie, and trimbling of al their membris, be
reassone of their motheris malisone, come in pilgramage to his town of Hippona
quhair he vas bischope for the time, And in sicht of the hail peopil, be
intercessione of S. Steuin, Sidonius lib. 1. Epi. 6.
var hailed. Sidonius Apollinarius vryttis to S. Hierome hou that he had
co^pleit his pilgramage to Sanct Petir and Paul, Hierom. ad Marcellam.
and that thairbie he had obtened his health. And S. Hierom him self vryttis to
Marcella, that it var almaist impossibil to him to count all the learned and
halie men, and vemen, quha sen the ascensione of Christ, hes cummit in
pilgramage to Jerusalem: He testifeis mairouer, that euin from our I Will of
Brita^nie, they quha var may halie and deuoit, could nocht be content vith
them selfis, quhil they had been in Jerusalem, and adorit Christ in that
place in the quhilk he vas crucifeit for the saluatione of man: Chrisost. Homi.
32. in Epist. ad Romanos.
S. Chrysostom. in his 32. homily on the Epistle to the Romany, schauis quhat
deuotione he had to pas to Rome to se the halie chainis quhair vith S. Petir
and Paul var bund, and to humil him self befoir the bodeis of the halie
Martyris. Eusebius lib. 6.
Eusebius in the sext buk and elleuint chapteure reherses the lyk of the
ancient vryttar Origenes, quha desyrit to pas in Pilgramage to Rome. Basilius
in his homily of the forty Martyris, Basil. Homi de 40. Marty.
exhortis al men to pas unto them, that hes mister of quhatsumeuer thing: God
sayis he, vil refuse na thing to the Martyrs, quha hes sched their blude for
him: Theodoretus in the life of Simeon geuis the cause, Theodo. in vita Siniconis.
that mouis halie men to pas in Pilgramage, quhilk is ane treu and arde^t love:
For they sayis he, quha loves onie man, ar blythe to se the places quhair he
hes remani^, or quhair he is bureit, or onie thing that apertenis to him: And
siclyk in his aucht buke de curandis Graecanicis affectionibus, Theodo. 8. de
curtagne: affect.
quilk is almaist al of this argument, quhair he declaris, hou that innumerabil
peopil hes obtenit health be the intercessione of the Martyrs, and halie men
to quhome they did make their Pilgramage, quhair of sayis he, the testimoneis ar
may evident and cleir, be the markis, quhilkis they quha hes obtenit sic
health, hes left in the kirkis of the Martyris, as Imagis of the membris,
quhilk hes been restorit to health: And as tuiching domestik exemplis their be
zit, ane hundredth treu and faithful men in the vest of Scotland, quha can beir
good record of the profeit of that Pilgramage, quhilk the peopil maid to S.
Niman of Gallouaye, suppois ze quha ar rude and ignorant of all that, quhilk hes
been before zou, leaning onlievpone zour auin vane, and fantastical Judgment,
esteem may fulishlie, nocht vithout greit injury of God, and his halie
Sanctis, sik thingis to be superstitious. Their vas sum four hundredth zeiris
syne quha condemnit the ganging in Pilgramagis, as ze do, quha var judged to be
haeretikis, Petrus cl^^nia lib. 2. Epist. 2.
be all the Doctoris, and learned men of that aige, as amangis vtheris vitnessis
the may halie man S. Bernard, and Petrus Cluniacensis, Testifeand that the
universal kirk hes ever approuit the use of sik Pilgramagis as may halie and
profitabil, ze that God dois vork money thingis mair miraculouslie be his
Martyris and Sanctis ef^ir their death nor he did vork be them quhen they var
on lyffe: To schau, as vryttis the may learned Theodoret in the same buke
quhilk vas cited befoir, that the vord of God be the quhilk he promised to his
Apostlis, and seruandis, that the varld could nocht be abil to vincuse, or
ouercum them is may certane and treu, because that euin quhen the life is taken
fra them, they ar mair michtie and potent, nor ever they var befoir, and vork
is sua miraculous vorkis, that euin they, quha put them to death var
constrainit to confess the vord of God to be treu, that is, that the Martyris
and seruandis of God, can nocht be vincused, or ouercummit. Bot ze, gif ze
considder veil, quha takis auay sua glorious vorkis of the Martyris, sa far as
lyis in zout pouar, ze vald make God ane lear. Money hundredth zeir befoir S.
Bernad their vas sum Heretikis callit Eustachiani quha reprouit the universal
kirk, be reassone of the Pilgramagis, and assembleis quhilk the Christian
peopil vas accustumed to observe in the kirkis of the Martyris, Concilium
Gangr. cap. 20.
quhilk Heraesie vas incontinent condemnit in the Concile Callit Gangrense, sua
that in this point, as in money vtheris, ze have only reneuit auld, and
condemnit haeteseis, and maid ane mass of them al togidder: Aug. haere. 1.
As Of Simon Magus, denying good vorkis, and that ve ar iustifeit thairbie: of
the Marcionitis, denying the distinctione of ordoris in the kirk: Aug. haer. 14.
of the Nouatianis, denyi^g the sacramentis of Paenitence, Ambro. de paeni.
and Confirmatione: of the Manichaeanis denying the fry vil of man: Aug.
haere. 46.
of the Aerianis denying the praying for the deid, Aug. haere. 53.
and offering of the sacrifice of the Mess for them, and the keiping of
fasting days appointed be the kirk: August haere. 36.
of the Noetianis, affirmand that quhasoeuer beleuis as ze do,
nochtuithstanding they be destitute of good vork is, that they may be saif, as
the Noetianis teached of their faith: Of the Eustachianis, Concilium Gangre^se
cap. 20.
denying the Pilgramagis unto the halie places, quhair the relics of the
Martyris ar: Aug. de pec. merit. and remiss. li. 1. cap. 11.
Of the Pelagianis, teaching that the bairnis ar sanctifeit in their motheris
vombe, and that Baptism is nocht necessar to them: of Iouinianus affirmand na
difference to be betuix Marriage and virginity, Aug. haeres. 82.
and that it is lesum eftir the vou of chastity to Marie: Hiero. ad Ripariu^.
Of Vigilantius that ve sold nocht pray to the Sanctis, nor honor their
relics: La^francus iu lib. co^tra Berengartum.
Of Berengarius affirmand that their is only ane sign of Christis body in
the sacrament: And of money vtheris that hes follouit eftir, as of Viclephe
Huss and vtheris, condemnit be them quha ever hes been estemit for lauchful
doctoris and pastoris in the kirk, as be Irene, Iustine Martyr, Arnob,
Cyprian, Nazianzenus, Basil, Augustine, Ambrose, Hierom, and vtheris. This is
the some of my conference vith the Ministeris, quhairin I have dissembled na
thing of the force of their argumentis, as al men, quha vas present, vil
testify: As to my pairt, because it var tedious, and our prolixe to rehearse all the reasnis quhilk I vsit for defense of the treuth the time of my
impresonement, being content to have schortlie tuiched their principal and chief
headdis, I desire may ernistlie every man, as he louis his auin saluatione,
to co^sidder of quhat spirit, the reformatione (as the Ministeris callis it) of
that deformit kirk in Scotland hes proceidit: quhilk gif he do vithout
affectione, I dout nocht bot he sal cleirlie persaue that all the mischief,
thift, sacrilege, adultery, incest, contempt of God, violating of hislauis,
and commandimentis, murder of spiritual magistratis, and pastoris, Be felling
them in private streittis under silence of nicht, Casti^g of rottin eggis and
al kind of filthe at them in oppin market, Be banising, impresoning and
harling them on sleddis, Be tramping the memoriallis of al religione in
guttaris, be rugging down of kirkis, be spulezing of Abbayis be transferring
the orname^tis and rentis thairof to the vphalding of huris, ignominious
vagabundis, or at the lest men vithout al verteu, hes proceidit thairof: Sua
that gretar Ab hominatione may nocht be lukit for, at the cumming of onie other
Antichrist heireftir. As to the Sacramentis, quhilk Christ hes institute as
ordinar menis, quhairbie grace necessar for the spiritual, and temporal estait
in general, lyk as the oynting of Preistis for spiritual regeneratione: The
mareing of men and vemen for procreatione of Childrene: The promotione of
superioris for regiment, and government: And siclyk ordinar menis, quhairbie
grace necessar to every particular mannis saluatione is geuin be God, vsand
the administratione of ane anoyuted Pastore, ar pairtlie vilfullie rejected as
Co^firmatione, Repentance, and Extreme Unction: Pairtlie in vord granted, and
in very deid annullit, as Baptism, and the Sacrament of the Altar. For the
quhilk cause money regardis nocht quhidder their Childrene be baptized, death
approaching, or nocht: They cum to their co^munione as to ane huntaris bankat:
Gif they fall in deidlie syn, they abyd continually in the net of the devil,
vithout remissione of the same, for reiecti^g the ordinar mean of absolutione:
The pure peopil deis lyk doggis vithout confort, nather vil the Ministeris
dengzie them selfis to vissie them, Albeit they vil ryd xx mylis for hoip of
ten Crounis to vissie ane lord, that gif he have leuit al his days faythfullie
in the feir of God, they may troubil his conscience vith controuerseis of
disputationis, quhidder gif the Angellis prayeris be profitabil for us or
nocht? Their is na thing hard out of their pulpittis, bot blasphemy aganis God
in lauchfullie promouit Pastoris, and Princes, to bring the Pepil in
suspitione, that the neu testament of our saluiour, is the inuentione of the
Paip, lyk as they blasphemouslie speak of his Sacrifice, and Canonis of the
Apostlis. Gif onie man feiring God, considering their beginning and conferring
the samyn vith haereseis condemnit in our foirfatheris days, offer them
disputatione: They travel be al menis to seik his life, sua that they appeir
nocht the murtheraris of him: As be experience I knau of my self, aganis quhom,
they, lyk falls traittorous learis, as I tak god to vitnes, Inuenit thingis
quhilk I never thocht, concerning the honor of the kingis Majesty, nocht
vorthie of rehearsal, quhairbie they laborit my ruin, transferring the cause
from professione of religione to lose Majesty, and treassone, as they vald
have callit it: Bot zit the eternal God, quha never frustrat onie, that
vnfenzeitlie beleuit in him, in despytt of their rage, hes preseruit me from
danger bayth of body and saul. God of his mercy grant the Peopil of the hail
country grace to vndirstand, that lyk as the Ministeris began vith ane falls
promeis, to vit that the peopil sold have their teindis fry, and the
teacharis of the Protestaons sold gang in sik simpil pouartie, as did the
Apostlis, sua they may knau that the lesingis hes na mesure, fund out be them,
quha hes succeidit to their leing father kmnox: And lykuyse persaue the hid
abhominationis, quhilk lurkis under their negatiues: For gif the Paip of Rome,
quha ever hes been President to Christis kirk sen his ascensione, be thocht the
Antichrist, It follouis consequenlie that nather Christ hes ane kirk, nather
zit hes cummit in the varld, seeing as they teach be instinctione of Satan,
and contempt of God, that his kirk hes been inuisibil: The rejecting of the
halie days, quhilk vas institute be the Apostlis, tendis to na other thing,
bot ane obliuione, Ignat Ep. 4 ad Philippenses.
and forzetfulnes of all the Joy, that al mankind hes obtenit be the cu^ming of
our saluiour, and the neglecti^g of sik solicit honor of his halie name, as
had our foirfatheris, quho^ God blissed in their days vith al spiritual, and
temporal benefeittis: Quhairfoir to the effect the Rottin fruits of their
deformatione may be zit mair manifest to the hail varld, I will subioyne ane
comparesone of the treu religione befoir professed in Scotland, vith this
diabolical haeresie, quhilk being offerit to me be the Author, after I had
endit This my conference, I thocht good to subione as may pertinent to the
sam effect and purpose.


THE DIFFERENCE, COMparesone, and change from the treu Catholic faith, to the
neu deformed religione.
CHAP. XXXVII.
1 ANe change is maid from ane religione quhilk ze had, Unto money diverse and
contrarius sectis, and forms of may damnahil haeresie: from ancient: Unto
neu: from universal, and commone, to private, and singular: from that quhilk had
the universal consent of zour selfis at hame, togidder vith al Christian
nationnis of Europe. Unto that, or them, in the quhilk nather zour selfis ar
aggreit, nor onie monarchy Christian agreis vith zou.

2 Ane change from ane religione gouer^^t be the just monarchy of our saluiour
Christ, his Apostlis and their successoris, To ane monstrous policracie of sa
money headis as their be vsurpit Ministeris, ze of vemen headis, Childrene
headdis, and popular headdis, as thocht their var als money Goddis, as their be
absolute Princes, and as gif it var lauchful to have als money diverse forms
of government in the kirk of God, quhilk can nocht be bot ane, as ve may have
several policies, in Civil kingdoms be they never sua money.

3 Ane change from that quhilk vas planted be godly Apostlis, mentenit be the
assistance the halie Ghaist, and men of good consciencis, Unto this quhilk is
fosterit, be vsurparis of princes pouaris.

4 Ane change from that quhilk maid fischaris Apostlis, unto this that makis
Bischopis, Abbotis, Prioris, Archidiaconis, monkis, preistis, personis,
vicares, freris, and religious Nonis, to becum periurit Apostatis, and
foirsakaris of that Christian and godly faith, quhairunto they gave their
ayth befoir God, and his halie kirk.

5 Ane change from praying for saulis according to the vord of God, and custume
of the halie kirk sen the days of our saluiour, To condemning the life and
co^uersatione of our praedicessoris unto hell, be the very instinctione of
Satan: From giving of almous, To dissoluing of hospitallis: Fro^creiping in
conuentis, To bragging in courtis: From vouing of Chastity, To mareing of
Monkis: From consecrating virginis, To vedding of Nunnis, From promising
pouartie, To professed usury: From volontar obedience, To obstinat arrogance:
From fasting on fish days, To gormanding flesh on frydayes, and the halie
time of lentearne: From vatching and praying, To sleiping in the kirk: From
kirk me^nis praying, To layict me^nis preaching: From sermonis by doctoris, To
veme^nis lecturis: From ressoning, To railling: From reverence speech, to
fulishe lauching at al halie thingis: From remembering on Sanctis, To burning
their imagis: From going in Pilgramage, To hanting of harlattis: From penance
of Pardonis, To dissimulat faith, and presumptione: From veping for vickitnes,
To lauching at syne: From scrupil of evil doing in small thingis, To gloir of
mischeuous dealling in materis of gretast vecht and importance.

6 Ane change from that religione quhilk condemnit al erroris, Unto this quhilk
mentenis al hereseis, sua that na heresy is their of auld condemnit, quhilk is
nocht nou amang zou reneuit, and professed may impudentlie.

7 A change from that religione quhilk acceptit and embraced Christ, his
Apostlis, and their ordinar successoris head of the general kirk, To this
quhilk hes embraced ane inuisibil kirk vithout knauledge of Christis authority
in onie lauchful superior vpone the face of the earth: Albeit it tuik the
fundame^t from the kirk of Ingland, quhais first fruit of religione vas to
place, in the Chyre of Petir and feminine head, as gif onie voma^ be peruersion
of the ordore and lau of nature, micht have supremacy and iurisdistione over
the kirk of our saluiore, As head, paip, heich priest or Apostle, as Prophet,
or Patriarche, as Archebischop, or Bischop, as Abbot, or prior, as person or
Vicar, as priest, clerk, or spiritual magistrate and pastore quhatsumeuer.

8 Ane religione of negatiues, a religione of leis, a religione of periureis, a
religione of fleshly and lice^tious liberty, a religione that leidis to
lousnes, and al dissolute life, a religione that of scripture, denyis sindrie
hail volummes, that of text it self, corruptis places infinite, and vntreulie
translaittis the rest, that sold decyd onie questione or controversy.

9. Ane religione that leuis zou na scripture at al, quhen sa money bukes ar
denyit, sua money places corruptit, and changit, sua money textis falsely
translated, and sua money haeretical glossis, and expositionis put their vpone.

10 Ane religione that Falsifeis the fatheris, sklanderis the doctoris, beleis
the paipis, beleis the Emperoris, beleis the praecteis of the kirk, and al
historeis, that testifeis the treuth of thingis past.

11 Ane religione that callis Christ in the sacrament ane idol, that callis the
only sacrifice of the Christian kirk, idolatry: that professis it to be sin
to believe that the Euangel is treu, saying. This is my body, my flesh is
very meat, or that fasting, praying, almous, vouis, or other good vorkis dois
pleise, or appese his vrayth, albeit they proceid from special grace, throuche
Christ Jesus our saluiour: That teachis Christian faith to be falls doctrine,
and their auin falls, arrogant, and abhominabil haeresie to be the treu faith of
Christ, albeit it be repugnant thairto in all poyntis.

12 A religione that teachis the chief outuard sacrifice, and honor to God,
that ever vas vsit quhair Christis name vas professed, to be idolatry: that
teachis sacrilege, incest, and the vilful slauchter of sacred, and anoyntit
personis, to be verteuous deiddis, acceptabil to God, and that teachis the
auld, co^mone, and knauin vay of saluatione, to be the hie vay to damnatione I
call it thairfoir be inuicibil consequentis a religione that turnis darkness into
licht, that teachis hell to be heuin, and God him self to be the devil of hell.

13 Ane change from ane religione, quhairin faith, hoip, cheritie, fidelity,
abundance of good vorkis, good discipline, ordour, famous, and vorthie renoune
in all proceidingis did abu^de, To this, quhairin exces of vengeance, laik of
faith, vehement mischief, mistrust in nicbthourheid, infidelity of kindred, and
acquentance, insatiabil avarice in steid of prudent liberality dois regne.

14 Ane change from reverence bering to the day of the birth of our saluiour
Christ, his cruel Passione, michtie Resurrectione, and glorious Ascensione,
fasting, praying, abstening from mechanict labor, and doing al good turnis
quhilk may procure the mercy of God touart them, To ane blind and misordorit
form of religione, that makis abhominatione thairof, and confou^dis their
feystis vith other days apoyntit to mechanict laboris: quhairbie it may be
esilie collectit, that they, and their sect ar the may affectionat disciplis
of the Chief Antichrist, because they have laborit be al meinis to put the
blessed monumentis of Christis benefeittis out of the memory of their
miserabil auditoris.

15 Ane change from ane veil ordorit religione, quhairin every estait vas
knauin seueralie be his Ecclesiastical apparel, To ane neu fund, headles, and
co^fused rabil of vitles Bischopis inarmit vith tua handit suordis, in steid of
blissingis, and feiding of their flokis: quha ather compellis them to pay
doubil teindis, to garneis their unsavory mules that beiris their Croces, and
bringis forth other small conspiratoris aganis the kirk of God, or ellis to
deluge, and leave the ground void, and red to them selfis: And breiflie sik
confusione that na stranger, except he be of continual conuersatione vith
them, can discern betuix the popular, and vsurpit estait of the daft Abbotis,
gukkit Prioris, guseheaddit Personis, asin vittit Vicares, and the pretland
Prebendaris, for housoeuer the headles Parochinaris be inclynit, sua is he
also, that he may be estemit ane good follou, and na thing different fra the
commone sort.

Ane change from that, quhais peopil aluays paenitent, and reddie auaittand
vpone the calling of God, had participatione of the sacrament of Christis body
and blude befoir their departure out of this life, at the hour of death: To this
quhilk hes prescryuit, and limitat certane times to the mocking of Christ, and
abusing his peopil, under the pretext of administratione of the said sacrament,
falsifeing that scripture, as al vtheris, quhilk Christ our saluiour expreslie
hes left us, for ane sufficient and may plain testimony of his latter vil.

17 Ane change from a religione, quhais Pastoris addicted them selfis, and
their actionis only to the kirk, the veilbeloued spous of Christ, and for his
saik bure al honor, and reverence thairunto, Unto this quhais vnlauchful
Ministeris never anointed, nor ressauit in spiritual society quhat sumeuer,
castis auay the foirsaid spous, and vith palliardise and al kind of harlatrie
abusis the sacred and halie place.

18 Ane change from that quhais anointed Bischopis, and Preistis in presence of
God and halie kirk auoued chastity, and leued continent lyuis, Unto this
quhais vsurpit Bischopis, apostat Preistis, and palliard Ministeris, professis
procreatione of adulterous childrene, and money of them plurality of
harlattis, falsely call it vyuis.

19 Ane change from that quhilk vas spread throuche the varld at first, and ever
sense me^tenit by the vryttin gospellis, and epistles of treu Euangelistis, and
vndoutet Apostlis, Unto this quhilk by hargabusis, and pistolattis of armit
suldartis of the Antichrist is intrudit, and mentenit eueriequhair.

20 Ane change from that quhilk vas served be the ministry of them, quha had
been brochtup in learning, ordour, and obedience. Unto this, quhais falls
prophets ar maid of Tinklaris, schocloutaris, soutaris, broustaris, skinnaris,
tail zeouris* glaisin vrichtis, and professorts of mechanict artis, of the
baisaist quality, and may mischeuous condition, that could be fund amang
the vnreulie peopil, because the honestar sort vil nocht accept the vocatione.

21 Ane change from that, quhilk throuche cheritie contenit men vithin the
boundis of piety, justice, temperance, and verteous exerceisis, Unto this
quhilk by ane solifidiane presumptione, first induces in man lousnes of life,
rudnes of maneris, vyldnes of lukis, pride of speiche, hautenes of gesture, and
ane ruffiane lyk rusching unto al vice, nixt thaireftir unto atheism,
barbarism, or Mahometis faith at the leist.

22 Ane change from that, quhilk by na penalty constrainit onie man to leave
the faith, or religione, quhilk he embraced, Unto this quhilk by feir of
authority, private actis of parliament, maid in time of Civil dissensione,
commandiment of commissionaris, banesing from the cu^trey, vith souertie nocht
to return, by bandis, infinite vexationis, amerciamentis, baratrie,
depriuatione from leuingis, and offices, inuy of the cu^trey, putting out of
the court, displesour of the king, Tinsal of landis, confiscatione of guddi^,
personal impresonment, by sindrie deathis sc^ort and violent, torments of
hungar, compelling men (...) or deid, mair, or les to fall from the faith,
quhairin they var baptized.

23 Ane change from that quhilk by ancient, general, and godly lauis corrected
only them that vald have departed from it, quhen they had first freylie
professed the same, Unto this, quhilk by neu, private, and vsurpit, vranguse
lauis, contrare al ressone punises, impresonis, oppressis, and makis pure them
quha never accep^it, nor allouit the same.

24 Ane change from abounding in Riches spiritual, and temporal, To this quhilk
aboundis in riches, and hes nather of them bayth, from credit in vord, To
discredit in seal, and obligatione.

25 Ane change from voluntar repentance, To compelling, and provoking a reddie
vay to do the lyk or rather varse, quhen they love men for committing of al
kind of impiety, aganis God, his halie kirk and the lauchful authority of
supreme magistratis.

26 Ane change from that, quhais first fruits var to rin in vildernes, to
forsaik the varld, and al feliciteis of this miserabil flesh, Unto this quhais
first fructis var to spulzie Christ our saluiour of his spiritual kingdom,
demolish kirkis, to make Nonis, and freris spulzie their closteris, the voued
men to rin auay vith harlattis, the professed men to stei^ auay temporal mennis
vyues, and dochteris, and to cause them spulzie their housbandis, and fatheris.

27 Ane change from that, quhilk keipit zour vomankynd in all vomanlie gravity,
To this that leidis the zealous imbracearis thairof unto al glaikrie: From that
quhilk teached them madinlie schamefastnes, To this that teachis them to be
eschamit at na thing, And hes drauin them, from sobriety, To vanity, from
cleynnes be veschi^g, To unsavory painting: From being the exemplis of
modesty to al nationis, To be patronis of al lichtnes and instabilitie of vit:
From sobir lukis, To licht eyne: From sad, and civil speking, To bauld babbling
quhatsumeuer, lest they sold seem ignorant: From vorking, To playing: From
spairing, To spending: From bukis of prayer, To ballattis of luue: From
occupeing beiddis, To brydling their heiddis: From veiring of Christis Croce
and image, To behalding of their auin dissimulat visage: From threid, seyme,
and neidil, To danse at the feidil: From blushing to heir of marriage, To
lauching to heir of love: From the bondage of marriage vith ane, To the liberty
of Mareing many, From a decent feirfulnes convenient to their kind, To ane
vndercent hardines: From modest, and pudict behavior cumlie for vemen, Unto
mair nor a manly audacitie, in vord, deid, and al other sort planlie repugnant
to al halines of life, and the qualiteis of ane profitabil vyf.

28 Ane change from ane brydil aganis syn, To ane spur, and exempil of al
iniquity: From that quhilk feirit me^ to do evil, To this quhilk stayis men to
do veil, lest thairbie they be thocht Papistis: From that quhilk by hoip of
Goddis reuard, invited men to do good varkis, Unto this quhilk be hoip of mannis
auanceme^t, alluris men to mischief: From conscience in ceremoneis, To defy
sacramentis: From contritione of heart for syn, To induratione of heart in all
abhominabil vickitnes: From confession of syn be mouth, To conceling of syn by
aithis: From seiking to satisfy for syn, To the doubling of syn vpone syn.

29 Ane change from seyndil suering, To oppin, manifest, and usual perjury,
vith blaspheming of Goddis halie name: From universal treuth, and fidelity ane
touardis another, To co^mone discredit be febil faith, vord, and vryt: From
feiring to lie, To plane, and accustumit impude^cie: From building of
Chapellis, To down pulling of kirkis: From erecting of altaris, To ouerthrauing
of Abbayes: From honoring the sanctuary, To Profaning the sam vith al kind of
licherie, filth, gun, and gengzie, smythis, maisonis, falls decreittis, murder,
bucherie, stabling of horse, ky, scheip, and suyne, vith infinite pollutionis
horribil to be rehearsed, as manifest testimoneis of the kingdom of the
Antichrist, and his abhominabil desolatione.

30 Ane religione that every quhair generalie is first apprehendit, may
zelouslie embraced, and vehemently mentenit be the leudast of condition, the
may vicious of maneris, the may contentious, vnquiettast, and varst of
conuersatione, Inchantaris, Necroma^tiaris, mischa^t mensleyaris, and manifest
adulteraris, quhairof, lat every mannis private experience gif testimony, that
may remember the first precharis of this doctrine, the principal, and may
fervent discipillis thairof in Scotland, or ellis quhair in every town,
city, village, Parochin, and houshald.

31 Finalie, Ane change is maid from a religione quhais imbracearis Christ
blessed vith al kind of requesit benefeittis bayth spiritual, and temporal Unto
this quhais imbracearis, God hes plaged befoir the eyis of the varld vith
schameful tormentis, befoir their suddane, and odious death: hes diminisit
their rentis, for tending to augment their dominionis, vith spiritual
benefices: And for testimony that he vil have his decreit performed vpone that
generatione, he hes taken from diverse, and the may special of them al hoip
of birth, of neir, or lauchful airis, to succeid to the samyn: Or gif be his
visdome he have sufferit them zit on life, ather they ar retened vithout
dignity, out of memory, and of na reputatione, or ellis extreme abject, quhil
God have his just iudgeme^nt pourit on them, for their fatheris faltis, and
their auin perseverance in the sam vickitnes. God of his infinite gudnes grant
them knauledge of their impiety, and grace to return to the bosume of the
Catholic kirk of Christ Jesus, the natural sone of the leuing and may heich
God, to quhome, vith the Father, and halie Ghaist in unity of Godheid, be al
honor, glory, and praise, for nou and ever. Amen.

Because the sons of Israel hes foirsaikin thy covenant, 3. Reg. (...). 19.
their aduersaris hes brokin down thy altaris, and persecute thy Prophetis.

Zit,

In the dayis of tha kingdoms, the God of hea^in sal raise up ane kingdom,
quhilk sal n^^er be ouerthrauin, and that his kingdom sal nocht be geuin to
ane other people, Dan. 2.
bot it sal ouercum, and put at under al their kingdoms, and it sal stand for
euermair.

Exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici eius. FINIS.
Deo gratias.
THE MATERIS OF CONTROVERSY QVHILK ar entreated in this conference ar their.
1 Justification. fol. 1 2 Praedestination. fol. 6 3 Fry vil. fol. 7 4 The
verteu of the Sacramentis. fol. 9 5 The number of the Sacramentis. fol. 9 6 The
Sacrament of Baptism. fol. 9 7 The halie valter. fol. 10 8 The Sacrament of
Confirmation. fol. 13 9 The Sacrament of Paenitence. fol. 13 10 Purgatory.
fol. 16 11 The pardonis, or Indulgencis. fol. 17 12 The varkis of
supererogation. fol. 20 13 The fastingis of the kirk. fol. 21 14 The Sacrament
of the Altar and real praesence of Christis body and bluid in the same under
the forms of breid and vine. fol. 23 15 The transsubstantiatione of the bre^d
and vine in the body and blude of Christ I^sv. fol. 33. 16 The sacrifice of
the Mess. fol. 39 17 The praying in latin. fol. 49 18 The apparel and
ornamentis of the kirk. fol. 56. 19 The dedication of kirkis and altaris. fol.
59 20 The Sacrament of Extreme unction. fo. 62 21 The Sacrament of Marriage.
fol. 64 22 The obseruatione of the vow of chastity maid befoir God, and his
halie kirk. fol. 65 23 The Sacrament of Ordore. fol. 79 24 The authority of
the Pape. fol. 81 25 The jurisdiction of the Pape over al other bischopis. fol.
86 26 The continual succession of the Paipis from Petir to Gregore the
threttei^t quha is Paip for the present. fol. 96 27 The authority of the
General Conciles, fol. 104. 28 The estait of Bischopis. fol. 106 29 The judge
to decyd al controuerseis of Religion, especialie in the kirk of Scotland, and
of the judgment of the vryttin vord. fol. 108. 30 That the kirk hes ever been,
and is visibil. fol. 116. 31 That the treu kirk aucht to be Catholic or
universal. fol. 119 32 That Sir Iohann kmnox, and the rest of the Ministeris in
Scotland ar nocht Lauchfullie callit to be preachouris. fol. 126. And of the
name quhilk Martin Luther did choose unto him self as may Glorious and for
quhat cause. fol. 330 33 The Propirteis of the Antichrist in general, and that
his number is fund in the name of Martin Luther quhilk he chusit to him self as
may glorious, and vsit quhen he vrait in his auin vulgair tongue, and That to
him and his disciples conuenis not only the number of the Antichrist, bot the
rest of his propirteis in lyk manner. fol. 332.140 34 That al treu Christianis
aucht obedience to the heich priest and Christis vicar upon the the face of the
earth. fol. 154 35 That nocht only the vryttin vord, bot the traditionis of
the universal kirk also, aucht to be receauit, and beleuit be al treu
Christianis. fol. 117 36 The observation of the festual and Halie dayis. fol.
163 37 The making of Imagis for representation. fol. 166. 38 The Invocation of
Sanctis. fol. 172 39 The Honor quhilk in the Catholic kirk vsis to be exhibit
to the Relics of the Sanctis. fol. 175 40 The Pilgramagis. fol. 179 41 Ane
Comparesone betuix the Auld religion and the neu, (gif onie be) accommodat
cheiflie to the capacity of the rude people, be imitation of S. Augustine in
his popular detestation of the Donatistis.
SIquis videtur inter vos sapiens esse in hoc saeculo, stultus fiat vt sit
sapiens: sapienti^ enim huius mundi, stultitia est apud Deum.

Gif any man amang zou appeir to be vyse in this varld, let him be anefule,
that he may be maid vyse in very deid: for the visdome of this varld is folly
in the sicht of God.

S. Paul. 1. Cor. 3. Elegi abiectus esse in domo Dei mei magis, quam habitare
in tabernaculis peccatorum.

I have chosin to be repute abject and contemptible in the house of God, rather
nor to duel in the tabernaclis of the vicked.

Psalm. 83. FINIS.
Imprentit at Pareis, the first day of October, The zeir of God, 1581.


