AN EXPOSITION OF THE 28. VERSE OF THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE TO THE
ROMANS. Wherein is manifestly proved the Doctrine of JUSTIFICATION by FAITH,
and by Faith only.

By FRANCIS BVNNY, one of the Prebendaries of the Cathedral Church of DVRHAM.

Habac. 2.4. The just shall live by his Faith.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby, for Henry Fetherstone. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD LORD, WILLIAM, LORD BISHOP
of DVRHAM, F. B. wishes most happy increase of all graces in this life, and
endless happiness in the life to come.
HOw bad a guest sin is, and how unworthy to be intertayned in the house of
our hearts, there is no man but will readily confess, if he consider, first,
how diligent it is to solicit and allure to evil, always provoking and
intising to offend; and when it has prevailed, how clamorous it is and ready
to accuse us, never suffering us to have true peace and quietness, until by
some means or other, we find our selves reconciled to him against whom we
have offended. Neither by any other way can this atonement with God be wrought,
so that our consciences may without fear stand before God, Romans 3.25.
but by him only whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith
in his blood. He is called Jesus, Matt. 1.21.
because he saves his people from their sins. And, Romans 5.1.
we have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Now this peace with God,
which Christ by his death has wrought, paying for a ransom thereof, his
precious blood, is made to dwell in our hearts, by an assured faith, and
steadfast apprehension of the mercies of God in Christ.

But the light of comfort which this most sweet doctrine should make to shine
to such, as feeling the burden of their sin, groan to be eased of the same,
is so dimmed and darkened by the clouds of Merits, and such Satisfactions as
men have devised to blind the eyes of the simple withal, that hardly they can
find that true consolation. I therefore in two Sermons, preached at Durham,
endeavored according to my small talent, to scatter those mists, and to make
the Sun of truth to shine to all such, as wilfully do not wink against the
same. Wherein how little soever I have performed, my endeavor was to take away
some stumbling blocks (whereby the unlearned have been somewhat hindered) that
the truth might have free passage. This short Treatise has long lain hidden in
corners, almost quite forgotten, at the least without any purpose that I had to
publish the same, until a right Worshipful friend thinking better thereof,
then it was my part to do, showed himself very forward to further the
publishing of it. Seeing therefore it must come to light, I humbly entreat your
Lordship, that it may go forth under the shadow of your protection, who have
most right thereto, not only in respect of your Honors diverse favors showed
to my self, but because the Sermons were (long since) preached in your
Cathedral Church, perchance also in your own hearing, at the least by one
devoted to your Lordship, who will pray the Father of all graces to enrich your
Honor with his heavenly blessings, to the comfort of Gods Church, while here
you live, and in the end to your endless and unspeakable joy, in a better life.

Your Honors in all duty at commandment, FRA. BVNNY.

AN EXPOSITION OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH.
ROMANS 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by Faith, without the works of
the Law.


ALL knowledge of things godly, and necessary for this life of ours, is good
and commendable: but none more needful for a Christian, either yet so
comfortable for a wounded and afflicted conscience, The most needful knowledge.
as that which teaches us, how, and by what means, we may have peace with
God. For when without partiality we take a view of our selves, and consider
duly of our own ways (which thing we must do, before we can have true
quietness at home in our own consciences, or perfect reconciliation with God)
we cannot but see in our selves many wants and infirmities, often doing the
evil we should not, omitting also and that not seldom, the good duties which
we should perform: always wanting that cheerfulness, alacrity, and
sincerity in the good things we endeavor or take in hand, which must by
Christ, season our work, and make it acceptable to God. In regard of so
manifold imperfections, how shall we be able with confidence and assurance, to
stand before that just Judge, who also sees the very secret of our hearts, and
searches our hidden thoughts (and therefore before him, even the least and
most unknown offense lies open) unless we know assuredly that our atonement
is made?

The Apostle S. Paul, as in many other places, so in these words also,
preaches unto us most plainly, the means of our atonement, and how it
comes to pass that we are reconciled to God, and (as I may say) friended
with him. But Satan, that ancient enemy to mankind, Satan's endeavor to darken
this doctrine.
who seeks, and that most greedily, the destruction of our body and soul, by
his instruments in the Popish Church, indeuoureth to dim this Sunshine,
that we should not enjoy that sweet comfort: and to put this candle under the
bushel of violent and false interpretations; lest the light thereof, shining
in the house of God, should discover the absurdity of their errors. I
therefore will assay (as God shall enable me) to put this candle in a
candle-sticke, Mat. 5.15.
that it may give light to the whole house of God, by freeing it from their
wrested glosses.

To come then roundly to the matter, the difference between us and our
adversaries concerning these words, stands especially in two points: The one
is the interpretation and meaning of the words themselves: for the other, they
much mislike the Conclusion (of our justification by Faith only) which out of
the words we gather. Therefore will I (by Gods assistance) first, justify our
exposition, then also our conclusion. Which that I may more fully perform, I
purpose in the third place to answer the principal objections that they have
out of Gods word, whereby these seek to impugn our doctrine.

Justifying, what it signifies.
And first this word of justifying, our adversaries following that sense which
the Latin word may yield, as if iustificare, to justify, must be to make
righteous, do take it for an inherent righteousness: as if the Apostle had
said, By faith we are enabled to live holily, and to have increase in
righteousness. True it is, I confess, that our gracious God, of his infinite
goodness and mercy, works in us holiness also, Act. 15 9. Hebr. 11.6.
and godliness, Purifying our hearts by Faith, without which it is impossible
to please God; and therefore justification in that sense, we deny not, but
willingly acknowledge it to be an effect of Faith, and that all our goodness
grows from it, as the fruit from the root, and heat and light from the
Sun: but the question which is now to be answered, is, how the word
(justified) must here in these words of S. Paul be taken?

Phil. 3.5.
I say then, it is most likely that S. Paul, being of the kindred of Israel, of
the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as he was best acquainted
with the Hebrew phrase, so he would rather use it then the Latin. Nay, this is
more then likely, because in this very Chapter before, he has used this very
word according to the Hebrew phrase, and in that sense, that it has commonly
in the Scripture, as our adversaries themselves must needs confess, in his
allegation out of the 51. Psalm. It is therefore very absurd, Romans 3.4.
that our adversaries, to confirm their sense of this word, are forced so to
understand it, as it is never, or at the least very seldom understood in the
Scripture, so that hardly they can allege any testimonies, where of necessity
it must be taken in their sense: whereas we are able to bring very many, which
they confess must have our sense.

Another absurdity I find in their interpretation, Justification and
sanctification, confounded by the Popish interpretation.
that they confound these two notable benefits which we have by Christ: that
is, our justification, and our sanctification. Of the first he speaks in this
place, and to the end of the fifth Chap: and of the latter he begins to speak
in the sixth Chap. as (to the end I need not stand long in proof hereof) Tho.
of Aquine (whom, I know, our adversaries will trust in a greater matter then
this is) shall testify for us in these words: After the Apostle has showed,
that by the grace of Christ we are freed from sins past; Tho. Aquin. in Romans
6. Lec. 1.
as well that which has been brought in by the first man as that which by the
Law abounds: here he shows, that by the grace of Christ, power is given us
to resist sin afterward. And this he teaches, entering into his exposition
upon the sixth Chapter of this Epistle to the Romans, proving directly that
which I have said. Now, the confounding of these two benefits, which the
Apostle here and elsewhere distinguishes, is very absurd.

But here by the way I would ask a question of our Romish Masters, what they
think of these words of their Angellical Doctor? For if it be true that he
says, as it is indeed most true, and well warranted by the Word it self: then
is it most false that our adversaries here say, that the Apostle speaks of an
inherent righteousness, which I thus prove; Inherent righteousness is for the
avoiding of sin to come, but the Apostle speaks not of the avoiding of
sin to come, before the beginning of the sixth Chapter: therefore, before the
beginning of the sixth Chapter, he speaks not of inherent righteousness. The
Minor, which is only by them to be denied, is taken out of the words of Tho.
Aquinas.

Besides these absurdities, we have strong arguments, whereby to refell their
interpretation. As first, The Apostles meaning.
the intent and meaning of the Apostle, who from the 16. verse of the first
Chapter, unto these words, proves, that all both Jews and Gentiles stand in
need of the mercy of God, because they are all found guilty before him. The
Gentiles not having the Law written, All are sinners.
yet had such light of nature shining in their heart, as taught them so far
forth to know what was good, and what was bad, that they had their thoughts
accusing one another when they did evil, or excusing, if they lived according
to that knowledge. But they walked not after that light, neither followed that
which their own conscience told them was good; ^^m. 2.15.
they showed not in their life the effect of the Law written in their hearts:
but might say with that unhappy woman MEDEA, Video meliora proboque, deteriora
s^quor: I see and approve that which is better, I follow that which is worse.

As for the Jews, among whom were the Laws of God written in tables of stone,
and that they might never be unmindful thereof, they had their Priests for an
ordinary mean of their instruction, yea the Prophets also as Gods
extraordinary remembrancers, to put them in remembrance of their duty, and of
Gods Law; they, I say, who had greater helps to have been better; yet lived so
little according to that Law, that the Apostle thus charge them, Romans 2.24.
Romans 3.20.
The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles for you. Hereupon the Apostle
thus concludes, That by the works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in
Gods sight.

Verse. 23.
But the Apostle having thus proved, that all have sinned, and are deprived of
the glory of God, will not leave us in that uncomfortable case, but shows by
and by how we are delivered. And as he has taught us, that all both Jews, and
Gentiles, are transgressors of the Law, and by transgression guilty: so now
most comfortably he declares, how we shall be acquitted of our transgression,
Our delivery from sin.
that we may plead not guilty. The question then being, how we being breakers
of Gods Law, may appear before our God, and with confidence, and plead not
guilty. This we can never do by any inherent righteousness, no goodness, no
holiness, that in this vale of misery, while we carry about us this lump of
sinful flesh, we can attain unto, may acquire us before God, but this must
be by faith in Jesus Christ, as the Apostle teaches. Now by this it is plain
enough, that the Apostle saying we are justified by Faith, and bringing this
as the conclusion of all his former discourse, should speak nothing to the
purpose, if he would here tell us how we may live righteously, who must rather
teach us how we may be freed from the danger, wherein he has proved that all
men are.

And as the Apostle had in these words no meaning to show how we are enabled
to walk in holiness (for of that he means afterward to speak, as before I
showed) so the words themselves do sufficiently confute our adversaries, as by
this argument may be proved. The Apostle speaks in these words, of such
Justification, as is not gotten or had by works: Not by works.
but the Justification in the Popish sense is only by works, therefore the
Popish Justification is not that which the Apostle mentions. The Mayor is
plain by the words of this text. A man is justified without works. The Minor
they will not deny. For that increase of righteousness, which our adversaries
so much speak of, is nothing else, 2. Pe^
but to join virtue with faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge
temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godliness, and
with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness love. Such a
continual laboring to be adorned with all goodness, Good works necessary.
is the Justification, that is by inherent righteousness. This, I confess, is
a goodly ornament unto a Christian. But if we look well about us, we shall
find it too short to cover our imperfections, and therefore must we seek
otherwise to appear righteous before God, namely, in the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, by whom we have forgiveness of sins. And whereas the Apostle
denied that we are justified by works, would you not think he spoke very
absurdly, to take this word as the Romish Church understands it? For to say a
man is made godly without good works (and this they must say) is as if I
should affirm, any thing to be burnt in the fire, without heat.

Again, Justification in our adversaries sense is always in doing. For it is
our regeneration or new birth, our renouation or sanctification, which can
never be perfected, so long as we are in this flesh, and carry about with us
this body subject to sin. Here we are militant and striving, after, we
must look for the crown. Here we are Pilgrims, after this we shall be
Citizens, and rest in joy. For now we know but in part, we prophecy in part:
1. Cor. 13.9, 10.
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
abolished. And as our knowledge is but in part, even so, yea much more is our
obedience here very maimed and imperfect. That Paul himself confesses, Our
inward man is renewed daily (says he. 2. Cor. 4.16.
) And he whose praise is in the Scripture for wisdom, does very aptly liken,
the way of the righteous to the morning, Pro. 4.18.
that shines as the light, that shines more and more, unto the perfect day.
By which fit similitude Solomon sets forth unto us, the continual increase
in godliness, that an inherent righteousness (that I may so term our maimed
and imperfect obedience) can bring forth. Saint Bernard pithily and prettily
expresses as much, comparing man in respect of his fall, unto one that falls
upon a heap of stones and in the mire too. Bernardus de Coena Domini.
Cecidimus super aceruum lapidum (says he) and in luto; vnde non solum
inquinati, sed etiam vulnerati, and grauiter quassati sumus: lauari quidem cito
possuinus; ad sanandum vero opus est curatione multa. We have fallen upon a
heap of stones and in the mire; so as we are not only defiled, but wounded
also and sore bruised. We may quickly be washed, but to heal us there must be
long time. By washing away our mire, he means our Justification, which he
says may soon be, but by healing our wounded and bruised nature, he
understands our sanctification, Aug. de Trinit. lib. 14. cap. 17.
which is long in doing. Therefore most truly, says Saint Augustine, Sane
renouatio ista non fit in momento: Truly this renewing or new birth is not
wrought of a sudden.

And now to add an Assumption to that proposition, that righteousness of
which Saint Paul speaks, Justification already perfited. Romans 5.1.
is already in them that are justified: We are justified (says he) as
speaking of a thing already perfited: as also elsewhere, being justified by
faith, we have peace with God. The same Apostle telling the Corinthians, that
Fornicatours, Idolaters, etc. shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: and
applying this unto them, 1. Cor. 6.11.
says, Such were some of you, but you are justified. These reasons then being
well considered of, give us to understand, that there is so great difference
between that sense of this word Justification which our adversaries would
have, and that which is agreeable to the Apostles meaning, as that their
exposition of this word here, cannot be good and true.

But as I mislike (and that justly) of that they teach; so is it needful I
should show what is the true meaning of this word. We seek no strange
signification of the word, neither force it to any other, then that in the
Scriptures most commonly it has, and most properly belongs unto it. This I
might prove by infinite testimonies: I will produce but some few. He that
justifies the wicked (says Solomon) and he that condemns the just, Prou.
17.15
even they both are abomination unto the Lord. In like sort in Esaias, God by
that Prophet denounces, Esa. 5.23.
Woe to them that justify the wicked. I know, our adversaries will not say,
that woe shall be to them that shall make a wicked man righteous, and reform
his ungodliness: but to such as call evil good, or good evil. Esaias 5 20.
The Prophet David acknowledges his sins to be very great, that GODS
faithfulness in showing mercy to him, may be confessed, that thou (says
he) may be justified in thy sayings: which words the Apostle in this very
Chapter alleges, as before is said. But that God stands in need to be
justified in the Popish sense, our adversaries dare not for shame say. To be
short, the Prophet David prays thus. Enter not into judgment with thy
servants, O Lord: for in thy sight, shall no man living be justified. In all
which and infinite more places that I might produce, the word justifying is so
taken, as that a man is absolved or acquitted, that he is pronounced not
guilty: and so must it in these words be understood, when the Apostle says,
we are justified by faith, that is, by faith we stand before GOD, and may
plead, not guilty.

For confirmation of that which I have said, I use this argument. Saint Paul
speaks here of such Justification, Justification brings peace. Romans 5.1.
as makes us to have peace with God. For so are the words of the Apostle,
Being iustifi'd by faith, we have peace with God: But Justification in the
Popish sense makes us not to have peace with GOD, and in our sense it brings
peace with God: therefore Saint Paul speaks not of Justification in the
Popish sense, but in ours. My Minor only is to be proved: (for I have already
showed that the Apostle auerreth the Mayor) and that has two parts, the one
negative, wherein I deny Justification in their sense to bring peace with God:
the other affirmative, that in our sense it does.

That Justification, as it is a doing of good works, and a living righteously,
so far forth as man's frailetie will permit, (which is the sense that our
adversaries say belongs to this word here) cannot procure our peace with God,
I prove, because the perfection of the Law which we are commanded to observe
and keep, is such as man can never attain to the fulfilling thereof. None can
fulfill the Law.
For who is he that can so rule his affections by the Spirit, that he can in
all sincerity and soundness serve the Lord? Not any Man, but Christ, could
ever do it, as the godly most plainly confess. The reason is, because the
Law commands perfection, and our weakness is not able to perform it. The
Apostle teaches us so much, saying: It was impossible for the Law, in as much
as it was weak, Romans 8.2.3.
because of the flesh, to free us from the Law of sin or of death. If then
our obedience be so imperfect, can we hope to find quietness in our
consciences, and peace with GOD, when we shall stand before him, who because
he is infinite in wisdom, sees all things, be they done never so secretly
or in the dark, yea, he hears what we whisper in the ear, and knows the
most secret thoughts of the heart: and because he is just, will punish
transgressors, and in that he is Almighty, is able to take vengeance? No, no,
our best works can in this case give us no security. Then by inherent
righteousness we have not peace with God.

But that knowing our selves to be acquitted of our sins, we have peace with
GOD (and in that sense we take this word of justifying) it is most plain.
Sin hinders our peace with God.
For first, the thing that hinders this our peace, is sin: sin, I say,
that naughty and noisome neighbor, even the worst neighbor that any man can
dwell with. It never rests but either by fair means or foul, it intiseth
to consent to it. Romans 7.23.
For what else is that Law that Paul did see in his members, rebelling against
the Law of his mind, and leading him captive unto the law of sin, which was
in his members? And when it has prevailed, Psalm. 51.3.
it is ever before us as a servant of God complains, neither will it let us
take any rest, Genesis 4.7.
it lies at the door of our conscience, always accusing, and bawling against
us. And mark I pray you what sour fruit this bitter root yields: It makes
a breach between God and us, as the Prophet Esaias tells Gods people in his
days: Esa. 59.2.
Your sins have separated between you and your God, and your iniquities have
hidden his face from you, that he will not hear. And by that means we are
deprived of many blessings, which GOD uses to bestow upon his servants, as
another of the Prophets also says to the Jews: Ier. 5.25.
Your iniquities have turned away these things (speaking of rain in due
season, and the appointed time of harvest) and your sins have hindered good
things from you. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 8.
And yet by sin, we have greater hurt then this. For God denounces many
plagues against his people if they transgress, which also, that he can power
upon the inhabitants of the earth, when in his just judgment he will execute
the same, the drowning of the World in that general deluge, and the casting of
fire and brimstone from Heaven upon those wicked Cities of the plain, and the
rooting out of that Nation, which he did choose to serve him, does sufficiently
teach us. Until then, sin so odious to GOD, so grievous unto men, be taken
away, it is impossible there should be any true quietness or peace unto men.
For GOD often tells his people, howsoever they would flatter themselves in
their own strength or in the friendship of their confederates, or in their
external ceremonies and service of GOD in outward show; That there is no peace
to the wicked: Esa. 48.22. Esa. 50.11. Psalm. 14.5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.^
but they shall lie down in sorrow, and fear where no fear is, because they
have promised to themselves, peace and safety, without this atonement with
God. Out of all which it does appear, that if we will have peace with God, we
must first have sin, this cumbersome neighbor, removed, which altogether
hinders this reconciliation, whereby we have quietness of consciences.

Therefore the Apostle tells us, Romans 3.24.25.
that We are justified freely by Gods grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood, Reconciliation with God by forgiveness of sin. Act. 13.38. Ephesians.
1.7.
to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of sins that are past,
through the patience of God. And the same Apostle preaching at Antioch,
teaches this Justification in these words: Men and brethren through this man
is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, as also elsewhere, By Christ we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to his
rich grace. Which great and inestimable benefit whosoever feels, has to his
unspeakable comfort, a most sweet taste of that blessedness which the Apostle
out of the Prophet David mentions. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, Ps. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.7. S. Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 61. Hieron. in
Romans 4.
or whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not
sin. Fide viuenti (says Saint Augustine) soluuntur peccata: He who lives by
faith, has his sins forgiven him. And Saint Hierome having written thus, Per
solam fidem iustificat Deus: God by faith only does justify, does after show
how this justification is, and in what manner: Proposuit per solam fidem
peccata dimittere: He purposed to forgive sins by faith only. And thus by
forgiveness of sins, the cause of this dangerous jar between GOD and us
being taken away, we have boldness to call him Father, and to stand before him
pleading not guilty.

But God gave a Law to his people, Exo. 23.15. Good works.
That none should appear before the Lord empty. So that being now freed from
sin: yet must we be fraught and laden with holiness and righteousness. Well
therefore does Saint Peter out of the Psalm conioyne these two precepts,
Eschew evil, do good. Psa. 34.14. 1. Pet. 3.11.
But where shall this goodness be had? Or how shall we get any thing, that
may be acceptable to God? Our light is but darkness, our righteousness, but
as stained clothes. And when we have endeavored our selves as much as we are
able to serve the Lord, yet shall we find many wants, much imperfection. It is
therefore good, we do as did Bernard, who of himself thus writes: Ber. in
Cantic. ser. 61. Christ alone supplyeth all our wants.
Ego vero fidenter quod ex me mihi deest, vsurpo mihi ex visceribus Domini,
quia misericordia affluunt; nec desunt foramina per quae effluant. I (says
Bernard) do boldly take out of the bowels of the Lord that which I want of
mine own; because they abound with mercy, neither want they holes by which
they may gush out. And after he adds what holes these are; Foderunt manus
cius, and pedes eius, latusque lancea forauerunt, and per has rimas licet mihi
sugere mel de petra, oleumque de saxo durissimo, id est, gustare and videre
quam suauis est Dominus: Psalm. 21.16.
They have pierced mine hands and my feet, and have opened my side with a
spear, and by these rifts, I may suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of
the hardest stone, that is, I may taste and see how sweet the Lord is.

And we may with the greater boldness claim this righteousness that is in
Christ, because that we being by faith made one with Christ, Imputatio^ of
Christ's justice.
and married unto him, he by right of marriage, is made partaker of our
sins, to ease us of the heavy weight of that burden: and we in regard
thereof too, have an interest in his righteousness. 1. Cor. 1.30.
For he is made unto us of God, wisdom and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. Which imputation of Christ's righteousness,
howsoever our adversaries do much mislike; Romans 4.3.22 Romans 4 5.24
yet Abraham had it, and it is a righteousness that belongs to all that
believe. Saint Bernard, though he saw not all things, yet he saw much
sweetness in this most comfortable doctrine, so much condemned in the Romish
Church. ^er. Epi. 90.
Assignata est (says he) homini aliena iustitia, qui caruit sua; Another
righteousness is assigned to man, for that he wanted his own. And a little
after: Cur non aliunde iustitiae quum aliunde reatus? Why may not we have
righteousness from another, seeing guiltiness is from another? Again, Tutior
est mihi donata, quam iuuata, That which is given me, is safer then that which
is bred in me. And thus I trust I have sufficiently proved, that sin being
abolished, and the condemnation thereof taken away; and we appearing before God
in Christ his righteousness, Genesis 27.27.
which is unto us as Esaus garment which was unto Isaak of a sweet favor; we,
I say, stand as not guilty, and have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The second difference, between our Adversaries and us, is of the word Faith.
For explanation whereof, What faith is meant.
I will not enter into consideration of all the significations that this word
has, but only search how in these words it must be taken. Our adversaries
say, it is Assensus solum firmus and certus, Bellar. de Justific. l. 1 cap. 5.
ad ea omnia quae Deus credenda proponit: A constant and sure assent only, unto
all things which God would have us believe. This is the faith that our
Adversaries say, S. Paul speaks of, when he tells us, we are justified by
faith.

Stapleton our Countriman, indeuoureth out of S. Augustine, Stap. Antid. in
Romans ^.17. ^^ug. de ^^ir. and lit. cap. 32. To believe God
to prove the sufficiency of this definition. And to this end he alleges
these words: Nulli dubtum est eam fidem commendari ab Apostolo qua creditur
Deo: No doubt the Apostle commends that faith whereby we believe God. These
words, we confess, are S. Augustines, and, as he speaks them, most true:
but by Stapleton wrested from their right and natural sense. For whereas in
the former Chapter this Father had spoken of two kinds of Faith, Cap. 31. To
believe in God.
the one whereby we believe God, the other whereby we believe in God: now in
this Chapter he entreats first of the former, commending such as believe God,
and that which he teaches, rather then other Masters. And that this is
Augustines meaning, himself can best tell. Cap. 32.
We must inquire (says this Father) what faith the Apostle so greatly
commends, for every believing is not good. For whence is that; Brethren,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirit, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
whether it be of God? And so he goes forward, to prove that every doctrine is
not to be believed, and thereupon affirms, by way of conclusion, that which
Stapleton alleges, that the Apostle commends the faith, whereby we believe
that God says. But after, remembering that S. James commands to ask in
faith, Iam. 1.6.
of that faith he says, This is the faith whereby the just man lives; This is
the faith whereby a man believes in God, who justifies the wicked. And thus
we see how untruly Stapleton deals, in the allegation of his proof, out of
Augustine, for to justify their definition of faith.

But against this their definition of justifying faith, The Popish definition
agrees not to justifying faith only.
we have diverse reasons. For first, the rules of Logic teach us, that in all
definitions we must take heed, that the definition extend no further, then to
the thing that is defined, and therefore are such differences therein to be
used, as may distinguish that which we would define, from all other things: for
otherwise a man shall not know by the definition, what a thing is, and so the
definition shall not do that, for which end only it is made. But this their
definition of justifying faith, extends further then to the thing defined.
For it comprehends the faith which may be, and is in many wicked ones, who
neither are, nor ever shall be justified, because even they may assent to all
the articles of Religion, as daily experience proves sufficiently.

August. de verb. Dom. ser. 61.
S. Augustine, besides the place before alleged, elsewhere also speaks of
two sorts of faith, the one is to believe God, the other to believe in God. But
in his Sermons of the time, he mentions three kinds of believing. August. de
Temp. ser. 181. Hebr. 11.6.
First, to believe that God is, and this is one step to God, as the Apostle to
the Hebrews teaches us: He that comes to God, must believe that God is. The
second is to believe God, that is to say, that which God teaches, and this S.
Augustine does worthily commend (as is said) but yet of it he affirms,
August. de Temp. ser. 181.
that credere vera esse quae loquitur multi and mali possint: Many, even evil
men, may believe it is true that God speaks. Now the third sort is of such as
believe in God, which only is that which in the Creed we confess, and is
available to justification even by Augustines judgment, as whosoever reads his
words, must needs acknowledge.

Now our adversaries rest but upon the second sort of believing, and seek no
further. Which is much like as if a sick man should be persuaded, that a
Physicion has skill enough to help him, and the Apothecary has drugs enough to
do him good, but reapeth not the fruit of the Physicions counsel, nor gets
any good of the Apothecaries store, because he neither follows the Physicions
counsel, nor receives any medicine from the Apothecary. For such a general
persuasion, without a particular application, profits little. For this
assent, which is in their faith, must not be cordis and voluntatis, Bellar. de
Iustific. l. 1. c. 4 and 5.
of the heart or will, as Bellarmine untruly teaches us, and others too, but
only mentis and intellectus: Of the mind or understanding: in so much as he
makes the mind or understanding, to be the seat of faith, noting it for a
second point of difference, between us and them, that we say faith is in the
heart, which they deny, and place it only in the mind. But if in the heart it
be not, then can it not have the application that I spoke of.

Faith must be in the heart.
Against this their opinion, I thus reason: Justifying faith is in the heart:
Popish faith is not in the heart: therefore, Popish faith is not that
justifying faith. My Minor is the doctrine of the Papists, and of Bellarmine
among other, as is said before. The Mayor, or first proposition, S. Paul will
prove for me sufficiently, so that it may not be denied. Romans 10 10 Gal. 4.6.
With the heart a man believes unto righteousness. What can be more plain?
Because you are sons (says the same Apostle elsewhere) God has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts. And what works it thereby? The
Apostle tells us: Whereby we cry Abba, Father. And how learn we this
lesson of the Spirit? First, the Spirit teaches us to believe, and to have
confidence, and then this faith brings forth prayer as a fruit. For, How
shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14
The Eunuch, after Philip had instructed him in the faith, asked, if he might
not be baptized? Philip made answer: Act. 8.37, 38.
If thou beleeuest with all thine heart, thou may. Arator therefore, a
Christian Poet, who wrote about 1100. years since, has these words: Arator
in Act. lib. 2.
Cord salus credentis erit, confessio voce: In the heart, is the salvation of
the believer, the confession is in the mouth. To be short, unfaithfulness is
by the Apostle assigned to the heart: Hebr. 3.12
Take heed brethren (says he) lest there be in any of you at any time an evil
heart and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God; therefore, by the
Law of contraries, faith must be in the heart too.

A third fault, that I find, with this definition, is, that they say, it is
assensus solum: An assent only, No true faith without knowledge. Bellar. de
Iustific. l. 1. cap. 7.
as before out of Bellarmine I showed; whereby their meaning is to exclude
knowledge, as a thing nothing at all required in faith. In so much as
Bellarmine shameth not to affirm, that fides melius per ignorantiam quam per
notitiam definitur: Faith is better defined by ignorance, then by knowledge.
But herein the common proverb is verified, plus vident oculi quam oculus: Mo
eyes see more then one. For the University of Colen, in their Censure, Censur.
Colon. explic. Dial. 4.
written against Monhemius (though they were Papists, and in other points
adversaries to the truth) yet in this write far otherwise then Bellarmine
does: Fidei ratio in firma notitia consistit: The definition (say they) of
faith, stands upon firm knowledge. We cannot herein speak more contrary to
Bellarmine, then they have done.

Yet, true it is, that Bellarmine in the Book and Chapter, last alleged by
me, grants, that in faith there is a kind of knowledge; for, he says there
are in him, that believes, two things, Bellar. de Iustif. l. 1. c. 7
assent and apprehension, which apprehension, he says, is notitia rudis and
confusa: A rude and confused knowledge. A knowledge, belike, such as his sight
was, Mar. 8.24.
who saw men walking like trees, saving, that this knowledge is not like to
bring forth so good an effect, as his imperfect sight did. 25.
For, he soon after was restored to his sight, and saw every man a far off
clearly: but they who seek for faith in this confused knowledge, shall never
find it.

An unknowing knowledge the Papists brag of.
And if you desire to know what this confused knowledge is, wherewith they
content themselves; you may give a great guess thereof, by that which they
tell us of the Colliars faith, holden for a true faith in the Romish Church,
commended by Staphilus that slanderous Apostata, approved also by Stapleton,
who translated that idle pamphlet. Staphilus his Apology.
The Colliar told the Devil, he believed as the Church believes, and the
Church believed as he did. But further, what the Church believed or himself
either, he could not tell. This is that confused knowledge then, that they
would, men should content themselves withal; to be able to speak of the
Church in general, but not of the particular doctrine thereof, to call God
Father, but not to know by what means he is our Father: to say, we believe
in Jesus Christ, not understanding any thing of his person, or office. And
thus, not to know how to apply unto our selves, the comfort of these, or any
other general points, is a found faith with our great Masters of Rome. But
though Staphilus say, the Devil was overcome with that answer, and put to
flight: yet, sure I am, that God requires greater knowledge, and therefore
gives his word, and appoints his ministry for the instruction of his
people. A particular knowledge is needful. Exodus 12.26.
Neither did Moses suppose such a general knowledge would serve the turn,
when he so straightly charge the Israelites, to instruct their children in the
true cause of their feast of Passover. When your children (says he) ask you
what service is this you keep; Then shall ye say, It is the sacrifice of the
Lords Passover, 27.
which passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he
smote the Egyptians, and preserved our houses. Joshua also thought it not
enough, that Gods people should have a general persuasion, that God was good,
but he took order, that his particular benefits should be remembered even of
their children. Josh. 4.6, 7.
And when Joshua would that Moses should forbid Eldad and Medad, Number. 11.29
to prophecy in the Host, Moses answered, Would God that all the Lords people
were Prophets, and the Lord would put his Spirit upon them, wishing a more
special knowledge unto them, then was ordinary among Gods people. And the
Apostle prays, that the Colossians may be fulfilled with knowledge of Gods
will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. He adds his reason,
Coloss. 1.9.
that you may walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things: 10.
giving us thereby to understand, that without particular knowledge of his
will, in all things we cannot please him. But, what stand I upon this point?
Does not Saint Peter (who they say was the first Pope, and therefore that he
commands, they will confess must be obeyed) require such knowledge in every
Christian, 1. Pet. 3.15.
that they may be ready to give answer to every man, that asks a reason of
the hope that is in them? Shall we then content our selves against so many
express testimonies of the word, with that rude and confused knowledge of
Bellarmines, or the Colliars faith, so well liked of Staphilus?

But what reason have they so to rejoice in this dim light, Why this general
knowledge is so praised of Papists. Ioh. 3 20.
like such as have sore eyes, and therefore hang something before them, to
keep the brightness of the light from them? Our Savior Christ yields the
reason in these words, Every man that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. Our adversaries
teach so many doctrines which cannot abide the light of the word, and
touchstone of truth: they have devised, and daily do devise, so many
fruitless works, and blind devotions, so many false and wil-worshippings, and
superstitious services, repugnant to the Sacred Scriptures, and so little
sauouring of that obedience, that is, either commended in the godly, or
commanded in the word: that to cloak the wickedness and abomination in many,
but folly and vanity in the best of these their devices, they are forced to
tell the people, that ignorance is the mother of Devotion (for so they may lead
them into a very dungeon of Superstition) and that a folded up faith, is good
enough for them; Stapl. Antidot. in Act. 16.31.
Nec aliam simplex and idiota Christianus habere tenetur; neither is a simple
and unlearned Christian bound to have any other faith. Is not this the way to
make fools and idiots of Christians? This, this, I say, is the way to cast men
into a gulf of Idolatries, Mat. 23.15.
and to make men twofold more the children of hell then you are. And then
with, an Iopoean, you rejoice, that Ignorance has hatched many Devotions. A
mother worthy of such badde Daughters.

Now, this assent being proved to be no true justifying faith (for thereby we
only believe that which God teaches, not in God, as in our Creed we profess)
let us step a little forward, and see what this faith is, which we affirm does
justify. And if we rightly consider thereof, True faith.
we shall find two things necessary for one that believes; the one is
Knowledge, the other is the Application of that our knowledge. Knowledge.
That knowledge is necessary to attain to faith, if we had no other proof,
yet this were sufficient, that God uses so many ways for the instruction of
his people, that by Ignorance they should not err. He gives his Law to be a
rule of life and Religion, appoints his Priests to teach the same, and to
supply their negligence, he sends his Prophets, extraordinary Messengers, to
iogge his people upon the elbow, so putting them in mind when they did amiss.
And has he not ordained the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.13 1. Cor. 14.26.
that we may meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son
of God? The sundry gifts that GOD has given unto his Church, ought all to be
employed to the edifying thereof. Luke 1.17.
John the Baptists office was, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord,
as the Angel does foreshew, or as Zachary his father says, Luke 1.76.
To prepare the way of the Lord, that is, to make men fit to believe in Christ.
And how does he execute this his function? Even by giving knowledge of
salvation unto Gods people, 77.
by the remission of their sins. Our Savior Christ thus speaks unto the
Jews. Ioh. 10.38.
If I do (the works of my Father) then though you believe not me, believe
the works, that ye may know and believe. As if he would say, Unless you know,
you cannot believe; and therefore consider of my works, that you may know, and
so believe. To this purpose also, Act. 15.7.
is that which Saint Peter said: Among us (the Apostles) God chose out me, that
the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel and believe. Now,
it is most plain, that men hear (unless they be such forgetful hearers as
S. James misliketh) that they may know, Iam. 1.24.
and so believe. But that I may be short, Knowledge is so necessary for such
as believe, as that it is taken for faith it self, and that by one that did
know better how to speak of these matters, Ioh. 17.3.
then all our Romish Rabbis. This is life eternal (says Christ) to know thee
to be the only very God, meaning, that it is life eternal to believe God, to
be the only very God, and whom he had sent, Jesus Christ: and such speeches
are common in the Scripture.

But as meat how good so ever nourishes not, but such as eat it: and
Physic, be it never so medicinable, helps not but such as receive it: Even
so, Application, second thing required in faith.
if this knowledge be not applied to the grieved or wounded conscience, the
offendour shall never have peace with God thereby. The Apostle having handled at
the full the example of Abraham, and set forth his constant faith, with the
comfortable effect it had, That it was imputed to him for righteousness, Romans
4.22.23.24.
then teaches us by application what use we must make thereof: It was not
written for him only, that it was imputed to him for righteousness; but also
for us to whom it shall be imputed, which believe in him, who raised up Jesus
our Lord from the dead. Notably for this point, Benard. de Annunt. Sermon. 1.
Saint Bernard writes. Si credas peccata tua non posse deleri, nisi ab illo
cui soli peccasti, and in quem peccata non cadunt, been facis: If thou believe
thy sins cannot be done away, but by him against whom thou have only sinned,
and who himself is not subject to sin, thou do well. Here is a good and a
Christian knowledge: now mark what use we must make of it. Sed add adhuc
(says he in that very place) vt and hoc credas, quia per ipsum peccata tibi
donantur. Hoc est testimonium quod perhibet Spiritus Sanctus in cord tuo,
Dimissa sunt tibi peccata tua: But yet add this (says good Bernard) that thou
also believe, that by him thy sins are forgiven thee. This is the testimony
that the holy Ghost bears in thine heart, Thy sins are forgiven thee. Here
we have a particular application of that general knowledge before mentioned.

And out of this place of Bernard, we are by the way to note, how the Romish
Church which would (though most unjustly) be counted the true Church, has
this long time deceived the world, in making men believe, the Pope has power
to forgive sins; Man cannot forgive sins.
whereas Saint Bernard most plainly, and to the Scriptures most agreeably does
teach, that God only can forgive sins, both because our sin is a breach of
his Law, and himself cannot sin. Fie, therefore upon that man of sin, who
being himself full fraught with sin, and ouerloden with wickedness, dare
take upon him that office, that belongs only to our Sinne-lesse GOD. He only
can make clean that which is conceived of unclean seed, Job. 14.4.
and besides him none. He, I say, he only, can truly make this Proclamation,
I, I am he that puts away thine iniquities, Esa. 43.25.
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Howsoever that
graceless wretch, Boniface the eighth, who instituted the first Romish Iubile,
giving therein immunitie both from sin, and the punishment thereof, would
make the world believe that he has power to forgive sins too. Anton. part.
3. cap. 8 tit. 20.. 2. The fruit of application. Praefat. exhort. ad Martyr. ad
Fortunatu^. Job. 19.25.26. Micah. 7.7. ^. Tim. 1.15
But as Antoninus Bishop of Florence, writing that History, says, God only
forgiueth sin.

But to return, from whence for a few lines I have digressed. When we can in
this sort apply unto our selves the mercy of God, and thus make a garment
fitting our selves, to cover therewith our shame of the wool of the Lamb (as
Cyprian in one place prettily speaks) (for so he calls the Scripture.) Oh,
with what assurance will we be able with Job to say, I am sure my Redeemer
lives, I shall see God in my flesh. And with Micah: I will wait for God my
Savior, my God will hear me. And with the Apostle, Christ Jesus came into the
World to save sinners, whereof I am chief. Notwithstanding for this cause was
I received to mercy, that Jesus Christ should first show on me all long
suffering, unto the example of them, who shall, in time to come, believe in her
(...) eternal life. But the Apostle shows in many places unspeakable
comfort, by applying to himself in particular, the mercies of God, in so much
as he assures himself, that none could charge Gods servants to endanger
them, none could condemn them. Romans 8.33.35.38.39.
Yea, who shall separate us (says he) from the love of Christ? I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor the Angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, is able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Thus we see what wonderful assurance and confidence
they have, whom Gods Spirit guides, to apply unto their wounded consciences,
the most Sovereign salve of the promises and examples of Gods mercy. Whereas
others in the time of fear and danger, languish in perplexity, Luke 23 30.
Bernard. de Annunt. sermon 3.
and could wish the mountains would fall upon them, and the hills would cover
them. For truly (says Bernard) as it were speaking unto God, Non reponis ^leum
misericordiae, nisi in vase fiduciae: Thou, Lord, put not the oil of
mercy, but into the vessel of confidence. This, this, I say, is the faith
commended by the Apostle, this is the faith that justifies before God, which
beginning with knowledge of Gods mercy in Christ Jesus, out of it gathers
confidence and boldness.

And thus with good warrant out of the Word, I trust we may affirm, that this
faith which does assuredly know, and comfortably apply unto us the promised
mercies of God, causes us with boldness to stand before God without fear of
condemnation: yet not for the merit or worthiness of the act of believing; but
because the office, yea the very nature of faith is, to apprehend and take hold
of Christ, through whom we are found righteous before God: in that he is made
unto us of God, wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.30
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, as before I have said.

The last words in this sentence, What works of the Law are meant.
whereof there is any question between our adversaries and us, are these, The
works of the Law. Out of these arise two doubts. The first is, what Law the
Apostle speaks of in these words. For some, even very ancient, have been in
that error, that he speaks of the Law ceremonial, as Origin, and others. Now
the Romish Church, not seeing how they might maintain their doctrine of
Merits, and Justification by works, unless they were of that mind also; were
in former times of that mind too, being glad that they might shroud themselves
under the name of ancient ^^^rs. I need not speak in particular of these
Popish Writers, seeing Bellarmine confesses as much as I say. Nonnulli (says
he) e Catholicis, Bellar. de Iustific. l 1. cap. 19.
docent per opera quae Apostolus a iustificatione excludit, intelligi
obseruationem legalium ceremoniarum: Many of the Catholics teach, that by the
works which the Apostle excludes from justification, the observation of the
ceremonial Law is meant.

But how many, or how great in learning, Not works ceremonial. Romans 2.13.
or account soever they be: S. Paul affords us proof enough to convince them
of error. When he says, The doers of the Law shall be justified, is there any
color of reason to imagine, that they who observe the ceremonies of the Law,
shall be justified? We see in the first and last Chapters of the Prophet
Esaias, Micah the 6. the 50. Psalm, and in other places of Scripture, that many,
who were most diligent performers of the ceremonies, were notwithstanding
misliked of God, yea reproved for satisfying themselves with that external
service. What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, Esa. 1.11.
says the Lord, I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and of the fat of fed
beasts, and I desire not the blood of Bullocks, nor of Lambs, nor of Goats.
That also, which the Apostle writes of the effect of the Law, written in men's
hearts, by reason whereof, we have thoughts accusing and excusing, cannot be
understood of the Law ceremonial.

But to come yet nearer to the purpose, S. Paul, even in that place where he
handles this question, concluding the former part of this discourse, and
having proved Jews and Gentiles to be transgressors of the Law, either written
or of nature, thus says, Therefore by the works of the Law, Romans 3.20.
shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight. And lest we might make any doubt
what Law he means of, he yields a reason of his former assertion, which
makes the matter plain. For by the Law is knowledge of sin. And yet that it
may be more manifest what Law is here meant, elsewhere in plain words he
expounds himself: Rom 7.7.
I knew not sin, but by the Law: For I had not known lust, except the Law had
said, Thou shall not lust. Out of which words I reason thus: The Apostle
speaks of that Law, that makes us to know sin; but that is not the Law
ceremonial: therefore the Apostle speaks not of the Law ceremonial.

Yea, this place seemed to S. Augustine to have such force, as that thereupon
he groundeth that which we teach. August. de Spir. and lit. cap. 8.
Ac ne quisquam putaret hic Apostolum ea lege dixisse hominem iustificari, quae
in Sacramentis veteribus multa continet figurata praecepta, etc. And lest any
man should think the Apostle to have said, that a man is justified by that,
which in the old Sacraments have many figurative precepts, from whence comes
circumcision, which children were commended to receive: he by and by shows
what Law he meant, and says, For by the Law is knowledge of sin.

But the Apostle himself is best Interpreter of his own meaning. Out of that
he had said, some perchance would gather, that he had little regard to the Law,
whereby the Jews would be offended, (for they knew the Law was given of God.)
Others would take occasion thereupon more boldly to transgress: to meet
therefore with these inconveniences, he makes unto himself this objection:
Romans 3.31.
Do we then make the Law of no effect through faith? Yea, we establish the
Law. But the Law ceremonial is not by the Gospel established, Hebr. 10.1.
Romans 10.4.
but abolished. For that Law had but the shadow of good things to come. But
the end of the Law is Christ. So that he, offering himself upon the Altar of
the Cross to God the Father, Job. 19.30:
a sacrifice for sin, did upon good ground say, It is finished. So as Christ
being come, if we will still tie our selves to the observation of that Law,
Gal. 5.2.
Paul tells us, that Christ shall profit us nothing. 4.
Ye are (says he) abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the Law,
ye are fallen from grace. Therefore were the Apostles in their days very
careful, to teach men to rest upon Christ, and not to imagine that now in the
time of the Gospel, they are tied to those impotent and beggarly rudiments,
Gal. 4.9.
as the Apostle calls them. This may appear by that notable Council, Act.
15. and in diverse places. Much more might be alleged, to prove that the Law
ceremonial cannot in this place be understood. But this, I trust, is
sufficient: and had indeed been more then enough, but that our Adversaries of
later time, Bellar. de Iustif. l. 1. c. 19. Andrad. Orthodox. Explic. l 6.
although they dare not defend that opinion, yet would they make it seem less
absurd, as does Bellarmine, in pointing to some places that their error is
grounded upon, as if they had reason so to teach, and Andradius names some
Fathers of that mind.

Well then, by the Law, without all question we must understand the Law
moral. But here arises another doubt, what works are here excluded in these
words, What works are excluded.
Without the works of the Law. And here our adversaries do earnestly contend,
not to have all works excluded from Justification, but such only as are done
before they believed. For if they should confess that no works can justify,
then falls down that doctrine of Merits to the ground; a most gainefull
doctrine to Pope and Popish Priests (who must supply with their store, that
which other want of their own merits.) But we teach that all works, All works
before and after, excluded from Justification.
as well such as follow our justification (this our adversaries deny) as the
works that we do before our justification (which themselves confess) are in
these words excluded, from being any causes of our justification before God.

And to auerre this, which we say, we have many strong reasons. The first is
taken from the words themselves, being mightily strengthened with the
faithfulness of him who teaches this doctrine, and with his sincerity in
teaching. For as he requires in other disposers of the secrets of God, that
every man be found faithful: 1. Cor. 4.2.
so he testifies of his own faithfulness in his ministry, speaking unto the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus. Act. 20.20.
I kept back nothing (says he) that was profitable, but have showed you, and
taught you openly, and throughout every house. And again, 27.
I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all the counsel of God.
Neither can we in reason suppose he would deal more sincerely with them of
Ephesus, then with the Romans, of whose instruction in the faith how careful
he was, may well be seen in his first and fifteenth Chapters of that Epistle.

The Apostle therefore, All without exception.
speaking of works without any exception, as he does (without the works of
the Law) if any works should not have been excluded from justification, he
might have been charged by the Romans, that he kept back somewhat from them,
namely, what works were to be admitted as causes of justification, and what
not: and so did not show them all the counsel of God. For if he had been of
our adversaries opinion, sincerity would have forced him to have said, When I
say, we are justified without works, I speak only of works done before we are
justified, not of all works. For when we are once justified by God, then by
our works we must justify our selves. So that if any works may be accounted
as causes of our justification, the Apostles manner of speaking would rather
have beseemed some acquiuocating Priest or Jesuit, who have taught their
hearts to dissemble, and their tongues to lie, yea who profess to teach the
art of dissimulation, and cogging, and glory in their falsehood, whereby they
deceive the world, then this faithful Apostle.

It is most certain therefore, that the Apostle, being as he was, a most
faithful disposer of the mysteries of God, one that detested all such
doubtful or double dealing in Gods matters especially, 1. Cor. 2.4.
Whose preaching stands not in the iniycing speech of man's wisdom, but in
the plain evidence of Spirit and power, excepting no works, excludes all.
And many such like speeches we have in Scriptures, in which such indefinite
propositions (as Logicians call them) are universally to be understood. Hebr.
4.15.
Christ is said to be without sin. Now, seeing there is sin Original and
Actual, of commission, and of omission, shall we imagine, that because the
Apostle says not without (all) sin, therefore Christ is subject to some
sin? Zach. 2.4.
God makes promise to his people, that Jerusalem shall be inhabited without
wall. Now, because there are sundry sorts of walls, some of stone, some of
earth, or of other matter, as men fancy: shall some cauilling companion say,
Though they had no stone walls, yet had they some other walls for their
strength? But infinite such places might be brought, wherein it may easily
appear, that though this universal sign (all) be not added, yet it must be
understood, as also it must be in these words of S. Paul, as well all works
going before, or following justification, as all Laws, either Natural, or
Moral, or Ceremonial.

Again, if the Apostle had meant only to exclude the works done in our
infidelity, he needed not so carefully to have set down the manner of our
Justification, as he does immediately before these words: That it is by the
righteousness of God, Romans 3.22.24.
by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. And that,
We are justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation, 25.
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness
of sins. In all which, there is not one word of Works, but all is ascribed
to Christ. Wherein the Apostle, also writes so carefully, and so warily, as if
he feared nothing more, then, that man should rest any thing upon his Merits.
To conclude therefore this my first argument, I say with the Apostle, If it be
of grace, it is no more of Works, Romans 11.6
or else were grace, no more grace: but if it be of Works, it is no more
grace; for then were Works no more Works. So that, because the Apostle says,
it is of grace, and by faith without Works, therefore Works are wholly
excluded, as Andradius himself will warrant me to say. For, Mercedis ratio,
Andrad. Orthodox. Explicat. lib. 6.
cum gratiae nomine ex aduerso pugnat. For the consideration of reward (or
Merit) is clean contrary to grace.

A second argument I take from the final causes of this doctrine of
Justification by faith only, which are two, set down by the Apostle. The one
in this Chapter, immediately before the words of my Text; namely, to exclude
our rejoicing or boasting. But if all works be not disabled, as insufficient
causes of our Justification, some works should be left, wherein we might
rejoice. To exclude rejoicing in our selves.
For by rejoicing, the Apostle means nothing else, but that confidence that
men have, whereby they content themselves, as if they were out of danger of
Gods wrath. Saint Paul then concluding out of that he has taught of
Justification by faith, that our rejoicing is thereby taken away, teaches us
thus much, that whosoever apprehends with an assured faith this Justification,
that we have by Christ, rests nothing upon his own works, or contenteth not
himself with the righteousness that is by the Law. But on the contrary, our
Adversaries suppose their rejoicing is not taken away. In so much, as a great
man among them dares affirm, Andrad. Orthodox. Explicat. lib. 6.
That heavenly bliss is not so freely given of God, and liberally, as in
respect of their works it is due. And by and by after: We gather, that
eternal felicity ought not to be imputed according to grace, but according
to debt. And therefore within a few words after, he also defines Merit, Merit.
A free action whereunto a reward is due. Which Doctrine of Andradius, because
it is also the Doctrine of the Romish Church, we may truly affirm of them,
that they do, what in them lies, to make the Apostle a Liar, when he
affirms that rejoicing is taken away by the Law of faith: seeing they still
rejoice and content themselves in their works. But I will end this with one
short argument: If Justification may be by works, then is not our rejoicing
in the Law taken away by faith: but it is by faith taken away: therefore
Justification is not by works. The Minor proposition is the words of the
Apostle. Romans 11.6.
The Mayor is proved by that, which a little before out of the Apostle I
alleged, that works and grace cannot both stand as causes of our
Justification. But notably for this purpose, does Chrysostom gather out of
these words: Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans hom. 7
If the faithful man, and he who is saved, would think well of himself in
this respect that he regards the Law, do hear in these words, how by the
Law it self his mouth is stopped, how by the Law he is accused, how the Law
it self denies as it were salvation to sinners, and excludes all boasting:
and he who as yet believes not, being hereby dejected and humbled, may take
occasion to draw near unto faith: thou see how great force faith has, how
it drives us from whatsoever we had before, not suffering us to rejoice though
never so little, in them. And a little before he has said that God saves,
Nullis ad hoc vsus operibus, sed fidem tantum exigens: Not using (for our
Justification) any works, but requiring faith only. Sedul. in Epist. ad Romans
cap. 3.
Sedulius also very well notes thus, Talis gloriatio quae veniebat ex
operibus legis excluditur. Such rejoicing is excluded as comes of the works
of the Law.

Our comfort.
Another end why our Justification is by faith, is for our unspeakable comfort,
That it might come by grace, and the promise might be sure to all the seed.
Romans 4.16.
Whereas if we should seek to get the inheritance by the Law, Gal. ^.18.
we could not think to have it by promise, and so in respect of our own
manifold imperfections, we might always be doubtful and wavering, and far
from that comfort, that Gods children find in themselves. In this respect
then, it is good, that we persuade our selves, that we are saved by grace,
Bell. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 7
that we may look unto Christ only. Yea, Bellarmine himself gives this
advice: Propter incertitudinem propriae iustitiae, and periculum inanis
gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia ponere. In
respect of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the danger of vain
glory, the safest way, is to put all our confidence, only in Gods mercy and
goodness. Very well writes upon these words of the Apostle, Theophilact:
Theophil. in Epist. ad Romans 4.
Quum vniuersa sint in Dei, tum gratia, tum misericordia, fita, profecto quae
ab eoconferuntur, stabilia fore and certa omni semini, id est, credentibus
cunctis existimanda sunt. Seeing all things are of Gods grace and mercy: sure
the things that are given from him, as it may be thought, are stable and sure
to all the seed, that is, to all believers. Ambros. in Epist. ad Romans 4.
Saint Ambrose also says, Firma esse non potest, promissio omni semini, hoc
est omni homini ex omni gente, nisi fuerit ex fide: The promise cannot be
firm unto all the seed, that is, to all men of every Nation, unless it be of
faith. And he after yields a reason of that he has said, because by the Law
we are found guilty, and the promise cannot be given to them that are guilty,
unless they be purified, which must be done by faith. Thus then I reason,
The promise of Justification must be sure: but unless it be of faith, it
cannot be sure: therefore the promise of Justification must be of faith. The
Mayor is Saint Paul's, Romans 4.16. The Minor is the former words of Saint
Ambrose.

A third argument to prove, that even the works of them that are regenerate,
cannot justify, and are excluded by Saint Paul, from having that force, is
taken from the example of Abraham, who is set forth as a pattern, in whom we
may learn how we all can attain to Justification, as it is plain to see in
the fourth Chapter of this Epistle to the Romans. Abraham, Abraham not
justified by works.
a good while after he was called out of Vr of the Chaldees, had lived a good
time in obedience unto GOD, had done no doubt, many good Works, and offered
many Sacrifices unto God: yet, without respect unto any of his Works, that he
now the child and servant of God had done: Abraham believed God, Genesis 15 6.
Gal. 4.9.3. Romans 4.13.
and that (his believing) was imputed to him for righteousness. And therefore,
Paul is bold to use such exclusive words: The promise was not given through
the Law, but through the righteousness of faith. And, Sicut Abrahae, and
nostra filiorum eius per gratiam, says Primasius: Primas. in Epist. ad Romans 4.
As was (the Justification) of Abraham's, so is ours also, who are his children,
by grace. But to be short, I suppose, we may be bold to gather out of that
which is said, this reason. As Abraham was justified, so shall we be: but
Abraham was justified by faith, without the works that he did, being Gods
servant, therefore we also shall so be justified. All this argument may well
and strongly be proved out of this fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans.

But what need many Arguments? Confitentem habemus reum. Stapleton our
Countriman, a sure friend to the Romish Church, and as loath as any of them, to
write any thing that might any way impugn their Popish Maxims, seeing the
deadly wound which these words of the Apostle give to their Doctrine of Merits,
is very careful to salve that sore: yet the force of truth drives him to
grant that here the Apostle, Antidot. in Romans 3.28. Our works cannot merit
forgiveness of sins.
Excludit opera a virtute iustificandi absolute, id est, a virtute remittendi
peccata: Excludes Works from having power simply or absolutely to justify,
that is, to remit sin, or from power to remit sin. What can be more plain?
Good Works cannot obtain remission of sins, says Stapleton, and therefore
not justify absolutely or perfitly. Now, an imperfect Justification we are not
acquainted withal, neither has Christ or any of his Apostles taught us any
such. But we know that a perfect cause has her perfect effect, a perfect
Sacrifice (such an one was that which Christ offered) has obtained perfect
Justification before God for all believers.

But here, I would feign have asked a question of Stapleton, if he had been
alive, or of some other friend of his, (seeing he is gone, to give an account,
how well he has used his talent, whether to gain souls to Christ or to
Antichrists) how Parish Priests shall do hereafter? When men and women come to
be shriuen, and have confessed their sins, shall their Ghostly Father, bid
them fast so many Frydayes, Wednesdayes, or Saints Eeues, gad on Pilgrimage to
Hales or Buxton, to Compostel, to Rome, or to Loretta, wear Haire-cloth next
their skin, go bare-foote and bare-legged? shall they torment their body
with Whips, or other punishments, Popish penances plain cozenages.
or beggar their Posterity in building Chaunteries, and such like places, for
satisfaction for sin? All this is to no purpose. For Stapleton assures us,
there is in these, or any other, though better works by far, such as GOD
has commanded, no power to remit sin; so that Justification must be sought
for some better way. And so it seems, the World has been couzened a great
while by these cogging Companions, which have made men and women believe, that
by such Works they may satisfy for their sins. And thus I trust upon so
good a confession of Stapleton, so good warrant of the Word, and sure grounds
of doctrine, we may conclude that a man is justified and accounted guiltless
before God, by faith apprehending Christ Jesus, in whom we have redemption by
forgiveness of our sins, without any Merit of our Wrokes, whether before or
after our Justification.

Now, that which out of these words we conclude, does of necessity follow, but
that our Adversaries fearing, lest their Diana of Merits should be nothing
esteemed, if they cast not a mist before men's eyes, to hinder from them seeing
the clear light of truth that shines in our Doctrine, Act. 19.25.28.
assemble as did the Siluersmiths at the call of Demetrius, who told them, by
that craft they got their goods; and with such other speeches, made them full
of wrath, insomuch as they cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.
Even so is it with us. The Romish Demetrius, that gets much by selling such
as they call good Works, with his followers seeking to defend the Doctrine of
Merits, cry out of that which teaches Justification by faith only, whereby
they may have much loss, if want of evil gotten goods may be counted loss.
I confess, we teach, that Faith only does justify: that is, that a true and
lively faith, wrought in our hearts by Gods Spirit, working by love, True faith
only justifies.
fruitful in good works, adorned and beautified with holiness of life (for
these are badges whereby to know a true faith) does justify and acquit us
before God, so as we boldly stand and plead not guilty. Whereby our
Adversaries may see, how unjustly they slander us and our Doctrine, as if we
were enemies to all good Works. And yet we only teach, that such a true faith
as I have now described, without respect of the Works that always accompany
it, does justify, not by the Merit of this faith, but in that it is our hand
whereby we apprehend and hold fast, that Justification which we have in Christ,
through the unspeakable mercy of God.

And this our Doctrine is so warranted in Sacred Scripture, as nothing more.
Saint Paul does often use exclusive words, Exclusive words. Negative.
Equivalent.
as these are without the Law: without Works. Sometime plain negative words,
Not by Works, not by the Law. Otherwhile words equivalent, or of such like
force; As, by grace, Freely. These manners of speech when I consider of, I
cannot but like well of the good and Christian counsel, given by Primasius an
ancient Writer, Audi gratis, tace de Meritis. Hear (what the Apostle says)
freely, and speak not a word of Merits.

Thus, therefore I reason for our Doctrine of Justification by faith only: If
Works are not to be joined with faith in the matter of Justification, then
faith only, even by the confession of our Adversaries does justify. For our
Romish Catholics deny not this our Doctrine but in respect of works, neither
do they in any their Books or Writings, seek to match any thing with faith
as cause of Justification, but works only: But works are not to be joined
with faith, in the matter of Justification, as the Apostle most plainly
proves: Gal. 2.16.
Know ye, that a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ. Again, Ye are saved by grace, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
through faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of Works, lest
any man should boast himself. Lastly, these words to the Romans are very
effectual. Romans 1.28.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the Law. As if he would have said, We the Apostles of Jesus Christ, appointed
to be the Scholemasters and Teachers of the World, upon good ground teach this
as a doctrine not to be denied, a principle in Religion not to be doubted of.

Faith only
And howsoever our Adversaries impugn this Doctrine, and would persuade the
simple, that it is strange, and has no warrant: yet are we able to produce
such, as many hundreds of years since, have taught the same, and gathered it
out of these words of the Apostle. Origin, who lived about fourteen hundred
years since, in very few words, Orig. in To. lib. 3. cap. 3.
does twice auerre the same: Dixit Apostolus (says he) fide, solius
iustificationem sufficere, ita vt credens quis tantummodo iustificetur: The
Apostle has said, that Justification of faith only will suffice, so that he
who believes only, is justified. Isichius wrote at the least a thousand years
since, and he says much like, as Origin before him: Isich. in Leuit. l. 4. c.
18
Gratia and misericordia, fide comprehenditur sola, non ex operibus, vt dicit
Apostolus: Grace and mercy is obtained by faith only, not by Works, as Paul
says. We cannot then be justly charged as Teachers of new Doctrine herein,
seeing we affirm nothing, but that others long before us have taught.

But, because this is so much misliked, as it is, and so scornefully rejected
of our adversaries, although all truth must be grounded upon the word of
truth, Iam. 1.18.
as S. James calls the Word of God, neither needs it the testimony of any
man, which God in the Sacred Scriptures so plainly has delivered: yet for the
satisfying of the simple, and the stopping of the slanderous mouths of our
obstinate enemies; I purpose to let you see such a consent with us in Doctrine
for this point, of Ancient Fathers and Learned Writers long before our time, as
in no one article or piece of doctrine, wherein our adversaries dissent from
us, I suppose a greater can be showed, neither mo several Authors alleged. So
that I may well impanell for trial of this controversy, two Grand-Iuries of
famous men, well reported of for godliness and learning among all men; many of
them, and the meanest of them, of such reputation in the Church of Rome, as
they are thought sufficient to go upon trial of as great a matter as this is
(although it be of great importance:) And S. Paul himself shall speak for
all, as you hear he has done, and be Foreman of this Jury, for they all
have learned of him that they say, even in these words, which now I entreat
upon.

And first I will second him with some of them, Commentaries upon these words.
that wrote their Commentaries upon this Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans. All
I have not, out of such as I have I will allege, but out of every one, one
place, although out of diverse of them I might produce very many. Of Origin I
have spoken before, and therefore I now omit him. S. Ambrose is next, who
affords very good choice of testimonies, he has such plenty. Amb. in Romans 3.
Iustificati sunt gratis (says he) quia nihil operantes, neque vicem
reddentes, Sola fide iustificati sunt dono Dei: They are justified freely,
because working nothing, neither recompensing, they are justified by faith only
by Gods gift. S. JEROME very briefly, but as plainly, writes, Hieron. in Romans
4.
Per solam fidem iustificat Deus: God justifies by faith only. Then have we
Sedulius, writing thus: Ad Christum veniens sola quum credit fide saluatur:
Sedul. in Romans 3.
He that comes unto Christ, is saved by faith only, when he believes. And
the last of this rank shall Primasius be, who writes thus, Primas. in Romans 4.
Impium per solam fidem iustificat: God justifies the ungodly by faith only.

Another sort of them, whom I mean to produce in this matter, Other expounding
other Scriptures
are such, as expounding other places of Scripture, have in such their
Commentaries taught the same doctrine. Among whom the first is Hilarie, as most
ancient in years, so most worthy to have the first room, because he sets
down the very words in question between us now: Hill. in Mat. Con. 8.
Sola fides iustificat (says he) Only faith justifies. The next shall be
Chrysostom, who, as he was next him in years of all this company, so he
differs very little in words. Ex sola quippe fide nos saluauit: For by faith
only he has saved us. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 5.
Augustine, a man most famous in Gods Church for learning, and his great
labors against Heretics, well agrees with the rest, saying, Aug. in Ps. 88
Conc. 2.
Sola fides Christi mundat: The faith only of Christ cleanses. To whom may
Cyril also be added, who though he have not the same words, yet teaches he
that substance of doctrine in these words: Cyril. Alex. in Job. lib. 9. cap.
30.
Per fidem; namque non aliter saluamur: By faith; for no other way we are
saved. ISYCHIVS I have before produced, I will not therefore mention him again
in this place. But venerable Bede, the glory of our North Country, speaks
more plainly. Per iustitiam factorum nullus saluabitur, Beda in Ps. 77.
sed per solam iustitiam fidei: By righteousness of works shall no man be
saved, but by the righteousness of faith only. Theophil. in Gal. 3.
After him Theophilact writes thus: Demonstrat (Apostolus) fidem vel solam
habere iustificandi virtutem: The Apostle shows, that even only faith has
power to justify. Very well also, and agreeably to the rest writes Haimo, who
lived about some 800. years since: Haimo in Gal. 3. Bernard. in Cantic. ser.
22.
Fides sola saluat: Faith only saves. And most comfortably, as in many things,
writes good BERNARD. Quisquis pro peccatis compunctus, esurit and sitit
iustitiam, credat in te qui iustificat impium, and solam iustificatus per
fidem, pacem habebit apud Deum: Whosoever feels remorce for sin, and so does
hunger and thirst after righteousness, let him believe in thee, who do
justify the ungodly, and being justified by faith only, he shall have peace
with God. And Oecumenius tells us, Oecumen. in Iam 2.
That ABRAHAM was an image of justification by faith only, when it was imputed
to him for righteousness that he believed. Then have we Rupert, Rupert. in Reg.
cap. 39. lib. 2.
who writes, that sola iustificare potest fides Jesus Christi: The only faith
of Jesus Christ can justify.

Sundry other Fathers also and learned Writers we have, who in their several
Treatises affirm that also, Fathers in their several Treatises.
which we out of the Apostle do gather. To begin with Cyprian as most ancient:
Fides tantum prodest (says he:) Faith only profits. Next unto him comes
Basil, Cypr. l. 3. ad Quir. c. 42. Basil. Hom. 22.
whose words are these: Ea demum perfecta and omnimoda gloriatio est in Deo,
quandoneque propter suam ipsius iustitiam quis extollitur, sed agnoscit se
quidem vera destitui iustitia, verum sola in Christum fide iustificatum esse:
That is perfect rejoicing, and altogether in the Lord, when a man is not proud,
no not of his own righteousness, but confesses himself to be destitute
thereof, and that he is justified only by faith in Christ. GREG. NAZIAN. who
for the great opinion of learning, that was conceived of him, was called the
Divine, as he was in Basils time, so was he of his mind too, as these his
words do show: Nazian. Orat. 21.
Confiteri Christum, and credat illum a mortuis suscitatum esse and saluaberis.
Siquidem credere solum iustitia est: Confess Christ, and believe that he is
raised from the dead, and thou shall be saved. For to believe only is
righteousness. PAVLINVS also is of the same mind, that the rest are, as we
may see in an Epistle, which is among S. Augustines Epistles: his words are,
Epist. 58. Aug.
Salus fide sola quaeritur: Salvation is sought for by faith only. This is also
the judgment of Ruffine, in his exposition of the Creed, it is among Cyprians
works. Ruffin. in Symbolum.
De remissione peccatorum (says he) sufficere deberet sola credulitas:
Concerning remission of sins, believing only should suffice. And the reason
of this his assertion is not to be omitted. Quis enim causas aut rationem
requirat, vbi indulgentia principalis est? For who will inquire after causes,
or a reason, where indulgence (or pardon) is principal? THEODORET also, as often
in other his Treatises, so also in his books against the Idolatry of the
Gentiles, and in defense of Christian Religion, writes thus: Theod^r. de
curat. Grae. Affect. l. 7.
Non vllis operibus nostris, sed per solam fidem, mystica bona consecuti sumus:
Not by any our works, but by faith only we have gotten unknown good things.
Now unto these I may add Leo a Pope, in an Epistle that he sent by one called
Philo, to Leo, then Emperor. It is not his 70. Epistle (as Bellarmine untruly
quoteth the place) but 76. But his words are these: Catholica fides humanum
genus sola vinificat, Leo Epi. 76.
sola sanctificat: The Catholic faith does only quicken, only sanctify
mankind. But Bellarmine answers, that Leo in those words speaks De fide
dogmatica: Of a dogmaticall faith; Bellar. de Iustif. l. 1. cap. 25.
and such as is opposed against Heretics. As if he had said, that the Arrian
faith, or that of the Eutycheans cannot sanctify, but that faith which is true
and Catholic. Be it so, yet he must needs grant, that no dogmaticall faith,
that is, no external profession of Religion, how earnest in show soever it is,
be it also never so true, can quicken and sanctify, until it be as a seed
sown in the heart, taking hold of Christ for the remission of sins; and so
it, I say, it only gives true life to a Christian. I have also read these very
words, cited out of Alcuine, whom some call Albine; the book, I confess,
Alcuin. Praefat. ad Carol. Mag.
I have not seen. But if he have such words, he seems well to approve that
which Leo has written, because he has alleged his very words without any
change. I will cloze up this rank with one, well esteemed of in the Church of
Rome: Rich. de S. Victor. decisione dubi. Apostoli.
Ecce (says he) habes aperte, quod possit homo aliquando iustificari ex sola
fide, absque legis opere: Behold, thou see plainly, that a man may sometime
be justified by faith only, without any work of the Law. Which, seeing he
will grant to be sometime, I see no reason why he should doubt, but that it is
so always. For there is but one way of justifying Jew or Gentile, Romans 3.22.
one or other, Even the righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ,
unto all, and upon all that believe.

Christian Poets.
There are then three ancient Christian Poets, who sing the same song, with
these Fathers and learned Writers. Iuuencus is first, Hier. Catal. Script.
eccl. Hieron. in Mat. 2. Iuueac. hist. Euang. l. 2.
who lived about the 330. year of Grace, of whom S. Jerome makes mention, and
also cites a Verse out of him, in his Commentaries upon S. Matthewes Gospel.
This Iuuencus, I say, has these words: Namque vbi certa fides fuerit complexa
salutem, non erit vlla illic anceps agitatio iuris: For when assured faith has
taken hold of salvation, there will be no more doubtful waging of Law. Not
long after him was Prudentius, who in a book, entitled Psychomachia, wherein
he shows what fights and battles the soul has, Prudent. pugna concord. and
discord.
speaking of faith, writes thus, Haec mea sola salus: This faith only is my
salvation. And I find alleged by that famous learned man of our time, D.
Humphrey, in his answer to Campians first reason: the like out of one Victor
Cemensis, as I take it, but his words are these, Victor.
writing of Abraham's faith, Credidit, and nudae fidei consensio sola, plenam ad
iustitiae and meritireputata coronam est: ABRAHAM believed, and this consent
only of bare faith, was imputed to him for a full crown of righteousness and
merit.

Popish Writers.
Yet have I reserved three great Rabbis in the Romish Church, for the shutting
up of this question, who if they speak, as their Foreman has done, and many
other before them, I hope, we shall be found not guilty of error, much less
of heresy. The first of this company is Gratian, the very storehouse of their
Canon Law, who very plainly affirms, Did. 2. de Poenit. charitas est a q.
that fidei soli vaenia promittitur: To faith only is pardon promised. And a
little after, Fide sola peccata relaxantur: By faith only, sins are remitted.
If any man answer, that he there tells us but what Augustine says: true;
but withal he alleges it, not as misliking, but as approving it as sound
doctrine. After him comes Peter Lombard, though equal in time (for it is
said that Gratian, Danaeus in Com. in Lombard. in prolegomenis, c. 4.
and Lombard, and Petrus Comestor, were all brethren, and the bastard children
of a Nun) Lombard, I say, Bishop of Paris, whose authority in the Church of
Rome, was like that Pythagoras had among his Scholars, among whom it was
enough, to say, The Master says it. His writings are in such account with
them, that they are the very ground of Popish or School divinity. In so much,
as since he wrote his books of Sentences, very many by their Commentaries
have labored to explane him, studying sometime to make him agree with himself,
sometime with that the Church Romish has formerly taught. Lambertus Danaeus,
in the place before alleged, reckons at the least 37. or 38. who have taken
such pains, and yet as not having reckoned all, refers them, who are
desirous to know of mo, unto Trithemius.

This great Doctor of the chair for Schoole-diuinitie, in a Preface he writes
before his Commentaries upon Paul's Epistles, in the very latter end thereof,
gathering a brief and sum of the former part of Paul's Epistle to the
Romans, has these words: Pluribus modis ostendit iustitiam and salutem,
Lombard. Praefat in Comment. in Epi. Paul.
aeque Iudaeis and Gentibus esse, non per legem sed per fidem Jesus Christi, vt
a lege eos tollat, and in sola fide Christi eos constituat: The Apostle many
ways proves, that righteousness and salvation is both to Jews and Gentiles
alike, not by the Law, but by faith of Jesus Christ, that he may withdraw them
from the Law, and settle them in the only faith of Christ. And after, in the
very beginning of his exposition, upon the third Chapter of the Epistle unto
the Philippians: Lombard. in Epist. ad Philip. c. 3.
Contra Pseudo-apostolos eos monuit, ne legalia ab eis recipiant, sed fidem
Christi solam sufficere credant: Against false Apostles he has admonished
them, that they receive not of them precepts of the Law, but believe that the
only faith of Christ suffices.

Yet have we the Doctor of Doctors behind, that Angellical Doctor (for so they
call him) whose words at Rome are Oracles, and his writings, with too many,
have more credit, then the sacred Scriptures. Yet in this, I believe, he will
prove a Lutheran or Caluinist, I know not whether, but sure I am a Paulinist.
Ye shall hear his own words, that you may know I wrong him not. Moralium
legitimus vsus est (says he) vt homo non attribuat eis, Tho. Aquin. 1. Tim. 1.
Ier. 3.
quam quod in eis continetur. Data est lex vt cognoscatur peccatum, Romans 7.
Concupiscentiam nesciebam, nisi lex diceret: Non concupisces, quod dicitur in
decalogo. Notable good counsel it is, which in these words he gives, and
sound and Christian instruction, which I would it were well marked. The lawful
use (says he) of the moral precepts is, when a man ascribes not any thing to
them, but what in them is contained. The Law is given, that sin might be
known, Romans 7. I knew not lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust,
as is said in the Decalog. Now mark the conclusion, which he hereupon
infers. Non est ergo in eis spes iustificationis, sed in sola fide, Romans 3.
Arbitramur hominem iustificari per fidem, absque operibus legis: Therefore,
there is not in them (the precepts of the Law) any hope of justification, but
in faith only, Romans 3. We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without
the works of the Law. I have the more carefully set down his words, because
they are so plain and pregnant for us. For first, he teaches that the lawful
use of the moral Law, is to let us see our sin (not to seek for
justification by it, as after he shows.) And why should we be taught this,
if not to drive us unto Christ? Then also he affirms, that there is no hope
of salvation therein, but in faith only. And that which does much contradict
our now Romish Catholics, he gathers this doctrine of Justification by faith
only, even out of these words of Paul, as we do. How now can we be Heretics,
and your Angellical Doctor a Catholic! No, no, he writes as plainly for
Justification by faith only, as any of us. It is high time the purgers of men's
writings should be set on work, to mend their Index Expurgatorius, that Thomas
may be taught to speak otherwise then thus, or else he will mar all, for he
speaks here not Romish.

For to make it more plain, what he thinks elsewhere too, concerning
justification by works, when duly and indifferently he considers of the word
it self, and examineth that he writes by the true touchstone, one place
more, out of the said Thomas, I trust, shall not be thought tedious. Expounding
the words of S. Paul to the Galathians, Gal. 3.10.
As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse, He shows, the
Apostle speaks here of all works, Aquin. in Gal. 3. Lect. 4.
Ceremonial, or Moral. Opera enim non sunt causa quod aliquis sit iustus apud
Deum, sed potius executiones and manifestationes iustitiae. Nam nullus per
opera iustificatur apud Deum, sed per habitum fidei, non quidem acquisitum, sed
infusum. Et ideo quicunque ex operibus legis iustificari quaerunt, sub
maledicto sunt, quia per ea peccata non remouentur, nec aliquis quo ad Deum
iustificatur, sed per habitum fidei charitate informatum: For (says he) works
are not the cause why a man is just before God, but the executions rather, or
manifestations of justice. For by works is no man justified before God, but by
the habit of faith, and that not gotten, but given. Whosoever then by the
works of the Law, seek to be justified, are under the curse, because by works
our sins are not put away, neither is any justified before God, but by faith
beautified with love. These two sentences of Thomas of Aquine being duly
weighed, do as plainly auow Justification by faith only, and disprove
Justification by Works and our own Merits, as any thing we do say or write:
insomuch, as if he were alive, I make no doubt, but he should be forced either
to recant, or would be accounted a Caluinist, he follows so truly the trace
of Saint Paul's Doctrine herein.

But, what if our Countriman Stapleton be of this mind too? I know that (if
he were alive) he would not say so for any thing, he has always been so
pestilent and perverse an enemy to the same, calling the Doctrine of
Justification by faith only, Stap. Antid. in Act. 15.10. Antid. in To. 3. v. 21.
A most wicked and most pestilent Doctrine. Yea, and elsewhere too, he is
nothing better persuaded thereof, but says, It is impious, and full of shame:
so shamefully does this impious wretch, write of this most comfortable
Doctrine. But we will not move him to say it plainly: we will not stand upon
terms; so he teach the substance of the Doctrine, we will bear with him. And
with a little help he will be brought to that. We will but lend him a Mayor
proposition, much like that which I used in the beginning of this discourse of
Justification by faith only, and he will fit himself of a Minor, and so iumpe
with us in Doctrine. If the Apostle exclude from Justification all works, so
as they have no power to justify, then faith only does justify: but he
excludes all works from having power to justify: therefore faith only
justifies. The Mayor I have showed before, is not to be denied of any
Papists, because that they seek not to join with faith any thing in the
matter of Justification, but only works. As for my Minor, Stap. Antid. in Act.
3.10.
it is granted by Stapleton in the words before alleged, that the Apostle
excludes Works from having power to justify absolutely, that is, to forgive
sins. Thus have we one more on our side then we hoped for, and so may be bold
(I trust) to conclude.

Now, although this cloud of witnesses is sufficient, I hope, to clear us from
any sinister imputation of evil dealing, as if we would teach that is
strange, and not heard of, but of late days: yet we have in this point, a
better testimony then all men can afford us. For the assurance of this
Doctrine is this, that the holy Ghost seals up this confidence in our hearts,
Romans 8.16.
and Gods Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the children of
God, and having received the Sprit of adoption, we are bold to cry, Abba
Father. This, this, I say, is the argument that more persuades the children of
God, then all that men can bring. This argument did so convince even the very
conscience of Saint Paul, Phil. 3.8.9.
That the righteousness of the Law was (as I may so say) but loathsome to him,
in comparison of that righteousness which he longed after by Christ. This
righteousness whosoever has a true feeling of, he does but laugh to scorn the
idle disputations of them, that seek to prove it must be had by Works.

But I am not ignorant, how our Adversaries do what in them lies, to elude
the testimonies of God and all good men, and as much as they can, to dim the
very light of our consciences; that we should not see this comfort. Bell. de
Iustif. l. 1. c 25 Annot. in Iam. 2.24.
And therefore Bellarmine seems to make some answer to some few places
alleged out of the Scriptures and Fathers against them. So do the Rhemists
too, in their Annotations upon the new Testament. But all in vain: the Sun
of truth shines so clear, that all they can do, is not sufficient to dim
the light thereof. For this word, Faith only, being so commonly used as it is,
teaches us, that nothing but faith is that which by our Savior Christ
justifies. For it only cannot be said to do it, if either Law of Ceremonies,
or of the Commandments, the works either of the unrighteous or of the
faithful be joined with it. And therefore, though our Adversaries would
sometime exclude one thing from justifying, sometime another: yet so long as
they exclude not all, but faith in Christ Jesus, from being cause of our
Justification, they seek but to deceive us.

Aug de fide and operibuc. 14. Good works necessary when we are justified.
Aug. de fide and operibus cap. 14.
Yet I deny not, but works, as S. Augustine says, do follow him that
already is justified, though they go not before him that is to be justified.
For they are (as a little before I said out of Thomas of Aquine) the execution
and manifestation of our righteousness, but no causes thereof. In which sense,
the Fathers very often, especially Saint Augustine, in many places having
showed plentifully out of the Apostle, That we are justified by faith without
the works of the Law: Yet withal, he gives us to understand, that, Hoc non
agit, vt percepta ac professa fide, opera iustitiae contemnantur: he goes not
about thereby to make us contemn the works of righteousness, we once having
received and professed faith. No, we (when once we are justified) are Gods
workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we
should walk in them.

Again, they tell us, some of the Fathers speak of faith as it is
Dogmaticall, for our profession or Religion, and that in such sense only they
affirm, Faith only to justify, because it is the true, and not a false faith
that must save. Of which I said somewhat before, when I alleged the words of
Leo, for confirmation of our Doctrine. But yet somewhat more to explane the
matter, we must consider that faith has two respects: Outward Doctrine.
The one as it is an outward thing which is taught, or we may read of it in
Books. That pierces the ears, it has also consent of the mind and
understanding, when we yield to the truth thereof. But this; though a true
faitht yet until it be planted in the heart and believed, justifies not. As
for example, the Devil may and did know the true faith, as when he said,
Jesus, the Son of God, Mat. 8.29. Mark 1.24.
what have we to do with thee? Again, What have we to do with thee, Jesus
of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know what thou art, That holy ome
of God. We read also elsewhere in Saint Mark, Mark. 3.11
When the unclean Spirits saw Christ, they fell down before him and cried,
saying. Thou art the Son of God. And Saint James says plainly, Iam. 2.19.
The Devils believe that there is one God and tremble. But our Adversaries will
grant, that although it is a Catholic faith that the Devils have: yet it
furthereth them not to salvation. That faith in Christ Jesus does justify is a
true faith, that is a true Doctrine; yet no doubt acknowledged of many, that
shall never find with comfort the sweetness thereof. But when this persuasion
is well rooted in the heart, Inward assurance.
so that it makes us to rest and repose our selves upon God, which we call
believing in God, then does it justify. Thus then, although it is most true,
that it must be a Catholic, not an Heretical faith that saves: yet even that
true and Catholic faith does not quicken, it does not sanctify, or justify,
unless to our endless comfort, we receive the same into the heart. And so as
the Catholic faith is only available: so until it be received into the
heart, it helps not, and then it only justifies.

But many things are out of the Scripture objected against this Doctrine,
whereby the simple, and such as are not acquainted with the Word, Heb. 3.14.
neither by long custom have their wits exercised to discern both good and
evil, as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks, may soon be deceived. For to
such as have not judgment to try Metals, even Tin will seem Silver, and
Copper Gold; because in color they are somewhat like. To say nothing of such
places, it may be dangerous in these our evil days, lest thereby some that
desire to know the truth, by the name of Scripture, wrested to a wrong sense,
may be led into error. And yet to speak of every particular place alleged
would be very tedious, for they are many. I have therefore thought good to
draw them into some few heads, and so answering their principal allegations,
it will not be hard to judge of all others also.

I will begin with such Scriptures as seem to ascribe Worthiness unto men.
For out of them does Bellarmine thus gather, Dignum esse praemio, De Iustific.
lib. 5. ca. 2, 3 What worthiness in men. Wisd. 3.5.
and mereri praemium idem sunt: To be worthy of a reward, and to deserve a
reward is all one. And to prove this worthiness in men, he alleges four
places. The first is taken out of the Book of Wisdom, God tried them and
found them worthy of himself. The Book from whence this testimony is taken,
is known not to be Canonical Scriptures, and therefore of no such credit in
Gods Church, as that upon places out of it, we may ground any Article of
Religion. And this answer might serve very well to this objection. But yet
the words themselves do not of necessity prove merit or worthiness of the
works that we do. And that first in respect of the person that tries, the^
also in regard of them that are tried. He that tries his servants, is (I know)
wise enough to examine and spy faults, just also to punish them: But he is
also content to cover with the righteousness of his Son our faults, and to
hide our iniquities, not beholding us, as in our selves we are sinners, Who are
found righteous or worthy. Dan. 9.24.
but as we are in Christ righteous. Then also who are they that being tried are
found righteous? Even they whose debt Christ has paid, for whose sins he
has satisfied, and sealed up, as Daniel says, that they may be no more
remembered, Whose iniquity he has reconciled, to bring in everlasting
righteousness. Of such we see who bring with them nothing whereby they should
be found worthy, but have all from Christ, it is said, he found them worthy.

Other two places he brings for which we are much beholding to him, because
by them we may learn how to answer such testimonies, as seem to ascribe
worthiness unto men. One is out of the answer that Christ makes unto the
Sadduces (a Sect which thought there is no resurrection) who thought to
intrappe him in a subtle question. The question was of one woman that married
seven husbands, who all dying, they would know whose wife she should be at the
Resurrection? To whom Christ answers thus, They who shall be counted worthy to
enjoy that world, Luke 20.35.
and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry wives, nor are married. The
other is much like this: 2. These. 1.5.
That ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also
suffer, says S. Paul to the Thessalonians. Now, who knows not that we may
be counted worthy of that, which in due consideration we cannot be worthy of?
So, that they are accounted worthy, proves not that they are worthy indeed, as
shall, God willing, by and by plainly appear.

The fourth place then must serve the turn, or else nothing is said. That is,
the words of our Savior Christ of some of Sardi: They shall walk with me in
white: for they are worthy. Revel. 3.4.
As if Christ had said, they shall triumph with me, or reign in glory, and
life everlasting, for they are worthy. But what are they worthy in respect of
their work, or for the merit thereof? For if not, it helps not our
Adversaries.

And that neither they, nor any other, No man worthy of eternal life, but
Christ.
that is conceived (as we all are) of unclean seed, can be worthy in respect
of works: I prove thus. No man is worthy of eternal life, in respect of
works, but he who can fulfill the Law; but no man can fulfill the Law:
therefore, by their works no man can be worthy of eternal life. My first
Proposition I prove thus. God himself says to his people of Israel: If thou
keep my Statutes, thou shall live in them. Leuit. 18.5.
In which words, as we see a promise of life, so must we observe the condition
of keeping Gods statutes, if we will look to be partakers of the promise. And
no doubt the Apostle S. Paul, out of these and such like words has learned,
that which he teaches us of the justification, which is of the Law: The man
that does these things, Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12. Deuteronomy 27.26 Gal. 3.10.
shall live thereby. But if the condition be not observed, then mark what
follows, Cursed is every man, that continues not in all the words of this
Law to do them. This continuance in doing the Law, and keeping the Statutes of
God, teaches us neither to be idle, nor evil occupied, and that we must not
swerve, either to the right hand or left, leaving the right path of Gods Law at
any time. For S. James has truly out of this place gathered, Iam. 2.10.
that whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, is
guilty of all. Not because, whosoever breaks one Commandment, breaks all. A
thief, in that he is a thief, is not a murderer, or adulterer: but the
meaning is, he is guilty of transgression, and therefore cannot be saved by
the Law. If then eternal life be promised to them only, that keep the whole
Law, as is proved, much less shall it be merited by any that fulfill not the
same.

My Minor, or second Proposition is, that no man can fulfill the Law. For
confirmation whereof, I mind rather to point unto arguments, We cannot
perfitly fulfill the Law.
then any way to dilate them. First therefore, it is a perfection belonging
only to Christ, to keep the whole Law. He only was without sin, because he
never did transgress: He only could offer the sacrifice of perfect and holy
obedience, so that (in this respect) he only could make the atonement between
God and us. As for his Apostles (though, no doubt, good men) yet they prayed,
Luke 17.5. Mar. 9.24.
as they had good cause: Increase our faith. Help our unbelief. And our
Savior himself taught them, and in them, the perfectest that ever was, Mat.
6.12. Hebr. 7.26.
to pray, Forgive us our trespasses. Our imperfections then being so many, and
so great, Such a high Priest it became us to have, as is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, made higher then the heavens. For but by such
a Mediator, our sins are so great, as that we never could have been
reconciled to God, because we are far from keeping the Law.

Our conscience teaches this.
Secondly, our own consciences will so testify with me herein, and against our
selves, that, I hope, I need not produce much proof hereof. Let us but
examine our selves by that rule, which the Author of all truth gave unto some,
who would get (as our Papists say they can do) eternal life by doing: by
which he meant they should try and examine themselves. Luke 10.25.
Master (says a certain expounder of the Law) what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? 26.27.
And he said to him, What is written in the Law? How read thou? And he
answered, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy thought, 28.
and thy neighbor as thy self. Then he answered him, Thou have said right,
do this, and thou shall live. If, I say, we examine our selves, and try our
ways by this rule (which is a very true rule, and cannot deceive) we will, no
doubt, acknowledge our manifold transgressions. For it is impossible that flesh
and blood, so long as it has within it this bitter root of corruption (which
whilst here we live, will never leave us) should so abandon the love of our
selves, and our own delights, that thereby our love of God should be nothing
hindered. If we consider of our best works, we shall not find such alacrity
and cheerfulness in our selves, as is fit; neither in the work such respect
to Gods will and glory; as we ought to have. So that our conscience must
needs tell us, that, because we are conceived of unclean seed, Job. 14.4.
no man can make us clean: and therefore we must sing that song that they did,
who thus say, We have been as an unclean thing, Esa. 64.6.
and all our righteousness as filthy clouts. And if we make trial of our love
to our Neighbor, he whose charity among us most abounds, will perceive
himself to be of his mind, who said, Proximus egomet mihi: I am nearest
neighbor to mine own self. So shall we be found far short of the duty we
owe, either to God or Man. These things are so plain to such as have any
feeling consciences, as that I need not stand upon proof hereof.

Lastly, the confessions of all the godly, The confessions of the godly. Job.
1.8.
will teach us what we may think of our obedience, and fulfilling the Law.
Job was a good man: None was like him upon the earth, an upright and just man,
one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Yet good Job, as in sundry other
places he confesses himself to be guilty, so in these words: If I would
justify my self, Job. 9.20.
mine own mouth would condemn me: If I would be perfect, he shall judge me
wicked. As if he had said, If I would go about to clear my self, I cannot
do it, I must acknowledge my transgression. 1. Sam. 13.14.
David was a man according to Gods own heart, as Samuel reports: yet, he of
himself, and all other, says, If thou, O Lord, straightly mark our iniquities,
O Lord, Psalm. 130.3.
who shall abide it? That is, none can stand before thee, to justify himself,
if thou pry into their lives to examine their transgressions. The Angel of the
Lord calls DANIEL a man of desires, Dan. 9.23.
God so delighted in him, and loved him: yet he in that notable prayer that he
makes for the deliverance of Gods people, now that the 70. years of their
captivity were expired, as it were, to put God in mind of his promise of
deliverance, confesses not only the sins of their Fathers, of their Princes,
and of the People; Dan. 9.5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11.
but wrappeth himself in that number too, acknowledging that to them belonged
nothing but shame and confusion; to God only mercy and forgiveness. Paul, we
all say, was a good man also, taken up into the, third heaven, and heard words
which cannot be spoken, which are not possible for man to utter: Romans 7.21.
Yet this heavenly man found by the Law, that when he would do good, evil was
present with him: whereby it came to pass, 19.
that he did not the good thing which he would, but the evil that he would
not, that did he, as a little before, the same Apostle has complained. To be
short, S. James was an Apostle of our Savior Christ, Mat. 17.1.
whom he took to be one of the witnesses of his Transfiguration, a faithful
servant of God: yet of himself, Iam. 3.2.
as well as of other his brethren, he has said, In multis offendimus omnes: We
all offend in many things. We, I say, that are chosen of God, we the Apostles
of Jesus Christ, who have received the holy Ghost in some good measure, who are
aided and guided by the grace of God, we all, I say, offend in many things.
Such confessions of the godly, have imboldened the worthy learned Fathers,
Hieron. in Gal. 3.
to say after them as does HIEROME, Nemo legem seruat: No man keeps the Law.
But of that sort I will bring no mo testimonies. Aquin. in Gal. 3. Lect. 4.
The Angellicall Doctor shall speak for all: Implere totam legem est
impossible: It is a thing vnp^ssible to fulfill the whole Law. And thus the
premises being proved, this conclusion does follow, that in respect of works
no man is worthy.

But because Christ says of some of Sardi, that they are worthy, Worthy, how.
Ephesians. 1.4.
there is, no doubt, a worthiness in Gods servants, although in respect of
merits we justly deny it. Therefore, Gods children are said to be worthy,
first in respect of their election, in that God has chosen them before the
foundation of the world: especially, seeing we are chosen in Christ, 11.
in whom only we are found worthy. For we who in our selves are not, yet in him
are found worthy. The meditation hereof made the Apostle not to make reckoning
but of this only, Phil. 3.9.
That he might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness which is
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ. Seeing then we have
all our worthiness from Christ, that we may more earnestly seek to him, it is
needful that with all the godly we acknowledge our own unworthiness. Now,
true it is, Romans 8.30.
that whom God has predestined (and chosen to be his) he also calls (not
only externally by outward means, but inwardly also by his grace) and whom he
calls, he also justifies; and whom he justifies, he also glorifieth: but
yet our corruption being such, as will not suffer us sincerely to follow our
calling, and walk worthy of our profession, our worthiness in this respect
will be found but unworthiness, but as it is supplied by that worthiness of
Christ. Hier. ad Clesiphontem.
Let us therefore harken to that Hierome says, Haec hominibus sola perfectio
est, si imperfectos se esse nouerint: This is the only perfection of men, if
they know they are imperfect. And so may we well say of our worthiness: Herein
we only are found worthy, if we confess our own unworthiness. For as Saint
Augustine writes, August. de Spirit. and lit. cap. 36.
In ea quae perficienda est iustitia ille multum profecit, qui quam long sit a
perfectione iustitiae proficiendo cognouit: He has much profited in this
life, in that righteousness that is to be perfited, who by profiting knows
how much he wants of perfection of righteousness.

Another objection they have out of such testimonies, as teach that God shall
reward every man according to his work. Psalm. 62.12. Mat. 16.27 Romans 2.6.
Reave. 22.12 Bell. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 2 Aug. Confess l. 9. c. 13 How the
godly are rewarded according to works.
Of which sort the Scripture affords us diverse. And out of those words,
Bellarmine draws this Doctrine. Secundum opera sua, id est, vt opera
merentur, According to his works, that is, as his works deserve: I might
answer him with that golden saying of Saint Augustine, Vae hominum vitae etiam
ladabili, si remota misericordia discutias eam: Woe to the life of man that is
commendable, if thou (Lord) setting mercy aside do sift the same. But that
the absurdity of his assertion may the rather appear, it is needful, that if
the reward be given according to the merit of the work, there should be some
equality of proportion, between the work and the reward it meriteth. But
what proportion can there be between works so imperfect as before I have
showed ours to be, and that eternal glory, which is so great and excellent a
reward, that the Apostle describes it in these words: The things which eye
has not seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
ear has not heard, neither can enter into the heart of man, God has
prepared for them that love him? Howsoever therefore Bellarmine dares affirm;
Bell. de. Justific. lib. 5. cap. 18.
That non requiritur absoluta aequaelitas inter meritum and praemium, a perfect
equality is not requisite between merit and the reward (which thing he indeed
barely affirms, without any one testimony of Scripture, or sentence of
Fathers) yet dare I boldly pronounce, that if any man says, that eternal life
is given as works deserve, and yet that there is no proportion between
eternal life, and the work, he speaks most absurdly, making merit no
merit, and deserving no deserving, whereas in all reason and learning, how much
a work wants of the equality with the reward which is to be given for doing
it, so much it lacks of meriting that reward. Very well, therefore S.
Bernard, after he has showed, That men's merits are not such, Bern. Sermon. 1. de
Annunt.
that eternal life is of right due to them, or that God should do wrong if he
so give it not, because even our merits are Gods gifts, and therefore, we are
rather bound to God for them, then he to us, asks this question: Quid sunt
merita omnia ad tantam gloriam? What are all merits to so great glory? As if he
had said, There is no proportion, no equality. This then which Bellarmine
herein has taught, is as absurd, as if a man should affirm, that he does
not sell twelve pennyworth of ware or do twelve pennyworth of work, must be
deemed to have truly deserved twelve pence. I trow, Bellarmine would not well
like of such penny-worthes.

Not as works merit.
One other argument I will produce, which plainly enough confuteth that which
Bellarmine says, that According to the work, must be expounded, as the work
meriteth. Consider of the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, Mat.
20.1.3.5.6,
whereof some went to their labor at the dawning of the day, others at the
third hour, but some were not called to work, before the sixth or ninth
hours, yea other about Sunne-setting, that is at the eleventh hour. The
Master of the Vineyard, when even was come, sent for the Laborers, and as he
promised to the first, paid to every one a penny. But they who came first, 12.
pleaded that they had borne the burden and heat of the day, and therefore
thought as our Papists do, they deserved more then the rest. But the master of
the Vineyard answered, they had their due, and what he promised; if he gave
other more, that hindered not them. Now, I would that our Romish Catholics
would answer truly to this question, If payment should have been made
according to the merit of the work, who deserved most? I suppose they will
answer (for otherwise they cannot truly answer) that they who came first to
their labor, deserved best payment. Yet, we see the last had as much as they.
Therefore it is plain, payment was not made to them, nor shall be to us, as our
work meriteth, but according to promise. For every one had his penny. Hill.
in Mat. Can.
Merces quidem nulla est ex dono, quia debetur ex opere: sed gratuitam Deus
omnibus ex fidei iustificatione donauit. 20.
There is no wages of gift (says Hilarie) for it is due by the work: but God
has given a free (reward) unto all by Justification of faith. The penny in the
Gospel. Prosper de vocat. Gent. lib. c. 17.
Thereby proving that this penny was not as wages, but a free reward, not for
the work but given in promise. Notably therefore, says Prosper (who wrote
about that time, Saint Augustine did) who gathers out of this parable,
Operarios accepisse donum gratiae, non mercedem operis; that these workmen
received a gift of grace, not a reward or wages for their work.

But Bellarmine contending for merits, would feign remove this block out of
the way. He fears lest some of his friends stumbling thereon, should reele
from the Romish Church. He therefore out of Augustine and others tells us,
that denarius diurnus, Bell. de Iustific. li. 3. c. 16: and li. 5. cap. 6.
this penny for the day work, is aequalitas aeternitatis, non gloriae,
equaelitie of eternity, not of glory. But our controversy is not what this
penny is, but in what respect it is given, whether for the worthiness of the
work or not? If he say for the merit of the work, the Parable is against his
opinion therein. If he say it is of promise, as elsewhere he seems to
affirm, we have that we seek. Bell. de Iufic. l. 5. c. 19.
We see (says he) the whole penny given to them, who had not labored the
whole day: and the Lord himself shows in these words, I will give to him as
to thee, etc. that this was done not of duty, but of liberality. Here our
adversary confesses, the reward not to be as the labor merited. Therefore to
omit that needless question what this penny is, let us here remember, that
it is not given for the worthiness of the work. For Bellarmines answer seems
to me much like as if I ask which way I may go to London, and he answer me
it is a fair City. Seeing then the reward is of mercy, and not of merit, let
not us by ascribing that to our works, which is given freely in grace, be
unthankful unto him, who so loved us that he dyed for us, as Saint Hierom
exhorts us, yielding this reason: Ierom upon Gal. 2.
Abiecta est gratia, si mihi sola non sufficit, Grace is but cast away, if it
only suffice me not.

Thus it is plain, I trust, that, According to the work is not as our
adversaries say, As the work meriteth. But because many, even among Gods
people, delighted rather in outward show of godliness, then in the truth
thereof, contenting themselves to bring their offering to the Priest, to wear
(with coming to the Temple) the pauement of Gods house, without any true
devotion, to perform some outward works in observing days and times, and
diet and such like; these words teach us, that the All-seeing eye is not
deceived with such counterfeit holiness, but he looks more narrowly unto the
work it self. Wherein he first beholds the fountain, from whence it
flows, and the root from whence it springs. For as a filthy fountain
cannot yield wholesome waters, nor an evil tree bring forth good fruit, as our
Savior Christ says; Mat. 7.18.
so cannot a man that lies in his natural corruption of the old man, do any
thing that shall be acceptable unto God. The works that come from the Spirit
of Regeneration, he rewards in mercy: the works that are only from the
old ADAM, what show of holiness so ever they have, in Justice he rejects.

Works of the regenerate.
Now, the works that are done by the newborn children of God, savor much
(though not wholly) of the Spirit of regeneration. For they are done with some
cheerfulness, and willingness, though not with such alacrity, as the godly
themselves wish. And this cheerefulesse is a thing well pleasing unto God, not
only in giving to the relief of the needy, Cor. 9.7.
but even in all service that we perform to him. When GOD appointed the
Tabernacle to be made, and people were to bring stuff of all sorts toward
the making thereof, yet might none be accepted unless it were-giuen with a
willing heart. Exodus 35.5.21.22. Ps. 119.108. 1. Chron. 28 9.
And David in that respect commends to God his Prayers: Accept, O God, the
free offerings of my mouth. And teaching his Son how to serve God, he gives
him this lesson: And thou, Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind. This graced the widows
two mites, Luke 21.
because her willingness of heart, caused her to cast into the treasury, that
which she could not well spare, whereas other gave of their abundance.

They also who are regenerate, aim as near as they can, at the right end in
their works. Mat. 6.1.2. The right end of good works.
They do them not, that they may be seen of men, and praised of men, as do
Hypocrites; they respect not their profit, estimation or reputation among men,
neither have any other such worldly respect in framing themselves to obedience.
No, they seek not thereby to satisfy for their sins as Papists do, most
injuriously against the satisfaction that Christ has made, but rather confess
that to be spoken to them which Bernard says: Peccata tua maxima sunt and
nimium multa: Ber. in Cant. Sermon. 38.
nequaquam pro tot and tantis etiamsi te excories, potes satisfacere. Thy sins
are very great and very many. Thou can not satisfy for them being so many
and so great, though thou would flay off thy skin. Their chief care in
performing their obedience, is That their light so shine before men, Mat. 5.16.
that they seeing their good works, may glorify their Father which is in
Heaven. And although they desire earnestly with such alacrity to serve GOD:
yet find they that most truly Saint Augustine writes, Aug. de peccat. merit.
and remiss. l. 2. cap. 7.
alluding to that place of, 2. Cor. 4.16. Profecto qui de die in diem adhuc
renouatur, nondum totus est renouatus, and in quantum nondum est renouatus, in
tantu^ adhuc in vetustate est. Surely, he who is yet day by day renewed, is not
as yet wholly renewed, and in as much as he is not renewed, he is of the old
man. Whereupon he also infers, Proinde ex hoc quod in vetustate sunt,
quamuis iam baptizati, ex hoc sunt etiam filij seculi. Therefore in as much as
they are of the old man, though they be baptized, yet they are herein the
children of this world. And what perfect or unstained work, the children of
this world are like to do, it is not hard to guess. Seeing therefore, our new
birth is here never perfited, Our new birth he^: not perfect.
we cannot so apply our selves to serve God, as that in respect of our service,
we dare stand as just before God: but with good Bernard, we must cry; Meritum
meum miseratio Domini: Ber. in Ca^t. ser. 61. Ber. in Ps. Qui habitat, ser. 15.
Ber. in Ca^t. ser. 67. August. de Sancta Virginit. c. 32.
My merit is the Lords mercy. Hoc enim totum est hominis meritum, si totam spem
suam ponat in eo, qui totum hominem saluum fecit? For this is all man's merit,
if his whole hope be only in him, who has saved the whole man. And, Deest
gratiae, quicquid meritis deputas: Whatsoever thou give to merit, thou take
from grace. Therefore, with Augustine also we think, that, Enumerationi
meritorum, praefertur confessio peccatorum, Confession of sins is better then
reckoning of merits. Out of all which, it is plain, that according to the
work, is not as the work meriteth (for our works cannot merit so great
blessing) but according to the nature of the work: which if it be a fruit of a
good Tree, what wants in the goodness of the fruit it self, is in Christ
fulfilled, in whom we and all that we do are accepted.

And the light of this candle, also discovers that most impious blasphemy of
the Church of Rome against God, and their treachery against men: who these
many years deceiving the world, made them believe, that the Pope can pardon,
Pardons and Popish Satisfactions.
and Priests can satisfy for men's sins. The gain that thereby they have
reaped, is very great (if such wicked getting may be called gain.) For
neither does Pope pardon, nor Priests pray, unless they be well hired. And
whosoever has store of treasure, may in that Romish Church be bold to sin,
seeing the Pope has Pardons enough, and Priests can patter out heaps of
prayers: But woe to poor souls that have no money to buy such merchandise.
With such trash the sacred Scriptures are not acquainted, neither have they
been of any antiquity, as our Adversaries are forced to confess. Durand. l.
4 did. 20. quaest. 3.
Of Pardons we cannot say much (says one of them) because the Scripture
speaks not expressly thereof. John Fisher our Countryman, sometime Bishop of
Rochester, acknowledges that the use of Pardons and Purgatory, Admodum sero
repertus est, is very lately found out. Artic. 18. cont. Assert. Lutheri.
But these words unanswerably confute that impious doctrine, so injurious to
Christ his death and passion, God shall reward every man according to his
work, I say, his work, not other men's works. For as S. Paul says, 2. Cor.
5.10.
We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he (not
another) has done, whether it be good or evil. It is therefore a far more
Christian lesson, to learn out of these words, Ephesians. 2.10.
because we are Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has ordained, that we should walk in them; Gal. 6.10. 1. Pet. 1.17.
while we have time to do good unto all men, as S. Paul exhorts us, and to
pass the time of our dwelling here in fear, as S. Peter wills: then so to
puff up our selves with pride of our merits, as if we had some good in us, 1.
Cor. 4.7.
that we have not received, as the Apostle vpbraideth the Corinthians.

Thirdly they object against this doctrine of Justification, such Scriptures as
promise unto works eternal life. Revel. 7.14. Promise of life eternal.
These are they (says Christ) which did come out of great tribulation, and
have washed their long robes white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are
they in the presence of the Throne of God. 15. Mat. 25.34 35.
Of this sort also is that: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world: For I was hungry, and ye
gave me meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye
lodged me, Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 5. cap. 3.
etc. It seems Bellarmine reposeth in this argument much confidence, as did
that great Goliath the Philistine, in his great strength and mighty weapons. But
not every promise of reward, proves that the thing, whereunto it is so
promised, deserves the reward, Mat. 5.10.
which our Adversaries are to prove. Blessed are they (the Truth himself
tells us) which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of heaven. And yet the Apostle S. Paul counts, Romans 8.18.
That the afflictions of this present life, are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto us. Neither does the Apostle take upon him to control
that, which Christ affirmed. For Christ speaks of a reward which shall be
given in mercy: S. Paul tells us, that eternal life cannot be gotten by
merits.

Mat. 10.42
Likewise, Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water only, to one of these little
ones to drink in the name of a Disciple, verily, I say unto you, he shall not
leese his reward. Upon which words the Author of the imperfect work in
Chrysostom, Author oporis Imperf. hom. 26.
writes thus: Non quia aliquid est quod dat, habet mercedem, sed quia magnus
est propter quem dat: He has his reward, not because it is any thing that he
gives, but because he is great for whose sake he gives it. And Leo a Pope,
handling the same words too, yields this reason, why a cup of cold water, a
thing of it self very mean, should have promise of reward, says thus: Quae
per se vilsa sunt, fides efficit pretiosa: Leo sermon. 6. de quadrag. simile ser.
4. and de itiun. ser. 3.
Things base of themselves, faith makes precious. But to this end, that which
before I spoke of the works of the regenerate tends. For let a man, not
regenerate, offer many times of (I say not cold water) but of most precious
liquor, to what use, or to whom he will; yet cannot he hope for any reward in
heaven. For it is faith that purifieth our hearts, and also teaches us to
depend upon the goodness of God, framing our hearts unto obedience, and
seasoneth our offerings and all that we do. It is faith, I say, that taking
hold of the promises, looks in all our works, not what we do, but what God
promises. August. in Psalm. 32.
Non aliquid Deo dedimus and debitorem tenemus. Vnde debitorem? quia promissor
est. Non dicimus Deo, Read quod accepisti, sed, Read quod promisisti: We gave
nothing to God, and he is become our debtor. How is he our debtor? Because he
is a promiser. We say not to God, Restore what thou have received, but, Pay
that thou have promised. And again, Fidelis Deus, qui se nobis fecit
debitorem, August. in Psalm. 109.
non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed tanta promittendo: God is faithful who
has made himself our debtor, not in taking any thing of us, but in promising
so great things to us.

We therefore confess, that eternal life is a reward given to good works,
but not in respect of the merit of the work, but in regard of the promise,
which he that is faithful has made. A servant is hired to do his Masters
work, he agrees of his wages, and takes the work in hand. But his Master
often finds fault with his negligence, want of skill to work as he should, or
other wants, whereby his work he finds not well done, which he also might,
if he would, allege, as not being bound to pay for that is not done, or is
evil done. Yet his Master pays him that he promised; not because his work
deserved the wages, but because he promised him so much, and was not willing to
remember all the faults, that were in the work. Even so is it with the best
servants that God has. Our service is far short of that it should be: yet
God, for Christ his sake, pardons our wants, accepts our good endeavors,
and because he is faithful, is as good as his word and promise to us.

A fourth objection they have, out of such places as testify of the innocence
of Gods servants. And they are of two sorts. For the Prophet David does very
often by that argument crave aid of God, Psalm 7.8.
because of his innocence and righteousness. Judge thou me, O Lord, (says he)
according to my righteousness, and according to the innocence that is in me.
Psalm. 25.21.
Again, Let my uprightness and equity preserve me. Whosoever reads the book
of Psalms, shall find this very common. Innocent herein, not simply
But out of such prayers, no man may conclude, that David pleads righteousness
before God, or merit of works. He only alleges, that in this point he was
righteous, that he had given no just cause to them, why they should so
persecute and pursue him, and seek his life. Therefore he complayneth, that
they hate him without a cause, Psalm 35.19. Psalm. 69.4.
and make him restore the thing he never took. Infinite such places are in
Scripture, whereby it plainly appears, what innocence or righteousness the
Prophet speaks of. Not that he is just before God: but that men deal
unjustly with him. And this is no good argument: David says, he is righteous
in respect of his adversaries malice against him: therefore he pleads his
justice before God himself, or that he is simply or altogether righteous.

But sometime also righteousness is ascribed unto men here upon earth. As
among sundry other to Zachary and Elizabeth, of whom S. Luke writes, Luke 1.6.
Innocent, in comparison of other.
Both were just before God, and walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord, without reproof. S. Augustine handling this very history, does
truly teach what justice they had, as elsewhere, so namely in these words:
Secundum quandam inter homines conuersationem laudabilem and probabilem, Aug.
cont. Pelag. and Celestin. l. 1. cap. 48.
quam nullus hominum posset just in quaerelam vocare: They were just in regard
of their conversation, commendable and allowable, such as no man might justly
complain of. And after he brings the example of Paul, Phil 3.6.
who according to the righteousness that was by the Law, was without reproof.
And yet this righteousness he accounted dung, and loss, In comparison (says
AVG.) of that which he hoped for.

And because the Pelagians pressed him with an authority out of Ambrose, to
prove that a man might in this life be perfect, he shows what mind S. Ambrose
was of for that point, alleging some words of his out of Ambrose his
Commentaries upon Esaias, which book is not now extant (that I have seen)
although here and elsewhere, S. Aug. make mention thereof. And Ambrose himself
refers us also to that book; Amb. in Luc lib. 2.
The words alleged are these, Multi sunt perfecti in hoc mundo, qui si
perfectionem veram respicias, perfecti esse non possunt: Many are perfect in
this world, who if you look to true perfection, cannot be perfect. Whereupon
also S. August. does thus conclude, Item immaculati sunt multi, quum si
minutius excut^as, immaculatus esse nemo possit, quiae nemo sine peccato: Many
also are undefiled, when as if you sift the matter narrowly, no man can be
undefiled.

Notably also for this point writes S. Ambrose, by occasion of those words of
the Apostle. Let us as many as be perfect, Phil. 3.15.
be thus minded; Ambros. in Ep. ad Phil. cap. 3.
Ad comparationem caeterorum qui res diuinas negligentius curant, perfecti
dicendi sunt, qui adhibita solertia perfectionis it er ambulant: In comparison
(says he) of such as are negligent in heavenly matters, they may be called
perfect, who are careful to walk in the ways of perfection. S. BASIL
expounding these words of the Prophet DAVID, Judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, Basil. in Psalm. 7.
and according to my innocence that is in me, takes innocence to be
simplicity, or want of experience, whereby men fall into many inconveniences:
And righteousness he interprets to be such justice, as is hominibus
comprehensibilis, and possibilis his qui in carne viuunt: Such as men may
attain to, and is possible for them to have who live in the flesh: and thus he
frames that prayer: Ad librilem humanae fragilitatis iustitiam meam appendens,
ita me iudices: Waighing my righteousness in the wayscales of man's frailty,
judge me after that manner. By all this it does appear, that though some are
commended in Scriptures as just men: yet perfect righteousness (which only can
stand before God) none can attain unto. For, Hier. cont. Pelag. l. 1.
Cunctorum in carne iustorum imperfecta iustitia est: The perfection even of
all just men, while they are in the flesh, is imperfect, as S. Hierome says:
but imperfect righteousness cannot merit eternal life: therefore no
perfection that man has here, can merit that life.

This, which I have already said, I would have thought a sufficient answer to
those Scriptures, wherein some are commended as just: but seeing some contend
to establish a greater righteousness in us, then we can have, I am forced a
little further to look into this matter. Kemnitius, a great learned man,
Popish impious speeches of Merits. Kem. exam. part. 1. page 211.
who has most learnedly examined those wicked decrees of the impious Council
of Trent, tells us, that Lindan, no small fool in the Romish Church (
Reuerendiss. Episcopus Traiectensis, he is called) is very angry with some of
his fellows, for affirming, that God of his clemency and goodness rewards
our good works, to which he teaches a reward to be due for the worthiness
thereof. Andradius Paiuas, I am sure, Andrad. Orthod. explicat. lib 6. page 518.
dares and shameth not to write, that the joy of heaven, which the Scripture
calls the retribution and reward of the righteous, is not so much given them
of God freely and liberally, as it is due to their works. And as the Apostle
S. Paul proves our Justification by grace, Romans 4.4.
because otherwise it should rather be of debt then of favor (and the reward
and grace, says he, are quite contrary) so dares this man (because eternal
life is in Scripture called a reward) gather this doctrine most false, Page
519. Page 522.
That it ought not to be imputed according to grace, but as a debt. And not
long after he reproves Kemnitius, for finding fault with the Censurers of
Colen, for writing that God set on sale eternal life. And not much unlike is
that, Cens. Colon. explicat. Dialog. 5.
which they of Colen teach, That by grace there is in our works an
infiniteness, that they being somewhat helped by that gift (of grace) do
worthily merit eternal life. So that we see, they imagine, any little help
will serve the turn: A plain proof, that their study was more how to defend
their doctrine, then in sincerity to examine themselves, how unable they are
to keep Gods Law, so as they may merit eternal life thereby.

A man may justly wonder, how any that has any feeling of his own frailty, or
any knowledge of Gods word, can be so besotted, as to teach that which is so
contrary to that every one of us do, or justly may feel in our selves, and so
directly against most manifest Scriptures. Is any of them better then he, who
said, no doubt as well in respect of himself, Job 15.14.
as of others, What is man that he should be clean? and he that is borne of a
woman, that he should be just? Are they more righteous then David, who
confesses, that if God enter into judgment with his servants, Psalm. 143.2.
no flesh living shall be justified, or found righteous in his sight? Are they
holier then he, who said, Dan. 9.5.
We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and done wickedly, yea, we have
rebelled and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments? Are they
of greater power to resist sin, then Paul, who said, Romans 7.19.
I do not the good thing that I would, and the evil which I would not, that
do I? I think, they dare not for very shame, to match themselves with these
men, that had so great testimony of their sincerity from God himself; at the
least they will not prefer themselves. How then dare they so stand upon their
merits, seeing these godly men have no trust in their works, but so wholly
disable them?

Neither is there in the Scripture any thing more plainly delivered, any
Doctrine more often taught, Scriptures are against doctrine of merits. Tit. 3.5.
then that which teaches us to deny our merits, and to rest only upon Gods
mercy in Christ for the forgiveness of our sins. Not by the works of
righteousness which we have done (says Saint Paul) but according to his
mercies he saved us. And again, God has saved us, 2. Tim. 1.9.
and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through Christ Jesus
before the world was. And again, By grace ye are saved, through faith, Ephesians.
2.8.9.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any
should boast himself. And infinite testimonies tending to this end (if it were
needful) might be brought, proving plainly how little we may rest upon our
merits, and how little soundnes is in our works, and therefore also showing
how little cause our adversaries have to write that eternal life is due to
good works not of mercy, but of merit, as LINDAN, ANDRADIVS, and the Colen
Censurers do teach.

The reason of this conceit they have of their works, is because they suppose
none but great sins hinder our perfection. Leuicula vitiola (Kemnitius
alleges out of Lindan a Popish Bishop) Asspergines and naeuuli sunt, qui
perse non maculant nec contaminant, Kem. exam. part. 1. Venial sins they
lightly esteem.
sed quasi puluisculo leuiter aspergunt vitam Christianam, vt nihilominus tamen
per se sint perfecta, and vndique immaculata renatorum opera in hac vita.
Which, if they be the words of Lindan, he uses so many diminitiues to lessen
and make nothing our breach of Gods Law, as thereby he shows himself to be a
very graceles wretch, without any feeling of the burden of sin. They are in
English thus: Little, light, petty sins, are as sprinklings and small
stains, which do not of themselves blot or defile, but as it were with small
dust, do lightly sprinkle a Christian life, so as, notwithstanding the works
of the regenerate, are of themselves perfect, and every way undefiled. Indeed,
Andradius too, though not in such scornful terms (as I may well call them)
teaches the like Doctrine: Andra. Orthodox. explicat. l. 5.
Peccata (says he) in quae iusti quotidie labuntur, iustitiam euertere nullo
pacto possunt, ac proinde neque perfectam and absolutam legis obedientiam
quoquo modo impedire: The sins whereinto even the just daily fall, can by no
means overthrow righteousness, Cens. Colon. explicat. errorum Dialogi. 5.
and therefore cannot any thing hinder the full and perfect obedience of the
Law. The Censurers of Colen also, though not so vnmodestly, yet as untruly as
Lindan, affirm, speaking of venial sins, that Leuia illa nec impios, nec
malos efficient, nec operum nostr^rum obsunt efficaciae; Those light sins
make men neither wicked nor evil, neither do they hinder the efficacy of
their works.

Which their Doctrine, to be most absurd and false, we may prove by many
reasons, The least sins hinder our obedience and stain it.
as first thus. Every breach of Gods Law makes our obedience imperfect: but
every venial sin is a breach of Gods Law, therefore every venial sin
makes our obedience imperfect. My Mayor I would think should need no proof
seeing that where breach of a Law is, there is not absolute obedience to the
same. And Saint James tells us, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, Iam.
2.10.
and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. But that every venial
sin is a breach of Gods Law, is plain. For if there be no breach of Law,
then is not forgiveness needful: but forgiveness is needful for the taking
away of venial sins, as is most manifest by that place of Saint John: If we
acknowledge our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.8.9
he is faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Whereby we understand that the sins that Saint John
speaks of, are by forgiveness to be done away. And that he speaks of
venial sins, not only Andradius, Paiuas does testify, Andro. Orthodox.
explicat. lib. 5. page 421. Bell. de Amiss. great. l. 1 cap. 6.
but Bellarmine also in plain words. So that by two witnesses of good credit
among our Adversaries, it appears, that venial sins are no otherwise taken
away then other sins are, and therefore that our perfect obedience is by them
so hindered, as that it cannot stand before the just Judge.

Again, whatsoever sins are short of that obedience that God commands in
this Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
with all thy soul, with all thy might: are hindrances unto the perfection of
obedience: but the sins which they call venial do that (for in committing of
them our whole heart, mind and soul is not bent to observe Gods Law)
therefore such sins are a hinderance to our perfect keeping of the Law. But to
be short: If venial sins be no transgression of Law, they are to be much
blamed that call them sins: (For where there is no Law, there is no
transgression) but if they be a breach of Law, as before I said, they are of
the nature of sins, and unless they be pardoned, shall also have the reward
of sin.

The godly fear their venial sins.
But what seek I to prove that, which every man's own conscience (if they be
not too much besotted) will tell them? Was it not venial sins as our
Adversaries account, that made Paul cry out as he does: O wretched man that I
am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He could never have said of
himself as he does, of being without reproof concerning the Law, if he had
been stained with notorious and such as they call mortal sins. And shall
Paul be so scarred with venial sins, and can we imagine they make us
nothing the worse? How much better were it for us with good Bernard to
confess: Passio tua vltimum refugium, Ber. in Can. Ser. 22.
singular remedium. Deficiente sapientia, iustitia non sufficient,
succumbentibus sanctitatis meritis illa succurrit. O Lord, thy passion is my
last refuge, a singular remedy. For when wisdom wants, Justice suffices
not, and merits of holiness fail, that helps. And thus I trust it does
appear, that howsoever our Adversaries teach of venial sins (which they
confess are in the godly) yet are they such stains in the garment of our
righteousness, as are not to be shaken off with every knock of the breast, or
washed off, with sprinkling a little holy water or other such like tryfling
devices. No, no: unless this our garment be dipped in the blood of Christ and so
made white, it will ever appear defiled.

A fifth objection. They tell us that eternal life is called a reward, great is
your reward in Heaven. Mat. 5.12.
As before in answering their third objection, I said, that not every promise
proves that which is given, to be merited by the work: so here I do auerre,
How life eternal is called a reward.
that the calling of eternal life a reward, does not euict, that it is given
in regard of the worthiness of the work. If you demand, why it is then called
a reward: I answer, It pleases God not only to acquaint us with his will,
that we may know what is good and what is evil: but also by many arguments
sometime of his power, sometime of his Justice, sometime of his goodness to
move his people to obedience. To them therefore, that with more alacrity, Gal.
6.10.
While we have time to do good unto all men, as the Apostle exhorts, he
tells us that our labor shall not be without reward. The like argument does
the Apostle use to the Corinthians, 1. Co. 15.58
Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, abundant always
in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

But eternal life is called a reward: Be it so. It is also called a Kingdom,
Mat. 25.34
and that prepared for Gods servants from the beginning of the world. If
prepared so long since for them, then not bestowed for the worthiness of their
work. If a Kingdom, it is an inheritance, that is given by grace (for we are
sons by adoption) heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. Or else by
election we have this inheritance. Romans 8.17.
For no man is elected to a Kengdome in regard of his merits, especially, so
long before he can do any thing for it. Coloss 3.24.
The Apostle calls it a reward of inheritance. Ye shall receive a reward of
inheritance (says he.)

Howsoever, therefore it is called sometime a reward, yet is it a reward that
is promised, Gal. 3.29. Bell. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 18.
and therefore Saint Paul says, We are heirs by promise. And therefore
Bellarmine himself confesses, that remota promissione, non tenetur Deus
acceptare opus nostrum ad mercedem: taking away the promise, God is not bound
to accept our work, to reward it. Now if a father promise his son, being yet
but a child both in strength and discretion (and such children are we in
heavenly matters) a great reward, if he do some small matter at his
appointment, yet such as he knows passes either his ability or skill:
whether shall we say when this recompense is given, that it is of promise or of
duty? The son indeuoureth as well as he can to do it, and with much ado
with continual help of his father, he does it at length in some sort. I hope
no man will say his work deserved it. For the Father promised much for a small
matter, he helps his son to do it, and bears in the end with many
wants: even so God for the little that we can do promises much, and that we
do has many imperfections too. Can we then think of merit? Ber in Cant.
Sermon. ^7.
No, no, the Spouse of Christ does then show her self to be more full of
grace, when she ascribes all to grace, knowing her part is first and last.

Luke 17.7.
But against the meriting of the reward, that parable in S. Luke is most plain.
A servant ploweth, or does any other work in the field, when he comes home,
his Master bids him not sit down, but wills him to dress meat, and give
himself, and wait and serve him: teaching us that we have no time to bestow
otherwise then upon our Masters work. Ambros. in Luke 17. Theopilact. in Luke
17.
We must always while we live be doing, says Ambrose. This Parable shows
(says Theophilact) that a man must not be proud of any good work: no, neither
yet in the fulfilling of all the Commandments. For the servant must do what
his Master commands, neither must he ascribe it to himself as a good work.
Ambros. in Luke 7. Dionis. Carthus. in Luke 17.
And Ambrose gathers the same lesson too. Let no man glory of works, for we
owe our service to the Lord. So does the Carthusian also. The servant is tied
to this, and after his work in the field, he must labor in the house that he
may daily be laboring.

It being thus, let us consider of the conclusion of the Parable. So likewise
ye, Luke 17.10.
when you have done all things which were commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants, we have done that was our duty to do. Hieron. ad
Ctesiphontem. Theophil. in Luke 17. No merit in this work.
If that servant were unprofitable that did all (says Hierom) What shall we
say of him that could not do it? Theophilact also in like manner. If when we
have done all the Commandments, yet we have no cause to think well of our
doing, how greatly do we sin, when not doing the greatest part of Gods
Commandments; yet we are proud of our doing? The Carthusian likewise: If they
must account themselves unprofitable servants, who have fulfilled all the
Commandments: what shall we do, who in so many things transgress, and so
imperfectly perchance keep that we keep, that as the Prophet Esai says, all
our righteousness is like a filthy clout?

But Bellarmine tells us, De Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 5. Bernard. de tripl.
custodia. Bernard. de precepto and dispensatione.
that Christ so concludes to teach humility. I answer with Bernard, Sane
propter humilitatem, sed numquid contra veritatem? True indeed for humility:
but is it against verity? He also elsewhere thus speaks to that servant: You
are free from duty, but not glorious by merit: You have escaped punishment, but
have not gotten the crown. The Parable teaches us, that all we can do is
duty, therefore we may not think of merit: because, whatsoever we are able
to perform at any time, in any place, by any means, we owe all that service
to God.

Lastly, I come to those words of James, in show as contrary to Saint Paul as
can be; yet because they both had one teacher, both were guided in writing by
one Spirit, and were both of one faith and Religion, we are sure both teach one
Doctrine. Romans 3.28. Iam. 2.24. What Justification is by works. Jude 4. Aug
lib. 83. quaest. 76. and de fide and operibus cap. 14.
And yet Paul says, We are justified by faith without works. James says, We
are justified by works, and not by faith only: and both these are most true.
For if we speak of the cause of Justification, then must we hearken to Saint
Paul, who teaches, that is by faith without works. But, because many turning
the grace of God into wantonness, gathered out of the Apostles words that so
they believed, they needed no regard or care how they lived, as Augustine says
in more places then one: Therefore Saint James teaches, how men shall know that
we are justified, and what manner of faith this true faith is. For faith
without works as it is not a true, or living, but a counterfeit and dead
faith, so it avails nothing to Justification.

So that the word of Justification has not the like signification in S. James,
that it had in S. Paul. For in S. Paul it is taken for our justification before
God, as in the beginning I have declared plentifully. And in S. James it
signifies that Justification before men, whereby we are known to be
righteous. S. James his words tend to that end: Iam. 2.18.
Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.
He would have a faith showed to men, which cannot be but by works: for works
are the touchstone, whereby a true and lively faith is discerned from a false
and dead faith, when oportuniry is offered to us, to bring forth that fruit.
Otherwise the faith that many speak of, will prove no better, scarce so good,
Verse. 19.
as that the Devils have, who believe and tremble. Therefore as S. Peter
exhorts us to beautify our selves, with that better then any golden chain
of Christian virtues, which will make us neither idle nor unfruitful, 2 Pet.
1.8.
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, so does S. James give them of his
time to understand, how they have mistaken a bare name of faith and knowledge
of Christ, for an effectual and a justifying faith.

He therefore speaks in this sort: Thou say thou have faith: I see it not,
for thy works show no such matter. Prove then before men that thou have this
confidence in God, that thou have this assurance within thee, of thy atonement
with him. Primasius who wrote about 1100. years since, so expounds these
words, reconciling that which seemed to be contradiction in the Apostles S.
James (says he) speaks of the works that show a man to be faithful,
Primas. in Romans cap. 3.
as himself in that which follows, expounds it: Show me by works thy
faith. It is works whereby faith is known. Venerable Bede also is of that
mind, Bid upon Iam. 2.
that James would vt fidem suam per opera probarent: That they should prove
their faith by their works. But Thomas of Aquine the Angellicall Doctor, whose
authority in the Romish Church will bear the sway, will loose this knot. For
reconciling those words of PAVL. Gal. 3.11.
No man is justified by the Law, with these words of James, Iam. 2.21.
ABRAHAM was justified by works: He tells that the justification that is of
works, is an execution or manifestation of righteousness, whereby he is
showed to be just. And, by and by after: The righteousness before God is in
the inner heart: Tho. Aquin. in Gal. 3. Lect. 4.
but the righteousness that is of works, that is that makes known or manifest
him that is just: is before men. What can be spoken more plain? S. Paul
teaches how with boldness we may stand before God, pleading not guilty (now
this confidence is always within us) S. James would have this by their fruit
to appear unto others, Lest men deceive their own hearts, Iam. 1.26.
and the Religion of such men prove vain, as himself says elsewhere. Thus
then truly considering, in what sense the one and the other Apostle do take
the word Justification, the difference appears to be none at all, and so the
matter is easily compounded.

And thus I trust it will appear, the premises truly considered, that our
interpretation of the Apostles words, (A man is justified by faith without the
works of the Law) is both true and Catholic: Romans 3.28.
our conclusion, that out of them we gather is sound, and agreeable to the
Apostles doctrine, having a very great consent of most approved antiquity, yea
and of Popish writers too: And our works (how good soever) have not in them
any worthiness or merit, but are in mercy rewarded according to promise. So
that the servant of God must learn with good Bernard, to say; Bern. super
Cantic. ser. 67.
Gratia reddit me mihi iustificatum gratis, and sic liberatum a seruitute
peccati: Grace restores me to my self justified freely, and so delivered from
the thraldom of sin. Luke 2.23.24.
Then shall we sing with that multitude of heavenly Soldiers praising God and
saying, Glory be to God on high. Yea with those many Angels round about the
Throne, Revel 5.11.
and about the Beasts and the Elders, and those thousand thousands, Saying with
a loud voice: Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive power, and
riches, 12.
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise: because, O Lord,
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, 9. Revel. 1.5.
yea thou have loved us, and in it have washed us from our sins. Which
Meditations will teach us, casting off all confidence in our selves, or our
own righteousness, 1. Job. 3.8. Mat. 1.21.
to rest only upon him that came to destroy the works of the Devil, and to
save his people from their sins: who his own self bare our sins in his
body upon the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live in
righteousness: by whose stripes we are healed. To him therefore with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and praise, now and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

