SUTTON'S SYNAGOGVE OR, THE ENGLISH CENTVRJON: Showing the vnparrallelled
bounty of Protestant piety.

BY PERCI. BVRRELL, Preacher at King JAMES his Hospital in the Charterhouse.

Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 12. de Prae. Euan. Concurritur ad loca sacra, quae dicuntur
Synagogae.

PSALM. 112.6. The just shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Printed London, by T.C. for Ralph Mabb.

To the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, To the Right Honorable, Right Reverend, and Right Worthy Governors of
King JAMES his Hospital, my most freely noble, and ever honored Patrons,
Grace and Glory multiplied.
MOst Reverend, and Right Honorable.
As Temples are consecrated to the honor of our great God, so Books should
be dedicated to good men, because both have Altars of intended service, and
gratitude. To your wisdom did our Founder commend his state; at your Honors
feet J lay down these dressings of his memory: Debui quod potu^, non potut
quod ^ebu^. Aug. ep. 28. Hier.
These fruits of a thankful soul, for my free admission into the
Charterhouse, and my freely obtained presentation to a Benefice, may the
Fonuders wealth ouershadow his Preachers poverty. Certes the pious magnificence
of famous Sutton, is a great ornament to our deceased King of blessed memory, a
greater to this age, the greatest to Protestant religion. Jf J for his sake may
hope for any favor, Turn in (my Lords) turn in, and let thousands follow,
while your Lordshipps behold, and dispose That beautiful Chapel, those well
furnished Chambers, those tables, those gowns, those books, our memorable
Founder has purchased, for such aged men, and hopeful children, whose duty it
is to petition the Lord of Lords for the temporal, and eternal happiness of
you our gracious and happy Governors, among those kneeleth,

Your Honors most humble, and devoted Servant in the Lord, PERCI. BVRRELL.

Suttons Synagogue: OR, The English Centurion.
LVKE. 7.5. He has built us a Synagogue.


ANniuersarie Commemorations of Magnificent Founders, are as wch^^ned
Instruments to sound the praises of the Deceased, and as goodly Monuments to
commend unto Posterity the Gratitude of the Living. Exc^^len^^ (...) Father;
Monumenta mem^r^ar^m, (...) ^^^is mo^^^^^^a. Aug de C. D. li. ^ c 2^.
Th^se Solemnities are not superstitions Sacrifices, but pious Records: (...)
L^ctanus D^al. (...).
So that as Toxaris to Menippus concerning the Annual honors done to Pylades,
I may preface to you of this first Stone, or unpolished Pillar, raised or
intended to our SVTTONS honor. We do by Statute celebrate the memory of our
unparalleled Founder: Not to Canonize him for a Saint, but to inuit an
imitation of his blessed Magnificence. For as S^^ ptorum an^^ ad Sanctorum
imitationem ^^^endun ^r. Aug. vbi super.
St Augustine has observed, To commend the Bounty of the Dead, is to spur
up the Liberality of the Suruiuing. Wherefore at length, Awake Organ and
Voice, Old-men and Children, Priest and People, Awake: Let us offer the sweet
incense of zealous thanks unto that God who has appointed his Steward Sutton
to be a nursing Father to the aged, whose state, or bodies have been maimed by
bearing Arms, and as a prudent Mother, to maintain youth in the acquiring of
Arts: To this end are we assembled this day, to this end has Sutton raised
this Synagogue; I must have this day no other Theme, you shall hear no other
note, but Sutton has built us a Synagogue, He has built us a Synagogue.

Difficile est abijs diligi, quos dignitate antecesserit. Hier ep. 9.
It is a point of high difficulty, and therefore of greater honor, to purchase
love of those who are outshined by us in eminent dignity: yet, this can bounty
and gentleness effect; for behold, our Centurion, (whose office it was, to
bridle the insolences of the mutinous Jews, and to rank them in obedience to
the Roman State) even our Captain enjoys favor, and receives honor from a
stifenecked, proud, and rebellious nation. The Elders express the reason in
the former part of this verse; He loves our Nation. Love can command love, and
charity like fire can melt souls frozen in perverseness, or like the Adamamant
can attract hard, and ferreous spirits: for see, the Reverend Fathers of
Israel, tender to the well fare of our Centurions Grome, and those incredulous
Jews, who scorned to petition Jesus for the salvation of their own souls,
are zealous Advocates for the corporal health of the Centurions Servant: the
strongest motive they conceive for the reparation of the temple of the servants
body, is the commemoration of the Masters piety in erecting a Temple, or
building a Synag^gue to the honor of God: so my Text. He^h^th built us a
Synagogue.

Herein observe the 1. Noble Founder. 1. Office, or title, a Centurion, this an
honorable title. 2. Work, a strange work, a Centurion, a Builder. 3.
Expedition, He has built.
2. Sacred foundation. 1. Temple, a Synagogue. 2. Templers, a whole Nation, for
us.



The founder, He.

He, who? is the man of magnificent piete? a Nehemia with a sword in one hand,
and a Synagogue in the other; he who has merited the character, of Dicier hic
est
The man, the founder: He, a Centurion, a Captain of an hundred, but the
chiefest among thousands: He, that C^^taine whose honor it was to have his
Garrison in Capern^^m, the metrapolis of Galile, and which is more, the City of
the great King: Centurio Romanus, and ipse sructut ce^tesi^ t^us Chrysostom st. ser.
102.
He, that good Centurion, the ground of whose heart answered the labor of our
heavenly husbandman, with the happy increase of an hundred fold; He, he was
that Soldier, who did as well follow the Lord of Hoasts, as command men: He,
he who was valiant in the field, and devout in the Temple. Quis non diligat
eum, qui sub paludamento militari, opera agat prophtarum? Hiero.
Oh let us admire, honor, and love that Captain, who in the habit of a
Martial man, performed more then the office of a Prophet required: Here is a
Captain worthy to lead the whole Christian world, for he loved the people of
God, and built a Synagogue for the God of all people.

Altenigina generatione, demesticus operatione princep. militum, socius
Angelorum. Orig. in Math
He, a Roman by generation, by regeneration a Saint; by nation an alien from
the Commonwealth of Israel, by faith a Son of Abraham, a Captain over men,
a Peer of Angels. The less his profession did promise, the greater is the
honor of his devotion: the Soldiers ^^^e i^ to spo ^^^en, and ruin Cities;
but this Captain ^^richeth God, and builds Synagogues.

The Church must be placed upon a high Mountain, that all nations may behold
her glory and fly unto her, but in ^his holy march, Captains must bring up ^he
Vanity, mi^^ary men must be leaders; nor may this ^c^m^ st ange, (...) ^e the
^athers, and they will inform ^^u, that a So^^^^er and a Saint may have but
one (...): so as not Abraham the father of the fa^^hf^ll, a mili^ar^ m^^? was
not David a Soldier, b^fo^^ a Pr^phet or a King? did not he raise that Temple
in his heart, which was after finished by the (...) o^ Sol^^on? Heb. 1^.^^, 3^,
and, 4.
that shall I more say? For the time would fail me, (...) ^ll you of Joshua,
of Gidion, and of Samso^, of Ah^z, and Iehosaphat, who subdued Kingd^^es, waxed
^th^^ in fight, put to flight the armies of ^^iens, conquered thems^^^^s, and
did not only ere^t Altars ^^o, but we e^^uing Temples of the Lord? If you
look into the Gospe^, Luke 3.14.
you may observe the Soldier a more a^tentiue ^^^itor of John the Baptist,
then ^he R^bbie; after ^he ascensio^, you may behold a most ^minent Sa^^ in
C^^tain^ Corneli^s, Acts 10.2.
He was a devout man, and one tha^ ^^red God withal his house, he g^ue much
alms to the people and prayed God always: if we (...) Eccl^^^^^t^call
Histories, we shall find the b^ t^o ^^^^^s, the ^^st ^^n: Iulians thundering
^^gion, Constanti^^ (...) Great, and the victorious as well as pi^^^ Theod^^^
(...) ^rne, ^he zeal and faith of our ^^^^ion (...) ^ethe S^^ne of God with
admiration, Math. ^.^0.
^as St. A^^ustine ex^or^^eth, Christ did ^ug^st ^p 4^.
admire, that is, com^^^nd the piet^ of our Captain: thus we ^e a ^^^^di^^ may
^a S^^nt.

If r^^s^n might ^e p^^m^^ted to discourse of the se^^et one ^ati^^^ (...)
should divine, hat^^ or^^ (...) ^^rdinall virtue, but a principal, a
^undam^ntall grace; therefore Christ entitled a Captain, the strong man, in
one word, he who was a Lamb for me^k^n^sse, was also a L^^n for courage: but
it may^^ you are tired with following our Centurion, therefore I shall now
entreat him to come home to you with an application.

Here we learn, Saints may bear Arms, An observation concerning wars.
and they who bear Arms may be Saints: war is not unlawful, where the
cause of war is just: cowardly and cruel is that opinion of Anabaptisticall
spirits, which condemns war, and damneth the Soldier, for as Christiana
d^sciplin^ bella n^^ culpat om^^. ep. 5, Mer^^llino.
St. A^gustine, Christian religion does not prohibit all wars: elegantty
Nihi^ militants nocet ba^theus. ep.
St. Jerome, The Soldiers belt is no enemy to the sword of the Spirit; the
coat of mayle no super^^d^as to the breast plate of righteousness; nor the
headpiece of steel, any obstacle to the helmet of salvation: hear H^c
reprehendere tit^^dorum est non religiosorum. contra Faust. Mani. c. 74.
St. Augustine again, What is the crime? what is the greatest misery of war?
by an honorable death in the field, to prevent a foul, at best a more
painful death amidst personate mourners in a Chamber? Upon this ground to
censure the military profession, is a character rather of a Coward, then a
Saint. Take away the hunger of rapine, the thirst of revenge, and the
boundless desire of enlarging dominions, A Christian may with as safe a
conscience be a Soldier, as a Minister: Thus we see a Centurion man be a
Saint.

Again, Oh that all Soldiers, The application.
did march under our Centurions colors, for then shall Kingdoms be happy, and
Martial affairs prosper, when devout men are Soldiers, or Soldiers are
devout men; but alas what hopes of vi^tor^, when, as the Armies encounter an
Enemy, so Soldiers war against God, and the crying and unrepented sins of
the people fight against the Souldi^^^? All histories are plentiful in this
point, and St. Ambrose makes it a rule, Ep. 82.
that the sin of the Soldier, sharpeneth the Sword of the Enemy: there was a
time when the evening was a prophet to the following day, Haralds troops
employed their last night in reuellings, and lasciviousness, but the companies
of William of Normandy, did bless their designs with prayers and fasting,
and so became conquerers, Hezekiah, Ahaz, and Iehosaphat, went from the Temple
to the field, or rather made the field as a Temple, wherein they proved
triumphant, not so much by fighting against Man, as by humbling their souls
before the Lord of hoasts: K. Charles.
blessed be our Iehosaphat, who has commanded fasting and humiliation to be
as the Heralds of his no less just, then necessary wars, this point shall
end in a short eiaculation, O thou God of battails, arm our forces with truth,
meekness, and righteousness, then shall their hands do terrible things, and
their feet shall tread upon the necks, of thy Gospels, our gracious Kings, and
these Kingdoms Enemies.

The Centurion has put off his Armor, and now begins to build, here is the
second branch, building, He has Built.

(...). Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 3.
Building must accompany faith, and in this one word of building, we shall
find the several furnitures, rooms, and stoaries of all the duties of
Christian religion, the Apostle is plain, Let all things be done to
edification.

Caeleste adificium dispere gendo construitur. Gr. M. hom. 37.
There is an evident difference, between celestial, and terrestiall buildings;
terrene houses are raised by collecting, heavenly mansions are framed by
distributing moneys, and we may conjecture that our incarnate Messiah, was
pleased to be the putative Son of a Carpenter, that as Christ was, so each
good Christian should endeavor to be an holy builder.

In goodly buildings we must find. A foundation, This is Christ, the living,
the life giving, the chief cornerstone, the foundation of foundations; here
the builder vpholdeth the work, or rather is the basis of his own structure:
would you see how Christ was squared and adapted for this edifice? observe
those no less busy, then cruel laborers, his stony-hearted tormentors; the
rods were as the Masons brushes, the cross the form whereon they carue, and
hew their stones, their hands the mallets, the nails ye thorns, and spear,
the several tools to polish, and fit this stone for a foundation unto our
heavenly Mansion.


The maine Pillar, Hope, the Walls Charity, the Cement the Word preached, the
Windows Knowledge, the Roof Faith.

For the Furniture, the most convenient Hangings, are meditations upon our
Saviors Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and his glorious return to
judgment: the Chayres and Beds, are Love; the several vtensiles, or other
ornaments, are Meekness, Temperance, Patience, etc.

There is a sentence no less famous then difficult concerning the materials of
this building, 1 Cor. 3.13. the Fathers are divided in their dispute, whither
this place concern the doctrine of the Preacher, or the conversation of the
Auditor: (...).
St. Chrysostom is firm for the latter, him I follow, while he writes, that
this text does point at the actions of Christians. now read the words. If any
man build upon this foundation, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13.
Gold, Silver, Precious stones, Wood, Hay, Stuble, every man's work shall be
made manifest.

Gold, Silver, Precious stones,] these are solid, Caietane. in 1 Cor. 3.
glorious, and high prized virtues. Gold, the love of God; Silver, charity to
man; Precious stones, these are the several acts of piety toward God, and
mercy toward man.

Wood, Hay, Stuble,] by these are figured, dangerous sins; Wood is the worms
nest of corroding envy, or malice. Hay, is ambition; Stuble, this is the type
of obstinate schismatics; verse 15.
now follows the knot, the maine difficulty: if any man's work be burnt, he
shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be Saved; but this saving is equal
with damning, so Ambr. in 1 Cor. 3 Chrysostom. in eundem locum
St Ambrose, he shall be saved by fire; his body and his soul shall not be
wasted by the torments of hell; St. Chrysostom proves, what St. Ambrose
affirms: That is said sometime, to be saved, which is not consumed, as gold
in the fire, as the liver in the fable, this this indeed, is the hell of hels,
death without death, and torments without consumption: least this might seem
strange, St. Chrysostom reinforceth his argument, with an excellent
observation from Scripture language: It is the elegance of sacred rhetoric,
to give gentle names to severe punishments, as hell and the grave, are called
the places where all things are forgotten, which at the first view may promise
quiet and the oblivion of all calamities: thus the death of the wicked is
termed a sleep, thus it is said of the wicked, Job 21.33.
That the clods of the earth shall be sweet unto him; here is most bitter and
desperate sweetness: the same Father shall conclude (...). Chrysostom.
he that builds with Hay or Stuble, shall continue in endless torment.
Apply.

Application.
Re^ie ^^^ficare, est ti^ embu^. ^re. Aug.
He builds most fairly, who lives most religiously: pluck therefore the hand
out of the bosom, work and build: the best approbation of our faith, arises
from the operation of the hand; as the curious Artizen, so the religious
Christian, must be known by his handy worl e; divinely Irenaeus Qu^d feris
lucet, in^^ s^t, and quod intus est fori^ luceat. Irenaeus lib. 4.
Let your charity burn within, and holiness shine without; by the former you
shall avoid hypocrisy, by the latter idleness You must all be builders, God
is the Master of the work, all the Sons of men, King, Priest, and People,
must be laborers. Birds make their nests, b^asts have ^^^ir d^^^s; let men
build houses, let them ^^a^e ^u^r^asting habi^a^i^ns, Make you friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that ye may b^ received into euerla^ting habitations: let
us hear the Sermon ^f David to his Princes, Set your heart, 1. Cron. 22.1^
and your sou^^ to seek the Lord your God, Ari e and build: As lively s^ nes,
come ^^e unto Christ the living ston^, 1 Pet. 2.4.5.
that (since you cannot build of yourse ues) you may be built up as a spiritual
house accoptab^^^ Go^ ^y Ie^us Christ. I shall end with the Apostle, Ephe. 2.2^.
The Lord Ie^us build us all together for an habitation of God through the
spirit,

We have a^^^ady seen our ^ounder, as a Captain, and a B^i^der; now behold
him like a Cherubim, ^ith wings over his hands; this you may find in his

Expedition, he Has.

As the Eagle ha^^eth to the pr^y, or the greedy Soldier to the ^poyle, so our
Centurion to the most noble acts (...) piety, Plu^imum tu omni re celeri^as.
Seen. B^^. ib. 2.
sure our leader was one of the R^^^ C^^^res: and it was his honor, for where
the a^^^^ ^igious, there I^h^ his march is most glorious, e^^^dition must b^
comm^^^ab^^, ^^^ncere, Vo en^^s and a^^^^^. ^mb. ^. N^^. (...).
in all c^mmendable, a^tions, the reason is evident: C^l^rity is a fair
char^^ter (...) sincerity, and a quic^e hand is a promising sign of a willing
heart. (...) into the family of Abraham, you shall read h^artinesse in
nim^l^nes: First Abraham runs in per^^n to meet the Angels, Genesis 18.2, 6,
and 7.
then he charged S^^ah ^o make read quickly, then he runs again to the
^^^rd, lastly the S^ruant is as quick (...) th^^ dr^sse; thus we see, (...),
Wi^e, S^ruant, a^^ in Abra^^ms ^^nt are (...) in ^he performance of any service
vn^^ God: I will, is but a large complement, and we know those to be most slow
in performance, who are nim^^e in promise; sweet and honorable is the memory of
this Founder, He did not frame a College in the paper model of a litigious
will, but saw a Synagogue raised at his own proper charge to the glory of God:
so the E^ders, he Has.

The innocent Dove has a nimble wing, so those good souls which are quickened
with that Spirit, who once appeared in the form of a Dove, flee spedily unto
works of piety; the Sun cannot so much rejoice to run his course, as the
faithful to consummate their race of Godliness; the elements, of fire, air,
and water, are active and quick in their motions, so where soever the holy
fire of zeal, the water of sanctification, or the breath of the Spirit are
found, there is a speedy motion: nay even ye dull and lazy earth is moved with
an earthquake, Genesis 49.21. Act. 9.36.
but no terror can stir the earthly minded man; the blessing of Nephthali was
to have the swift feet of a Hind, Dorcas was as nimble as the Roe: Vtinam
precenta faminarum imitarentur viri. Hier.
Oh that good men would imitate the speed of this woman: Solomon says, Be not
slack in thy business, I beseech you be not slow in the business of the Lord:
Prou. 10.26. Leuit. 11.41.
f^r snayles, worms, and creeping creatures were bani^hed from the Altar of
God, to instruct us, that slow paced men can be no pleasing sacrifice for our
God.

To spur up our devotion, let us consider, that God is pleased to pay
magnificently for the expedition of man: Man's expedition, and Gods salvation
embrace each other; for no sooner can the devout soul say, I have kept the
faith, 2. Tim. 4.7.
but he may read, Henceforth a crown of righteousness is laid up for thee;
no sooner can our Savior proclaim, I have fulfilled the will of God, but a
voice is heard from heaven, This is my beloved Son: Luke 9.35.
nor is God more indulgent to the natural Son of his bosom, then to the
zealous, and his adopted sons among the children of men; for observe, Matthew.
19.28
does Peter come unto our Savior and say, We have left all and followed thee?
the blessing is annexed, You shall sit on thrones in the kingdom of heaven:
Nay but impatient incredulity must have somewhat in hand, what would you
expect? will you be content with a thousand for one hundred? this is more then
extortion dare challenge, yet the speedy soul shall have more, even one
hundred for one; Matthew. 19.2^.
one hundred for one, not of corruptible gold, but in the incorruptible
treasure of peace of conscience, and the sweet assurance of heavenly
happiness: Remember Zacheus, Luke. 19.9.
does he come quickly to entertain the Son of God? the sequel is, This day
is salvation come to his house: excellently St. Augustine, Quam suaue mihi
subito carere pe^cati sua^ tatibus. Aug. Confess.
Oh What a heaven of joy is it to be a penitent soul, heartily and spedily to
loath the poysonning sweet of bewitching sins? oh then all you who have that
good ambition to be married unto the Lamb of God, take into your souls, the
prayer of the Spouse, Draw us oh Jesus and we shall run after thee. Cant. 1.4.


Apply, When drunken Archias received intelligence, Plut. Pelopidas.
of treason plotted against his Majesty by Pelopidas, be st^mmerd forth this
reply, Great matters to morrow, and so became a prophet of his own ruin: are
not most of us of the Court of Archias? when the conscionable Minister
informs us of the damnable stratagems of Satan against our souls, we
ordinarily conclude, Great matters to morrow, hereafter may be soon enough.
When unhappy Faelix heard S. Paul's Sermon of temperance and judgment to come,
Act. 24.25.
he trembled indeed, but his conclusion was, Go thy ways for this time, I
will hear thee at some more convenient leisure, thus while the preacher is in
the pulpit, a fit of devotion may be raised in the soul of the Auditor, but
resolutions of holiness must be put off to some other time: so that as
cheating and bankrupt debtors answer their creditors, so most men reply unto
the Spirit, Matthew, 22.5.
come to morrow, or some other time: I have bought a farm, I have married a
wife; profit or pleasure must be observed, God must wayt. Pro. 3.28.
Solomon advises not to hold a friend in suspense till to morrow: Oh be not
less respectfull of thy God, then thou would be of thy friend. That good
God who has promised salvation to him who shall repent at any time, has bound
himself to no time of ^ayting for thy repentance.

We may read of an heretical brood, which were called Clinici, Centur.
their devotions were like themselves bedrid; they would never think of a new
life, before they were in the jaws of death. The whole world is of their
faction, for scarce any think of being holy, or doing good, until there be no
hope of being. Delay in matters of greater moment is accounted dangerous: in
the assuring of our salvation, by the holiness of our conversation,
procrastination may prove damnable; the feet and the heart were Gods part of
each sacrifice, the heart for sincerity, Leuit. 1.9.
and the feet for celerity. If you could consider the greatness of your
journey, even from earth to heaven: and the shortness of your life, which is
called a vaper, James. 4.14.
that appears (...) in for a moment, surely you would gird up the lo^^^s of
your mind, and run with faith and patience the race that is set before you.
Heb. 12.1.
I beseech you mock not God, cheat not your own souls, with the hopes of a
panegyricall, or commendatory Sermon over your hear^e, or with the legacy of an
ambitious doale at your funeral, but while you read this poor meditation,
pray that this may be the hour of your conversion, a living sacrifice, or the
sacrifice of the living is most acceptable unto the Lord. Ier. 13.17.
Oh Jerusalem wash thy heart from iniquity, when shall it once be? I have done
with the Founder: now let us survey, the sacred foundation.

The second general.

A Synagogue] The Temper of the Founder is best discovered in the foundation:
the ambition of Pompei, and the luxury of Lucullus, were presented to the view
of all, by their stately buildings; but our good Centurion will have no other
Monument of his glory, but a place where the honor of God may dwell, a
Synagogue,

(...), is the mother and root of our Synagogue, and has two daughters,
(...), and (...), the former does commend unto us either the assembly of men in
the service of God, Casaubonus exercit. ad An. Bar. 16.
or the union of the soul with God by the participation of the blessed
Eucharist, thus the visible Church is styled, (...), Basil. M. in Psalm. 28.
a visible collection or congregation of men, thus also, (...), is a
conjunction of the soul unto God, as the members are to the head. (...), the
Synagogue was a place consecrated for the assembling of men to praise, and call
upon the name of God.

There were three especial places among the Jews for ye worship of God.

1 The Temple, here were prayers, sacrifices, and sermons. 2 The Synagogue,
here were prayers, and sermons, but no sacrifice. 3 The Schools, here neither
prayers, nor sacrifices, but lectures and disputations.
The glorious Temple was the Cathedral or mother Church, the Synagogue as the
Chapel of ease: it is observed that for one Temple, there were 480 Synagogues
in Jerusalem; I guess one reason may be, that prayers and sermons were more
acceptable then sacrifices.

The especial offices performed in the Synagogue, were these.

Man was instructed. God was honored.
Instruction of men.

Arts and Arms are the equal supporters of great and good Kingdoms, and the
one profession cannot be more dangerous, then the other is labourious. Plutarch
cannot resolve whether flourishing Rome did owe more to the Forts and Walls of
Romulus, or the Schools and Temples of Publicola: surely Athens was more
famous for being the nursery of good letters, then the Metropolis of all
Greece. One special act of renown was performed by Nero, Tacit.
he dedicated a school as Tacitus notes, hoping thereby to raise a monument
of immortal honor to his own name, and no marvel, for what tongue of the
eloquent can sufficiently express the merits of such Heroes who have been
Founders of Schools, 2 Reg. ^0.20.
and Patrons of good letters? beasts may beget beasts, a rural Pagan may be
the father of a man, but to beget, or enlighten a soul, is a work only for
God, Malms.
or a learned professor. Henry Beuclarke was bold to tell William the
Conqueror, that a man without learning, was but a silly beast in a rich
caparison. The memory of good Hezekiah continued among posterities as a sweet
ointment poured forth, for conueying commune waters into the City of Jerusalem:
with what honor shall we crown their names, who have like Caleb blessed this
Island with the upper springs of sacred knowledge in our Universities, Judges.
1.15.
and with the lower of humane and politer learning, in our free schools
throughout the kingdom? So long as there shall be one leaf in any Library,
so long as a stone shall remain upon a stone in our Colleges, so long as
there shall be one man upon the earth, let the memory of our Founders, be as a
banquet among posterities. I am not besides the cushion while in the Synagogue,
I honor Arts, for whatsoever was in the School, was after a most eminent
manner in the Synagogue, but I have stayed too long among the lower forms: Now
we may hear a divinity lecture or a sermon.

Cices.
As the Orator did desire another Crassus to decipher to the life, the excellent
worth of Oratorie, so I confess ingeniously, that I heartily wish some
powerful and eloquent Apollo, would lend me a tongue to speak the admirable,
and soul saving excellency of learned and devout sermons.

As every thing of price, so the knowledge of divine mysteries does require
travail. Prayer, meditation, and song study, are expected in the preacher;
memory, devotion, and attention in the hearer; Hocker. l. 5. Ecc. Pol.
it is well observed by that Oracle of our Church, that we bring not knowledge
with us into the world, and therefore the less opportunities or abilities the
people have in themselves, the more they need the help, and should be
thankful for the labors of learned ministers. Christ was not only the word,
but a Preacher, nor did he only merit the crown, but direct his Auditors in
the way of everlasting salvation. I may compare good sermons, to Moses and
Aaron conducting the Israel of Christians, to the Canaan of heaven, to the
keys of David, to the salt whereby conversation is seasoned, M^th. ^.1^.14. 1.
Cor 1^
or to light whereby the soul is guided: the Apostle has all, It pleased God
by preaching to save them that believe.

God has given the heart, and great is the number of our Synagogues; God has
given the word, and greater is the number of Preachers; but where is the army
of conscionable hearers? Chrysostom.
the obedient son does often visit the house of his father; so the Saint does
frequent the earthly Mansion of his heavenly God: Saluianus. l. 5. Spernitur
Dei templum vt con^urra tur ad theatrum.
but may not the complaint of Saluianus be revived? The Temple of God is
despised, and the stage more honored, Churches are empty but Tauerns, and
Brothel-houses are throngued. A Recusant can have no apology; art thou a
sinner? in the Temple thou shall find a Savior; have thou a bleeding
conscience? here shall thou find the Balm of Gilead; art thou a Saint? here
shall thou find God ready to establish thee, Psalm 122.1.
Oh for the spirit of David, He was glad when they said unto him, they would
go up to the house of God. The way to the Church triumphant in heaven, lies
through the Church militant on earth. I will conclude this meditation with the
word of Jacob which was usually engraven upon the frontispice of ancient
Synagogues, The Temple is the house of God, and the gate of heaven, the
Righteous will enter in and hear what the Lord will say unto him, and meditate
what he shall say unto the Lord; and that is the second benefit of the
Synagogue,

To honor God.

In vain shall the most cloquent Apollos touch the care of man by Sermons,
unless the ear of God be m^^^d for a b^^ssing by prayers. Prayers are the
Alpha and Omega ^f all religious exercises: in sermons God vouchsafes to
sp^a^^ to man, in prayers man is admitted to speak to God; in sermons God
descends unto man, in prayers man ascends unto God Sermons are the seed
from whence g^od prayers spring, prayers are the deaw which make sermons
flourish: wherefore as the two Tables, and the po^ of Manna were in the Arc;
so the Tables of sermons, and the Manna of prayers, are conserved in our
Synagog^e: I dare not adventure upon the copious division of the Apostle, and
show unto you the difference and the excellencies, 1 Timothy 2.1
of prayers, intercession, supplication, and thanksgiving: only thus.

Prayers 1 Supplicat^rie, for blessings to be obtained. 2 Gratulatorie, for
blessings received.


First of Supplication: Supplications are the Jacobs ^ather, where by the soul
mounteth up to heaven, they are the delight of God, and the happiness of man:
zealously to ^eseech, is powerfully to command; thus did Jacob wr^s^le with the
Lord, and triumph, nay the kingdom of heaven inuiteth, and suffers violence,
the p^easing violence of importunate, and strong supplications. The omnipotent
Majesty, whose title is invincible, loue^h t^ ^^e ever come by an Army of
humble suppliance. Would you ^^e vic^orious over your insolent enemies? prayers
are the most prosperous Soldiers: While Moses holds up his hand, the
troops of Amalecke fall to the ground: let us therefore furrow our cheeks
with an inundation of tears, and beleaguer the Lord of Hoasts with our
continual prayers, let our deuoutest supplications, sharpen the swords of our
Soldiers, prosper the designs of our Commanders, beautify the Crown of our
religious Sovereign, and continue a room for every man of this Island to sit
under his own vine: Cry mightily unto God, and pray instantly for the well
fair of Jerusalem. Would you be blessed with the pardon of your sins, with
the hidden Manna of a peaceful conscience, with a crown of eternal glory, or
with what ever the magnificent hand of God can confer? Prayer is the price,
and the Temple the house of prayer. Psalm. 48.9.
We will pray and wayt for the loving kindness of our God in the midst of his
Temple.

Now of Thanksgiving: in the Temple every man speaks of the praise of God,
and no marvel, for as St. Augustine largely, No pen, Aug. ep. 32. it. ep 77.
no tongue can be better employed, then in expressing, no heart, no soul then
in conceiving, the great debt of our thankfulness unto God: such and so
infinite is the bounty of our God, that night and day with bended knees,
inflamed hearts, and well tuned tongues, Arnob. l. 1.
we ought to pay the hourly tribute of our deuoutest praises: What can God do
more, then crown man with loving kindness? what can man do less, then exalt
God with thankfulness? no man so poor but he may, no man so great but he
should offer this cheap, yet precious incense. To this end Altars, Temples,
Synagogues, Churches are raised; to this end man and Angels created, that God
may receive the glory of praises: In all things give thanks, for, 1 Thessalonians. ^.18
therefore was our Synagogue builded. Apply.

The building is a Synagogue. It is not only lawful, but commendable, to call
upon and praise the name of God in our private families, and secret closets;
but the greatest blessings do accompany the sacrifices of a Synagogue, that is
a Congregation. The Lord is in his glory when he is enclosed with the greatest
multitude of petitioners, Oh that men would praise the Lord in the assembly of
the Elders, Psalm. 107.32.
in the midst of the Synagogue.

Again, each soul should be a living, and a holy Temple: God indeed is the
Lord of heaven and earth, and needs not to borrow a Synagogue or house made
with hands, Act. 17.24, 35.
his chief delight is to keep his Court with those, the Chapels of whose
souls are best adorned with charity and holiness, Know you not that your
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 6.1^.
It is the scandal of our times, that some Churches have been turned into
stables, this gangrene is enlarged, and the Temples of our souls are become
the Augean stables of all sinful filthiness; the drunkard translateth his
temple into a swine-styue, the wanton his into a stew, the covetous his into a
den of thieves, the profane swearer his into an ordinary or dycing Room,
where you shall hear no other language but h^^^ oaths; every notorious sinner
is a sacrilegious po^^tor, or destroyer of this spiritual Synagogue, fra^^d by
the founder of heaven and earth. I conclude, Ye are the temple of the living
God, 2 Cor. 6.16.
I shall pray that God may please to dwell with you, to walk in you, that he
may be our God, and we his people.

Now behold the Templer, for Us.

For the hungerpined only to behold plentiful and delicately furnished
tables, or for the extremely indigent only to gaze upon huge masses of
treasure, might rather prove a torment, then a comfort: come therefore now and
let us behold, the blessed union of the Centurions magnificence, and our
happiness. We, we are the heirs of this sacred and ample bounty, He has
built Us a Synagogue.

Us.] The end gives glory to the action, and brings happiness to the agent:
lavish expenses cannot entitle a man liberal, nor rash boldness style any man
valiant; for inconsiderate rushing into dangers is a frenzy, and profuse
casting away of treasures, is frantique prodigality: that bounty is most
honorable, which has the largest, and most religious object. He shows his
bounty to man, and his piety toward God most happily, who does erect a
Synagogue for the people of God.

Us has a fourefold relation. 1 Us Enemies. 2 Us Captives. 3 Us Strangers. 4
Us Of the True Church.


Us Enemies.

Who was not a voluntary vassal, was reputed an enemy to the Roman State, the
greater far the sweetness of our Centurion, to so perverse, so Jewish an
adversary: friendship and kindred make too straight a sphere for charity to
move in; Omnes odit, qui malos odit. Aug. ep.
for he sha^^ scarsely affect any, ^ho embraces only those to whom he is
obliged by merit or by blood: let the memory of this Captain be as an ointment
powered forth, he knew as well how to ^^ercome in love, as to conquer with the
sword. Math. 5.43.
The Jews esteemed it lawful policy to hate their Enemies, but our Centurion
was not sowred with this leven of their doctrine, nor infected with their
practice; it may be he had observed, that the charitable sun did impart her
cherishing beams unto the good and bad, and that light he would follow; he is
an Angel rather then a man, that can overcome evil with good; it was an act
(I had almost said) able to make, surely to snew a God, To love an enemy, so
the Apostle of our God of love, Math. 5.44.
He loved us when we were enemies: ^mitate the Lord Jesus, Bless them that
curse you, Love them that hate you, for this is to be a Son of God, and a
follower of our Centurion.

Us Captives.

Misery and infamy are linked together in the Captives chain; nor is it so
much pity, as pride or covetousness, that does continue life unto the
conquered; it was the barbarous c^stome of the insulting Romans, to drive those
who their sword had subdued, by herds through their City as the sport, and
scorn of women and children, then to sell them as beasts, or which was the
greater courtesy, because the shorter tragedy, to cast them to the beasts,
tumble them into the sea, or set them at liberty by some other death: but it
seems our Centurion was truly valiant, who never knew enemy but in the field,
nor used other bonds in the City, but love, nor other prison, but a Synagogue.
Proper is the doctrine of St. Augustine, We are all members of that large body
of mankind, these lovely titles of neighbor or brother, are not built so much
upon consanguinity, or similitude of shape, as upon the image of God engraven
in our reasonable soul: Have pity upon those who are in bonds. Be kindly
affectionated one toward an other. Romans 12.10.


Us Strangers.

True charity scarce knows the name of stranger; all are brothers, all
children or fellow members in her register: Inuisum hominum genus Tacit.
she does guide the eye, and temper the heart of our Centurion. The Jews are
deservedly called, a Nation hated by all, because spiteful to al; they
esteemed all other people as bastards, and others reputed them as rebels: but
see, no perverseness of nature, no jealousy of rebellion, no nor that
exasperating name of Jew, can abate the edge of truly compassionate love;
Parity in condition should raise a mutual tenderness in affection, we are all
strangers, and without treason it may be printed, Emperors and Kings are but
soiourners even in their own dominions: Let not our love be estranged from
them, who are of a strange Nation. entertain strangers.

Hebr. 13.2.
Us the people of God.

As yet the Jewish Synagogue, was a true Church, and the sons of Jacob, the
royal Priesthood; happy therefore that zeal, which did express piety toward
God, in magnificent favors upon Gods people. Religion has her name for
uniting men's consciences and affections; nor can there be a fayrer evidence of
true religion, then love to the Church. Psalm. 16.3.
All my delight is upon the Saints, was David's note, and his temples could take
no rest, until a place was found for the habitation of God. Brethren, love you
God? honor his servants, repair and beautify his temples: the farewell of
our Centurion, reuiueth that of the Apostle, Do good to all, Gal. 6.10.
but especially to the house, and household of faith: for this is to love the
people of God, and to build a Synagogue.

The Roman Captain is now discharged, and if ever he had a parallel, he must
be raised from our English Centurion, from THOMAS SVITON, our magnificent, and
sole founder.

Thankefully to commend unto posterity, Commemoration.
the famous acts of deceased Worthies, is an office, of as true gratitude, as
great and venerable antiquity: Come therefore now, and let us triumph over
those commune enemies of eminent goodness, Ig^^rance, and Envy: Were it a
point of the same facility, to bury in oblivion, as to lock up in silence, the
ineffable magnificence of our SVTTON, the Auditor or Reader should have had no
subject of his critics from my tongue or pen. but to forget SVTTON totally, is
as impossible as to express him fully; you shall therefore censure me, so you
will honor him: my never yet practiced Panygyricall vein, is more poor in
relation to his worth, then my eleemosinary state in comparison of his wealth.
Tacitus shall be my pleader in his prologue to Agricola, Tacit.
Commend and admire others, Pardon me, while I endeavor to awake our blessed
Founder, and lead him through the five rooms of my text; first you shall
discover, Who and what our Founder is.

He] The builder of the Synagogue a Centurion, our Founder more, a Mr. of the
Ordnance, a Gentleman of Ancient descent, of liberal education, a man rich in
Arts, and famous in Arms; for the former, he was so advanced in good letters,
that he appeared the most complete man of his times, for discharging the office
of a learned, wise, and able Secretary to the most Honorable Peers of this
Nation; and what ability he had sucked from the University in speculation, he
did with credit practice under famous Warwick, and great Leicester. These were
the first paths that lead to Suttons greatness, and our happiness: for his
other honors from Arms, if you observe the time of our Centurions employment
in the field, you may know, there was a time when foreign religion was the
patroness of domesticke rebellion; when two Northern and superstitious Earls
durst display the Romish ensign against invincible Elizabeth: then, then was
this famous son of Pallas advanced to the command of the Ordnance, and gave a
happy probatum of his loyalty, valor, and wisdom; here I suppose he learned
to honor, and resolved to cherish Military men; but you will enquire from what
mine his infinite treasures did arise: I can inform you, from prosperous
merchandising, from the great farm of all the mines about Newcastle, and from
the wisdom of his virtuous fr^gality: of his person I will conclude, in the
encomium of Pammachius framed by St. Jerome: E^eemosynis dives humi^itate
sub^mis. Ier ad Pammachium de obitu vxer^.
Sutton was gentyle by birth, high by humility and which is greatest honor,
Rich by charitable b^unty:

Now to his building, He built.

He was a great and good builder, not so much for his own private, as for the
public; his treasures were not lauished in raising a Tower to his own name,
or erecting stately Palaces for his own pomp and pleasure: the sustaining of
living temples, the endowing of Colleges, the enriching of Corporations, the
building Causwayes, and repairing of highways; Above all, the foundation of
King James his Hospital at his sole and proper charge, were the happy
monuments of his architecture, surely this was to be a Mogarensis in the best
sense, that is to build for ever. He did fulfill the letter of the Apostle in
building Gold, Silver, Peruse our Founders Testament.
and Precious stones; for he commanded Plate and Jewels to be sold, and
converted into money for the expediting of our Hospital.

I shall not mention thousands conferred upon friends, and servants; but these
legacies ensuing merit a lasting memory: in the renowned University of Camb. to
Jesus College 500 Marks, to Magdalen 500 pound, for the redemption of
prisoners in London 200 pound, for the encouragement of Merchants 1000 pound to
be lent gratis unto ten beginners; nor was his charity confined within these
seas, but that Western Troy, stout Ostend shall receive 100 pound for the
relief of the poor from his fountain; To trust the Minister is to h^nour him.
in all these his piety was very laudable, for in many of these acts of bounty,
his prime repose was in the conscionable integrety of the Priest, in those
places where he sowed his benefits, certes this was to build as high as heaven:
now observe his expedition.

He Has built.

Expedition is commendable in laudable enterprises, and even in this our
Founder had his honor: While his Wife lived, his house was an open Hospital,
and when she expired, he was frugall in his own family, that he might prove
the more magnificent to many. Origin persuades that our Saviors advise, to
leave all, had not so full an aim at the effect, as the affection; and herein
our Founder merited ample honor, for if any questionod him, where he would
employ his great estate, his divine and constant reply was, that his bread must
be cast upon the waters. i. upon the watery cheeks of the neglected poor:
Moreover he procured an Act of Parleament for a Mortmaine, for the establshing
of an intended Hospital in Halling-bury in the County of Essex; but a more
noble Spirit prompting him to restore that Charterhouse to true religion, which
was formerly sacrificed to superstition, Suttons case by Sir Ed.
he became an humble suitor to King James of blessed memory, to vouchsafe to be
the Royal Godfather of this royal foundation; whereunto that learned,
letters, and Scholar loving King, Cook. Founders will.
did graciously condescend, and confirmed our Founders bounty upon us by his
Letters Patent, and the broad Seal, this being done, memorable Sutton
charge, nay adiureth his Executors and overseers, as they shall answer before
the tribunal of Jesus Christ, that they employ their best endeauours, in
hastening, and reducing into act his intended charity; would you hear more? I
have it from honorable authority, that if the thread of our Founders life had
been continued somewhat longer, his vote and purpose was, to have been the
good Master, of our great Society. So much for expedition: Now view the

Synagogue.

Our Foundation may be esteemed rather a glorious Temple them a Synagogue, and
rather a City then a Temple; but I will not step beyond my bounds: in a
Synagogue we found formerly, Instruction, and Devotion: for devotion, those
reverend heirs of our Founders magnificence twice every day visit our
Synagogue, and ascend in soul to heaven by zealous prayers, and unfeigned
thanksgiuings; such is our strict observance of the daily service, that we may
seem nearer unto the Cathedral, then the parochial congregation; on the
Lords day, Jesus is faithfully, though plainly preached in our Synagogue. For
instruction, here ingenuous children do daily sit at the feet of their learned
teachers; but of these hereafter: We find in the sacred Oracles a frequent
mention of Masters of Synagogues.

The great Master of our Synagogue is fixed upon the most honored grandies of
our State, and the most reverend Prelates of our Church, they who sit at the
Helm of our kingdom, are graciously pleased to steer and guide the goodly
Ship of renowned Suttons charity; and here we may note the wisdom of our
Founder, who made choice of such honorable and powerful governors, who were
able and ready to maintain his bequest, and honor his foundation: it is the
glory of our noble governors, and the happiness of our Society, that no
cunning advocate, no greedy Lord, could undermine our foundation; and what was
nobly begun, is honorably continued by them, for fatherly, and merciful
justice, let no Court, no state compare with our government. All, all deserve
our thanks to them, and our hearty prayers for them, the poor shepherd
shall, and the religious flock must importune God for a blessing upon them,
Great Manours and good manners confirmed.
by whose wisdom and goodness, many blessings are conveyed unto us: the
Vicegerent of this grand Master, is the right Worshipful Sir R, D. Knight,
whose providence has adorned our Chapel with Organs, and beautified the
walks and several rooms of our ample foundation. Relinquet marmoriam.


Now observe the Members of this Synagogue.

For Us.

Our body has one Master

Several Officers, as Preacher, etc. of whose institution you may read at
large, in Suttons Case, Suttons Case.
Published by one of our Governors, Sir Edward Cook.

Several cohabiting members, Aged men who have hazarded their blood, or
impaired their state by wars, or suffered loss by Sea, fourscore.


Several cohabiting members.

Hopeful children carefully instructed in the learned tongues, and humane
Arts, lecently clothed, plentifully dyeted, and connueniently lodged, 40
Besides these, The faithful providence of Sir Rich. Sutton Knight, has
purchased lands from whence twenty four Academians receive annual pensions in
both our renowned Universities.

Here is a Protestant.
Briefly -- very nigh two hundred daily feed upon our Suttons bounty.

I shall conclude with the charge of Darius, Day by Day we have our portion
without fail, E^ra 6.9.
yt we may offer sacrifices of sweet savor unto the God of heaven, and pray
for the life of our religious Prince and Patron King Charles: and thus do we
pray,

O thou King of Kings, cloth all our Sovereigns enemies with shame, but upon
his head let the Crown flourish; mak^ his reign prosperous on earth, and
glorious in heaven; make this foundation a ^ynagogue of devout men, serving
thee in all peace and holiness so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, all
power, majesty, mercy, wisdom, and blessing be ascribed for ever and for
ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the names of the Right Honorable, Right Reverend, and Right
Worthy Governors of King James his Hospitoll, founded by Thomas Sutton Esquire.
The most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury his Grace,
Suruiuing ouer-seer.

The Right Honorable Lord Couentrie, Lord Keeper. Lord Privy Seal, Earl of
Manchester. Lord Steward, Earl of Penbroke. Ld. Chamberlain, Earl of
Mongomery


The Right Reverend Lord Bishop of London. Lord Bishop of Ely. Lord Bishop of
Lincoln.


The Right Worshipful Sir Edward Coke. Sir Randolph Crew. Sir Robert Heath, his
Majesty's Atturny general. Sir Henry Martine, Deane of the Arches, and judge
of the Admiraltie. Doctor Done, Deane of Paul's.


Sir Richard Sutton, Suruiuing Executor. Sir Robert Dallington, Master. Mr.
Thomas Brown Esquier.

