A Brief Answer, unto those idle and frivolous quarrels of R. P. against the
late edition of the RESOLVTION: By Edmund Bunny.

Whereunto are praefixed the book of Resolution, and the treatise of
Pacification, perused and noted in the margent, on all such places as are
misliked of R. P. showing in what Section of this Answer following, those
places are handled.

PSALM. 120. 7. I labor for peace: but when to that end I speak unto them,
they prepare themselves unto war.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlewood, Anno. Dom. 1589.

The Praeface to the Reader.
GENTLE Reader, The occasion of this mine Answer.
I am now to crave this favor of thee, that I may be so bold, as to present
thee with such an argument, as of the very nature of it, is not so welcome to
those that are of a quiet and peaceable disposition: such also as my self do
so little like of, that never yet did I meddle therewith of mine onwe accord:
having otherwise business enough, in another kind, that is sufficient to
occupy me. Howbeit, it is needful also, that the adversary be answered, and
that the weakness of their allegations (which otherwise might seem to be
strong) be ever discovered, that others be not shaken thereby. And seeing that
I am now by this occasion drawn forth to this kind of argument, and withal
have left me good store of matter to go against, I could do no less then to
answer my call in this kind also. The matter is this. A few years since I
somewhat purged, and afterward published (as it is sufficiently known unto
many) the Book of Resolution: the rather to provoke those discontented
countrymen of ours, to gather themselves to more moderate ways, and to better
agreement in the cause of Religion: as in my Praeface I had noted before. To
which end also I was not so curious in purging of it, but willingly left
whatsoever I thought might tollerably stand: and somewhat further to induce
them also, I adjoined thereunto an other little Treatise tending to
Pacification. Since which time the same R. P. that had set it forth so
corruptly before, has not only set it forth so again: but also has much
increased it, with those common fragments of their moth-eaten Popery: and with
some other both discourses and vagaries besides. Howbeit, he has altered the
title, and has framed another so grossly unto it, that of whom soever he
borrowed the best part of the former: yet may you be sure that the title of
this latter Book is his, without any question: For being weary of the former
title, that made the whole matter no more but a Christian exercise (as in
deed, being purged, it might rightly be termed so) upon a small occasion he
iustleth that aside, out of the way: and being very impotently carried with a
Pharifaiacall zeal, to advance the righteousness of works, against the
suffering and merits of Christ, he must needs have this Christian Exercise in
the way of godliness, to be a Directorie, guiding men unto salvation, and yet
Christian too: as though Christ had come downs from heaven, to teach us to
seek our salvation (at least in part) in our own righteousness: and not only in
his death and merits, without any thing else to be mingled withal, in that
account. The additions also that he has put thereunto, do seldom answer the
former platform: some, of argument good enough in themselves, but not so fitly
agreeing to the matter that he had in hand: others, that draw nearer to the
matter that was to be handled, but weak in themselves, and in many places to
so little purpose, that he does naught else oftimes but fetch certain idle
careers about it. A book that was much (until they had seen it) desired of
many, upon the hope that by the former was conceived of it: but once being had,
so little answering their expectation, that accordingly it finds (even among
the most of themselves) but small estimation: and being so corrupt a thing as it
is, and almost as incorrigible as the Ma. himself, I mean not to wast my labor
about it.

In the Praeface of which book, That the Adversaries have it their common
manner to make much a do about nothing.
and in certain of his Annotations thereon, he much inueigheth against me, and
it passing angry for meddling so far as I did with the former. But it is upon so
little ground, and to so little purpose withal, that for a time I could in no
wise persuade my self, that it were any better then lost labor, to make him
answer: both because the matter it self was of no importance, that he laid to
my charge, but in all places (to speak of) answers it self: and because the
book likewise was of small account, nor had, but of few of their own favorites:
and among them also could little be suffered to come abroad. But yet one other
respect there is, wherein at length I was persuaded to make him answer. For it
is not unknown (almost unto any, in these days of ours) what grievous
complaints they make against us, how boldly and resolutly they clear
themselves, and charge us, almost in all things that go betwixt us: as
plainly appears in their Rhemes Testament for altogether: and in their
several writings besides, for every one a part by themselves. Wherein it is a
world to see, with what faces and boldness of speech they auowe, those foolish
and wicked doctrines of theirs (that without question are only Romish and most
schismatical, yet notwithstanding) to be very Catholic: and the truth of Jesus
Christ, as it was by himself, and by his Apostles delivered unto us, to be no
better then plain heresy: and, for those wicked practices that of late they
have so busily employed themselves about, how some of them deny those things
that were as clear as the light of the sun, others justify those that are
most wicked and treacherous in the highest degree: and, when some of them are
punished for those their demerits, and yet but in very moderate manner, and but
so far as urgent necessity required neither, yet notwithstanding they cry out
of such persecution as never was heard of. Which writings of theirs what man
can read (that is not before acquainted with their manner of dealing) but that
needs he must yield some credit unto them? although he can think that all is
not true: yet so bold speeches as those, must needs breed a persuasion with
some, that there is some great cause that so they complain: or at least somewhat
there is wherein they are injured. So that when as now they find by experience,
they are not able by learning to show it to those, that can examine their
speeches by learning: the next that remains is, by out-facing and boldness of
speech to retain such credit as they are able in the hearts of those, that they
know will examine nothing they say, and yet nevertheless believe that it is as
true as the Gospel. Now that they see, that there is no place for the Kingdom
of the Beast in the hearts of those that examine all things by the word of GOD
before they believe them: what other way is left unto them, but to establish
his throne only in such, as will believe whatsoever they say, and never make any
question of it?

This adversary of mine to follow the same course likewise.
Of which kind of out-facers and liberal speakers because this adversary of mine
is one (and so does show himself very plainly, in this which he has done
against me) although the matters be not great, that in this private quarrel of
his do lie betwixt us, yet because it may serve well enough, to show their
manner of dealing in such quarrels as they use against us, I saw no cause to
refuse the occasion that himself has offered, and so to put him in mind of his
doings therein, that others also may so much the better see, what to think of
the lavish speeches, high words, and great outcries of him and his fellows
for these matters. And the more angry that he and his fellows do now show
themselus to be, and the more impatiently that they do, whatsoever they do,
the plainlier do they bewray themselves unto those, that can rightly decypher
whence it proceeds: that is, from an evil and a desperate cause. Leesers, I
grant, are by common proverb allowed to have their words: yet when they are so
very impatient, and that for the veriest trifles that are, it is a fair and
likely conjecture, both that their wine in spent already, when as now they draw
forth nothing but lees: and that they have but small store of bread, when as
they eat Akorns so fast and hungerly as they do.

Which that thou may the better perceive in this adversary of mine, In what
manner this my answer in framed unto him.
and in this quarrel which he has taken up against me, I have made him this
answer that now I do present unto thee: it may be, not in so large and ample
manner as some would require, but (I trust) both sufficient to note the matter
aforesaid, and strong enough for mine own defense in those my doings. The
controversies of purpose I have ever avoided (I mean for any set Treatice of
them, but only so far as did appertain unto mine own needful defense) both
because I am well eased already thereof by many, that can dyscusse them much
better then I: and for that the party himself, that of purpose does still
enterlace them with other matters, yet himself will never seem to have it his
purpose to meddle with them. And yet in truth, it seems to be the only cause,
why he would seem so to deal in matters of godliness: that so, where as
otherwise by learning himself does know, that he could never be able: yet
under pretense of treating but only of godliness of life, he might win some
credit to those popish errors, that hitherto for their pomp and bellies they
have sought to defend. And therefore less marvel, that he was so marvelous
angry, that I wiped out those his popish coruptions out of the former book so
much as I did: because it crossed his secret purpose, and did not suffer him
so quietly to enjoy that silly help, that now he thought meetest, whereby to
let in their naughty errors. Insomuch that heerby they teach us to beware of
their Popery, not only in such books of theirs, as wherein they profess to
treat of those matters: but in the residue to, wherein they would in no wise
seem to meddle with them, but for to treat of godliness only. And to the end
that thou might the better perceive, what are those places wherein he finds
himself so much grieved, for this cause I have praefixed those books again
before this mine answer: and in the margent of those places against which he
inueigheth, have noted unto thee, in what part or Section of this mine Answer I
have treated thereof. That so thou may the more readily find, both what
grounds he has taken of this his quarrel: and how weak they are to bear the
burden that thereon he has laid. This is the effect of my Answer unto him:
which also thou had had the last Summer, but that the Printer (after that it
was delivered into his hands) desired, for one matter thereunto appertaining, a
further respite. But I trust that now also it comes not out of season: and
such as it is that do I now commend to thy favorable censure and
interpretation, and so bid thee heartily well to fare in Jesus Christ. From
Bolton-Percy in the auncienty of York.

1589. Edm. Bunny.

The answer of Edm. Bunny unto the Praeface and Annotations of R. P.
I Have at the length (with much adoo, Not thinking at the first to make any
answer here unto by what reason I was after induced unto it.
got sight of that, which (by others) before I had heard you had done against
me. Wherein you have so far discovered your self, that for a time, after that
I had pe^rused your doings, I thought it needles to make any further answer
unto you: partly because that such a quarrel is more private, then that it
needs to be imparted to others; but especially, for that the matter that you
bring, is so weak, as that it needs none to cast it down, but does easily
fall of it self, without any further impugning of it. But when I had further
considered withal, how confidently you are wont to speak on your own
behalf, when you have no jot of truth to bear you out; and how ready some
others are to believe whatsoever you say: in this respect I thought it best to
make you answer, that so both your self and others also may better perceive
that oftimes you complain without any cause; and that, when as you make most a
do, there is not always any great matter to occasion the same. And so I must
give you to understand, that although in these your doings you deeply charge
me, yet have I given you so little cause so to do, as that whatsoever contempt
and reproach you did mean to cast upon me, and by that occasion upon others
also, the same is like all to be yours, and to redound unto your self the
author of it: and that not only in those things wherein you have directed your
style against me, and others; but also in that which in this edition you have
otherwise brought us.

Of that which he had done against me. Of the Title of the book, wherein he
would charge me, to have bin desirous to have crept into the credit of it.
First, by altering the manner of it to his best advantage.
2 Against me you have directed your style, first about certain matters going
before: and then about certain others that appertain to the books themselves.
Concerning those things that go bebefore, first you take in hand the title: and
that you set down in so cunning manner, to your best advantage, as that
although you do not in plain speech, charge me with any thing: yet seems it
thereby that you could be content to induce your readers to think, that I would
gladly have crept into the credit of it, as though it had been mine own
doing. Howbeit I did plainly set down the supposed author of it, so far as out
of the book it self I was able to gather: and further, then the title it
self did lead. For whereas I did thus set it down A book of Christian exercise,
appertaining to Resolution, that is showing how that we should resolve our
selves to become Christians indeed, by R. P. and then a certain space after
that, Perused, and accompanied now with a Treatise tending to Pacification, by
Ed. Bunny, so distinguishing the one from the other, and putting mine own name
to no more than was mine, and setting those two letters unto the other, that I
found in the end of the praeface following: you have told your gentle Reader,
that I have given it this title, A book of Christian exercise, etc. Perused,
and accompanied with a Treatise tending to Pacification by Edm. Bunny. Wherein
although you durst not be so bold, as plainly to charge me, that I would seem
to take upon me more than was mine: yet in covert manner you go very near it,
in suppressing those letters that I put to the former part of the title; and by
setting my name in such sort in the end of the latter, as that it might seem
to have been set by me to them both. The seely help that you have for your
self, is in your miserable, etc. but plain dealing had been much better. And
that you meant to give the occasion, Then by striking out a word that made
against him.
that others might think that I had used so indirect dealing, another thing
also does very much boad, if it do not clearly prove it: and that is, when you
came to recite the latter part of the title, as I had set it, there, because you
saw the manner of it was such, as that it would not take it well, that you
should so use me, therefore did you therwithal cut his tongue out of his head,
that it might not bewray you. For whereas I had noted in the title, that now
that book of Resolution, was accompanied with that other Treatise of mine
tending to Pacification, because that it did plainly import, that that book
of Resolution was before, and none of mine: therefore you struck out that word
Now, that others might the more easily conceive that opinion of me, that
therein you labored to cast upon me. If in truth you were persuaded, that you
had such advantage against me in those things that follow, as afterward you
would seem that you are, you might well have spared this kind of dealing: and
either you should have set down the whole, as I did, so to afford me my just
defense; or else you should have suppressed that (together with the other)
which being severed from that other, might for your sake seem to charge me with
that which I did not. How he has altered my name, either of gross
negligence, or some foolish mystery.
Now, that herein you do leave out one of the letters of my name (and not
only here, but continually after, almost throughout your whole book) I know
not well what to say unto it. If you have done it of set purpose, belike you
have some mystery in it: if it be so, then bring it forth, and accordingly
you shall hear from me again, if need so require. If not, that is, if you
have no mystery in it, then is your negligence very apparent, that having it
set down right unto you, you have so very often missed it, when you were to set
it down again. And wheresoever such negligence reigns; belike the matters
are not great, that there we may look for. But because that this matter was
but of small importance, we will be persuaded, that you made store of your
diligence here, and would not gladly spend any part of it now, that so you
might have the more in a readiness for that which follows.

3 After the title you take in hand the sentence of Scripture which I did set
under the same, Of the sentence of scripture.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Heb. 13.8. and
therein you charge me two special ways: and yet notwithstanding you leave unto
me greater advantage against you therein, then you have any against me, in any
part of the whole whatsoever. But belike the sentence it self being so
pregnant as it is, against the very sinews and marrow of your profession, did
at the first, even at the very sight thereof, so offend your eyes, that
afterward you could not deal peaceably with it. First, (you say) you see not,
to what purpose I should place that sentence there: What fault he finds in
me about it.
you call it a mystery; and you think it were hard for other men to
conjecture, why I did it. What if you know not why it was done? What need that
offend you? So that the sentence it self be good, what need you be grieved
that you find it there? Are your gatherings or gleanings of that nature, that
such a sentence may not be allowed such place among them. But because you
cannot conjecture, nor others neither, as you suppose, what reason I had there
to place it, I will not stick my self to tell you, that which may satisfy
you and those others. You must know I had to deal with that, which did not in
diverse points agree with the truth it self in Jesus Christ: which when I
labored to take away, it might be notwithstanding, that I left some unespied
of me. In which respect, every one may plainly see, that it did very fitly
appertain to the purpose: both to be a defense unto me, for such corruptions
as I took from it; and to be a preservative withal, against such corruptions
as remained (if any such were) showing thereby, that I meant not to commend or
leave any other unto them, but only Jesus Christ our Savior. And if you had not
blind-folded your self, before you came to it, with a settled purpose, to catch
at whatsoever you might get any hold of, your self no doubt must needs have
seen it: so fitly it does agree with the purpose that I had in hand, and the
argument it self does so plainly witness the same. Then you proceed to a
further matter, and deal more hardly, both with me, and the text it self.
The text you would have supposed to be, not only in it self hard or obscure;
but also one of those Obscure sentences or places, wherewith The holy Fathers
noted the ancient heretics to delight themselves, and deceive others: and
then, coming to me, that I have to that end brought it in; that is, to
delight my self, and deceive others. Wherein that you may prevail the better,
in your marge^t you send us to Epiphanius and Augustine, and after a sort to S.
Peter too, as though we should find the same in them. Who knows not, I pray
you, that heretics were wont (as plainly appears now in your selves) to use
certain sentences of scripture, to establish their errors withal? But what is
that to this purpose? Have you any dowt of any such dealing in this? must
Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, be now so obscure, so
apt to deceive, and so ready a trick for an heretic? I know what you mean:
and, if you durst for shame, you would speak plainlier than you do. If Jesus
Christ be the only Savior, for all the ages already past, for the time present,
and for the time to com, you see not well where to cog in those other devises,
and mony-doctrines that you have of your own. For this cause therefore needs
must this also be an obscure sentence, and apt to deceive: and to use the same,
the trick of an heretic? But do you think that Epiphanius or Augustine
would sooth you herein: or that S. Peter meant of any such matter? If they
would, find it, and set it down: if not, how is it then (mark whence you are
fallen) that you are not ashamed so fowly to wrest them. What advantage therein
he has left against himself.
The advantage that herein you have left to me against your self, is (in
comparion) no great matter; and yet such as I said: and such as it is, needs
must you hear of it, because you are so ready to catch at others. It rests
therefore in these 2. points: one, that you do the sentence some wrong, to set
it down so negligently and co^fusedly as you do, not distinguishing the members
thereof by orderly pointing, as you had it of me, and as it is (witness your
selves) in the text it self; How indistinctly (and therefore ilfauoredly) he
sets down that text of scripture.
the other, that twice together you do so resolutely ascribe it to S. Paul.
Touching the first it may be but the oversight of you or your printer: howbeit,
both of you ought to have used more diligence in it. The sentence is to good
purpose, it is weighty, and of great importance: you ought to have seen
better unto it; both he for his part, and you for yours. But I doubt very much,
that your Printer has done, but as you your self set it down unto him: and
that you have done it of purpose, nothing at all regarding how confusedly, nor
how ill-fauoredly you serve us with the word of God. But we will not so take it
at your hands. With ill will you are brought at length to have some dealing
with the written word of God: and very shame has won at your hands, not so
far to abandon your selves from the scriptures, as otherwise full gladly you
would. And now that you must for shame do somewhat, you would gladly do it as
ill-fauouredly as you might, that so we might find, neither life, nor comfort,
nor sense therein. But you shall not so abuse the word of life: you shall not
shrink from it, and yet you shall not sliue it neither. Whereunto if we may be
so bold as to add, that your self is one of these Iesuite-friers (that late
offspring of that ruinous Popedom) as that R. P. that is thought to be the
author of this book, is said to be: you have done well, so to let the world
understand (and you may do well to mark it your self) what ill accord there
is, betwixt Jesus and Jesuits whenever they meet. You had no sooner espied
him to be in place, but by and by your stomach rose against him: and some way
or other must you needs show your gall, there was no remedy. As touching the
latter of them, I deny not, but that it is the judgment of diverse of the
ancient fathers, How resolutely he sets down, that which the fathers
before, nor the learned now, could so fully agree on.
that it might be the Apostle Saint Paul that wrote it; and, of some that it
was: and so likewise of the writers now. But yet you cannot be ignorant
withal, that the matter was then in question among them: and yet is, with the
learned now. What ground therefore can you have to affirm so resolutely, that
which the fathers of old, and the learned now, have not yet so thoroughly
decided? If you allege the determination of the church of Rome, we hold it for
nothing in these matters now: since the time that you are departed away from
the faith, in so many things as you are: and have banded your selves against
the Lord, and his anointed. And if needs you will look to be allowed this
liberty, that you may so determine upon it, as you think good, you had need
first to see how those reasons may be answered, that are to the contrary:
rather than so seruilely to cleave to the bare judgment of those, that set it
down as themselves list (I speak it but of your own companions now) without
regarding unto what side the strongest reasons incline. Seeing that we do all
agree, that it is Apostolical, and the undoubted word of God, it can be no
derogatiue unto it, soberly to harken further of him that wrote it, neither yet
to doubt in such a point of an opinion but so far received, so long as we
see not the reasons cleared, that are to the contrary. But it may be you will
think, that these things are so small in themselves, that the advantage, that
therein you have left unto me, was not to be regarded, nor so to be laid to
your charge. Whether it be little or great, it forces not now: but this may I
plainly set down unto you, that the lesser of them both is of that
importance, that therein (as I said) you have given greater cause or just
reproof; than I did to you, or any other, not only for setting down the
sentence it self in such sort as I did, but also in all the rest that
follows. When you were so ready to reprove another upon your own surmise,
without any sufficient ground for your persuasion therein: you should have
taken such heed to your self, as that wherein you condemned another, your
self were not found more faulty than he.

His idle caueling about the first page, a sufficient pattern of all the rest.
4 Being come thus far, your conclusion is, And this for the first Page. Yea
verily: your dealing about my first Page only, may be sufficient to teach us
all, how ready you are to pick some quarrel or other; and what indifferency or
plain dealing we may look for at your hands, in all the rest. And I will assure
the Reader, together with you, that such as this your beginning is, such and
none other is that which follows: in the one you have given a taste of the
other. For such occasion as I gave you (in the disposing of the title, and in
prefixing the sentence aforesaid) so to inueigh against me as you do, such have
I given you in that which follows: and as you deal in these things against
me, as if there were a fault committed, when as notwithstanding you have found
none, and do not, nor can not lay any to my charge, eue^ so do you in the rest
likewise, as (I trust) the indifferent Reader shall soon perceive. And so you
have done very well, so distinctly to point your finger as you do, to this
your worthy handling of those matters that you met withal in the first page:
and I am content, if so you will have it, that it shall stand for a right
pattern of all the rest. Be it now whatsoever it can be: such as this is, such
is the other; and any man that will, may in this beginning, see the whole
course that you do hold until the ending.

5 Which that your self may better declare, A frivolous slander of the keys
and crown, upon the Archbishop of York his Arms.
as you have ended with this your first page: so have you a fresh begu^ with
the next. For there, by placing the arms of the church of York, and the
Archbishop (that now is) together, you readily infer (a conclusion no doubt,
that follows on the premises, passing well) that it is with us Good doctrine
now, and very commendable in my L. g. of York. to claim both keys and crown
from Peter's seat, which in the bishop of Rome, is made so heinous, and so
bitterly inueied against daily. But do you in good sadness believe, that now we
have any doctrine of such matters: or if we had, that we account the same to be
good? or have you the face to make this comparison betwixt the churches of
York and Rome: as though it were none other claiming of the keys and crown
from Peter's seat, which in the B. of Rome, is (as pleases you to term it)
made so heinous etc. but only such, as by setting down the arms of the church
of York, is challenged to the Archbishop there? If you be but in jest, the
matter may be more easily borne: if you be in earnest, it is too gross and
too plain an untruth, for any to oppose themselves against it. Your own
fellows will take so ill with it, that your unshamefastness need not to be
chastised of any other. As good title thereunto, only by coupling their arms
together, as they have any by the word of God.
But seeing that you have set the comparison, I will not stick to put you in
mind of one special point thereto appertaining. You know how your Bishop of
Rome has claymed both the keys and the crown; and that you suppose the same
to stand, by very good warrant from the word of God: on the other side, you
know how little the Archbishop of York has claimed the matters you speak of
(the one of them nothing at all; nor the other neither in such sort as you
mean) and that your self can be in no wise induced to think, that only by
the marshaling or setting down the arms of the church and his together, he
may justly make any claim unto them. And yet are not you able to find in the
holy Scriptures, any one place whatsoever, whereon you may better ground that
usurpation of your Bishop of Rome, as peculiar to that Sea of his (the Crown
at all, or the Keys either out of his dioces:) than any body else may be able
to prove, that by this title only, that is, by setting down of their arms
together, the Archbishop of York may take upon him those things that you
talk of. Insomuch that as that can never be proved, nor has so much as show
of reason, not any piece of groundwork at all: no more has that of yours in
the word of God; howsoever that hitherto you have otherwise borne the world in
hand. And, whereas it appears in this your new book, His printers Alphabet:
fit for the matter he has in hand.
that the first letter of the Alphabet that your Printer has used in the
printing thereof (I mean for the capital, or greater letters) is ever decked
with a couple of devils, shaking out their tails, and laying their hands on
the first letter of those your labors (as appears in all those chapters that
begin with the first letter of the Alphabet (six or seven in all) it shall be
as easy a matter to prove, that your whole Book (whatsoever thereof is
yours) is of the devil, only because that by your Printers good means in the
first letter of your Alphabet they do so often and so readily meet together to
confer on the matter, or else to confirm it, by such imposing of hands, as
there they use, as for you to prove, that, by ioining those arms together
(which is all out of which you have made that large conclusion) it is with us
good Doctrine now, and very commendable in my Lords grace of York, to claim
both keys and crown from Peter's seat. The common proverb is, that it is but
an ill procession, wherein the devil bears the cross: and that would not
stick (as weak as it is) to yield a stronger proof for the one, than is any
that you have for the other.

6 Then coming to my Epistle Dedicatorie, Upon the Epistle Dedicatorie he
associateth himself to an
there much plainlier you show forth your self in your right and proper
colors. And yet in this place I will say nothing of your so base and homely
gibing: much less of your altering and leaving out, in that which you allege
out of me; seeing the matters are not of any great importance. But the matter
that I charge you withal, is, that there you show your self to be so
impudently given to reproach, even such a one also, who in many good respects
you ought to reverence (your self can easily know whom I mean) that first you
seem clean to forget how wicked an ymp he was, that did but discover that
great oversight of his father Noah, and made report thereof to his brethren;
and did not seek himself rather in silence and reverence to make it up,
before it had been further known: and what a judgment it pleased God
thereupon to thunder forth against him by the mouth of his father, and against
his posterity also. There was (not far off) a better example in both his
brethren for you to have followed, if you had the grace to have taken the same:
and so much stronger against you, as in this you know there was a fault
indeed, and in the other you settle your self but in the weak report of
others, and in your own naughty surmise. But you make no great reckoning to
say the worst you can of any of us: our Bishops are no Noah's to you; and
therefore that example of Cham crosses you not. Put case it do not: yet was
there no help with you, but that needs you must join your self to such a
company in so bad an action as that? When (by all likelihood) you could not be
ignorant, how that same upon the hearing was found to be a wicked practice, and
that by the highest court that we have, and the parties condemned for it (who
afterward also, for the most and chiefest of them, did themselves confess it)
was your desire of reproching so great, that yet notwithstanding you must take
in hand so bad a matter, and sort your self to such a condemned company as
those? But belike you were loath there should be any so bad a matter among us,
and you not to have a hand in it also: and could not find the worst of the^ al
so base a people, but that, in such an actio^ as that, they were company good
enough for your self. Howbeit, howsoever you can be persuaded of them that in
such case they we^^ meet company for you: yet is it on their parts likely
enough that, if they had suspected such an one as you to have been so ready to
join with them, even that only would have made the meanest of the^ to have
misliked their own doings so much the rather. And then had it been good, that
you had bin one at the first, that so all the rest might have bin stayed
thereby. Yet this one thing I can easily grant you, that you thought your
self no babe in this, that being disposed so to reproach, you chose out such
an one, of whom you might be assured, that, after his cause so well debated,
and sentence given with him in so high a Court as that, he would little esteem
of the misreport of such fellows as you. But I pray you Sir, The great lewdnes
of his own fellows in that kind.
could you so far forget your selves, that you had so much leisure, as to
quartell at this? With how great uncleanness you are charged on all hands, and
long have been, and how weakly it is answered by the best of you all, is a
matter more clear, than that I need so much as to point the finger unto it.
And in so great, so unnatural, and so monstrous iniquity of yours, could you
so soon let pass the beam of your own eye, for to pick out the mote of an
others? What say you then, as to many other charges of the like effect, so
specially unto the Treatise of that holy Poligamie of yours? Whether is it but
small uncleanness that the same discovers among you? But let old things pass,
that you have before been charged withal: and it also, together with them,
because it treats of the other parts of Christendom also. And because that
of a discontented Romish Englishman, you are become, as is said, a Frenchman
now, to go no further than your own clergy there, what say you to that
latter collection in Le Cabinet du Roy de France: Le Cabinet du Roy de France.
set forth but six or seven years since, and dedicated unto the king
himself, where you have gathered unto your hands, a note of a strange and
wonderful company of wives, young women, and others also, abused by the
Popish clergy there; such for number, as some man would scantly think at the
first, would be ouermatched at Doomes-day it self? If the uncleanness of that
sin had annoied you, there had you a monstrous dunghill of it: if the neernes of
it were that which troubled you, there you had it even at your nose. The number
of wives, that at that time were found (or at least, noted) to be corrupted by
you, throughout all the twelve Archbishopriks of France, amou^t to the number of
eight hundred and fifty thousand, threescore and eleven, and threescore and
two thousand, and two hundred. Of these, where they had fewest, which was in
the Archbishoprike of Vienne, and of young women, one thousand-thousand,
fourscore and one thousand, eight hundred and four; and where they had least
of this kind, which was in the Archbishoprike of Vienne also, yet not with
standing no fewer, that threescore and eight thousand and nine hundred. And yet
besides these, you are noted to have abused forty and two thousand, six
hundred, fourscore and three others, in Sodomitrie also: and where you abused
fewest of al in this kind, which for this matter was the Archbishoprike of
Bordeaux, yet there you are said to have abused no fewer than one thousand and
two hundred. Besides all which, the purueiors of this their harlotrie, or such
as they used to bring in this game to their hands, such as we call no better
than bawdes, (and so consequently, fowlie also corrupted by them, though not in
their bodies, yet in their souls) were no less than one hundred and
threescore thousand, eight hundred, twenty and nine: and the bastardes, and
bastards bastards, of this holy Clergy (witnesses inow of their uncleanness)
seven hundred, threescore and fifteen thousand, one hundred thirty and eight
persons. Again, whereas the Clergy of the Archbishoprike of Vienne had the
fewest faults discovered (for the two former) and the Clergy of Bordeaux, for
the other: yet, that neither you, nor any other of their fellows besides,
think much with them for coming so far short of the rest, if it please you
to consider the number of themselves, and of those whom they corrupted, and to
lay them together, you may easily find, that they were no Saints neither but
in this point like to the rest for the number of them. For whereas themselves
(together with their officers and servants) were no mo but fifty and five
thousand, and on the otherside, the wives that they polluted, threescore and
two thousand, and two hundred; the young women, threscore and eight thousand,
and nine hundred; their male kind also, one thousand and six hundred: in does
so fall out, that they polluted mo than them selves, by seven thousand and two
hundred married wives, and thirtene thousand and nine hundred young women, and all that thousand and six hundred males besides. So that, though you leave to every
one of their officers and servants, one (making the^ in number but as two
parts of three, in respect of their masters themselves:) yet you leave two a
piece to themselves, and an overplus of four thousand three hundred and on,
either to take as a further booty to themselves; or, if you think good, to be
bestowed on such of their officers as they would have the likest to them.
Whereunto if we ad their purueiors (or bawds) which were twelve thousand, and
were not only by them corrupted, but also very able men likewise for to witness
this uncleanness of theirs, then also the bastards, and bastards bastardes of
this holy Province, which were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred:
there may you find witnesses inow (fourtene thousand and four hundred mo than
themselves, master, officer, servant, and al) to witness this uncleanness against
them. The like might be said of the clergy of Burdeux also: but that one only
example may be sufficient to give you some reasonable taste of the rest. And as
for your bishops (which, a man would think should herein be freest of al)
although themselves be as it is said (Archbishops, and al) under an hundred:
yet those also (even themselves alone, without the help of others for them: see
what reverend fathers you have that come masking here) have polluted 468
married wives, and 900 single women (and have among them 540 bastards) and yet
notwithstanding have abused in Sodomitrie, 124 others besides. Above half a
score a piece (one with another) had in bodily abuse by these holy fathers.
When the heads of your clergy are such, I pray you, what may a reasonable
man think of the rest? What further he says of that matter, I refer unto your
own perusing of it. Yet thus much by him does plainly appear, that this
uncleanness is generally spread over you al: and that your whole popish clergy is
not only infected, but fowly polluted with it. But these things belike were
but triflles with you at home: and that other blunder with us, a great matter
abroad. But by your patience, fie on that forced virginity of yours: most
abhominably it stinketh before God and the world. But of this enough: and more
than needed, but that needs you must be in these matters so prying abroad, and
so blind at home. A wilful oversight.
That in this place you conceive that my Epistle Dedicatorie treats of
mortification, and contempt of the world (which notwithstanding it does but
briefly touch in the end of it only; and that but by occasion also) and
whereas shortly after you do wrest my words to your own purpose, otherwise
than I did mean them, if in simplicity you have done it, then because the
matters are not great, I will not trouble your conceit therein. Nevertheless if
you missed so far of the argument of the one, and sense of the other, for the
have that you made to come the sooner unto your vain of reproching: though the
matters themselus be not great, yet therein you deserve some just reproof. But
it seems rather, that of purpose you would so take them, so to make you a
readier way to that, which you were desirous thereon to set down. And then,
the more impudently that you were given to join with so bad a company in so
naughty a matter, the more does it argue the fault to reign in you, and the
deepelier you have offended therein. But if I therein treated of mortification,
and contempt of the world, then must you either separate these things from that
devotion, piety, and contemplation, that after you speak of, or else must you
call back (as well you may, for the number of them) some part of those
lauishing speeches that there you use, or otherwise be contrary to your self
in this. But the less that I directed mine Epistle unto that end: the meeter
it is, that for my part I take not this advantage of you.

7 My Praeface to the Reader is the next that comes under your censure: Of
the preface.
and how welcome that is unto you, it appears by the hard entertainment that
with you it finds. For here you show your self to be much offended, not
only with me, but with others also. And the cause why you find your self so
grieved, is, for that I said that the Book of Resolution seemed to me, Of the
fou^tains whence the book was taken.
to be gathered out of certain of the Schoolmen (as they are termed) that
living in the corrupter time of the Church did most of all by that occasion
treat of reformation of life: when as others (of them) were rather occupied
about the controversies that were most in question among them. But what is
there here, that so much offends? Forsooth that thereby I endeavored (as you
do charge me) to make the book more contemptible in the judgment of others:
and that so I might the rather get it under my learned censure, to use at my
pleasure. But that I meant not to make it contemptible, may sufficiently
appeer, both by the report that I gave it (better than your self before
deserved, but much less now) and by the pains that I took about it, to
cleanse it from that corruption of yours, wherewith it could not have come
abroad, and which was a blemish to the book it self, though you cannot see it.
Neither should you (especially taking it so much to your self as now you do)
have thought that book so far abased, by imputing a good part of it to any of
those whom there I spoke of; as also you could not do it, without a great
ouer-weening of your self, nor without overmuch abasing of those. And whereas
you tell us of certain fathers, out of whose homilies, sermons, commentaries,
and other works, the book was taken (in which man or you might have attributed
some part thereof to the Scriptures also, but that you glory much less in
the^, than in the others, that so your glory may redou^d more justly to your
shame) it is nothing at al to the purpose that so you allege. For though the
matter therein contained, were first derived from the Scriptures, and Fathers
originally: yet not withstanding that hinders not, but that it may well be
taken out of the monuments and works of those that wrote long after them, and
gathered such matter somewhat nearer together. Now, as for your self, although
it may be that I do not know you, yet by the light that now you have given
us, of the profoundnes that is in you; and if you be the party that most
commonly is named unto it, you are (I warrant you) as likely as others to make
your choice rather, where you may have it nearer gathered together, then at
large in the Scriptures and Fathers themselves. That herein you charge me so
deeply with ignorance, and that my study is less than nothing at all in
those your Schoolmen, the matter is not great, if therein I suffer you to take
your pleasure of me: and, when you have made me as unlearned in them, as
shall like your self best, or best may serve to advance you, it may be, that
I my self could well be contented to spare somewhat of that also that you would
leave me; and yet notwithstanding, am not so little acquainted with them
neither, that any thing I fear your learning in them, or in any others. And
(God be thanked) there is much good learning to be had, though a man do never
come near those that you speak of as also there was long before them. But I
pray you good Sir, are you able to allege any one of them all, from whom a
good part of that book may not be derived: either among those that dealt in
the controversies, if you respect your points or doctrine; or among the
others, if you respect the rules of life and conversation? Or to go no further
than your self has occasioned, may we think that you are persuaded indeed,
that this book (which now you call yours) stands so clear in all your
parables, understanding of Scriptures, application of them, your divisions
also, and manner of speech, from that sort of Schoolmen that before I spoke
of, or you now speak of, that whosoever should conceive that in some good part
it descended of them, he must needs be so ignorant in them, as that he knows
not so much as the very subject and argument that they handle, as it pleases
you, in the depth of that learning of yours to charge me? Could you warrant
me thus much, that it were as worthy the labor, as it were possible enough
to do it, it were no hard matter soon to show, that a great part of it might
well have been taken, not only out of those that before I noted, but, as you
had dressed it in such colors as you thought good to bestow upon it, even out
of those that you also have named unto me. When as in the first lines of al
(after your title and sentenced that you set us down, you cannot be content to
be our resolving to serve God, beginning aright, and perseuering therein to be
our duty, and an acceptable service to him, Page 2, 3.
but needs you will teach us forth seek salvation thereby, not by the
righteousness of Christ, but by our own, when you tell us, that our forefathers
received the ground of faith peaceably, and 3
without quarrelling (not from the holy scriptures, or from their father) but
from their mother the Church when as so barely you set us down the example of
Cornelius, as though you would make us believe that he had works, or a
virtuous life acceptable to 4
God, before that ever he had any faith: when as you call it Scripture
indifferently, as well what you find in those books that are Apochrypha, as
in 5
those that are Canonical: when you tell us, that 6
wilfulnes in Popery, is suffering for righteousness: when as so odly you take
occasion to let us understand, whence or from who^ we have those things
delivered unto us, that we are to believe, and then make no mention at all of
the word of God, neither of the prophets, nor of the Apostles, neither of the
old Testament, nor of the new, nor so much as of 6.7
Christ himself; but only of the Catholic Church: 7
when faith and knowledge are with you, masters of so light importance, in
respect of life and monks: when to this end you tell us again, that Christ
(...) the Apostles spoke much more of things to be done, than of things to
be known: of good living, then of right understanding: that few are damned
for luck of knowledge, which commonly all men baptized have sufficient (except
in time of heresies) but many thousands for ill life daily, that the parts in
man which appertain to understanding and knowledge, were not so hurt by the
fall of Adam as the parts appertaining to action: to know much (of those things
that appertain to Religion, and the service of God: for otherwise you wander
from the matter you spoke of before) is a pleasure, but to do much is a pain:
and 8
that the Scriptures and the ancient holy fathers have made great and long
discourses, ample volumes, and many books, about this second part of Christian
Divinity, which consists in action, but (if we supply the other part of
your meaning here, out of the former place, whereunto your self do refer us
as) have written little to speak of in comparison of the other, of that which
belongs to faith and knowledge: when talking likewise of the reaping of 9
glory in the life to come, you come in so odly with this correction; if it
be our good hap to come to it: when coming to the joy that Angels have in 14
the conversion of a sinner, you put in a parenthesis of your own that they
will not cease to pray for us while we are reading: when as coming to the
storm of Isaaks going forth to meditate or pray, (what time as Rebecca was
coming home unto him) you do not hold your self contented with so much as the
Scripture, sets down, that at that time so he did, but must needs stretch
it further, alleging that place to show, that he was went also to do it: when
you so specially tell us of mortal 19
sin, as though that some other sins there were, which in the judgments of
God deserved not the curse of the law: 25, 32, 34. 35, 37.
when as you so often and so so plainly set down, that to this end we are
sent into this world, to serve God in this life; and, by that (our) service, to
gain everlasting glory in the life to come, and ever teach us to gain heaven
by our works, throughout your whole third chapter (and yet but cogd in by your
self, as the place it self bewrays, 25, 33.
as before I noted) when you restrain the time of our redemption unto the time
of Christ's death and passion (or rather, as you mean, unto the time of his
harrowing of hell) as though that none (by the virtue of his passion following)
were redeemed before: when as you tell us of the 35
foolish Virgins, that they were innocent from sin, and yet shut out, because
they lacked but the oil of 39
good works: when in good sadness you will seem to make wearing of hair cloth,
lying on the ground, and beating of the body, to be so necessary and so
forcible helps against sin, clean for getting in the mean season, that
faithfully to do the work of our vocation (every one no more but as he is
called) is of such power to bring down the body against sin, as that we
need neither those, nor any such other frivolous means, that are not
commanded in the word of GOD; but may well pass them over, either to be
talked of, of such as you are that are farthest from them, or to be used of
those that live idly, and are not occupied in their calling: when as you do
so boldly sort into the number of such almes-deedes, 41
as are by the word of God approved, the setting up of Chaunteries, and of
such Abbyes, Nunries; Priories; Hermitages, and such like, as we had of late
amongst us; when besides you tell us, or at least insinuate, and would feign
have us believe, that those our late cloisterers and chaunterie priests, were
so holy a people, that they left the world. and betook themselves only to
the contemplation of heavenly things; and in this case make no quaestion, Ib.
but that when those forefathers of ours plucked those things from their
children and posterity; and bestowed them on because of their own souls, yet
were they deeds of charity notwithstanding: when as thereupon Ib.
you complain; that now adays men do not bestow their goods to the ease of
their souls in the life to come: when as you teach us to purchase the prayers
of others, that by their intercession we may 42
enjoy life everlasting: when as in so few pages (for you see that I have not
chosen them out, but only taken them as they lie together) you come in with so
much such trumperie as this, and somewhat more than I have alleged, and hold
on that course throughout your whole book (and ever lightly the farther the
worse, so often as you can find any opportunity, so to smite your ^^^er rules of
godliness with that infectio^ in you) can you have the face to bear us in
hand, that these things can in no wise descend of the^, whose favor and
speech we know well enough, and whom we see so fully resembled in this
pedlary ware that you have brought us? But if you were indeed persuaded, at
least if you did certainly know (as you would bear us in hand that you did)
that there is no reason why it might be probably thought, that a good report
of it might very well descend from those Schoolmen, that before I spoke of it,
what then is the cause, that (having so clear advantage therein) here again
you flee so fast to those accustomed shifts of yours?. How comes it to
pass, that in no wise you will understand of whom I speak, and whom mine
own words do plainly describe? Or what need had you both to alter my very
words: and to change the pointing of them to your advantage. As touching the
former, you know well enough, that dividing the ages that have been before
from the Apostles time to this age of ours, into a couple of principal parts,
the Divines that wrote in the former ages, are generally called the Doctors, or
Fathers: and the others that wrote in the times that were since (and yet before
this age of ours) are generally called Schoolmen like wife; as those also that
have written since in this our age, the late or new writers. But whereas,
although that name be generally given to all the writers of those latter ages
(as your self does know, and can give them none other, live that so you could
have had no cause to cavil) yet, because that it is more properly given to
certain of them, therefore did I in plain words so distinguish: first,
showing which sort of them I meant (whom you also do know, and may not deny,
to treat very often and much of such matters, and those not a few of them
neither) and then sheading out the other sort of them apart by themselves,
those that were occupied about the controversies that were most in question
among them, which also you know, was not over straight a limitation for that
sort, considering the great controversies, that were in those ages with most
of them. How is it therefore, that this being so wonted a thing as it is (and
the matter it self so plain) and my words directly leading from those, that
you would have me to understand, and plainly pointing unto others (whom you
set by) both by the limitation of these words, certain of them, and, as they
are termed (which you struck out) and by further description also: yet
notwithstanding, even thereupon only you do so deeply charge me with
ignorance, not or any thing that my self had said, but only for that which it
pleases your fatherhood to father upon me? As touching the latter, of
altering my words, He alters my words, and changes the pointing, to make
them square better to his purpose.
and changing the pointing or distinguishing of them to make them square
better to your purpose, lay but my words again before you, and compare them
with these of yours, and soon shall you find so much as I speak of. For
whereas I said, that it seemed to be most of all gathered out of those that I
noted, and afterward again me thought we had in the book it self, that which
might lead us to this conjecture: you have put in, that I well perceived etc.
and whereas I did not affirm so much neither, so absolutely of the whole
(although for the most of it; very well I might) but limited the same by two
several speeches (first, that it was most of all gathered etc; and then
afterward again, especially for the invention of it:) you perceiving that
these limitation made the matter to come somewhat short, to give so just
occasion of quarrel as you would have had, strike them both forth, and make me
to pronounce it absolutely of the whole, making me to say, that I well
perceived that this book was gathered; etc: So likewise for the pointing,
whereas my saying was, that it seemed most of al to be gathered out of
certain of the schoolmen (as they are termed) that living in the corrupter
time of the church, did most of al by that occasion treat of reformation of
life, etc; you part this sentence, which I made entire and one in it self,
into two members, the one, that it was gathered out of schoolmen; the other,
that they lived in the corrupter time of the church. Which, although you do
but with a semi-colon (which notwithstanding was too much by 2 degrees, because
there should have been there no distinction at all:) yet by better
consideration of your manner of pointing in diverse places (unless the printer
has failed therein) it seems that you meant to put the whole power of a
colon or middle distinction; and then was your fault so much the greater. For a
rich man (they say) it is a shame to be a thief. If therefore you had such
advantage against me, what need you then so clean to leave out, that which
made against you: and to alter and force that which remained, so much as you
do? If you had not that advantage against me, by any thing that my self
had set down, till you should have helped it, and framed it better to your
purpose, were you yet so desirous to reproach, that rather you would break
through unto it by so hard conditions, than let it alone until you were justly
occasioned thereto? If this be your manner, howsoever we need to care but little
for your pen: yet I see very well, we must needs look to your fingers.

8 In this place you do not content your self thus to have drawn your hand
on me alone: Of the want of learning that he in his vanity does charge us
withal.
but needs must you ride on others also. And first you labor (upon your
grief conceived against me, and supposing me to be my Lord Archbishops
chaplain) to load many of us together with the reproach of ignorance: setting
it down in plain speech, that much learning is not required to the dignity
of being an Archbishops chaplain. Concerning which matter, there is no great
need to make you answer. We are not now to vie our learning: God make us
learned unto salvation. He has learning enough, that knows Christ, and
rightly does use the learning he has. If you have gotten so much more than
your fellows, that you can charge so many with ignorance, first, we would
have you to give the glory to God: and then, coming home to your self
again, to take good heed that you carefully keep within the bounds of
sobriety and modesty, notwithstanding all that learning of yours. This being
done, then do we think that it were very meet that you brought it forth, to
the help of us and others that want: that as heretofore we have heard of this
your learning (of your own mouth) more than once or twice, as we take it; so
at the length we might see it also, and find wherein we might justly account
our selves behind you. Would you once do that, you should not need, so often by
words to put down us, and advance your self? We would then give you the
place, without any more business; you should enjoy it without contradiction.
Thus much also we would wish you to remember withal, that Satan the old
enemy of mankind, who first used the serpent for his wilines to deceive the
woman, to this day also very much delights to make his choice of such
serpentine heads, that so he may the beter beguile the people of God. But I
pray you Sir, are you (in good sadness persuaded indeed, that our Bishops
chaplains are so far inferior in learning unto you, and your fellows? Then
I on the other side would wish you not to rippe over far in that matter, least
you find it to fall out in the end, that (...) but Bishops chaplains with us,
are more learned than Bishops themselves with you. But to go no higher than to
your selves, what books or writings what disputations, or other exercises of
learning whatsoever, in divinity, in humanity, in the tongs or in history
(or whatsoever else you can devise) are you able to show, wherein there was found
any want in us, or any better store in you? Or which of the Arts, or what
good learning is better advanced, or plainlier taught by those that are of
your profession, than it is by those that are of ours? On the other side you
cannot deny, but that both you lay wallowing in very gross ignorance, till
you were quickened up by us; and that in many things we have made you give
ground already: as also it is not unlike, but that, if you would have stood
unto it, long ere this you had been clean chased out of the field of al good
learning. How the adversaries ever have shunned, and yet do, the trial of
learning.
Which of you al (now think of the best: you must withdraw your eyes from
your self, and from such others as you are) was ever able in learning to stand
unto the cause you had in hand. Supposing at the first, that the Scriptures
would have served your name, were ye not feign to abandon them, and to flee
for help to the Fathers? And when thence also you were beaten out, were you
not fain to run to the Church, and there to entrench your selves in this, that
the Church can never err? As now likewise, when you see, that in that also
you cannot be safe, nor able to stand against the forces that come against you,
your only help and last refuge is, the persuasion of your own conscience,
that so you have been taught, such is your conscience, and so you believe. And
yet I deny not, but that sometimes you come forth with some floorish or show
of learning: but yet to no purpose, because that all such furniture of yours,
is but as a band of scattered men, often foiled and vanquished already, and
such as now will abide or stand no longer together, but only till the enemy
come. When the captain, being hardly followed on by the enemy retireth his
soldiers within their tre^ches, or to any other strength or place of defen^e,
is it not a token, that himself and his company is ever weak to keep the
field: yea, though himself and his soldiors too, should vaune never so much
that they could? To come unto your selves, it is your manner now-adayes to
talk much of learning to advance your selves above the moon, to make others
as grasshoppers in your sight and yet notwithstanding what one controversy is
there (of any importance) wherein you will stands the trial of learning:
what other thing do you with all your confederates, but only retire them to
their trenches? What other learning is it that you teach them whereby to defend
themselves in those causes, but only that so they are persuaded and that their
conscience already is settled, and may not be moved? Had you any help at all
in learning would you not teach it those your adherents? Nay would it not
^^^ene as fast among you, from one to another, as other things are wont to do
that make for your purpose? Or are you so ready to help one another in other
matters of less importance, and could you be so forgetful or so careless in
this? No, no: there is another matter in it. You have therein a privy maime: it
is not in you, and that is the cause that you do it not. Go talk of our
learning among the ignorant; and of the goodness of your cause, to those that
believe all that you say: we know well enough, that your cause is naught and
that you have no learning at all that can defend it. What fair offers have
often been made you, your selves do know, and cannot deny, if you would: how
weakly you have behaved your selves in answering of them, though you can not
find in your hearts to acknowledge, and make your friends believe you do not see
it; yet others do see it, and glorify God, that now the nakedness of that
strumpet of yours is so discovered, that al me^ may see that she was naught
else, for all her glittering wherewith she has now so long deceived us, but
only an arrant harlot, most odious to God, a ^^etestation to the godly, and
yet notwithstanding, He is so weary of being so roundly handled in matters of
controversies, that now he braggeth us with an other argument, to till us
aside from dealing any longer in this.
(and that in the just judgments of God) a snare to you. For it was meet that
her illusio^ should be strong upon you, that hardened your hearts against the
gracious calling of God, and could never yet to this day be induced to receive
the love of the truth.

Having so spoiled so many of us at once, of al our learning belike you are in
some need your self, when you scamble so hard with those for it, that have so
little by your own confession) then you put with full sails and a trim gale of
wind, into an other fancy of yours, as mad as this that is gone before; and
supposing it to be an haven, where you might well and safely harbor, needs
would yor arrive, and come on shore, but it is but a sand-bed, you are
deceived: it holds you of; and will not suffer you there to land. For now
with one breath (but it is but a vain blast) you do both utterly deprive all
us, of ability and power to make any books or treatises of devotion, piety,
and contemplation; and challenge that to be a feat belonging to your selves,
yea proper and peculiar to you alone. And (but that I am now to keep me
only to that, which is in this part of your praeface which you direct against
me) it were a sport to see, what reasons and Scriptures you gather together
toward the end of this your wandering and wrangling praeface, and how you
urge them to make for your purpose in this matter. But are you so persuaded
indeed? No, not so: it is an other matter you shoot at. You know, that you had
(for your glory, and for your bellies) very much of late corrupted the truth
of Christ, and that in such sort you had settled your errors in the hearts of
the ignorant, that they cannot be clean rooted out yet. And now, because that
we are so busily occupied, in laying forth, your manifold errors and
corruptions before the people of God, by the Scriptures, by the Fathers, by
Councels, and al (which is the thing that in this age of ours, and as you had
corrupted religion unto us, was, and yet is most of all others to be done of
us) this does go so near unto you, and you find your selves so netled withal,
and so little able to stand against it, that now you cry for books of
devotion. And here it is not unworthy the marking, that so soon as you have
abased us in matters of learning (to advance your selves) immediately you are
so devout, and call so hard for books of devotion: remembering belike, that how
unlearned soever then, in your sudden passion you had made us, yet you found,
that we had already so hardly beset you in matters of learning, in all the
controversies that are betwixt us, that now you thought it best to call us to
books of devotion; that so the folly of Gahal of old might be the more lively
represented in you, unto this present age of ours. Judges 9.
For as he, in the absence of Abimelek, had made light of him, but the next day
after, when he was come needed then to be egged on, turned his back, and was
overthrown: so you likewise, that in a little forgetfulness what foils you had
taken in the matters of controversy that are betwixt us, so boldly bereaved
us of all good learning, by and by after, upon better remembrance of those
matters, brag us so hard with books of devotion, that in the controversies it
seems you grant, that you are not able to go any further, and list not to
hold the field any longer. But as Zebul thereon said unto Gahal, so might any
one of your friends say to you likewise: Where is now thy mouth that said, who
is Abimileck that we should serve him? Is not this the people that thou have
despised? Go out now I pray thee and fight with him. Again, what devotion is
it you speak of? For if you do content your selves with such as the written
word does teach us, it is so vain a quaestio^ for you to demand, and that
in sincerity, which of us have written of any such matter, that it is not
worth any answer, but rather to stand by it self, for a note of your folly
when as it cannot be unknown to you, but that so many of us as have written,
concerning the institution of a Christia^^e have effectually handled that
matter. See Calvin thereon in his Institutio^s, and Musculus in his Common
places (books that cannot be of all others, unknown to you, and therefore I
rather name them) and mark then, whether you find not matter in them,
concerning devotion, piety and contemplation, that you will grant, to have
ouer-reache your self therein. The same may be said of many others. Mark
again; whether in the said book of M. Calvin, you do not find him specially
to treat de vita hominis Christiani: de abnegatione nostru ad crucis
tolerantia: de meditatione futurae vitae: and quomodo vtendum praesenti vita.
Are these no treatises of devotion, piety, etc? And how effectualy he has
done it; the matter it self will testify. The Scriptures you know, do
altogether treat of devotion, piety, etc. and these (you cannot deny) are now
much more fully expounded, and more seriouslly by us commended to others; than
they are by you without comparion. Other places do more specially treat
thereof; as the Ten Commandments, and much of Deuteronomie, and namely that
song of Moses; the whole books of Job, the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
the song of Solomon; certain places of the Prophets also, but especially of the
Evangelists and Apostles, as namely those 3 chapters of S. Matthew. of the sermon
of Christ on the mountain, and many others. And are not al these as faithfully
expounded by us, as by you? Or do you find, that devotion therein is wanting in
us, more tha^ in you? How say you to M. Calvin again upon the Psalms: and in
that which he has done upon Job? can you tell us where to find among your
writers, so many good lesso^s of devotion, piety, etc? Luther also, in this
account, I am sure, you will grant to be ours. And how mightily he beats down
the estimation of all things in the world, eue^ of the greatest excellencies in
man: and how notably he raises up the inner man to those heavenly and eternal
things that are in Christ, as in many other places besides, so especially in
those his Commentaries on the Epistle to the Galathians, it cannot, or ought
not to be so far unknown to you. The argument of the Epistle to the Hebrews is
not of that nature, that it does so readily yield that kind of matter, in the
judgment of most men. And yet how notably and fitly does M. Deering in his
Lectures thereon, in many places, so advance that which is true godliness
indeed, that you cannot find any of those your late masters that you named,
any where to be preferred before him. Erasmus also I think, pleased you not so
well, that you will take him for one of yours. How say you to his Enchiridion
militis Christiani: and de praeparatione ad mortem? Are these no treatises of
devotion, piety, and contemplation? How say you to those that wrote the
Centuries? Have they not a special title De moribus Christ i^^^rum ^^ And
(...) you find nothing therein, that treats of devotion, piety, and
contemplation? Chitnei Regula vi^e; and De morte and vita aeterna: Ri^ius de
consolandis ag^^^ tantibus: as also De stultititia mortalium in pr^^^^^
stinanda correctione vitae: The Sick man's salve by Thomas Becon:
Psychopharmacon Reibn^^di ^^^richii Hadamaris: Bradfords most godly and
heavenly meditations, and many others of like matter, are (no doubt) very well
known unto you, if you be but of half the reading, that you would bear us in
hand that you are: but you can find nothing in them, that concerns devotion,
piety, and contemplation. But hereby you declare, what kind of devotion,
piety, and contemplation it is, that you speak of: such as is either gross
idolatry, or superstition; or at least consisting but only in such outward
exercise as the Apostle sets aside, and allows not to stand for any part
of true devotion. How arrogantly he challenges to him self and his fellows,
that which is the farthest of from them of al others
But having so denied this faculty to us, it is an other pastime to see, on
whom you bestow it. For on whom do you bestow it, but on your selves? it is a
thing peculiar and proper to you alone. A proper matter indeed, and a likely
thing to be true, that such as are so gross idolaters (in whom by good
warrant we may look to find, almost all the iniquity that can be named) so
unshamefast maintainers of the stews; so open defenders of so pestilent
trecheries against their Princes; such as in some cases make no conscience at
all of perjury; yea and the meanest and basest sort of these also, and that is
more, such as of whom the choice and chief of al, even at their deaths, have
(for the most part, no one spark of any true devotion or piety, nor so much
as humility neither: yet notwithstanding should now account their copper so
very good silver, that they can so easily persuade themselves, that they
alone, and none others, are the men that can only treat of devotion, piety,
and contemplation. Have you so long abandoned marriage, and stained your selves
with all pollution? Have you wallowed so long in so abominable and restles
whordoms, with that most shameless strumpet of Babylon, and with all manner of
uncleanness and wantonness with her, that now, when the skum of that your
uncleanness is gone to the bottom, and settled there (because you would not take
it off in time:) yet notwithstanding you can account your selves to be the holy
ones of all the world; and that none others can treat of holiness, but you
alone? Now fie on the folly of such presumption: it is a world to see, in what
a paradise you would settle your selves, if others would but let you alone. How
properly they themselves are occupied in writing books of devotion piety, and
contemplation.
But belike your self did surely dream it, or else you could never have had so
strong a persuasion thereof, as hereby it seems you had. But, if I may be so
bold as to awake you a little without offense, may it please you to wipe your
eyes, to look up, and to consider, how you and your fellows employ your
selves in such kind of labor: you I mean, that are at this day in wilful
banishment for your conscience sake (as ye pretend, and boldly bear the world
in hand) from this your native country of England; saving only when it
pleases you to steal in (to your own advantage, and to help forward some
wicked practice. For as for those others that you allege, of former times, and
of the learned of other countries when you come to this praesent time, your
portion is little or none in them. In all ages and places God is wont to
stir up some, to rebuke the loosenes of those days wherein they live:
especially, when that great loosenes, that popish idolatry brought in amongst
us, did so mightily praeuaile as it did; and yet does at this time also, in
all those countries where yet it reigns. Whereas therefore those that you
have named, do appertain either unto former ages, when popery reigned, or to
those countries that yet are in that miserable captivity, and so consequently
to those times and places that abound in all manner of loosenes, and could not
then, and cannot yet get the opportunity, to debate the controversies of
Religion, nor to sift out the corruption thereof, what other thing were the
former then, or the latter now able to do to better purpose, than to inueigh
so much as they could against that loosenes, that so much ouer-whelmed all
godliness amongst them? But now when we come unto you, our discontented
countrymen of England, such of you especially as are the greatest stirrers and
sticklers in these our days, we would gladly know of you, whither we might
goo, or where we might seek, to find any of you all so tollerably occupied.
To Rhemes? But we see well enough, (and too much a great deal): what matters
you hammer out on your forges there. To Rome? What is it else, but even the
very nursery it self of all these treacheries, whereabout you have been so
long employed; against the law of nature, of man, of God; and what other thing
is it that there you do, but that first you learn those Italian feats; and
then, that you undergo the charge, and address your selves to put them in
practice? Or shall we seek out where otherwise you are; here and there
lurking (with those that are most like unto your selves) within the land? We
may long seek you, before we can find you: you lie so close, and so much
disfigurely your selves besides. But whenever we find you, we are sure of
this, that we cannot otherwise find you occupied, than in defacing the
present state, and the truth it self: and lying the platform of some
rebellion or wicked practisse; or putting the same in execution. As for books
of devotion, piety, and contemplation, write them who will, you are not the
men that will trouble the world with any such matters. Let others take the
pains to do them: it is enough for you, when they are done, to take unto
your selves the glory of them. Though you be not of that disposition nor
temper, that you can occupy your selves with so honest, and godly and
peaceable affairs: yet, when they are done, your temper can bear it well
enough, both to make them as pack-horses unto you, to carry forth your errors
withal; and besides that, to shrewd your credits, and cover your practices,
under the claim and title of them. But that you do so busily take up (and that
in your own person too, loath to trust your harbinger with it) all the rooms
in the Catholic Church, that none may have place there but your selves alone
(who of all others here among us, are farthest from it) that so it might the
rather be thought, that this min^ (of coining books of devotion) goes only
with you, and that (to that end also) you make the truth of Christ so to
participate the very power and force thereof, to your most loathsome ridiculous
popery, as though it could not stand without it: both these points are of such
a nature, at that the bold^ier you do avouch them, the less do we need to
make you answere^

Of the faults that he finds in the Resolution. How iniustly he charge me
with corrupting, falsifiyng, etc.
10 And now that you com to the books themselves, first you begin with the
Resolution: and therein first you charge me with very ill dealing throughout
the whole; and then you come unto certain particulars. The ill dealing that
you lay to my charge throughout the whole, is no less than corrupting,
falsifiyng, and mangling of this your book, and of the Fathers and Scriptures
alleged therein: as appears in this place of your praeface; and in the
title, annotations, and table it self of this your new book. But are you so
liberal, to charge me so deep^ly, upon so small occasion as this? Had you any
thing at all elected your self, Being taken in the manner himself he thinks
best with open mouth to lay it on others.
of the selfsame kind of dealing which he that ^et out your former
Resolution, used toward the original copy, as before I noted by very good
proof in my praeface to the Reader, and out of the third, and beginning of the
fourth chapters of the first part thereof; or but your fellow to whom I pointed
in mine Epistle; then, both I could have ^orne it better; and others might have
thought that you had proceeded more orderly unto it. But you were taken with
the manner: and finding no way to help your self, you thought best to pass
^^ over with silence; and with open mouth to lay that fault to the charge of
others so much as you might. But to let you alone with your own doings, and
to deal no further with you, but only so far as is needful to answer your
wrongful charging of me, did I offer any other discurtesie unto you, but only
that in quietness I left out that which I saw could not well stand? Did I it with
any con^umelie, or bitterness toward you? And did I not plainly profess unto
all, what it was that therein I had done? Did those few things that I added, or
any parentheses (as you call them) put any thing in that was contrary to your
profession, or disagreeing from the argument that you had in hand? If you found
any of those things in me, how is it that you have not brought them to light?
If not, what color of reason had you therein, to exercise the bitterness of
your style against me? Are you so far privileged, that you may set down
whatsoever you lift, without controlment? When you are disposed to set forth
error, they no body (...) maintain the truth? Must you have that liberty and
freedom, to send us in whatsoever you (...) and must we be tied to accept of
all? When you have taken the Fathers and Scriptures captiue^ and abuse them at
your pleasure, and very dishonorably hale them after you, may no body stir to
cut asunder their bands of captivity, and to set them free from such slavery
of yours? When wi^^ find you to have dealt so very injuriously with the godly
Fathers, and with the Scriptures themselves, must it needs be corrupting,
falsifiying, and mangling, to redress the same? But, that you (...) so
desirous to make your case all one with (...) you are to know, that you are but
a scholle^^ you are no Father. If it were ill done, so to deal with the
Fathers: is it therefore ill done so to deal with you? If their writings were
authentike, and such as could not be amended, must yours need^ have that
privilege also? You are too hasty you should first win it, before that you
wear it. But that you think is substantially done, And how? Upon how weak a
groundworke he builds this grievous charge
Forsooth diverse of you have charged us with such matters: and some others
besides of our own company, (as you do charge them) have affirmed the like
the one of the other. Howbeit for this matter, you show your self, and so
much to desire for^ to have the thing it self to come unto trial; as to hold
your self fully contented and satisfied, if you may be allowed so to haunch
at our credit, and yet to be suffered quietly to pass away therewith: you do
so saintly grow to the matter; and keep your self so far off, from that
which concerns the trial of it. For although you would seem to say somewhat
that might be of force so to charge us: yet do you finely give it the slip,
and take unto you another course. You allege no place by us corrupted: you
tell us not what Father, what Council, what Scripture it is, that we have so
abused. Had you named any (such as are not answered already) you knew that
the matter had come to trial: but that, you love not. You know the weakness of
your side so well in these causes, that you thought not good any further to
provoke the trial of it. And what is it then whereon you rely, and which you
have chosen to give some credit to this your slander? What is it else, but
only the bare report of certain others? Some, your own fellows, whose
mouths are found to be no slander, who long since now, and very often have
showed themselves to be more ready so to charge us, than able to prove the
least part that they speak, whenever their sayings are brought unto the
trial: some others again that are nearer to us in their profession, and yet
at variance among themselves, and so in heat of contention (it may be) have
reproched each other much like as you do charge them. But you know well
enough, that neither the whole company, nor every particular person of any
profession, is to be charged with whatsoever any one, or some few of that
profession shall take in hand: and that among the best that ever were, all were
not sound; or at least, either spoke not, or wrote not so circumspectly as they
ought to have done. So falls it out, that whereas you had to (...) the thing
i^selfe (seeing that needs you would take upon you in such sort to say it) yet
being you no more, but only that some others have said ^^: and those also
either at variance amongst themselves, and so not yielding in any such speeches
sufficient groundwork whereon to build an (undoubted assurance that so it is;
or else (which is more) our mortal, and sworn, and known enemies, and
therefore such as make no conscience at all to say the woorst that they can of
us without any evidence or color of truth, and the best that they can of
themselves, as directly as can be devised against the truth. For this matter
therefore, I need not to give you any other answer, than only that same that
your self brings with you Dead pays, you know well enough will do little
sonn^^ in time of need. You bring but a vain floorish, and show: and when you
would rather have noted somewhat your self; you are feign notwithstanding to
go to hearsay, and there to take up your lodging for this. But if we be
disposed to change you with the like, we need not run to that poor help of
hearsay for it: but we can turn you to the places themselves, and those very
(...) both heretofore, and now also.

11 But two special points there are, The places that he specially touches,
do readily turn to his own reproach.
which if I should but generally lap up with the other, it may be, that therein
you would account your self to go away with some advantage: whereas on the
other side, the matters are such, as that therein also the advantage that is,
is against your self. For first, as touching those sentences of Scripture that
you bring in, (the one of the seared, and yron-burned conscience: the other of
those that sin wilfully and damnably in their own knowledge and conscience,
both which you would have to serve your turn against us so far as you could) I
must do you to understand, that they are for the truth, and so make nothing at
al for you, but altogether against you. For concerning the seared and
yron-burned conscience, Of the seared conscience.
whereas we read of two uses of the searing-yron (the one to sear up and
staunch the blood, when some part is new cut away; the other to set on a mark,
or a burn, especially upon notorious offenders, that others may know them) as
the former of them, in all respects, and to all purposes, agrees as fitly to
you as to any, for that now you have given up your selves to a reprobate
mind, and sold your selves to all iniquity, without any sense or feeling at
all, but altogether hardened in your wilful resisting of the truth, and frosen
up in the dregs of your sins: so the latter of them comes nearest to you of
all others, and cannot so fitly be applied to any other, as it may unto you.
For in you do we find, and in your forheades, both those burns or marks of
reproach, which in that place the Apostle does speak of, and in the very next
words that follow: I mean the forbidding of marriage, and meats which God has
created to be used, with giving of thanks of those that are faithful, and
know the truth. Seeing then the Apostle told us before, in what sort they
should be marked, and now we find the same so evidently and plainly in you:
there is no way for you to shift it off, but that needs you must be of that
disfamed and stigmaticall company that the Apostle there describes. I know
that heretofore there were others also: for that is ever the nature of the
world, in all sorts of corrupt religion, to have a great piece of their
devotion in those matters. But what is that to you, to help out your selves
from that account? You may well get others unto you: but you can never get out
your selves. And although there have been some others, that in some measure
have done the like: yet are you able to name none, that have done it so much
as you. So like wise in the other, of sinning wilfully and damnably in their
own conscience and judgment, Of sinning wilfully in their own conscience.
as it also even of it self, and at the first sight did never agree more fitly
to any, than it does to your selves: so might your selves very plainly
perceive it (if you would examine the matter sincerely and truly) by the great
contrariety and contradiction that so plainly appears in your profession.
For whereas you profess your selves to hold all the whole Scriptures, the
old Testament, and the new, although it may seem that you do it, not so much
for any good heart that you bear to the word of God, as to avoid the
outcrie and shame that otherwise you must needs sustain among men: yet seeing
that you do so profess the written word, and it again so directly goes
against many points of your profession, what do you else, but wilfully and
damnably sin even in your own conscience and judgment. Insomuch that it is not
only granted by diverse of you, that in your profession diverse things might well
be amended: but also it has bin by certain of your selves affirmed, ^s
touching ours, Acts and momuments, out of Hen. Pantal. lib. 19. an 1543. in the
story of Mollius, one of the Italian Martyrs. Athanasius abused and falsified.
that it is the truth that we affirm, and yet nevertheless have said withal,
that the same was not meet for this present time, for that it could not be
taught or published without the detriment of the Apostolic sea. Then as
touching Athanasius, whom you bring in to make a grievous complaint against the
Arrians, for corrupting the first Nicene council, we know indeed that you
made him to complain, that the Arrians burnt up the canons of that council,
and destroyed the copies thereof: and this would you gladly let in to the
persuasion of others, by this your smooth allegation thereof. But the truth is,
that after that once you had forged the Council of Nice to speak to your
purpose, and were taken in the manner by the Bishops of Affrike: then to salve
up this matter again, you put an other forgerie thereunto, that such canons as
you alleged, might well enough have appeared, had not the (...) burnt up the
copies, of which you make Ath^^^sius himself to complain unto you. But this
forgerie is so palpable, that many ways it be (...) it self: and by diverse of
us it has been (...) so fully proved unto you, that I need not (...) again
to stand upon it. So here may you see the just judgments of God against you,
and (...) how palpable blindness now you are fallen, (...) whereas you might
have brought many other Scriptures and Fathers to that purpose that you
intended, that is, to show that some are obst^sate, and statly refuse the
manifest truth, and that heretics have corrupted diverse of the Fathers: yet
notwithstanding must you light on these (and none others) that were so fit to
be applied against your selves, and to bewray your own ^^ dealing in matters
of forgerie, which so gladly you would fasten on us.

That he is made to speak like a good Minister of the Church of England.
12 The particulars that you lay to my charge, are some of them the same in
effect, that already you have done in the general charge going before,
charging me with corrupting, mang^ing, and leaving out such things as stand to
your humor but some others of them do vary therefro, and take an other course
unto them. Of those that are to the same effect with the other, some of them
do but concern your self: others the cause that you have in hand. Concerning
your self, you are grieved at this, that I make you to speak (as you say)
after the phrase of Protestants, like a good Minister of England, and as one
that had been trained up in John Caluins schools. But as for your speech I
meddle not with it as it is yours: you may speak as you list for me. But if
we shall hear you in that which is good, you may not look to be allowed such
a manner of speech, as may deprave the thing it self, and be offensive to
those that hear you. We know your meaning well enough, and the intent of him
that reigns in you, the prince of darken^^e. By your good will, you would
give no credit nor estimation to any thing at all that is good but because
that such a course were too open, therefore you can easily content your selves,
sometimes to commend that which is good, so that you may do it in your corrupt
manner, thereby to abolish the power of it. And in the process of your book
we may indeed very well perceive, that you care not how you speak, so that
you speak not like a good Minister of England: and thereupon belike you come in
with your Hobdomndes, Dopositum, Pressures, Confide, and such like choosing
rather, thereby to seem to walk in the clouds than to go on the ground as they
do. But needs must there be a very great desire to vary from others, where
so hard opportunities are rather taken, than none at all. But what are those
places wherein you find your self most grieved on this behalf? Are they any
other but such, as wherein you would have helped out the credit of some
corruption or error of yours, under the name or title of others? Which if in
this I have not allowed you to do; have I therefore made you to (...) as a
Protestant, or one that was (...) John Caluins school? Have I at any time
forced (...) impugnanie one point of your own professione to affirmely of ours:
You have made your (...) but what have you found? In what one (...) you
alleged have I offened that (...) My self did acknowledge what I had done, and
(...) far I had gone for that matter and though I would not suffer you to
speak here among us, (...) (...) you would; yet on the other side, neither did
I urge you to determine with (...) in these controversies that were betwee^^^.
And therefore you have not truly said that in all place (...) conveniently I
might I have made you speak like a good Minister of England neither had. (...)
any time any cause to hope that so good a work might be wroght upon you. I
only mended certain of your grossest phrases, wherein of (...) (but of purpose
withal) you carry forth some (...) also but I would you knew it; that we
should hold him for a ye^i^ had Minister, in the Church of England, that having
such ^cc^sio^ to treat of (...) godliness as here you have taken, should so much
rely on bodily exercise, and wander so far fro^^ble substance of that which
you take in hand, and so weakly a^ow the truth as here is done. Again,
diverse of the matters that you handle, are so impertinently confirmed by the
Scriptures, that you allege (as partly I noted before unto you) that we
should not hold him for a good Minister in our Church, that should apply them
no better than so. One of your profession it might very well become, but it
were a shame for one of ours, to make no better account of the word of God,
than to build such matter thereon as it never meant. And whereas you make so
light account of Master Calvin, that reverend, and godly, and learned Father,
it is no new thing unto us: we know well enough, that because he bears you
down so clean as he does, ^^ none of you al, nor altogether, are able to
resist the power and spirit that is in him, therefore do you guash your teeth
upon him, and ease your stomaks with such reprochful and disdainful speeches,
seeing that learning and truth do both fail you to incou^ter with him. The
examples that hereof you allege are. The first was, that whereas you talked
(as you say) of Catholic priests that hear confessione, I made you to say,
men that be skilful to give counsel. And true indeed, that whereas you had so
framed your speech, as best might serve you to restrain the wife and
comfortable handling, and right managing of a christian soul, only to those
whom you untruly call catholic priests, and withal to establish that lewd
devise of your auricular confession, and to make it a sacrament too: I on the
other side (leaving those your contentious brablings) quietly expressed the
matter you had in hand in such other terms, as might sufficiently express the
thing it self, and not lean to any of those corruptions neither. But as I
forbear to name you; so may you see, that I took not the place to our selves.
Though I (...) out that unruly and disorderly company of yours whom you would
so feign commend unto us under the name of Catholic Priests (then the which
they are nothing less:) yet did I not so fra^^^ it, as that it might seem to
import none but our selves, by putting in the Ministers of the Gospel into
their rooms; but left the description (...) indifferent to you (if so you
could employ yourselues) as I did unto us. This is the partiality that here I
used: and the like might be said of both the others.

How little cause he has to complain of those few parentheses that I had
added.
13 Concerning the cause that you have in hand the matter that you chiefly
charge me withal, is, partly for that I have put thereto somewhat of mine
own: but especially for that I have taken so much out of yours. That which I
put to ^^ mine own, was so little in it self, and so indifferently and
sparingly done, that as you have taken it nothing so grievously as the other:
so in much you needed to have found no fault at all. And yet notwithstanding I
will not deny, but that in this point you had the advantage against me, if
there were any thing material therein: because that the mention thereof was
omitted in my pr^face to the Reader, and the additions themselves (in some few
places) no better distinguished. But now that your self have made the search,
let us see what it is that thereby you have found. The places that your self
have gotten, and wherein you find your self most grieved in this kind, are in all but three. and those of no special importance, but that well they might
have been omitted by me, saving only that thereby you might better perceive
how little cause you had to be offended in this also. First you charge me,
that whereas you had set down, that our Savior being demanded by a certain
Prince, how he might be saved, would give him none other hope, but only by
keeping the Commandments, saying; If thou will enter into life keep the
Commandments; there do I help the matter with a parenthesis, saying, he
would give him none other hope (so long as he sought salvation by his works)
but keep the Commandments. The next is, that whereas you alleged out of
Saint Paul, and out of the Revelations, that men shall be crowned in heaven
according to their fight in his life: I bodged in (as you say) this parenthesis
(in some good measure) thereby to limit the Holy Ghost in his meaning. The
third, and last is, that whereas you alleged plainly the words of Scripture,
No man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred in Gods sight: I added
this parenthesis (by outward things.) These are all the places that you charge
me withal: I likewise do willingly acknowledge that for the first, and last,
it is true; but as touching the second, I say that there you have somewhat
depraved my words, from the sense that I had given them. And now as touching
my doings herein, it was meet, that seeing you labor so much to establish
your own righteousness as to make a way to salvation thereby; and to keep men
always in doubt of the favor of God toward them, so to make your own wares
more saleable to all (and to that end perverted these places of Scripture, the
better to shroud those naughty errors, but gainefull ^^to you, under the
cloak and show of truth) I on the other side, should be as careful, that no
(...) took occasion of error by either of them. Which how could I, on your
behalf, more easily have done, than by giving so brief an interpretation
upon those places? especially, when as my interpretation is such, as is not
mine, but borrowed of others greater than I (as your self does, or may know)
and very agreeable unto the truth of the places themselves. But as touching
this place of Ecclesiastes (which also you have not rightly quoted) whereas it
pleases you to say, that you plainly alleged the words of that place, as
plainly as you have done it, yet notwithstanding, if you will take the pains
to consider of your dooinges again, you may plainly perceive, first that you
have added three words in the end, more than the text it self does yield,
by any translation whatsoever, (though yet notwithstanding it stand well
enough with the sense of the place) then also, these words, he be worthy
(whereon the chief strength of your sense consists) are not found in the
Hebrew it self, nor in Saint Jerome, when of set purpose he interprets the
place; although I deny not, but that in your common vulgar translation (which
gladly you would father upon him) it be there (for this point) as corruptly
interpreted, as it is here alleged by you. So likewise, more specially to
consider of that other place of yours, where you say that I bodged in that
parenthesis (in some good measure) if you mark the place better, you shall
find, that I did not add these words unto the affirmative, as you have
framed them (to your better advantage) which indeed had been more obscurely
spoken: and that you have corruptly cited both my words; and yours also. For
you said before, that none should be crowned there (in the life to come) but
according to the measure of his fight in (...) and thereunto cited those places
of Scripture, which yield no such matter unto you, but only that such as
strive here, shall overcome, and be crowned there; without any apportioning
of it according to their measure of striving, as you had framed it. Whereas
therefore you had further gone than those places did warrant, and would gladly
abuse that also to the mainteinance of some of your errors; not eating in the
mean season how you tormented a weak conscience: which way could I in fewer
words, and with less alteration of those that you had given me, both have
answered those places you cited, and provided for the broken heart against such
discomfortable doctrine, as you would gladly have forced upon it out of the
same? Weigh then the matter a little better, and you shall see the bodging that
you speak of, to be so bound with the ba^^bias that you put on it, that needs
it must hold the contrary course, to that which at first you meant unto it.

Of those follies and errors of his that I left out.
14 But to come to those things that I have taken out of yours, (which is the
greatest cause of your grief against me) those I grant are very ^^nie, and
such as cannot be particularly handle^^ly but that needs it must grow to a
large discourses. But to take a nearer course, what one thing at all have I
stricken out of yours (of this kind that now you charge me with) but only that
which (...) manifest popery; or at leastwise tended thereunto, in such sort as
you had placed it? Whereas therefore such vanities of yours are already (in
these days of the Gospel) so manifestly discovered, and many of our
profession have in their writings declared the same, such as are not answered
by you as yet, nor ever can be (as now it (...) plainly appear, by such
weak endeavors as you have made, in whatsoever you have taken in h^^^) what
reason was there, to leave so gross corruptions therein: especially when those
are matters of doctrine; and this book of yours (if so I may call it)
professes no other, but only to labor amendment of life? Must it needs be so
grievous to you that of these things that were of diverse arguments, we might
not take to our selves the one, but that needs we must take the other also?
Need we your heathenish fable of Purgatory, Purgatory.
to persuade unto good life? Are not those infinite, and altogether undeserved
favors of God the Father in Jesus Christ, sufficient to move those that are
already come in, to the knowledge, and fear, and love of him, and the
torments of hell (which are no fable but (...) indeed) sufficient to bring into
the fear of him, those that are without as yet? Or, if those cannot, can your
fained Purgatory do it? May we in no wise think it sufficient to confess
our sins unto God, Auriculat confession.
and that with a true and godly sorrow, but that needs we must reckon up all
to one of you (that so busily pry into all men's dooinges, and into the secret
intents of alll for the better accomplishment of your own unclean, and
naughty endeavors) and be content to undergo, what you shall think good to
lay upon us? When we clearly hold, that wherein we have offended our
neighbor, we are, in that case, to acknowledge our faults unto him, and to
reconcile our selves again: must we yet have any other than God, to whom of
necessity we are further to resort, and to make our confession unto? And as
for your Satisfaction, Satisfaction.
when as we make no question at all, but that we are ever to satisfy to our
neighbors, for such hurts or wrongs as we have done unto them; and otherwise
also do readily grant, that the more we have lived in sin, the more careful
should we be to employ the rest of our time in the fear and service of God: is
there no remedy but that needs we must go so far with you, as to make that
slender account of sin, that, when one way we have sinned; we may an other
(...) make amends into God for the same? Moonks.
Is it how sufficient for us to have in reverence those (...) men of old, that
either to be safe from persecution, or to avoid the general corruption of the
world, withdrew themselves aside to some godly exercise among themselves; and
those that since in any other^ age have done the like: but that needs we must
have in the like estimation those belly gods of yours, that of purpose forsook
al honest labor; (...) enjoy their ease, and the pleasures of sin without
controlment? Or are you able to name any thing at al, wherein those late Moonks
of yours, were (...) to those godly fathers before, under whose name you would
so gladly cloak the most filthy pollution of these? Virginity and chastity,
Virginity.
such as is (...) indeed, we acknowledge to be the good gifts of God, and a
part of that service; that, in their kind^^ very acceptable and welcome:
chastity always, and of all sorts whatsoever, virginity also in such as
(...) the gift, and are called unto it. And may not this lie enough for us,
unless we make it a ni^^r with you^ both to iustle marriage clean but of credit
for the holier sort^ and to cover th^se ^oul pollutio^s, which your forced
forbearing of we (...) to tell you. As for wilful poverty, Wilful poverty.
what talk you of it. Who knows not, that, (...) which is wilful poverty
with you, is so full and peace (...) all the wealth, and pleasure of the world
the sides (...) not found (where these houses stand as the, (...) wont) in any
other estate or sort of (...)uer? And why should you take it so ill, that we
accent not of such Apparitions as you speak of? Apparitio^s.
As if we knew not, both that we have whatsoever we need, in the written
word, and that you have bewraied, as well your infidelity, in that you have
the^ in such estimation; as your folly in crediting of the^. As for your
chastising of the body, Chastising of the body
sackcloth, hairecloth, and lying on the ground, first you need not be so much
offended with me, for leaving the^ sometimes out of your book, when as your
selves do altogether leave them out of the whole course of your life and
doings. But delicate wantons must needs be talking of such great matters: if
not of a certain humor they have, so to content and flatter themselves; yet (at
the least) to make others believe that they have such things in some
admiration. But seeing they are allowed to you when you do not abuse them, may
you justly complain, if they he withdrawn from you, when you wrest them to some
abuse? When you put holiness it self in those things, that are but bodily
exercise only, or when you would have such things to be of force to do away
sin: is it not time look to your fingers, and to take heed that we leave not
so perilous weapons in their hands, that either cannot tell how to use them, or
are disposed therewith, to hurt themselves or others? When you bring them in,
not as things that are godly in themselves, but as excercises tending to it nor
allow the^ the power of satisfiing for your former sins, are you able to name
any place where they are put out? So likewise, who is there but will
acknowledge, Watching, weeping, abstinence, fasting.
that watching, weeping, abstinence, and fasting, being rightly used, are
very good exercises of true godliness? that is, when our watching is, to be
advised of our estate in the way of godliness: our weeping on the behalf of our
sins, or exile here in this mortal life: our abstinence, to forbear such
things as may hinder our service to God: and our fasting either a special
endeavor, to do some piece of service to God; or a set mourning, either for
sin, or other calamity. In this sense if you commend them, who is it that
finds fault with you? but if you set the^ to do away sin, and attribute
that virtue unto them, or any otherwise abuse them to your own fancy, was it
not meet that they should be delivered from such ill dealing? Merit.
Your works of merit hire, laboring for reward, gaining of heaven, and the
facility that you suppose therein, do (...) remain: which also you complain
to be strooken out. So are they indeed. For what reason was there, to let them
stand? Is it not enough for you to have heaven offered unto you, but that you
must have it by your own purchase also? Or being your self so vainly
persuaded of the righteousness that is in man, must we needs let the same stand,
to the dishonor of God, and overthrow of others? If needs you will think so
well of your selves, and of your own three-halfepeny works, yet there let it
die, and go no further: let not others be troubled with it, nor have the
infection of so dangerous, and vain an opinion brought before them. Works are
good, when they are done for the service of God; to glorify him, or to
benefit others: but if you do them, to gain heaven, you have made them odious
to God; and your self is an hireling also.

15 Those that vary from the nature of these others going before, Of my
Annotations.
and take unto them an other course (not charging me now, with corrupting,
falsifiyng, and such like, but only with want of wit, discretion, or grace)
are such as you gather out of my Annotations: of which you say, some are fond;
others absurd; and a third sort wicked. Howbeit as fond as I am, yet thus much
have I marked withal, that although you do reply to certain of them, where you
think that they have some matter for you: yet on the other side, where you are
able to say nothing against that which I have noted, (which we may find in
many of them) you do not there acknowledge your oversight, but only pass it
over with silence, and still hold on your wonted course: loath to amend it,
though you see that you cannot defend it. But to consider of those wherein you
think that you have the advantage, and first as touching those that are fond,
Of those that he calls fond.
whereas I have given a note of a point, wherein Philosophers were long since
deceived, A note of Philosophers, taken to himself and his fellows.
and out of which certain of our deuines had taken occasion of error also:
you cry out a-maine, that I charge you and your fellows to hold that error.
Whereas notwithstanding I never meant, neither you, nor your fellows neither,
and my words are clear enough in themselves: because I spoke of Philosophers,
and not of you; and of the divines of a time past, and not of the time that now
is present. And seeing you cannot but know, as I do take it (propter summam and
doctoris authoritatem and vrbis) but that most of the ancient Philosophers do
hold, that anima sequitur temperaturam corporis, and that not only diverse of
our Physicians in times past, that stuck so much to natural reason doubted of
the souls immortality, but certain of our divines also, that were wont to
take their light so much from Philosophy, were somewhat likewise deceived
hereby: how comes it to pass, that none of these considerations, nor
altogether could help you to understand, that I meant neither you, nor your
fellows? For notwithstanding these considerations, and the euidencie of the
place it self (see now how far the desire of contention has blinded your
eyes) and that it could not with any indifferency, be wrested to this supposed
sense of yours: yet as though the matter were clear, and could not be
otherwise, you thereupon take it marvelous hotly, and call it patching, cobling,
lying, and fondnes. But the less that you find any such thing, in that which
is there set down by me; the more must it rest on that which thereon is so
unadvisedly gathered by you: and considering how wide you were in this matter,
what lets now, but that ye might well take home again some of those your
toyish speeches, aduising your self a little better, who now it is that has
affirmed, that which is neither so, nor so, and whether it be you or I, that
is that good man, that understands not what he does say, or his aduerse-part
does hold, albeit (if ye believe him) he has studied the schoolmen. And but
that you are possessed already with so inordinate affections, as many ways you
show your self to be, you could never so far mistake this as you did; unless
you have some privy gal in your profession that belike was a little rubd thereby.
As in this you have mistake^ me, so because in another place you have mistook
your self, seeing no reason in the death of Christ, and I took you with it,
alleging there was great reason in it that Christ should die: Whether there be
any reason or not why Christ should die, if we should be saved.
here you can in no wise take it in another sense, but that I would make the
mystery of our redemption, no matter of faith, but only of reason. So that
whereas before by declaring that you saw no reason in it, you made it known,
that you little understood the mystery of our salvation in him (and so
consequently could minister but cold comfort to others for that matter in time
of need:) so, by this your interpretation of my admonition thereon, you show
your self not desirous to learn any better; nor in good part to take it, being
offered

16 Then concerning those that you call absurd, Of those that he calls absurd
first you come to my note of the knowledge that we shall have one of another,
Of the manner of our knowledge one of another in the world to come.
after our resurrection in the kingdom of God, which you hold to be such, as
shall consist of that earthly knowledge that we now have in this life; and
altogether omitting the reasons that I alleged, you content your self with
the ods of the persons that you would seem to have conceived, and there you
rest. Howbeit you were to have known, both that Cyprian in that his sermon by
occasion of the pestilence that then so raged in those parts, endeavoring
himself to imbolden the people to be willing to die if God should call them,
might very well utter (in the way of persuasion) many things, whereon it were
not good to build any general doctrine: and that all the opinions of the
learned, either of him or any other, are not always to be received. Then
also, that you would seem to set so much by Cyprian, it is no more but your
wonted vanity: as, upon disdain, you do in like sort make light of others.
You would gladly shroud your selves under the credit, and reverend estimation
of the godly Fathers: but in truth you esteem of none of them all, but so
far as you hope to wrest them to your own naughty purpose. So that although
Cyprian were indeed as fully on your side, as you face us out that he is: yet
notwithstanding there is no just cause for you to make it so clear a matter,
as that there may be no question of it. The place of Cyprian abused.
But now in truth, there is no such matter as you pretend. For whereas you did
speak of our natural parents, kinsfolk, and friends (as by the course of
your words appeered before; and because that now in that respect you have
rejected my Annotation thereon, which otherwise granted the selfsame matter,
as we are members of one body; and, besides these, by that wise note of yours,
which you have set in the margent of the book it self) it is most certain
and very plain, that no man can gather, that S. Cyprian meant it of those, but
rather that he meant it only of such, as before I had allowed unto you in that
annotation. And there he uses an argument of the desire that all men commonly
have, when they are abroad in other countries, to return home again to see
their friends. Hereupon he infers as follows. Patriam nostram paradisum
computamus: parents nostros patriarchas habere iam coepimus: quid non
properamus and currimus, vt patriam nostram videre, and parents salutare
possimus. Magnus illic nos chaerorum numerus expectat, parentum, fratrum,
filiorum, frequens nos and and copiosa turba desiderat, etc. that is, we
account that paradise is our country; we have now begun to have the Patriarks
to be our Fathers: why do we not make have and run, that we may be able to see
our country, and salute or parents? A great number of friends do there await us,
of parents, of brethren, of children, a great and mighty company does (there)
desire us, etc. Whereby we may see, that whereas it is the common nature of all,
to cover and desire to be with their friends, he does give them to understand,
that there they have a great number of friends, of al sorts, that will be glad of
their coming. Insomuch that howsoever a man's desire is, either to his father,
or to his brother, or to his son, or howsoever else (as all, we know are not
alike delighted with every one; but one with his parents, another with his
brethren, a third with his children, and so forth with the rest) there shall he
have in that holy and blessed company his own desires fully satisfied, and be
sure to find (to his full contentation) either parents, or brethren, or
children, or wife, or neighbor, or friend or whomsoever else the link of
Christian unity and love can make delightful or dear unto us. That this is
the sense of the place (and not that, which you have so grossly gathered) it
app^eereth in this, both for that he alludeth to those that are in foreign
countries, and desirous to see their own country and natural friends (and so
consequently, arises from the consideration of these, and returns not unto
them again, but to others) and because that himself sets down, who are
those parents that he means, that is, the Patriarks, or holy Fathers, and
not as you did grossly suppose, our natural parents. And the better to
confirm, that he meant not any such earthly knowledge to remain, within
almost as much of the beginning, as this place of yours was toward the ending,
he plainly says, that, when we do: part hence thither, terrenis coelestia,
and magna paruis and caducis aeterna fuccedunt: that is, that unto earthly
things do heavenly succeed; and that in place of small things, and brittle, we
shall there enjoy (such, as are both great and aeternall^ Whereas therefore, the
knowledge of father, mother, wife, or children, and such like here in this
life such I mean, as you did speak of) is but earthly, small, and brittle,
therefore we may see that this holy Father meant not, that such knowledge as
this, should have such a place in the kingdom of God, or with those
immeasurable and vnspea^le ioies, that there the Saints of God should enjoy.
Herein may your self sufficiently perceive at the least, you have made it
plain unto others) how untruly you deal with the Fathers that you allege: and
upon how sure a groundworke they stand; that think they may safely believe
you, in these your vain brags of the Fathers. And as for your ten couple of
Bunnies, that, as you gibe, weigh not so much in affairs of the soul, as one
Cyprian, first you see that Cyprian now, under whom you would feign have
shrouded your folly, has so ^at left you, that if you knew where to get ten
couple of Cyprians mo, you would not stick (as now it seems) to falsify
all, to make good your answer unto this and half couple of Bunnies, that you
have chosen to wrangle withal: then also, as Cyprian here does plainly refuse
to be so far abused by you, so I trust, that as for this one couple of Bunnies
(of whom it seems you take occasion to make your couples) by the goodness of
God we shall be (...) (the weaker of us) in this cause to with (...) the worst
you can do, and so to discover your shift^ withal, that fewer shall be deceived
by you. Secondly, coming to the rule of S. August. S. Augustines rule.
which you would gladly that men should have thought to (...) been such a thing,
as since was taken up by your unclean cloisterers, you are there offended with
(...), first for that I say that it was ^i^ a more careful (...) in the way of
godliness: then, for that I added further (as you say) that it was but such as
we are all bound unto. Against which you allege S. Augustine himself and
Possidonius, Augustine and Possidonius both abused together.
as though they told us of other matters, such as I denied (...) you in my
Annotation: and you set so good a sa^^ on the matter, that such as know not
your qualities, What Saint Augustines rule was generally.
may easily be deceived with you. But what do you find in either of them, but
(as before I said) that which tends but only to a more careful endeavor in
the way of godliness; and nothing at all helps to countenance the superstition
or loosenes of those orders of yours? You called for them, and lo they are
come: but what can you get them to say for you, in that which now we have in
hand? You made as though they were altogether yours, and that so fully as might
be wished^ but when they are come, they have nothing at all to say for you, nor
for any of those your orders. What it was more specially as touching wiuing.
But whereas in the latter of those my Annotations I said, that we are all
bound to that same that there I speak of, by occasion of that word bound, you
busily seek to him in some poor advantage unto your self: that is, that,
especially as touching wiuing^ you think that Saint Augustines rule contains
somewhat more, than I and my fellows at this day do practice. It is not to be
denied, but that now (...) his conversion he gave over the desire of marriage
and would not have women cohabit with him. Good reason why S. Augustine should
refuse to cohabite with women, and yet that to be no rule unto others that are
not in the like case with him.
But when as he had lived so loosely before, and kept a concubine, only for
his pleasure, without regard of procreation, could such inordinate affections
of his, have any place in sound conversion? And when he had so large
experience of his former infirmity, was it not wisdom for him, now to take
heed of their company also: or when he had fallen before, might he not easily
have grown into suspicion again, unless he had used some such prevention?
Could not he that desired no children (and therefore desired not the use of a
woman, but only to content his inordinate lust) think marriage to be no
needful estate for him: but that such as joy in that blessing of God must
needs abandon marriage also, and have it thought unseemly for them? Or if he,
upon his own special disposition (by course of nature) found it needful for
himself to live apart from them, did he therefore prescribe the self same rule
to all others besides, or must it be as needful for others as (in that case)
it was for him? Or was this any more, than (as the case then stood with him) a
more careful endeavor in the way of godliness (as before I said) saving that he
did more specially frame it to his own proper use? But now to come to your
selves, Forgetting how far themselves are polluted with all uncleanness, he
condemns lawful marriage in us.
could you so far forget how abhominably you defiled your selves and others,
for want of marriage (which wilfully, and with great reproach you abandoned from
you) that now you can have the face to find any fault with us for lawful
marriage? Where such unshamefastness is so readily found, it avails little
there to bestow any sound advise. But what cause had you so to deprave that
latter annotatiou of mine (as you had placed it?) My Annotation depraved.
Did I say, as you have made me to say, that Saint Augustines rule was but such
as we all are bound unto? I said it not: but comparing Saint Augustines
conversion, with that other of Anthomes before, I said that it might well be
doubted, whether Saint Anthony had on that place sufficient groundwork of
those his doings, unless he had some special motion besides: but that it was
otherwise with Saint Augustine, whose conversion was not but to such things as
we all are bound unto, and upon such a place as speaks to all. So it is
very clear, that I spoke of his conversion generally, as he was become a
Christian, and not of his Rule, as you ouer-ruled my words at your pleasure.
If you think indeed, that you have such advantage as you praetend, what need
you then so eagerly to follow upon so pettite helps as these? Lastly, Of the
assurance that we have in God.
you are again offended that I will not suffer you quietly to run away with
that gainefull point of your doctrine, the vncontaintie of the favor of God
toward us: and because you have nothing else to say against that which I
alleged out of the Apostle, therefore both you carpe at it by the poor help
of an aequiuocation, and whereas I spoke but of that assurance, that the
faithful may (...) of themselves, you make fair toward it, to enlarge my
words to a further meaning, as though I had meant, that they might have been
judges of others also: I long to see, when you will take any one thing in
hand, wherein you will speak any thing at all to the purpose, and yet seek
no other advantage; than the place it self will give you.

17. So these you say are fond, and absurd: but these are nothing to those that
follow; for they are wicked. Of those that he calls wicked
Ill halting beliked before a criple. But now let us see, what that wickedness
is, that these Annotations are charged withal. This you lay forth by these
three places: the first, about the conversion of Saint Anthony; the next,
about the conversion of Saint Augustine; the third, about the silence of the
blessed Virgin, when Christ in her hearing; was so much blasphemed. In the
conversion of Saint Anthony you charge me with this, The conversion of S.
Anthony
that whereas he, hearing the sentence of the Gospel, Go, and sell all that
thou have, etc. and taking it as spoken unto him in particular, thereupon went,
and sold all that he had, and gave it away to the poor: I thereupon noted,
that it might well be doubted, whether he had in that place sufficient
ground-woorke for those his doings, unless he had some (other, say you)
special motion besides. This is one of those great points of wickedness that
you charge me withal; and this note you say, is scornful and irreligious.
Answer me therefore, is that sentence, Go and sell all that thou have, and
give to the poor, etc. spoken in differe^th to all, or not: or, which is the
same, are al Christians bound thereby, to go and sell all that they have; and to
give it to the poor? If you say they are, the do you indeed say somewhat to the
defense of this your wrangling censure: but then on the other side you run your
self so far on the shore, that you will never be able to recover it again.
If you grant that all are not, and that men may be good Christians, though
they sell not all that they have, and give it away: then are you driven (will
you, nill you) to allow of mine Annotation thereon, though now in a toy you
have cast it off with great reproach. In the conversion of S. Augustine, The
conversion of S. Augustine.
your grief against me is, for that when you did so much commend the manner of
his conversion, without exception of any thing at all thereunto apperteining,
I, considering that certain things therein might give over much credit to
certain distempered humors of flesh and blood (as, for a man to leave his
function and calling belonging to the affairs of this life, and to betake
himself, as they say, to continual prayer, and contemplation those also that
are married, thereupon to part the one from the other, and that sometimes
without consent of the other part first had, which are to be seen in the
story of a couple, of whom he makes mention in the eight book of his
Confessions, and sixth chapter) gave this note on it, that some points of the
story are large are such, as that a man may as well doubt the readiness of
Satan to illude and deceive: as behold to our comfort the goodness of God in
his conversion. And this you say I did, to bring in quaestion that excellent
man's conversion. But why then have you so much gelded my note, My Annotation
dismembered.
as you did? Why have you so clean left out the latter part of it, which would
very clearly have discharged me of that suspicion, when as I said that we
might behold to our comfort, the goodness of God in his conversion? You saw well
enough what it was that I bent my style against. Which because you were not
able with any credit to defend, and yet were desirous to make your self a
way to find some fault, therefore both you turned it an other way, and
purposely left out those words of mine that made against you. And yet
(forsooth) needs must you have this note of mine to be most ridiculous, and
yet blasphemous. About the B. Virgin you storm exceedingly, The silence of the
blessed Virgin.
as though you went about to make the world believe, that she had no friends on
earth, but only your selves. And what is the matter wherein I have so much
offended? That which I said, did I restrain unto the blessed Virgin alone: or,
to her and to those other women, that there I spoke of? Had not your self, or
your former Author, first set down (by occasion of the like discourse out of
Augustine) that the confession of the thief was therein more welcome, because
that Christ was not acknowledged of other at that instant? Did not your self,
or your former Author, thereupon set down, first in this place, that all the
world forsook Christ, and even the Apostles themselves, either doubted or lost
the faith of his Godhead: and in the next section following, out of Augustine,
that therein the perfection of the just did stagger? When you had thus laid
down their sin in gross: might not I show the particulars? But I noted the
B. Virgin (but other godly wom^ withal) to be of that company. I did so indeed,
and why not? Does it not make the reason (you bring) so much the stronger? Does
it not follow, that the more he was forsaken, the more welcome must be the
thieves confession? when you had gathered to that account all the world, and the
Apostles themselves; do you take it so ill, that I should glean after you, and
bring in those few? Or would you have us to think, that already you have
bestowed all your goodwil so fully upon the B. Virgin, that you have left none
at all for the Apostles, for those godly women, nor for all the world besides?
You may tell us so, if you list, but you can never make any believe you. Would
you plainly tell us, what commandments were broken by those others, your
self should ease me in the same, which so hotely you lay to my charge. But
that recou^ting the sins of the faithful (not to their dishonor; but to Gods
glory, and our edifieng) should be to bring them as a pray into the claws of
the devil, when as notwithstanding the speech is not but of those, that without
question are sound believers, is such a properdish of divinity, as that it is
pity, but that you Jesuits should ever keep it in, to your selves, and
never draw forth any part thereof unto others. We know that our Jesus is
the Savior of none, but of sinners only. But if I, for so easy and needful
recounting of some few sins of certain of the faithful, deserve such a fee
at his hands that you speak of, what may we think that he will hold such a
Proctor as your self worthy of, that so smoothly can lull men asleep in
opinion of their own so absolute cleannes: to so manifest a contradiction of
the word of God; and to the overthrowing of souls unto perdition? But the
matter that galleth you, is this-Seeing that it is in so fresh remembrance with
you, how fowlie and shamefully with much adoo at length you obtained, to have
it set down for a tolerable opinion, and not to be gainsayed by any, that the
Virgin Marie was altogether without sin, you are now so very loath to hear of
any thing that may call it in quaestion, as that (the rather to proppe up your
great idolatry to her committed) you would have all accounted as fond, that
are not therein as haereticall and blasphemous as you. But the less marvel it
is that you deal so with me, when as some of you have not been ashamed in
much like sort to deal with Saint Jerome himself in that very matter that now
is betwixt us. For whereas he (in his answer to the eight question of
Algasia) by occasion had plainly set down, that there was none without sin,
but Christ alone (and yet with great circumspection, that he did not thereby
impeach the dignity of any of the godly, of which he reckons Job,
Zachary, and Elizabeth) some of you notwithstanding in the end of that his
Treatise have added this Antidotus (in his works printed at Paris, anno 1534.)
that solum Christum eximit a peccato, qu^niam de his nondum definer at
Ecclesia: that Saint Jerome (therefore) exempted Christ only from sin, because
the Church had not yet determined those matters. If therefore in this matter
you deal so with him, I may take it so much the better, that therein you so
deal with me. Nevertheless when as you make such a wonder at it, and count it
to be so absurd a matter, and so impossible to be declared, you declare your
self to be either marvelous ignorant in the sense and meaning of the
commandments; or else to bear so ill an heart to the truth it self, that you
will not acknowledge it, when you see it. Otherwise how could you but see, and
acknowledge withal, that to suffer Christ so to be reproched, and in the mean
season (though it were but for fear) to say nothing in his defense must needs
be a breach of the first Commandment as he was God, and had not his honor by
them given unto him: of the fifth, as he was their Messiah, their Anointed
Priest, Prophet and King, and yet was not so avouched by them: of the sixth, as
this their silence was, or might be offensive to others (offenses being
spiritual murder:) and of the ninth, though he were not but a man, in that
he had not his good name by them defended? But in the mean season you have
made this point clear, that they are marvelous happy men that have you for
their teachers: that either do not understand the principles of Religion; or
cannot in any wise be content to confess an open truth, when as you see that
it does reprove your wonted errors. As for the words of contempt and reproach,
that here you do interlace, and in your Annotation of the place it self, that
herein I am ridiculous, and blasphemous, and that worthy prayer of yours,
God help the fond man, I doubt that I may not be so bold as to take them from
you, because they are the chiefest weight of all that you bring for that
matter: at least for my part for this present time, I do return them to your
self again from whence they came, until you shall bring others more worthy
some answer.

18 But that upon the praemises you take on so in the end, Of his vain and
frivolous illation, upon the premises.
that we have no honest meaning, no fidelity, no conscience, no respect of God
or man, that deal in this order: that it is not hard, to found any new
religion, or to defend it, nor to avouch what folly or falsehood soever by this
manner of proceeding: that if we had ability to our will, our consciences would
permit us to make, I wot not what alteration, subversion, and metamorphosis in
all matters of antiquity: that if we had to our selves the setting forth of
the holy Fathers and Doctors works, we would lop them, and circumcise them,
and set them forth in their ierkins, yea, bare hose and doublets: and that, if
we had the keeping of all antiquities, fathers, councels, and scriptures alone
to our selves, as you had, we would make them current and absolute for our
profession, and frame them to speak even as John Calvin speaks in all
matters of controversy, or rather, as that good man for the time would have
them speak, unto whose hands the last edition of such works should be
committed: all this is, so much as concerns us, but a vain and causles
out-crie; and, so much as concerns you, a false, and a foolish Tesuiticall
out facing of that which you know to be nothing so. For what cause have I given
you, either in this sort to charge me; or (for my sake) so impotently to run
upon others, and to pour forth upon them so plentifully, what the
distemperature of your unquiet brain can imagine, or the volubilitie of your
slanderous tongue can vtter^ Have you herein any cause to complain, that we have
no honest meaning, no fidelity, no conscience, no regard of God or man? Are
not these very grievous accusations? And must it of necessity follow, that
either you have in this dealing of mine, some special cause so far to complain:
or else, that you make no conscience at all, falsely to accuse; and to bear ^
show as though you had much matter against us, wherein notwithstanding you
know you have none? And so, because it is evidently seen, that herein you
have no such cause to complain, as you would seem by such an out-crie to have
(eu^ in the judgment of your own adhaerents) therefore have you now even in
this only (though we had no other proof at all against you, as indeed we
have very much) sufficiently declared, both that such complaints of yours do
not ever import any fault in us: and that this heavy charge of yours, of no
honest meaning, no fidelity, no conscience, no regard of God or man, finding
no place to light upon us, returns home to your self again, as to the
proper owner of it.

19 To say somewhat particularly, How little cause was given by me that so he
should charge us.
both of my faultines in this matter, and especially of the innocence that you
claim to your selves, have I herein so much as attempted, to make the book,
that I did publish to seem to be yours, in such sort as I had published the
same? Did I not both in the Title briefly, and in the Praeface more at large
plainly praemonish and acknowledge, what I had done for that matter? Did I not
persuade my self, think you, that if therein I had left you any advantage
against me, you would have been ready to take hold of it: and have not your
self verified that conjecture of mine, that so mightily storm for nothing at
all? And though I had not regarded you, yet for mine own credits sake, I might
in no wise have set it forth in such sort as I did, and withal bear the world
in hand, that so it was set out by you. For who would have believed, that one
of the adhaerents of the Church of Rome, a wilful exile from his country for
that foreign pre^ates sake, and of (blind zeal, or vain hope, or for
impunitie) a professed Friar (as it is thought) would ever publish any such
book so little infected with their own unsavory opinions? All men know well
enough in what manner you speak, and what ye write: nothing at al, when you are
in your proper vain, but contentious brablings, or traitorous libels, or, when
you come forth under a vi^ard, borrowing for a purpose the show of some
godliness, to make it a packe-horse to carry forth your popery by it. If I
therefore should have given forth the same as yours, I had not only given
forth an untruth of you, but also I had discredited my self, for that no body
would have believed, that so corrupt branches as you, and your fellows are
known to be, could ever bring forth any fruit that is so little corrupted.
And as for your self, you need not to fear, that it would be altogether
accounted yours: unless you were sure that there be none, that can set down
such a petigree of it, as that they leave a very small portion thereof to be
yours (but those brabling points of popery only.) I have heard long since, and
not, sought out by me, by one that has travailed in those parts, that your
self did but translate the Book that now you call yours, and added unto it
most of those points of popery, and not much besides: and that the Book was
before in the Italian tongue, and in Italy commonly sold, and by the reporter
read there. But whether it be so or not I cannot say, nor will not ground upon
report. If it be so, your self best knows: and then there is the less cause
why you should take this matter so hotely. Sure I was when first I read it,
that a latter had busily added unto the doings of the former: and that chiefly
in matters of popery, as in my preface before I noted. And since I saw your
latter book I was thereby much more strengthened to think that whose soever
the better part of the forine book was, without all quaestion it was none o^
yours. But to return to my self again, seeing that I had sufficiently
acknowledged and published to all, that it was not done by you in such sort
as it was set forth by me, you have no cause hereby to gather, that we are so
void of honest dealing, fidelity, conscience, and regard of God and man, that
if we had the keeping and setting out of the Fathers, as you have had, we
would lop them, and circumcise them, and make them to speak as our selves
would. I have done no more yet, but only that I would not suffer you to
traile them in, against their wills, and to make them speak as you would have
them: I have not labored to make them speak as we would have them.

20 And so now to come to your selves, that have had those monuments of
antiquity so long in your keeping, How faithfully the later church of Rome
has kept the monuments of antiquity.
and have (as you would feign have the world persuaded) so truly kept them, and
so faithfully set them forth to others, herein you discover your unshamefast
and graceles nature so far, that no body needs to lay you more open than you
do your self. For what man, that has any honest shame, can so confidently
bear the world in hand, in that which himself does know to be most untrue?
and that, not only for the time that is past, but also for this time that now
is present. For, as touching the time that is past, how can you be ignorant
(would you never so feign) of the great corruptions and forgeries, that your
Church of Rome has ever used? Immediately after that persecution was ceased,
and that you had gotten a little rest, beginning to devise for your own
advancement, did you not labor to have corrupted the Nicene council, The
Nicene Council.
and that so grossly that you were manifestly taken withal, by the whole
council of Carthage, S. Augustine himself being one of the Fathers that took
you with it: And when you were taken with the manner, did you then acknowledge
your fault, and ask forgiveness, that we might conceive hope of grace, and that
you would use it no more? No, but having the forhead of an harlot that shameth
with nothing, you added an other forgerie unto it to save your credit withal;
bringing in Athanasius complaining, that the Arrians had burnt all the copies of
most of those canons of the Nicene Council: so to make some show to the world,
that those bishops of Affrike did not justly give you the repulse in that your
ambitious attempt; but that all they did want the full copies of that council,
which notwithstanding you then had, and thereby made the claim that you did.
Afterward, when you had gotten on cock-horse, and were desirous to make the
world believe, that it was not of new usurpation, but from reverend antiquity
most certainly descended, how did you then altogether follow upon that
naughty practice, forging many decretall Epistles under the names of most of
the Fathers, Decretall Epistles.
exceedingly aduauncing your praerogatiue, and commending your ceremonies, and,
besides that, making a fair deed of gift in the name of Constantine the
Emperor, Constantines gift.
unto Siluester the Pope of all the West part of the Empire, after that to
remain unto the Pope alone? And had not the just judgments of GOD ouer-taken
you with your ignorance and folly, or (as we commonly say) had your skill
been to your will, how had the Church of God been unto this day deceived
with those pamphlets? How loath should we have been to have doubted of any
of these your gross corruptions, so long as they should shroud themselves
under the names of so reverend Fathers? But (God be thanked for it) your
forgeries do hang so properly together, that they do no sooner come to the
light, but that by and by they show themselves what they are: insomuch that
now diverse of your selves have written against them; and some others besides
(though loath to behold the weakness of this their cause, but so little as may
be) yet notwithstanding are very ill ashamed of them.

21 If we come to the Fathers, The Fathers. S. Jerome.
in some few of them it may be seen, what we may look for in the rest. In
the works of Saint Jerome, as you have set them forth unto us (as the books
them selves will witness) the whole fourth Tome you know is none of his: nor
in the seventh any thing but his Commentary upon Ecclesiastes; in the
eight, but his translation according to the Hebrew, nor that very certainly
neither; in the last but only his Commentaries on Matthew, on four of S.
Paul's epistles, and his translation of the book of Didimus of the holy Ghost.
But many others (you know well enough) are joined unto them, and go under the
name of his works generally. In which case if a man should ask, who are the
likeliest to have shufled in these, among the true woorkers of that Father, and
to put them out in his name; it were easily answered, that in reason it were
like to be those, that have had the keeping of them, and to whose purpose they
are fitliest framed: which, as you know, comes near unto you, and that in
such sort, as that in no wise you are able for to clear your selves of great
fault therein. Of Augustine likewise you know it is set down, S. August.
that in such matters men have made as bold with him, as with any other of
the Fathers besides. As for example, in the ninth Tome of his works, where
there are about seven and forty several works under his name generally, yet
notwithstanding there are not past seven (or thereabout) that are known to be
his; and all the other forty flatly rejected, saving a very few of them
that are but doubted. In the last tome likewise of his fifty homilies he has
about half: of his sermons de tempore, not fully out a tenth (for he has but
about 43. of 256:) of his sermons de sanctis, he has a dozen, of one and
fifty: and of his sermons ad fratres in eremo, of threescore and sixteen, he
has but six, and your Abbat Tritthemius himself, in his recital of the
Ecclesiastical writers, when he comes to this Father, he does not only
put out by name certain of those (as none of his) which you notwithstanding
commend unto us among the rest: but also does add generally, that So many
Treatises and Sermons are falsely ascribed unto that Father, that the reckoning
of them up, would require a volume by it self. You were the keepers of these
books also; you had the writing of them out; and your cause it is that those
additions give credit unto: we have received them so of you; and our cause is
no where helped by any of those bastard works whatsoever, but on the other side
as much discredited as they are able. If therefore the quaestion be betwixt
you and us, whether part it is that has so corrupted the Fathers, there is no
quaestion, but that needs it must fall to be yours: or, at least, that it
comes much nearer unto you, than it does unto us.

22 But yet to make it somewhat cleerer, by some example, Particular examples.
M. R. in his confer. cap. 5. diuis. 2.
first I trust you know well enough how far you are of late charged, as with
diverse others, so namely with Thomas Aquinas, for his ill dealing with Cyril,
and with the whole Council of Chalcedon. My self at this present will go no
further, but only to put you a little in mind, both how truly you can find in
your hearts to allege, and how you alter the place it self, when it makes
for your purpose so to do. For the former, whereas Augustine teaches to judge
of Scriptures, which were most to be esteemed, De doctrine. Christ. lib. 2.
cap, 8.
sets down this rule, that therein we are to follow the authority of the
most part of the Catholic churches, and especially of those that have
Apostolic Seas, and have been vouchsafed to receive the Epistles from the
Apostles sent unto them: Did. 19. In canonicis.
you tell us that he says, that those also are Scripture, that the Apostolic
Sea has (meaning Rome ^) and such as it has vouchsafed to send unto others.
And this for the advancement of your Church of Rome, and to make all such
things authentike Scripture, that either it brings forth out of your own
libraries there: or else at any time it is disposed to send unto others. For the
other; whereas in like manner the same Saint Augustine said at the first, that
that body of Christ wherein he rose from death to life, must needs be in one
place: you have now of late made him to say, that it may be in one place: and
this because you saw it made so directly against your fond and blastphemous
error of Transubstantiation, which now you have taken upon you to defend, and
thereupon have endeavored to help your selves with such poor helples shifts as
these. That you have made Augustine so to speak now, the books do witness that
you have printed: that he did not say so before, your own late Doctors do
plainly testify, li. 4. did. 10.
the master of Sentences, de consecr. did 2. Prima quidem.
Gratian, part. 3. Quest. 75. Art. 1.
Th. Aquinas, super can. missae. lect. 39. A.
Gabriel Biel, and others. What others of this kind might be alleged, your
selves do know so well already (both because your selves be the doers, and are
daily taken with this kind of dealing) that it is about needles to bring in any
mo examples of it. I would you could as readily acknowledge your ill dealing
herein, to your amendment: as we are able to charge you with it, to the utter
discredit of the naughty cause that you have in hand.

23 As touching this time that now is praesent (I mean, since the time that
God of his goodness has bestowed this light of the Gospel upon us) first it is
good for you here to remember, that already I named one such companion of
yours in mine Epistle, Johannes Baptista Fickler: such a companion in this kind
of dealing, as any where I believe you were hardly able to find. And
therefore you did wisely, to say nothing of him. Then also I trust your self
can likewise tell, how deeply you are charged already, that ever since this
light of the Gospel has set you so straight, and put you so much to your
shifts as it has, you have done your endeavor the best that you could, to
frame the Fathers and other writers to your best advantage. And namely, how to
that purpose you have dealt with Ludouicus Viues, Johannes Molanus, and Carolus
Sigonius, whose books yet extant, M. Reinolds in his praeface of the Confer. to
the Seminaries. page 23.26.
as they were imprinted before, do plainly show in their latter impressions
by you, how fowly you have abused them since. So likewise, when you got
Manutius to Rome, to reprint the Fathers for you, under the oversight of four
Cardinals, how corruptly you began with Cyprian first: and that Manutius
himself confessed reasonable plainly, how il he was there employed by you. But
to come somewhat nearer unto you what say you to that wherewith Franciscus Iunius
does charge you, that himself did see (at Lions, in the shop of Frelonius)
of your dealing with Ambrose: In praef. ad lect. in Indicem Expurg.
when as there he took you in the manner, crossing out of the works of that
father, which before had been set forth according to the ancient copies)
sometimes but certain sentences only, but sometimes again whole pages
together? Or how are you able in any good sense to defend that which you have
already done these many years, and daily yet do, by that your Index
expurgatorius? Have you not thereby put out at your pleasure, whatsoever yet
you had left of the Fathers that made against you? And not only that, but
whatsoever Arguments, Annotations, Scholies, and such like, the learned men of
late (and some of them even of your own side also) had put thereunto, whereby
your former dealing with those Fathers was the rather called in question, by
the light that they gave to the works themselves, out of their observation,
and diligent reading? And have you not now printed them again after your
fashion: dismembered themselves now more by you, than by your predecessors
before; and spoiled likewise of those learned helps that gave light unto them,
and to your former il dealing with them? Or could you hold your selves
contented to stay there? Have you not reached forth those self-same fingers of
yours to many other good woorks besides, of divinity, humanity, history,
philosophy, law, physike, and all: and in them also sometimes put in what you
thought good, but for the most part dashed out (at your pleasure) whatsoever
touched any of your errors, or no more but your pride and loosenes of life?
And yet notwithstanding, have you not in such sort set them forth, as though
they were those Fathers and Authors themselves, nothing at all gelded by you?
For, do you profess the thing you have done, or could you find in your
hearts that men should be privy to your dealings herein? Why then did you all
things in hugger-mugger? Why did you so sercretly among your selves (and none
but the chiefest and surest of you) gather that Expurgatorie table of yours?
Why did you print no mo copies of it, but only for certain chief and special
persons? Why was it, that not one of those copies might come abroad? Why was
there taken so strict an order, that those that had them should keep them
close, and never to be known of them? For have you not expressly provided, ne
quis praeter Prototypographum Regium hune Indicem imprimat, neue ille aut quis
alius public vel private vendat, aut citra ordinariorum facultatem, out
permissionem habeat. And speaking of those sure-bies of yours, unto whom you
dare commit these copies, do you not there again command, that ipsi priuatim
nullisque consciis apud se Indicem Expurgatorium habeant, quem eundem neque
aliis communicabant, neque eius exemplum vlli dabunt: sed tantum id curabunt
diligentissime, vt loca praedicta inquirant, expungant, etc. Are not these your
own words, and many others to the same effect, in that your Table? So your
Correctors and Printers must so do: but they must not be acknown why they do
it, or what direction it was that they followed. Insomuch that you may safely
bear your nouices and prosylites in hand now, that there is no Doctor, nor
almost any other approved writer, that in any thing speaks against you. For
whom you could not correct to your mind, him have you boldly strooken out
clean: so very peremptory now have you been. And those miserable prosylites
of yours must needs be persuaded now, that all is with them, and nothing at
all any where against them. For they may in no wise suspect any such dealing
in you: and your selves wit make sure enough, that you will not tell the^. That
so it may be fulfilled in them, that Christ himself noted in others such like,
that they should be two-fould the children of hell, more than your selves. For
your selves do know, what legerdemaine you have used in these matters to
deceive them withal, and so may esteem of your cause accordingly (but only of
policy for to hold up, so long as may be, your earthly estate:) but they do
not know it, and so may be in good sadness indeed, and never epsy how they
were beguiled. But God be thanked, that would not suffer you so to abuse the
world still: but has now brought forth into the open light of the sun,
that mystery of iniquity, that you have been woorking so long in your secret
corners. God be thanked also, that before he would so fully bring your
dooinges abroad, he suffered you to run so far as might be sufficient to
show unto all, how you have deal with the Fathers and Councels, and all other
antiquities before: and how far past shame you are now, to stick at nothing
whatsoever it be, whereby you may hope to hold men's eyes in blindness still, and
to entangle the truth it self. As for your self, I do not charge you as one
of the dooers: it was somewhat before you came to have any place among them;
and yet not much. Neither do. I think, that yet you are of that credit with
them, as it was then thought meet for those, that should be the dealers in
that matter. But I trust that you will not deny, but that since that time it
is come unto your knowledge, that so they have done. If it be so, what face
have you then, that could so boldly lay that to my charge, and to the charge of
others besides, that neither in me, nor in any of us, you are able to find:
and that which you knew might be found in your selves in the highest degree?
Were you persuaded, that by crying out so loud against such dealing, you could
have us to believe, that your selves did so much detest it, that we might
doubt no such thing in you? Indeed we do not doubt it now: for our selves do
plainly see it. If you did not know so much before, then by all likelihood you
will soon leave them now, when as you find that same in them in so plentiful
manner, that supposing to be in us you have showed your self so much to
mislike: unless you had rather that in your self it should appear by this one
example in steed of the rest, that neither your profession, nor your other
doings thereunto appertaining, are in truth any other, but such as your selves
being better advised do ever mislike, and of your selves grant to be naught.

Of the treatise of Pacificatio^.
24 Then coming to my Treatise of Pacification, although you catch here and
there at (...) yet whosoever it is, that considers how little fault you were
able to find, after that once you had given your self to do what you could,
may soon epsy, that, in effect, you have justified all. And indeed there is
nothing at all, that for this matter you have laid to my charge, but only that,
which is either of no importance, but very trifling: or else if the matter be
in it self of some weight, then is the place first by you depraved, and after
that objected to me as mine. Insomuch that there is no point at all that you
charge me with, but may easily be sorted to one of those two: that is, either
trifling; Of those that are trifling.
or else depraved. Of the former sort are these two, that first you charge me to
have offered you so great injury in that your book, that I thereby have cut
off all hope of agreement; the other, that you carpe at my method, and say that
all things there run in couples: of the latter, are all the rest. Of the injury
that he says I have offered unto him, to the overthrow of al agreement.
That you charge me to have offered so great injury unto you, that thereby
the way to agreement is praeuented, it lies upon a matter of controversy
that is betwixt us. If you had set down no more (in the book that now you
call yours) then that which stands with the truth, then might you justly
complain that I had done you wrong therein: but if you have put in more, and
wickedly mingled the truth of God, with your lies, as it is certain that you
have done, and I do charge you, where then is this wrong that you do complain
of. As for my method, Of my method.
what cause have you at all to complain, but only that you think that you
are wrong, if you carpe not at all? Have you never read tables ere now? And do
you not know that the fewer members that any thing is reduced unto, the
better it is thereby divided? If I have labored to reduce all to fewer
members, and thereby gotten the method so much the better, both for the plainnes
and certainty of it, must this needs be so offensive unto you, that you
could not pass by, before you had snatched at it also? Was it not enough for
you to go untouched, for the loose and negligent divisions that you have made
(if so be I may truly call them yours (but that you must be finding fault
with an other, in that which your own doings do justify? Or have you the face
to say, that it confounds memory to have all reduced unto a couple of
principal heads, and the subdiuisions to the same belonging to be sorted
withal to their proper places: and yet that it confounds no memory in yours
to leave the^ at large, to four, five, six, seven, eight, and mo, and to take
them hand-ouer-head: that first, that should be last; and that last, that
should be first? But such is the vanity of our Jesuits now (and belike, a
piece of their order) that they must find fault with all others, and never like
of any but themselves: and ever they are to mislike the manifestation of the
truth, not only as touching the thing it self; but also, whenever any do
labor to set it down more distinctly, or in plainer manner, that so it might
be so much the better perceived by others.

Of those that are by him depraved, in that which I had set down to persuade
others.
25 Those that you have first depraved, and after that objected unto me, are
very many: and yet to so little purpose withal, that it is in a manner but lost
labor to go against them, they do so easily fall of themselves. But that you
may see your vanity the better, I will not stick a little to hold the glass
unto you, so that you also will look better into it, and be content to
acknowledge those spots that so you may find. And first (concerning Religion),
Concerning Religion. That I should seem to vaunt of our own proper lerning,
above all others.
whereas I say, that it has pleased God to bless this age of ours, with so
clear and singular a light of the truth, as (to our knowledge) he never yet
bestowed on others, here do you full wisely charge me, that I exclude all
your company, and claim to have that light alone among our selves. And yet it
is as clear as the sun, that I spoke it only of this Age generally, and not
of the parties that are divided: not of our selves, more than of you; but
indifferently, of both together, and all others besides. But otherwise you
could not tell, how to bodge in those impertinent complaints, that thereupon
you infer, to ease your stomach of the boiling of them. He gibeth at the
consequence, after that first he has taken away one halse of that whereon it
depends.
Immediately after, taking upon you to recite the chief and principal points of
that my Treatise, you begin so ilfauoredly, that thereby only you put us out of
hope, after-ward to find good dealing with you. Whereas therefore I said, that
you ought to join in profession with us, for that it becomes and behooves
the Church of God (in many respects) to be at unity in it self: and yet the
case so stands in this matter, that we are not able in our profession to
yield unto you, but you very well may, and of duty ought to accord unto us:
here come you in and say, that to prove that you should join with us, I
allege that the Church should be at unity in it self. Which reason, say
you, how far it proves his purpose, let the Reader consider. Yea verily,
the Reader may very well consider, that your cause is very weak, when as you
can get out no greater matters to cavil at: and yet are feign in them also, to
lean so much to untruth besides. Afterward again, whereas I deny not, but
that diverse there may be, that do not care for any Religion, That I should
seem to grant, that there is no cause why men should ioin with us in respect
of Religion: but in respect of Policy only.
who yet notwithstanding would be loath to join with the Pope, for many good
causes in respect of their civil estate: here come you in again after your
wonted manner, charging me to say, that this only reason of State, holds
many on our side froe from coming to you, who otherwise in conscience would
have no scruple at all; and therewithal you wonder that ever my Lord Archbishop
would let such a confession to pass in print. As though I had either plainly
professed, or covertly insinuated thereby, that such as do embrace this
religion especially, do it not in respect of religion it self, but in some
wordly respect only. Which how foolish a cavil it is, it self alone
sufficiently declares.

The I devise bugs on the Ecclesiastical authority of the B. of Rome.
But then, that you leese no time, while your hand is in, you go further, and
are bold to say, that though this poor Minister, to terrify the common
people (say you, but these bugs terrify your papacy more) deuiseth bugs upon
the Ecclesiastical authority of the Bishop of Rome: yet (your conclusion is)
that it is very plain and palpable, that there is no such inconvenience. But
soft I pray you. Did this poor Minister (think you indeed) devise these
bugs? Were they never heard of before. Are there no histories that you have
read, or can believe, that make mention of them? Would you so feign, so slily
pass over the great complaints, that the countries here-abouts, as England,
France, and Germany continually have made, at home, and abroad, of this
matter? As for the examples of private men, although they be infinite, and, of
al sorts and degrees very many: yet being but private, and of several
persons, it is not unlikely, but that such an one as professes such blindness
as you do, would readily say he saw none of them all. But France and Germany
(if you look abroad) are great States: and England likewise, if you can
content your self at home. And as for the two former of these three, neither
of them is so far off, nor in these your wilful and graceles wanderings so
unknown unto you, but that you might easily know (could you as readily
acknowledge it when you do see it) that in France Lewis the ninth, Philip the
fair, Charles the fifth, sixth, and seventh, did all provide by public
authority, against the covetousness, extortion, ambition, and pride of the Sea
of Rome: and that although Lewis the eleventh (in latter time) was content at
the Popes request, to abolish the Pragmaticall sanction, and other laws that
they had made to that purpose; yet diverse Bishops, the students of Paris, and
Johannes Romanus the Kings Attorney, a wise, a learned, and an eloquent man,
would in no wise consent to the abolishing of them. In Germany likewise the
nobles and commons did earnestly solicit Frederike of Austrich the Emperor,
both before his coronation, and after, for the redress of those matters (in
such manner as France before had done:) and being at that time defeated by
the wicked counsel of Aneas Siluius, did nevertheless, still hold on the same
endeavor whenever opportunity served, and to that end put up a supplication
to Maximilian, of ten special greeuances, and an other of an hundred (in the
session of Noremberg) to the Pope himself. And for the other, being an
Englishman (though but a bad one in the quarrel that now you sustain) never
heard you what great stickling and business about these matters there was,
betwixt William Rufus, and Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury: between Henry the
first, and not only Anselme, but Thurstan also the Archbishop of York: and
between Henry the second, and Thomas Becket that proud, and arrogant, and
headstrong traitor? Nor how Edward the third, did to that end not only revive
the statute of Praemunire, made before by Edward the first: but also would in
no wise abrogate the same, though he were much solicited unto it by Gregory
the eleventh: nor how Richard the second by public authority likewise both
reconfirmed, and further strengthened the same: nor how, though it was again
attempted to be abolished in the reign of Henry the sixth by the earnest
entreaty of Martin the fifth, yet was it not obtained, but still stood in
force, even to this praesent age of ours? If these things were strange, or
but seldom heard of, I would with good will have noted unto you the stories
themselves more at large, and the places whence they are taken: but being so
evident and known as they are, in is but lost labor to deal any further, but
only to put you in mind of them. How is it then that you go about to persuade
your reader, that these are but bugs by me devised to terrify the common
people? Have you the face so to dissemble the weakness of your cause: and to
lay off the same, you care not how, upon any others? Then are they unwise,
that knowing this, will hereafter be deceived by you. But to proceed, is it
the Ecclesiastical authority of the Bishop of Rome, whereon these bugs, (as
you say) are devised? Is that Ecclesiastical authority of his of that nature,
that it can meddle with civil causes, so many, so great, and so very much?
And are you sure that neither the Empire, nor the kingdoms of Spain, France,
Polo^an, nor others; nor the ancient Princes of this realm of England, ever
found the inconvenience that now we speak of: that the Princes of England were
for so many ages together more potent and glorious, than they have been since
the suppression thereof: and that the matter you speak of, is in it self so
plain and palpable? Certainly, whosoever it is that can so boldly affirm
these, we have no great occasion to hope that he will make conscience of any
thing else: and there is an other Note-this for you to put in your margent,
because you are feign to fetch them so far, for want that you have them not
so near as you would. After this you come to an other, as proper a shift, as
most of those that are gone before. For whereas I had said before, that it was
the safest way to rest in Christ alone for the whole work of our redemption;
That, because I teach, that we ought to rest in Christ alone, for the whole
work of our redemption, therefore I abolish works: and that we all are little
occupied in any good woorks.
and that in such sort, as that we sought no help of Angel or of Saint, of
our own or other folks merits: here come you in with a fond collection and
childish cavil, that, by this reason, such as should never pray, nor desire
others to pray for him, he that should never fast, nor do other good deed,
but should rather defy the same, and lay all upon the passion of Christ,
should be the nearest to that advantage. But can you in good sadness no better
perceive how these two may stand together: both for to rest in Christ alone,
for the whole work of our redemption; and yet to be occupied therwithall in
such woorks, as God has prepared for us to walk in? Or if needs you would
carpe here at, might you not by the like reason have carped at many places of
the Apostles, and Christ himself? For that you charge us to do so little, it
is no marvel, nor matter neither: your selves must be able to give a better
account of your own life, before that you shall be allowed with us, to take
the account of any others. But you Jesuits, Seminary priests, and all that
company of unnatural impes, that so wilfully abandon your own country to
practice against it, and to deuote your selves to that foreign priest, have
faces of brass: that although your selves do know, that you are defiled
(almost) with all manner of evil, idolatry, whoredom, seditious practisings,
and treasonable attempts in the highest degree; yet is your modesty such, that
you can be prying at other folks lives, and flatly condemn them, before that
you find them (any thing like) so ill as your own. Would you give us but this
sparing, that you would not so hardly charge us, until we were but half so
bad as your selves, we might then more easily come unto agreement for this
matter. But when the loosest of all others that this age of ours has, and
those that have sold themselves to so much iniquity, take upon them to be
controllers and condemners of others, howsoever you may please your own selves
therein, and hope thereby to get your own lives to escape unespied: yet may you
not think, that with those that stand indifferent, it can be taken for
sufficient, whether it be to charge us, or else no more but to discharge your
selves.

26 And so having in this manner glaunced at such matters as I set down
concerning religion, Concerning our civil estate.
then you address your self in like sort to deal with certain others that
do appertain to our civil estate. Where first it greeneth you that I say,
that (as you report it) the blessedness of England is greater at this time, than
ever it was since the land was first inhabited: That I should seem to exempt
our profession from temporal calamities: and that our superiors convey our
treasure out of the land to foreign uses.
or, as my self had set it down, that (to those that profess the Gospel, and
labor to reform their wanderings thereby) this country of ours has now
enjoyed these many years, the most peaceable, and the most blessed time, that
ever it can be found to have had, since that the land was first inhabited. And
so proceeding, you first depraved two other places besides, and then come in
with your floorish upon them after your manner. For whereas first extolling the
goodness of God, unto those that seek the advancement of his glory, I said,
that, howsoever it be with others, yet shall it surely go well with those; and
then after, commending the government that now we have under our own
Princes at home, therein I noted, that our treasure is not now carried out of
our Realm, to the maintenance of foreign power (as heretofore it has been)
and employed against our selves, but that it is employed now to the honor and
defense of our selves at home: for the former you make me to say, that
Protestants in these temporal affairs are always prosperous, and for the
latter you say, it seems that this good man talks rather by meditation or
fiction, than by any great intelligence he has in such affairs. A goodly
catch: and God be thanked, that you are able to find no greater matters; but
that you are feign to sit down with these? But is it so grievous a thing to
you, to hear of the peace and welfare of England? Of the peace of the church.
Or are you able any of you all, to name such a time of peace and blessedness,
as now we have had? Or if we commend the goodness of God toward those that
are his, ca^ it no otherwise sound with you, but that we must seem to say,
that in these temporal affairs we are always prosperous, in that sense that
you do give it? If in the way of thankfulness we gladly acknowledge the goodness
of God, toward our native country and us, had you no better note to put in the
margent of your recital of it, but Imollerable lying f^^aterie? And if there
was no remedy, but that needs that note must in, must you needs be so eagerly
set upon it, that you would put in (to the first word of it) an l more than
needed, and more than true orthographie bears, to make it ^^^le better in the
mouth of your reader? Then I perceive, it is needful for those that have to
deal with you, to hold their feet so well as they can: if once they be down,
you care not how pitifully you stamp them under your feet. If in like manner we
acknowledge him to be very gracious toward those that profess the gospel,
insomuch that when others are troubled, yet are these more safely preserved and
more comfortably governed: was there no remedy, but that immediately you must
ask us again out of your margent, How those that profes the Gospel, do prosper
at this day, in France and Flanders. But, God be thanked, they prosper well,
and much better than you would have them: and in England also much better now,
than at that time you hoped, that by this time it should. But to keep only to
those, it was not long since the Gospel had (in a manner) no foot among them:
now you see it has gotten such hold, that the worst you can do, cannot expulse
it again. You are fain to tolerate it in the one, and of necessity you must
let it alone in the other. But what if it should please the wisdom of God to
steep it a little longer in blood, before it should find the days of peace?
Would you thereupon so readily infer, that it were declining: or would you so
quickly prepare your triumph, as if it were now quite ouerthrown? you were no
dout a wise company, if there were among you al, no wiser than you. Be it
therefore known to you, that the more that God for the time leaves his children
in your hands, to do with them as you think good, and the more that he does
purge them in the fiery furnace of your cruelties, the cleaner and holier are
they made to him, and surer are they in his good time to be advanced. And
whether it prove so with the^ or not, yet was it no better tha^ plain folly in
you, in such particulars so far to triumph, on so unsure event in the end. But
pardoning this point of folly unto you, what a malicious slander is it to
charge those that now sit at the stern of government with us, to let go our
treasure abroad, Of carrying out our treasure.
to the mainteinance of foreign powers against our selves. Is it not needful,
that Princes be at charged abroad, for to maintain their peace at home? If the
same be found among us, is that so ill a matter in it self, as you can be
persuaded, that therein you have sufficient ground-woorke, to bluster abroad so
vile a slander? Can you see no difference betwixt our former (slavish and
immeasurable, but forced) suffering of that proud praelate of Rome, to gather
together and carry away the wealth of the land as pleased him, and to employ
the same against us when occasion served: and the voluntary and needful
employing of certain moderate sums or pencions now, that are bestowed abroad,
both to our profit and honor at home? Are you so blind, that betwixt these you
were able to epsy no difference at all? No surely, it was not that: I will not
charge you with ignorance of it, but that of malice you would not see it: and
for that cause you transposed my words, or did alter the placing of them to
your advantage. For whereas I said, that our treasure does not now go out of
the Realm to the mainteinance of foreign power, but is employed to the honor
and defense of our selves at home: you have set me down to say, that it is
not sent out of the Realm to the mainteinance of foreign power, but is
employed at home, to our honor and defense. Whereby we may very well
perceive, that your stomach (in these matters) is not so dainty, but that for
want of a cleaner diet, you would be content to feed more homely rather than
sterue?

27 And having so taken your pleasure of all these things that I set down for
the better persuasion of those that yet are out of the way, Other places by him
depraved in that which I brought for the removing of certain impedimentes that
hinder others.
to join with us in the truth of Religion: now come you to see what you can
find in that which I have added thereto, to remove such lets as hinder, that so
the persuasion may take the better place with them. And first reckoning up
certain of the meanest of those impedimentes that I said to hinder diverse of
you, there, He, first depraueth, and then derideth.
because you would be loath to be thought to be stayed by them, although indeed
those be the chief that do hinder most of you all (that is the fear of your
discredit, and the loss of private commodity) you do nothing else but only
scoff at the matter, first calling them certain grave impediments, and then
shortly after adding, Thus discourses this wise man in very great sadness.
Which in truth is one of the best parts in you, to your purpose, because that
therein, as before of old, so now we see that yet also, you easily pass
many: but when otherwise you try your cunning against the truth, therein you
make it known unto all, that you have nothing at all to say, that is able to
abide the trial. Whereof although we have had examples inow already: yet, that
you may the better see, that whatsoever you deal in, or wheresoever any would
take the assay of you, he should ever find you like to your self, here must
I in like plainnes tell you, that there is nothing at all that follows,
wherein your self do not most plainly confirm the same unto us. As for
example, when as I had demanded of you, why you should stand so much upon
certain controversies, and among others recited the manner of Christ
descending into hell, Christ's descending into hell.
that you have conceived (the manner I say, not the thing it self) there you,
to bring us and our profession into some discredit thereby, will in no wise
be acknowne that I spoke but of the manner of his descending into hell, and
not of the thing it self (which notwithstanding I did very plainly set
down) and tell your readers, that I demand of you in very good earnest, why
you should stand so much on Christ's descending into hell. But did I so
indeed? Did I speak of the thing it self, or of the manner of it only? Did
I not very plainly set down, that in such sort he descended into hell, as it
fully sufficient in the justice of God to acquit us: and that the same is
fully believed of us all. But belike you account your self as much privileged
to say what you will, as all that fear God acknowledge themselves to be
limited only to say the truth. Yet on the other side, thus much liberty must
you grant unto others again, that hereafter they believe you no further,
than such dealing of yours deserves. Furthermore, because that I there, and
before had declared, that put-case your late Translation at Rhemes were true,
yet the points that you had gained thereby were very few, and withal of no
great importance: heere-vpon, That I should grant, that their faith and ours is
all one.
as I do take it, you charge me (for otherwise I cannot see whereon you can
gather it) that I do grant, that our faith and yours is all one in substance.
Which notwithstanding is clean contrary unto that which I have there set
down, as may sufficiently and fully appear, both in the second section
before, and in the eighteenth that after follows: and yet nevertheless, here
do you charge me in your idle margent with Atheism also. So great a grief is
it unto you, to have it disclosed or uttered by any that you have gained so
little by that long craved Translation of yours, by which you would gladly have
it thought, that you had borne down all before you. If this therefore be the
matter whereon you ground that charge, then have you taught us, that Atheism
is; not only, as before we took it, to believe no God, no heaven, no hell, and
to make no account of Religion, but to take it as a policy only: but also, to
hold, declare, or utter, that those points of Religion wherein you descent
from us, are very trifles, and nothing worthy such standing in, as you
afford them. Whereby it seems notwithstanding, that your selves have the^ in
some admiration (how trifling soever that we account them) or at least that
you would bear the world in hand, that you are so highly persuaded of them.

28 At length you come unto that part of my Treatise that concerns the
Church, About my treatise of the church.
wherein I show, what the Church is, and what it is to depart from it. Wherein
it seems you were very loath to be found any other at the finishing of this
your unquiet and wandering discourse, then at the beginning, and ever since, you
have declared your self to be? And first you bring in somewhat, that tends
to the matter that you have in hand; then other things also that do nothing
belong unto it: both sorts so coupled and couched together, as that how diverse
soever they are in nature, it seems that your purpose was, that both sorts
notwithstanding should dwell together under a roof Concerning those that belong
to the matter you have in hand, first you set down the estate of the matter
betwixt us, as best agrees to your purpose: and then you dally upon it at your
pleasure The state of the matter that is betwixt us that you might better frame
to your best advantage, Taking in hand that which I set down, first some part
of it he dismembreth, and some he falfifieth.
one part of it you do dismember, and another you flatly falsify. As touching
that which you have dismembered, whereas I granted, that seeing you have the
outward profession of the Christian faith; therefore in that respect you also
may be accounted to be of the Church generally: because you thought that this
word generally was not for your purpose, therefore have you clean put it cut,
and yet notwithstanding taken the rest as allowed by me; which without this
limitation I never granted, and is in no wise to be allowed. As touching the
other, with what face could you say it, that ^ do charge my fellow Ministers
and brethren, first to have urged this separation ande? Whereas in truth I do
no where so charge them, but very plainly impure that to our adversaries,
and especially to those that are the most cunning, and most learned of them:
adding further in plain terms, both that they do busily urge that point,
and would have neither us nor others, to make at all any quaestion of it, is
plainly appears in the beginning of the fifteenth section. But belike the
time is now come, that God would have it known unto the world, that the
deeper you are rooted in those your Romish conceits, and the more sway that you
bear among your selves that are of that sort, the more assured may we also
be, that you have the more pi^^ off not only al conscience, and fear of God,
o^^ all honesty too, and shame among men, so (...) to avouch so plain
untruths-

29 Your dalliance tends to this end, After he dallieth thereupon. That I
should seem in such sort to grant them to be of the church, as that it were no
great matter, of whether religion a man were, of theirs, or ours.
that now at the length I, against al custom of my brethren, do offer unto you
this so great and sudden courtesy: ^hen, that you take upon you, to show,
what the cause is, why so I have done. This great and sudden cortesie that
now I offer unto you, is, that I do not deny you to be members of the same
church with us generally: and therewithal grant, that the church whereof I
speak, is the true church Catholic and Apostolic. I cannot deny you to be of
one and the self-same church with us generally, because that being demanded of
your faith, you say that you believe in Christ, and withal witness that your
profession by receiving (after a sort) both the old Testament, and the new, and
those two Sacraments that are therein to us commended: as we also on the other
side believe in Christ; receive those scriptures; and have those Sacraments in
daily use. But this courtesy, as you term it, does not in truth so much
please you, as it does inwardly vex and fret you, that thereby you see your
wo^ted course so crossed with the truth it self, that you are out of hope so
far to abuse the facility of diverse, as heretofore full often you have done to
your own advantage: bearing them in hand, and facing them down, that if they
like not of your errors, but embrace the truth of Christ as it is in it self,
without your corrupt or needles additio^s, they are no more of the Church as
they were before; but now must go seek a new habitation, and so convey their
descent from other ancestors, as that always they find themselves to be a
distinct people from you, not only since your corrupt estate, but also before.
How they are of the Church.
That you account this a new and a sudden courtesy, that I now at the length,
against all custom of my brethren^ as you say, do offer to you, that it is a
mere fiction of yours, and a manifest untruth: and yet notwithstanding it is
true too, that hitherto we have accounted you (as your self alleges) and yet
do the Synagogue of Satan. For we all account you in some sense to be of the
church, as the Scribes and Pharisees were; as that man of sin is said to sit in
the Temple of God; as abomination was said to stand in the holy place; as
Ismael was for a time with Isaac, in the house of Abraham; as Esau was for a
time with Jacob, in the womb of Rebecca; as those were builders, that ever
refused the head stone of the corner, as those were his own, that nevertheless
did refuse him, and knew him not when he came among them; and many such like:
and I dare adventure, that you are able to allege none, that in such sense
denies you to be of the church. As for example, M. Calvin is one that most of
al excludes you from al sound interest in the church of God, and color of it:
as plainly appears, as in many other places of his godly, profou^d, and
learned works, so namely in the second chap. of the fourth book of his
Institutions. And yet he so concludes his Treatise, as that in such sense as I
have set down, he leaves you some interest in the church. His words are
plain; in the beginning of the last section of that chap. Quum ergo ecclesiae
tit ulum non simpliciter vo^umus concedere Papistis, non idro Ecclesias apud
cos esse infician^^er sed tantum litigamus de vera and legiti^ima ecclesiae
institutione, quae in communione cum sacrorum, quae signa sunt professionis,
tum vero potissimum doctrinae requiritur. Antichrist u^ in temple Dei sessurum
praedixerunt Dan. and Paul: illius scelerati et abominandi regni ducem and
antesignanum apud nos facimus Romans Pont. Quod seeds eius in templo Dei
collocatur, it a innuitur, tale fore eius regnum, quod nec Christi nec
ecclesiae nomen aboleat. Hinc igittur patet, nos minime negare, quin sub eius
quoque tyrannide Ecclesiae manea^t: sed quas sacrilegia impietate profanarit,
etc. That is, when as we do not simply (or without al manner of limitatio^)
grant to the papists the title of the Church, we do not (altogether) deny that
they have any churches, but only we strive about the true and lawful
institution of the Church, which is sought in the fellowship (or partaking)
partly of holy things which are signs of our profession, but chiefly of
doctrine. That Antichrist should sit in the temple of God, Daniel and Paul have
for showed of that wicked and abominable kingdom, we do hold that with us
the captain and chief leader is the B of Rome. That his seal is placed in the
Temple of God, thereby we are given to understand that such shall be the manner
of his kingdom, that shall not abolish the name of Christ, or of the Church.
Hence therefore it appears, that we doubt deny, but that under his tyranny
Churches remain: but such as he with sacrilegious impiety has profaned:
etc. And on 2. These. 2.4. he thus concludes his treatise thereon. Templumerge
Dei esse fateor in quo dominatur Papa, sed innumeris sacrilegiis prophanatum.
That is: I grant therefore that to be the Temple of God, in the which the
Pope bears the sway, but with innumerable sacrilegies profaned. Luther also
(you know well enough) deals roundly with you, and makes you no better (in
respect of our Apostacle and usurpation) than the Synagogue of Satan, and the
Kingdom of the Beast: and yet; in respect of the word and Sacraments after a
some remaining among you, he does freely leave you altogether as much as I have
given you. For writing against the Anabaptists he grants that there is
plurimum bom Christiani sub Papatu: and then reckons up the holy Scriptures,
both the Sacraments, and the Catechism, of the Lords Prayer, the ten
Commandments, and the Articles of the faith; granting withal, not only that
these things are after a sort to be found among you: but that the very truth
of them indeed is there to be had; though by most of you they are all very
much corrupted. These are I trust sufficient for this matter: Rob. Bellar. tom.
1. com. 3. lib. 3. cap. 13. and co^. 4. lib. 4. cap. 16.
and these have I the rather alleged, because, that they are acknowledged also
by one of the chief among your selves. In which respect it where not amiss
that you went unto him again, and there learned, how, with his better advise,
you might make these two to agree together: that he, your master, does
acknowledge such things to be granted by others before; and you, his scholar,
should thus boldly set down, that it is first granted by me against all
custom of my brethren. Howbeit, in this case also I may hold my self the
better contented with this your dealing, when as I consider that now-adaies you
deal even so, both with Jerome, and Augustine also. Quest. 11. ad Algasiu^. De
Ciu. Dei lib. 20. ca. 19
For whereas they both had so interpreted that place of the Apostle, 2. These.
2.4. (Jerome very plainly, but Augustine somewhat doubtfully at the first, yet
afterward plainly enough also, for that he would have it to be not in templo
Dei, but in templum Dei: tanquam ipse sit templum Dei, quod est Ecclesia) that
Antichrist should sit, not in the temple of Jerusalem, as you would have it,
but in the Church of God: because you see, that so the place makes much
stronger against you, therefore make you light of their authority, as plainly
appears both in Bellarmine your champion, and in your note in the Rhemes
Testament on that place. For whereas in this case you take it so ill at their
hands, that they, should interpret that to be the Church of God, because
thereby you find your selves to be tied, for to seek out your Antichrist there:
it is less marvel that now when Antichrist has showed himself so much as he
has, you can so il bear, that we should take any such course, as auowing your
state to be no better, than the power of Antichrist, nevertheless we should grant
you to be of the church generally. And yet notwithstanding Jerome, in an other
place also, when, out of the end of the 2 chap, of Sophony, he fore-sheweth,
that in time then to come, marvelous grievous things should befall the church in
the time of Antichrists reign, although they be such, as at the first sight may
seem blasphemous (for any man to say, that such things at any time should
befall the Church of God, as himself does there confess) yet nevertheless he
says, there in the reign of Antichrist, it shall be turned into a wilderness,
and delivered to (savage) beasts, and that it shall suffer whatsoever the
prophet there describes. Where you may see that notwithstanding that it be the
Church; yet does he not stick to say, that it should notably be eclipsed and
that by the power of Antichrist also: and that although Antichrist should so
ouerlay it, and that it should become as a wilderness, and be so much pestered
with all noisome beasts; yet does he name it, and account it the Church
notwithstanding. But you think you have sped very well, and made a good market,
in that I have termed that Church to be the true, How they are of that Church,
that is true, Catholic and Apostolic: and yet themselves nothing at all the
better thereby.
Catholic, and Apostolic church, whereof I allow you to be members by outward
profession generally. But you need not boast so much of your peny-woorths, as
you would gladly seem that you might. For those titles of true, Catholic, and
Apostolic, do but appertain to the church in gross or generally, in respect
of the name or faith of Christ, that there is professed: and are not
communicable, or to be imparted to all the members thereof indifferently, or to
all those sorts that (after their manner) are under the same, but only to one
sort of professors therein, such as together with the outward name, are of that
profession indeed, that outwardly they do pretend. From which because you are
so far departed as you are, therefore have you no part at all in any of
those titles in respect of your selves, although they do belong unto that
Church (in respect of the faith that it professes) whereof you are such rotten
members as you are. And though your selves are corrupt, and in truth go
directly against (in many great and special matters, that are of the
substance of it) the selfe-fame faith that in terms you profess generally:
yet nevertheless the faith it self that so you profess, being considered,
not as you hold it, but as it is in it self, and as it is holden of us, and
all others, that rectify our profession by the written word, is of that
nature, as to which those titles of true, Catholic, and Apostolic do of right
appertain. Which once being so fully and truly invested in them, what
hinders, but that, though not corrupt members yet the whole may rightly take
that denomination: both in respect of the faith it self, and in respect of the
professors of it, one sort truly holding the same, and the others also
professing none other but only the same generally? Does not a land rightly
take his denomination of that grain wherewith it is sown, though afterward
both it self be thin, and not only certain other grain besides (that came
in with it, or else the ground it self has yielded) is now spread among it,
but is full of weeds likewise? If you can be content to allow us the one, you
shall find no reason left you, why you should deny us the other. Much less if
you call to remembrance that the same Church, whereunto Christ, and his
Apostles, and all his Disciples adioined themselves, and from which Christ did
never separate himself (notwithstanding the great corruption and contempt of
the word of God, and of Christ himself that reigned among them) was
notwithstanding a true church, grounded on the election of God, and of the
doctrine of the law, and of the Prophets generally, or in respect of the
whole. As for my self, if I had not in as plain speeches, and in as full and
resolute manner, denied you to be any true members of the Church of Christ,
and so consequently, had not therewithal, opened mine own meaning, and clean
shut you out from the enjoying of any good room therein: then might you with
some better color have made such vauntes of those your peny-woorths. But when
I did as fully condemn you for rotten members, as I did allow you in that
other sense to be of the Church, it was I warrant you, but Sardonicus risus,
and a poor seely joy that you had thereby. As therefore in respect of the
faith that in gross you hold, and for the reverence that I bear thereunto
(as it is in it self, but not as you hold it) I allow you in such sense to
be of the Church: so be you sure, and, if need be, I confirm it unto you
again, and again, that in respect of your foul and great Apostacy, I also,
as well as my brethren, account you be as had members, as ever were any, and
as far from salvation, and al other privileges of the true, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church (in the course that yet you are in) as ever were the Jews
themselves that put Christ to death, or any others, if you can find any worse
than they.

30 Now as touching the cause why I have offered you, Upon what cause he
would have it to seem that I did grant them this courtesy
as you term it, so great and sudden courtesy, whereas here you take upon
you to show what cause my self do allege for the same, and would make your
Reader believe, that my self alleged none other than as you have here
recited, herein also you have abused me much, like as in the rest you have
done: for that it is clear (and you cannot deny it) that I alleged diverse
other reasons besides for that matter, and all of more importance than this (or
at least, not one of them all inferior unto it) and spent the better half of
that section only in it, as in the fifteenth section morefully appears. But
herein belike you would again give some warning to al, to see to your fingers;
and teach the^ how you are wont to deal, in all your brablings against the
truth: that is, to cut out some od point by it self, that you think your
self most able to deal withal, or to give most color unto you; and, setting
down that in steed of the whole, to tell your Readers, that that is the thing
that we do rest on. Then also in reciting the words themselves, whereas the
consenting that I did speak of, and which I misliked, was, to suffer you to
make such an absolute division betwixt us, as my words do there plainly
declare: you, perceiving that those words did not sound full enough to your
advantage, altered them quite, and took such as you thought would serve you
better (especially, standing so barely, as you have there made them to do) and
in steed of the^ you have made me to say, to grant that we are not both of
one Church, But still I say, God be thanked that your cause is no better (even
with your selves) but that you think needful so gredily to hunt after so poor
and seely helps as these. It is bad enough of it self: and yet by such dealing
you might easily know, that needs must you make it so much the worse. But if
you will deal plainly, and are desirous a little to prove what you can do in
the matter it self that most does gal you, this is the thing that you have to
do. You are to show what authority you have in the word of God, why you should
so resolutely condemn all those to be none of the Church of Christ, that
agree not with you in those points that now are in controversy betwixt us.
Not so careful to keep them in: as that they should not thrust out others.
This is the thing, you know well enough, that I did beat on: not caring so
much to keep you in; as not to suffer you to exclude others so much as you do.
For seeing you are such rotten members as you are, and yet take upon you to be
the judges of al others besides, to thrust out, and take in at your pleasures
(ever co^demning those that are right, and wickedly iustifiing those that are
wrong) it was not so needful now to be so careful to hold you in under that
title, though it were no more but generally, as it was, to let you understand,
both how far your selves are f^^n from the truth it self, and how manifest and
open wrong you do to those that so you shut out, as not apperteining to the
Church of Christ. And seeing that by this only slight you do so much prevail
with many, who dare in nothing dissent from you: so long as they fear that in
so doing they forthwith should leefe the interest they had in the Church, nor
so much as inquire of any thing you teach, on what ground or warrant you do it,
upon the persuasio^ that they have of you, that you alone are of the church,
and that in you it cannot er^he^ce is it that it was needful for me also
(having in hand to answer those doubts that chiefly hindered the weaker sort and
such as of conscience cleave unto you) so to discover your subtlety therein,
as that so many as would look about them, and not esteem of things as they
are accounted, but as they are indeed, might the better perceive, What it is
that for this matter they are to do.
that with such toys, they need not any more to be stayed. You on the other
side, if you will say any thing to the purpose in this matter, must be able to
show, that notwithstanding that we receive Christian Religion so much as we
do, yet can we be none of the Church of Christ in any respect: either because
of some thing that we hold besides, that is of that force as to exclude us from
all interest there; or else (which is the thing wherewithal you will rather
charge us) for that some of those opinions of yours, wherein we dissent from
you, are of that importance, as that no body can in any sense be of the
Church of God (not so much as generally, which is the thing that we do not
deny unto you, notwithstanding that you are fallen so far as you are) unless
he hold them all, and every one, without exception. Or to speak more plainly,
you must prove your propitiatory sacrafice, transubstantiation, popedom,
righteousness of works, intercession of Saints, prayer to them, prayer for the
dead, purgatory, image-woorshipping, pilgrimage-gadding, and such like, to be
so needful points of Christian Religion, as that whosoever holds not them,
or any of them, he cannot be of the Church of Christ, though never so much
he hold all, that Christ or his Apostles have left to us in the written word.
This is the only thing that must help you, for this matter: this if you do
not, whatsoever else it is that you bring, neither does it hurt us, neither can
it comfort you, whatsoever joy you would seem to conceive, upon this new and
sudden courtesy offered unto you.

31 Those others that nothing belong to this matter, Two other matters of
another kind.
and yet are lodged under a roof, are two: one, that you take upon you to
show, why I took in hand to write this Treatise of Pacification; the other,
that you do before-ha^d give us hope of a certain new work, which perhaps
hereafter may be taken in hand. As touching the former of these two; Why I
should write this Pacification.
what mean you, again to take in hand to find out the cause in mine own
words, and again so far to leave the plain way, as before you did? Had you so
good success in the former, that now you have so good a courage to attempt it
again? But it is your lot (in the bad cause that you have in hand) ever to
be sure to fall, whenever you strive to arise. The cause why I wrote this
treatise of Pacification, I had my self down in two places: in my Epistie
Dedicatorie, the second leaf, and first page; and in the beginning of the
Treatise it self, in the first leaf, and second page. In the place that you
allege, out of the third section, and either out of the foureteenth or
fifteenth page, there do I give no cause at all, why I wrote this Treatise:
neither yet do I directly set down, But by way of supposall, that which so
greedily you catch for your purpose to cheer you withal. For my words are
plain, that we also will be content to set by Religion for a season etc, and
now consider of those things alone that do concern our ciuille-state: and
again. Be it therefore, that whatsoever their profession be, yet shall they have
many of those that now are with us to join with them, if in this point there
be found no lawful impediment or matter to stay them. And now Sir I pray you,
if you would needs have taken upon you out of mine own words to declare unto
others, what moved me to write this treatise, ought you not rather to have
taken it out of one of those places before recited, where I dealt in the
selfsame matter: then out of this other alleged by you, where I speak
nothing at all of any such thing? And, if you had meant honest and plain
dealing, would you not have taken the course that I speak of? But put-case,
that that also were some part of the cause, could you yet have the face,
altogether to set by Religion, and matters of faith, (which I set by but for a
time, whilst that I reasoned of the other) and then tell your reader, that the
consideration of our civil estate was the only matter; and that, by mine own
confession: and that my self confessed, that indeed now I perceived, that me
held with us rather for respect of state and civil commodities, than of
conscience and belief. Did I any where confess this? Have you no shame to
charge me with so manifest an untruth? Does your religion give you that
liberty? Have you so thoroughly digested that new lesson of yours (to keep no
faith to those that profess the gospel) that now you regard not what you say
of them, nor how you charge them. But the quality of your cause being better
considered, the matter is less, that by you it is accordingly handled. But you
ad hereunto, That regard of temporal commodities is all that we have to move
others to our profession, as he would have it.
that regard of temporal commodity in very truth is the only reason, or bait
that we can lay before you at this time, whereby to move you to come to our
part: and withal, that our Lord knows how bare and brickle a thing it is,
and how long or little while it may endure. In the former, whereof you seem now
to discover the reason to us, why you would before have made your reader
believe, that I made this Pacification for no cause else, but for that now I
perceived, that me^ held with us, rather for respect of civil commodities, than
of conscience and belief. For if there were on our parts no other groundwork
of persuasion, but only the regard of temporal commodity: then without
question I could have had to this purpose no other matter at al to write of;
and so consequently needs must I have made the treatise only for it. Therefore
do but prove that to your gentle reader: and the other will follow upon it, hard
at the heels. In the latter of the^, wherein you talk of the bricklenes of it,
and how little it may endure, although you cast in certain other speches besides,
to shadow the matter so far as to your purpose should be needful for the time:
yet considering your attempts since, against the person of her Ma. and the
State it self, it may well be both that your self were privy to the^; and that,
if so they had fallen out, you had laid thereby a pretty foundation to win the
credit of a Prophet among you, as one of your fellows lately did in England.
We know (as well as you) that al erthly prosperity subject to mutabilitie: and
that no man knows the time or season, how long, or how little it is to
continue. And if it shall please God to enter into any such trial of us, as
you would fainest see, we^ trust that we shall be in a readiness to obey his will:
and that it also shall be, both to our great benefit, and good of the Church;
and to the further overthrow, both of your selves, and of your profession, now
in this declining estate of your wicked pope-dome. I also grant, as touching
these speeches of yours, if otherwise the cause be good, and the persons be not
suspicious, such speeches as these may well be uttered without offense. But I
ad withal, both that it is a false slander of you, to charge us, that we
rely upon it (and yet nevertheless are we of duty very much bound herein to
acknowledge the goodness of God toward us; and that so much the rather, as we
see the same so much to grieve you, and so firmly to be continued hitherto unto
us, notwithstanding so many vile attempts of yours, to the contrary:) and that
it is likely, considering the quality that you are of, that in these very
words you showed your self (to some purposes in covert manner, but otherwise
plainly enough) not only how to lay in wait for the same, but also that you
had already conceived an undoubted hope to prevail, wherein notwithstanding
hitherto (God be thanked) you are clearly defeated. And our trust further is,
that seeing you are now so far past, not only religion, but all honesty too,
as witness these your vile and naughty practices, continually iterated one
after an other: both that God will still be against you; and that the most of
your wonted adhaerents, considering into how reprobate ways they may easily
find you hereby to be given, will now begin every where, to see how much
you have abused them, and daily forsake you more and more. That Strumpet, you
know, that sometimes has been in that honor and estimation, with the Princes
and people of the earth, and with whom they have lived in fornication, being
by her enchantments deceived, is at length to be forsaken and hated of them,
to be stripped naked and burned also. And it may be, that GOD will use this
extreme wickedness of yours, to make others both better to know you, and the
more to detest you also: so to make the readier way to those his judgments,
which we beseech him to hasten to his good pleasure, for his names (...); and
for the comfort of all his people, that soon should have a readier way to
their salvation, if that great stumbling block were once removed out of the
way.

32 As touching the hope that before hand you give us of that new Book, Of the
hope that he gives us, of a certain new work to be taken in hand: which
none of them all, nor altogether, can ever perform
that perhaps hereafter may be taken in hand, you have in such sort set
down the argument thereof already, that, although it may be that some of you
could give the adventure of such an attempt: yet, to deal plainly with you, I
must needs give you to understand, that it is such a matter, as that none of
you all, nor altogether, are able to perform; no, nor to come any thing
near. For therein perhaps must be declared, and that more largely, that, the
regard of temporal commodities set aside, all other respects, reasons,
allurements, motives, and considerations, which heaven and earth can yield,
whereby to stir a Christians man to embrace any religion, are all for you,
and none for us. But auaunt Satan? Have thou not yet left thy woonted
bragging? Art thou not yet persuaded, but that thou may be able so far to
advance, so notorious falsehood of thine which is so plainly discovered
already? Were thou not sufficiently foiled before, when as thou did but
vaunt of the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, as if all were
thine, and at thy disposition: but that now thou have so far possessed the
minds of some, as that in them having gotten the place, thou art not ashamed
now to say that whatsoever arguments of persuasion there are, in heaven, or in
earth, they are all for that corruption that thou have scattered into the
church, and none at all for the truth it self? As for thy self, it is but thy
kind: thou art a lier from the beginning; and the father of all falsehood and
lies. And as for those that thou have so far bewitched, it is the just
judgment of God, that they illusion should be so forcible and strong against
them, because they would in no wise receive the love of the truth. But for the
matter that is in hand, neither thou, nor thine, shall ever be able to come
any thing near, unto that which thou would seem that thou could. It is not
in thee: the tou^e^ that thou have taken in hand, thou art in no wise able to
finish. In boasting thy self so immeasurably thou have more plainly discovered
thy shame. For either must thou with shame give over this proud vaunt of thine:
or else so far discover thy weakness, whenever thou shall attempt to do it,
that thereby thy shame shall be the greater. Howsoever it be, this glorying of
thine must needs be confusion and shame to thee: it is too late to avoid it
now. But (to leave your prince that rules in you ^^ to come to your self
again) I pray you good Sir, have you already so clean forgotten, how little able
to perform that enterprise your late champion was, that having gotten half a
score reasons on behalf of your profession, such as he thought none could
answer, with great confidence did publish the same, and challenging all men to
make him answer, quickly found, that neither he, nor his fellows were in any
wise able to stand unto it? Was this Icarus of yours so lately overtaken, and
that so plainly, in that presumptuous folly of his: and yet must you needs
be renewing the same point of folly again to the overthrow of your self
likewise? Nevertheless by mine advise it were not amiss, that as your
bel-fou^ders were wont to desire their sta^ders-by to say a sort of
pater-nosters, and auees while the metal was running; or as when your great
masters would have faced us down, that a late Princes of ours was with child,
they ordained processions, and made public prayers, that it might be a
man-child, and a proper one too: so you likewise, seeing perhaps it must needs
be done, and none of us may say to the contrary, would now advise you of such
necessary helps before hand, that they be not wanting when you should need
them. Again, must the regard of temporal commodity be set aside in this
account, He forgot himself when he laid this unto us.
as a matter that is only for us, and not for you? If you mean, that the
profession of faith that we do hold, must needs be more welcome to others,
because it delivers them from power of darkness, and miserable servitude,
wherinto of late you had brought them, in this case I grant, you said very
truly, but nothing at all to your own purpose; and consequently, we cannot
be persuaded yet, that you had so honest meaning in you. But if you mean that
we which are the teachers of it, teach it but for our own advantage, and not
for the truth it self, (which lies fairest for your meaning, and most agrees
to your disposition) then must I tell you, that herein also you ^latlie
pronounce against the known and manifest truth. For who sees not, or how can
your selue? deny, but that, in regard of temporal commodity, ^^ had been
much better for us to have taken part with you, than so far to have sundered
our selves form you: if so be that we could so have held out the word of god;
or being once come in, have suppressed it again? Is it not a readier way unto
temporal commodity, to keep men so ignorant of the sufficiency of their
salvation in Christ, that we may thereby have them ever to hang more upon us,
and to make no end of endowing us with the best things they had, for their
souls health: then to teach our salvation in him to be so absolute, and in
himself so fully accomplished to all believers, that the people of God need
not to seek for such by-helps to any other whatsoever? Is it not a readier way
to temporal commodity, to make kings and princes believe, that they must hold
their crowns and kingdoms at our pleasure: then plainy to acknowledge the fulness
of their right and power; and that we therein have in no wise to meddle with
them? But the reasons are many, that turn this back to your own bosoms.
What dealing then is this in you, to lay that on us, which is yours and so
boldly to set us down so great untruths? Or, what one part is there of your
profession (even in the cleerest of all, as you do use it) that one way or
other doot not specially respect this temporal commodity (that you would
feign have so far from you, and so near unto us) that is, either your profit,
or else your pleasure, or ease; or at least, your credit or estimation with
others: or yours at least, much more than ours, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever? But having once brought your favorites to this, that they shall but
hear you, and read such things as you set them down; and utterly refuse and
despise all others besides, we grant it is for you to set a good face on the
matter, how bad soever the cause be that you defend: that so those miserable
adherents of yours, may gather the better hope they are right, when they see
that you do so boldly defend them; and never be able to find how far you do
abuse them, because they reject or abandon from them al such as should bring
them to the knowledge of it. In the mean season you are no babes, that can so
cunningly handle your matters. And thus much as touching that part of your
doings, where in you have directed your style chiefly against me, but yet
against others withal.

Of the residue that he has otherwise brought us.
33 As for the residue, that (in this your second edition) you have otherwise
brought us, my self do not mean (as before I said) to go against is, nor to
discover your weakness therein (but to hold my self contented with mine own
defense) both because that for the most part it rested now the controversies
that are betwixt us; and your self is yet so little disposed to be further
advised in the others. For the controversies are so handled already, that it is
not so needful now to take in (...) again so stale and miserable remnantes as
those: howsoever that you can with such countenance obtrued unto us such wash,
and clipped, and counterfeit coins for good and lawful; as though yes the
Church of God did not know the vanity of them. And seeing that your self
has herein already sufficiently declared, how hardly you take it to be
otherwise advised than stands with your present humor, I shall be as ready
for my part to pass you over for those matters, and not to trouble your humor
therein: saving only that I will not stick to put you in mind of some few
things, which I think were good for you to consider of, both in respect of
the truth it self; and that you also may grow to some better temper, and not so
highly esteem of your self; as has so great contempt of others joined
withal. And first as touching the whole, Of the whole book generally.
the title you know you have altered now, and that in such fort, that hereby
only we might easily charge you, Of the Title of it.
that so much as in you lies, you have marred it all, even whatsoever therein
does tend to the rule of a godly life: and yet not denieng, but that the
scriptures therein are good, the Fathers also that there are alleged, and
other rules of godliness that are there prescribed, so far as either of them does
agree with the written word. But my meaning is (as before in the preface I
noted) that seeing you have turned now the matters you speak of, fio^ a
Christian exercise, to be a directorie guiding men unto salvation, if thereby
you mean to teach your adherents, to seek their salvation by their good
woorks or godliness of life (as the common opinion of you all, and this now
book of yours in many places does sufficiently witness, that so you mean:)
then it is certain, that because such woorks, be they otherwise never so
good, yet to such end done, are utterly lost, and therein become odious to
God, therefore when as in this your new book you teach men so to be occupied
in these matters, you have made your self a false prophet thereby, and this
book of yours an accursed pamphlet in the day of the Lord. Whereby also you
have made it now more plainly to appear, why you set in hand together out of
others those lessons of godliness, and to commend the same to the people: not
for any care you had to make them more godly, but to use that occasion to
nourish in them that pestilent error, of ascribing their salvation (for a good
part of it) to their own proper works; and withal to let in your other
errors (whereof this new book of yours is full) which otherwise you knew well
enough, that by any learning you were never able to commend unto them. Wherein
it may be, that you were persuaded, that at the least you should be likened to
the Graecians of old, that when they could not by maine force get within the
walls of Troy, The Trojan horse.
afterward by seeming to break up their siege, and to leave a sacred horse
behind them, to the great benefit of the City, if it were taken in unto them,
by that means obtained, that certain bands of their own soldiers were
unawares taken in, and all the rest immediately after brought in besides, to the
utter overthrow of those that received so goodly a praesent, so craftily
provided, and left unto them. It may be I say, that you might liken your self
unto these. For you also, finding that now by learning you are not able to
settle your errors in the hearts of others, as heretofore you were wont to do
while you were not resisted; would seem now to leave off dealing in matters of
controversy, and herein to treat of devotion only: and yet throughout your
whole book you so interlace the controversies also, and make devotion so to
hang upon them, that none can receive your rules of godliness, but that if they
mark not well, they must needs receive your errors withal. And so under
pretense of teaching godliness, your meaning is, thereby to let in your errors
into them, as they by leaving that horse unto them, did seek to gain the
City thereby. But these things are in summo genere: The monks hood.
of famous warriors, two mighty peoples, a noble City, a strange policy,
and to the one side utter destruction. A baser kind will be meeter for you.
Acts and mon. 1209.
You might therefore liken your self rather to Bartrams boy, in that busy, but
causles, and therefore ridiculous stir at Oxford, when on the sudden, in a
special pagent of their popish devotion, they were all persuaded the Church
was on fire over their heads, and thereupon hasted forth so fast, that they
cloyed the doors, and hindered themselves. At which time the boy to avoid the
press, climed upon the door, and then espying a shifting Moonke, getting out
over the heads of those that stuck fast in the doors, thought it a fit
opportunity to him, to leap into his cowle behind him, that so he might get
out of the danger that then was feared. For so you likewise have thought this
moonkish hood of your popish devotion to be so fine a way for you, to get out
your popish errors withal, that you could not hold, but in they must, and
abide the adventure: seeing well enough, that now they wax stale and out of
credit, and therefore like quickly to perish, unless by such means you could
happily raise their credit again, or at least praeserue them (some what
longer yet) from that consuming fire of the word of God, that (not in
supposall, as in the other, but in very truth) so mightily has begun to
consume them already. Howbeit as that Moonke did soon after find fault with
his burden, and rid himself of it: even so you had stuffed those your
precepts of godly life so full of your popery, that you may not marvel though
they took so ill with so unnatural and needles a burden, and did seek to
be disburdened of it. In your new book (I grant) you have taken a better
order. For there you have made the burden so strong, and the bearer so weak,
that it can never deliver it self: but must be content to be under it still.
Then also whereas how you have enlarged it, Of the matter of it.
in volume or quantity, double to that it was before, or at least near
thereunto, yet are these your additions such (either so little appertaining
unto the former argument, when the matter it self is good: or ^^so vain and
weak, when otherwise they answer the argument that was before propounded) as
that howsoever you are offended with me, for taking out (but little to speak
of) from your former books yet, if any friend of yours, at whose hands your
would better take it, would now take out the most of that which in this your
second edition you have put unto it, my opinion (by your patience) is, that he
should make your book so much the better aesteemed (but only for the names
sake) with most of your friends that would read it for godliness sake, or to stir
up their mind thereunto. Not denying hereby, but that some part of the matter
(in it self) is good: as, that there is a God, which rewards good and evil,
and of the certainty of Christian Religion (which two matters are prosecuted
at large in two several chapters, and are the greatest part of your additions)
and some other besides. But those things you know were at large handled
before by the Fathers of old against the Gentiles and Jews: and of late
likewise; as by diverse others in some part or other, as occasion served, so
very fully by Monsieur du Plessis, in that notable book of his of the truth
of Christian Religion. You know likewise, that such things as are of diverse
arguments, are not ever so welcome unto those that (for the time) desire to
hear but of the one: though in their kind the one be as good as the other,
and in time and place as welcome. But yet as touching those reverend Catholic
Priests that you speak of, that suppose so many among us to be fallen unto
Athersine by beating out the points of Religion, first it may be that they
do think, that so many as abandon their woonted errors of popery, do
utterly cast of all true Religion likewise. And yet notwithstanding I will not
deny, but that if by themselves they measure others, they may very well
think (if they can have the grace to consider, how far they are fallen) that it
is needful now to lay again those first principles of all Religion, that
there is a God, and that the faith of Christ is (without question the only
truth. But yet are they not able in this land to find any others, of what
estate or calling soever, by whom they may take so true a skantling for these
matters, as by themselves: as their treacherous practices long since have
witnessed, and daily yet do, to the shame of you all. And this of the whole.

Of a few particulars.
34 To come to particulars, my purpose is no more but this, a little to unfold
unto you these two points: how loath you are to be admonished, or to amend, any
thing that already you have set down, be it never so wrong; and yet that there
is very good cause why you should not trust to your self so much as you do.
That you are loath to be admonished, That he is loath to amend that he has
done amiss.
or to amend, that which once you have done amiss, appears sufficiently in
this, for that you do so grievously take this little amendment that herein I
have tendered unto you, though in never so quiet and gentle manner. Insomuch
that whereas I never used any contumely of speech against you, for any thing
that you had so corruptly put in; and besides that, absteined also from just
reproof, and never did any more, but either left them out, or amended them in
quiet manner: you on the other side, by all such occasions have stirred up your
self, to lay on load in reproachful and taunting speeches. But whereas it
seems your self does account them as deadly instruments against whom they
are thrown: yet the truth is, they are but the shuttle-cocks of your own
vanity, and carry with them no force at all against the truth and upright
dealing. Then also I think your self may not well deny, but that I
admonished you of, or my self amended certain things, wherein you were wrong:
which notwithstanding you have not corrected in this your new book, but have
come forth with them again as corruptly now, as you did before. Whereof
although I were able to allege very many examples: yet I will content my
self with few. And first when you have occasion (whether orderly given, or
purposely taken) to allege any thing out of those books that are not
Canonical: yet you still call them the Scripture, Apothrypha, and Canonical,
like Scripture with him: and why.
and the H. Scripture, as well as those books that are Canonical, or undoubted
Scripture indeed. And this you do both against the use and custom of the
primitive Church (respecting the whole generally) and of an evil heart to the
holy, and undoubted word of God: that by aduauncing other books also to the
same degree, you may so the more easily take down the better estimation of it,
and make it no better than those that are of your own allowance. In like manner
whereas before I put you in mind of many places corruptly translated, Corrupt
translations still continued against the Fathers.
or wrong applied, yet nevertheless you hold on still your headstrong course:
as, propter dolos, for in lubrico posuisticot. Psalm. 73. against Jerome; and
above, for upon all his woorks. Psalm. 144. against Saint Jerome, and against
Saint Augustine both; and many others like unto these. Wherein you do not
only go against the Fathers, but also against the truth it self: and all to
continue your former course, and a little thereby to help out a few od points
of your profession, not worth three halfe-pence the best of them all. So
likewise how you did somewhat ouer-slippe your self beyond the warrant of
the word of God, to ascribe that as a custom to Isaac, that the text
reports but of one special time, I noted unto you toward the beginning.
That, you may see, how I had amended, only by leaving your error out, and
nothing at all laying it unto your charge, not bewraying it unto others. Which
notwithstanding now you have taken it in again, and more discovered your
weakness therein, than you did before. But it may be you will say that that
part of your book was printed before. What if it were? yet was not the usual
help of corrections in the end of your book denied unto you. But for this
cause to leave all the forepart of the book, and (to be sure) to leave you
out three parts to your self, and to take in hand but the fourth part only,
the hindmost of all (by which time though the print went on, yet might you have
good time of aduisement) and there to pick out but some few things also,
whereas I ( page 271.) help to rectify the number of quarters, that you ( page
297.) had set down for a Corus in Salomons provision, Corus.
far above. Ierom beiond al mesure, and much above Josephus also: you
nevertheless do still hold on your former course, and in your new book have set
it down altogether as corruptly as you did before. A little after ( page 300.)
you had set down, that on thursday etc friday the Jews cried crucifige against
Christ, and prefored the life of Barrabas before his. And yet I trust you know
well enough, that though they bare him il hearts before, and likly enough that
they on thursday were practicing against him: yet neither of those two things
that you speak of were done but only on friday. Whereas therefore I ( page
281.) left out your thursday, and set them on the head of friday only: yet you
in your headstro^g course have put in thursday again as it was before. After
that again, handling the vanity of worldly pleasures, you bring in ( page
322.) a text of Scripture (wrong quoted also, both for the book and chapter)
that the lineage of king Baasa was destroyed, for that they provoked god in
their vanities. In which place by those their vanities, he means their
idolatries: as by the place it self is apparent; and by the best interpreters
thereon, old and new. And Johannes Benedictus, a Divine of Paris, and one of
your own company (taking his direction, as himself professes, out of
Jerome, Augustine, Ambrose, Gregory, Hilary, Chrysostom, and all the best
approved writers that antiquity yielded, as appears in his Epistle
Dedicatorie) in his Concordance, upon the word vanitas, does plainly so
interpret that very place. Whereas therefore I left it out, as not appertaining
to the matter you had in hand: you notwithstanding have put it in again, and
as wrong quoted as it was before. Belike at the first you followed some table,
and whatsoever place you found to talk of vanity, that did you think to be
for your purpose, and in that persuasion persist as yet. But whether that were
in you a vanity, or not, you may at leisure resolve, if it please you. So
likewise (even with the common sort) do you plainly mistake that place of the
Hebrews, concerning Esau, saying, that God would not forgive him, though he
demanded it with tears, ^^. Wherein, although I will not deny, but that you
may have some other that does so expoundit: yet is the stone it self a
sufficient interpreter of that place against all. And your own fellows of
Rhemes, in their note on that place, do plainly say, that it is not meant
that Esau could not find remission of his sins at Gods hands (which is the
sense that you have gathered) but that having once fold and yielded up the
right of his first-birth unto his younger brother, it was too late to be sorry
for his vi^^^uised bargain. In which latter part of their note, although if
they had better heeded the story whence it was taken, they might have
interpreted the same somewhat better, of the blessing that was past to an
other: yet is the former very sound, and crosses you as directly as may be.
And whereas I had so mended it to your hands; you nevertheless come in with it
again as you did before: so well seen belike in the word of God (in those
matters that are of deeper judgment, or fore-stalled with some unadvisedness; or
ignorant prejudice) that as you can readily err with the ignorant and common
sort; so likewise can you as little perceive it, when as you are gently
admonished of it. The like might be said of many others: but these I trust may
be sufficient for this matter. And yet I will acknowledge withal, that some
few of them you have somewhat amended much, like as you had direction from
me. As for example, whereas before your words were, that Christ complained
grievously by the Prophet that sinners built upon his back, and prolonged
their iniquity, 348, which indeed does not stand with the sense of the place,
as I had noted 330, and therewithal help the place by saying that Christ
might so complain) you, perceiving somewhat your former mistaking, have thus
far helped it, that our Savior seems to complain etc. Again, whereas you
said before, that Christ went forth into the streets twice in one day to
reprehend those that were idle, and I, perceiving t^^o faults therein, amended
them both, saying; that Christ in his parable still reprehended grievously
those that stood idle etc. you, perceiving now that it was not Christ himself
that went forth to reprehend the idle, but that he put the parable of another
that did, have now thus far mended it, that you say that Christ in his
parable went forth into the streets twice in one day etc. But as for that
other slip of yours that you talk so praecisely of twice in one day, that have
you mended nothing at all: and it may be not perceived it neither. And yet the
text it self (that you do speak of Mat. 20. 17.) does plainly say, that first
he went forth early in the morning, then afterward again at the third, sixth,
ninth, and eleventh hours of the day. In so much that it is the more marvel,
that finding him still (as you say, which notwithstanding we read but of once)
to rebuke those that were idle you never found him notwithstanding at any time
to rebuke this your idle reading and regarding of his holy word. The sense
also of diverse places of Scripture, which you (out of others sometimes) had
corruptly set down, alleging it for the sense of the place, which was either
but an alluding unto it, or else not so good I had one way or other either
amended, or made more tolerable: which you notwithstanding have brought in
again, as far wide as they were before. I am not ignorant, but that by one of
those four ways, which you take upon you so commonly to use (and whereof
sometime there is some use in deed) in the expounding of holy scripture, there
may be some color pretended, for such wanton and wandering expositions^ and
that diverse there be, of reverend account otherwise that therein have not a
little offended. But in this light of the Gospel, those that so dally with the
word of God, are worthy rather to be hissed out; than to be repressed by
admonition. Last of all whereas you had often used those profane speeches of
hap, chance, and fortune, perhaps and perchance, and I had not only left them
out, and put others in their place (such as gave no such way to offense, and
yet served the place as well as the other) but also did bring in Augustine
against them: you nevertheless have taken them freely in again, as one that is
^oth overmuch to amend, or little regards what offense by his speech he may
give unto others.

35. That there is good cause why you should not trust to your self so much as
you do, That fowly he erreth in many things.
might ea^y be gathered throughout your whole book. But first, as touching all
such matters as belong to the controversies, with those (as I said) I will not
meddle, because that whatsoever slip you make therein, yet it is hard for you
to perceive it, much more to acknowledge it: so long as you are persuaded, that
you are in the truth, or do but retain the mind that you do, so wilfully
winking at the manifest light, and so hardening your hearts against this gracious
calling of God. Then also certain other things there are, that are no
controversies them selves, and yet notwithstanding so near allied to them,
that therein also I may not deal with much better hope than in the other. For
therein also you show your self to be so impudently given to maintain your
wonted fancies, that you care not how far you advance whatsoever you think may
any way serve your purpose therein, nor how far you abaje whatsoever it is
that crosses the same: nor how far you eclipse or darken the truth that
goes against you; nor yet how far you advance any manner of error that
makes for you. In the ods that he conceiueth betwixt faith and works. Pref. 7.
and in the book it self. 315.
Hence is it, that the more to discredit the reading and hearing of the word
of God, and to keep the people in ignorance still, and the better to advance
that unsavory and loathsome righteousness of your own good works against that
righteousness of faith, that rests only in the death and merits of Christ:
you slily and smoothly bear us in hand (but with how wicked an heart, and how
unshamefast a forehead let others judge) that knowledge and faith are no
matters to speak of; and of light importance in respect of works the one to
be ofttimes dispatched in the space of one weeks learning; the other mough for
all our life: Hence is it again, In defining of a true Christian. Part. 1. c.
5.
that when you come to define a Christian man, you shun the leuel that you have
in the word of God, and so handsomely bring the matter about, that when you have
said, whosoever considers what you have set down, and lays one part
thereof to the other, he may easily see, that you make him a marvelous proper
man; for all the world such as your self, and none other. Insomuch that
whosoever were disposed to examine your dealing herein, he might easily it
taken known unto all, either that you know not which way to begin, rightly to
define a Christian man: or else (which is the likelier, and yet not altogether
praeiudicing the other neither) that you could not find in your heart truly to
do it, because it crosses you so much as it does) nor to draw so near
toward it, as otherwise it is possible enough that you could. Hence is it
likewise, that when you take upon you to comfort a man against despair; In
comforting sinners against despair. Part. ^. cap. 1.
although you bring diverse things well after your manner (that is, corruptly,
mingling the truth of God with your lies) of the love and mercy of God, not
only toward man generally, but also toward sinners; of the assurance thereof
likewise, and how the penitent may apply the same to themselves: yet, neither
have you sufficiently declared, who, and what kind of men they are, unto whom
these mercies of God appertain, and who may of right take hold thereof, by the
undoubted warrant of the word of God, but only by the way, and generally (a
thing notwithstanding that proportionably needs as large handling, as does
the other) nor how the justice of God is so answered, that he may afford us
those mercies, without impeachment of his own glory on that behalf. Both
which points are of such importance to the raising up of the troubled soul,
unto the assurance of Gods mercy, as that, unless the soul of a man be
thoroughly satisfied for those things also, it can never take hold of the
assurance of that special favor toward it, that may sufficiently strengthen
it against despair, though otherwise the mercies of God, in that course they
you have taken, were much more fully displayed before it, and that without
any kind of corruption mingled withal. Whereas therefore you profess your
self in that chapter to have it your purpose to minister comfort unto the
sinner, that otherwise in despair of Gods mercy might be in danger,
altogether to turn aside from the way of his service, and yet notwithstanding
leave out so principal matters, as without the which the other can minister no
sound comfort, hereby also it may indifferent plainly appear, how rightly it
may be applied to you, that Job did lay to the charge of his friends, that
whereas they took themselves to be wise, yet were they, in such case, but as
physicians of no value, and miserable comforters all the sort of them.
Miserable comforters all the sort of them.
But this you have, because you are loath to afford unto Christ, the honor that
to him appertains. Otherwise you must needs have seen, and set down
accordingly, that although the mercies of God were exceeding great, as indeed
they are infinite, and much greater than they are, if greater could be: yet
might no man look to be partaker thereof, but in Jesus Christ, and by faith
in him. By occasion whereof you should more fully have opened unto us the
points of the Covenant that is established in him; and who they are with whom
it is made: and not so negligently (or slily rather) have lapped up so great
matter and so necessary unto the purpose that you had in hand, with the
terms of repentance generally. For though it may stand (being largely taken
and rightly withal) for the effect of the whole, and is taken oftentimes both
in the Fathers and Scriptures also: yet (to such a purpose) as, in it self
oftimes it does need a larger discourse for the opening of it, especially to
those that do not sufficiently understand the power thereof; so was it any
wise to have been in that place performed of you, if you meant to minister any
sound comfort; and not rather to settle a sinner in your accustomed popish
presumption, than rightly to raise raise him up to a Christian faith. Having so
largely entreated of those things, that, in that case, lie on the part of God
toward us: you should not so slightly have put off the others that lie on our
parts toward him again, being so large in themselves as they are, and in that
case requiring as large a discourse. So likewise for the other, that is, how
the justice of God is in such sort answered, that without impeachment of his
own glory, he may vouchsafe us those mercies of his, it was a point that went
so near unto the sufficiency of our redemption in Christ, that either you saw
not what belonged unto it: or else could in no wise find in your heart to
meddle therewith, least so you overthrow the very foundations of the
gainfullest parts of your profession. These, and such like others there be,
so near of kin unto the controversies that you maintain, that I mean not to
deal with you therein: though otherwise you have left advantage enough therein
against your self, for those that would. For being of so corrupt minds as
you are, so long as you do hold those opinions that you do, it may be no
marvel, though you persuade your selves that therein you have some color of
defense: howsoever that others do plainly see, that therein you are as plainly
deceived as can be.

36 Therefore to omit those that are of this kind, In certain others that do
nothing belong to any controversy.
and but to put you a little in mind of a few others wherein there lies no
such color of defense for you, first, what time as Isaac went forth to
meditate, as you allege, you make him then to be but a child: Isaac was but
a child with him, when he was forty years old. Page 16.
and if we join your words together, that there stand but a little a
sunder, a little child. And this (we are sure) was no bodies else but only
your own: because it is not in the former Book, but only in this latter, of
your own trimming up. But I fear it is you that was the child, and not he:
because the Scripture (in the next chapter after) does plainly witness, that
he was at that time upon forty years old. Whence you should have this conceit
of yours, I cannot tell. Howbeit hereby you make me to call to remembrance a
much like matter that was said to be done in Oxfoord, about the same time
that you were there (if you be the same that I hear that you are:) or at
least not so long before, but that a fresh report thereof might very well reach
unto you. A certain company of country plaiers came thither to play: they made
it known what they did mean; and, as the manner is, drew in a company soon
unto them. Among other things they had to deal with the story of Isaac: both
of his sacrificing, when he was but a child; and of his marriage, when after
he came to riper age. They were not so well stored of persons to furnish their
parts, but that one boy must play Isaac, both in his childhood, and manhood
also: but as the boys own face served their turn for Isaacs childhood; so had
they for him a fair long beard, to resemble his manhood. But all the cunning
was to hit the time when he should have his beard on, and when he should not.
What will you? there was no more but right and wrong. When therefore he came
forth as a child to be sacrificed, he had on his, beard: and when after he
was to be married, then as a child he had it off, and only his own boys face
to shut up the matter. But I hope you were never so mad, as to take it thence.
That which you speak of your fifty Gentlemen consumed by fire, Fifty
gentlemen for two hundred and fifty. pa. 70.
might with some color be laid on the Printer, but that the number is written
at large: and especially for that you have so many slips of this kind, that it
is a great deal more likely, that you aimed thereat (after your manner)
blindly enough, but so well as you could. Howbeit the story is (both in the
Bible, and in Josephus too) that they were no less than two hundred and
fifty. But it may be those two hundred were weary of their entertainment,
because you did look no better unto them: and so being disposed to play the
gentlemen with you, got them out of sight, when you should have taken the view
of them. For the sacrificing of Iephthes daughter, Iephthes sacrificing of his
daughter. Page 78.
whom you say her father did put to death, you have (I grant) in that matter,
many great authors for you, both old and new. But if it had pleased you
better to have opened your eyes, to the light that in these days God has
given us, it may be, you might have espied an other opinion, likely to have
the stronger warrant in the word of God. Your reckoning likewise that Abraham
lived very near two thousand years after Adam, Of the time when Abraham
lived pa. 143.
must (unless you follow, as knowing no better, the Grecian account)
improperly spoken, or else false: because the truth is, that it was but a little
more betwixt the first creation of the world; and the birth of Abraham; and
otherwise, from the death of Adam, unto Abraham's calling (which seems to lie
nearest to your purpose, and therein to the best advantage for you) there wants
above 800. of those that you have gathered. But whereas you make 400 years
(after the death of Jacob) of the people of Isreal's bondage in Egypt, Of the
time of their bondage in Egypt. Page 144.
you show your self nothing near to understand, how to reckon those 400.
years that are mentioned Genesis 15.13. and Act. 7.6 (as in the 13. chap.
likewise, and 20 verse, saving that others are there put unto them) nor those
400. and 30. in the 12. of Exodus the 14. verse, and in the ^ to the
Galathians, and 17. verse. Wherein although the judgment of diverse does
something varies yet is there no such varying in them, as under which you may
be able to cover the ignorance that here has slipped you. For seeing that you
show your self to speak of that part of the time, whereof there is little
recorded in Scripture of their doings, and the same to be after the death of
Jacob (for both these limitations are your own) you have made it evident
thereby, that you mean that very time in which the persecution was raised
against them, and afterward in cruel manner was executed upon them: and not the
whole time from the first calling of Abraham; nor from the promise renewed
unto him. For, from the first calling of Abraham, until their coming down
into AEegypt, and likewise of their first entertainment there for a time, there
is in Scripture so much recorded, as (excepting the first and the last year of
their being in the wilderness only) there is not more of any history, of that
quantity of time, in all the Bible: and, besides that, it all went before the
death of Jacob. But now, whereas from the calling of Abraham, or from the
promise renewed unto him, until their deliverance out of Egypt, there are
reckoned but those four hundred and thirty years in all, and the time of their
wandering in Canaan, and the coasts thereabout, is very clearly found to be
two hundred and fiftene years, before that Jacob (by Joseph's means) came to
soiourn in Egypt; and the residue of Joseph's life after that his father was
come, was about threscore and eleven (al which are parcel of those four
hundred and thirty years, and past before that bondage of theirs began:) it
appears most plainly, that herein you were marvelous wide, and are in no wise
able to excuse your ignorance in it. So that howsoever your fellows may use
you to some other purpose, that will serve their turn as well: yet by your
patience it seems to me that they need some other to make their reckonings.
But of these enough, and more than needed, but that needs you must be the
only men of the world for learning, and praunce up and down on the face of the
earth, and fling here, and there, like the goodliest, and the most serviceable
coursers that are: and yet in the plainest ground that is, are ever tripping,
and stumbling too, and ofttimes falling flat down on all four. Insomuch that
wheresoever else your learning lies, yet in the word of God we find that you
are but as other men are, and those not of the greatest account. You make so
light of it, that it also makes as light of you; and therefore sends you
empty away: that so you may be, both to your selves, and to those that choose
you to be their leaders (and that of the just judgments of God) an heavy, and
an unprofitable burden, lamps without light, and wandering guides, ever
shocking on to and fro, in the glimmering of your own light, and by the sparks
that your selves have kindled; and yet notwithstanding never being able to
avoid the reward of this your infidelity, that of course befalls unto you
from the hand of the Lord, that when you have done, you shall lie down and
sleep in sorrow.

The first part of the conclusion, beginning with a brief recital of the
whole. First generally, that he deals herein, as Laban some time dealt with
Jacob. Genesis 31.
37 And so having now thus far examined those things that you have laid to my
charge, and trusting that I have sufficiently satisfied, if no^ your self, yet
the indifferent reader therein, now (to draw to an end for these matters) I
would wish you to consider, how like to Laban you have dealt with me: and so
take it in better part, if I use for: my self, the same defense that Jacob did.
For now that you have so hotely followed upon me, as it were with hue and
cry, or rather in most hostile manner, when you have charged me (with open
mouth (with so great injury done unto you, unto the Fathers, and Scriptures
themselves; when you have made the best search that you can, and turned all
things vp-side-downe, that nothing at all might escape unespied: what is there
now that for all this you have found, wherewith you may be able to charge me:
or wherein have I made any such fault against the Scriptures, the Fathers, or
your self, that deserves so much as the tenth part one half of those
outcries, and outrageous speeches that you have blustered forth against me?
What I had done, I have fully acknowledged: how grievously you have taken it,
that have I also in some part declared, but not so fully. And now, as Jacob
said unto him, so do I say unto you likewise: let it here be laid in the sight
of al men, and abide the trial; both of your brethren, and mine. He charged
Jacob, that he stale away without his knowledge: and took away his daughters
with him. But were not his daughters the wives of Jacob, and might not Jacob
lawfully take them? And had he first made Laban privy unto it, may we think
that Jacob might have had his consent, so to have done? He charged him also, to
have taken away his idols with him: and indeed they were gone, but Jacob was
wrongfully charged withal: and could not tell, which way to help him unto
them again. Your idols likewise, I grant, are gone: but why should you be so
angry with me. The truth it self has made them to hide their faces for
shame: and I am not able (would I never so feign) to show you how to get them
again. So that although Labans idols indeed were gone; yet was there nothing
that he was able justly to lay to the charge of Jacob: insomuch that at length
he: thought he had stirred too much already, and there-vpon drew into amity
with him. And although that the latter of them be a greater matter than you
are able to reach unto, of any man else expects of you: yet would it not be
amiss, that at your leisure you should consider indifferently, whether you
have not stirred herein a great deal more, than either the cause it self
required, or else was wisdom (on your own behalf) for you to do. For first as
touching the ill dealing and great injury that your complain of, Then more
specially in the particulars.
it is such, as either chiefly respects your self in these your labors: or
else the cause that you have in hand. Concerning your self, you charge me
with altering the title so, as if you would persuade your Reader, that my self
would have had the glory of it: and yet you are feign to set down the same to
your own advantage, otherwise than you had it of me; and quite to leave out
that which you saw discharged me of it. You complain of great corruption,
mangling, falsifiyng: and what not? And yet you bring forth nothing at all to
any purpose, to discharge your credit therein. When I charged Philosophers,
and some Divines of old, to have had their errors about the immortality of
the soul, that took you as meant of your self and your fellows, and
there-vppon are passing angry for it: and yet was it but your own oversight,
that so did take it; and in no wise can be ascribed to me. Yet these are the
injuries (and a few others of less importance) that are so great, as that
there is nothing, but open hostility may rise upon them. Concerning the cause
that you have in hand, you are highly offended, that I have left out your
Purgatory, Auricular confession; Satisfaction, idle Munkerie, forced
Virginity, wilful Poverty, Apparitious, frivolous Chastening of the body,
watching, weeping, abstinence, and fasting after your manner, and merits: and
yet neither have ^taken them from you, but refused our selves so to take them;
neither is it in me to allow so honest a place unto any such matters, as the
truth has now so plainly declared (the best of them all, as you do use
them) to be so wicked, or at least but vain. That the blessed Virgin is
altogether without sin, is a late error of yours: and because that under it
feign you would shroud your woonted idolatry to her committed, you cannot
abide that it be crossed never so little. Because I cannot allow that, a
special commandment, that was particularly given unto some, should stand as
a general rule unto all, nor, that men may at any time leave their calling,
nor married folks part asunder without consent: therefore do I both
discredit Saint Anthonies calling; and call in question S. Augustines
conversion, and yet must may Annotation thereon be dismembered also, to help
out that conceit of yours. Not so content (I mean to complain so much as you
do without ar^^^ cause, and to make so great outcries, for such things as you
might much better have passed with silence) that yet you may much better show
your self what you are, is it not a proper dalliance that you make, of the
arms of the Archbishop, and Church of York, joined together? Do you not
think that you were full gravely occupied, in so serious matters as these? But
that was no sufficient way for you to show what you are, and what is in you,
but that needs you must make your selfe^ party likewise in that late wicked
practice against him: as though it were of some great importance, what part you
took in that action; or your partaking could give some credit, either to the
cause it self, or unto those that help it forward. But in the mean season
you have made it a likely matter in reason, that you would be loath, that any
should have such a matter in hand, and not allow you to make one among them:
and seeing you have made such choice of your companions, we are now so much
the rather to acknowledge the old proverb true, that like will to like,
whenever we see (you know whom) and the Friar so met together. For as for
other things that belong unto us, whrewith you would so gladly find fault,
they go so skant with you, that you are feign to carp at the assurance that
the Scriptures do teach us to have in God, because it hinders your marke^ with
us: and that marriage is not restrained further among us, than the word of
God allows it to be. Which latter point was in no wise to be reproved by
you: considering how fowly you are polluted because you do so far abandon that
holy ordinance of God from you. And yet are you so eagerly set thereon, that
to force that advantage on your side, you have depraved both my Annotation,
and Saint Augustines rule besides, which feign you would have strengthened
against us therein. With like wisdom and honesty is it, that when we
advance the blessedness of these days to the glory of God; and joy that our
money does not now go forth to the mainteinance of foreign power abroad:
you call the one intolerable lying flattery; the other you (...); is but a
fiction. As touching my self, there ^^ede be no question, but that you are
througly ^^^gred with me: you do so unquietly take whatsoever I do, whatsoever
I say. When I bring in that sentence of Scripture, Jesus Christ yesterday and
today, and the same for ever, you cannot tell what I should mean thereby; and
besides you abuse (for my sake, I fear) the sentence it self. When I am so
bold as to guess that a good part of your book might be taken out of certain
of the Schoolmen: thereupon I must be so ignorant in them, that I do not so
much as know what they treat on; and yet, both you know that so it might; and
your self are feign, both to shut up your eyes, that you might in no wise see
whom I speak of, and there also to alter my words again to your advantage.
Afterward, in the Pacification, not only the method misliketh you, when as
notwithstanding you do find no fault with it: but also whatsoever I say, that
do you ever almost take in a contrary sense, when as notwithstanding the
words be clear enough in themselves, as before is declared. But then
coming to your own sweet selves, the copy of your countenance is by and by
altered, and there you put on more amiable looks. For you (forsooth) are the
only men that can make books of devotion, pretty, and contemplation: and you
perhaps (it is well, that this comes in with perhaps) will one day declare,
that our profession is such, as has nothing at all (in heaven, nor in earthy
to move men unto it, but only respect of temporal commodity; but yours has
all. So that now for devotion, and the controversies also, all the learning
that thereunto belongs, lies altogether with you, and none with us. And yet
are you no sooner entered into the remembrance of the learning you have found
in many of us, and name (...) in the controversies that are betwixt us, but
that by and by you call hard upon us for books of devotion: when you were
desirous to say somewhat against us by the authority and force of some
special places, in all your store you found none other but such as did most
readily turn against your selves: when you thought you had Cyprian to accord
unto you in your persuasion of our glorified estate, it appears you did not
understand your own author: when you heard that the silence of the blessed
Virgin, and of other Disciples of Christ (leaving him unto the reproach of all
men, and nothing at all defending his innocence against them) was a breach of
diverse of Gods commandments, you could not tell how to begin, to find it the
breach of any one. To which end also may be referred, that knowledge and
faith is (with you) but of one weeks learning: your gross and rude definition
of a Christian man: your imperfect discourse against despair: and your so
unskillful reckoning of those years that I have admonished you of so distinctly
and plainly set down in the text it self. But the more you deny learning to
those, that so readily find such ignorances in you, in so small a room so
many together, in a work that was labored, and car^^^ing with it great
vaunts of learning: the strongger you conclude against your self, the more
have you brought your self in question; and the less are you able now to
cast off the selfsame reproach, that you were so desirous to cast upon us. All
which if now you had rather to have in less room, it is no more (in effect)
but this, that you have boldly borne us in hand of much; you have mistaken,
depraved, and falsified more; and freely have you taken your liberty and
pleasure to carpe at all; but otherwise, against me, or for your self, that is
worth the writing, or worth the reading, you have brought as little as may
be; and that is nothing.

38 This is (in a manner) the effect of all your labors herein: The second
part of the conclusion, ending with a short admonition of the judgments of God.
these are the causes you had to complain; and this is the business you have
made thereupon. And now have I no more at this time to say unto you, because I
see no such temper in you as may put me in any hope, to do you any good by
sound admonition. For seeing that you have so many ways so ill a cause, not
only in your religion now, but also in your naughty dealings against princes
and states themselves, and yet notwithstanding, are in no wise able your selves
to find it, nor can be made to perceive it, by those that do most plainly point
you unto it: how many we think otherwise of you, but that either you are
stark blind, and can see nothing at all; or else have hardened your hearts so
much against the merciful calling of God, that though you see it yet you
cannot believe it nor yield your selue in obedience unto it? If it be so, then
is it clear, that in that case there can be no dealing with you^ your
conversion, so long as the justice of GOD does leave you therein to your
selves. Yet others may see, and acknowledge in you, the fearful, but righteous
judgments of God, that having followed idols so much as you have, now are you
become idols your selves: having eyes, and yet not able to see; ears, and yet
not able to hear; fair nostrels to see too, and yet having in them of this
kind of life) no breath at all. Insomuch that now we have in you experience
again, of that which has been taught us before, that as the wares of God are
plain and right unto the just, so are they stumbling-blockes to the wicked:
and that Christ himself, in the wisdom of the Father, is in so wonderful
manner given unto us, as that although he be in Sion a chief cornerstone,
ebect, and precious to them that believe: yet is he likewise a stone to
stumble at, and a rock of offense to them which stumble at the word, and are
disobedient. Go your ways therefore, ye shrinking children, that have
forsaken the Lord of life, and counted your selves unworthy of him; that have
had the Gospel delivered unto you by Christ himself, and have not kept it;
that all this while bearing the world in hand, that you are the only
builders, can never be induced to have any liking of that which is the
head-stone of the corner. And, if there be no remedy, but that needs you
will hold on the course you are in, walking in darkness, in the midst of light,
abiding in bondage, when you may be free, and disposed to perish, when
salvation is offered: what can we do better, than (as Christ in the like case
did) fully content and settle our selves in such judgments of God, the causes
whereof are ever just, how secret soever they be unto us. His name therefore
be ever blessed, and glorified of all those that are his, that to the glory of
his holy name, and to the further manifestation of his great, and unspeakable
mercies to his chosen people, it has pleased him, to hide those things from
the wise and learned, and to open the same unto babes. Even so be it: for so
it stands with his good pleasure. Among you all we trust there are some, that
do appertain to the secret election: and are to be called in their time. Now
is the time when they may as plainly perceive how far they are falling (if
they should go on still with you) as ever they or any others might, since the
world began. God give them grace so to perceive it, and so to withdraw
themselves from your naughty ways (and that, while they have this acceptable
time, before that ever it be too late) that with you they be not partakers of
those heavy judgments that are already prepared for you: and of which (in the
course that now you are in) you shall one day taste, and cannot escape, would
you never so feign.

FINIS.

