CONFLICTS AND COMFORTS OF CONSCIENCE.

A Treatise, showing how the Conscience, in cases of deepest distress and
distraction, may recollect it self, and recover solid and sound Comfort.

Collected from private proof, for public profit.

By H.B. Rector of St. Mathews Friday street.

Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my heart-sorrows, thy Comforts have refreshed
my soul.

Bern. de Conscientia. lib. c. 6. Conscientia me a meretur damnationem:
Paenitentia mea non sufficit ad satisfactionem: sed certum est, quod
misericordia tua de^et omnem essensionem.

Printed at London, for Michael Spark. 1628.

REVERENDO Clero Anglicano, in primisque Londinensi, Gratiam and Pacem cum
veritate.
REverendi in Christo Patres ac Fratres, hirsutum hoc Cilicium, proprijs e
visceribus contextum, proprijs concinnatum humeris, charitatis vestrae censurae
ingenuae, candidoque iudicio imprimis permitto; non veritus hoc omnibus
exponere, quod vni mihi ipsi libens impono. Bibliopola fortasse vaenum
proponet. At Cilicium quis mercatur? Quis vel tantuli emet paenitere? Id genus
vestimentum cuius tandem humeri non reformidant? Verum suum cuique. Mihi fas
sit, quod meum est, bona omnium cum venia, extra litem, extra inuidiam tollere.
Neque est, quamobrem quis mihi vitio vertat, quasi in hac textura mihi
indulserim, aut pro piloso filum laneum, vbi non oportuit, intexuisse. Audacter
enim dico si vel Aduersarius meus libellum scripserit, annon super scapulam
meam portarem eum? Annecteremque, si non cum Iobo, pro diademate ad ornandam
innocentiam: at cum Christo meo (qui in dorso suo peccata mea omnia portauit)
pro Corona spinea, ad animam Crucifigendam meam.

Nec detrectaut Medici corporum exta inspicere, Chirurgi manu incisa. Nec vos
vtique, o sacratissimi conscientiarum animarumque Medici, didignabimini hanc
meam chirurgiam seu anatomian, qualicunque stylo deseriptam, intueri. Anatomici
aliorum corpora resupina, infaelicium animarum nupera hospitia, caetera sana
(sua interea, minus forte sana, ignorantes) ad minimam vsque fibram venamque
discernunt: Ego meam ipsius animam, adhuc in viuis, tot morbis scatentem,
afflictam vulneribus, sic aperio, vt sicui opus sit, ab expertissimo discat,
quibus consciencia fulta praesidijs, quibus nixa argumentis, causam suam possit
aduersus ignita Diaboli tela, aduersus seipsam confitentem ream, pro tremendo
Dei Hominumque Tribunali defendere.

Mirari autem hic interea loci liocat sapientissimi Dei omnia suauiter
moderantem prouidentiam, quod cum primum hunc libellum Typographo in manum
imprimendu^ traderem, praesto erat tunc illi pro manibus alius liber
procudendus, in quo graphice depicta fuit sancta nostratis Bernardi Gilpini
vita. O sortem disparem! Non qualis Pharisaeum inter and Publicanum fuit,
quorum alter suam sibi iusticiam apud Deum gratulatur, alter Misrecordiam
deprecatur: verum hic videre licet (stupendum exemplum!) hinc venerabilem
Autistitem Alumni quondam sui, diu iam defuncti, humilis Praesbyteri nomen ac
famam, idque vitae pie probeque iustitutae nomine, ab obliuione and silentio
hominum, a puluere ac cinere vindicantem, aeternaeque Posterorum memoriae
tradentem, atque hoc non modo in pium grati animi indicium, sed in huius
aetatis pessimae optimum exemplum (quasi istius iam egeni miserique Diuitis
fratres morbis essent moribusque tam deploratis, vt nulla remedij spes reliqua
sit, nisi in vno Lazaro rediuiuo) hinc vero, v^um ^ sacris Ordinibus (...),
seipsum aetro Calamo, quasi carbone notantem, proprijs pennis ferientem, non
innocentiae candorem prae se, sed squalorem paenitentiae ferentem. Quorsum
haec? Scilicet, vt sicut Gilpinus exemplar stat^itur ab Episcopo, innoeentiae:
sic ego vltro resipiscentiae? Esto. Vtraque enim ducit ad faelicitatem via; at
ista, per amaena locorum, haec, per aspera and iniqua: illa, per Roseta; haec,
per vepreta. Tantum* abest, vt ego me huic tanto viro in eadem lance conferam.
Absit. Sed attendite Fratres; si haec inter se tam disiuncta aequa librare
trutina velitis, forte constabit, non leuiorem illam in me gratiam fuisse, quae
^peruerit mihi os ad humillima^ laudis Dei in ignoscendis peccatis meis
consessionem: quam quae in tanto Antistite animum manumque incitauerit ad
exarandum humilis Presbyteri existimationem; vel quam quae in ipso Gilpino
operata sit tot charismata ad perfectionem. Nemo mihi iuuideat, quin indulgeat
magis, si qualem hanc quantulamu^ cunque nactus sum Gratiam, eam tanti
aestimari cupiam, quanti vllam vnquam infimis mortalibus datam, quos dignatus
est Pater Misericordiarum vna mecum vel in minimorum scanctorum Album
ascribere. Ingentis quidem Gratiae est, si cuius Anima instar sit robustae
nauis, quae latera fortiter opponat fluctibus, nec cedat procellis, donec tuto
and illaesa ad Portum appulsa sit: an igitur minoris erit gratiae, siqua
Animula, tanqua^ Nauicula, rimulis plena, vndis ventisque iactata, scopulis
saepe allisa, lacerata, and pene naufraga, tandem tamen e medijs periculis
emerserit, and in placidissimum sinum, fidissimamque Stationem peruenerit?
Talem ego vobis Nauiculam, Animulam hic ostendo, quam confido tamen propediem
ad optatum Portum, coelesti spirante Aura, Clavum tenente Gratia, appulsam fore.

Sed vt Auiculae Noctuam, vt vlcus Muscae, ingens huc colluuies turbaque
circu^fluit. Quid hoc (inquiunt) Portenti? Ecquid homo iste patrauit tanto
squalore, tanto Cinere ac Puluere dignum? Ecquod in se flagitium admisit?
Adulteri, scortatores; talem oris vultusque habitum coguntur (licet id quam
rarissime) induere. Talia vulgus apud se, passimque, in promtu est, quod
exagitet. Reuera enim quam lubricam in me, difficilemque spartam susceperim,
quamque iniquis censuris exposit^m, haud ignoro. Sed non ponendi rumores ante
salutem Stult^rum incurata pudor malus vlcera celat, inquit Poeta. At de Iobo
Gregorius quanto diuinius! Videatur (inquit) vir iste cuilibet magnus in
virtutibus suis: mihi certe sublimis apparet etiam in peccatis suis. Mirentur
in eo qui volunt, castitatis continentiam, mirentur integritatem iustitiae,
mirentur viscera pietatis: Ego in eo non minus admiror confessionem humillimam
peccatorum, quam tot sublimia gesta virtutum. Scio enim quod per infirmitatis
verecundiam plerumque grauioris est certaminis commissa peccata prodere, quam
non admissa vitare; et vnumquodque malum, quamuis robustius vitetur, tamen
humilius proditur. Haec ille. Ecquis autem Iobo, vel in perfectione sublimi,
vel in confessione humili, conferendus? Ergone Job adulter? ergone scortator,
quod peccata sua palam confessus fuerit, and sese aspernatus, in puluere ac
cinere paenitentiam egerit? Absit. Sat illi tamen erat causae, quamobrem sic
faceret. Licet autem seipsu^ Patientiae ac Paenitentae specimen ediderit:
deserere tamen, aut prodere suam Innocentiam noluit. Nec mihi quis tam iniquam
instituat legem, vt dum me ipsum paenitentiae typum do, innocentiae meae
desertor, eam ad praedandum exponerem. Benedictus sit Deus meus, cuius mihi
Gratia nunquam defuit, sed ita semper custodiuit, vt neque alicuius pudicitiam
vnquam violauerim, nec cuiusquam impudicitia me. Soli huic Gratiae acceptum
refero, quod semper se interponens, vel voluntatem mihi detraxerit peccandi,
vel opportunitate^. Hic certe habeo, quod ipsi Diabolo, egregio isti Delatori,
and fratrum nostrorum Accusatori os obstruam, and de tot eius periculosissimis
tentationibus triumphum agam. Nec tamen interea obstat, quo minus hoc modo in
me exemplum statuam; qui nec omni tempore, prout debui, ac me decuit, ab omni
specie mali mihi caui, nec affectus meos, oculos, vultu^, gestu^ ita cohibui,
vt quam remotissimus ab omni culpae essem. Qua in re sentio quam sit miserrima
Ministri Euangelij sors, cuius vel leuissimis Stipulis grauissimae aliorum
Trabes praeponderantur. Adeo vt, quae medicina eius Reduuiam, eadem aliorum
Paronychiam valeat, quae eius Pustulam, aeliorum Fistulam sanare. Hinc
operaepretium me facturum putaui, si in hac opella omnium ob oculos ponerem
afflictae conscientiae tum pericula, tum remedia; idque, quo plus momenti
haberet, in Typo Ministri Euangelij. In quo, vti spero, nemo se, aut Ordinem
sacrum laedi a me queretur, post qua^ libellum hunc perlegerit. Quem ego vobis
praecipue consecratum volui, fratres charissimi, vt quos habeo luctuosae huius
Sementis Iudices, eosdem vos Testes, dum viuo, melioris adhuc Frugis, Messis
vberioris habeam. Legite, and iudicate; and quod grauitas vestra non sinit vos
approbare, optime nouit charitas condonare. Ego siquo modo tandem ob Christi
mei merita ex minimo in Regno Gratiae ad infimum in Regno Gloriae gradum
aspirauero, splendidiora ibi vobis Diademata, post veritatem fortiter asserta^,
post strenue oppugnatas and expugnatas nimium audaces ac petulantes haereses,
post certamen bonum Fidei faelicissime decertatum, non inuidero, qui hic
didicerim sancta vestra and intacta charismata eo admiratione maiori prosequi,
quo assequi imitatione nequeam.

Valete in Domino. Humillimus vester seruus and conseruus Henrieus Burton.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I here present thee with A Treatise of Conflicts and
Comforts of Conscience. Which, how suitable for thee, I know not: But I am sure,
for me. The bitter Conflicts of the Mother in the birth, may justly name it
Ben-oni, Son of Sorrow: But the Father, Ben-iamin, Son of the right hand;
Or Barnabas, Son of Consolation. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
Such a tenderling could not be bo^^e in a colder Season; it must encounter many
bitter storms; But being strengthened by Paul's Comforter, it runs
aground, not waighing the loss of the Ship, to save the Souls, though driven
on the Barbarians shore; hoping also, that howsoever, as the Barbarians, seeing
the Viper leaping on Paul's hand, deemed him some Malefactor; but cast off
again into the fire without hurt, changed their minds: So happily it may befall
the Author of this Treatise. Who of set purpose proposing himself the maine
subject of these Conflicts and Comforts: May h^ply occasion some Readers in
their have to pass upon him a far harder sentence, then he deserves* What Is
the matter, say they? Adulterers, Fornicatours are only fit for public
penance. But let such know, that it becomes a Minister of the Gospel to be
humbled for the lest offense, much more for greater. Blessed be God, by whose
Grace I have be^ne kept for ever committing any such act, throughout my whole
life. Let the great Accuser of our Brethren stand up, and accuse me in that
kind, if he can. Yet the vile corruptions of nature, and the foul aberrations
of life, yea even mere heedlesse follies and needless frailties, may they not
be cause enough to plunge a man in the deep, to cause him to abhor
himself, and to repent in dust and ashes, and that especially when they fall
upon a Sacred person? Even holy Job did so. How much more such a one, as being
equal to Job in sacredness of person, yet is far inferior to him in the
perfection of virtues?

But they object: If it be no more, who is free? If every one should write a
Book of his human follyes, the world would not contain them. This savors
of too much nice and needless scrupulosity; Or as done of spl^ne, to aggrauate
others sins, which might pass for current, at least for venial, were it not
for such strait laced Consciences, which grieved for small sins, make the
greater out of measure sinful. As the envious man, to have both his neighbors
eyes put out, is willing to loose one of his own. How many, yea and sometimes
Churchmen too, may play the good fellows, be ouerseene, and ouer-shooes, and
yet make no such scruple of it? Or if men espy the least hole in the Ministers
coat, they will easily g^t in their whole body, hiding all their deformities
under his holely Coat, as silly Papists their sins under a Friars cowle. And
may not Papists also, specially their Priests take it in snuff, when they shall
see common frailties so deeply lamented, as it must needs damme to the de^pe
Pit of Hell their ordinary Adulteries, and Fornications, which they account
but venials, specially in a Priest? May they not hereupon grow upon the simple
people, as whose liberty is too much captiued under the yoke of such a
Ministry, as cannot brook in themselves the least aberrations, how much less
such as they censure and esteem far greater in the multitude? Or else may
they not disgrace such Ministers unto their people, by making Mountains of
their Molehils, while Ministers bewail their Molehils as Mountains?

To this multiplicit objection I answer: First, It were to be wished, that all
offenders would give public evidence of their Repentance, if not by Orall
confession, yet by an actual reformation. Secondly, I see no reason why any
common Christian should inuy, that a Ministers heedlesse smallest slips should
in the skales of his own judgment preponder others head die falls. Thirdly,
What Mariners will be so desperately madd, as to run upon the Rock, because
the Pilot sometime in the security of a calm fell a sleep at the Stern? O^
what Servant will go cut his own throat, because his Master against his will
cut his finger? Fourthly, Why should better taught Christians be like those
untaught Lystrians, who either Idolatrously will sacrifice to the Apostles* or
hearing them professing to be men of like passions with them, in the turning of
a hand stone them? Yet, if no remedy, Let him that is without sin, cast the
first stone. Fifthly, For the common Adversary of all grace; nothing will stop
his Serpentine two forked tongue. If a Minister be altogether blameless, he
hears, A Puritan: But if in the least casual error obnoxious, Worse then a
Publican. Lastly, It is the glory of the Gospel to make the least sins vile
in the eyes of the true Professors thereof, to the confusion of Babel, with
all her Crimsin, Criminal, Capital, yet Venial, yea Meritorious,
Meretricious Sins. And it shall ever be the glory of the Ministers of the
Gospel, as an evidence of true grace in their hearts, when they shall with a
meek, yet magnanimous Spirit be able to dig^st the sower herbs of malicious
exprobrations cast in their dish by the profane Adversary, and to answer them,
as David did mocking Micol, with a noble resolution, I will yet be more vile
then thus, and will be base in mine own sight.

In a word, if any shall bear himself big upon such instances as this (of a
man made nothing in his own eyes) thinking to purchase some opinion of
sanctity to blaunch his monstrous lurking lusts, by how much his mouth shall
vent the more venomous Censures against it: let such learn of the Heathen
Poet: Qui, ne tuberibus proprijs offendat amicum,
Postulat, ignoscat verrucis illius; aequum est
Poscentem veniam peccatis, reddere rursus.
Who would be glad not to offend
With his swollen bunches his dear friend,
His warts must pardon; This is just,
Who pardon craves, he pardon must.
But why stand we thus to answer every Obiecter? Let this Book answer for
all. Read it. And if it will not satisfy thee: Yet I hope it will aboundan^ly
satisfy him, for whom it is specially written.

Yet one objection more is: That in these loosse and licentious times, it had
been more necessary to reach men the way to repentance and humiliation for
sin, then how to find comfort, being humbled. For most men, though never so
sinful, are apt enough to lay hold on Gods mercy, which yet never trod the
way of true repentance, thinking it sufficient (as the Thief that trusts to
his Neck-verse) if at the very end of the Race they can work force in but one
foot, and with a Peccaui crowd in at Heaven Gate. For such Ben-onies most will
be, to assume the name of Sons of Sorrow, but not before the giving up of
the Mothers ghost, that bare them. As the Phoenix is not bred, but of the dead
ashes of the Damme. Most men being as loath to see their sin dye, as Hagar her
bond son. How many Iudasses will never repent, confess, restore, but with
the Halter in their hands? Or at the best, as the Aramites, going with Halters
about their Hypocritical necks to the King of Israel, to flatter God for a
pardon. The Usurer builds no Hospitals, relieues no poor, till he die, nor many
times then, choosing rather to dye, then make his Will. Balaam will but dye the
death of the righteous as loath to forgo his wages of unrighteousness, while
he lives. He that lives a Thief, would dye a Martyr, though we read but of
one that did so. Dicique bea^us Ante obitu^ nemo (in the worst sense) Every
one would be happy, but not till death. In this regard then it had been more
requisite to show men their folly in deferring their repentance, till either
sin or sickness have made them senseless of their sins, or in putting off
the payment of their debts, till the score grow greater and greater, and they
less able to pay, turning at length quite Banckrupts: That so repenting in
time, they may enter in at the Gate of Mercy, before it be quite shut up, with
an, I know you not: Depart ye workers of iniquity.

Answ. This objection (I confess) is of some moment. Too many (alas!) are
ready with Ioab, flying to lay hold on the Horns of the Altar, when yet they
have not made their peace with King Solomon, the King of peace. But in case any
inordinate liver shall be brought to a sight and sense of his sin, while he is
yet meat-whole, as we say: here he may, by Gods grace, find comfort. And as for
that other task to teach men the way to repentance, others have bestowed
profitable pains therein; and especially of late a learned and reverend
Predecessor of mine, M. Mason, in his Tribunal of Conscience. Wherein for the
point of morality, in the examination of a man's life, he has taken worthy
pains. Only I could wish, if his leisure did serve, that he would be
pleased to add thereunto a Rule how to examine a man's Errors in point of
Faith, and of the sound knowledge of the Mystery of Christ. For where this
foundation of sound and saving knowledge is not rightly laid in the heart, as
the foundation, whatsoever repentance a man goes about to frame or erect, it
either falls, as built on the Sand, or vanishes away in an ayerie
imagination. For the purpose: How can a man, that either is ignorant of the
grace of Christ, of the Gospel of God, and of the nature of saving Faith, or
else is arrogant in the singularity of his own opinion, wherein he
ouerturneth the whole foundation of Grace, ever come to true repentance for his
sin? For true repentance is a special gift of Grace: It is an immediate
fruit of saving Faith illuminating and sanctifying the heart, and whole man:
and God gives this grace to no malicious enemy of Grace, but to such as having
received it, are thankful for it, as a gift of Gods free grace in Christ,
flowing from the Fountain of Gods eternal love in electing us in Christ,
before the World was. So that it may seem a worthy work, and necessary (if
any) for the adversaries of grace, swelling to a great height in these last
times, as if they would bring another Deluge upon the Earth: to show the way,
how such may come (if it be possible) to the acknowledgement of the Truth, to
repentance and amendment of their Errors, and Sins, that they may be saved.
Only it is a question, whether their Errors uphold them in their Lusts,
especially Ambition, and Love of the World, or these their Lusts hold them fast
in their Errors. But I will not over bouldly press this Task upon any, it
being both touchy and tedious. In the mean time, if any shall reap either
Consolation, or Instruction by this poor Work, to the furtherance of their
Salvation, and the adu^ncement of the glory of him, who set me on work, it is
the Fruit of all my Labor, and I rejoice therein, yea and I will rejoice.

THe Proeme.
CHAP. I. The first Conflict, or trial, wherein the Conscience of a man
Regenerate, apprehending Gods wrath for sin, is perilously shaken. page 17
CHAP. II. The Comfort. How the Soul is reduced and restored into Gods favor,
and so, to the peace of Conscience. p. 34 CHAP. III. Conflicts with Gods people
offended, specially when the faithful Pastor is afflicted for the least
offense given by him to his Flock. p. 125 CHAP. IIII. The Comfort. Showing how
Gods Minister may recover Comfort of Conscience, and that among his offended
Flock. p. 133 CHAP. V. Conflicts, arising from the Sacred society of the
Ministry offended. p, 166 CHAP. VI. The Comfort. How in this case the poor
forlorn Patient may find relief. p. 170 CHAP. VII. Conflicts with old Friends
and Familiars, grown strangers. p. 203 CHAP. VIII. The Comfort. How a man may
overcome, or, at least, not be overcome of the former Conflict. p. 215 CHAP.
IX. Conflicts with an evil name. p. 224 CHAP. X. The Comfort. How in this
deplored case, the dejected Soul may sustain it self, and hold out to the
end. p. 236 CHAP. XI. Conflicts with the Enemies of the Truth. p. 246 CHAP.
XII. The Comfort. How in this Conflict the Soul may stay it self, and wind
out of it p. 257
Errata.
IN the Latin Epistle; page 2. line 13. for, intexuisse, read intexuerim. p.
3. l. 9. r. dedignabimini. p. 5. l. 7. r. misericordiam. p. 8. l. 10. r.
Sanctorum.

In the Book; p. 57. l. 4. for Conflict r. cooler. p. 131. l. 19. r. credatis.
p. 145. l. 9. f. corruption r. corrupts. and l. 24. f. coming r. winning. p.
161. l. 24. f. turning r. teaching. p. 180. l. 16 r. quid. p. 210. in the
margent, l. 6. r. ardo^. p. 270. l. 21. r. nuzzle. Other lighter escapes the
judicious Reader will easily correct.

THE PROEME.
TO go about to write of Conscience (it self being a Book worn and borne
about either in the Closset of every man's Breast, or at least in every man's
Portmantue, wherein all his particular thoughts, words, and acts are recorded)
may seem to be a labor better spared then spent. Yet considering how little
use most do make of this their Bosome-booke, how little time they spend in
looking in it, which though their maine Account-booke, yet they make least
account of it; as the Traveler, never opening his Portmantue, till he come to
his iourneys end, like the young Spend-thrift, running every day upon a new
Score, but not once willing either to look into the Merchants or Mercers Book,
saving only (for fear of the Crocodile) by starts, when he comes to set to
his hand for new commodities, or much less, to cast up the old Score; and
again, considering how either by the fall of Adam, through the deprivation of
original and natural light, the defaced Characters of this moth-eaten Book
are hardly legible to his Bleare-eyes; or through the habitual custom of
deceitful sin, the Conscience is grown so hard, as scarcely it will admit
of any impression; or through the general practice of sin in the world, it
does plead a prescription, and has learned to cloth it self in the habit of
virtue, accounting the fashion of the time a Law sufficient to frame it self
by: I have therefore thought it not altogether superfluous, to speak something
of Conscience, if not for the contemplative part in this so learned an age, at
least for the practicke, as more necessary; and if not for others profit, at
least for mine own comfort, as more voluntary. Wherein (to win the better
credit to this Discourse) I imitate the Chyrurgion, who having ripped up, and
cured the Impostume in his own body, is careful to improve his experience to
the instructing of others, laying before them his own infallible rule for all
to follow in the like case. Nor am I afraid to lance mine own wound, so I may
thereby both cure my self, and procure others safety. It is a foolish fear,
or shame, that conceales the sore, till it proves mortal. For, as Saint
Augustine says, Aug. in Ps. 133.
If they be miserable, who fear to come into their houses, where they have a
scolding wife: How much more miserable are they, who are unwilling to return
into their own Conscience, least there they be ouer-borne with the brawlings
of their sins? To buckle with which, a Christian courage and resolution is
requisite. V^aliquid auri extrahamus terrum peruertimus: vt summum bonum
occupemus, scrutars pectus piget. Senec. Proverb.
We dig into the Bowels of the Earth (says the Heathen man) that we may
thence draw forth some gold: and that we may possess the chief good, we are
loath to search our heart. The Author of those Sermons, Ad fratres in Eremo,
inserted in Saint Augustines works, says, He that trusting to his good
Conscience, neglects his good name, is cruel. And such is the inseparable
combination of these two, that on the other side we may as truly say, He that
trusting to his good name, neglects his good Conscience, is cruel. These two
may not be severed. A good name is a precious ointment poured forth. But whence
poured, saving from the pure Alabaster box of a good Conscience, the only
shrub, distilling the true Balm of Gilead, yielding the fragrant smell of a
good name? Yet too too many (alas!) are too cruel on both sides; some, bearing
themselves too boldly upon their good Conscience, and not fearing in the mean
time to abstain from (at least) appearance of evil, incur thereby an evil
report: others carrying all fairly without, to purchase a good name, yet look
not inward, that their Conscience be answerable, while therein lurk some
invisible monstrous corruption, be it pride, self-loue, ambition or the like
evil habit. By which means it comes too commonly to pass, that a good
Conscience is attended with an ill name: and a good name unworthily bestowed
upon a man of bad Conscience: So easy are misgiuings and mistakings on all
hands. Some can better get a good name, then keep a good Conscience; others
(yet the less unhappy of the two) can enjoy a good Conscience, even with the
loss of a good name. And did not the innocent Lamb of God, for conuersing
with Publicans and Sinners, hear of the Pharisees, Behold, a glutton, and
wine-bibber? So fickle and false is fame, as well to mis-apply Crucifige to the
good Conscience, as Hosanna to the bad.

But no marvel, if men may be so mistaken in the judging of others
Consciences, whereas most are deceived in the discerning of their own. The
Conscience, like the heart, being (through misguidance of the judgment)
deceitful above all things. Ier. 17.9.
And this comes to pass (as we touched before) by the similitudes between the
good and bad Conscience. For, (as Lib. de Conscientia.
Bernard has well distinguished, better then defined) there is, as a good
Conscience, and quiet; and a good Conscience, and troubled: so, a bad
Conscience and quiet, and a bad Conscience and unquiet. A like symptoms in
both. How shall we then discern the good, from the bad Conscience? Surely
thus. The bad Conscience and quiet, is that, whose tranquillity or calm is
contracted either of a benummednesse, Consuet^do peccandi tollit sensum peccati
and Cawle grown over it through long custom in sin, or from a profound
ignorance of the nature of sin, and of the Law of God, or from a profane
contempt of saving knowledge, and the means thereof, and the like; such are
said by the Prophet to be at ease, settled upon their lees, Ier. 48.11.
not poured from vessel to vessel: but the good Conscience and quiet, is
that, whose peace, after trouble for sin, as a calm after a storm, flows
from no other Fountain, but the mercy of God in Christ apprehended by Faith
for the pardon of the sins of the believing penitent sinner; as the Apostle
concludes, Therefore being justified by Faith, Romans 5.1
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. He that wants this
Conscience, flowing from Faith, which lays one hand on the Sacrifice, Christ,
saying, Lord be merciful: and so repentance, laying the other hand on sin,
saying, To me a sinner; can never go home justified; his Conscience wants the
true peace. And this peace and quiet of a good Conscience is further settled by
a firm purpose of pleasing God in all good duties for the time to come. As the
same Apostle says, Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience in all
things, Heb. 13.18.
willing to live honestly. So that the good Conscience looks both ways, both
backwards, finding true peace in Christ's righteousness by Gods mercy imputed,
and by Faith apprehended, and applied for the pardon of sin past: and
forwards, with a sincere purpose of reformation, and conformity to the Word of
God for the time to come, willing, resolving, and indeuouring to live honestly.
This is the good Conscience, and quiet.

Again, the bad Conscience, and unquiet, is that, which being struck with the
sting of sin, either with Judas and Achitophel, runs to the halter, as if
that were the next way to heal it; or by diuersion seeks to put it off, as
Cain falls a building of Cities, and following his pleasures, if so he may
charm the Serpents biting, or skin over the wound, or wear out the skarre and
ruthful remembrance, or still the hideous cry of his horrid murder; or by
this kind of Dictamne, cause the mortal Arrow, sticking in his side, to loosen
away. But the good Conscience and troubled, is that, which for sin being
humbled, and upon repentance, through Faith, hearing, The Lord has put away
thy sin: yet as a woman with her afterbirth, is exercised with grievous
conflicts afterward. It was David's case; after his absolution pronounced by
the Prophet from God, whereupon he might, and did no doubt for the present
find solid and assured comfort; Yet how many a bitter storm does he endure in
his soul? How many a sharp fit? So that as a man in an Hecticke fever,
without intermission he cries out, Thy hand is heavy upon me day and night.
And, Ps. 32. Ps. 38.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, nor any rest in my
bones, because of my sin; for mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an
heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. All his penitential Psalms breathe
nothing else, but groans and sighs from a troubled Spirit. Yet all the while
he possessed a good Conscience, though the fruition thereof was for a time to
his greater humiliation, and exercise of his Faith, denied and suspended from
him. Holy Paul in that perilous Navigations, though he was comforted by the
Angel with a promise of safety for his own life, and theirs which sailed with
him, yet arrived not at the Port, without great difficulty, and with the loss
of the lading, and wrack of the Ship: So Gods Child, as David, though upon
repentance for sin, he have his Pardon sealed, and life secured, yet so
hideous are the storms of renewed remorse for sin, which still lie beating
upon his brittle Bark, that he must suffer much damage temporal, before he
can, upon the Planke of redubled repentance, waft and work himself, to reach
the calm and comfortable Haven of Melita. This is that Conscience, that
troubled Conscience, of the Conflicts and Comforts whereof we are here to
speak.

For as for the afflicted bad Conscience, as of all such, as live in a known
sin without repentance, and now and then are troubled with some fearful
qualmes coming over their stomachs, while they seek to have not the cause,
which is sin, but the effect only removed: We purpose not to be troubled
with such. In such cases let the Adulterer repent and beccome continent; the
Drunkard repent, and become sober; the oppressing Usurer repent, and restore,
and become liberal to the poor; and so in the rest. Otherwise, never let them
look for any true comfort and peace of Conscience. Yet for their better
instruction, such also may reap much help by this Treatise, to further them
in the practice of true repentance, thereby to obtain true peace of
Conscience. For here we propound and describe the case of a troubled Conscience
in the highest degree, together with the remedies of it: that so no troubled
Conscience, in any less degree, or kind, might here fail to find comfort in
time of need. For he that knows how to cure the greatest wound, can the more
easily cure the less.

CONFLICTS AND COMFORTS OF CONSCIENCE.
CHAP. I. The first conflict or trial, wherein the conscience of a man
regenerate, apprehending Gods wrath for sin, is perillously shaken.
IT is the nature of all sin, once committed, by guilt to affect the
conscience with a fearful apprehension of Gods wrath both temporal and
eternal, as due to the sinner. It was decreed so in the beginning by an
unchangeable law of God: In the day thou eatest thereof, Genesis ^.
thou shall dye the death. And no sooner had Adam transgressed, but an horror
seized upon his soul, he hears Gods voice, he fears, flies, hides himself:
What Is the matter now? Adam, where art thou? might God well say; not in what
place, but in what case art thou? surely the Serpent had left his sting in
Adams Conscience. Now he is affrighted with hearing Gods voice but a far
off, as of a Judge sending forth a Hue and Cry, or summons to the malefactor to
appear before him: whom before, he ioyed to behold, as a dutiful son,
delighting in the presence of his loving and liberal father.

Ob. But Adam was afterward received to mercy, and that by a new covenant, of
Grace (the old, of works, being utterly forfeited) and that in and through
Christ, the promised seed of the woman. Is not then the case of man's Conscience
now altered? Can the member of Christ, the vessel of grace, the heir of life
eternal, be from henceforth repossessed with any such apprehension, as of
Gods wrath eternal, due unto him for his sin? Far be it. Can he who is
once justified from his sin by faith in Christ, fall back into the state of
condemnation? Romans 8.33, 34, 35, and 11.29.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? Ioh. 23.1, Romans 8.35.
And are not the gifts and calling of God without repentance? And whom God
loves, he loves to the end? And who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? 1 Pet. 1.5
And are not the elect of God, kept through faith by the power of God unto
salvation? and has he not said, I will not fail thee, Heb. 13.5
nor forsake thee?

True: Notwithstanding such is the malignant poison of sin even in the
regenerate, that though the dominion thereof be taken away, so as it cannot
lead the faithful away captive to death eternal: yet the guilt of it may so
sease upon the Conscience, the thick cloud of his sin may so eclipse Gods
loving countenance from him, as that he may for the time seem in his own
apprehension, to be a very castaway; yea and that even then, when God is in
Christ reconciled to him. Even as a father, when his son has offended, yea
has been humbled for it, confessed it, entreated pardon of his Father; though
his father cannot put off the bowels of natural affection, nor ceases to love
his son still, but purposes to bestow the inheritance upon him, yet shows
him nothing but an angry countenance, lays the rod upon him, threatens to
disinherit him, and all this but in love and wisdom, disciplining his son,
both for the sounder reformation of what is past, and securer prevention of
further offenses which otherwise he might fall into. It is the Apostles
comparison, Whom the Lord loves, he chastises, and scourges every son whom
he receives. Our earthly fathers for a few days chastened us for their
pleasures, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous, yet
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them that are
exercised thereby. And surely of all other chastenings, none so terrible, as
this of the Conscience, being lashed with the cords of its own sin. All Jobs
corporal afflictions no way comparable to this. What a lamentable voice was
that uttered by David, I said, I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes? And
that, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And infinite the like woeful
conflicts had holy David with the apprehension of Gods displeasure against him
for his sin. There is no death, no hell so terrible as this, when the black
hellish cloud of sin comes between the soul, and the sunshine of Gods
favorable countenance.

Ob. But how comes this of the nature of sin, seeing that not all, nor most
sins, do usually cause this apprehension of Gods dreadful displeasure in a
man's soul? How many a covetous, voluptuous, ambitious, carnall-minded man
passes away without touch of any such apprehension of Gods wrath? yea, on the
contrary, the more he thriueth in the fruition of his sinful desire, the
more he flattereth himself in the presumption of Gods favor toward him;
which is the ordinary error of the world, to measure Gods friendship by outward
prosperity; which David's carnal judgment once had almost led him into. Psalm.
73


Answ. It is not the nature, but the accessory dec^itfulnesse of sin, growing
from a habit and custom of sinning, wherewith the soul being possessed,
becomes stupefied and void of all apprehension (through Satan's enchantments,
sounding in the ears, Mercy, mercy, and closing the eyes from once looking
upon the justice of God) of divine indignation. Yet all this while sin is not
idle, but as a worm lies gnawing at the stomach of the dead conscience, and
as the moth, does by little and little insensibly fret away all the softer and
tenderer part of the soul, leaving nothing at length, Sensim sine sensu.
but the knotty thread of an inueterate stupiditie. Again, there is great
difference between the sins of the regenerate, and of the unregenerate. For
although habitual corruptions be in the one, as well as in the other, but in
the regenerate inherent and inhabitant only; in the unregenerate also regnant
and predominant, though some one corruption more conspicuously and actually
predominant above the rest, as the Beelzebub or ringleader: Yet those
indwelling inmates in the regenerate, though they be but as the Gibeonites,
captiuated to Israel, and as the relics of the Canaanites, made Tributaries,
Judge. 3.
but not expelled; though I say the corrupt old man be subdued to the new man,
which after God in Christ is created in righteousness and true holiness; yet
are they very grievous to the Saints, being as thorns in their sides, and
pricks in their eyes, molesting them continually, and causing even the holiest
to exclaim, O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Whereas on the contrary, the
corruptions in the unregenerate, though reigning and raging lusts, yet are no
whit troublesome or burdensome to them, except then only, when by some outward
impediment they are crossed, and cannot enjoy their wished desire to the full;
or else when Satan at the hour of death, or so, having hem upon the hipp (as
we say) or at advantage in some perilous temptation, presents unto them the
hideous shape of those their foul enormities, that so down the precipice of
desperation they may tumble headlong into the infernal pit. Again, the
Conscience, both for the natural quickness, and tenderness of it, is not
unfitly compared to the eye. Now the eye that is sound, how is (...) offended
with the least moate falling into it, nor is it quiet, till it be quit of it?
whereas the unsound eye, having a thick and hard Filme grown over it, yet is
not sensible of any Pain, though now deprived of sight. The sound eye is the
conscience of the regenerate man, which is offended with the least moate of
sin, yea with the very motion only, crying out, who shall deliver? but the
unsound eye is the conscience of the unregenerate, which being ouergrown with
the hard filme of habituated corrupt humors and lusts, is no less void of
the sense of any trouble, then of the sight of his sin.

Now, as the regenerate cry out of their inherent corruptions (...) so, much
more, when upon any preualent temptation, working upon, and taking advantage of
their want of instant and constant watchfulnes over their souls, their
corruptions break forth into (at least) some degree of act, and so, as it
causes scandal, hereupon their sorrow is infinitely aggrauated, and their
souls cast down into the very gulf of horror and terrors of the wrath of
God. Now they are wrapped in a thousand sad perplexities. Now they fall a
arguing (Satan's sophistry being ready with his scriptum est) that surely God
is become their enemy, that he loves them not, that he has cast them out
of his favor, discarded them out of the number of his Saints: that they have
been but hypocrites all this while. For those that be his, he keeps. He
keepetp the feet of his Saints from sliding. 1 Samuel 2.9. Pro. 2.8.
The wicked are they, whose feet shall slide in due time. And, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
Psalm. 37.23.
The Lord orders a good man's going, and makes his way acceptable to
himself. And, none shall be presented to Christ, as his spouse, but such as
are without spott and wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.
such as are holy and without blemish. And, the Angel reapers shall gather out
of Christ's kingdom al things that offend, and them which do iniquity. Upon
these Premises Satan infers: But God has not so kept thy feet; thou art
not free from spots, wrinkles, blemishes; thy life has been offensive, and
thou a worker of iniquity: therefore thou art none of Gods Saints; thou
appertainest not unto Christ; thou must be culled and cast out of his kingdom
for an hypocrite, for a Reprobate. These and the like assaults Satan makes
against the soul of Gods child afflicted in conscience for his sin.

And now poor soul, what will thou do in this case? whither will thou fly?
God has with drawn his loving countenance from thee, his word is drawn forth
as a two edged sword to kill and cut thee off. And now what Balm is left in
Gil^ad for thee? what Physician there?

Nor is this conflict for a spurt, and away, but of long continuance: how does
the poor soul languish with complaints. Day and night thy hand is heavy upon
me. My soul is sore troubled; but thou O Lord, how long? And what does more
add to the souls grief, then the continuance of a tedious and strong fit of
temptation? Terre saeile est prefer grave.
If heaviness did endure but for a night, and joy return in the morning, it
might the better be endured, though sharp for the time. The continual storm
of 15 days, without intermission, was very tedious and terrible to those in
Paul's ship. But how tedious are those storms, wherein the soul and conscience
are tossed, not for a few days, but for many months, and years together. If a
natural child, for some offense, be but for a few days debarred from his
loving fathers presence, what a heart-griefe is it unto him, how impatient is
he, how penitent, how longs he to enjoy his fathers countenance again? If
Absolon had not been a graceless and unnatural son, 2 Samuel 14.
his five years banishment from the King his fathers face and favor, had
been not a little irksome to him; but especially those two years in
Jerusalem; so that his burning of Ioabs field, might have been imputed to his
zealous and impatient affection of seeing his father, and not to his subtilty,
in so making away through the very fire, to his wicked ambition of usurping the
kingdom. But we speak here of a natural gracious son, to whom the offense
of a father is a burden intolerable. Psalm. 42.2.
This was David's affection, when he was so long banished but from the visible
Type of Gods presence and face, the Ark of God. And till reconciliation, no
peace.

CHAP. II. The Comfort. How the soul is reduced and restored into Gods favor,
and so to the peace of Conscience.
But blessed be God, whose faithfulness will not suffer his Saints to be
tempted above that they are able, 1 Cor. 10
but will give the issue with the temptation, that they may be able to bear
it: Who says, For a small moment have I forsaken thee, Esaias 54.7, 8.
but with great mercies will I gather thee; in a little wrath I hid my faee from
thee, for a moment: but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer.

But by what means is the conscience raised from this gulf of temptation, to
the haven and rock of comfort? How may Gods child come to get the victory over
so sore a conflict? What? By considering, God is merciful. True: But he is no
less just. Or, because perhaps thou have tasted of temporal and corporal
chastisments; that therefore the bitterness of death is over, and God is now
pacified, and satisfied for what is past? Indeed temporal chastisements ought
to be humiliations to thee, but can be no satisfactions to God. For what
proportion between a temporal punishment suffered, and an eternal deserved?
Or between an infinite justice offended, and a finite patience satisfying? No
mulct will redeem the least sin; not ten thousand rivers of oil; Micah 6.7.
not the first borne of thy body, for the sin of thy soul. No man may
redeem his brother, Psalm. 49.7, 8.
or make agreement with God for him. It cost more to redeem their souls. That
must be let alone for ever. All Purgatory imaginary flames cannot purge the
stain of, or satisfy Gods justice for the least sin. That doctrine is a
mere dream, blasphemous, derogatory from the all and only sufficient
sacrifice of Christ, that any thing else, either their sacred fire, or holy
water, as ^stinct. ^e con^^atione
they affirm, but that precious blood, can purge away the least sin.

Or to let all these alone, think thou that time will wear those fits away?
Or will thou drive them away with merry company? Or drink them away, as
good-fellowes do their melancholy-fits? Alas, this does but add more fuel to
the fire of thy Conscience, while it adds sin unto sin. This is rather to
delay thy comfort, then to allay thy grief.

What course then will thou take? To resolve this: there are sundry special
and sovereign preservatives, keeping the soul from sinking under the Gulp^e of
a troubled Conscience. The first is Faith, the saving, living, justifying
Faith, the nature whereof, is never to depart from God, but to cleave unto him,
whatsoever come of it, Romans ^.18.
and even against hope to believe under hope. It resolves, Though he kill me,
Job 13.15.
yet will I trust in him. This Faith belieueth even in unbelief. I believe
Lord, Ps. 116.10.11.
help my unbelief. What a perplexed speech is that of David's? I believed,
therefore have I spoken; I was greatly afflicted; I said in my have, All men
are liars. David both believed in the promise of God toward him, and yet
through humane frailty, in have, doubted of the same. He said in his have, All
men are liars. And what need he repent of that speech, as spoken in have? Are
not all men liars? But his meaning was, he mistrusted God in his have; though
yet he believed. Notwithstanding the Scripture says, He that belieueth, shall
not make have. Es. 28.16
Such a mixture is there in the Regenerate, of Faith and Infidelity at one and
the same instant, about one and the same object. This is that Faith, which
never fails a man in his utmost extremity, but supports him even against
despair it self. I should utterly have fainted, unless I had believed to see
the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living.

Object. But how can a man both believe and doubt, at the same instant, about
the same thing?

Answ. There is in the Regenerate, the Old man doubting, and the New man
believing. It is against the property of Faith to doubt. Doubting comes of the
Flesh, and believing of the Spirit, and these two are contrary one to the
other, they fight one against the other in one Soul, as Jacob and Esau in one
Womb. So that even then, when the Soul is like to be ouer-borne with the
tempest of carnal distrust, the seed of Faith, by a secret and insensible
working for the present, being fast rooted and riuetted into Christ, as the
Ankor in the Rock, or the Tree-root in the firm ground, preserues it from
either wrack, or wind-fall. Thus David comforts and cheeres up his dejected
Soul: Psalm. 43^
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me?
Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God.

Again, Faith has two strong supporters, to stay it from fainting: The first
is, the promises of God: the second, experience of former feelings of mercy.
First, Gods promise is the proper object, and pillar of hope. This promise, is
not a word of course, but a word of Gods solemn Covenant; a word, not
transient, but permanent, a word written, in a more lasting monument, then Lead
and Stone. Yea this promise is confirmed with Gods Hebr. 6.17.
Oath, and ratified with his Seal, with the Privy Romans 8.16.
Seal of his Spirit, in every faithful man's heart, and with the Broad
Seals, his two Romans 4.
Sacraments. This promise of God in Christ for salvation, Faith (...), est
veraefidei. Chrysostom. Genesis 13. Ser. 35.
appropriates to the belieuers own self; concluding, Faithful is he, who has
promised, who will also do it. And as Satan on the one side is busy to buzze
into a man's head places of Scriptures, by him perverted, and mis-applyed: so
Faith on the other side opposes against him the sweet promises of God: Math. 11
28.
as, Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will refresh you. I
came not to call the righteous, Math. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance. Nor do these promises belong only to those, who
have not yet been effectually called, but to those, who, after their
effectual calling, have, through humane infirmity fallen into some sin. As,
children, 1 Ioh. 2.1
I write unto you, that you sin not; And if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for our sins. These, and the like promises of God, Faith laying
hold upon, are like the hand of Christ reached out to sinking Peter, staying
the Soul from perishing in the Floods of Spiritual perturbations. Ps. 119.92*
and ve. 49.50
Except thy Law (says afflicted David) had been my delight, I should then
have perished in mine affliction. By Law, there, he means the Gospel, with
the promises of it. For else, Gal.
the Law causes wrath, and can minister no consolation to the wounded
Conscience, but only sends the Patient to the good Physician, Christ. It is
one of S^tans usual stratagem^ to hide Gods promises, all he can, from Gods
child in time of Spiritual temptation, and to present him, Qui statuit aliquid
part ina^dita altera, Aequum licet statuerit, haud ^quus fuit Senec*
and wholly take him up with Judgments, thereby to drive him to despair.
Therefore, as a Judge, that hears one parti^, and reserueth never an ear for
the adverse parti^, must needs be unjust, yea, although he happily pronounce
right judgment: So the sinful Soul looking altogether upon the judgment of
God, and reserving never an eye, to look upon his mercy and promise, is like
to proceed unjustly against himself, though thereby he pull upon his Soul a
just condemnation. But to prevent this, It stands not with the condition of the
Children of the Promise, the blessed Seed, Romans 9.8, 23.
those Vessels of mercy, which God has before ordained unto glory, that in
them he might make known the riches of his glory: verse 22.
It stands not (I say) with their condition, to be, as the vessels of wrath,
swallowed up of wrath, being selfe-fitted to destruction: But in the Children
of the Promise, mercy shall triumph against judgment, when Faith in Gods
promises of life shall overcome all difficulties.

The second pillar and prop of Faith in the Souls fainting, is experience of
former fruition of mercy. This was David's practice, Ps. 77.
I have considered the days of old, etc. I call to remembrance my Song in the
night. Thus in his distress, he calls to mind what sweetness, and comfort he
found formerly in God, by those familiar Soliloquies, which his Soul did sing
unto God by night, in the grateful remembrance of his benefits. And Psalm 143
complaining, My spirit is overwhelmed within me, my heart within me is
desolate: Yet he comforts himself with the meditation and memory of Gods
former gracious dealing toward him verse 4, 5. And Psalm 27, he even
challenges God upon form^r mercies, verse 9.
saying, Hide not thy face from me, put not thy servant away in anger: Thou
have been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, oh God of my salvation.
Thus upon this experience David gathers such assurance, that though his Father
and Mother forsake him ( And can a Mother forget, forsake her son?) yet
though she should be so unnatural, yet says God, I will not forsake thee)
yet, says Douid, Even then the Lord takes me up. So that for the Conscience
afflicted, to recollect the experiments of former mercies, which the Soul once
sweetly inioyed, is a solid ground of comfort, whereon to cast the Anchor of
Hope in a present storm, yea and the secure Harbor also, wherein to repose
her self, in a settled assurance of Gods love, for the time to come, and for
ever. And the reason is, Whom God loves once in Christ, he ever loves. The
gifts and calling of God are without repentance. His blessing upon his
Children, is like that of Isaac upon Jacob, I have blessed him, and he shall be
blessed. Balaam told Balack, that there was no reuersing of Gods blessing on
his people; God is not as man, Number. 23.1920.
that he should lie, or repent; Has he said it, and shall he not do it?
Behold I have received commandment to bless, and he has blessed, and I
cannot reuerse it.

Object. But the memory of former mercies inioyed, may serve to minister to
the afflicted Soul for sin, rather matter of more grief, then of any joy,
and rather to aggrauate our sin, and so our sorrow, then to redintegrate or
renouate our comfort. What a corrosiue was it to Dauid's heart, trow you, after
that his sin, to hear the enumeration of Gods many favors and benefits
toward him, mentioned by Nathan to him, 2 Samuel 12 7, 8.
as in the person of God? Enough of it self, to wring from Dauid's gaulled and
grieved heart a confession with tears, I have sinned against the Lord.

Answ. True it is, we have no sweeter, nor stronger ties to serve and obey God,
then his benefits toward us; which as they are more in num^er (as he that has
fewest, has so many more, then ever he deserved) or more excellent in their
nature: So, when at any time we sin against this our liberal Benefactour,
all those benefits stand up as witnesses against us, vpbrayding us with extreme
ingratitude and unkindness; as in the former example of David. And
consequently, in the Souls humiliation for sin, Gods benefits coming into
remembrance, do so accumulate and heap themselves upon the Soul, that (as
Tarpeia, T. Liuius Lib. 1.
the Roman Damsel, was pressed to death with those Jewels cast upon her,
which the Sabines wore on their left arms, the price contracted, for betraying
to them the Capitol of Rome) she is now pressed down beyond all measure.
That speech ( Et tu Brute) uttered by Caesar to Brutus, might have been a
sharper Dart to pierce Brutus his unkind heart, then his Poinado was to stabbe
Caesar. When Joseph was tempted by his wanton Mistrisse to folly with her, Genesis
39
he answers her, what obligations of fidelity his Master had laid upon him, in
that he had entrusted him with all his goods, taking no account of him: and
should he not be faithful, not to violate that one Jewel, which alone he
had reserved to himself? So that, if Gods many benefits he has trusted us
withal, if the liberal allowance of all the Trees in the Garden, will not,
cannot (as they should) restrain us from the one and only forbidden fruit of
sin (as certainly they would, Genesis 2^
if we took but heed in any temptation to set Gods innumerable, and
inestimable blessings toward us before our eyes; which would make us say, as
Joseph, How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? But alas
we are too forgetful) Surely then if we do sin, all the other Trees in the
Garden will be ready to fall upon us, and press us down, not affording us so
much as their shadow, to hide us (if possible) from the wrath of Gods angry
countenance, Math. 9.
much less to refresh us therewith. Yet in the midst of the press of Gods
benefits, wherewith the Soul is now oppressed, Faith with her finger touching
upon, and pointing unto that everliving Fountain of the grace and mercy of
God in Christ, formerly experienced, finds cure for the issue of the bleeding
Conscience, even then when it seems to be quite spent, and cast behind Christ.
So that, I say not, Math. 16 23.
that to the afflicted Conscience the memory of Gods temporal benefits will
bring comfort, no nor simply, of those Spiritual mercies on our Souls
formerly felt; since all of them may justly vpbraid us for our ungracious using
of them. But least the Soul in this conflict, of the apprehension of Gods
wrath deserved, should be swallowed up, her ready way is to have recourse to
the stabilitie of Gods love, mercy, and grace in Christ toward us, which
having once, and often formerly felt, and inioyed, we may recollect our Faith,
and rest assured, that waiting with patience a while, the Cloud will pass
over, and the Sunshine of Gods favor will return upon us. And thus we may
reckon Gods promises, and our spiritual experiences of his mercies, as two
preservatives more. Only this must be remembered withal, that the more
experience we have had of Gods favors, the more it ought to drive us to a
greater measure of repentance; which will follow fitly here, as a fourth
Preservative.

The fourth preservative then of the Conscience from perishing under the
apprehension of Gods wrath, 2 Cor. 7.10.
is godly sorrow; so called, 1. because it is a spiritual grace and gift of
God. 2. because as it comes from God, so it goes, tends unto, and ends
in God; sorrowing, not so much, that his justice is provoked, as his mercy
abused, and his glory profaned by our sins. Herein it is opposite to worldly
sorrow, which as it springs from a guilty conscience convicted by the
evidence of Gods law reflected upon it: So it respects only the worldly
estate of a man, that he may still enjoy the same, and prevent temporal
judgments. 1 King* 21.
This worldly sorrow was in wicked Ahab, and so may be in all Reprobates. But
the godly sorrow is so far from regarding the punishment deserved, that if
the godly Penitent had it put to his choice, he would rather suffer the very
torments of hell, then to have committed the least sin against God. This is
true godly sorrow, which choosing rather to dye the death, and to fry in hell,
then to sin against God: hereby it becomes a strong antidote against
despair. For what power, can even the flames of hell fire have over that
soul, which is so drenched in the flood of this godly sorrow, one drop whereof
that poor Dives had not to cool his tongue? So that to despise hell torments
in comparison of sin, this gives a Supersede as to Despair, and seals to
the penitent soul a Quietus est, from all fears. For how shall he now be any
whit appalled with the apprehension of Gods wrath, that willingly would rather
suffer his wrath in hell, 2 Cor. 11 31. Filiusi staroum ^a^hrymaru^ perire non
potest: as Ambrose comforted Monica Augst. mother, weeping that he was a
Maniche^
then by sin incur it on earth? Thus judging ourselves, we shall not be
judged. Impossible it is, that a son of this sorrow should perish. Had that
seuentimes heated furnace any power at all, so much as to scinge the outer
garments of those three noble Confessors, while they preferred the suffering in
that flame, before they would once bow to the Tyrants Idol? such a conflict is
godly sorrow.

Again, as godly sorrow looks primarily to Gods glory: so, secondarily, it
reflects upon the souls special good, namely, salvation. For godly sorrow
works repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of. 2 Cor. 7.10.
But as for any temporal end, or corporal benefit, or the saving of this
present life, godly sorrow takes the least care. The difference in this point
between godly, and worldly sorrow, is lively set forth in those two Thieves,
crucified with Christ; which two Thieves, on each hand of Christ, were a Type
of all mankind, of the Elect, on Christ's right hand, and of the Reprobate on
the left. All were Thieves in Adam's fall. And to redeem effectually all his
Elect, Christ is numbered, crucified with, for Thieves. Now the one of these
Thieves believing, confessing Christ upon the Cross, what was the thing he
aimed at? His temporal life? A repriuall thereof? Nothing less. But, Lord
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And how did he answer his
fellow Thief, but not fellow Saint? Fear thou not God? We are righteously
here; we suffer condignly. Such is godly sorrow, humbly submitting it self to
all torments, as duly deserved. When on the contrary, the obstinate Thief his
desire was all for his temporal life: If thou be Christ, save thy self and
us. As if Christ's saving of himself, had been the way to save them. This is
all the aim of worldlings, to be no further for Christ, or Religion, then
Christ and Religion will serve their temporal turns; at the utmost, Number.
23.10.
desiring (if they must needs at length dye) to dye the death of the righteous,
and that their last end may be like his; the covetous man will then (because
he must) become liberal, giving all from himself when he can keep it no
longer* the drunkard will then dye abstenious, because he can drink no more:
the ambitious Temporizer would dye a Child of the Truth, when by neutralizing
he can rise no higher: the Pontifician Priest would dye in the garment of
Christ's righteousness imputed, rather then in S. Francis Cowle, when now he
can gain no more full offerings by imposing upon the simple seduced: but now
to do this re integra, in their health, while they may yet live longer, and
get more wealth, and spend more merry days, and rise higher, and live like
Abbey Lubbers, they like not to be like the righteous man.

Again, godly sorrow never goes alone, but is accompanied with sincere and
ingenuous confession of sin to God. Till David did this, he was exceedingly
troubled and tormented in Conscience. How pitifully complayneth he, Psalm. 32.
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, etc. Psalm. 32, 3, 4.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine* iniquity have I not hid; I said
I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
iniquity of my sin. Here Dauid's godly sorrow breaking forth, and venting it
self in an humble confession of his sin to the Lord, brings case and
comfort to his Soul; even as a turbulent wind, enclosed and pent in the bowels
of the Earth, causes a terrible Earthquake, not ceassing, till by some
rupture it have a vent. Or as the stomach, striving with some indigestible
morsel, which the inordinate appetite had swallowed down, Orig. in Ps. 37.
is not eased, till the same be rendered back again. Or (as the iugling
Friars make the simple believe) as the soul of such a rich Churl departed,
cannot be at rest, till such his ill gotten goods be restored to the owners,
at least to some religious Covent. No, nor then neither, since not before.

One ingredience more would here be added, as necessary to cause our godly
sorrow to work the more kindly and effectually, to recover sound health to the
soul. For it may so come to pass, that the offense, which the world has
taken at a man's sin, may affect a man's heart so much the more with sorrow,
because it has brought a disreputation upon his person, and a stain upon his
good name; whereas otherwise perhaps he would have made light of that sin,
being concealed from the world, and so have still continued in it. And again
it oftentimes, yea too usually comes to pass, that for want of sound and solid
repentance for former sins, God suffers his child even to fall into some
scandalous sin with the world, that so at length he may be thoroughly cast
down for all, and come to a perfect hatred of all sin. And surely one sin
soundly and thoroughly repented of, does mightily and maruellously arm a man
against the tempters assaults for the time to come, if it be but attended with
a small guard of a wary watchfulness: Whereas on on the contrary, repentance
slubbered over, and dallied with, causes the enemy to grow much more audacious
in new assaylments, while he observes us the less able to resist his
batteries, by how much we have been more remiss and careless in the sure
making up of later breaches. As a wound, not thoroughly healed, but skinned
over, festereth, and becomes a greater sore. Or as physic, not working
kindly, does but fit the body for more diseases. For this cause then, that we
leave no one corner of our deceitful hearts unswept and vnransackt, it is
behouefull for us to call our selves to a strict and severe account for all our
former old sins, and upon a melius inquirendum to enter into judgment with
our selves a fresh for them, as finding them now guilty of Treason, which
before happily we condemned but of petty Larceny; when as now we may justly
deem, that for want of due humiliation and sorrow for them, they (as a thief
saved from the gallows, that should have been put to death) have been ready
to cut our throat, by leading us on to the more bold committing of sin. For
as we prophecy in part, so we practice repentance, and all other duties in
part. And the more imperfect our repentance is for sin past, we are not
only the more weak to stand out and resist temptations, and to subdue the
remainder of our corruptions, but the further short we come of the inioying of
those solid comforts of Gods Spirit, which it pours in greater abundance into
the most penitent soul: So that for the greater strengthening of the wounded
soul fainting under the weight of some great temptation for a new sin, it is
necessary to renew our repentance in a greater measure then ever, for all our
old sins; that so the more ground we sow with godly sorrow, we may reap the
more plentiful harvest of consolation. This was David's practice. In his old
age, and upon that great sin of his, he prays the Lord not to remember the
sins of his youth, which no doubt he had long ago repented of, but now upon
so fearful a fall, being driven aground by the tempest of temptation, he
cannot bring his vessel off again, but with a greater springtide of tears,
in a redubled repentance.

But many are so mealy mouthed, that for shame, or pride, they will not
confess (at least, in particular, Pro. 28.13.
as David, Psalm. 51.
This evil) this or that special sin to God. Because many times thereupon
depends a necessity of restitution and satisfaction to man for the offense
done, Non remittitur peccatu^, nisi restituatur ablatum. Aug.
without which, confession to God, in such cases, is vain. For the sin is not
remitted, unless the wrong to man (if it be possible) be satisfied. In the
Law, robbery, cozenage, violence, perjury had a sacrifice for it, but he must
withal make full restitution according to the Law, the same day of his
sacrifice; see Leuit. 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

The fifth Preservative of Conscience, distressed with the fear of Gods
displeasure, is Prayer. O the sweet and souerain help, which Prayer, frequent,
fervent, faithful, humble Prayer subministreth to the Soul, when plunged in
the deepth of perplexed dolours! As David, in that short, but pithy
Penitential, Out of the deepes have I cried unto thee, Ps. 130.1
O Lord. Jonas prayed unto the Lord his God out of the Fishes belly, Yea, Out
of the belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice. And when David said
in his have, I am cut off from before thine eyes: Nevertheless (says he)
thou heardest the voice of my supplycations, when I cried unto thee. Prayer is
of force to bring again the dead Child, to raise dead Lazarus, even the
stinking Soul, out of the Grave. No place, no case of calamity, Spiritual or
Corporal, whence Prayer may not procure deliverance. Only out of Hell is no
deliverance. Why? They pray not there to God. In the Parable, Dives prayed, but
to Abraham, to a Saint, not to God; enough to cause his prayer to be rejected,
as not worth a drop of cold water. A good example for all such Clyents, as
invoke Saints for their Advocates. A practice learned from Dives in Hell, but
which finds neither Precept nor Promise in the Scriptures, and so can hope
for no better success.

Now among the many admirable uses and effects of prayer, two are of singular
note: the first, that prayer is a most effectual antidote to prevent the
committing of sin. What need I speak of the infinite experiments my self
have found in this kind? Let every child of God but take notice of his own
proofs herein. For my part, how many forcible temptations, prouocations,
inuitations, occasions to sin have made battery upon this weak Fort, when it
has been ready to hang out the flagg of parle, and of yielding: and only
prayer steps between, working a sudden and strange alteration in the
affections? it brings a fresh supply of of grace, fortifieth the weakest
places, repaireth the breaches, repulseth the batteries, causes the enemy for
that time to retreat. I could produce strange instances in my self, but I
forbear. Nor is there any lawful affair of this life, but if prayer have an
oar in it, it makes the better way to arrive at the wished port. But for the
preventing of sin, and restraining of our inordinate passions, it is in a
manner the only effectual means. Never has any temptation further
prevailed, but as prayer has been neglected: I am sure this is true in mine
own experience. And surely where the daily practice of prayer is not, there it
is no marvel, if Satan keep his revels. David, noting the many corruptions
and abominations of wicked men, and persecuting Tyrants, he renders the reason
of all, They call not upon the Lord. Psa. 14^4
But do not such men pray? Yes, they may; but as the Pharisees, in an outward
formalitie, and under a color of long prayer, they devour widows houses.
Who are more for a ceremonious and solemn formalitie of endless and
superstitious prayers, then the Church of Rome, which yet the Holy Ghost
styleth the great Whore? Can such blind prayers be effectual, but to pull down
vengeance upon their heads, which by their pompous solemnity have undermined
the very groundworke, and Pillar of all true Religion and devotion, the
preaching of the Word, now turned into Mass and Matins? But no marvel, if
the Seuen-branched golden Candlestick be there removed, and turned into an
Idoll-Altar, where the very Prayer in an unknown tongue.
Light of Devotion is quite put out, and the Oil dried up.

The second principal use of Prayer, is, after a man has been overtaken with
a temptation in any degree, tending at least to the actual committing of
sin, and to the fulfilling of it in the lust thereof, to raise up the humbled
Conscience to a hopeful expectation, to a constant affiance, and in fine, to a
comfortable fruition of Gods mercy. We see what strong cries David (all along
the most peerless pattern of practick piety in this kind) lifted up, when
his soul was cast down for his sin; as all his Penitentials, but specially
the 51, do witness. And surely had not the sinne-burthened Soul access to
the Throne of Grace, and Mercy by the means of Prayer, what hope were there?
But Prayer is like Noah's Dove, which returning, brings the poor sinner
tidings, that the Deluge of Gods wrath is assuaged, and in token thereof
presents him with the Oliue-branch of peace and reconciliation. Or as when God
is on his March against us, with his great Army of terrible Judgments, Prayer
is the Herald, sent to make an humble treaty for truce. And therefore in all
Spiritual conflicts, there is no duty, which Satan goes about more to divert
from, or disturb in, then this of Prayer. Yea, he is ready to present a man
with, and to foist in, a thousand by-occasions, or cogi^ations, either about
our profits or pleasures, thereby to divert the Soul from prayer, persuading a
man, he may do that as well another time, as now. And it is more then
proaable, that David was thus carried away, when, for almost a years space,
that sin of his in the matter of Vriah, and Bathshabe, lay as a charmed
Serpent, sleeping in his bosom, unrepented of, till Nathan came, and by his
Riddle vncharmed it, and so rowsed him from his Lethargy.

Object. But did not David all that while exercise the duty of Prayer? Had he
not at least the Arc in his Court, and there his morning and evening
Sacrifices of Prayer?

Answ. No doubt. But it is likely, he contented himself with the public
solemn Service and Sacrifice of Prayer, neglecting in the mean time his more
intimous and private devotion, wherein he should have more punctually humbled
his Soul, cast himself down naked in Gods presence, and made special
supplication for the pardon of his sin, and so have demeaned himself in his
holy wrestling with God in secret, as he could not do in public with any
decorum, or without being censured by men, of indiscretion or folly; As Hannah
for her zeallous prayer was thought of Eli to have been drunk or mad. Or at
leastwise, not intermitting his times of private prayer, yet he remitted of
that fervor and zeal, of that extraordinary sorrow, and tears, requisite
for obtaining the pardon of such a sin. Or if among other his sins he
bewailed this sin, yet he went not to the quick, he searched not the wound
to the bottom. His repentance as yet was but an ordinary, and
euerie-day-repentance, whereas his extraordinary sin required an
extraordinary sorrow. He might also the while pray for mercy and pardon, but
not so effectually and heartily for such a measure of mercy, as his sin
required. And the reason, that his repentance, and consequently his prayer for
pardon, at the best, was not yet so sound, as it ought (which was the cause,
that as yet he found not that comfortable fruition of Gods favor and mercy,
as afterward upon his more serious repentance) was, his want of due
consideration in waighing the horriblenesse, and hugeness of his sin. For
when Ioab's messenger brought David word of Vriah's death, 2 Samuel 11 ^5.
he made no more of it, but returns Ioab this answer, Let not this thing
displease thee (in the mean time it should more have displeased thee, oh
David) for the sword deuoureth one, as well as another. Thus he colors over
his murder with the chance of war. Or bearing himself upon being King,
perhaps he might applaude his own wit in such a prittie invention, being
seconded with a successful execution, thinking it better, that even a loyal,
and innocent subject should perish, then the Kings honor receive the least
blemmish; though indeed hereby it was the more fowlly stained, and even double
dyed with that crymsin sin. As though the committing of a new sin, should
help to expiate the former. Or as though for defiling Vriah's wife, he should
make amends in taking away his life. But thus by going about (politickly as he
imagined) to hide his sin of Adultery, he raised the Hue and Cry of
innocent blood to proclaim and paint it out to all the world. In what a fools
paradise was David all this while, trow you? But the Prophet Nathan pulls off
the Visar, and lets him see his monstrous two-faced sin. He displaies the
Arras, wherein the whole story of his sin was lively expressed, which David had
all this while kept folded up, and cast by in a corner. But now by Gods mercy
coming more sadly and wistly to take a view of it, he suddenly breaks out
into this lamentable voice, I have sinned against the Lord. 2 Samuel 12
Whereupon, and not before, he heard, The Lord has also put away thy sin.
For as Ambrose notes, we seldom come to know sin, Lib. de Paradiso. cap.
14.
till after committed, which before, we accounted no sin; Yea till we come
to feel the smart of it, in the punishment either of afflictions, or guilt of
Conscience quickened up, or shame of the world, or sharp denouncing of Gods
judgments by his Prophets, as here by Nathan to David. And perhaps all this
while David, out of a conceit, that his sin was not made public to the
world, was the less troubled in Conscience for it: but now beginning to
perceive, that public notice was taken of it, it beg^n the more to work upon
him, in regard of the scandal. And surely well it so might. For of all sins,
those that are scand^lous, do most deeply pierce the heart of Gods Child,
making there such a wound, as is not easily cured; but while he lives, will
prove a heart-sore to himself, as it has been an eyesore to the world.
Thus by one means or other will God bring his Children upon their knees, if a
kindly sorrow will not work it, a public shame shall.

Thus (to return whence we digressed) effectual prayer for the pardon of
sin issues not, but from true and unfeigned repentance, as this from a true
knowledge, and due estimate of our sin. Though that which helps to
express and wring tears from Dauid's heart, was the enumeration of Gods
favors toward him by Nathan, deeply aggravating his sin, and making it out
of measure sinful; as we touched before. As Peter, after his three denials,
thinks not yet what he had done, till the Lord looks upon him, and then the
very reflection of that gracious countenance of his dear Master, checking him
for his ungrateful disloyalty, yet as the Sun-beame thawing and melting his
very heart, frozen by the High Priests fire, causes him to go out, and weep
bitterly.

The sixth preservative is, the example of the Saints, 1 Cor. 10 11. Romans 15.4.
who have been raised even from fearful falls. Nor stand they for ciphers; they
are recorded to admonish, and to teach, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope. First (I say) the examples of the Saints
falls admonish us to beware of sin, least even then, when we seem to stand
surest, we take a fall. Secondly, they teach us, that if we have fallen, and
that in our fairest way, where we never suspected falling, we should not lie
still, but speedily get up again. Nor let any man be out of hope for the
greatness of his fall, as if it were unrecoverable. For if he look upon the
examples in Scripture of this nature, he shall find them to be of no mean
rank, but of highest eminency, if we consider either the greatness of their
persons, or the grieuousnesse of their falls. David, as great a Prophet, as a
Prince, and no less eminent in grace, then in place and calling, yet how foul
was his fall into those two most fearful sins of adultery and murder, and
both out of measure aggrauated by the manifold circumstances, both personal
and real, attending the committing of them? Solomon, a glorious type of
Christ, a Iedidiah, beloved of God, endued with incomparable wisdom; yet how
fell he by two matchless sins, lust and idolatry, wherein also he lay a long
time? And that (which made their sins so much the more damnable) they both
fell in their old age, which takes away from them all excuse or plea of youth;
both of them above fifty. 1 Kin. 11.4.
In time of the Gospel, yea in the very corporal presence of Christ, Peter,
though a prime Apostle, a chief pillar, yet how fearfully fell he into a
flat denial, disclaiming, and abiuring his dear Master, and that with
direful imprecations, and execrations upon himself, if he so much as knew
him? Nor wanted it aggravating circumstances, as his Masters late immediate
premonition, his own deliberate resolution, and protestation to the contrary,
a weak wenches breath, his own sibboleth, or lisping Galilean language
bewraying him, his Masters present deplored condition, needing rather fast
friends to back him, and faithful servants about him, to own and honor him,
then such renegadoes to add to his affliction, seeing also this was the last
service and honor which Peter was like to do to his living dying Lord.
Hereunto might we add many more examples, but these may suffice. And they are
of great moment: For bring me ever a child of God, more sanctified then David,
more dignified then Solomon, more fortified then Peter. David, a King, a
Prophet: Solomon, a King, a type of Christ, the wisest of men. Peter, an elect,
a prime Apostle. And tell me, what greater sin then adultery, then murder?
But David committed adultery but once, thou often. Then look upon Solomon, he
lay a long time wollowing in lust, and idolatry. But thy sin is of another
nature: thou art an Apostate, thou have denied the Lord, that bought thee. Then
look upon Peter. But he did it for present fear of his life, thou for love of
this present world. Yet hold to the example, that Peter's weeping may help to
soften thy hard heart to repentance. But happily Satan may go about to persuade
thee, that thy sin is greater then all theirs, to drive thee to despair.
Indeed Satan is ever in his extremes; he either possesses a man that his
sins are less then they be, that so he may never come soundly to repent of
them: or else, when the sinner begins to be humbled, and to be ouer-shooes in
sorrow, the devil is ready to push him over boots, yea to plunge him over head
and cars; he presents him with a false glass, wherein he beholds his sins
beyond all measure monstrous, and above all example. But herein he lies. There
is no sin incident to the condition of Gods child, wherein some of Gods
dearest Saints have not gone before, whereof ye have examples of highest
nature, of sundry kinds. For we speak not here of diabolical sin, committed
with a high hand, and such, for which a man finds no place for repentance, as
profane Esau, or Judas, or those Pharisees and high Priests which sinned
against the holy Ghost. Heb. 12.9
But we speak of the sins incident to Gods Saints, which for the outward
act, are not inferior to the greatest sins of reprobates, but they differ
mainely in the inward affection. Judas, for love of money betrayed his Master;
Peter, for fear of his life, denied him: both repented* but the halter sent
Judas to his place, mercy received Peter to his Apostleship. Ahab committed
murder for a field, David for a wife: both repented. But as their hearts
mainly differed in the committing of sin, so in their repentance: so that David
upon his hearty repentance, obtained remission of his sin, but with temporal
judgments, to his further humiliation and salvation. Ahab, upon his
hypocritical repentance, obtained an intermission, or adiournment of temporal
punishment, to his utter condemnation and perdition. For Ahab (as all such
reprobates) committed sin with his whole heart, but repented by halfes: David
(as the Regenerate) on the contrary; they sin by halfes, but repent with
their whole heart. For the reprobate is all flesh, all the old man: but the
regenerate is divided between the old man and the new: It is no more I that
sin (says Paul in the person of the regenerate) but sin that dwells in
me. In the reprobate, in the service of sin, the flesh is wholly taken up,
but in spiritual duties it is altogether lame, and untoward, as the fish out
of his element. But in the regenerate, it is the flesh only that sins, but
the spirit only that repents. And though we cannot so sensibly discern this
difference of sin by the outward act: suffice it, that God, who sees not as
man sees, clearly beholds, to put a maine difference between the sins of
the one, and of the other, to give repentance, or to deny pardon.

Now to bring this down to every man's heart. In what degrees of men shall we
find a waightier instance, then among the Ministers of the Gospel, who are
persons of highest note, of holiest calling; and such, as if they sin against
the Lord (as Eli said to his sons the Priests) who shall entreat for them? 1 Samuel 2.25.
Yet God forbid, that such having sinned, should despair. Non itaque, etc. (as
one in Saint Augustine says.) Although the Priest have sinned, he ought not
therefore to despair, De vera and falsa paenit. lib. cap. 5. i^ the 4. tom. of
S Aug. mork^s.
notwithstanding it be written, who shall entreat for him? Tota namque
Ecclesia, etc. For the whole Church, and some other Priest, and the whole order
of the Saints shall pray for him, and Christ himself, who offers himself to
God for us, Sed ideo considerandum, etc. But therefore a Priest must be
heedfull, least he easily fall, whose sin is noted to be the more grievous.
Dicat apud se, etc. Let him say with himself; If the people, empty of the word
of God, shall offend, I must bear part of the burden: I dare not lay heavy
loads upon them, and not move them with mine own finger. But if I sin what
shall I do? I shall not so easily escape, I must bewail my misery; For I am
of a higher condition, then the people under me. Sic Sacerdos and timeat
peccare, sed magis timeat desperare: So the Priest let him both fear to sin,
but much more fear to despair. So that of all examples, the Ministers sin
is most dangerous, and difficultest to be pardoned, either of God or man. Now
because I cannot be so bold with any, to make instances of as with my self,
being a Minister of the Gospel: what though my heart cannot check me of
committing the like actual sin of Adultery, as David? or of fornica^ion, as
Solomon? and blessed be God, whose only grace, and not any godnesse, or power
in my self, has preserved me from committing any such sin actually, so much
as once in all my life) Or much less of Murder, or, of abiuration of the Lord
jesus Christ, my merciful Redeemer? Or least of all, of any habttuall,
reigning affections, as covetousness, ambition, and the like? Yet being
sensible of ^y many corruptions, sundry ^^berations in life, absurd and wicked
follies, which might be venial in others, but become mortal in me; as being
such, which have brought a wound not only to my Soul before God, but to my
good name in the world, insomuch as neither the world can be otherwise
persuaded of me, but that I am a son of Belial, some profane hypocrite,
loose person, or the like: nor yet mine own conscience can be otherwise
satisfied, but that the least degree of sin in me may stand in comparison
with the greatest enormities, that ever any of Gods children have of frailty
fallen into: What shall I do in this case? whether shall I turn me? when I
may sit me down in sad solitariness, and thus debate, deplore my forlorn
estate: What? such a one as I commit the least folly? A Minister of Christ? was
^uer any so absurd? ever any of Gods Prophets, or Priests, or Apostles, or
Ministers? I mean not traitorous Iudasses, or covetous Demasses, or ambitious
Dio^repheses, or adulterous Hophnies and Phineasses, or such like, which
continuing in their sins unrepented, unreformed, have nothing of the sacred
calling, but the bare name: what comfort can these examples minister to a
faithful Minister, overtaken with any fault, whereas themselves perished in
their sins? But I mean the better, the best sort: Yes, I find David committed
adultery, Murder, yet a holy Prophet, and repented, and was received to
mercy. Solomon had many Concubines, many Idoll-gods, yet a holy Type of
Christ, and repented, and was received to mercy. Peter denied, forswore his
Master Christ, yet a holy Apostle, and repented, and was received to mercy.
What then? Have my sins euer-topped theirs, that I should despair of their
mercy? Or is my person, or calling holyer or higher then theirs, that it
should so aggrauate a less sin in me, as to make it equivalent, or
transcendent to theirs? Far be it. Being so then, here is comfort for me.
Only this account I must make withal, that the higher reckoning my least
sin amounts unto, being racked up to the highest pin by the height of my
holy calling, the deeper I must be plunged in the very gulf of grief, and
humiliation for the same. Considering, that as great a Sacrifice was offered
for the Priest's sin alone, Leui. 4.3, 14.
as for the whole Congregation, though each sinned alike in the same kind.
David, Solomon, Peter, all smarted for their sin. And who would buy sin at
so dear a rate, as they paid for it? But yet they found mercy, and favor at
Gods hand. This was their comfort. And their example is my comfort also. For
why should any man, beholding such examples of Gods super-abundant mercy in
pardoning sins of highest nature, he having sinned, not by the patronage of
their example, but by the imprudence of his own impotent passions: Why (say I)
should any man, out of a comfortless deiection, shut himself out from all
hope of Gods mercy, as an abject or outcast, and not rather with the hand of
Faith and repentance, which never knew how to be repulsed, knock at that gate
of Grace, which so easily was opened to them, yea which of its own accord,
more readily then that iron gate did to Peter, will open to every faithful
penitent sinner? Yea, for this cause, for our sakes, are those examples
written, and left as everlasting monuments, that no Adulterer, no Idolater, no
denyer of Christ, should despair of mercy upon repentance. And though these
examples are written for all, yet are they most proper for Gods Ministers, when
they are humbled for any sin or offense against God, or his people, least the
check of their holy calling might altogether amate them and leave them
comfortless, and so expose them as a prey, to the Destroyer. But blessed be
God, who has provided such Treacle, made of the Mummy of his dead Saints, to
cure his living ones of the Serpents mortal Sting.

Yet, the while, I ascribe no more to these examples, but as excellent
adiuuants to faith, it being the principal instrument, whereby the Soul, in
her deepest thirst, as with a bucket, draws the waters of comfort out of the
Wells of Salvation, the head Fountain whereof is Christ. In this Poole of
Bethesda, in this Fountain set open for Israel, whosoever are washed, are
cured of all their maladies. So that if the Adulteress had never an example of
a penitent Mary Magdalen: Acts.
nor the Abiurer of Christ, a penitent Peter: nor the Coniurer, of those
penitent Magitians: nor the Persecuter of Christ in his Members, of a penitent
Paul: nor the Idolater, of a penitent Solomon, or Manasses: nor the
Sacrilegious person, of a penitent Achan: If an Extortioner, or cunning
Cauiller had never an example of a penitent Zacheus, making restitution: nor a
whole sinful State of a penitent Nineveh: nor the cowardly or sleepie Minister
of a penitent Jonah: nor the Thief, of that penitent on the Cross: Yet if
all, all kind of sinners look but upon Christ with the eye of saving Faith,
upon him they shall find all their iniquities laid, all their burdens borne,
all their debts discharged, all their bills cancelled, all their stripes
healled. Those, stung with the fiery flying Serpents, some more, Number. 21.
some less, all mortally; some, in the head, some, in the feet, some, in the
eyes, some, in the hands, some, in the breast, or elsewhere, yet all that
looked on the brazen Serpent, lived. So all sinners, stung by the old fiery
flying Serpent, some after one manner, or measure, some after another, but all
mortally, the least sting of sin wounding to death, whether it be in the eye
of lust, or in the feet of affections, or in the hand of action, or in the head
of invention, or in the breast of conception, or the like, none live, but such
as with the eye of a living Faith look upon Christ, Ioh. 3.14, 15.
lifted up upon the Pole of his Cross. There thou may see all thy sins
nailed, all punished in thy Savior; no lim of his body was free, no one
faculty of his Soul vntormented, to satisfy, and heal all thy wounds, which
sin has made in any member of thy body, in any faculty of thy Soul, or in
all together. Yet, I say, out of the super-abundancie of Gods care, that no
means should be wanting unto his Saints to preserve them from perishing, it
has pleased him to leave unto us the most notable examples of his mercy to
his dearest, and greatest of his Saints offending, for the help of our weak
Faith in Christ, that no temptation, no not sin it self, armed with all the
power of Hell, should be able to pull us out of his hand.

The seventh Preservative, to comfort the Conscience in the apprehension of
Gods wrath for sin, is the exercise of outward afflictions, which falling
upon Gods Child after his sin committed, they are the tokens of our heavenly
Fathers love, who leaves us not to our selves, to follow our follies, but
mercifully chastizeth us to our betterment. So the Lord says, If my Children
forsake my Law, Psalm. 89.
and walk not in my Judgments, etc. Then will I visit their transgressions
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes: Nevertheless my loving
kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail. Lo here a special mark of Gods fatherly love to his Children, in
correcting them with his Rod. Thus God dealt with David, when, after he had
pardoned his sin, yet he spares not to lay load of afflictions upon him.
Supplicia peccatoru^, post remissione^, certamina esse, exercitationesque
i^storum* Aug* de Peccat. mer. and remiss. li. ^, c. 33*
Not that afflictions are penal satisfactions for sin, but paternall
corrections, and medicinal applycations, and exemplarie instructions and
admonitions, even to warn the ungodly also. For if God spare not his own
Child: How shall the rebellious Servant escape. Yet out of this eater came
meat, out of this strong, and bitter, came sweetness unto Dauid's Soul. Psa.
23.
For he says, Thy rod, and thy staff comfort me; as well the rod of thy
correction, as the staff of supportation and protection, comfort me. Have thou
sinned then, and does God by and by not defer to correct thee? Be so far
from imputing this to the anger of God toward thee, as rather hence gather
assurance, that this affliction is from the very bowels of a loving and wise
Father, who will not pamper thee in thy childish folly, but will humble thee,
to do thee good at thy later end, that thou may glorify him in that quiet
fruit of righteousness, which affliction brings forth in all those, who are
his true-bred Children. Aug. de serbis Domini ser. 37.
Magnae misericordiae est nequitiae impunitatem non relinquere, and ne cogatur
in extremo Gehennae damnare, modo flagello dignatur castigare. It is Gods great
mercy not to leave sin unpunished, and that he vouchsafes now to chastise
with the whip, that he may not be compelled to condemn in the extremity of
Hell fire.

Object. But will some man say, Although (I confess with grief) I have
grievously offended God in such or such a manner, and that to the scandal of
others: Yet I thank God he has hitherto spared me, forbearing to lay
temporal afflictions upon me; and so as I am sorry for my sins, so I trust
he has pardoned me, and accounts me as his own Child.

Answ. Let no man take this as a sign, that therefore God loves him, because
he does not afflict him, although he has committed some grievous sin. But
in this case, look that thou bring not thy self into a fools Paradise. Thou
may justly suspect, that all is not right with thee; that as yet, thou have
not soundly repented thee of thy sin. For tell me what measure, yea what
manner of joy thou find in God? Is it not rather carnal then spiritual?
Rather carnal, that thy person is spared from affliction, and thou inioyest
outward prosperity: then spiritual, that thou find any solid comfort of the
pardon of thy sin, sealed unto thee by Gods spirit? Would ye not think
David was a jolly and joyful man, so long as that hony-moone lasted, during
the festiuities of his new Bride and Nuptials, sporting himself in his wished
pleasures, not only now inioying, but possessing his Bathshabe for wife? Did
he not take himself (trow you) for a man in high favor with God, and that now
all was whole again, God and he good friends, his sin (if all this while
he thought it a sin) fully expiated, and all made up in the marriage? But
(tell me) what if God had left David in this his prosperity, wherein he said, I
shall never be moved? What if he had not sent Nathan, with a rod in his hand,
to whip David? But God will not leave his child so. It is not long, but he
disciplines him, to make him know himself. And be thou well assured, whosoever
thou art, that have thy portion in God, thou must look for thy portion of
afflictions. And til then, never think thou art, as thou should be; Deus
vnicu^ habuit filium sine flagitio, nullum sine flagello. Aug.
God had but one Son without sin, but not one without sorrow. But if God
defer to afflict thee for thy sin past, do not thou delay so much the more to
humble thy soul; yea the more pains thou must take therewith, the more God
spares outwardly to humble thee. Seeing that outward affliction well used, is
a good help to our humiliation.

Hereupon follows the last Preservative (to omit others) to wit, the fruit,
which true humiliation works in the soul. He that can command light out of
darkness, can also, and does so produce good out of evil, that he would not
else suffer his elect to sin, were it not, that he is able to cause it to be
an occasion of a far greater good, then the evil can counteruaile. Augustine
says, God causes all things to cooperate for good to them that love him: Aug.
de Corrept. and grat^. ^ cap. 9.
Vsque a deo prorsus omnia, vt etiam siqui eorum deuiant, and exorbitant, etiam
hoc ipsum eis faciat proficere in bonum, quia humiliores redeunt, atque
doctiores: yea in such sort even all things, that if any of them do stray, or
decline from the right path, he causes this very same to further their good,
because they return more humble and wise. Now the fruit which true repentance
brings forth, is that which differenceth it mainly from counterfeit
repentance. For counterfeit repentance may be very like the true; like that of
Judas, consisting of contrition, confession, and satisfaction: but what was the
fruit of it? he went and hanged himself. Ahabs repentance was a very formal
penance; but what was the fruit of it? He continued still in his Idolatries,
he hated the true Prophets of God, and harkened to the Prophets of Baal to his
destruction. But these were not the fruits worthy, or beseeming amendment of
life, which every true penitent must bring forth, as John the Baptist preached.

Now the fruits of true repentance are manifold: As, Psalm. 38.17.
a continual* godly sorrow for sin past: a greater care to avoid all sin,
and that especially wherein he has most offended, 2 Cor. 7^ 10.
a greater zeal of Gods glory, which we have dishonored, a greater endeavor
to profit his Church, which we have scandalized, and every kind of way to
redeem the time. Hence it is, that after Peter's tears for his threefold
denial, John 21.
Christ asks him three times, Simon Peter love thou me? To which Peter
orderly replying, Lord thou know that I love thee: Christ adds three times,
Feed my Sheep; intimating to Peter, that as he had dishonored God, and
scandalized his Church by a threefold denial: so now he must so much the more
treble his labor, in feeding Gods sheep, thereby to win the more honor to
God, and profit to his Church; yea, and as Peter had denied Christ at his
death, for the saving of his own life; so Christ immediately after tells him,
how he must by his death glorify God, Ioh. 21.18, 19. We see also what
abundant fruits David's repentance brought forth to the sound instruction and
sweet consolation of Gods Church to the worlds end: so in Solomon, and others.
Paul for his many persecutings, and hauocks of the Church, did afterward
labor more abundantly then all his fellows. As Christ said to Peter, who by
his fall weakened and scandalized his brethren, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren. And who more fit to comfort others consciences, then
they that have been exercised with the bitter conflicts thereof themselves? As
the Apostle says, Blessed be God, the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we
may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith
we our selves are comforted of God. And to this end holy David was not ashamed
to display his sinful wretched condition to all the world, that Gods Church
might reap the fruit thereof by his admonitions, and consolations. And what
though the mouths of railing Shimeies were opened upon him, calling him a
son of blood, and of Belial? Yet David meekely holds on his course in
bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, the benefit whereof might redound
to all that fear God.

For a conclusion of this point, let the penitent labor to get assurance to
himself of the favor of God, and that by the observation of two things:
first, of Gods dealing with us since our sin, and upon our repentance for the
same, I cannot say simply, after our repentance, since our whole life must be a
continual repentance. And first, to observe the comforts of God in us. Where
we must note, that God is very wary in pouring into our wounded souls a
greater plenty of the oil of comfort, but with much mixture of the sharp
corrosiue vinegar: yea, he distilleth his balm but by small drops, and as
patients newly recovered from a strong fever, diets us with small bits, and
pittances at a time, least by ouerfull a diet, the weak stomach of the soul
be overcome with a surfeit, and so fall into a relaps. Secondly, to observe the
strength and ability which God has left us, I mean of spiritual grace,
whereby we are assisted in the performance of spiritual duties, public and
private, domestical, or Ministerial. Herein may he comfort himself, when
upon his repentance, he finds the graces of Gods spirit no way abated, but
rather by prayer increased, and his zeal to Gods glory and his truth more
inflamed now, then formerly, as being incensed by a kind of holy indignation,
and revenge for his sin, to expose himself to the greater malice and obloquy
of the world, whose malice is doubled against those, who are most courageous
and zealous for the truth. So that when a man observes how the Lord prospers
his endeavors and labors with a rich success of the service of Gods people,
he may with the greater comfort and courage go on, this being a notable
evidence of grace, of his reconciliation with God, of that well of living water
in his soul, springing up unto everlasting life. Notwithstanding by the way
all along he meet with many rubs, and obstacles, difficult to encounter with,
but more difficult to overcome, as will appear in the ensuing Conflicts. For
being reconciled to God, yet the penitent shall find a world of discomforts,
or the discomforts of the world, to exercise his patience, meekness, and
humility. Even as a Ship riding at anchor in the Rode or Harbor, having
escaped the storms in the main Ocean, yet is tumbled and tossed with sundry
proud waves and billows, that it hardly finds any steddie rest.

The second thing, is to observe certain infallible marks and tokens of grace
in the penitent soul; and these are (besides those reckoned up by the Apostle,
2 Cor. 7.11) first, a sincere purpose of heart with prayer to please God in all
things, having respect unto all his Commandments. Ps. 119.
Nor are we to rest in a purpose, and desire, though never so sincere: but to
add a most careful endeavor in the use of all means tending thereunto; as
prayer public and private, hearing of the Word, reading, meditating,
conferring, communicating, and the like, all singular and necessary helps to
our Christian obedience, being as the Oil to cause our Lamp to flame forth;
and withal to be no less careful of avoiding all those means and occasions,
which might lead a man back again to the service of sin; least also by
coming near to danger, he tempt God, and expose himself to Satan's
temptations. Have thou fallen by lust? Have thou repented of it, abandoned it,
not only in resolution, but practice of all good means? Yet if thou fear
not occasions, how apt is the new cured wound to be offended? Hieron. ad
Nepotian.
Nec in praeterita castitate confidas. There is no trusting to thy former
chastity. Nec Dauide sanctior, etc. Thou art neither holier then David, nor
stronger then Sampson, nor can thou be wiser then Solomon. Hieron. regulae c.
4
Cum proximat stipula, accendit ignem. And he says of himself, Creditas
experto etc. Believe him that has had experience, etc. Much less trust we to
the facility of repentance, if we be overtaken. He that once has known
truly what repentance is, will not readily come into the fire again. They
that sin and repent, and repent and sin, do but dally with repentance, as
they do with sin, they never knew yet what true repentance meant. Nec statim
nobis poenitentiae remedia blandiantur, Hier. reg. c. 22.
quae sunt infaelicium remedia Cauendum est vulnus, quod dolor curatur. Nor
let us be ready to flatter our selves with the remedies of repentance, which
are the remedies of miserable men. Beware of the wound, which is cured with
grief. But on the contrary, if being conscious to thy natural corruptions
which way they bend, thou art careful to shun the occasions, not only
rejoicing for ouercomming them, but for not coming into them: Though Nulla est
laus ita esse integrune, vbi nemo est, qui aut velit, aut conetur corru^pere^
Cic. Yet, Ego arbitror securionis esse co^tine^tiae, nescire quoth quaeras. Hieron.
this is a sure sign of grace reigning and remaining in thee. For though it be
a greater glory to overcome temptation by buckling with it: yet it is greater
safety not at all to come into it. The cold Iron, void of motion, yet coming
where the Lodestone is, how quickly is it drawn toward it, and affected
with it? so forcible are dispos^tions and objects when they sympathize
together. Therefore he that best knew our weak temper, taught us to pray,
first, lead us not into temptation; but if led, Deliver us from the evil. And,
Pray, that ye enter not into temptation. He is fairly blessed, that has hardly
escaped shipwreck from amidst the sands and Rocks: But he, that dwells safely
on Land, and never tried the Sea, has he not cause to bless God, for keeping
him far from danger, into which many run wilfully, some of necessity? In a
word, he must ever be bewailing his defects, and contending after perfection,
and the more slips, or trips, or falls he has taken in the Race, the more must
he mend his pace, So running, that he may attain the price.

CHAP. III. Conflict with Gods people offended, specially when the faithful
Pastor is afflicted for the least offense given by him to his Flock.
THIS conflict, next to that, wherein the Conscience wrastleth with the wrath
of God, may challeng precedencie of all other, in afflicting the soul, and
plunging it into infinite perplexities. For to a faithful Minister, who makes
a conscience of his Calling, and so of his answerable conversation, to whom
nothing in the world is more precious, then the Spiritual welfare of that
Flock committed to his charge, what can be a greater corrosiue, then to have
a stumbling block cast before his people, and that (which is most grievous of
all) by his own careless procurement? How many sentences now stand up against
him? Woe be to that man, by whom the offense comes; better, a Millstone were
hanged about his neck, and he cast into the bottom of the Sea, then he
should offend one of these Little-ones? Whereupon the Conscience infers:
Then, what woe is due to me, to me a Minister, for giving offense, and that not
to one alone, but to the whole Church of God, but specially (which most nearly
touches me) to mine own Flock. Again, the Apostle admonishes Timothy, Let
no man despise thy youth; And, A Bishop must be blame-lesse: But the
Conscience infers, I have been obnoxious both to contempt and blame. Again,
Ministers must feed their Flocks, by the Word, by Hospitaltie, by Example: But
the Conscience infers, I have been faulty in the worst kind. Ministers are
the Light of their Flocks: But the Conscience infers, My light has been
turned into darkness, and how great is that darknesse^ Ministers are the Salt
of the Earth: But the Conscience infers, I have been unsavory, and so
henceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out to the dunghill. Ministers
are Watchmen, and must give a strict account to the great Sheepherd: But the
Conscience infers, I have not kept watch over mine own Soul, by means
whereof the Souls of my Flock are in danger to perish. Thus his Conscience
(who makes a Conscience) convicted by these, and many the like sentences of
Scripture, and taking them all to heart, Tell me (if ye can) what Creature in
the world can seem more wretched, more accursed, then this man does in his
own eyes, in his own apprehension? May he not take up that Lamentation, Is
it nothing to you, Lam. 1.12.
all you that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like to my
sorrow, which is done to me* wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in his
fierce wrath? May he not complain with the Spouse, They made me the keeper of
the Vineyards, Cant. 1.6
but mine own Vineyard have I not kept? And thus he argues with himself: What
is now become of all my pains, studies, endeavors, desires to do good, to win
souls to God? Must now (alas!) one small moth fret away, and cat up that fair
garment, that has been spun with so much pains, wouen with so much patience,
and scarce begun to be worn with any pleasure, and less profit? Alas, good
Jeremy, how poor and impotent was that thy impatience upon so light a cause,
as to curse thy birthday, and all because the people cursed thee? And wherefore
did they curse thee? Thou neither took'st, nor lent'st upon usury. Was there
not then a cause? Thou would not be an Usurer, like them. The more happy
thou. But if they had cursed thee for some folly or error in thy life, reason
rather thou might have had to have cursed the day of thy birth. O holy Job,
thou complainedst, thou wast become strange to thy wife, to thy Family. Why? By
reason of thy loathsome body. Yea, but thy heart was sound, thy Conscience
clear, thy life unstained. Where was thy Spirit, that should sustain such
infirmities? But (alas!) the wounded Spirit who can bear?

But that which most of all augmenteth his misery, and dampeth all his best
delights, is, that he cannot with comfort and courage, with alacrity and
delight exercise his Ministry among his offended ^^^cke. For whatsoever he
goes about to teach them, may they not say unto him, Turpee^^^ Doctoris eum
(...) redargu^^ ips^m
Physician, heal thy self? Or with what face can he reprove sin in his
people, that is culpable thereof in himself? Or when he preaches the word*
does he not hear that voice of God, Psa. 50.
Why preachest thou my Law, and take my Covenant in thy mouth, whereas thou
have cast my words behind thee? Or does he not hear that thunder of the
Apostle, Romans ^.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest,
A man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say, A man should not
commit adultery, do thou commit Adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do
thou commit Sacrilege? Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking
the Law, dishonourest thou God? Or how can he read that Sentence to his
people, Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ? And, Walk so, as ye
have us for an ensample? When his people may shelter all their sins, though
never so monstrous, under the lest erroneous slip of his frailty and say, Qui
nobis ista dicu^t, et ipsi non faciunt ista. Aug. in Ps. 128
They that teach us these things, themselves keep them not. In a word, how can
he take into his hands the dreadful Sacraments, whereas the people account
them profane, and unwashed hands? In this case then, how shall the Minister of
God, that should minister comfort to his people, find comfort to himself?

CHAP. IIII. The Comfort. Showing how Gods Minister may recover comfort of
Conscience, and that among his offended Flock.
BUT how? By imagining his people to be so good, so wise, as measuring their
Minister by themselves, to be a man of like passions, they will the rather
compassionate that in him, whereof they have so just cause to complain and
bewail in themselves? Alas! This is a cold comfort, for a man to be pitied
for his folly. And a generous mind will disdain to build its comfort upon a
base fantasy. Nay rather, may he not expect contumely, in stead of pity,
and contempt, in stead of Christian compassion? For where shall he find such
perfection? Will not a mote in his eye seem greater to them, then the beam in
their own? Will they not the more lightly leap over the block of their own
gross iniquities, by stumbling at the straw of his infirmity? By straining
his g^at, will they not the more easily swallow down their own Camel? If the
Apostles were sacrificed unto, Acts.
and by and by in the turning of a hand stoned; If for Paul's sake the
Galathians would have pulled out their eyes, and yet not long after became his
enemies, and that for no other cause, but for telling them the truth; So
ticklish is the state of a faithful Pastor in the favor of his, Obsequiu^
amicos veritas ^diu^ parit.
people, quickly forfeited by telling them their own* What can he hope for
then of the goodness of a people, to whom he is justly become obnoxious? They
cannot now do less, then show dislike, which may serve to pass for good
zeal, if, for the cause, they do not hate the person; or if now they be not
glad to make the least error in his life, a iu^t cause to be revenged on him
for all the truth of his Doctrine.

But he may imagine, that being at least a well-taught people, they will
consider, that as the Minister is more eminent then they in place, and so ought
to be in grace, and spiritual virtue to resist sin: So he is more subject
to manifold and more violent temptations, and that through the malice and envy
of Satan, who knows, that if he can smite the Sheepherd, he may the more
easily scatter the Flock; And if his garment be but scinged with one of his
fiery Darts, yealding some ill savor, either they may impute it to his
imbecillitie, or negligence, taken napping then, when he should have watched:
or to their neglect of prayer for him to be kept holy and blameless, he having
no less need of their prayers, then they of his: or else they may impute it to
some sin, which themselves do live in without repentance, for which God may
punish them in their Pastor, as Israel was made subject to three days
pestilence at the best, through the sin of Dauid's numbering the people, to
which God suffered him to be stirred up by Satan. So that thus the people
reflecting upon themselves, and bearing a part of their Ministers offense, they
may seem to lighten the burden of his distressed Conscience. But (alas!) who
will duly weigh the infinite perils, which the best Saints of God, but
especially his Ministers, do continually encounter with? Or who takes thought
to pray for him? He must pray for all; as Job for his Children, while they
were a feasting; But who for him? Although the neglect hereof may bring an old
house upon the careless peoples heads, as it befell Job's Children. Or which
of the people will smite the hand upon his own thigh, and say, My customarie
and usual sins, as in my deceitful dealling, either with men in my Trading,
or with God, in my lying, or in my swearing, or profaning the sacred
Ordinances of God, or the like, has been the cause, in part at least, why God
might in justice suffer this or that temptation to prevail over my Pastor, to
the further imperilling of mine own Soul, by hardening me in my sin, through
his example, which otherwise should make me the more cautelous, least I abuse
his weakness (for which I know not how greatly he is humbled) to my
wilfulness in committing, and continuing in sin?

Or else, may not his Conscience perhaps find comfort, by considering, that
though a Ministers conversation be of great moment to win the people to God,
yet it is not that, which the people must build upon for their salvation, but
the sound Doctrine which he teaches. It is Christ's rule: The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses his Chair; Math. 23 2.
All therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; But do
not after their works; For they say and do not. But (alas!) howsoever this be
true, and may serve to establish the hearts of Gods people against the
stumbling block of his delinquencie: Yet in the mean time, what comfort can
himself reap from hence? Yea, do we not see by common experience, that a
small scandal in a Minister, be it habitual, or but in some one act, wherein
he walks not, works more upon the general corruption of the people, then
the example of all his virtues, joined withal his painful, and sound
preaching, is able to counteruaile? So that, though a few will follow his
Doctrine for Conscience sake, as being the Word of God: Yet the most and
greatest part, especially among the rude and undisciplined rustickes, will
rather choose to live by the least bad example. As Saint Augustine upon those
words ( Do men gather Grapes of Thorns) says, Aug in Euang. Ioh. Ser. 1.
Evil Ministers are Thorns, which sitting in Moses his Seat, the Vine of
good Doctrine in-twines, and wrapes about them; Do thou gather the Grape, so
as the Thorn may not prick thee; that is, what they say, do thou; but after
their doings, do not; Their doings are Thorns, their sayings are Grapes,
springing from the Vine of the Word, from Moses his Seat. But (says he) (I
speak by experience, else I would not believe it) many come to us, and ask
counsel of us how to lie, and circumuent, supposing, that such things please
us. So he. So apt are natural men to imitate the least error in their
Minister, when they could be content, that his Doctrine also were such, as
might feed them in their humors. Or, when they see the Grapes in-folded within
the Thorns, they will hardly adventure the pricking of their hand, when
seldom by such Thorns the heart is pricked with remorse unto repentance to
salvation, while profane worldlings, and carnal professors, bearing an
inbred malice to the Word it self, are glad upon the least occasion on the
Ministers part, even to absent themselves from his Ministry, and Gods public
Ordinances, yea contemning and abhorring them, specially if the Ministers life
be habitually scandalous, as in the examples of Hophni and Phineas. 1 Samuel 2.17.
So that of necessity such must speedily break off their course of sin by
repentance, and make open demonstration thereof by their reformation, that by
their example their sinful people may also be drawn to repentance.

Or, in case the Ministers offense is not of an habitual exorbitancie, but of
some individual act of infirmity, heedlessely or negligently breaking forth
from some corrupt disposition of his nature: his heart being otherwise upright,
and as true as Steel (as we say) as free from the purpose of sinning, as the
cold Steel is from fire; but being struck upon by the Flint of some sudden
temptation, may express some sparkles of inbred corruption, which yet without
the Tinder of consent, or at least without the Fuel of prosecution or
practice, quickly dies: And on the other side, the whole tenor of his life
being a constant progress in Christian duties, and those specially of his
Calling, continually fighting with sin, and corruption dwelling in his
nature: Will not one universal habit of grace so counterpoyse, and
counteruaile some particular act of inbred corruption, as that his people may
reap much more good by the one, then hurt by the other? Seeing, a wise man
will not wilfully go throw himself down headlong, because his guide unwarily
has slipped in a plain way. And he is a madman, that will desperately go
cut his throat, because such a one has foolishly cut his finger. But (alas!)
we se, that a small skarre upon the fairest face, proves the fowler blemish:
and the least obliquity or crookedness marres the straightest line: and the
smallest mote will most trouble the tenderest, the clearest eye: and one small
fly-corruption, the whole box of the purest ointment: and one small error is
enough to disgrace and disparage all the most beautiful actions of virtue.
Quicquid est, in quo offenderis, id pene emnia, quae laudanda sunt, obruit. Cic.
The Heathen Orator could say, whatsoever it is, wherein thou have offended, it
does blurre and blot out in a manner all those things which are praise worthy.
And the conceit and fear of occasioning or hazzarding the loss of one poor
soul in his flock, shall afflict him more, then the coming of many to God
can comfort him.

But if in case, against an evil far fetched fame, which the further it
trauaileth, the more it lies (like some talkatiue and vaineglorious trauailer,
who would be admired for those strange uncouth things, which he never saw) he
can oppose his good carriage amongst his own people, where he is best known,
and can protest and say with Samuel, Whose Ass or Ox have I taken, or what
bribe, to blind mine eyes, to do any man wrong, or the like? or if he be
traduced for an adulterer, or one viciously given that way, and can plead in
the face of all his Parishioners, among whom he has lived long enough to be
known, Whose wife, or daughter, or maid have I corrupted to commit folly with
her, or used any light behavior toward her, although there were opportunity
enough: may not this be a great comfort to him, and a witness for him? But yet
if in any other place he has incurred an evil suspicion that way, and that
justly upon some aberration, all his good carriage among his own people, what
will it profit? Is not the world apt to take every thing in the worst part, in
evil, concluding substances upon shadows, and fruits of radical iniquity,
where she sees but a leaf or blossom of corruption, sprouting forth beneath
the new grafting of the old Crab-tree-stocke? and in good, contrary; esteeming
the substances of holiness but as shadows of hypocrisy, and the fruits of
piety, but as leaves of pride and ostentation? What comfort then may he hope
for this way? seeing a false suspicion once rooted, is hardly removed, but
passes for current, as if the worst that could be said were too true. And it
is too common, that that Monster many-tongued Fame, in speaking evil, will as
far ouershoot all bounds of truth, through malice, as in speaking well she
usually comes as far short, through envy.

But they are a loving people; 1 Cor. 13
And love couers a multitude of sins; it rejoices not in iniquity, but in
the truth; is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, it bears all things,
believes all things (in the better part,) hops all things, endures all
things. Indeed, a^though to a faithful Pastor, nothing is more dear, more
desired, effectu non affectu, if so it please God, as an event of his labor,
not as the end of his desires, as the blessing of God, not as an Idol of his
own making,) then the love of his people; which inioying, he is the better
armed against all discouragements and difficulties: yet here is the mischief,
that when he has by the expense of much pains and peril, purchased their
love, now it greeues him so much the more, if not altogether to loose, yet to
have hazzarded the loss of it, through the least defect, or default on his
part. So that hitherto he can find no solid comfort.

Where then? Surely he must go to the God of comfort. He must still again
and again, upon the redoubling of the waves, and returning of the storms,
with the Disciples in bodily distress, come to Christ saying: Master save me,
or I perish. All other comforts are but as the Egyptian Reed, which the more
leaned upon, pierce more deeply. Thus did David, Psalm. 142.
when all other outward comforts failed him, I looked on my right hand, and
beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me; no man cared
for my soul. What then? where should he find comfort? I cried unto thee O
Lord; I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion, in the land of the living.
And here it is worth our observation, how David goes about to lay sure and fast
hold upon the horns of Gods Altar. He intitles, and ingages God only in the
quarrel of his sin, as having offended none, but him alone: Against Thee,
Thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. See how he doubleth
the Emphasis: Against Thee, Thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight. Why, had not David offended and sinned against men also, against Vriah,
his life, his wife, and those other that dyed with him for company, yea against
the whole Church, against the very enemies of the Lord, causing them to
blaspheme? etc. How then says he here, Against Thee, Thee only? 2 Samuel 11
To omit other interpretations of this speech, some referring it to David as
King, whom none but God could punish; some, as Gods Child; some as spoken
comparatively between God and men, that though he had offended men much, yet
God most, not only in regard of his Law violated, but of his love unkindly
rewarded: others, that David's sin was known only to God, and concealed from
men, in that he says, In thy sight: (although neither David's adultery with
Bathshabe, nor his murder of Vriah could possibly be so closly carried, but
his Court, and Camp, and so the world might take notice of them, he having
employed messengers to fetch the one, and Ioab to betray the other, and had
made Vriah drunk, which smelled strong enough, and being dead, Ioab bids the
messenger say to David, Thy servant Vriah is slain also, which he knew would
pacify David for that his dishonorable defeat, and wherefore) this I note
mainly, that howsoever men might make either the best, or the worst of all
this, either by flattering him to his face, as being a King, or flowting him
behind his back, as having enemies; so that comfort he could no where find:
hereupon he makes his appeal to Gods judgment seat, With whom was mercy; from
man's, of whom he could expect but little; he pleades, that if any had cause to
judge, then God most of all; wherein David desires that God would take the
matter into his own hand. David knowing well enough, that the principal
Creditor being satisfied, the same will take such order with all the rest, as
to work the debtors peace with them upon reasonable terms, since he has all
their hearts in his hands, and is alone able by his Grace to satisfy them, so
as no damage shall come unto them by their forbearance.

Again, that Gods Minister in this case may find comfort in his Ministry
among his people, he must observe another practice of David, which is, to have
his heart established by Grace, and that, not only in the assured pardon of
his sin, but also in the sincerity of his conversion from it, that he may
the more cheerfully apply himself to instruct others. Psalm. 51.
Note Dauid's words well, Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine
iniquities. That Is for the pardon of his sin, and the discharge of his debt
to God. What then follows? Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a
right Spirit within me: that is, a clean heart from the guilt of sin past,
and a right Spirit, to abhor and avoid sin to come. And he adds, Cast me
not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me; Restore unto
me the joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. How does he
labor to fortify himself in Gods favor and grace? And what then? Then will
I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee.
Then, and not before, when a Minister has found peace with God in the pardon
of his sin, he may with comfort of Conscience apply himself in his Ministry
to be an instrument of converting others unto God. As Christ said to Peter,
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. As David goes on, Deliver me
from blood-guiltinesse, O God, thou God of my Salvation, and my tongue shall
sing aloud of thy righteousness. O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall
show forth thy praise. Nor did Solomon become a Preacher of Repentance to
other, before he had first repented himself. And Esaias, being a man of
polluted lips, had no heart to prophecy to others, before the Seraphim had
touched his lips with a coal from the Altar, saying, Lo, this has touched thy
lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. Whereupon Esaias
now can say, Here I am, send me. Esa. 6.7.
So that a Ministers peace with God, gives him comfort and courage to preach to
others that grace and mercy, whereof himself has had particular experience.
As Paul says, For this cause I obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1.16.
that in me first, Jesus Christ might show forth all long suffering for a
pattern to them, which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.
But on the contrary, I see not with what confidence or courage a Minister can
stand in the presence of God, and in the face of his Congregation, either to
instruct others in righteousness, which himself follows not, or to reprove
them of sin, whereof himself repents not. Famous is that example of
Origin, Centur. 3. cap. 10
who for his offering of Incense to the Idol, being excommunicated from the
Church of Alexandria, and coming to Jerusalem, and there entreated, yea and in
a manner enforced to preach unto them, he going up to the Pulpit, as if he
would preach, recited those words in the Psalm, But to the wicked, says God,
what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words
behind thee? He no sooner had read these words, but closing the Book, fell
into a sad and bitter weeping, and that so abundantly, that as a stream it
carried the affections of the whole assembly with it to weep for company, and
that out of a fellow-feeling of those compunctions of heart, which so stopped
his mouth, and opened the floodgates of repentance, for his late sacrificing
to the Idol, and for other his errors, whereinto he was said to fall, after
that his fall. Such an insupportable burden is sin unrepented upon a
Ministers Conscience, that till by the mercy of God he be well lightened of
it, uneath he shall bear the Lords burden unto the people. But upon his
humble repentance, being at peace with God, and having obtained the comfort of
his Spirit, and the assistance of his grace to settle him in the state of a
good Conscience, and of a holy life: hereupon he becomes imboldened to preach
of mercy to others, whereof himself has so plentifully tasted, and whereby
sinners may be converted unto God.

Thirdly, The Minister as he has offended his Flock any way justly, he must
labor to make them satisfaction. And this stand sin four things especially:
First, In dubbling his labor and diligence in the faithful discharge of his
Ministry, that what he has formerly lost by any kind of neglect, either in
life, or Doctrine, he may endeavor to regaine.

Secondly, In laboring so much the more to set forth himself as a pattern of
a true belieuer, in faith, in patience, and other virtues, whereby the calling
not only of a Christian, but of a Minister and Pastor of Gods people is
adorned. So that the constant example of his carriage and course for the time
to come, may be as a mouth, to signify to all, his exceeding humiliation and
sorrow for his sins past, his hatred and detestation of all sin in himself
and others, and his earnest care and purpose of heart, expressed in his practice
utterly to abandon and avoid the like, and all sin for the time to come,
setting himself with all boldness to reprove sin in others, which now they
may behold so hateful to himself; turning also his people, that setting
themselves to speedy repentance, they need not to doubt of Gods mercy toward
them, seeing that the sin of their Pastor was not denied it.

Thirdly, To be continually exercised in fervent prayer for his people, that
from henceforth, they may reap infinitely more profit by his Ministry, and
example of life, then formerly they have received hurt by any his neglect, or
occasion. This will be a means (through Gods special blessing cooperating) to
reconcile and reunite the peoples hearts to their Pastor, and to cause all
things to succeed happily between them.

Lastly, He must practice the Spirit of meekness toward the weak, laboring
to restore such, considering his own self, who has been, and lest he may
be yet tempted. And to be patient toward all, that if he meet with any unkind
affronts, or closse biting malicious frumpes, he either answer not at all,
remembering that God has laid that burden upon him; or else, lest the
malicious may thus, being let go, perish in his sin, he is to admonish him,
either privately, or, if occasion require, publicly before all the company,
so, as they may learn to fear God, lest they turn the fall of their brother
through weakness, now repented, now recovered into their own presumptuous
ruin irrecouerable. But never to retort or return rebuke for rebuke, even as
David would show no revenge upon cursing cursed Shimei, hoping God would do
him good for his cursing that day, and knowing, that God would not hold Shimei
guiltless, but without repentance, without peace bring him to the grave, as it
befell Shimei. Thus may the afflicted and humbled Conscience of Gods Minister
be through Gods grace and mercy enabled in some good m^asure to bear up
against such winds and waves of trial, and in time to overcome them. Although
when he has done his best, and suffered much, yet he must make account never
to be quit of his pain altogether, till death, but as a hurt or bruise in the
body in youth, it will become an ach, and symptom of old age, accompanying him
to his grave. As David, in his old age, complains of the aches of those sins
in his youth, still sticking in his bones, when he said, Psa* 7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, etc. So that he must conclude and resolve
with Hezechiah, Esa* 15.
I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my Soul. And say with
David, My sorrow is continually before me. And ever to make this use of his
former sins, even to be humbled in his best graces, and most beautiful
actions, and provoked to aspire to all perfection therein, not fearing now to be
proud, who has such cause to be humbled.

CHAP. V. The third Conflict, arising from the Sacred society of the Ministry
offended.
IT was no small grief to the Spouse, when she said, My Mothers children were
angry with me. Cant. 1.6 and 5.7.
And again, The Watchmen, that went about the City, found me, they smote me,
they wounded me, the Keepers of the Walls took away my veil from me. The
least offense given by a Minister, if it shall be taken to heart of the whole
Sacred fraternity, and made theirs: when the Delinquent considers it, what a
torment is it to his Conscience? when he shall now see their countenances
auerse, full of high indignation and contempt toward him; when now, as a
person excommunicated with Anathema Maran-Atha, they refuse to converse, or
keep company with him; when now, as the Owl, he is abhorred, forsaken, left
desolate, disconsolate, of all the Birds. And all this, so much the more
grievous, as seeming to be grounded upon the peremptory Canon of the Apostle,
2 Thessalonians. 3 6.
Now we command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every Brother, that walks inordinately, etc. And
again, 1 Cor. 5 11.
I have written unto you not to keep company. If any that is called a
Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, with such a one, no, not to eat. So that most discomfortable must
it needs be to a Minister, when any way justly he falls upon the universal
displeasure of those of his own Coat, being abhorred of them, persons by
Calling Holy, of esteem Reverend. In such a case then, what shall the poor
Owl do? Whither retire, but into her dark Cell, the very emblem of Hell?
Or at the best, being but as a Sparrow sitting alone upon the House top: Or as
a Pelican in the Desert, without comfort, without resort of friend, or
Physician, to comfort or cure the bleeding wound. Solitariness only affording
him this benefit, that he may the more freely, Ille dolet vere, qui sine test
dolet.
without witness bewail his doleful condition. For to whom shall he make
his complaint, or of whom seek comfort, when the whole College of Physicians
forsake him, as a man whose case is desperate, and incureable?

CHAP. VI. How in this case notwithstanding, the poor forlorn Patient may find
relief.
YET in this perplexed state, whatsoever his offense may be, more or less,
this may be one comfort to him, at least in the behalf of the Church of God,
that the Ministers thereof should be so zealous of the credit of their Sacred
calling, that if any one among them shall by some exorbitancie or irregularitie
dishonor the same, without any apparent sign of remorse or repentance, all
are so affected with it, as they look on their Delinquent Brother a far off,
as men do upon a Plag^y or Leprous person. Yea let him account it his
happiness to live in such a Church, whose Sheepherds are so tender of his, and
their own unstained purity. For in such a Church (if any such Church be upon
earth) no Minister will ever dare to be so covetous, one of a thousand as to
heap up riches, and revenues one upon another, without number, weight, or
measure, more like a Secular Potentate, then a Spiritual Optimus ille
Dispe^sator que sibi nihil reseruat. Hiero^y.
Stuard, or Sheepherd: For if so, he must look to be, not had in admiration
for his wealth, but Nogotia^orem Clericum, et ex inop^di^ite^ e^^^gnobili
gloriosum, (...). H^er. id Nepot.
scorned and shunned of the whole frat^rnitie, as a man vnwor^hy, unfit, vna^le
to teach others the way to Heaven, who has taken up his heaven upon earth,
whose whole zeal to recommend Heaven to others, is for no other end, but that
himself may enjoy the earth alone. None of that Churches sacred Order, no nor
any other profane Secular will be so shamlesly a Boon companion, to make the
Tavern his Study, the Dice and Cards his Books, Fortunes box, the Poores
box, to which his charity sacrifices of his contingent gains, thus spending
and spinning out the Thread of his life and liuelyhood, and all to make a
Cobweb to cover him: For if so, God forbid he should hope for impunity, but let
him look justly to be cast out of his Brethrens society, as a prodigious
prodigal, fitter to keep Hogs, then worthy to sheere the Lords Sheep. No
Minister then could ever halt in his Religion, be Idolatrously, or Popishly
affected, or any way complie with Neutralitie and Lukewarmenesse in Religion,
by preaching or otherwise: If so, let him look, that all the rest of his
Brethren will, as one man, stand up against him, and oppose him. No Minister
will be ambitious, haughtily affecting the honor of preeminence over his
Brethren, rather then the burden of his Office: If so, let him look that they
all, not out of carnal envy, but holy zeal, will with their very looks
humble and abase such a one, and with one voice disclaim him, with a Nolumus
hunc dominari super nos. No Minister will easily walk inordinatly, that is, as
the Apostle applies it, not working in his Calling, or doing the work of the
Lord negligently: For if he do, let him look, after admonition, to be avoided
of all his Brethren as a Heathen or Publican, as our Savior speaks. According
to that of the Apostle, If any that is called a Brother, be any of these, a
Fornicatour, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Rayler, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, or such like, with such a one, no not to eat. In a word then, if
this be done to one, who cannot justly be taxed with any of all these, who had
rather dye, then sin, yet through some frailty, or folly has offended his
Brethren, though it be infinitely more offensive to his own afflicted Soul,
and for which he is like all his life long to wade in this veil of misery,
through a sea of sorrows, and flood of tears: Then what may another expect,
that walks in an open scandalous course, without the least touch of remorse,
much less sign of reformation? Especially in such a Church, whose greatest
care and vigilancie is to be found without spot or wrinckle, since the Apostle
says, If any man obey not our word, note that man, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed. Yet (oh that we would note this Apostolic
caution well, and put it in better practice!) count him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a Brother. And yet (alas!) for many seueere Censurers, where is
one brotherly Admonisher? For all are ready to condemn, to contemn, when many
times (if they knew all) they had more need to comfort their dejected and
disconsolat Brother, if ever themselves tasted of the same bitter Cup of
Spiritual discomforts.

Another mitigation of his malady may arise from the consideration of the
perfect condition of these his Brethren, and that as others sin, so (it is to
be hoped) their own also in the first place, cannot but be displeasing to
themselves, and then the comfort may be, that one time or other at last, they
will look more favorably upon him, be reconciled unto him, take him into
their bosom again, they cannot be implacable at least rebuke him in the
Spirit of meekness, as knowing that themselves also may be tempted. And thus
let me be the object of contempt to my Brethren, while I may enjoy the sight of
the vnstainednesse of their perfections: and themselves without envy honored
and admired of all. But yet (alas!) these comforts will not come home enough.
To rejoice at the happy estate of Gods Church and Children, though it be a
symptom and sign of true grace, and a quality proper to none, but to Gods
elect Saints: Yet what comfort can it be for a man, to rejoice at others
welfare, and in the mean time to be pressed down with the weight of his
own unworthiness? Or how can he be comforted to see others in honor, that is
himself compassed about with disgrace? Could the sight of Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom any whit comfort poor Dives, now in Hell torments, or not rather add
fuel to those flames? Much less shall he ever think to extenuate his own
sin, and consequently mitigate his sorrow, by discovering or uncharitably
thinking that there may be far greater obliquities in others, then he can
easily find to be in himself. As though another Plague would assuage my
Fever: Or another Gangreue my Reduuiae, or sore finger. Yea, on the contrary,
the least sin becomes the more damnable, when it seeks a patronage, or
shadow from some others Master-sinne. This is to look upon others sins with
a Perspectiue glass, turning that end outward, which dilateth and multiplyeth
the object, but the other toward a man's self, which contracteth and abateth
it. Nor is it safe for a man so to compare or parallel himself with others, as
looking only on their infirmities and slips, but not on their more masculine
virtues and graces: And on the other side, reflecting upon his own moralities,
perhaps not mixed with the like imperfections, at least in appearance, yet
coming as far short of the others perfections, and nobler parts, thereupon
either to comfort himself, or to contemn them, in comparison of himself. As I
remember a sweet observation of Saint Augustine to this purpose: Aug. co^tra
Manich. l. 22. c. 68.
Multi nunquam Christum vel semel abnogauerunt, nec eius pro nostra salute
passionem improbauerunt, nec Gentes Iudaizare coegerunt, and tamen Petro, qui
haec fecit, impares comparebunt. Ita multi fideles, nullius appetentes vxorem,
nullum maritum appetitae vsque ad mortem persequentes, Dauidicum tamen meritum,
qui ista fecit, non attingunt. Tantum interest, quod cuique in seipso,
quantunque displiceat, vt penitus extirpetur: and quid pro eo fructiferum, and
opulentum ingenti feracitate consurgat: quia and agricolae plus placent agri,
qui spinis etiam magnis eradicatis, centenum proferunt: quam qui nullas vnquam
spinas habuerunt, and vix ad tricenum perueniunt. Many never, no not once,
denied Christ, nor discommended his Passion for our Salvation, nor compelled
the Gentiles to Iudaize; and yet they will be found far inferior to Peter, who
did these things. So also many Belieuers, having neither des^red any man's wife,
nor persecuted the husband of any desired, unto the death, yet they attain not
to Dauid's excellency, who did these things. Of so great consequence is it,
what displeases every man in himself, and how much, that it may utterly be
rooted out; and what in stead thereof springs up, as a fruitful and rich
crop: because even those Fields do more delight the Husbandman, which having
great Thorns scrubbed up, do bring forth an hundred fold: then those, which
never had any such Thorns, and yet scarcely amount to thirtie-fold. So he.

But to find solid comfort, the Patient must imitate the Spouse, who being
beaten by the Watchmen, for not keeping her own Vine, yet goes on with all
care and diligence to seek out him, whom her Soul loved, whom till she
found, she could find no sound comfort. Christ is that great and good
Sheepherd, that gave his life for his Sheep. He is that merciful High Priest,
who takes compassion of our infirmities. If any man sin, we (we says the
beloved Disciple) we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins. This is that sweet Jesus,
who rejected not his penitent Apostle, though he had denied him thrice. This is
that Judge, before whom the woman ^eprehended in Adultery, being accused, she
found mercy, when her accusers, readier to stone her, then so much as once to
smite upon their own breast, yet slunke away selfe-condemned, not abiding the
issue of their accusation, while she, neither seeking to hide her sin, nor
to hasten from the sentence, wholly committing her cause to the clemency of the
Judge, was dismissed with this comfortable speech, Neither do I condemn thee,
go, and sin no more. To this merciful Judge let the distressed Conscience
appeal, when all the world accuses, condemns.

And now O Lord Jesus Christ, thou only compassionate Physician of the wounded
Spirit, thou only refresher of the weary, and laden, thou only merciful
High Priest, who wast therefore acquainted with infirmities, yet without sin,
that thou might take compassion even of our sinful infirmities: Vouchsafe
to reflect one look of grace upon thy wretched Scruant, which as the
Sunne-beame may so warm the cold comfortless Soul, as sending up vapourie
sighs toward Heaven, they may distill in such a kindly sad shower of godly
sorrow, as to cause the parched ground of my heart to fructify more
abundantly, as after the latter rain, to a blessed Harvest. O Lord Christ, my
sinful Soul dare the more boldly appeal, and approach to thy Judgment
Seat, because thy self was judged for me, and art become not only my Judge,
but my Advocate. At thy Bar, I fear not to hold up the hand of my faith, and
to open the mouth of humble sorrow to confess guilty. Seeing I cannot do
this, but presently, as by the Law of Relation, thou auouchest thy self my
Savior, my Surety, my Sacrifice, my Satisfaction, in whose pure Blood all my
pollutions are washed, on whose Cross the handwriting of all that debt of
mine, more then ten thousand Talents, is fast nailed, and cancelled. Oh, that
it where my lot, to have none other Judge, but thy self, to be sentenced at
none other Bar, but thy Tribunal! Why? Because thou ar^ not Just? Yea a most
upright Judge. But oh, that I might fall into thy hands only, and not into the
hands of men! For with thee there is mercy, that thou may be feared. Thou
so forgiuest sin, Aug. de peccatoru^ meritis et remiss. l. 2. cap. 19
as withal thou forgettest it, cancelling and crossing thy Book: But man once
offended, writes it in his marble heart, for perpetual remembrance. Only thou
playest the good and wise Physician, keeping Idcirco Sanctos et fideles suos in
aliquibus vitiis tardius sanat, vt in his eos minus, quam implendae ex omni
part iustitiae sufficit, delectet bonum, vt quantum tertinet ad integerrimam
regulam veritatis eius, non iustificetur in conspectu eius omnis v^uens Nec in
eo ipso vul^ nes dam^abiles, sed humiles, commendans nobis eandem gratiam suam,
ne facilitatem in omnibus assecuti, nostrum putemus esse, quod e^us est.
long open the deeper wound, least the sudden healling and closing of it up
might prove dangerous. Thus thou dealt'st with David, who lying weltering in
his blood, thou the good Samaritan took'st compassion, poured'st in thy healing
Oil of pardon, but withal the corosiue wine of humiliation, so to eat out, or
suppress the luxuriant new-growne flesh, lest festering inwardly, it might
prove to a Gangreene. And when I am thus cast upon the worlds reproach, I know
it is not without thy just, good, and wise all-disposing hand. Thou saw what
small fruit all my ordinary and euerie-day repentance brought forth, how it
did not work in me such a perfect hatred and detestation of sin, such an
exact care and Conscience of avoiding the least appearance of evil, as thou
requirest; how it labored at the best rather to lop off the out-branches of
sin, as eye-sores of the world, then putting the axe to the root of the Tree,
to stub it up with all the radical sprigs and sprouts of affections. And how
easy is it to slubber over repentance, when the heart is not possessed with a
due estimate of the smallest sin? I thought all was well, or at least
tolerable, being free from the maine Act, nor making practice, nor taking
pleasure, nor walking in a purpose, nor watching opportunity, nor pursuing the
means of committing sin with greediness. Or if at any time a temptation did
overtake me, to yeald assent, upon thy gracious prevention, I so rejoiced with
the Pharisee, Lord, I thank thee, etc. as I neglected the Publicans Prayer,
Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Not duly considering in the mean time,
either the strictness of thy Law, or the Sacredness of my Person and
Profession, the one straightly prohibiting, the other infinitely aggravating the
least degree of, or disposition unto sin, causing that to be mortal in me,
which in others might be accounted venial. And although thou know, Lord
(which I dare the more freely recount, to the glory of thy Grace) how often,
when occasions were offered, even inuiting me to sin (boldness usurping the
seat of bashfulnesse) I have by thy present assistance (not else, while mine
own corruption, (when left to it self) would easily have followed) avoided,
declined them; and where I have observed temptations to be strongest, and
danger most apparent, have purposely, not daring to trust upon mine own weak
strength, withdrawn my self, where I have been like to be taken with the
lime-twigs, which the cunning fowler laid for me; have I not taken the wings
of the Dove, to fly a loft from the danger? yea sometimes finding upon trial,
a flexibility in the object, have I not dissuaded, have I not counseled for
good? Yet all this, all this while, as it seems, so deceitful is the heart
above all things,) not with that zealous affection, not with that through hatred
of sin, as was requisite. Certainly I did not with all my power resist the
Devil; so that it gave him encouragement to watch still new occasions to take
me tardie, when I should least dream of danger; and observing my spiritual
armor not so tightly girt to my loins, but like Ioabs sword to hang loose,
and dangling about me, he hoped one time or other to smite me unawares, as
Ioab did Amasa, kissing and killing both at once. And could he at all have
enclosed me in his toil, had not thy wonderful Deus dilige^tibus eu^ omnia
cooperatur in bonum, vsque aedeo prorssus omnia, vt etiam si qui eorum deuiant
and exorbita^t, etiam hoc ipsum eis faciat proficere in bonum quia humiliores
redeunt, atque doctiores. Aug. de Corr. and gra. cap. 9
Providence so disposed it to a further end, then Satan imagined? Have thou
there left me? No surely. For first, having chastised and purged me with a
fiery sickness nigh unto death, and heard my prayer for deliverance, and for a
renewed, redubled strength in my Ministry, to be a poor instrument of thy
glory, which my folly had any way stained: how have thou followed me ever
since? what with assisting grace, what with aff^iccting grief, least I might
be either too much exalted, with the one; or too much depressed with the
other? And has not thy unchangeable wisdom for this very cause, left some
corruptions in thy holiest Saints, to keep them in the balance of a due
temper, that so the tempter might not attain to his wished ends, while he
meets with two contrary winds to sail withal. For when he would tempt to
pride for the indowments of thy graces, how do our very corruptions stand up
against him to our humiliation. On the other side, when he would tempt us to
diffidence, deiection, desperation, in regard of our indwelling or out-breaking
sins, then thy grace interposeth it self, not only as a token of thine
unchangeable love, but as a mighty weapon, to batter down all Satan's strong
holds. Hereof have thou given me sufficient experience: herein abundant cause
of comfort: so that, may not I say with David, Thy rod (of castigation) and thy
staff (of consolation and sustentation) comfort me? But yet (alas!) O Lord,
was there no other way to preserve the wine of thy grace in me, but upon the
Lees of my corruptions? No way to poise the course of my brittle bark, that so
it might safely bring the Pearl of the kingdom to the wished haven, but with
the base ballace of sin? No antidote to preserve me from being exalted above
measure, for the portion of thy free goodness toward me, but by the treacle,
compounded of the Serpent, sin? But I may not reason with thee, whose
judgments are unsearchable, whose ways past finding out. But Lord did not thy
all piercing eye discover some monstrous pride lurking in my heart, ready to
break out, and bear it self big, when it should behold it self any way
beautified with the borrowed feathers of thy Doue-like spirit: and rather then
I should rob thee of thy glory, and so be left naked of thy grace, it seemed
good to thy wisdom to permit the prevention of it with the humiliation of
mine own shame? For otherwise, have thou not (in the midst of my infinite
weaknesses) given me a mind to know thee, a desire to please thee, a will to
obey thee, a heart to prefer thy glory before my life, a resolution to choose
rather to dye a thousand deaths, then to commit the least sin? But, O
wretched man that I am, the cause of all my calamity is in my self; this body
of death which I carry about, is the source of all my sorrow. Yet seeing this
is the common condition of thy Saints, none to be exempt from indwelling
corruption, all, the best, the holiest, to cry out of it, some for shame, all
for sorrow, why should I think by any privilege, to be holier then they? or
being the weakest, the worst of all the rest, shall not thy mercy, thy merits
be magnified so much the more in blotting out my misdeeds. I am sure I cannot
be a greater sinner, then thou art a Savior. Nor do thou save, but the
soul, humbled with, or for sin: nor do thou salve, but the wounded spirit.
And if no physic can work with me, Crudelem medicum intemperans ager saut.
Sen.
but such sharp corrosiues, Satan's buffeting messengers; then cut, ceare,
spare not, so thou curest me; so thou workest in me such a gracious both
humiliation for sins, and humility in the use of thy graces, that being made
lower then all contempt, I may be hid in the dust, until the indignation pass
over; always waiting and longing for thy coming to judgment, when all sin
in thine elect shall be for ever abolished, the root removed, the guilt
remitted, the stain washed, the reproach wiped away, the scars covered with
beauty, the scorn with glory. Even so come Lord Jesus.

But (alas!) O Lord, in the mean time, how many are the sharp conflicts,
which thy servant must still look to encounter with in the poor remains (if
ought yet remain) of this momentany life? Temptations to new, temptations for
old sins; no security for the future, no safty for the present, terrors
within, fightings without, no peace but only in thee, with thee. How shall my
Arc overcome such a deluge, my Bark bear up against such billows of Satan's
assaults, of the worlds affronts, as still abide me, still abase me, unless
thou the great Pilot, rebuke, repress, restrain them, adding new strength to
my wearied and weatherbeaten soul, to resist, to overcome. Is it possible,
that a poor wretch, forlorn, forsaken of all, should subsist, but by an
Omnipotent hand supporting? Herein does the excellency of thy grace most
clearly shine: as in preventing thy Saints from falling into many enormities:
so much more, when fallen, and that into some scandalous offense (the strongest
of al trials) in preserving them from falling away from their faith and
affiance in thee, even then, when all men, in face and affection, are fallen
away from them. Sovereign is that grace which preuents the fault; but much
more, that ouercomes the guilt; as health is more easily kept, then recovered.
This was that all-sufficient grace of thine, whereby David bore up against
infinite trials and troubles, inward, outward, by reason of his sin. A
president or example sufficient to vindicate the glory of thy Grace in
preserving thy Saints from falling away from thee, against all opposition. And
now Lord be pleased so to sustain the weakest of all thy servants from sinking
under the wares even of most violent temptations, that in him all may see that
all-sufficient indeficient grace of thine in thine elect, being in them a well
of living water, springing up unto everlasting life, never failing, nor
forsaking them: O never suffer me thy servant to become a spectacle of
desertion, least the world should say, Either is that no true grace, from
whence the professors of grace do fall; or being true, they are no true
Prophets, that once having it, come to loose it. Thus shall my sliding be
imputed to the impotency of my corrupt nature, but my subsisti^g to the
omnipotency of thy pure grace, in both which shall appear the glory both of
thy mercy in pardoning, and of thy grace in preserving. Thus what damage any
might receive by the example of my frailty, it may redound to their greater
advantage, by the stability of my faith, while thy grace shall either establish
them in thy truth, or restore them from their error. Thus to them that love
thee, all things shall by thy grace (...) for good, even to all the C^lled
according to thy purpose. T^^s nothing shall separate us from thy love. Thus
are we more then conquerors through thee, who love us. Thus is thy strength
made perfect in our weakness. Romans 8. 2 ^hes* ^
Thus shall thou be glorif^ed in thy Saints, and admired in (...) them that
believe. Thus, teach us, O Lord, to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, because it is Thou, that workest in us both to will and to do, of
thy good pleasure. Thus, if Thou be with us, who shall be against us? Thus, who
shall lay any thing against the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? seeing it is thou, O Christ, who dyedst,
or rather who art risen again, being at the right hand of God, making
intercession for us.

CHAP. VII. The fourth Conflict, with old friends and familiars, now grown
strangers.
IT is no small heart-breake to a man in misery, when he is forsaken of his
old friends and familiars. It was Jobs case, who said of his friend, Job 12.5.
He that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought
of him, that is at ease. And chap. 16.2. Miserable comforters are ye all. And
chap. 17.2. Are there not mockers with me, and does not mine eye continue in
their provocation? And chap. 19.3. These ten times have ye reproached me, you
are not ashamed, that ye make your selves strange to me: And be it indeed that
I have erred, mine error remains with my self. If indeed ye will magnify
your selves against me; know now that God has overthrown me, and has
compassed me with a net. And ver. 13. He has put my brethren far from me, and
mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me. My kinsfolk have failed me,
and my familiar friends have forgotten me. And chapter 15. My brethren have dealt
deceitfully as a brook. So that to all other Jobs miseries and calamities,
Pro. 18.24. and 19.4.
this was no small addition, no small aggrauation. For as Job says, To him
that is afflicted pity should be showed of his friend. It should so indeed.
But O Job, weigh well thy present state, and wonder not at this. It becomes not
thy gray wisdom in such cases to be deceived. For though there is a friend,
that sticks closer then a brother; yet wealth it is that makes many friends;
but the poor is separated from his neighbor. All the Brethren of the poor
hate him: How much more do his friends go far from him?

But what had Job done to demerit so to be deserted of his friends? Alas,
nothing at all, but that God had visited him with poverty and other corporal
calamities. Whereupon Job said, Job 19.21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God
has touched me. But this being all, Job had the less cause to complain. His
innocence was a Brazen wall unto him, to bid defiance to all affronts, or
frowns. But come we to Dauid's affliction for being forsaken of his friends.
That will touch to the quick indeed. Job was forsaken of his friends, because
God had stripped him of all his outward beauty, leaf and branch, no more left,
but the bare stumpe; so that no marvel, if the beasts forsook their old
hospital shade and shelter: But behold David otherwise; he, a King, with
Scepter in his Hand, and the royal Diadem on his Head, inio^ing a flourishing
and rich Kingdom, yet is deserted of his friends. Who would not wonder at
this? To hear a King complaining, My lovers and my friends stand aloof from
me, Psalm. 38.11.
and my kinsmen stand a far off? And, Psalm. 88 18.
Lover and friend have thou put away far from me, and hid mine acquaintance
out of my sight. And, Ps. 69.8
I am become a stranger unto my Brethren, even an aliant unto my Mothers
children. But wherefore all this? Because he was now fallen into poverty? No
such thing; for he was still a great King. Or was it, because he was a Type
of Christ, and therefore must look to fare so much the worse with the world,
and be evil entreated of his nearest friends, as Christ was? For the liker to
Christ, the worse liked of the world. Nor that neither; for then David might
have found much comfort to be for such a cause forsaken. But that which so much
estranged Dauid's familiars and friends from him, was his sin, so offensive
and scandalous; and withal his humiliation and open repentance for the same,
which caused all his carnal friends to despise him. Was not his sin the
cause, that his own Son, his chief Counselors, all Israel almost rebelled
against him, as an enemy of God, and as one unworthy to rule any longer over
them? They made it a fair pretense at least, which God used as a scourge to
his Servant, both for his greater humiliation and trial, and for example of
others. Yea the carnal minded made a mock also of his humiliation, as Micol,
as Shimei, as others, as unseemly for the Majesty of a King. As if in
sinne-cases it became the simple and poor vulgar only to weep, but not
Kings. To these two causes David refers his friends st^angenesse toward
him. First, For his sin: Psalm 31.10, 11. My strength fails me, because of
mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed: I was a reproach among all mine
enemies, but specially among my neighbors, and a fear to mine acquaintance,
Plebi lacrimar^ lic^t, Regi honest non licet. H^er. Ps. 69.5* 10, 11, 12
they that did see me without, fled from me. For I have heard the slander of
many. And, O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from
thee. Secondly, for his humiliation; When I wept, and chastened my Soul with
fasting, that was to my reproach. I made Sackcloth also my garment, and I
became a Proverb to them. They that sit in the Gate, speak against me, and I
was the song of the Drunkards. Here let Job's patience take brething awhile,
and solace it self. ^^stum and tenacem propositi viru^, Non ciuium arbor praua
iubentium, Non vultus instant^s tyranni me^te quatit solida. Hor. And Alium
multis gloria terris Tradat and omnes Fama per vrbes garrula laudet, Caeloque
parem tollat, and astrii, Me meatellus Lare secre to, tutoque ^egat. Sen.
Yea let him with astonishment be silent at Dauid's trial, in being thus
forsaken of his friends.

And Dauid's case it is, that suits with this present conflict. Tell me not, my
Brother, of thy friends forsaking thee, being fallen into poverty, or into
great men's disgrace, or the like; a masculine Spirit will easily encounter all
such contempt. But have thou some thing in thee, wherein thou resemblest
Christ, as one of his members, and therefore worthy to have the world for thine
enemy? And besides, some thing inherent and inhabitant in thee resembling and
sauouring of the old Adam, whereby thou art any way obnoxious to the worlds
censure, yea in so much, as now thy very familiar friends forsake and fly thy
society, as ashamed thereof? When notwithstanding there is nothing more
irksome unto thee, then to be a stranger to God, and all good men: Tell me now
in this case, do thou think any man more miserable then thy self? And the
more, as thou art a man more or less eminent in place and graces, and in
estimation for wisdom and glory. What comfort now can thou have or hope for
in thy life, forsaken of all in a manner, and even abhorred of those, whom thou
most esteemedst? When now those things, which would be highly esteemed in
others, in thee do loose their grace and acceptance. And all this through
thine own want of care, slacknesse, and remissness in thy noble resolution, to
do nothing unworthy thy person and profession. Tell me now, do thou not
hear the Accuser of the Brethren, Ca^endo magis, qua^ puendo. Qua^ multa
p^nitenda incurrunt viuendo di^
the old Serpent, whispering in thine ears, O thou forlorn wretch, why art
thou so base minded, so stupidly patient, as to possess thy life with the
loss of thy reputation, and of the love of thy best friends? Thou have lost
them irreuocably, and yet do thou desire to spin out a contemptible and
tedious life, whereof together with all those torments and griefs thou
suffer in thy Soul for thy folly, and deserved disgrace, thou may so
easily, so speedily many ways be rid? And this were the ready way to please
thy friends again. For to whom thy life is hateful, thy death would
consequently prove grateful and welcome. Or despi^^ng thee alive, they would
desire and deplore thee dead, as a thing precious. So that what thou can not
obtain by living, thou may by dying. And, by living longer, thou may come
to have more cause to repent thee. And what need thou to hoyse up Sails to
pass through a Sea of infinite troubles, and perils, being driven by no other
winds, but those tempestuous sighs, which arising from thy restless and
dist^mpered mind, must needs cause thy wrack upon some Rock or other: When
thou may with one short final breath be wasted over Lethe, where thou
shall never think of thy friend^ more, whom now thou can not remember but
with ruthful regret? Such like counsels, or cold consolations is the enemy
of thy Soul ready to suggest unto thee, when thou art deserted of all comfort
of those, whom thou most dearly love, whose loss thou so deeply lamentest.

CHAP. VIII* The Comfort; How a man may overcome, or at least not be overcome
of the former Conflict.
But hence Satan. And now poor Soul, have thou foolishly lost thy friends?
Lament the cause, more then the effect. So shall thy life be now not much more
bitter in the loss of thy friends, then it was wont to be sweet in the
inioying of them; So as, remembering themselves, they offend not God in the
excess of their strangeness, or disaffection, by adding to the burden, which
they should help to bear. And then shall thou comfort thy self with hope,
that you shall one da^ meet and converse in Hea^^^ in an inseparable
inoffensiue society. In the mean time their distaste shall be but one of
those bi^ter ingredients in that strong potion, which it pleases thy heavenly
Physician to purge the corrupt humor withal, or as Rue in thy Diet-drinke, to
macerate thy Spirits, and to frustrate the force of strongest Poison. But are
they, for all this, become thine enemies? God forbid. They are only strange to
thee in a twofold regard: First, Because they would have thee to know, that
they love thee so entirely, as that they cannot endure the least spot or
blemish in thee. Secondly, Because (not being privy to those grievous
conflicts, so long and still afflicting thy Soul, none taking notice thereof,
but God) their estranged countenance might silently admonish thee, thus smiting
thee friendly, and reproving thee. Though no doubt all this must needs add to
thy greater humiliation. Which is such a benefit, as though they know it not,
yet thou may acknowledge it. If outward crosses of the world had been the
only causes of this desertion, this had but deserved to be ranked among them,
as ordinary, and so the more easily borne of him, who makes no more use of his
friends, but to serve their turns, rather then his own. In which regard the
fewer friends he has, the less trouble, if a man had rather avoid the
pains, then enjoy the pleasure of well-doing. But now that they stand aloof
for some offense taken in point of morality, it can be no other, but a
testimony of their more sincere love to virtue. So that in such a case, take
heed thou do not take offense. For else, what comfort for thee?

But now in this destitution, what shall the desolate man do? How shall he be
comforted, weeping for those friends, which now are not? when he may say with
David, I looked upon my right hand (he means, Psalm. 142.4.
where his nearest and dearest friends should be) and beheld; but there was no
man that would know me; refuge failed me; no man cared for my Soul. Surely in
Dauid's case take Dauid's course. What did David then? verse ^.
I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the
Land of the Living. O welfare such a friend, who when all other fail, is a
sure refuge! And such is God to the faithful forlorn Soul, when of all the
world forsaken. And this benefit thou may take of thine estranged friends,
hereby to take occasion to take the faster hold, and make thy fuller interest
in God, as David did. Note
And ever as thy friends fail thee, by death or otherwise, or the world
frowneth on thee, ^et it drive thee to indeare Gods friendship the more unto
thee, who is better to thee, then ten Sons, then ten thousand Friends,
then all the World. And art thou denied the society of thy friends? Thou shall
the less desire it, the more thou walk with God in thy solitariness,
increasing thine acquaintance with him. Thus shall thou never be less alone,
then when alone.

Psa. 51.12.13.
Again, Being a Minister, first be reconciled to God thy self, and then labor
by thy faithfulness and assiduitie in thy Ministry, to reconcile and win
others to God, so begetting new friends unto him: So shall thou be sure never
to want most faithful and fast friends; All that love God, will love thee. And
these be such friends, as not measuring their love by worldly and carnal
respects, as worldlings do, no change of fortune can change their friendship.
Yea these also being endued with that love, which is kindled in their hearts
by Fire from Heaven, even the Holy Ghost, it is so tempred with humility, in a
sense and experience of human infirmities, as that it will not by and by cast
or cut off a fellow-member, affected with some accidental humor fallen into
it, but will rather apply fit medicines to cure it. Following the Apostles
counsel, Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6.1.
ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the Spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, least thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another
burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. In these shall thou find that Well
of living Water springing up unto everlasting life, whose Crystal streams of
love, are neither dried up with the parching heat of persecution, nor frozen up
with the pinching cold of stormy temptations suffered in their Brethren, but
at all times are open to refresh the weary Soul. To whom that of the Heathen
Poet may be applied, which he sang of true friends, whom yet he never knew:
Hor. Car. l. 1. Ode 13
Faelices ter and amplius,
Quos irrupta ^enet copula,
Nec malis diuulsus querimon^is,
Suprema citius soluet amor die.
O happy and thrice happy they,
Whom loves knot holds inuiolate:
Not loosened till life's last day,
By back-complaints begetting hate.


In a word, thy solitariines from old friends shall herein be a solace to thee,
that thou take it from the good hand of God upon thee, to which thou do
willingly submit thy self. Perhaps formerly thou made more account of thy
friends love, then of Gods love: Be the rather content then, and patient, that
God has laid this burden upon thee, nor simply as a punishment, but for thine
amendment, yea and enlargement of divine love, learning hereby to love and
enjoy God, above the best things of this life. And if friends fly from thee,
never do thou run after them. Only pray for them, and so leave them and thy
self to Gods all-disposing providence, who gives and takes away as pleases
him; Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

CHAP. IX. The fifth Conflict with an evil name.
AS of all outward good things, none is comparably so gracious, so lovely, as a
good Name, being as a precious Ointment poured forth: So of all outward evils
(specially to him, that would ascend the Mount of Honor by the steps of
Virtue) none so ruthful, so odious, as an ill Name. And of all other Jewels, a
good Name is rarest to be found, far sought, and dear bought, suddenly
lost, and seldom or never recovered, but with extreme difficulty, nor then
neither. Which happily is the cause, that so many will not hazard so much toil
to attain that, which possessed, at the best is but like the purest Crystal
Venice glass, or China vessel, which fetched from far, dum splendet,
frangitur, many times broken in the washing, and when most bright, most
brittle. And many can content themselves with the Bristow Diamond, or a painted
Rubie, rather then go to the price, or peril to fetch the true Indian
Diamond. Forasmuch as a good Name, like the purest garment, may be moth-eaten
with envy, and like the innocent Sheep conuersing among the bushes, loses
here a lock, and there a lock, and like the wholesome stream poisoned with
the tongues of mad Dogs, or Serpents, lapping in it, or meeting with some
muddy soil, loses of its native sweetness, and clearness: But on the
contrary, the ill name, the further it goes, the more it is augmented, as a
selfe-murthered corpse buried in the open field between sundry highwayes, where
every passenger casts his stone of infamy, and detestation upon the heap, in
perpetuam rei infamiam. So that of all wounds this is the most incurable,
ludibrium Medicorum. The Proverb is, As good be half hanged, as have an ill
name. Which has been the cause, that many being oppressed with the shame of
it, and out of hope of any likely remedy, have gone and hanged themselves
outright. Yea, among the Heathen, an ill name has been so detestable, as on
a time, A. Gall. Noct. At. l. 18. c. 3
when one in Lacedemon, of a notorious vicious life, but witty, and one that
could speak well, in a dangerous exigent of affairs, gave such advice, as all
the Citizens applauded it, and would have it presently enacted and decreed
under his name (as the manner was) thereat one of the nobler Senators starting
up, with a spirit full of indignation, uttered these words, What mean you, O
ye Lacedaemonians, or what hope is there, that ever this City and
Weale-publike should long continue in safety, if we shall use such corrupt
Counselors? If that his sentence be good and honest, I pray you let us not
suffer it to be stained with the reproach of a most filthy Author. And having
said this, he chose a man among the rest for courage, and uprightness, but of
a poor speech, and vneloquent, and commanded him, with the consent and request
of all, to pronounce the same sentence, in as good terms as he could, that
without mention of the former, this Decree of the people might be recorded in
his name only, in regard he recited it anew. And thus as the sage Senator
counseled, it was done. Sic b^n^ sententia mansi^, ^urpis au^^or mu^atus est.
So the good sentence stood good, but the infamous Author was changed. And
ever, Gratior est pulchro, veniens e corpore virtus. And in Sacred story,
David must not build the Temple, because he had been a man of blood in so
many battles; nor must Moses have the honor to This was in a mystery Moses
sinning was the Law broken, which could not bring Moses thither
condu^t Israel into Canaan, because (by his own humble confession) he had
dishonored the Lord by his unbelief, at Meribah. And Solomon in his boo^e of
repentance, in dislike of the vani^^es he had committed being King, styles
himself, The Preacher, not Solomon the King; saying only, I the Preacher have
been King in Jerusalem. On the contrary, Ioab would not send the news of
Absolons death by good Ahimaas, but by Cushi. And when David heard of two
coming running to bring news, and the one Ahimaas, he promised to himself
good tidings, for says he, He is a good man, and brings good tidings. So
prejudicial is the person to the cause, good or bad, for the very name sake.

Now it has been the lot even of Gods dearest Saints, to be ill reported of.
John the Baptist was reported for a Daemoniaeke, or one possessed with a devil:
yea Christ himself, the innocent Lamb of God, in whose mouth was no guile,
yet escaped not scot-free, but was famed for a wine-bibber, a friend of
Publicans and sinners, also a sedicious person, and I wot not what. And David
heard of Shimei, Come out thou man of blood, thou son of Belial; as much as,
Thou bloud-shedder, thou debosht person; yea, the drunkards made songs of him.
And Job complains, Job 17.6
He has made me a byword of the people, and I am as a Tabret unto them. And
Saint Paul heard, 2 Cor. 6.
One that stirs up sedition. And he went through evil report, and good
report, as a deceiuer, and yet true.

Only the difference is, how the ill name is deserved, how justly or unjustly
raised. And although by reason of the worlds unreasonable malicious envy
against true virtue, generally Gods Saints are falsely reproached: yet it may
so fall out, as even the holiest man, may justly and worthily fall into an
evil report. Who holier than David? yet it was his case, which Shimeis railing
did in part at least reflect upon, calling him, a man of blood, and son of
Belial, murderer, and adulterer. For David's adultery and murder were not so
closely carried, but men might easily take notice of it, howsoever the majesty
of his person and place might somewhat smother and smooth it over, by keeping
men's tongues in awe: yet it was so known already, as Nathan tells him, he had
given the enemy cause to blaspheme. So that the very Philistines had notice of
it, much more David's own people and Court. Gloss. O^din.
And the Hebrews say, that Achitophel ^ooke part with Absalon, in revenge of
Bathshebas chastity and honor, because she was his Niece. This being so, what
a torment was it to poor David's heart, thus to be reported, thus reputed,
seeing he had so deeply and (...) dese^ued it? seeing David* ^as no profane
Prince, whose lust was his law, or who held it as his privilege to be unjust,
in taking away the wife or life of any of his liege subjects, as though he
might sin by authority, or adultery were but a trick of youth, and venial
in Court; or the manner of making away Vriah a politic device, to make a
fairer way to his lustful ends: but as he was a sacred person, a King
anointed, a holy Prophet, and Saint of God, so nothing could so excruciate and
vex his noble spirit, then thus to see the crown of all his graces cast in
the dust, the beauty thereof defaced, Gods name dishonored, his own name
disgraced, religion reproached, and such a brand of infamy inusted on Dauid^
name, and that imprinted in sacred Record, never to be blotted out, as it were
in capital letters, Saving in the matter of Vriah.

Now tell me brother, thou that art in estimation for wisdom and glory, in
whose estimate nothing is so precious, as a good name, to have a good report
with all good men: in case, through some folly thou have made shipwreck of thy
credit, and so of all that freight of graces, which thou have toyled about all
thy life, now thy sincerity is censured for hypocrisy, and all turned topsie
turuie: What will thou do? Now thou may find, that a good conscience
wounded, may more easily be cured with God, then thy credit, once cracked with
men; the cure whereof depends upon as many Physicians, as there are men in the
world; whereof though some few possessed with divine love, may be willing to
lick it whole with their tongues, or as the noble Emperor Constantine, who
said, that if he did with his eyes see a Bishop to defile another man's bed, he
would cast his purple robe over it, least therewith any should be offended: as
he threw the bundle of the Bishops mutual complaints at the Council of Nice,
into the fire, saying it became them to pardon one another, since all needed
pardon of Christ: Yet the most will out of the superfluity of maliciousness
not stick to invenome it the more with their Serpentiue tongues and teeth.

CHAP. X. The Comfort. How in this deplored case, the dejected soul may
sustain it self, and hold out to the end.
IN this case, many will do, as with some bodily sickness, thinking to find
ease by change of air; especially far remote from the place where the disease
was contracted, where the offense was given. As many having made themselves
obnoxious to censure, and an evil report in England, pack away beyond the
Seas, thinking to expiate all with Irish air, and so to heal up the wound.
But of such the saying is too commonly verified, Coelum non animum mutant,
quitrans mare currunt. Mutatio (...), non ingenti* Aug.
They rather change the air, then their manners. For by that means they may
rather hide, then heal, rather cover, then recover their hurt, rather privily
bury their sin in the grave, where it more and more putrifieth, then in the
fire of godly zeal burn it openly, that so being resolved into the ashes of
humiliation, and exposed to the view of all, it may the more quickly be blown
away and scattered with the breath of better Fame. Yea in stead of curing, this
change of place, although joined with true repentance, yet leaves a suspicion
behind, that he carries his sin with him; which if he do, the further he
goes, the more places he infecteth: whereas on the contrary, the only surest,
and honestest way to blot out the ill name, contracted whither of evil habit,
or of accident, is with a Christian courage, and patience, (not with a
shameless boldness) to stay by it there, where the offense was given, and by
an evident reformation, in time to wear out the ill opinion or report, and by
his good example, or otherwise also by humble acknowledgement, where it is
requisite, to make the best satisfaction he can to the offended; while they
who have reported or reputed thee for a bad or debosht man, may with their eyes
see the contrary; they that have seen thy fall, may behold thy rising again,
to prevent them from falling by the example of thy fall: or if they have
fallen, to ^each them to rise again by the example of thy repentance. I say in
this ease he has ^eed of a mighty courrage and patience supported with
humility, denying, disclaiming himself, as that conuert-youngman to his late
Pa^amour, who meeting her, was strange to her; and she saying, Know thou
not me? It is I: he replied, A^ ego non sum ego: but I am not (...). He must
resolve, and arm himself with an humble meekness to abide frumpes, frowns,
or contemptuous affronts now and then. Nor can he expect to work out the
^oyson of an ill name otherwise, but as a strong body ha^ing overcome the
poison, works it out with a great deal of patience in loathsome botches or
pimples, d^facing the fairest body for the time. Such is the poison, wherewith
sin has infected a good name, it must first be overcome with the Antidote
of grace, and the preserua^iue of a strong faith in the heart, whereby the
strength of the poison is overcome, the conscience now recovering, and
beginning to enjoy peace with God: and so wrought out (although for along time
it may taint the best life, and most beautiful actions, (specially falling
into the hands of cruel and unconscionable Chirurgions, who to make a long
cure, poison the sore wi^h some malignant plaster, tempered with the poison of
Aspes under the lips, which but breathed on the Patient through the Serpents
hissing, or the foul mouth of Fame, of mere envy, keep virtue from
recovering her native hue:) And although he has done all that he can, used
the best possible means to clear himself, yet must he not rest here, or so
give over; he must not look to be so thoroughly cured, but know that the
Cicatrix or scarre will still remain to the eye of the world, which yet may
serve, both daily to put him in mind of his fall, still to repent of it, and
to prevent the like; and admonish others not to be secure, but to avoid
shipwreck, by their daily beholding such a Sea-marke.

But yet with these cautions, first and last, and all a long, on the one side
let him look mainly to the sincerity of his heart in the truth of his
repentance, and think he has never humbled himself enough. On the other
side, let him withal look to his peace with God, and the peace of his
conscience in the pardon of his sin. By this means dear Christian soul,
though thou can not hope of ever quitting thy reputation and credit with all
men while thou live, yet comfort thy self, that thy name is written in
heaven, and that thou have a new name given thee of Christ, engraven in a white
stone, pure from all blemish or blame, such as is built upon the foundation of
Gods Election, and made white in the blood of the Lamb, whose righteousness
imputed is the pure linen of the Saints, which shall never be taken from thee.

And if thou be a Minister of Christ, who have given cause of scandal to
thy sacred profession, although hereupon thou have passed the sentence of
condemnation upon thy self, as unworthy any more to take the name of Christ
into thy mouth, which thou have caused to be blasphemed: yet be not
altogether dismayed, but know, that those whom God, upon their Repentance,
receives into grace and favor again, being not left destitute of his gifts
and graces, he denies not unto them the privilege to be, or remain public
instruments of his service, as David, Peter, Solomon. And now, who fitter to
minister a word of comfort to the afflicted conscience, then he, who has had
such experience in himself, not only of the grievous conflicts of sin, but
also (after many fierce trials and temptations, and wrastlings with the
apprehension of Gods wrath) of those unspeakable comforts of Gods Spirit in the
peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost? Who can better then he, give
direction and admonition to the people of God, how to beware of the
deceitfulness of sin, who has himself so dearly bought the experience of
having been deceived by it.

In conclusion, as the Patient has need of patience until the coming of the
Lord: So let him pray instantly, that the Lord would hasten his coming, to
wipe off all stains from his servants, all tears from their eyes, and to
cloth both their names and persons with eternal beauty.

CHAP. XI. The sixth Conflict. With the Enemies of the truth.
IT goes hard with the poor servant of Christ, when he has given cause of
offense to the enemies of the truth, whether they be without, or within the
Church, open or private, professed Papists, or profane Protestants. For if the
Angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, surely the Angels of
darkness, and wicked persons, enemies of the truth, rejoice at the fall, or
least slip of one that bears Christ's Image. Yea it is meat and drink unto
them. They do so hunger after this, waiting for the halting of the godly man,
that rather then fail, they will invent how to fasten slanders, and cast
aspersions even upon the most innocent; so little need has any of Gods
children to be heedlesse of his conversation, as to expose his name as a prey
to their teeth. And yet this has been the lot even of the strongest Champions,
and holiest Saints of God David smarted so much the more, because he had by his
sin caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. O how near does this go to
the heart of Gods child, when he considers, how instead of being an example
of virtue, to inuit the enemies of the truth to the love of it, beholding it
to shine in the professors of it: on the contrary, he causes them to
mis-deeme the truth it self, yea to blaspheme it, and thereupon to condemn all that profess it. For such is the malice of envious men against the excellent
glory of the truth (the highest object of envy) that the least miscarriage of
one Professor preuailes more with them to condemn the whole communion of
Saints militant on earth, as hypocrites, and dissemblers, then the unspotted
conversation of thousands is able to wipe off, or to possess them with a good
opinion of their Profession. Yea and in stead of taking profit, and making use
of the enemies of the truth, among whom we happily converse, while their
vicinity or neighborhood should make us more heedfull of our ways, least we
offend them (nothing being more disgraceful to a man, then to commit any
unseemly act in the presence of his enemy, the Apostle admonishing, Walk
wisely toward them that are without) we on the otherside cause much hurt unto
them (not only the greater shame to our selves) by obfirming them in their
ignorance, prophannesse, idolatry, or superstition, which now they dare more
confidently prefer even before Gods pure religion it self, while their
natural morality, or superstition may seem in the least degree to outstrip
our practical divinity. Much more then what a disgrace is it for a Protestant
to run riot in the presence of Papists? Not that Papists can show any great
holiness of their religion, by the holiness of their lives, seeing they so much
exclaim upon holiness, in the professors of the truth, giving it the
nickname of a new kind of I wot not what heresy, as Puritanisme, or the like;
so that they plainly disclaim holiness in themselves: neither has their
religion it in it, for all their infused righteousness, to infuse any holiness
( Bellarmine making the sanctity of Doctrine, not of Life, to be that, which
shows the Church of Rome to be holy) into the professors of it; a thing
confessed by Bellarmine, His eight mark of the Church. Bellar. de Ecclae.
no^^, cap. 1^
that he is feign to travail far to derive holiness to make the Church of
Rome holy, namely (among others) from the holiness of Bellar. de notis.
Ecclae. cap. 13. Nota. 10^
S. Dominicke and S. Francis, the Founders of their religious Orders: Yea and
the better to comply with Protestants, (as the Iuy winding about the Oak, in
time eats out the heart of it) they favor them most, in whom they observe the
fewest and least tokens of grace and holiness, speaking evil of the best,
hereby not only making a division between Protestants, but insinuating
themselves into an united society of the worst sort of Protestants, whose
weakness makes them way the more easily to instill their poisonous Doctrines
into them, while they so liberally will promise Pardons and Indulgences to
those, whose profane lives stand in need of the whole Ocean of Gods Mercies, of
the whole Fountain of Christ's Merits in his Blood to wash and purge them, and
not those imaginary Waters that flow from the Sea of Rome, whose Conduits
convey nothing but empty air to thirsty Consciences, but flow back again
with streams of Gold, which the Alchimistes of Rome do sponge from the full
pouches of empty brains.

Nor speak we of any bastard Protestants, who casting off all care and
conscience of a Christian conversation, answerable to their general calling,
are willing rather to symbolize with Papists in their profanation of all holy
things, as the hallowing of the Lords day in all such Christian duties, as God
requires, and so consequently run along with them unto all excess of riot,
railing at those that run not with them; such Neutralls are neither good Fish
nor Flesh; but we speak of such Protestants, as making conscience of their
ways, to walk worthy of their calling, if they chance to step besides the
narrow path, and of human frailty commit the least error, so as even the
Papist comes to take notice of it: It is enough to raise a clamor not only
against the person in particular, but against the whole Profession, to make it
odious (if possible) to all the world. Certainly, if any sober Protestant do
but enter into a consideration hereof, he will be exceedingly wounded for the
least offense given in this kind, either by himself, or by another.

Nor does the offense only reach to enemies without, but it more nearly
touches the Conscience for enemies within the Church. What an indignation was
it to David (trow you) when he heard how the very drunkards, and debosht sons
of Belial within the Church, made their Songs of him? It was grievous to Job to
be the derision of those base brats, whose fathers formerly Job accounted not
(for their vile conditions, not for their poverty) worthy to be set with the
Dogs of his Flock? But this might the more easily be brooked, since not any
just offense in Job, but his virtues, so formerly envied, but now scorned,
being covered over and defaced with outward calamities, made him to be the
object of contempt. But Dauid's case was much more pitiful, when those
drunken companions at their usual Bacchanals made his sin their song. Can an
ingenuous, and noble Heauen-borne Spirit, even without bursting, brook such an
indignity? And yet not so much the shame, which himself sustaineth, as the
blame which Religion bears for his sake, and the desperate danger also,
whereinto by occasion of his example such Coribantes precipitate themselves: is
the thing, that most of all troubles his noble Spirit. What comfort then in
such a case?

CHAP. XII. The Comfort; How in this Conflict the Soul may stay it self, and
wind out of it.
WHo would not here stand aghast, and appalled, to consider into what a Maze of
perplexities, and Sea of sorrows, sin, though but in some error of our
life, does inwrap and ingulfe the poor child of God; still one wave following
in the neck of another, like Job's messengers, and every one more grievous
then other? How is it possible, but the poor man should be swallowed up in
the bottomless gulf? But lo, even in his utmost extreamitie there is a
planke for him to save him from drowning. First for the offense to the enemies
without the Church. The wound that is deeper will require the longer tent, the
longer time, the greater pains, the greater patience in curing of it. For
first, this must redoubble and renew his repentance. Secondly, he must pray the
more fervently for Gods enemies, for their conversion to God. Thirdly, he must
express such fruits of his repentance in his life and conversation, that even
they that are without, may thereby be brought within the Church. Fourthly, if
he be a Minister, he must so much the more labor in his Calling, and that not
only by preaching, but otherwise also, if God have given him ability and
opportunity, that thereby they may be brought to Christ's Fold. And if by his
labor he can rescue but one Soul out of the Devils paw, it will both comfort
him for the present, and procure unto him a more glorious reward hereafter.
Fifthly, though all his labor and industry this way cannot prevail to win any
one of Gods enemies, yet his good purposes and endeauours shall not be
defrauded of Gods gracious acceptance, nor frustrated of a merciful
recompense. Sixthly, if the enemies of God remain obstinate in their Idolatry
and superstition, it is not now (whatsoever their pretense be) because of
offense taken at him who professes the truth, but because they are possessed
with the spirit of obstinacy to affect falsehood and lies, rather then the
truth. For although through human weakness he had given them cause of
offense, to help to harden them in their Infidelity: yet now upon the more
clear evidence of his repentance, confirmed by his constant reformation, they
ought to be reconciled to God by his example. For if they will wilfully and
maliciously harden themselves in sin by others example of falling: then on the
contrary they ought wisely and willingly to abandon their sinful estate by
the pattern of his rising again. Otherwise, they therefore lie not in their sin,
because Gods child has unwarily sinned, whom they have seen to repent: but
because their habitual malice against the truth has blinded their eyes, not
to embrace it. So that the Child of God going on in the practice of these
foresaid duties, he shall find much comfort in his Conscience, and much peace
in his Soul. In the last place, as it fared with David, so it faring with any
Saint of God in the like kind, to be under Gods rod inflicted (as we noted
before) not as an expiatorie or vindicatorie punishment for sin, already
satisfied by, and pardoned for Christ, both for guilt and mulct, but as a
profitable medicine, not only to humble the Patient, but to warn and terrify
Gods very enemies not to sin, seeing God spares not his own children
offending: hereupon the enemies ought to take special notice of, and lay to
heart the afflictions infli^^ed upon Gods children, whom they have noted to
offend; and to be thereby moved to take heed, either how they presume to
censure him, or Religion for his sa^e; much ^esse, that they should the more
obstinately persist in their Infidelity and impiety; ever having before their
eyes that saying of the Holy Ghost by Peter: Judgment must begin at the House
of God; And if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them, that obey
not the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly, and the sinner appear?

Secondly, For offense given to the enemies within the Church, such as are
false Brethren, halfe-Christians, enemies of the Cross of Christ, such as the
Apostle describes, Phil. 3.18, 19: When to such Gods child is become a scandal
and scorn, and that in some sort worthily (though none ought to be so
diabolical, as to make a scoff of another weakness, but to mourn for it
rather) how shall his (otherwise) magnanimous Spirit be able to undergo such
an indignity? Surely not by accounting their scorn of less moment, because
though deserved, it is no ^esse usual with profane persons in their surquedry
to canuas and bandie, like a Tennis-ball in the Racket-court, the good names of
best Christians, casting all aspersions upon them, though never so unjust. Or
may not his grief herein find some mi^igation, that forasmuch as nothing more
disquiets him, then that he has caused the profane Rout to speak evil of
Religion, and the true professors of it: yet he well knows, that before this,
their malice wanted no incentiue against it? No surely; this is so far from
giving him any comfort at all, that it rather much exasperates his sorrow. For
while carnal worldlings, out of an inbred antipathy to true Religion (at lest
touching the life and power of it) speak evil thereof, and hate the beauty of
it, which shining in her Sons, discouers the deformities of the Children of
Darkness so much the more; in all which they are left without excuse, being
convicted of their own Conscience, while they hate goodness for no other
cause, but because it is good: But now when the practicioner and professor of
goodness has so exorbitated from the strait and strict path thereof, as he
falls under the Check of such Mates, he puts a weapon into their hands, not
only for offense, whereby they wound his uprightness, but for defense, to
maintain their own sin. Yea does he not put a Dart into their hand,
wherewith through his sides, lying open, for neglect of strait guirding on his
Armor, they wound the whole Band of his Fellow Soldiers? Oh, what a wound is
this to his Soul?

Yet why should he, at least so much torment himself for this? Does he not
know, that Religion is still an intemerated and unviolated Virgin,
notwithstanding all the reproaches cast upon her by maleuolent tongues, though
in some measure occasioned by the human imbecillitie of her otherwise
faithful Train? And are not all the Children of Truth, though Saints by
calling, though washed, sanctified, justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by the Spirit of our God, yet full of the Dregs of Corruption
remaining to be purged out by daily prayer, repentance, (...) the practice of
pious dutie^ Is there not still in such a body of sin to be destroyed? Still
a Law in the Members, still sin dwelling in them? Why then should some one
actual error in such persons be made such a Monster, or vn-heard-of wonder,
as to bring a scandal upon the whole Profession, yea or upon the Person
himself offending, so far forth, as to account him as a Reprobate? As though
sanctification consisted in an utter abolition of sin, branch and root, and
not rather (for the present condition of this life) in the destruction of the
tyrannical dominion of sin; and a daily conflict with the Relics of it.
For although all the truly regenerate be Saints, translated from the state of
darkness to light: Yet they put not off the nature of men, yea of weak and
sinful men, while they carry about with them this body of death. For alas,
how should the old bottles of our mortal bodies be able to contain the pure
new Wine of perfect holiness (perfect I mean in the degrees) and not burst,
and the Wine run out? How many, possessed but with a conceit and opinion of
perfection in this life, have lost even that grace, which they seemed to have?
How should not then Gods child be quickly puffed up and enamoured with the
beauty of his graces, and so, as Satan to be cast forth of Heaven like
lightning, as Christ admonishes his Disciples, Luke 10.18. if he had not some
allay of corruption, or sin to press him down, and humble him? Was not the
Apostle exercised with a Thorn in the Flesh the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, least he should be puffed up with abundance of Revelations? Or how
should Gods power be magnified in our weakness, who said unto him, My grace
is sufficient for thee, My strength is made perfect through weakness? Or how
else should we work out our salvation with fear and trembling, seeing it is
God that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure? Or how
shall God tread Satan under our feet shortly, if we be already Conquerours?
Or how shall we press hard toward the mark, if we be already perfect? Or
how shall we shake off the sin that does so easily beset us, and every
weight of humane frailty, to run with patience the race that is set before us,
if Gods Saints here be altogether without sin? Or how shall the Spirit fight
against the Flesh, if the Enemy be already vanquished? Or what need have we
of Gods mercy, that we should daily pray, Forgive us our sins, if we did not
every day commit sin? So that to grieve, that one offense in the Regenerate
should be sufficient to scandalize Religion, and the profession of it, may
serve to muzzle either Papists in their pride, or Carnal men in their
ignorance, who may think, that either there is a perfection of grace on Earth,
or else holiness being imperfect, there is no difference at all among men,
but only in outward appearance, some seeming to be better then others. So that
all this might seem to mitigate the Patients malady.

But yet (alas!) all this cannot give him any solid comfort. For although there
be no perfection of degrees in holiness here in the regenerate, yet a
perfection of parts there is; and so of the parts, that Gods child must still
be growing on, and aspiring toward the perfection of degrees. Whereunto
striving, if by the way, in regard of infinite incombrances outward, and no
less infirmities within him, he stumble or fall, stagger, or stray, never so
little, he is so much the more displeased with himself, and dejected in
spirit, by how much he pursued after perfection with greater sincerity and
eagerness. And although it stand not with the state of grace to be without
many inbred corruptions still dwelling, but not reigning in the regenerate: Yet
it is no small grief of heart unto him, to have committed the least sin. But
when his corruption breaks out into a blaine or bile of open offense and
scandal, oh what intolerable torment does seize upon his soul, as we see in
David! but no man can take an estimate of the weight of this burden, but he
that has it upon him.

Therefore to conclude all, and to wind our selves at length out of this
Meander of a turn-sicke conscience: besides other means of comfort mentioned
before, we will here add only these two. First, that the Delinquent or
Offendant give such testimony of his continual heart-griefe for his sins
past, as that he may even drive the most carnal man into an astonishment, and
to reflect upon his own great and many sins, thus resolving with himself: if
so be that one sin, and that committed of weakness, not of purpose,
casually, not of custom, cost a man so much sorrow and humiliation: then what
repentance and sorrow is requisite for all my great and many sins? Now I see,
that sin is not so slightly to be regarded, as formerly I have imagined. Thus
by Gods grace may the wickedest man be brought to repentance for his evil life
past, by beholding thy great humiliation for the least sin. What a comfort
then shall this bring unto thy soul, when thou shall be an occasion of
pulling an other out of the fire, by letting him see how grievous the burning
of soul and body in hell flames shall be, when but one spark, casually
lighting upon the soul, has been enoug^ even to make thy precious life
tedious to thy self, and thy more precious name odious to all.

The second means of comfort herein, is to possess thy soul with a greater
indignation against the least sin in thy self, but with a greater compassion
of others weaknesses. Pardon others many things, but thy self nothing. For if
the Apostles reason for spiritual compassion be forcible, as when he says,
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness; and the reason is added, Considering
thy self, least thou also be tempted: then (...) much more forcible is it
(...), to whom it may be said, Considering thy self who have been tempted
and over taken? Thus shall thou reap a double fruit: the first, that thy
lenity toward others grossly offending, shall make them the more amicable and
gentle toward thee, in pardoning thy lesser offense toward them. Not that
because we have offended, therefore we should remit our zeal (after the
testimony of our ^^pentance) to reprove (...) sins, for so it should be^ ^^^
to the Proverb, M^^lus mulum scabit: but that our zeal in reproving others
should appear to be kindled at our indignation for our own sins in the
first place. Thus when others shall perceive, that our zealous reproves are
bent against their sins, not their persons, (which they shall the more easily
discern, when it comes from a hatred of sin in ourselves,) it will so much
the more affect them, not only with a love toward our persons, but a hatred
toward their own sins. The second fruit is, that howsoever the Patient
shall be incountred with unkind affronts, frowns, or frumps, now and then; yet
his indignation and zeal a^^inst himself, if it cannot mitigate others
sharpness toward him; yet shall it be such an armor of proof unto him,
being tempered with faith, humility, meekness, and patience, as all Satan's
fiery darts shall not be able to pierce it, at leastwise, not mortally to wound
him. And in a word, so many outward discouragements as either he has, or yet
shall meet withal in the world for his offense past, they shall from
henceforth be but as so many * thorne-hedges round about him, ready to prick
and wound him, when any temptation would divert or draw him to the least
transgression.

FINIS.

