A Chain of Graces: DRAWN OVT at length for reformation of MANNERS. OR, A
brief Treatise OF Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly-kindnesse, Charity.
So far forth as they are urged by the Apostle in 2 PET. 1. verse 5, 6, 7. By
C. Burges P. of WATFORD.

For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither
be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ibid. v.
8. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for SAMVEL MAN at the Swan in Paul's Churchyard.
1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD Lord Russell Earl of BEDFORD, and to his most
Noble and religious Consort, the Lady LVCY Countess of BEDFORD.
Right Honorable,
IF the Dedication of Books can be any testimony of thankfulness to
Honorable Personages, to whom the Authors are most engaged, your Honors first
vouchsafing to admit me a mere stranger to the office of a Domestique
Chaplain in your Noble Family, affording me much respect, and constant
encouragement beyond desert and expectation; And your Honor, Madame, beginning
to take care of my further preferment from the very beginning of my Service;
and after a little waiting, procuring me a settled comfortable abode, and
Pastoral employment, so near your own Mansion, and under your wing, by your
gracious and effectual mediation to that Honorable Knight, and Baronet, Sir
Charles Morison, my Noble, and uncorrupted Patron, (for whose complete
prosperity, my witness is in heaven, that I daily pray upon my bended knees:)
lastly, obtaining, out of your honorable disposition, that further accession
of credit, and countenance to my Ministry, which now I hold; will easily
decide the question, to whom these First fruits of mine do chiefly appertain.
I therefore humbly present the same, as a small expression of that thanksgiving
which I gladly would, but cannot sufficiently render unto you, most Honorable
Founders (under God) of all that good I do possess.

I know well that things of this nature do rather increase, then pay the debts
of men ranged in so great a distance below your sphere: yet withal I find the
greatest Oceans willing to embrace the smallest streams that run unto them,
tendering their homage, and acknowledgement from whence they sprang.

And though it be most equal that such as publish any thing unfit, should
bear the whole burden of the shame, and loss upon their own backs, who ever
be their Patrons; yet it is an honor to such as need no Patrons to help them
out of brakes, to have their writings graced by Noble Persons of eminent
respect for learning, judgment and Religion, and to use their Names in such a
public act, whereby the world may know they be not destitute of friends that
will uphold them in any Work well done.

This Treatise was chiefly intended for the benefit of mine own Charge; but
now, by consequent, I have put my self upon the censure of various
dispositions, and do expect the common Lot of all Writers. My only care is, to
give content to such as read to profit. If any piece hereof shall, by Gods
blessing, add the least mite to your rich stock of Graces, or to any
well-affected, which is my highest ambition, I have enough.

But remembering that now I present your Honors with a Book, I must not make a
book of an Epistle. What further addition of thankfulness for your continued
favors, my prayers, observance, labors in any kind, my life it self, may
make, shall not be wanting, but gladly for ever tendered from, and by

Your Honors most firmly bounden in the strongest bonds, to be commanded, C.
BVRGES.

To the Judicious and well-affected READERS.
I Preface unto you (because it is the fashion) not to make excuses, or show
causes for the publication of this little Tract, but only to give account of
the reasons that induced me to some things in this Book; at which, perhaps,
some Readers may a little stumble.

1. The frequent quotations of Fathers Quid? quod prodest in horum (Patrum
scilicet) consideratione crebro versari, ne nos a consensu doctrinae and
ecelesiae dimoueri patiamur. Gualt. in Zach. hom. 1.
and others, in so small a Volume, may seem, to some, ambitious: But I rather
choose to fall under the censure of Peacocke Singularitans, who can but guess
uncertainly at what they would, but cannot justify concerning my intentions;
then be justly taxed of theft, by the truly learned, (who can discern where I
have been gleaning) for not acknowledging by whom I profit. Benignum est, and
plenum ingenui pudoris, fateri per quos profeceris: reprehensione dignum esset,
maiorum tacere nomina and eorum appropriare ingenia Plin. ad Vespatian.
.

2. The liberty I take in translating mine Authors, may seem to smell of
inabilitie to render them exactly: But because it is for Schoole-boyes to
construe every word by Dictionaries, and Rules of Grammar; and for Schoolmen
(absit invidia dicto) to interpret the sense of Authors; and because every
language has a proper elegancie of it own, which cannot be translated
verbatim into any other, and he should be ridiculous that would go about it;
therefore I have undertaken rather an Interpretation, than a Translation of
those I cite. Habet enim omnis lingua sua quaedam propria genera locutionum,
quae cum in aliam linguam transferuntur, videntur absurda August. de vera
Relig. cap. 50.
.

3. The placing of the Citations in the body of the Book, rather then in the
margent, may be thought a great distraction to the common Readers: But the
distraction would be greater on the other side, to those that are more learned,
by stopping of their reading with toylesome inquisition to pursue the
Citations, as with Hue and Cry, into the margent. Now, they are inserted in
such a manner, as need trouble none, if they consider the Characters are only
altered so far as the Latin sentence runs, at the end whereof they may set
in again as easily, as if they were to pass from one Paragraph or Section to
another.

4. Lastly, whereas I have (in imitation of that renowned Chrysostom) laid on
downright blows upon the sins I have been led against, and done my best
to disgrace those hellish monsters; I must entreat the equal Readers to
consider the difference between Allusions, and Comparisons strictly taken; and
that I have not used sharper speeches then the sacred word (our rule) has
done, which terms heinous sinners, Beasts, Swine, Dogs, Vipers, Caterpillars,
Locusts, Wolves, Tigers, Bears, children of the devil, etc. and therefore I
cannot be justly censured for railing, since I have the Scriptures for my
pattern.

These are the special offendicles that I thought meet to lift out of the way,
for preventing the prejudice of such as are unwilling (without just, and urgent
cause) to be preiudicate: and as for others that will needs be skipping among
these blocks, when they may go by them, let them knock their sheenes, and
welcome. I might now spin out a long encomiastick thread; and spend much time
to show that this little model, is the very white, the Apostle leuels at; the
Quintessence, the Center which all the lines of this Epistle tend unto: or, on
the other side, make large declamations against the sins of the Times, and by
all these press you to the viewing (at least) of this Golden Chain, which
being stretched out, will easily appear to be a glorious ornament, and badge of
honor, deserving the ambition of the greatest Peers. But then, what need the
Book it self? Great mock-begger gates to little houses, are but ridiculous.
Fishing before the net, bewrayes a Goteham brain. A large Epistle before so
small a Tract, would argue either a base begging of entertainment; a promise of
more then can be performed; a tedious inabilitie of knowing what not to say; or
else too strong conceit of the man's own good style, not to be expected from
me, who must strive rather to print matter then words; because no Printing
business does, or may excuse me from my weekly preaching.

If any thing herein prove profitable to such as read it, I ask no gift but
prayers for my pains, that I may in this, or any other kind further be
improued for advancement of our Grand Masters honor, and raising up of
spiritual seed unto him.

A Table of the principal things contained in this Treatise.
A
ABstinence what it is. page 91, 92 Alimentarie objects of Temperance. 91
B
Brotherly- kindness what it is. 177 The parts of it. 180. The ground of it.
182. The reproof and censure of such as fail in it. 191. Such as scoff at
the Brethren come nearest to the sin against the Holy Ghost. 192. The
reproof of false fellowship. 197. Exhortation to brotherly-kindnesse, and to
show it forth, as to all in general, so particularly to the persecuted French
Christians refuged hither for relief. 199. Means and helps to stir us up
unto it. 207
C
Charity what it is. 215. The extent of it. 216. The parts of it. 218. Reasons
to enforce us to be charitable as in general toward all, 222. so in
particular toward enemies, 225. Eight Questions about Charity toward
enemies, resolved. 227, etc. Reprehension to the uncharitable: viz. First, to
such as love none. 247. Secondly, to such as think it unreasonable to love
enemies. 249. Thirdly, to such as think no man loves them that rebukes or
punishes, for reformation. 252. Exhortation to the duty, with sundry pressing
motives thereunto. 255 Caelestine a Pope, his judgment of Gods grace, man's
will, and our merits. 20 Chastity. 92 Christianity requires the greatest
industry. 22 Clemency. 93 Continency. 92, 93
D
Diligence on our parts what it is, 15. 16, etc. and 24 Division of this
Epistle. 2 Division of the Text here handled. 12, 13 Divinity aims chiefly at
the will. 5 Doctrine and Exhortation how to be mixed. ibid.
E
Enemies who they be. 229. In what respects they must taste of our charity.
ibid. Exhortation a principal part of the Ministry. 4. A sharp reproof of
the despisers of it. 6, 7. The benefit of it. 11, 12 Eutrapelia. 95
F
Faith is the mother grace and root of all the rest. 25. How it is before other
graces, 25, 26. The necessity of it. 28, 29 Flattery, how base. 10. and how
basely rewarded. 11
G
Gentlemen, why sooner seduced to Popery, then meaner men. 8 All Graces, the
object of a Christians diligence. 29 Grounds for exposition of the Text here
treated of. 34, 35. And the marshalling of the several Virtues according to
those grounds. 36, 37 Godliness, how many ways taken. 159 How it is to be
taken here. 163. The reproof of such as despise it. 167. Exhortation to it.
168. Means to attain it. 174
H
Haeretiques, how different ends they make, from true Martyrs. 172 Honesty. 90
Humility. 94
I
Ignorance, how miserable it makes men. page 70, etc. Impatience described and
censured. 138 139 Impiety how dangerous. 176 Intemperance, and intemperate
persons. 100, 101, etc.
K
Knowledge, the diverse sorts of it. 57, etc. The difference between Simple and
Compound Knowledge. 59. Speculatiue, Practical, and Experimental Knowledge,
60, 61. What Knowledge is here urged. 65, etc. The reason of it. 67. The
misery of Popish Idiots. 70. Allegations out of Aquinas, Bellarmine, and
Durand, to prove the necessity of a distinct Knowledge. 71, 72, 73.
Dehortation from the Papal yoke. 79. Exhortation to grow in Knowledge. 80.
Means unto it. 81. etc.
L
Lorinus confuted touching the concurrence of man's free will. 19 Love, what it
is in the general description of it. 214
M
Mansuetude or Mildness. 93 Modesty. ibid.
P
Patience, how many ways taken. 114. etc. How it is taken here, and the
description of it. 119. The grounds of it. 127. etc. A sharp reproof of the
want of it. 135, 136. etc. Dehortation from impatience. 139. Two needful
questions resolved. 1 How men may be rid of impatience, and become patient.
142. 2 How far our patience must extend it self. with rules about it. 142
Parsimony. 95 Piety, how taken by Schoolmen, and humane Authors. 159
Pudicitia. 92 Preaching, a tax of such as find fault with the plenty of it. 76
Prudence. 61 Puritans. 6
S
Solifidians, who they be. 51 Studiosity. 94
T
Temperance, how many ways taken. 86. etc. The force of the Original word.
88. The sorts and parts of Temperance. Integrall. 90. Subiectiue. 91.
Potentiall. 93. How temperance is taken here, and our duty about it. 96. The
ground of it. 98. Reprehension of intemperate persons. 100. etc. Jnstruction
how to be truly temperate. 106. Incitation and helps unto it. 107
V
Virtue, the force and etymology of the word. 38 etc. The several sorts and
kinds of virtue. 41. Virtue and grace, how all one. 42. The difference between
Theological, Jntellectuall, and Moral virtues. 43. etc. How Virtue is taken
here. 45, 46. Virtue is necessary unto a Christian, as well as faith. 47. In
what sense Virtue is necessary. 48. etc. A Popish scandal of our Church,
touching works, taken away. 51. Exhortation unto Virtue. 52. Means to attain
it. 53. etc.
W
Wisdom. 62
Faults escaped.
Page 14. for this read these. p. 17. in the margin, for Phil. 1.12. read Phil.
2.12. p. 43. in the margin, for Psa. 48.7. read Psalm 84.7. p. 67. for (...),
read (...). p. 94. for business read business. p. 118. for (...) read (...)
in p. 180. for unspeakable, read unspeakably. in p. 205. for embrace read
embraced. p. 249. for possible read possibly.

Besides these words mistaken, there is sometimes a comma, for a period, and
colons misplaced. I hope the able friendly Readers will amend, or pardon such
small, and easy errors.

A CHAIN OF GRACES, drawn out at length for reformation of MANNERS.
2. PET. 1.5, 6, 7. 5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your
faith, virtue; and to virtue knowledge;

6. And to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,
godliness;

7. And to godliness, brotherly-kindnesse; and to brotherly-kindnesse,
charity.


CHAP. I.
THE form of this Epistle seems like to Pharaohs Butlers Vine Genesis 40.9, 10.
, which, though it bare many buds and blossoms, and plentiful clusters of
ripe rich grapes; yet was divided but into three maine branches. So this,
though fully fraught with admirable variety of excellent matter cunningly
wreathed together, yet according to the usual frame, consists but of three
principal parts: An Introduction, a Narration, and a Conclusion.

These words begin the second part hereof, commonly called the Narration, and
this stands on two legs: 1. Exhortation, c. 1. 2. Caution.


Which the Apostle puts in 1. Against Seducers, cap. 2. 2. Against Epicures and
godless livers, c. 3.


I am not ignorant that the two last chapters contain a prediction of that
great plague to come upon the Church by means of false Teachers, and Atheists:
yet withal I know the maine scope of the Apostle not to be Prophecy; but by
Prophecy to forewarne and arm the Church against those two sorts of devouring
beasts. The Prophecy therefore being but the ground of Caution, the Caution
deserves to bear the name of the second branch of the Narration.

The Exhortation (as I conceive) is graduall, the first degree whereof would
lift us up to godly conversation. The second mounteth higher, and feign would
draw us to get assurance of our effectual vocation, and election: Ver. 10.
both which are first set down, and then set on: first proposed, and then
pressed by sundry weighty arguments, which this grand master of the assembly
uses as a hammer to fasten his nails withal.

The former step of this his exhortation is laid down in these 5. 6. and 7.
verses: and this is that which only I intend at this time to ascend. And here
before I can get up upon it, I must stand and view the ground on which it is
built; because there is somewhat, worthy observation, in the Apostles method.

After he had drawn out, as in a small Map, the large Continent of Religion,
especially so much thereof as contains the rich revenue of a Christian, by way
of Doctrine, in the four first verses: now his method leads him to
Exhortation; teaching us hereby, Observation in general.
that Exhortation is a principal part of the Ministry. A thing so commonly
and constantly observed by the Apostles in every chapter of their Epistles, and
so instantly pressed on other Ministers 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 4.2. Tit. 2.5.
, that instances need not in so plain a point. Doctrine must first fill up the
lamp with oil, and then must exhortation added, put fire unto it.

The reason is, because Divinity, howeuer first it deals with the
Understanding, yet chiefly and principally it wooes the Will Pro. 23.26 Prou.
4.23. Deuteronomy. 5.24.
. It teaches truth, and presses goodness. Truth must go before, and lay a
ground for goodness. Doctrine must first inform the Understanding, that the
Understanding may inform the Will. But goodness is the end of truth;
Exhortation therefore follows Doctrine to incline the Will. Upon which
foundation a great Schooleman builds this definition of Divinity, Theologia
est scientia affectiua etc. principaliter vt ipsa boni fiamus Bonauent. in
Proaem. in Sent. quaest 3. conclus.
. Theology is an affectiue knowledge etc. principally intending to make us
good.

This gives a check to the purer wits, refined fantastiques, times, who feign
would take upon them to know more then Apollo, and to laugh this part of
Preaching quite out of countenance, as too plain a strain that grates their
tender ears; and therefore in derision use to say of such as use it, They are
good honest men, and give good exhortations, that serve plain country people
passing well. But etc. I hope you understand their meaning. Such coarse morsels
will not down with them; their fine palates call for choicer food. Every one
of them being no less, I hope, then a quick-sighted Aristarchus, from whose
censure Homer himself must not be free.

But tell me, Gallant, are you grown so learned as you would be taken? so
perfect, as if exhortation were a thing superfluous? What? become a downright
For such only were termed Catharoi in the Primitive Church, who held themselves
perfect. And this does best agree to the scoffers of these days, who think
themselves as good as need to be; and that it were a needless and idle thing
for them to follow Sermons, read, pray, avoid swearing, etc. it can no way
agree to honest godly sober men, who still acknowledge their wants, and go on
in their endeavors; and do not think of themselus, as if they had already
attained, or were already perfect. Phil. 3.12.
Puritan? so good, as needs no mending? Some I know there be that ramble after
knowledge as drunkards after liquor, not so much to nourish, as to please their
drunken appetite. For although every man can be content to deceive, yet no man
is willing to be deceived himself. Therefore some search for truth, who have no
mind at all to goodness. But quaerentes veru^, sed non bonum, ideo non
inveniunt summum bonum: Seeking truth, but not good, therefore they never light
upon the chiefest good; as Hugo Hugo de S. Vict. miscell. lib. 1. tit 73.
wittily. But the Gallant has no cause to fear that we suspect him to be such
a Gnostick: if we could come so near to feel his pulse; or his proud heart
would stoop to Catechism, we might soon discern that he of all others has
least cause to scorn the spoone, being such as has need of milk, and not of
strong meat Heb. 5.12.
. His birth and breeding tells him ordinary knowledge should not serve his
turn, but loath he is to be at pains to get it, and yet unwilling to be held a
Brute, or Vulgar; and therefore sets a good face upon it howsoever. And that men
may take him to be some body, he takes upon him to correct his Teachers; not
unlike to them who undertake the censure of Magnificat; or like some wiseling,
that should adventure to call his father, fool, to prove himself (si placet
Deo) the wiser man. Whereby, in truth, he shows, that yet he is to learn his
A. B. C. That scholar that once has learned any thing of his master, will
rather brag of him, then disgrace his teaching.

If any should demand a reason, why so many Gentlemen are seduced to Popery
sooner then meaner men, the answer would be easy. Their disdaining to be built
up the ordinary way, and to be conscionable hearers of such mean (but yet
best) preaching, as is fully laden with exhortation unto goodness, is the
chief occasion of their apostasy. They resolve, never to be catechized: they
must be held sufficient from their very cradle. Their curious ears will not be
beaten with plain song, although they understand no stroke of any curious
strain. And then, no marvel, if every dunsticall catchpole Priest, and
claw-backe fishing Jesuit do overcome them, if once they can but wind into
slender acquaintance with them: according as S. Paul has more then once
foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
Thus man that is in honor and understands not, is like the beasts that
perish Psa. 49.20.
.

This also puts in a timely caveat against that clawing strain, this divine
method, and to disgrace this kind of teaching. It is rather for a Parasite
upon the Stage then a Divine in the Pulpit to flatter thus. I need not to
apply. I know your wisdom and discretion. I leave it to your godly care to
make the application. I need not to exhort etc. when many times he knows too
well his hearers are too far from such a care. They only like some dainty,
fine, smart, short, light, smooth, easy ierkes of wit that may make them
sport, they love to see the man witty; so he know Master; as some that delight
to play with a Monkey, until she fall to scratch or bite them. But let no
faithful Minister of God seek to humor them herein, this is that indeed,
which they would have; but when they have it, they will despise thee on the
open stage. And thus the Gallant will not blush to say, -- my flatterers
Shall be the pure and grauest of Divines,
That I can get for money The Alchymist. Act. 2. Scen. 2.
.
And thus does God cast dirt in the very faces of such flatterers, even by
those very men they flatter, although that flattery be welcome to them. Trust
none of them all therefore with Application: bring hammers Ier. 23.29.
with thy nails, and drive them in unto the very head; yea goad them to the
quick Eccl. 12.12
; be instant in Exhortation, as well as Doctrine 2 Timothy 4.2.
or else thou do but half thy work, and for thy negligence deserve a curse
Ier. 48.10. Ezekiel. 13.9, 10.
.

Lastly, suffer the word of exhortation Heb. 13.22
. When our stomachs are down we are glad of sharp sauces to provoke appetite.
When our knife is dull, we use a whetstone to make it keen, yea sometimes the
Grindstone too, to make the sharper edge. Shall we not then think exhortation
needful to stir us up to goodness? who finds not too much dullness in his
best affections? too much coldness in his most fervent devotions? Oh therefore
be glad of exhortation to rouse our drowsiespirits; to put them on unto some
duties we yet neglect; or to double our diligence in those we have begun; or
give us comfort in those we do perform. It is a great chearing to a godly
soul to hear a duty pressed that he is faithful in. Exhortation is only
irksome unto such as have no heart to goodness.

Thus much of the Apostles Method. Now let us enter upon his present
Exhortation, in which consider,

1. entrance to it, And besides this.

2. The exhortation it self, wherein is set forth,

1. The Act, or duty exhorted to; (...), add.

2. The Object of it, which is double, viz.

1. Cui, that to which this addition must be made. And this is faith.

2. Quod, that which must be added to their faith. And these be the seven
graces of Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, etc. in the text expressed.

3. The manner of performance of this duty, giving all diligence, etc. This is
the natural resolution of these verses. But yet for plainness sake I will
follow the order of words in the handling of them.

And besides this, (...), pro (...), Exposit. And besides this.
as Beza thinks. The simple sense is this: Besides all that which God has
done for you, in giving you precious faith; all things pertaining to life and
godliness; calling you to glory and virtue; endowing you with exceeding great
and precious promises that by this ye might be made partakers of the divine
nature, etc. you must now on your parts do this which follows, viz.

Giving all diligence, Giving all diligence.
that is, not slothfully, and coldly, but earnestly and painfully, doing the
utmost of your endeavor always.

Add to your faith, Add to your faith.
that is, join, administer, supply, daily increase unto that precious faith
which through the incomprehensible goodness of God you have obtained, all
those precious fruits and graces following, both as a testimony of your living
faith, and as the way unto eternal life, the end of faith.

The observations that from hence arise are these:

1. We must not rest content in what God on his part has done for us, but add
thereto our own diligence for the attaining of eternal life. This point is
clear from this present text, wherein the Apostle exhorts, and presses to
diligence on our parts, to the utmost of our strength. Qui fecit te sine te,
non te iustificat sine te: He that made thee without thy self, does not
justify thee without thy self, says Austin Aug. de verb. Apostoli. ser. 15.
: because when he made him he found him nothing; but when he comes to apply
and impute righteousness to justification, he finds him a reasonable creature,
into which he infuseth grace, and enableth him to be willing, and to embrace
by faith, that justification which is offered to him. Which gives no hold to
any Pelagian spirit, to fasten the Tenent of man's will concurring of it self;
for he elsewhere disclaimes this utterly; saying that God ex nolentibus
volentes facit Contr. 2. Ep. Pelag lib. 1. cap. 20.
, of unwilling makes us willing. And again, volu^tas humana non liberate
co^sequitur gratia^, sed gratia potius libertatem De Correp. and gra. ca. 8.
: Man's will does not by liberty obtain grace; but by grace, liberty. And in
another place: Let Pelagians know and acknowledge, that GOD works not in the
hearts of men by the force of the law and doctrine, outwardly sounding in the
ear, but by an inward, secret, wonderful, and ineffable power, not only
veras reuelationes, sed etiam bonas voluntates Lib. de gra. Christi. ca. 24.
; true revelations, but good wills also. And so he expressly teaches in the
place first cited: Totum ex Deo, non tamen quasi dormientes, non quasi vt non
conemur, non quasi vt non velimus Jb. de verb. Apost. ser. 15.
. The whole is of God, yet he would not have us be as sleepers, or as if we
ought not to endeavor, or should not need to set our wills on work. So that
when God has by his grace made us willing, he requires our willingness and
diligence, (besides what he has done) to lay hold on that which he has
prepared for us. When we set meat before a hungry man, he will not look we
should thrust it down his throat, and he not take the pains to feed himself.
Nature teaches the sucking child to draw the breast when it is put unto his
mouth. So grace does teach a Christian not to be idle, but to endeavor
according to the strength he has received, to take possession of the gifts of
God. Though God does finish up the work it self, without man's help; yet God
requires that Will which in the first conversion was merely passive,
afterward to be active, and to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling Phil. 1.12.
. Because non sicut in lapidibus insensatis, aut in ijs, in quorum natura
rationem aut voluntatem non condidit Deus, salutem nostram operatur Aug. cont.
Pelag. de peccat. meris. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 5.
: He works not our salvation as if he wrought in senseless stones, or in
creatures in whom he has not created reason and will.

Briefly then, he requires our labor; not the strength of nature, but the
exercise of grace: not the natural power of our own will, freely concurring
with his work of grace; but the supernatural power of our will renewed, and
enabled to lay hold of eternal life: and so we work, to get what Christ has
merited; not to merit, by what we work. If any shall object; Then God does
all, and we do nothing: for if it be thus, we are wrought upon, and do not
work our selves: Austin supplies me with an answer; Immo agis, and ageris, and
tu^ been agis cum a bono ageris Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 13.
. Thou both workest, and art wrought upon, and then thou workest well, when
thou art wrought upon by him that's good.

Lorinus then did foully ouerreach, when from this text, and Austin he would
seem to prove a necessity of man's will concurring with Gods grace, according
to their Popish Tenent ex condigno in part deserving what it strives unto. For
though God gives man will, and enables him to take possession of what he
provides, yet this argues not a power, or worth in man to be copes-mate with
God in the procuring of salvation, no more then a beggar by holding out his
hand to receive an alms, does by the stretching forth of his hand merit the
alms he does receive. Nay we do less: for God gives hands and strength and
all unto us Phil. 2.13.
, and only requires us to use the hands and strength he has bestowed upon
us, to take possession of what in grace and favor he proposes to us. I will
shut up this with that of an arrant Pope Coelestin. 1. in Epist. 1. ad Galliae
episcop. cap. 12. vt citatur a Petro Crab. Surio and Binio tom. 1. Council. ex
lib. Pontisicali. nec non a Bellarm. lib. 6. de great. and lib. arb ca. 11.
quasi Coelestinus hoc dixit de liberate voluntatis naturalis; sed impudenter
terquet sententiam Papae suaeiste Jesuitia.
: Non dubitemus ab ipsius gratia omnia hominis merita praeueniri, per quem fit
vt aliquid boni and velle incipiamus and facere. Quo vtique auxilio and munere
Dei, non aufertur liberum arbitrium, sed liberatur, vt de tenebroso lucidum, de
prauo rectum, de imprudente sit prouidum. Tanta enim erga omnes homines est
bonitas Dei, vt nostra velit esse merita, quae sunt ipsius dona, and pro his
quaelargitus est, aeterna praemiae sit donaturus. Agit quippe in nobis, vt quod
vult and velimus, and agamus, nec otiosa in nobis esse patitur, quae exercenda,
non negligenda donauit, vt and nos cooperatores simus gratiae Dei. We doubt
not, says he, that all man's merits come from the grace of God, by whom it
comes to pass, that we begin to will, and to do any good thing. By which
help and gift of God, man's free will is not taken away, but his will made
free, that of dark it might become light; of crooked, strait; of foolish,
wise. For so great is Gods goodness toward all men, that he accounts those
our merits, which are his gifts: bestows eternal rewards for those things
which he of his bounty helps us to: he works in us so, that what he wills,
we will and work: nor does he suffer (his grace, or our will thus wrought
upon; for we may understand it of either; the Author expresses neither) to be
idle, which he gave to be exercised, not negligently vnimployed, that we might
be coworkers with the grace of God.

2. From the manner, the Apostle mentions, giving all diligence; observe,
Christianity requires the greatest industry Heb. 12.15 Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10.
. It is a state of happiness, but not of idleness. Ease is no argument of
bliss, for then Rogues, and beggars, and their nearest cousins, our
Potcompanions, should be the happiest men. We cannot rake a little pelf
together, but with much and tedious toil, and brows bedewd with sweat; much
less will heaven be attained without our greatest diligence Matthew. 11.12.
. Excellency does argue rareness, and doubles the difficulty in getting of it.
Labor processus virtutis, labor is virtues progress, says S. Ambrose Ambros.
in Psalm. 119.
. No labor, no virtue: great labors stand in the way to great rewards Not the
slothful, careless, or delicate, but the violent take the kingdom of heaven
by force: non qui alijs, sed voluntatibus suis praeclaram inferunt violentiam:
not such as do violence to others, but such as offer an excellent kind of
violence to their own wills, as Bernard speaks Bern. in octo punct. punct. 6.
.

Both these points condemn the desperate carelessness of such as throw off all
care of salvation unto God himself, elected, they cannot go to hell. These
men consider not what diligence the Lord requires: or else they think he is
in jest; or so good, that now it matters not how bad they be. But this may give
them cause to fear they have no portion in what he has provided for his
children; since, that grace which brings salvation, teaches men to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world Tit. 2.11, 12.
. To these I say no more but that of the Apostle, Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap Gal. 6.7.
.

Hence may we learn what we must do in working out our own salvation, viz.
Neither be idle, nor work to merit: but only do our utmost endeavor in
getting all Christian graces, both in obedience unto God who does command this
service, and for the fitting of our selves for what he means to advance us to
Dignum valde est, and omnino exigit ratio aequitatis, vt quibus a constitutione
mundi regnum paratur, spsi etiam sese regno parare non negligant, ne parato
regno inueniantur forsitan qui regnaturi fuerant, imparati. Bern. sermon. sup.
Job. 5.
.

And lastly, add, and covet after more as greedily as worldlings thirst for
gold 1 Cor. 31.
, and drunkards for their wine Ephesians. 5.18.
. Thereof may we crave not cups but flagons full Cant. 2.5.
. Let Hercules erect his pillar where he will, a Christians Nil vltra is set as
far as heaven, and he that stays before, drops into Hell.

3. Observe. Faith is the mother grace and root of all the rest: therefore he
says, add to your faith, virtue; because we must have faith before we can
have virtue pleasing unto God Heb. 11.6.
. Every virtue is the foundation of it own works. But faith is the root of
every virtue, and gives a soul to every virtuous action. Other virtues are as
the maine arms of trees, that bear a many lesser branches on them, but faith
does bear and feed those arms, and all. Faith is the Spouses wedding Ring,
the first part of all her husbands goods, that after he has married her, he
endowes her with, and by virtue of the same does give her interest in all he
does possess.

It is before other graces not in time, because in respect of infusion all
graces are infused together, but vsu, in respect of exercise and orderly
dependence on each other, as Hales Alex. de Alens par. 4. q. 12. m. 3. ar. 2.
distinguishes. Or it is first, causalitate, in respect of causalitie, not
principal and primarie, but secondarie and immediate, as the liver may be said
to feed the veins. All graces may be said to be together in time, as fire and
the light of it do both appear in time together; but yet there is in order of
nature between themselves a prioritie: for so fire is before the light,
because the light is caused by the fire. And so faith is before other graces,
because all graces flow from it, and depend upon it, and may be said to be
added to it, as the water of a fountain, that mounting up on high, descends
back into the Cesterne from whence it came.

Where then shall Bellarmines good works, moral, but spiritual too, (before
grace be given at all Bellar de gra. and lib. arbit. lib. 6. c. 15.
) have any place, since faith is the first thing, and leads in all the rest,
that God accepts in the sons of men? Austin well says of him that seems
to be most virtuous, and yet wants faith, that he is like a man galloping
upon the speed beside his way. And thus concludes of works; Si bona videbantur
antequam crederes, currebas quide^; sed praeter viam currendo, errabas potius
quam perueniebas De fide ad Petrum.
: If thy works seemed good, before thou did believe, thou did run indeed;
but, besides thy way, thou did rather wander from, then draw to God.

But the Papists thus explain themselves: That men without faith may do good
works, quoad substantiam operis Bellar. de great. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 6.
, in respect of the substance of the work, although they have no faith: but it
is not good in respect of merit at the hand of God. This spoke they truly, for
none can merit. But the other is a gross absurdity, that they affirm a man
may without faith do a good work for the substance of it. Whereas Intentio
facit bonum opus, intentionem fides dirigit: the intention makes the work
good, and faith must govern this intention, or else no intention can make it
good, as Austin speaks Austin. in princ. expos. Epist. ad Romans
: and all the world knows how he has stygmatiz'd the best works of the most
virtuous Infidels, esteeming of them but as glorious sins.

What now remains to us but that above all Graces we first make sure of
Faith? whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Hold out, and hold fast Faith, or
all is lost. What ever we part from, let us not part with this. This is the
maine Cable that holds our Ship at anchor upon our surest ground. If this be
cut, the ship must needs to wrack 1 Timothy 1.19
. This is the chiefest treasure in our Cabinet. The heathen Seneca could say,
Nihil retinet qui fidem perdidit: he has reserved nothing, that has lost his
faith. By faith, indeed, he meant, truth; (for other faith he never knew) but
yet it is true of what we mean by faith.

CHAP. II.
TO your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; etc. Seven several vittues
are linked in one Chain, and all alike propounded as the object of this
exhortation. Whence we may observe in general: All Graces as well as any must
be the object of a Christians diligence. It is not enough to show our diligence
in one or two Graces, or in a few duties, but we must extend it unto all. Romans
12. Phil. 4.8.
Therefore the Apostle puts up all these upon one file, using the Verb (...)
but once for all, that so we may take them up all together. All virtues are so
linked one in another, that he that will have one must have all, or else let
all alone. Hence Hierome Hierom. in Epist.
, (and after him, Bernard Bern. de Passione Dom. cap. 42.
to like effect:) All virtues do so cohere together, that he that has one
has all, and he that wants one, wants all. Their meaning is: He that has one
in any perfection, has also the seeds of all the rest at least Bellarm. de
gra. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 3.
. As vices, so graces assemble themselves by troops Can. 6.13.
. So Chrysostom: Neque enim sola temperantia potest homini salutem adferre, si
caetera desint bona, neque cura pauperum, neque benignitas, nec quicquam
aliorum quae cum virtute geruntur, sed oportet vt omnia simul concurrant in
animas nostras Chrysostom. de orando Deum, lib. 1.
. Temperance alone cannot bring a man to heaven, if other good things be
lacking; neither care of the poor, nor bounty, or any other things; but it is
necessary that all graces should be found within us.

Away then from Religion all trifling Pedlers, Herod but greater condemnation
because he did not all? He that keeps the whole Law, and yet offends in one
point, is guilty of all: for he that said, do not commit adultery, said
also, do not kill: now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art
become a transgressor of the Law Iam. 2.10, 11.
. So he that bade thee get faith, bade thee add virtue to it; and so of all
the rest. Virtue without knowledge will but breed superstition. Knowledge
without temperance does make a man no better then a learned swine. Temperance
without patience is not enough: nor patience without godliness: nor godliness
without brotherlykindnesse: nor brotherly-kindnesse without charity.

Have respect therefore unto all Gods commandments, Zachary and Elizabeth
Luke 1.6.
There is no way but this, to keep us from confusion, and everlasting shame
Psa. 119.6.
. We are in a militant condition with many and mighty enemies. Shall we go out
against such a puissant Army with but a piece of armor, or only with a man or
two? Nay, take we unto us the whole armor of God, or never look to stand in
the evil day Ephesians. 6.13.
. All the graces that are to be had, are little enough to defend us against so
many enemies as do encampe against us. But yet if there were no such
necessity of them for our defense, the excellency of them should make us take
them up. If a man discern but one grace begin to peep, does he not find it
good? Reason then will tell him, that if one be good; many, be better; and all,
be best of all.

This being premised, General grounds for the exposition of these 7. graces.
I come now to the particular, graces, or virtues, or duties, call them as you
please. For they are graces in respect of their original; virtues, in respect
of their habit; duties, in respect of exercise. Diverse have diversely descanted
upon the number, and order of these seven. I will not fill my paper with other
men's allusions, much less with their delusions. What comes nearest to the
Apostles meaning, I will briefly show; due reverence observed to all other men.

First, it is confessed by all, that these graces are such as pertain to
Christian conversation in this world among men, as fruits of faith in God.

Secondly, it is granted, that the Apostle does not curiously observe the
natural order, dependence, and flux of these seven, between, among, or from
one another; but only press them as necessary additions unto, and fruits of
faith, to prove it true and fruitful.

Thirdly, it is agreed, that the Apostle does not by reckoning up these seven,
exclude the care of laboring after any other elsewhere expressed: but only
mentions a great number, to intimate unto us a care of all; for he uses a
synecdochicall figure frequent in Scripture, mentioning only some, when he
includes all Isai. 4.1. Amos 1.3.
.

Fourthly, therefore the distinction of these seven, must be made according to
the several objects about which they are conversant in the practice of them.

Fifthly, the conversation of a Christian respects more immediately things, or
persons. For all his actions are either such as concern duties to be performed
by himself alone: or such as are immediately directed to the persons of other
men. Direction and furniture for both these sorts of actions are here set down.

1. The actions which are immediately circares, about things chiefly belonging
to his own person in the exercise of faith, concern either

1. Good, to which belongs virtue to do good, and knowledge to direct him in
it.

2. Evil, and this is either

1. Evil of sin, to which he shall be enticed many ways, for avoiding
whereof he must have Temperance.

2. Evil of punishment, sometimes for doing good, if it come from men; for
other causes, as it comes from God. For his carriage herein he must have
patience to bear, and godliness to honor God in the bearing of it.

2. The actions which more immediately concern his carriage toward the persons
of men, are such as he must perform either

1. To good men, considered as members actually ingraffed into Christ,
effectually called to the same glory and virtue with him, whom he must upon
this ground extraordinarily regard: toward these he must show
Brotherly-kindnesse.

2. To all men in general, considered as partakers of the same common nature
with us, and created in the image of God as well as our selves, and capable
also of bliss, for ought we know of any particular persons in the whole race
of mankind, conuersing or living on the earth; to these belong Charity.

Thus have I according to my skill marshalled these several graces in their
proper ranks: It now remains that I proceed to the distinct handling of them
as they lie in order.

CHAP. III. Of Virtue.
THe first that comes to hand, is Virtue. Add to your faith, Virtue. Somewhat
must first be spoken of the notation of the word, and then we will descend
unto the thing it self.

1. The word in the Original is (...), which signifies to make a free choice
of some excellent thing upon mature deliberation. So that herein is included
three things.

1. The excellency of the thing made choice of: that choice only comes from
virtue, which has fastened on some thing truly excellent.

2. The free embracing of it by the will. Choice argues freedom of him that
chooses. He that must be drawn by head and ears unto any virtuous action,
although he do the work, he is no virtuous man.

3. A mature deliberation and advice before the choice. He that does by
accident, or as it were by some sudden strong temptation, fall upon some good
work, without mature deliberation of the excellency of the work; and of his
duty to set about it, and does not in conscience thereof perform it, is no
virtuous man. Good turns done in sudden fits and humors, are no virtues in
him that does them.

The Latin word is Virtus, some say, a viro; because it is the property of
humane nature to be virtuous, and he deserves not the name of a man who is not
virtuous. But it is rather derived a vivel violentia, from strength, or force,
as not only Durand Durand. in 2. sent. did. 27. quaest. 1.
(who is therefore called fool,) but also Aquinas Aquin. Q. disput. quaest. de
virtist. in com. ar. 1. in resp.
, Hales Alex. Hales. virtus quia circa difficile. par. 3. q. 59. m. 5. ar. 5.
, and others do more rightly judge. Which Etymology, how ever some dislike,
is most proper; whether we regard the practice of humane Authors, whence we
had the word, who aunciently held, that there was but one virtue, and that was
Fortitude: or the sacred Scriptures, which set out Virtue by (...) Mic. 3.8.
Pro. 20.29.
and (...) Psalm. 84.7. Some say the word (...) which signifies a measure to
measure withal, is used to signify virtue. But I cannot find it any where in
this sense.
which signify force, strength, or power. Virtue it is by which we get the
Kingdom, as the way unto it. But this, the violent must take by force, or go
without it: virtue is conversant in works of difficulty, and therefore is it
virtue, because it has force, and strength to overcome a difficulty.

2. Touching the thing it self; because the word is diversely taken, we must
first distinguish, and then describe it.

There be, I think, as many divisions and descriptions, as Authors that have
written of it. That division of the Popish Schoolmen is worst of all: they
say, that virtue is either, 1. Natural, 2: acquired by industry, or 3. infused
by the spirit of Grace Vide Greg. de Valent. in 1 2ae. Thom. disput. 5. q. 3.
punct. 1.
. The two former members of which division they may put up in their pockets, as
erroneous, and false. That only deserves the name of virtue, in the Schools of
Christianity, which is infused. They only are virtuous who have it from above
Iam. 1.17.
. Purblinde Plato by the dim candle of corrupted Nature, did discern as much,
for thus he says, Virtutem humana neque natura, neque doctrina, neque
exercitatione parari posse, sed merum Dei donum esse Plato in Menone.
. Virtue cannot be achieved by humane nature, doctrine, or exercise, but it is
the mere gift of God.

Infused Virtue is therefore that of which we are to treat: and this, some,
describe by the causes; some, by the Act; some, by the effects; and some, by
the properties. That of Austin, refined by Aquinas, is best worthy of our
approbation; Virtue is a good habit of the mind wrought by God himself in us,
without our help, by which we may live well August. de lib. Arb. li. 2. cap.
18, 19. Aquin. 1.2. q. 54. ar. 4. nec non in Quaest. disp. de virt. in communi.
ar. 2.
. In which description we have the habit, efficient cause, act, or effect, of
virtue considered in the general nature of it.

Virtue thus taken, is in respect of the efficient cause Alex. de Hal par 3.
quaest. 62. m. 1.
, all one with Grace: for all virtues are graces, because freely given.
Therefore the Scripture when it speaks of graces appertaining to the execution
of moral duties, does often retain the name of virtue; as this text, and
other places Psalm. 48.7. Phil. 4.8. 1 Pet. 2.9.
witness. The Schools have diverse distinctions of infused Virtues. Briefly,
the sum of what they say, may be reduced to this general distinction, taken
from the different ends that virtues level at.

Of Virtues, some respect the chiefest and highest end of all. And some respect
ends, subordinate, and leading to the chiefest end.

1. Those virtues that respect the highest end are such as look and tend
immediately to God himself; and these are three, faith, hope, and charity:
Faith beholds him as he is summa veritas, the chiefest truth: Hope waits upon
him, considering him as he is summa largitas, the chiefest bounty: and Charity
closes with him, as he is summa bonit as the chiefest good Brulifer. in 3.
son. did. 26. q. 3. Tho. Aquin. Comment. in 1 Timothy 1.5. lect. 1.
: Whereas all other virtues have some lower object to pitch upon, immediately:
and therefore the former three by way of excellency are taken from the rest,
and by the schoolmen dubbed with the title of Theological.

2. Other virtues respect subordinate and inferior ends, which serve as means
unto the chiefest end, and of this sort are all besides the former three.

This latter sort are sometimes again distinguished into,

1. Such as are conversant circa vorum, to search out the truth of things, and
have their seat in the understanding faculty, and therefore are called
Intellectual. Of this kind are Knowledge, Wisdom, Prudence, Art.

2. Such as are chiefly employed circa bonum, about goodness for man's
observation and practice in his manners, or conversation, having their seat
chiefly in the will, by the exercise of which virtues, a man receives the
denomination of a good man: and these are called Moral; of this sort are
Justice, Mercy, Faithfulness, Clemency, Fortitude, etc. But here must be
observed, that not only among Philosophers, but Divines also, Intellectual
virtues go under the name of Moral; especially when both concur in the same
man who exercises all the virtues he has in doing good, as Aquinas notes.

Thus far of virtue in general: now we must enquire, How virtue is taken
here.
which of all these sorts of virtues, the Apostle in this text commends to
us. There is no question, but he speaks of Moral virtue infused; because he
exhorts us to furniture for our Christian conversation in this world,
agreeable unto our precious faith. But moral virtue indefinitely proposed, is
sometimes taken pro genere generalissimo, for the whole Nature of virtue
including all particular species, or kinds of virtue whatsoever under it; 1
Pet. 2.9. Phil. 4.8.
and sometimes pro genere subalterno, for all virtues of one sort, or kind, and
in this latter sense it is taken here: for it cannot be meant of all virtues in
general, because there be diverse other particular virtues distinguished from
it, and to be added unto faith, besides that the Apostle means by this word
Virtue, in the Text. Nor can it be taken for any individual and particular
virtue, because virtue indefinitely proposed, is nomen speciei, non indiuidui,
a name that imports not any particular virtue, culd out from all others, but
all virtues of the same sort, or kind. Beda tom. 5. in Comment. super hunc loc.


So that briefly by Virtue he means both the habit and exercise of infused
moral virtue producing all good works which are any where enjoined in the
word of God, as fruits of faith, adorning that Gospel, by our godly
conversation, which we do profess.

This being the meaning of our Apostle, the point from hence is plain, viz.
Christians must diligently labor to be virtuous, and do good works, as well
as to believe. Add to your faith, virtue. Faith is the life of the soul Gal.
2.20. Hab. 2.8.
; and virtue the life of faith Iam. 2.14.17. etc.
. Faith and Virtue are the two legs of a Christian; he that wants either, is
but a hobling heldein, and we know the Hebrew Proverb, the blind and the
lame enter not into the house for ever 2 Samuel 5.7.
. You shall as soon meet a man in heaven without faith, as without virtue
producing good fruits. And because the tree of virtue is ever full of fruit,
therefore as here we are exhotted to add virtue, so in other places to the
same effect are good works pressed 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Tit. 2.7.10. etc. Tit.
3.14.
, as well as faith. But here that known distinction of witty Bernard,
wherewith he concludes a Tract, is worth inserting, Works are via regni, non
causa regnandi Bern. de gra and lib. arbit.
, the way to heaven, not the cause of reigning. When against the Papists, we
deny works in the act of justification, as the Scripture does Romans 4.2, 3.
; we do not discharge the justified man from doing of them, as fruits of
faith to prove it lively Iam. 2.24.
, and as testimonies of his thankfulness and conformity unto God and Christ,
who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works Tit. 2.14.
.

According to the sense of Scriptures, we say with the Scripture, faith
without works is dead. And that a man is not justified by faith alone, without
works, in respect of the sensible assurance of it within himself; for he must
have virtue producing good works to justify the soundness of his faith,
against all Satanicall temptations; and to distinguish it from all vain
persuasions, and counterfeit faith.

Which exposition is neither strained nor new. For so Origin expounds that
place of James; saying, a man may be said to be justified by works, quia
certum est eum qui vere credit, opus fidei and iustitiae operari Origin. in
Romans 4. lib. 4.
. Because it is certain, that he who truly believes, works the works of
faith, and righteousness. I might soon cast up a mountain of testimonies, to
this purpose, if this little Treatise could bear them: but I spare; casting
but this one bone more to the Papists to gnaw upon, which I have taken out of
their own renowned Saint, Aquinas. Opera enim non sunt causa quod aliquis sit
iustus apud Deum, sed potius sunt executiones, and manifestationes iustitiae,
nam nullus per opera iustificatur apud Deum Aquin. in Com. super Gal. 3. lect.
4.
etc. For works, says he, are not the cause why any man is just before God,
but they are rather consequents and manifestations of our righteousness. For
no man is justified by works before God. So that when we consider virtue and
the fruits of it, as a consequent of faith in the justified man, we require
Ours also, to learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, Tit. 3.14.
that they be not unfruitful, as much as any Papist of them all.

This may take off the scandal cast upon our Doctrine touching Works, Saddle
upon the right horse; condemning the true Solifidians of our age, that boast of
faith, as good and much as may be; and will believe, with you, or any man
living; but no point good works. As for virtue, they are of Machiauils
opinion, the name is an honor, the use a cumber. Though these prate of faith,
yet they never knew it, much less enjoyed it. For faith and virtue are twins
of a birth, and ever dwell together: but these fruitless faithlings have no
room for virtue, and are so far from entertaining it, that they profess
themselves enemies to it, and all that give it any harbor: And these be they
that cause our doctrine of Justification by faith to be so much traduced by
those faithless vassals of that Man of Sin. But such we utterly disclaim,
as none of ours; they may bury their faith, and themselves too, when they will;
for their faith is dead, and stinketh long agone. A heavy doom will one day
pass upon them for want of virtue to their painted faith. There is a fearful
curse denounced on the barren fig tree Matt. 21.19.
while it stands: But that is not all; the dreadful axe of vengeance must cut
it down, and then it shall be cast into the fire of hell Matt. 3.10.
. And in the mean time, if any shame were in them, they would lay aside the
name of Christians; since the Devil himself may better take it up, then any
of them; for he believes, and trembles Iam. 2.19.
, but they do neither.

Let this prevail with all faithful men, Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; If
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things Phil. 4.8.
. Show forth the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness to his
marvelous light 1 Pet. 2.8.
.

Now that we may add virtue to our faith, we must do 5. things.

1. Directions to get virtue.
Labor to make the tree good by an effectual insition into Christ. As the
branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in the vine: No more can
we except we abide in him John 15.4.
. Till a man be truly regenerated, he is no soil for virtue to be planted in.

2. Labor to plant your selves in those places, where fruitful showers do
most often fall: the nearer the tree is planted to the waters side, the sooner
it shootes up, and brings forth fruit in season Psalm. 1.3.
. Take pleasure in the house of God, and follow his ordinances: they that
neglect the word shall never grow. But such as are planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God: They shall bring forth fruit in
old age: they shall be fat and flourishing Psalm. 92.13 14.
; provided always that as newborn babes they desire the sincere milk of the
word, that they may grow up thereby 1. Pet. 2.2.
.

3. Be a diligent Inquisitor into the nature of virtue; to know the excellency
and sweetness of it. If a thing be never so excellent, yet if the excellency
thereof be not known, who will regard it? Whereas any thing, once known to be
good, is every man's money. The excellency of gold, which all discern in it,
makes men so greedy after it; but no knowledge, no desire; no desire, no
possession. Ideo virtus non habetur, quia ignoratur, says one, therefore
virtue gets no entertainment, because she is a stranger to us.

4. Fall deeply in love with virtue. There is none that will not get the thing
they love, if it may be gotten: and love makes every labor light that we are
fore't upon, to get our love Genesis 29.20
. Yea love will turn us into the thing loved, whether we will or no. We
never get the thing we love not, but what we love we never cease to get.

5. Strive with God by prayer, that as he calls thee to virtue, so he would
work it in thee. This is the bucket of the soul that draws up all the water
we need, out of the wels of salvation. It is the key that vnlockes Gods own
treasury, and takes from thence supply for all our wants. This is of use in
getting every grace; forthough every good and perfect gift Iam. 1.17.
do come from God, who has engaged himself to give us all good things Ps.
84.11.
: yet he has made his pleasure known. For all these things will I be sought
unto, by the house of Israel, to do it for them Ezekiel. 36.37.
. Therefore if any man lack virtue, let him ask it of God, who gives unto
every man that asks, liberally, and reprocheth no man Iam. 1.5.
with his unworthiness, although he be of all men most unworthy. But spare to
speak, and spare to speed.

CHAP. IIII. Of Knowledge.
ANd to Virtue Knowledge. There is a twofold knowledge; viae, and patriae; a
knowledge of this present life, wherein he that knows most, knows but in part:
And a knowledge of our country heaven, wherein we shall know even as we are
known 1 Cor. 13.12.
.

That of this life (for of the other we are not here to treat) in respect of
the object may be distinguished into 1. Natural, which is exercised in the
inquisition of natural and worldly things. 2. Spiritual, which is conversant
about the things belonging to eternal life.

This spiritual knowledge in respect of the means by which it is attained may
again be distinguished into 1. Natural knowledge of God. Such is that which
may be gotten by conte^plating the creatures Romans 1.19.20.21.
. 2. Supernatural, or revealed knowledge: and this is that which is gotten by
Gods Word and Spirit.

This revealed knowledge is for the manner of it, either 1. Extraordinary, by
revelations, visions, dreams, or ecstasies, of which the old Testament makes
often mention. Or 2. Ordinary, by the ordinary instruction of the Word of God,
and illumination of the Spirit. And this again in respect of the time, and
dispensation of Gods word, may be termed either, 1. Legal, and this is such as
may be gotten by perusing the Law, and the Prophets. Which knowledge is
compared by S. Peter to a candle, or light that shines in a dark room 2.
Pet. 1.19
.

2. Evangelical. And this is that we get by searching of the Gospel, which is
far more clear then that of the Law, and therefore is it compared by S. Paul
to the glorious shining of the Sun shining in our hearts to give light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ 2. Cor. 4.6
.

This ordinary-reuealed-Euangelicall knowledge, is either, 1. Simple, 2.
Compound.

1. Simple knowledge is an evident apprehension of any thing that is true or
good. I know well that the Schoolmen take the terms of this distinction in
another sense: but withal I know mine own liberty to use them as I do, so
long as I give reason for what I do, of which let the equal Reader judge
And this is so called, because it is a simple and pureact of the
understanding, first, beholding, and then inquiring into, judging and proving
of it object by the rules of truth and goodness. And this is properly (...),
notitia, a word frequently used by the Penmen of the New Testament: and
always in this sense.

2. Compound knowledge is not only an evident apprehension of a thing, by an
act of the understanding, but also an approbation, and acknowledgement of the
thing apprehended by an act of the Will, and therefore I call it compound
knowledge, because to this act of knowledge, the Understanding and the Will do
both concur. And this is distinctly termed (...), agnitio.

The word in this present Text is Gnosis importing Simple knowledge; for so
this word is always used in the Scripture without exception. Of this therefore
we are now to treat. This Simple knowledge is threefold, viz. 1. Speculatiue,
2. Practical, 3. Experimental.

Speculatiue knowledge, a speculando, is a bare search into, and apprehension
of the nature, truth, or goodness of a thing, only to know it, and discourse
of it. 1 Cor. 8.1.


Practical knowledge is a search into such things as are to be done and
practiced, as well as known, and for this cause inquired after. This David was
wont to call understanding Ps. 119.34.
. This knowledge has a double act. 1. Scrutari, to search out the nature of a
thing, and means conducing, to the practice of it, if it be a duty; or to the
atchieuing of it, if it be a benefit, we thus inquire into: and this is
distinctly called knowledge, in the strictest sense. 2. The other act is
disponere, to dispose and order by judgment, and discretion, the means found
out by the first act of knowledge.

And this is called Prudence or Discretion, Prudence.
whereby a man is able to guide himself in use of those means only, which are
most convenient, and leave the rest. This is the quintessence of knowledge, and
is, or should be propior actioni, quam scientia Aquin. 2.2. q. 47. ar. 6.
, the immediate producer of every action that we may hope for any comfort in.

Experimental knowledge is that which arises from the taste, and sweetness a
man finds by trial of the means, to which he was directed by practical
knowledge Ioh. 7.17. Phil. 3.10.
. Practical knowledge is as the knowledge of the Physician, who by reading,
and judgment, knows such and such receipts to be good, against such, or such
diseases. Experimental, is as the knowledge of his Patient, who taking his
direction, finds by experience, the goodness of what his Physician did
prescribe unto him.

This knowledge is by some called Sapience, Sapientia.
or Wisdom, a sapore Bern. super Cant. ser. 85. Alex. de Hal. par. 1. quaest.
1. Durand. in 3. sen. did. 35. Bonauent. in proaem. in sent. quaest. 3. nec
non in 3. sent. did. 35. art. 1. quaest. 1. in resp.
, because of the sense and sweetness that experience brings us by such or such
a course of virtue: so that Sapience, is quasi sapida scientia, as much as
sauourie knowledge; as subtle Scotus called it Scot. in prolog. sent. Aquin.
2.2. q. 45. ar. 2.
. And this, I think, to be no absurdity. For though I know that some
distinguish Wisdom from Prudence, thus: Wisdom is conversant about the
substance, Prudence about the circumstances of all our actions. Some say, that
Wisdom is properly exercised about the highest causes, and chiefest highest
ends: but Prudence about the means conducing thereunto. This is not very
acute; because Wisdom includes Prudence in it, as a species of it. Again,
although some Schoolmen, as Lombard Pet. Lomb. sen. lib. 3. did. 35. a.
, and Aquinas do ground on Austin August. l. 14. de Trin. c. 1.
, that Wisdom is conversant about divine things, and knowledge about things
humane: Yet this is further urged then S. Austin meant it, who durst not
control that definition of the Orator, that defined Wisdom to be a knowledge
of things not only divine, but humane also Cicero in Tuscul. lib. 4.
. Nor is there any reason why he should: because the Scripture takes wisdom,
and knowledge promiscuously for experiment all knowledge, and spiritual
understanding.

After these many distinctions of knowledge here laid down, How knowledge is
taken in this place. (...).
I must now declare what knowledge is required in this present text. We showed
before that the original word imports a simple knowledge: but it cannot be
meant of that part or sort of simple knowledge, which is termed Speculatiue;
but of the other two, Practical, and Experimental knowledge. And this is
plain, because the Apostle presses them to such a knowledge, as may direct
them circa agibilia, or things requiring action, as all Interpreters confess.
But concerning the special object of this knowledge, there is some difference.
Some understand it of knowledge in divine mysteries, to build our faith upon:
some, of knowledge to build up others in grace: some, of knowledge of the whole
word of God. But under correction, I take it, that the Apostle does chiefly in
this text exhort Christians to such Knowledge, Wisdom, and Prudence as may
direct them in the due performance of every virtuous action: because he wills
them to add unto virtue, knowledge: that is, knowledge, to guide their virtue.
For Cognata virtus sapientiae est: quod sapientia ordinat, deliberat,
moderatur, virtus exequitur: Virtue and Wisdom be very near of kin; what
Wisdom ordains, deliberateth, and moderates, Virtue executes.

Having thus discovered the distinct kind of knowledge here exhorted to, the
observation hence arising may be this: A distinct knowledge of the word of God,
for an exact and complete direction in every virtuous action, is absolutely
necessary to every Christian. Every good action must be guided by the rule of
goodness: which rule must be known, or else it cannot be a rule to us.
Therefore the Scriptures do every where press knowledge Prou. 4.5. and 70.
Pro. 19.2.
, and show the want of it, to be the cause of all errors Mat. 22.29
, and destruction by them Hos. 4.6.
.

Hence Paul exhorts, to let the word of Christ dwell in us, (...), richly in
all wisdom Col. 3.16.
, that is, in all abundance, as all expound that place. So Hierome: Hinc
perspicimus non tantum sufficienter, sed etiam abundanter debere laicos
Scripturarum cognitionem habere, and se inuicem docere Hierom. in Col. 3.
. By this, says he, we see, that Laymen ought to have the knowledge of the
Scriptures, not only sufficiently, but abundantly, and to instruct one another.
To the same purpose Chrysostom upon this place, is very large, and says, that
here is required the knowledge of the word, (...), Chrysostom. ibid.
, not after a raw manner, and only in some particulars, but in great abundance;
and therefore he calls out to secular, (...).
or private persons that are husbands, and governors of families, and tells
them that this commandment is for them especially, that they should search the
Scriptures, not slightly, (...), with all diligence. So Oecumenius: The
Apostle requires the doctrine of Christ our Savior to dwell in us (...), in
great plenty; and that (...) Oecumen. in hunc loc.
, by searching of the Scriptures. Yea Aquinas himself does say as much:
Quibusdam sufficit modicum quid de verbo Dei, sed Apostolus vult quod habeamus
multum Aquin. ib. in Comment.
. To some a little pittance of the word of God suffices; but the Apostle wills
that we should have much.

Nor need we give a better reason hereof, Ad hoc quod aliquis been operatur,
non solum requiritur, quid faciat, sed etiam quo modo faciat, vt scilicet
secundum electionem rectam operetur Aquin. 1.2. q. 57. ar. 5. in corp.
: That a man may do well, it is not only required that he know what he should
set about, but also how, and in what manner he should do it; that so he may
work according to right choice. Virtue disposes us to a right end, but
Prudence must direct us in the means conducing to it: and therefore he lays
down this peremptory conclusion, Prudentia cum sit virtus dirigens hominem in
finem, praestans illi debita and conuenientis media, quam maxim est necessaria
homini ad been viuendum Ibidem in conclus.
: Since Prudence is a virtue directing man to his right end, furnishing him
with fit and convenient means unto it, it is absolutely necessary to him,
that will live well. Bernard also recites it as an error of some in his time,
that held man's reparation by grace consisted either cognitione veritatis, aut
amore virtutis: in the knowledge of the truth, or else in love of virtue. As if
the knowledge of the truth were necessary, not to all, but only to a few; and
for the rest it was enough to bear good will to Virtue. Whereas in truth,
says he, Perfecta virtus non est sine cognitione veritatis, aut veritas sine
amore virtutis Bern. super Salu. Regin. serus. 2.
: Perfect virtue cannot be without knowledge of the truth, nor truth subsist
without the love of virtue.

We have now seen proof enough, both by divine precept, expounded by
Antiquity, and reason to explain it. Now might I add a cloud of witnesses
for the practice of it: The ancient Roman Church To. 15.14.
, Timothy from his infancy 2 Timothy 3.15
, and all to whom S. Peter wrote 2 Pet. 1.12.
, do all declare the diligence we ought to use herein. Nor did they more then
need, or duty called them unto: For these, to whom this Epistle was directed,
knew all things, that in respect of duty could be pressed on them, and were
already established in the present truth: and yet we see the Apostle still
calling on them to add knowledge, and continually to grow in the grace and
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 3.18
.

How miserable then is the condition of all those wretches who are close shut
up in the Popes dark dungeon of brutish ignorance, Ninevites, not knowing the
right hand from the left Ion. 4.11.
! How fearful is their blasphemy who dare maintain, It is not needful for
the common sort to know more then the Articles of the Creed! Yet so Aquinas,
Bellarmine, and all the rour avouch, when they come to speak ex professo of
this point in hand.

Although in handling of other points, they unawares, yield a necessity of
further knowledge, as we but now have seen it dropping from Aquinas pen. Yea
Bellarmine himself (the great Goliath of this latter age) when he thinks
himself far enough off from the point in hand, and that we take no notice of
his contradictions, would then be thought no friend to ignorance, but
speciously alleges a place of Austin, to prove, that ignorance is the
wellhead of all mischief Bell. de amiss. gra. l. 6. c. 8.
: And a little after, he thus declaimes, Quid autem miserius fingi potest quam
ignoratio proprij finis, id est, very and summi boni Ibid. c. 9.
? What can be imagined more miserable then ignorance of our proper end, that
is, of the true and chiefest good which all should tend unto? Nor does he
content himself to reckon ignorance of the end, but also mediorum ad finem, id
est, earum rerum per quas ad bonam beatamque vitam perueniri potest: Ignorance
of the means unto that end, to be a deadly wound. But how shall this be cured?
Is it not by knowledge in the word? Will these tyrants see their men thus
wounded, and yet power in no oil? All their Lay People (as they term them)
are in this very case, and yet they cry out against any good Samaritan that
would take pity on them.

The Papists keep ado with that of Austin: Scientia non pollent fideles
plurimi, quamuis polleant fide plurimum August. de Trin. lib. 14. cap. 1.
: Many believers excel not in knowledge, although they much excel in faith.
Which yet is but a fig leaf in two respects: 1. Because Austin speaks not of
that knowledge now in question. 2. Because that if he did, this cloak would
prove too short, to cover their brutish doctrine of supine ignorance.

1. It is apparent to all that will examine Austin, that he speaks not of
knowledge needful to direct us in doing well; but of a special measure of
knowledge to vindicate the doctrines of truth from all falsifications of
cunning Heretics. For so his words that follow, plainly show, as Durand, a
Popish Doctor, has long agone observed Durand in Prolog. lib. sent. quaest. 1.
number. 7.
. Aliud est enim scire tantummodo quid homo credere debeat propter adipiscendam
vitam beata^, aliud est scire quo modo hoc ipsum and pijs opituletur, and
contra impios defendatur, quae proprio vocabulo, appellatur scientia: It is one
thing to know what a man ought to believe necessary for attaining of
blessedness: another thing to know further how to apply comfort to the godly,
and how the truth may be defended against heretics; which ability is
properly termed Science 1 Cor. 13.
, by S. Paul. This latter, scarce one of a thousand Job 33.23
attaines unto; it being required only in Ministers, and not exacted of the
common people Mal. 2.7.
. This tongue of the learned to know how to speak a word in season to him that
is weary Isai. 50.4.
, is not given to all. A man may have knowledge enough to understand all
positive truths faithfully explained, and yet want sufficiency to discover the
subtleties of heretics corrupting truth. Of which latter only Austin
speaks. So that here is no commendation of ignorance in the Laity, but only
a denial of so much knowledge in them, as should be in the Clergy, to
preserve the sacred doctrine of the Trinity inviolable. Therefore Durand goes
on to urge a necessity of knowledge in all that would do well, as far as
we; how ever others like not that their Catholics should taste of this
Catholicum. For thus he says: Necesse est ad hoc, quod per fidem credamus
explicit, and in particulari omnia credibilia, quod ipsa proponantur nobis and
explicentur. Et quia ipsa continentur in sacra Scriptura, quae non est nobis
naturaliter nota: ideo oportet habere notitiameius per acquisitionem studij,
vel doctrinae Durand. ib. number. 16.
: It is necessary that to the end we may by faith believe all things to be
believed, explicitly and particularly, that they should be propounded and
expounded to us. And because they are contained in the holy Scripture, which is
not naturally known unto us; therefore it is behouefull to get the knowledge
of the Scripture by study, or instruction.

It is then an impious thing for any to deny Gods people any means of
knowledge, especially the Scriptures, the key of knowledge. And little less
then blasphemy for any man to term diligence in preaching to teach the people
knowledge, Sensuality of preaching. In the days of Austin it was usual to
preach every day, as he that reads his Sermons August. to^. 9. in 1. Epist.
Johan. tract. 4, 5, 6. and 10. Memiuis sermonis diei hesterni.
, may discern. And afterward it came to be enacted in a General Council,
(...), Council. 6. gener. Constantinopol. 3. can. 19. extat Graece apud Binium.
tom. 3. Council. Latin apud Surium tom. 2. Council. neenon apud Iouerium in
sanct. Eccles. clas. 1. fol. 89.
etc. That it behoues those that are set over Churches, every day, but
especially every Lords day, to teach the people the doctrine of piety and true
religion. By which appears, that no Preaching, no knowledge was held too much
for any in those elder times.

2. What if their Idiots could believe without knowledge? Were this enough to
prove they have no need of knowledge for other things? I hope they are not
turned Lutherans, or Caluinists, and think to go to heaven by faith alone
without works (as they falsely affirm we teach men to do) Do not they press
a necessity of works, on all their people? And do not their own Rules
euince, that they who will do a good work must have an exact knowledge not
only of the substance, but of every circumstance of that good work? Does not
the Scripture join holiness and knowledge together 2 Pet. 3.18
? And does not Paul pray, that men may abound in all knowledge, and in all
judgment, to be able to discern of things that differ, that so they may be
filled with the fruits of righteousness Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
? Now, if knowledge, and so much knowledge be necessary; are not the
Scriptures necessary to be known of all that are bound to do good works?
Can any man measure, or square his work without a rule, or line? Is not
ignorance of Scripture maloru^ omnium causa, the cause of all evil, as
Chrysostom speaks Chrysostom. in Col. 3. hom. 9.
? Does not our Lord himself call the Scriptures, The key of knowledge? And
does he not tell the Sadduces in plain terms, they erred not knowing the
Scriptures Matthew. 22.29.
? And is not this the storehouse that must make the man of God perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto every good work 2 Timothy 3.17.
? Did ever any of our Divines press the knowledge of the Scriptures so far,
as Antiquity has done? Which of us have said so much, as old Chrysostom;
Oportet quidem Scripturarum and historiarum adeo exact habere cognitionem, vt
non egeremus longiori oratione ad earum doctrinam Chrysostom. hom. in Psalm. 7.
tom. 1.
. Truly it behoues us to have the knowledge of the Scriptures, yea of the very
histories of it, so exactly, that we should not need any longer preaching to
instruct us in them. The clamorous Papists would have enough to say, if we
durst say so much.

Wherefore let this make us more to abhor, cursed beast of Rome Reu. 20.4.
, who takes a pleasure in putting out the eyes of all his Vassals, and uses
them as the Philistines did the Israelites, suffering no Smith among them, and
locking up the key of knowledge from them. Let us obey no man against the
express charge of our Lord, who commands us to search the Scriptures; which
howeuer it were spoken at first, only to the Jews, yet it is extended as a
charge to all Christians until the end of the world, says S. Austin August.
de verb. Dom. ser. 45.
. If any servant require the contrary; suffer the penalty, but obey not the
precept. Si seruus iubet, and Dominus non iubet, caueamus ne audiamus August.
ibid.
.

Let it be our care still to grow in knowledge, get wisdom, and with all our
getting to get understanding Pro. 4.7.
, for it is the wisdom of a man to understand his way Pro. 14.8.
. But when we learn to know, let us know, to do; or else it had been better
never to have known 2 Pet. 2.21.
: although, not to know, be no less then damnation, and flaming fire 2 Thessalonians.
1.7, 8.
. Some there be that know, only that they might know; and this is curiosity.
Some, only to be known; and this is vanity. Some, to make a base gain of
knowledge; and this is Symonie. Some, to edify others; and this is charity.
And some, to be edified themselves; and this is humble piety. The three former
sorts gather Mannah, but it comes out again at their nostrills: only the two
other, are the better for what they gather Bern. ser. 36 in Caut. Hugo de S.
Vict. miscell. 2. lib. 4. tit. 88.
. The former are no better then the old hateful Gnostics; the latter only
deserve the name of Christians, and shall be blessed Ioh. 13.17.
. A good understanding have all they that do thereafter Psalm. 111.10.
Directions to get knowledge.
.

Now the means to get knowledge are many. I will name only three.

1. Prayer, which is the Merchants ship to fetch in all commodities: and this
is that the Saints have ever used to come by knowledge for themselves Psalm.
119.34, etc.
, and others Ephesians. 1.18, 19. Col. 1.9.
.

2. Have the key of knowledge ever in thy hand. Meditate therein day and night
Psalm. 1.2.
. Nothing made those famous Bereans more Noble, and better Gentlemen then all
their neighbors, but daily searching of the word of God Act. 17.11. Ioh. 5.39.
.

3. Get thine ear thoroughly bored and prepared when thou come to hear Psalm.
40.6.
: and be near to hear Eccl. 5.1.
. Though all knowledge be seated in the Intellect, yet it comes in thither by
the Senses. Knowledge is first in the Senses; then, in the imagination; then,
in the reason; then in the understanding faculty; and so it becomes
understanding in us Hugo Miscell. lib. 1. tit 15.
. The means of knowledge are not only the opening of things to be known, but
our applying of our selves unto them. Knowledge enters by two of the Senses,
the ears, and eyes: by the ears when we are taught by voice; by the eyes,
when we learn by reading, which also are of special use in hearing. When
knowledge is entered the outward Court of the Senses, if they affect it not, it
cannot get into the Castle of the Understanding. Therefore, above all, people
ought to watch their Senses, but especially their eyes, and ears. An open ear
and a wandering eye in hearing, will do no good: a fixed eye, and a dull ear
will prove as bad. Hence our Savior so often calls out to those that came to
hear, for a hearing ear: because if these porters stand not ready to let in
the word when it knocks, we cannot get the knowledge of Gods will. Faith
comes by hearing To. 10.17.
. He that comes to Church, and at first coming in, will force himself to pray
a little; but after a little while, suffer his eyes to wander, shall soon
find that these will steal away his ears after them: and so for turning away
his ear from hearing, his former prayer becomes abominable Pro. 29.8.
. Pray therefore earnestly for a prepared ear, and fixed eye, to attend unto
the word. The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of
them.

CHAP. V. Of Temperance.
ANd to your knowledge, Temperance. Hitherto have we seen the Apostles care to
have us furnished with such Graces as may fit us to be conversant circa bonum,
about doing of good. Now because there be many snares, and gins, and baits laid
for us by Satan every day, who labors to make us sin in every thing we have
occasion to meddle with: yea in our very meats and drinks, and lawful
recreations; and because it is not enough to have virtue to do good, and
knowledge to do it well, unless withal we set a strong guard upon our
affections, and appetites, that they break not out unto the desiring or using
either of things simply evil in themselves at all; or of things lawful,
immoderately: therefore he exhorts, Add to your Knowledge Temperance. A virtue
in so high account with very heathens, that they made it one of their four
Cardinals, which differed as much as virtue and vice, from those of Rome.

In the opening of this Virtue, I must follow my former method, 1. To
distinguish, and then, 2. describe it.

Temperance is taken sometimes in a large sense, and sometimes more strictly.

1. The several acceptations of Temperance.
It is taken sometimes in a large sense for the observing and keeping a due
order, proportion, and measure in all humane actions. Est modus in rebus, etc.
And this answers to two Hebrew words (...) which is but twice used in all the
Scripture, and in the judgment of S. Hierome, signifies the placing of a thing
in due place and order Hieron. in Esaias 5.17. pascentur agni iuxta ordinem suum.
: and (...) but once used, which imports a mixing of liquors, as of water and
wine, to temper and qualify them Can. 7.2.
: teaching us to temper the violence of our passions, with stayed reason, and
solid judgment, and so observe a due proportion in every thing Eccl. 7.16.
we do.

2. It is used sometimes strictly for an ouer-ruling and governing of the
appetite, affections and passions, in the desiring, or using desirable pleasing
things. And so again it is taken, either 1. For an utter abstaining from
things that in themselves are evil 1 Cor. 7.9. 1 Pet. 2.11.
: Or 2. for moderating the appetite and affections in use or desire of lawful
things; lest by excess we abuse them, and make them evil unto us Pro. 23.20.
For, as Bernard gravely; Etiam in bonis immoderatum aliquid non de bet esse
etc. Bona autem immoderato vsu noxia efficiantur, omnis enim nimiet as in
vitium deputatur, etc Bern. de modo been viu. ser. 63.
. Even in things that be good, there must be no immoderacy. Good things, by
immoderate use, become evil, and all excess is vice.

This temperance is set forth in Scripture by two words. 1. (...), usually
translated Sobriety Acts 26.25.
. And 2. (...), ordinarily rendered, Temperance Acts 24.26. Gal. 5.23.
. These two, in strictness of speech, are sometimes distinguished Tit. 1.8.
(...).
: yet the difference is not material, nor always observed. They differ only
in respect of the cause. For Sophrosunee signifies a moderation ex iudicio
rationis (...).
, out of the judgment of reason. (...), from (...), signifies a moderating of
the appetite by maine force, and strength. They both produce the same effect;
but the one by policy, the other by strength. And this latter is the word our
Apostle uses in this place; which word by our Translators is every where
rendered Temperance: howbeit in other Authors, it is used more to note a total
abstinence from things evil, then moderation in things not wholly to be
abstained from. But I suppose the Translators had chief reference to the
proper force of the word, which being compared with the best definitions of
Temperance, given by Divines, does well afford this exposition. For so Austin
speaking of Temperance, calls it an affection compelling and curbing the
appetite from those things which are desired in an evil manner Austin.
Temperantia est affectio coerceus and cohibens appetitum ab his quae turpiter
appetuntur. lib. 1. de great. and lib. arb. ca. 13.
. Another calls it, A Dominion of Reason over lust. A third, terms it a
fortification of the superior faculties, against the inferior sensualities
Gerson. par. 4. descrip. term. in Theol. vtil.
. All which descriptions do show a kind of power and maine force necessary
unto Temperance; and therefore the word is well rendered by our Translators.

Before I come to the doctrine, it will be necessary to set down the several
sorts, and parts of Temperance, and other particular virtues that border and
depend upon it. The Schools in speaking of it, consider, 1. the Conditions
necessarily required, without which Temperance cannot be complete; and these
they call, Integrall parts. 2. The several Species, or sorts of Temperance,
distinguished by the object; and these they call Subiectiue parts. 3. The
Particular virtues that have near affinity with, and dependence upon
Temperance, as the Suburbs upon a City; which are as less principal parts
in respect of the Principal; and these they term Potentiall parts.

The Integrall parts of it, Parts Integrales.
which are as it were the Midwife helping to bring forth Temperance unto act,
are two; honestas, and verecundia. 1. Honesty, which preserues a decorum, or
comeliness suitable to the excellency of man's nature, void of all obscenity and
filthiness. And this is Radically in the will, but declares it self
significatiue in the outward conversation Aquin. 2.2. q. 145.
. To this purpose is that of Isidor, Honestas quasi honoris status Jsidor.
Etymolog. lib. 10. ^. H.
. Honesty is as much as a state of honor, because it contains a man within
those bounds, that become his honor. Verecundia, commendable bashfulnesse, is
a fear of committing any filthy thing derogatory to man's excellency Aquin.
2.2. q. 144. art. 2.
. These two are so necessary unto Temperance, that without these, no man will
be temperate.

The Subiectiue Parts of Temperance, Parts Subiectiuae.
must be distinguished by the several sorts of Objects which Temperance is
exercised about. These may be reduced to two kinds, viz. Alimentary and
Procreatory.

1. Alimentary objects are Meats and Drinks, about which when Temperance is
exercised, it has two parts; Abstinence and Sobriety. Abstinence strictly
taken is that which moderateth our appetite in desiring of meats causing an
abstaining from all excess Ecclus. 31.16.
. Sobriety in the strictest sense is opposed to drunkenness, and moderateth
our appetites in drinking 1 These. 5.7, 8.
, sobrius quasi briam seruans, says Aquinas, a sober man is he that keeps
measure Hest. 1.8.
.

2. Procreatory objects, are carnal copulation, and all incendiaries and
incitements to it: about which Temperance being exercised, is called by three
names, viz. 1. Chastity, which is an abstaining from all unlawful desire, or
use of the act of copulation, whereby fornication between single persons, or
adultery between married persons might be committed Tit. 2.5.
. 2. Continency, which moderateth married persons, in the lawful use of the
marriage bed 1 Cor. 7.5.
. 3. Pudicitia, or a modest shame causing persons to moderate themselves in all
outward gestures and actions of complement, and familiarity, which savor of
lasciviousness, and beastly lust 1 Timothy 3.2.
. This last does not differ in the kind, but only modo, in the manner, from
chastity Aquin. 2.2 Q. 151. ar. 4.
.

The Potentiall Parts of Temperance that border on it, Parts Potentiales.
Greg. de valent. com. 3. in Aquin. disput. 9. quaest: 1. punct. 2.
are many; but chiefly, these.

1. Continency, (taken in a larger sense then before it was) which suppresseth
all exorbitant affections and passions of the soul, to keep us from all
excess.

2. Mansuetude, or mildnes, which moderateth the passions in cases of wrath,
and revenge.

3. Clemency, which mitigateth the extremity of law in the inflictions of
punishments.

4. Modesty, which orders the gate, and gestures of the body, so as they
discover not any lightness or looseness on the one hand, or too imperious
stateliness, and disdainful neglect of others, on the other side.

5. Humility, this is a grace that pulls down all inward proud thoughts and
high conceits, and tempereth our speeches, and behavior outwardly, that it may
no way declare pride, audacious perking, arrogant assuming, or ambitious
climbing: it omitteth nothing that deserves honor, so far, as wilfully to
neglect any duty, that tends unto it: if that duty come within the calling of a
man thus humble, who studies rather to be honorable then honored.

6. Studiosity, Graece (...), which moderateth our inquisitiue humor;
admitting diligence, but excluding tickling curiosity, and natural business
in things impertinent, or above our reach.

7. Eutrapelia, or vrbanity, which gives a lawful and timely liberry, but yet
observes a moderation in the use of sports, and honest recreations.

8. Parsimony, or frugality, which moderateth us in the matter of expenses for
the back or belly, or other delights about us: so as we neither lash out
beyond the compass of our ability and callings, nor yet withold more then is
meet, out of covetousness, or too much neglect of our selves becoming base or
nasty.

This is the sum of all School-learning touching Temperance. How Temperance
is to be taken in this Text.
Now it is high time to know how Temperance is taken in our present Text. And
first it is apparent that he speaks not of Temperance in the largest sense;
because, that, is no special virtue, but a common quality of all other Moral
virtues, to avoid extremes in every humane action; whereas here the Apostle
presses Temperance as a special virtue distinguished from others. Secondly,
it cannot be taken for that particular ability of moderating the passions of
grief and anger, for this belongs to Patience, which also is distinguished
from Temperance in this present place. Thirdly, therefore it must needs be
meant of Temperance strictly taken for restraining the Concupiscible faculty,
from unlawful desiring of evil things, and from immoderate desiring or using
of things lawful, which are the proper objects of those two senses, Tasting
and Touching. This being so; hence we may observe this point.

It is the duty of Christians to get so much power over their appetites, as
utterly to abstain from things unlawful, and to moderate themselves both in
desire and use of lawful things, free from all excess. 1. Care must be taken
for an utter abstinence from all things, that in themselves are evil, as
fornication, uncleanness, and all manner of evil concupisence Col. 3.5. 1
Pet. 2.11.
: yea all appearance of evil 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
. 2. We must get power over our selves in the desire and use of lawful things,
as namely of meats, and drinks Pro. 23.20, 21.
, the marriage bed 1 Cor 7.5.
, sleep Pro. 20.13.
, mirth Eccl. 3.3, 4.
, recreations, and such like: all which in their kind are lawful and good
Eccles. 5.18, 19.
, so we observe due measure and time in the using of them. The measure must be
suitable to our abilities and callings; so as we neither impair our health,
waste our estates, neglect or exceed our callings, offend the godly, or forget
God in our feasts and delights Isay 5.12. Amos 6.
. For then our eating is gluttony; our mirth, madness; Eccl. 2.2.
; our pleasures, luxury; and our liberty, libertinisme Gal. 5.
. The time must also be seasonable, to every thing there is a season Eccles.
2.1.
, the times of affliction Eccl. 7.14.
, and common calamities Amos 6.5, 6, 7.
, are not for feasting, but humiliation Ier. 6.26.
and fasting, at which times non est te^perantia in solis resecandis
superfluis, est and in admittendis necessarijs Bern. de Consid. ad Eugen. lib.
1. cap. 8.
, temperance must not only cut off superfluities, but be sparing even in
admitting of necessaries, because there is a time to mourn and weep, as well
as to laugh and sing. Good Vriah would not so much as take up his lodging in
his own house when Israel was in the field 2 Samuel 11.11.
, although he was sent for, and required by the King himself to do it.

The reason hereof is not more plain then weighty; because Temperance is the
only preservative of man's excellency and glory, by which he is differenced from
beasts. For the excellency of a man consists in reason and judgment, to know
what is good, and enough for him, and to contain himself within his proper
compass, not suffering beastly intemperance to take hold of him; which if he
do not, he makes himself a beast, and brings a reproach upon the whole nature
of mankind, in that he is able to govern his appetite no better then a
beast, which has not understanding to know what is sufficient. Therefore
Aristotle terms intemperance a childish vice Ethic 3. c. vlt.
, because no man, whose years should bring him more discretion, should be so
unmanly: by means whereof it becomes also vitium maxim exprobrabile Aquin.
2.2. q. 142. art. 4. ex Crist. in 3. Ethic. c. 10.
, a most disgraceful vice, that any man of any wisdom should account to be
the greatest reproach that can befall him, it being so contrary to his honor,
in what he knows naturally, as a bruit beast to corrupt himself o. Nature
taught mere Heathens to adore Temperance; for avoiding whereof, they used to
picture an hand, holding and offering a Bridle to the beholders, as an Emblem
of Temperance, to put them in mind of moderation in all their seasts and
meetings.

This yields a ground of just and sharp reproof of the great intemperance of
our present age, the Lord once threatened as a fearful Curse) to be their
glory Hab. 2.16.
? that wretched Heliogabalus whom Histories make odious to all Generations, is
now become the only pattern for our imitation. How men do strive to outgoe
each other in swinish luxury! All prouocations to excessive eating and
drinking, which Chrysostom once called the Tyrant of the belly, and thought
the name of devil was far too good for him that took a pleasure in it, is now
the only fashion Chrysostom. in Orati. hom. 4.
. We may now say of many of our times, that they have not so much temperance
themselves as they teach their Dogs. If they keep a kennell of Hounds, how
careful will they be to diet them and keep them empty, that they may follow
their chase the better when they come into the field to hunt. Whereas all the
while themselves like greedy Cormorants, and devouring Bears ingurgitate as if
their throats were whirle-pooles, and their panches bottomless. Never
considering that their very dogs shall one day rise up in judgment, and
condemn them for their foul intemperance.

The like complaint may be made (although in vain) against the hideous swarm
of beastly fornicators, and unclean adulterers, whose only glory is in hellish
Sodomy. What care they who knows their filthy fleshly pollutions, and
abominations, which they commit with shameless glory, in them? Yea many times
the sacred bond of Consangainity and near affinity is made a means of most
incestuous villainy; and kindred is a Cloak for many a filthy incest to go
without suspicion. How true is that of that lascivious Poet Ovid. Metamorph.
li. 9.
?

Dulcia fraterno sub nomine furta tegemus;

Est mihi libertas tecum secret loquendi,

Et damus amplexus, and iungimus osculacoram.

Quantum est quod desit?

Do these men believe that once the Lord did wash the filth of Sodom with an
ouerflowing flood of greedy ghastly fire? and that he still reserues an
everlasting monument of that his burning vengeance, for all deuillish and
luxurious beasts to look upon with trembling horror and deep astonishment?
Do they consider that euer-famous-fearefull-vniuersall deluge, that made the
carcasses of all mankind, (only eight persons excepted) to float upon the
raging waters, and sent their souls to fry in hell for ever, for that
intemperance which now men wallow in? Nay do they think of that devouring
fire that all this world must feel, to purge it from that filthiness which
they have cast upon it?

Is not the plague begun on many already? Do we not see daily spectacles of
heavy vengeance upon some, that are brought to a morsel of bread? on others,
that following drunkenness and riot, do often meet with desperate conclusions
of their filthy days? Yea many times their very sins become their bloody
executioners. And yet for all this, we may still complain, that most tables
are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is scarce any place clean
Esaias 28.8.
. All Gods judgments will do men no good. All the admonitions and
instructions we seek to load them with, will no more work them to
repentance, then persuasions and treaties of peace, the old Athenians to lay
down arms, till all their feathers were pulled off their backs; as one once
noted of them. Nothing will warn a voluptuous man; no not those dangerous and
queasie surfets, that daily threaten to send him packing to his place in hell.

But woe, and double woe to such debauched Monsters; a heavy doom shall one
day light upon them. Let them go on; since they will not stay. Let them do
all they can to prove themselves Egyptiar. Caterpillars, that labor to exhaust
whole Commonwealths of all their coin and treasure. Their day is coming
wherein they shall be smitten with great distress; and shall cry out, who
among us shall dwell with devouring fire, and who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings Esa. 33.34.
! And this must needs be so, because for such things sake comes the wrath of
God upon the children of disobedience: and upon these especially, who are
monsters of men, the shame of nature, the companions of beasts, the hatred of
God, the scumme of the world, raging waves of the sea foming out their own
shame, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

But I must leave these swine, and come to the direction that this point
affords.

Hence may we take instruction how to behave our selves in use of lawful
things. Stoics, but teach them to use Gods blessings without abuse. Use them
we may, because they are our portion in this world; but exceed we may not,
because they were given us to honor God, by our enjoying and using of them.
Temperance does not pluck up Appetite, and natural desires by the roots, it
only lops them when they grow too high. There is a lawful use of mirth and
recreations, as well as of meat and drink: only our care must be to keep to
time, and measure. And happy is the man that knows his times for all.

Lastly,

1. Be an humble and daily suitor to God by prayer for this particular Virtue;
and that he would enable us to be moderate users of his blessings Pro. 30.8, 9.
. One cause why men commit so much riot in the use of Gods creatures, is, want
of praying for the sanctified use of them.

2. Sometimes we must humble our selves by fasting, beating down our bodies,
and keeping them in subjection 1 Cor. 9. vlt.
, inuring our selves to know how to be hungry, as well as full Phil. 4.12.
. Sometimes the gluttons proverb proves too true: Two hungry meals make the
third a glutton. But this comes to pass in men that do not fast out of any
respect or conscience of this grace of temperance, but for other ends, and then
no marvel if it produce no better fruits. He ever does exceed that never curbs
himself in lawful things. He that feeds himself without fear of excess,
exceeds without sense of sin.

3. Put a strong bar upon all the senses by which lust enters. The senses
are the doors that let in those things to the appetite which makes it
immoderate in meats and drinks, and other pleasures of the body. Therefore
Solomon bids that man which is given to appetite to put his knife unto his
throat Prou. 23.2
: that is, look to his senses, that they be not too much taken up in the
delightful viewing of that abundance, and variety which is set before him; so
as to provoke him to any excess. So likewise in the matter of lusting. A
Covenant must be made with the eye Job 31.1.
; for adultery creepes in by the eye into the heart, before it be committed by
the body Mat. 5.28.
. Those persons that care not how they let their eyes wander, shall certainly
find their hearts polluted very often with impure lusts. It was a grave speech
of wise Pericles, to his friend Sophocles, when Sophocles called him to behold
a beautiful person passing by, he in stead of doing as Sophocles bade him,
forbad what Sophocles did, with this shortnip, Praetorem Sophocle oportet non
solum manus, sed etia^ oculos abstinentes habere Plut in Pericle.
: A Governor must be as careful of his eyes, as of his hands. I deny not but
there is inward corruption enough, and too much, that prouokes to intemperance
too often: yet this should not diminish, but increase our care over our outward
senses; because the objects they look upon, are as bellows to blow up that
fire of lust which is within us.

4 Be diligent in thy Calling: Idleness is the greatest Enemy to Temperance,
for it draws a man into Company that will provoke him; and if he be alone, it
gives him liberty to meditate lewd things. The diligent man is free from
temptations abroad and at home, and has a special blessing attending his
diligence in the use and comfort of outward things. His sleep is sweet,
whether he eat much or little. Men never go to wrack till they begin to
start out of their callings. David paid dear for his ease, and men pay dear
for their idleness. This draws them into company, company into drink, drink
into Bonds, and Bonds into beggary. And this is the just judgment of God for
men's idleness, and intemperance the daughter of idleness. Cupid being ask't,
why among so many he shot at, he never spent an Arrow upon Minerua? returned
answer, that he could never find her idle. The time wherein we are idle is the
Devils Market, wherein he will be sure to open all his Pack, and it shall go
hard but he will draw us to buy some commodity; this was the cause of that
inordinate walking, taken up by some in the Church of Thessalonica: when they
would not work, then they soon became intemperate; and the Apostles course to
bring them into order again was this: We command and exhort them that are
such, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their
own bread 2 Thessalonians. 3.11.
.

These be the four rules we must observe: one or two of them will not serve,
unless we put them all in practice. He that prays, and does not sometimes
fast, does destroy with one hand what the other builds. He that thinks to get
temperance by prayer without his own endeavor, looks God should work a
miracle; like the sick man that prays for health without the use of physique.
He that does both these, and yet sets no watch upon his senses, is like him
that leaves his doors all open, and yet thinks that nothing will be stolen.
And he that watches his senses, and yet grows idle; suffers his thoughts
within, to do as great a mischief, as his senses could.

CHAP. VI. Of Patience.
ANd to your temperance, Patience. Because a Christian is not only subject to
the evil of sin and temptation, against which he must arm himself with
Temperance; but also unto the evil of affliction for doing well; therefore the
Apostle wills him to add unto temperance, Patience. This, Austin calls magnum
Dei donum August. lib. de Patten. c. 1.
: A great gift of God. Patience is of continual use to Christians. It is as
bread, or salt, which they cannot make one good meal without. For the orderly
opening and handling of this point, we must first distinguish of the word; and
afterward describe the thing it self.

The word is used sometimes (...), abusiuely, and improperly: and sometimes
(...), properly, for that which is patience indeed.

The word abusiuely used is taken in a fourefold sense: viz.

1. A sinful patience, which makes a man to bear what he ought not. Whether
it proceeds from laziness and carelessness, suffering himself by lewd
company to be drawn on into the snares of the devil, as the ass to the yoke
without resistance or dislike; which honest John Gerson termed patientiam
asininam, an Asse-like patience: or whether it come from a voluntary
resolution to bear some things which himself imposes without any command
from God. Such is the patience of Baals Priests, and their Apes the Papists,
the one in launcing, the other in whipping of themselves. This is hypocritical
Patience, which they have borrowed from some Mountebanke.

2. A Stoicall patience, which makes a man, out of an opinion that he should be
(...), void of all passion, to show himself insensible of any thing that does,
or may befall him. This is no virtue, but a sin that stocks up natural
affections by the roots; and makes a man incapable of profit by any cross.

3. A customarie Patience, whereby a man long used to bear, is insensible of
bearing. Like the bordering inhabitants of Nilus, who by long custom are not
moved at the hideous noise that the fall of that water makes, enough to
astonish any other man. Or like some Mill-horse, that by long use, is not
troubled at his drudging walk. This is not Patience, but a brawnie hardiness.

4. A natural Patience, whereby a man out of the strength of body, or
natural constitution, is able to suffer many crosses without sinking under
them. So ye shall have some men that will draw fair estates through their
throats, and lie at the barrel, week after week, till all be spent, and
run so far in debt, they cannot show their heads; yet then can be as
Iouiall as if they ailed no such thing, and desperately resolve not to be moved
at it: and if you ask them, why? they have their answer ready, Sorrow pays no
debt; never thinking of Gods hand upon them in this distress, which he
requires them to behold, and to be humbled by it. Which, if they will not; he
will proceed to bring upon them more, and greater plagues, until he has
destroyed them. This senselessness of men is far from true Patience. It is
only (...), a natural hardness; the strength of stones, and flesh of brass,
as Job Job 6.12.
, elegantly.

The word properly taken is used also in a fourefold sense.

1. It is used to signify a forbearance to execute justice on offenders when
they do deserve it, and this is properly (...), Romans 9.22.
long-suffering or forbearance.

2. It is taken for putting up an injury without revenge Romans 2.4.
. This is that (...), or containing of ones self from breaking out, though
cause be offered.

3. It is taken for a contented brooking of delays Romans 2.7.
, answerable to the Hebrew (...) which signifies a patient waiting the pleasure
and leisure of one we sue unto Psalm. 9.18.
.

4. It is taken for a sensible yet quiet bearing of all crosses and afflictions
that may happen in our course, or for our course of well-doing 1 Pet. 2.20
: and to stand under the burden (not like some grinning Anticks by an house
side, that make ugly faces, and wry mouths, as if their backs were ready to
break with the burden, but) cheerfully and thankfully, till God give
deliverance, without any murmuring, or repining.

These two latter acceptations of the word are both contained in the word
(...), which signifies to stand under some weight to bear it up. The manner of
it, answers to the Hebrew (...) which notes a keeping silence Psalm. 37.7.
.

The two former acceptions of Patience, howeuer they are sometimes attributed
to men, yet primarily and principally they belong to God himself, who
therefore styles himself (...) longus narium, long of nostrils, that is, slow
to wrath Exo. 34.6. How Patience is taken here.
.

The two latter more properly belong to men, and therefore must necessarily be
intended in this present text, for they are both included in (...) And this no
power of nature, or strength of industry, but only the spirit of grace does
work within us. And therefore it is reckoned among the fruits of the Spirit,
because it issues from no other roots. This being so, the point arising hence
is plainly this.

It is the duty of all Christians to get, and abound in supernatural
Patience, which may enable them to undergo all labors, delays, and crosses,
even for well-doing, freely, cheerfully, and thankefully, for Gods honor, the
benefit of Church or Commonwealth, the preservation of their own faith, and
good conscience unto the end.

1. The first part of their duty herein, is to labor for that Patience which
is a Grace of the Spirit; not contenting themselves with Sinful, Stoicall,
Customarie, or Natural Patience, falsely so called. They that live in the
Spirit, must draw all their life from the same Spirit. No counterfeit or strange
virtues must be seen in them; such would be as odious unto God, as strange
fires in the Legal Censers.

2. The Act, and Object is the undergoing, and bearing of all labors Romans 2.7.
, delays Psalm. 37.7.
, and afflictions of all kinds 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6, etc.
; the corrections of God Heb. 12.5.
, the persecutions of men Iam. 5.7.
, the temptations of Satan 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
, the malice of enemies Ps. 44.10.
, the contempt of the proud Psalm. 123.4.
, the perfidiousnesse of false friends 2 Cor. 11.26.
, the contumely of words 2 Samuel 16.10.
, the torture of our bodies even unto death Heb. 12.35.
, if God call us to it 1 Pet. 3.17.
.

3. The ground of that we suffer, must not be for evil, but for well doing
Ibid.
, or else it is not praiseworthy; nor can we expect assistance, and strength
from God to bear with patience what we are to suffer for euill-doing. But if
we do well and suffer for it, and take it patiently, this is acceptable to God
1 Pet. 2.20
.

4. The manner of it must be voluntary, cheerful, and thankful; not running
desperately after crosses; but willingly bearing them when they are laid upon
us. Afflictions are not guests to be invited; but if they come unbidden, they
must have welcome, and cheerful entertainment. Patience perforce is no
Patience. No Cartwheele, for want of oil, does grate a man's ears, and sets
his teeth an edge so much, by harsh and tedious craking, as a grumbling
mumbling bearing of affliction does, in the ears of God; as we see by the
deep distaste that God often expressed against this sin in the Israelites.
Our Lord not only foretold of afflictions, but requires a joyful bearing of
them Mat. 5.11, 12.
. And so S. Paul, rejoicing in tribulation. And thus all the Church, even for
this, that they were accounted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. As in
gifts, so in suffering the manner is more to be regarded then the matter. This
is the course that all must take in suffering for well-doing. But in other
crosses that come through sin, or carelessness; not joy, but mourning becomes
us better; but still we must have patience free from all murmuring of inward
thoughts.

5. The end must be, 1. Not hope of gaining some outward good by what we bear,
as worldlings patiently, and willingly drudge and toil, and often break their
sleep to heap up pelf: and as sick diseased persons, that do with patience
suffer the scarrifying and launcing of their flesh in hope of health. This, men
by natural fortitude may attain unto. Herein, Vis desideriorum facit
tolerantiam, and nemo nisi pro eo quod delectat, sponte suscipit quod cruciat
August. de Pattent. cap. 4.
. The strength of their desires makes them bear, and unless it were for
something that delights them, they would not bear. Much less 2. must men
suffer evil to do more: as they that go into the field to fight, resolve to
suffer wounds and blows, in hope to execute their bloody malice upon some
enemy, by imbruing of their hands in blood. Of this, Austin gives this
censure; In illis qui mala sustinent, vt mala faciant, nec miranda, nec
laudanda est patientia, quae nulla est: admiranda duritia, neganda patientia
August. ibid. cap. 5.
. In those that willingly suffer evil, that thereby they may do more,
patience is neither to be admired, nor commended; for that indeed is no
patience. Admire their foole-hardinesse, deny their patience.

The ends of Christians suffering, therefore, must be these.

1. Gods honor, which we must advance in patient suffering for his sake 1 Pet.
4.16
. And this must be, by letting the world see that we esteem so highly of him,
that all the afflictions of this present life shall be so far from drawing us
to any thing dishonorable unto him, that we will willingly lay down our lives
at any Tyrants feet, rather then lay aside the duty and obedience we owe to
God. This made those worthy children so careless of great Nebuchadnezzars
strict command unto Idolatry, that they were not careful to answer him in
that matter; but told him to his head that they would not worship nor serve his
gods Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.
. The like we may discern in all those ancient Martyrs, who were tortured with
all the rage of bloody cruelty, disdaining deliverance to dishonor God Heb.
11.35
. This made Moses fly, not fearing Pharaohs wrath, because he saw him that was
invisible Ibid. ver. 27.
: and so must we.

2. The next end must be the benefit of Church, or State, in which we live;
resolving to bear patiently whatsoever displeasure, or misery, that may
attend advancing of a common good. Moses was well content to bear the rage and
wrath of cruel Pharaoh in often soliciting of Isreal's suit. The like did
worthy Hester, not sparing to adventure her favor with the King, and life and
all, to help her Countrymen, appointed as sheep for the slaughter, out of
Hamans snare; resolving to suffer any thing in such a service Hest. 4.16.
.

3. The last end must be, not vainglory, but the keeping of faith and a good
conscience; choosing rather to be put upon all the racks, and tortures, and
deaths in the world, then deny our faith, or forgo our innocence. These two
are far more excellent then life it self: and he that does not so esteem
them, never had them. Patience being her self a grace, will teach a man to die
in the defense of grace; resolving cheerfully mala non committendo, far,
quam non ferendo committere August. ib. de Patient. cap. 2.
: to suffer evil for doing none, rather then to do evil, by suffering none;
and as much disdaining to seek revenge, or break forth into passion, as not
to suffer. It bears, without desire of lading those who make it bear; not
rendering evil, but rather good, for evil.

The grounds hereof are many; but chiefly three.

1. Patience no constant worship of God in any parts thereof could be
cheerfully performed; as reverend Zanchius has well observed. For

1. Who would be a constant hearer of the word, which wicked men so much
contemn and scorn, and hate all those that do embrace it; in which respect
Christ calls it the word of patience Revel. 3.10
, because they have need of much patience who do resolve to keep it?

Yea, admit these outward vexations were removed; yet there be lusts within,
enough to make men loath the word, if they have not patience. Could any man
endure to have his very heart ripped up, and his beloved darling sins
arraigned, and condemned, and hewn to pieces before his face, if he wanted
patience? He that will be swift to hear, and slow to wrath, must not be
unfurnished of this grace, when he comes to hear. For if he be, the next news
we hear of him, will be this impatient speech, Durus est hic sermo, etc. these
be hard sayings, who can hear them? Yea after hearing, there is need of
patience in waiting the expected fruit. For the good ground brings forth fruit
with patience Luke 8.15.
. Grace is like the Oak that grows but slowly; and much impatience we often
see in hearers of the word, because the fruit comes up no faster in them; which
does not ripen, but keep it back.

2. Who would (according to his duty) pray continually, if patience were not,
to help him wait? Do we not see the best petition often for some things
before they speed? yea used roughly when they come to sue? What would the poor
Cananitesse do, if she had not patience to beg; after that cold comfort of
being called Dog Matthew. 15.
? It were a wonder to see blessed Paul go thrice to God, to ease him of a
thorn, and after all his labor, to be pricked still. Yet this was so 2 Cor.
12.
. Yea, Christ himself, prayed thrice Matthew. 26.
, and long together, and all to show the necessity of this grace, for the
instant performance of this duty, and continuance of our suits to God.

3. Who would believe, if it were not for patience to keep us from casting
away our confidence Heb. 10.35.
; since we never come to see the things we do believe 1 Pet. 1.8. Heb. 11.1.
?

4. There would be no hoping in God without patience to wait long for what we
hope Romans 8.25.
. And therefore it is called the patience of hope 1 These. 1.3.
; because, no patience, no hope.

5. We could not love God without patience. He that beholds wicked men live at
hearts ease, tumbling and wallowing in pleasure and constant prosperity, and
feels himself daily scourged, and distressed, though he do all he can to
honor God, in keeping a good conscience, and walking uprightly; shall soon
find himself sick of the Fret Psalm. 73.2.
, if he have not a great measure of patience to purge choler Psalm. 37.7.
. Love requires love; and an impatient man will never believe that he loves
him, who never holds his hand off his back.

6. Least of all can any man make a free and bold confession of his faith, in
times of persecution, without an almost incredible quantity of Christian
Patience. He that shall see the imprisonments, whippings, torturings, and
raging flames of fire, flying about the ears of Christians, with terrible
devouring imbracements, that many thousand Martyrs have endured, will think a
world of patience would not suffice to bear the like.

And thus we see what great need of patience there is, in all the parts of Gods
worship, and Religion, which cannot be conscionably performed where impatience
rules.

The second maine reason of this duty may be drawn from the great discommodity
of impatience in the course of our conversation with, there is no living among
men. In the world, daily vexations fly in our faces: and if we cannot bear
them, we may trusse up our pack and be gone out of the world so soon as we
will. For though men know one another weakness, and how apt they are to
break out into impatient passions; yet this for the most part, is so far from
making them careful not to provoke, that it makes them seek all occasions to
provoke the more; sporting themselves to see their neighbors rage, and play
the mad men. And so an impatient man is made the Town soole, to be the sport
and scorn of all that live about him.

The third Reason may be taken from the present benefit of Patience in all
estates. blows, a preservative against the Fret, a comfortable cordial
against delays, the key to the promises Heb. 6.12.
; and keeps a man as far from deiection, as from raging, in calamities. It
makes a man's life comfortable, what ever his outward condition be. It is of
excellent use to help us gain experience, and profit by affliction: which is
impossible for him to get that wants patience. Though God intends that every
affliction should make us better, yet impatient men are made worse. If a man be
once troubled, he is off the hooks for any thing, although he take never so
much delight in doing of it. We may see this even in gaming: when men once
begin to fret, and lose their patience, they commonly lose all their money with
it.

Afflictions, men must bear, whether they have patience, or not. If men bear
them patiently, the cross is made less; the profit, greater: if impatiently,
the cross is increased according to their impatiencie, and the profit is none
at all. Patience is as a paringknife that cuts the affliction less and less
till it comes to nothing: whereas impatience is like a loadstone, that draws
more weight unto it; and like birdlime, that hangs us faster in the snare. An
impatient man is like a wild bull in a net Isa. 51.
: a patient man, like a bird in a cage, who is put there to be tamed, not
famished; and therefore sings as merrily, as if he were abroad. Affliction falls
on a patient man, as a tempestuous storm of hail upon a well-tiled house,
that makes a great rattling noise without, but does no hurt, nor gets into any
room within: a man may as freely use any room in that house, as if the Sun
shined in his full strength. I might be infinite in such similitudes, to show
the rare effects of patience, where she is at liberty to have her perfect
work.

This serves to cast some water upon the great fire of impatiencie that every
where blazeth in the world. degree of impatiencie? If they can say, Such or
such did provoke me, then they suppose they should not do amiss, to be with
Jonah, angry to the death. Not considering this duty of patience; and that
patience is no patience, when it either has nothing to provoke it; or being
provoked, cannot temper passion, nor suppress the flame. He that being
provoked, has no rule over his own spirit, is like a City that is broken
down, and without walls Prou. 25.28.
.

This shows that a great many old tattered nasty rags of the old man do
still hang about us Coloss. 3.8, 9.
. It bewrayes our infidelity Iam. 1.3.
: it proclaims our folly Eccl. 7.11.
: it makes the Lord himself to load us with disgraces. Proud, and haughty
scorner is his name who deals in proud wrath Prou. 21.24.
. Yea, condemnation is threatened to those that do but murmr and grudge one
against another Iam. 5 9.
And we know the judgment of our Savior, He that calls his brother, fool, in
any hasty passion, deserves the fire of hell for his reward Matt. 5.22.
. It is a true Proverb, Hasty men never want woe: the reason is, because A
furious man abounds in transgression Prou. 23.22.
.

Chrysostom compares anger to a mad devil, and shows at large that no
demoniacall possession may be compared to it. For Qui daemonio vexatur, venia
dignus est; ir at us nulla, sed supplicijs innumeris, qui sponte sua in
profundum perditionis defertur, and etiam ante futuram gehennam poenas dat.
Tumultu enim quodam, and aestu intolerabili, die noctuque varijs cogitationibus
anxius iactatur Chrysostom. in Joh. Hom. 47. in fine. vide cundem in Matthew. Hom.
4. nec non in Act. Apost. hom. 6.
. He that is possessed of a devil, deserves pity and pardon, but the angry
man deserves no pardon, but numberless torments; in as much as he wilfully
throws himself headlong down unto perdition; tormenting himself before the
time; and tumbling up and down both night and day in restless burning, and
tormenting thoughts.

What can I say enough to disgrace this Monster? An impatient man is the worst
of all companions, Vide Chrysostom. in Act. Apost. hom. 17.
and unto none so bad as to himself: he is like the raging sea, ever foaming,
ever swelling, never pleased, never quiet, never good. He is the scandal of
religion, the shame of his friends, the scoff of his enemies: the tormentor of
himself by sparkling eyes, an unbridled tongue, trembling joints, swelling
like a Toade, glowing like a Devil, sparing no man, and least of all himself;
he is the troubler of his house, the ruin of his family, a rebel against God,
an infector of others, like a venomous mad dog that by biting of others makes
them in long continuance as mad as himself. He is the firebrand of a common
wealth, the burden of the world, the hatred of all, and stands fearfully
excommunicated by the Lord himself, from all society with reasonable men, all
the days of his fury Pro. 22.24
. He lives undesired, and dies unlamented; every one grieuing that he lived
so long, and every one ioying that now he is gone.

Let this make us ever to loath that loathsome sin of impatience, beast,
which makes us more ugly then the worst of beasts. What a reproach is it to a
man to be like a furious be are robbed of her whelps, in his own family
toward servants, children, wife and all, that he can take no delight in them,
nor they comfort in him; but must be forced often to fly from him as from a
mad man, by means of his striking hand and his bellowing tongue? What a
disgrace is it to hoggish Nabal for ever, that his very servants could see and
say that he was such a son of Belial, that no man could speak to him 1 Samuel
25.27
?

Oh therefore I beseech all Christians in whom there is any desire to honor
God by bearing of crosses, brooking of delays, receiving his corrections, and
to live among men, not to shame their profession, torment themselves, or those
that be about them, if there be any care of these, or any of these, that they
would labor night and day for this grace of patience, that so in patience they
may possess their souls Luke 21.19.
, and by it inherit the promises after they have done the will of God Heb.
11.36.
both in doing and suffering what ever he calls them unto. Man by nature is a
sociable creature; therefore nature it self does teach him patience, without
which there is no society. To which the bond of grace being added, these two
should for ever bind him to the peace, and good abearance. As patience is of
God, says Tertullian, and makes us resemble him, so impatience is of the
Devil Tertull. lib. de patient.
, and makes us as like him, as a coal to the fire that burns within it.

But because it is not enough to press the duty, unless we show how the
grace it self may be attained; and how far our patience ought to extend; I
will therefore, for more plainness sake, propound, and answer two necessary
questions, with which I will conclude this point of patience.

1. Quest. How may an impatient man be rid of his hellish fury, and become
patient?

Answ. This may be done by following, and using six Rules.

1. I must commend again the former help of prayer, without which no grace
can be had; therefore in prayer often arraigne, and condemn thy passion
freely, and fully in the presence of God, and shame thy self to the utmost of
thy power in confessing thy sin, and earnestly desire him to do execution
upon it, that so thou may be rid of this pestilent fret of anger: never leave
it out in any of thy prayers, but rather take occasion from this to make many
prayers the more unto God.

2. Get out of the company of impatient men: For, as all hot diseases, the more
hot they be, the more infection they spread: so is the disease of impatience
very infectious, and as catching as the plague. Therefore the Lord has taken a
strict course against all making of leagues, and friendship with an angry man,
or so much as keeping company with him that is furious. And he gives this for
his reason; lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul Prou.
22.24, 25.
.

But perhaps he is a father, a master, a husband, such as thou can not get
from? Therefore see further the directions following.

3. Be careful to prevent all occasions of passion in those, with whom thou
conuersest. When thy neighbors house is on fire, thine also is in danger. No
wise man therefore will set fire in his house that dwells next him. Wherefore if
thou thy self be given to passion, let thy study be, not to provoke others,
lest in provoking them, thou be paid back again in thine own coin, and
provoked thy self. But rather, when thou see them enraged by others, be
always ready with a soft answer, which will be as water cast upon fire, to
appease their wrath Pro. 15.1.


4. Ground thy self thoroughly in faith and hope, the mothers of Patience. He
that has faith to look up unto God in all crosses, shall find it a producer
of patience when it is tried most Iam. 1.3.
. And patience is called the patience of hope 1 These. 1.3.
. Because where hope of better things is, there will be patience to bear those
evils that fall in our way toward happiness. But where there is no hope of a
better condition, there can be no patience in bearing of evils. We see mere
carnal men can find patience to endure the cutting off of an arm, or leg,
from their bodies, when they are put in hope of receiving soundness to the
rest. Whereas the sturdiest beggar will roar like a bull for a lash of a whip,
that scarce fetches blood, and all because he can hope for no benefit by such
correction, but a Pass to send him homeward, which he cannot abide. Moses
could never have endured the wrath of the King, with so much undaunted
patience, if he had not by hope seen him that is invisible Heb. 11.17.
.

5. Get humility, for humility is like a puruier that takes up all the graces
that are to be had. And though she sit lowest in the school, yet she is the
best scholar, and learnes most lessons. God keeps all his graces for the
humble. This then would be both a means to get this grace from God, and a
help to turn out that impatience which lies within us. An humble man is never
without a cooler of his fiery passions. When he is most vexed with a froward
wife, a stubborn child, a careless servant, a contentious neighbor, etc.
humility would presently round him in the ear, and tell him, he has done as
much against God himself, and provoked him to his face every day, and
therefore he well deserves to be so served himself: And bids him mend his
manners toward God, before he grow into passion at others. Only pride makes
men so passionate Pro. 13.10.
. So much passion, so much pride: So much humility, so much patience.

6. Be frequent in meditation on these 5. things, viz.

1. That there is no cross so small from one end of man's life to the other, no
not the railings of a foul mouthed Shimei, but it is the providence of God to
bring it on thee, to exercise thee with it for some special end 2 Samuel 16.10.
.

2. That crosses are the common lot of all Job 5.7.
; especially of those whom God loves best Heb. 12.5, 6.
. Here we are in the School of Christ like unhappy boys, among whom the rod
must often walk. And we see that if a Schoolmasters have any of his own
sons in his school, he spares them least, because he strives to make them
excellent above the rest.

3. That all afflictions are inflicted for our profit Heb. 12.10.
; to humble and refine us Isa. 27.9.
, and to do us good at our latter end Deuteronomy. 8 16. Isay 38.16.
. The Patient has no cause to be angry with his Physician for giving him
strong Physic, when the strength of his disease requires it.

4. All crosses are measured to our strength 1 Cor. 10.13.
. When God afflicts the wicked, he cares not what they can bear; but lays it
on, according to their deserts: but when he corrects his own, he regards not
their deseruings, but their strength; because he does it not to destroy, but
cure them: yea he gives strength to bear, as well as crosses to exercise
their strength.

5. There is no cross so bitter, but it is accompanied with some remarkable
testimony of Gods special presence, and providence to sweeten it. If men
carefully consider all circumstances of their afflictions, they shall be sure
to find, that their afflictions are not so bad, but they might have been
worse; not so great, but they might have been greater, if the Lord had not
stood by to moderate them. And this is most apparent in greatest crosses that
befall the godly: who never fall into the fire, but God is with them to
preserve them from being burnt up Isay 43.2.
.

2. Quest. But what, must patience make a man so quiet, as to be moved at
nothing?

Answ. Patience does not take away affections and passions from a Christian,
but only the exorbitancy of them, in violent breaking forth against God, and
our own condition. For as in sad accidents, that are matters of sorrow unto
us, it is not only lawful, but needful to show sense of Gods hand upon us in
any kind; yea the calamities of others should come so near our hearts as to
make us weep with those that weep Romans 12.15.
, as our Savior himself, for the death of his beloved Lazarus John 11.35.
: so in occasions of anger, indignation is not simply prohibited, but permitted
to us, so we sin not in it Ephesians. 4.26.
. Of which we have a president in him that could not sin Mar. 3.5.
. But it is hard for us in anger not to sin, whose natures are so sinful;
therefore we must be angry as little as we can. He that in his anger would not
sin, must not be angry at any thing but sin. In the case of crosses and
afflictions, proud haughty scorner is his name who deals in proud wrath.

More particularly for the ordering of our patience, the directions of that
Renowned Italian Convert Zauch. in Prim. Pratept.
, a little more explained, and molded to our purpose, are worthy our
continual observation.

To guide our patience aright we must consider two things. 1. The persons with
whom we have to do. And 2. the things whereby they do provoke us.

The Persons are either God, or Men. Now, toward God we must never be
impatient, in the least degree; no not so much as in our secret thought to
think he might have been better and kinder to us, then we find him in any
affliction, though never so sharp and bitter. For as his wisdom, so his love
infinitely surpasses our highest capacity, and deepest policy. And he that
says or thinks God might have been kinder to him then he is, accuses God
either of want of love, or wisdom, and undertakes to be a master able to
teach his Maker. Therefore always take the Psalmists counsel, (...) be silent
to God Psalm. 37.7.
.

Toward men our patience is limited by four exceptions. The three first
concern the nature of the offense; the last, the disposition of the parties
offending.

1. If the offense be against God in abuse of his word and worship, by
neglect, or contempt, or profane disobedience in any kind; we ought not to
be patient, but as Moses and Phineas Exodus 32.19. etc.
, in our proportion, testify our dislike of such courses in any man we have
to do with Number. 25.7, 8.
, so far as our calling will warrant. Moses, the Magistrate, with his Sword;
and Phineas, the Divine, with the mighty weapons of the Word, must take a
course to the utmost of their power to express their zealous sury against such
offenders; let their blows light where they will.

For private persons, it is enough if with righteous Lot they make it appear
that they much distaste, and by grief are vexed at the soul, with the corrupt
conversation of the wicked from day to day 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
. This offense the Lord himself does often declare much indignation against,
and has given many dreadful testimonies of his fierce wrath upon the
contemners, and profaners of his worship. Now where God himself is impatient,
it ill becomes his servants to be patient. Christ himself though he were the
meek Lamb; yet he could find a whip to lash the profane higlers out of the
Temple Ioh. 2.15.
, with indignation enough, as may appear by the event. He had need bestirre
himself with a great deal of passion and violence, and set home his blows
with a witness, that should undertake alone to empty that vast Temple of such
a huge drove of Hucksters and mony-changers, as at such a solemn time would
there take up their standings, to furnish all comers to the Passover, with
provision for oblations, and sacrifice. We have the like example of his anger
against the Devil tempting him. In which temptation (as Chrysostom notes) he
was no way moved to wrath, till Satan required him to fall down and worship
him, which was a blasphemy against God, to whom only worship is due. But then
he was exasperated indeed, and in angry indignation banished him his presence,
that the devil was forced to leave him Matt. 4.
. Of which Chrysostom makes this use. Vt nos illius discamus exemplo nostras
quidem iniurias illatas ab impijs, sieve in dicto, sieve in facto, magnanimiter
sustinere: Dei autem iniurias, and contemptum, nec vsque ad auditum sufferre.
Quoniam in proprijs iniurijs esse quempiam patientem, laudabile est: iniurias
autem Dei dissimulare, nimis est impium Chris. oper. imperf in Matthew. 4. hom. 5.
. That we may learn from his example, to bear magnanimously the injuries
offered by wicked men in word or deed, unto our selves: but the injuries and
contempt that is offered to God, not to have patience so much as to hear them.
Because to be patient in our own injuries, is commendable; but to dissemble
the wrongs that men put upon God, is too impious.

2. If the injury be offered to our neighbor, in estate, reputation, or
religion, and he be not able to deliver himself; then our duty is to help
him, and not to be so patient toward the offender, as to suffer him to undo
our brother. Therefore as Abraham rescued his Nephew Lot, so must we endeavor
to assist those that be wronged: especially in case of seducement, wherein we
have the practice of the Apostle for our president, who wished from his heart,
that they were cut off that in things of this nature troubled his beloved
Galathians Gal 5.12.
.

3. If the injury be done to our selves, consideration is to be had whether it
bec not such as besides the wrong done to our selves, a chief part thereof
lights upon God, Religion, the Commonwealth, or our Callings, as well as our
persons, and estates: of which nature are lying, uncleanness, deceit in
payment of dues, robbing, stealing, assaults, common slanders that tend to the
disgrace of Profession, etc. In these and such like, Patience does not bar
any man to seek the redress of such offenders by just punishment, so he do
it without wrath, or thirst of revenge Ephesians. 4.31.
, but with meekness, compassion, and grief Judge. 21.2.
.

4. If the offense be only against our selves, and privately committed, then we
must consider the disposition of the parties offending, whether they be
refractarie and insolent, abusing us the more for our patient forbearing, of
purpose to vex us; wilfully persisting, notwithstanding our friendly
admonitions: or whether they be such, as unwittingly, and unwillingly offend;
and upon the discovery of their offense acknowledge the fault, promising and
endeavoring reformation. If they be of the former sort, then recourse is to be
had to the Magistrate, who therefore bears the sword Romans 13.
; unless they be persons within our own government, who must be with
tenderness, and love corrected by our selves Pro. 29.19 Pro. 19.18.
. If they be of the latter, then with all kindness, and meekness they must be
forborne, and forgiven Luke 17.3, 4.
. Admonish them we must, to further their reformation Gal. 6.1.
: but forgive them too, or else we run upon our own damnation Matthew. 6.14,
15. Matthew. 18.34, 35.
.

CHAP. VII. Of Godliness.
ANd to your patience, Godliness. Because Patience alone is not acceptable,
unless our sufferings, whereby patience is exercised, be directed to the
honor of God, which cannot be done without godliness; therefore to Patience,
Godliness must be added.

The original word is (...), which signifies to worship or honor any
superior, that has any relation unto us, whether he be God himself, our
Parents, or any other in authority over us, as the vicegerents of God our
heavenly Father Aquin. 2.2. q. 101. ar. 1. and 2.2. q. 121. ar. 1.
. Piety flows from Affinity, says Gerson Gerson. super Magnisic. tract. 5.
: because we worship none, whom we conceive not as standing in some relation
to us, and we to them.

By humane Authors, Piety is taken diversely; but most ordinarily for reverence
showed to parents and governors, and love to brethren and kindred; although
sometimes they take it also for that worship they perform to their gods Cicer.
lib. 1. de Not. Deorum.
. In the holy Scripture we shall find it used diversely. The several
acceptations of it therein, being distinguished by the object about which
godliness is exercised, may be reduced unto four heads, as Gregory of Valence
has well observed Greg. de Valent tom. 3. in Thom. disp. 7 quaest. 1. punct. 1.
. And these four, dicis causa, I may term, Divine, Natural, Compassionate,
and Conuersatiue.

1. Divine is that which immediately respects God in his worship 1 Timothy 6.11.
. The exercises whereof Paul calls (...), devotions, and uses the word (...),
to note the worship of the Athenians (...), to the unknown God Acts 17.23.
. And in this sense, we shall find Godliness taken sometimes, 1. For the
Principal foundation on which the godliness we perform unto God is
grounded: and this is called the Mystery of Godliness. Christ Jesus, God
manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
etc. is the ground of the relation between God and us; and so of that worship
we perform unto him. Sometimes it is taken, 2. For the subject matter of
godliness contained in the word Tit. 1.1. 1 Timothy 2.10.
. And sometimes, 3. For the act, and exercise of godliness in his worship Tit.
2.12. 2 Pet. 3.11.
. These two latter acceptions may also be extended to those other sorts of
godliness that follow, although they be here inserted, as fitly, and
principally appertaining to this part of godliness, which is termed Divine.

2. Natural Godliness I call that which we perform unto natural parents, or
Governors, forasmuch as they in a special manner represent unto us our Father
in heaven; unto which the Fifth Commandment binds us. This is that which the
Schoolmen most usually call Piety Aquin. 2.3. q. 101. Bonauent. in 3. sent.
did. 35. q. 6. alijque.
: and by this they distinguish it from the former performed to God; calling
civil honor due to superiors and friends, by the name of piety; and
religious worship due unto God, by the name of Religion, Religiositatis and
Theosebiae.

3. Compassionate God linesse I call that which is exercised about works of
mercy toward them that be in misery. For this Cornelius is styled (...), a
devout or godly man Act. 10.2.
, because he distributed much alms to the people. And this is commonly termed
Piety, says Austin, August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 1.
; because what men do to the godly for godliness sake, God accounts it as
done to himself; and because that such works of mercy are proper acts of
Religion Iam. 1.27.
; and therefore by a Metonymie of the effect for the cause they are termed
Piety.

4. Conuersatiue Godliness I call that which shines in the whole course of
our conversation by living godly; making the word of God the rule of all our
carriage, that so it may appear that whatsoever we do, we do it to the glory
of God whom we worship, and set before our eyes in all our actions; and resolve
to honor him in all things, whatsoever troubles, miseries, or persecutions may
happen 2 Timothy 3.12. 2 Pet. 3.11.
. This is the same with that in the Old Testament so often termed The fear of
the Lord Ps. 111.10. Pro. 1.7, etc.
; whereby the heart stands so in awe of him and his word, that it fears
nothing besides; but will in all things be ordered by him, what ever become of
it Isai. 8.12, 13.
.

This is called Godliness in two respects: 1. In respect of the chiefest and
highest ends that a godly man aims at in every action of his life, which is
the glory of God 1 Cor. 10.31.
. 2. In respect of the rectitude of the work, which is wrought by the rule and
line of the word of God: for piety or godliness, according to the Greek
Etymology, signifies a right or straight worship. (...), ab (...) recte, and
(...), colo.

We have seen the several significations, How godliness is taken here.
or rather applications of the word Godliness. We must now consider in what
sense it is taken here.

Godliness, in this place, cannot be taken for the immediate worship of God,
because all the graces here exhorted to, do not concern the solemn acts of
devotion in the parts of Gods worship, but Christian conversation in the world.
Nor can it be meant of that alone, which we either exhibit to parents, and
superiors; or unto such as are in distress; because we are to add it unto
Patience, and therefore it must needs be meant of that godliness which must be
had and exercised in all our conversation, but especially in the time of
affliction, which must not only be borne without impatience, but so borne, as
God may have glory by our godly carriage in it. Whence we are taught:

It is the duty of Christians not only to get Patience, but Godliness,
whereby, what ever they do or suffer, God may be honored, and themselves
enabled to go on in holiness, notwithstanding their sufferings. Patience is
an excellent grace, but nothing worth without godliness. A stock or a stone
can bear more then we, with less complaining: but godliness makes the
difference before God, between that senslesnesse, and the patient bearing of a
Christian. Patience is as the body, and Godliness as the soul, that gives
life to this body. It does not give content unto God that we be patient
sufferers, unless we glorify him by our sufferings 1 Pet. 4.16
, and reap some benefit unto our selves also; in as much as he does it to
humble us, and to do us good, that we might be part akers of his holiness
Heb. 12.10
: which cannot be done, but by the help of godliness to call upon God Psalm.
50.15
; to bless him for all Job 1.21.
; and to learn his law Ps. 119.67.
. Godliness is that which keeps us from drawing back in the time of
temptation, wherewith our patience is exercised Psalm. 4.17, 18, 19, etc.
. As a maine sail filled with a good gale of wind, drives the ship against
the strongest tide; so godliness, a Christian against the greatest
discouragements. Godliness makes all afflictions, not as bridles to take us
up, but as spurs to mend our pace; whiles we look not on the things which
are seen and felt, but on the things which are not seen 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
. Yea godliness it is, that helps us to all those meditations before laid
down to beget Patience in us. It is one of the maine roots of a Christian,
says Chrysostom, which keeps him standing against all winds and tempests
whatsoever. Take away godliness from a Christian, and you stock up the roots
of a tree; which being done, the tree cannot but fall with the next blast of
wind that blows upon it.

world, which sets so light by Godliness; supposing Godliness to be only for
Divines, the Church, and the Deathbed! Whereas the want of Godliness is that
which has brought all the plagues which ever came upon the world Genesis 5.13.
, and that are yet to come upon it Jude 15.
. Therefore let all ungodly men know, that a time will come, wherein the best
of them all shall be as chafe which the wind drives away Psalm. 1.4, 5, 6.
: that they shall not be able to stand in the judgment, which the Lord shall
bring them unto, for all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed,
but shall utterly perish in their own corruption: and that in the mean time,
God esteems them no better then filthy swine, and vomiting dogs 2 Pet. 2.22
; natural bruit beasts made and taken to be destroyed; vessels of wrath Romans
9.22
; children of the devil John 8.44.
, that shall one day go away into everlasting fire, to be tormented with the
devil and his angels for ever.

Let this therefore sharpen our appetites unto Godliness, grace of God that
brings salvation has appeared to us Tit. 2.11, 12.
. He cannot have salvation, who from that grace, learneth not this lesson. If
we consider the excellency, commodity, delight, and security of it, we
cannot but think him a mad man that labors not for it. It must needs be
excellent, that makes us as like God, as any child to his father. What
striving do we see, to be like the best in what men do affect? and therefore
we may well conclude, that most men are out of their wits, that they esteem so
little of this. If our minds were set upon gain; is not godliness great
gain, having the promise of this life, and that which is to come 1 Timothy 6 7, 8.
? Look into the Scriptures, and there we shall find godly men richer in
wealth then any others: and so men might be now, if they would be as godly. Yea
godliness makes a gain of every cross; whereas ungodliness turns every
gain to a loss. There is no evil that a godly man suffers, but it turns to
his good. There is no good which an ungodly man possesses, but it turns to
his evil. If our hearts do run upon pleasure; godliness is as pleasant, as
it is profitable. None can be so merry at heart, as the godly, because nothing
is so delightful as godliness. Earthly delights are either sinful, or vain,
or momentanie, that leave a sting behind them at parting: but godliness
procures holy, heavenly, continual pleasures, wherein a man may lie down, and
tumble himself till he be ravished again; and yet have no sin to answer
for, by that his excess. This brings us to his right hand with whom is
fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16.11.
. If we could imagine men Stoics, so that none of these could affect them; yet
there is no Stoic but would be glad to provide for his safety; let him say
what he will to the contrary. The security of godliness should move them to
godliness. There is no security but in godliness. There is no godliness but
it has security; if not from trouble, yet certainly from hurt. Sometimes it
prouides a godly man a chamber of rest in common calamities Isai. 26.20
; or if not this, yet it so armeth him to suffer, that, in respect of avoiding
the smart, when Gods honor lies at the stake, he will not accept deliverance
Heb. 10.35
For he builds upon an infallible ground, that God will lay no more upon him,
then he gives him strength to bear, and will as certainly give him the issue,
as bring him to the trial 1 Cor. 10.13.
. And though all that will live godly shall suffer persecution in one kind or
other; because there is no reason the servant should fare better then his
Master: yet this is an universal infallible observation, that never any godly
man suffered in a good cause, but with much courage, strength, assurance, and
triumphant joy.

Look upon the noble army of Martyrs, going to the stake with rejoicing, and
singing, and shouting, and rauishing consolations, as if they were going to be
crowned; as indeed they be. Their honor among men is wonderful, but with
Christ infinitely more. And if there be any degrees in that heavenly Quire,
their seats are certainly the highest. On the other side, look upon ungodly
malefactors in their sufferings, and you shall see them, for the most part,
especially heretics, fearing, trembling, quaking, yelling and roaring; as
Michael Seruetus Bellar lib. 1. de Christo, cap. 1. and Calvin. in Opuscul.
, that godless heretic, burnt at Geneua, Anno 1555. for denying the
Trinity, and other doctrines of faith, may serve for a sample: who feeling the
fire, could not with patience endure it, but kept a hideous roaring till his
life was exhausted, crying out to the beholders to dispatch him with a sword.
The like we may remember of Legate, at home.

Here then is an Antidote against all those perplexed fears and terrors that
do amaze Christians when they consider with themselves; How should we be able
to endure a fiery trial? Why: be godly, and I warrant you: the Lord will
either provide for your deliverance Psalm. 27.5.
, or be with you in the fire Isai. 43.2.
, as he was with the three children in the furnace, with Stephen, and all the
godly at their martyrdom. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations 2 Pet. 2.9.
: and as he knows how, so has he promised to all that are godly, because they
have kept the word of his patience, he will also keep them from the hour of
temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon
the earth Reu 3.10.
. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator 1
Pet. 4.19.
.

Thus we see what great security Godliness brings. Of which a Heathen Poet
has elegantly sung: Integer vitae scelerisque purus, Horat. carm. lib. 1. Od.
22.
etc.

Me thinks, that which has been spoken is enough to incite all men to the
acquisition, and practice of Godliness; which, who wants, may use these
four rules to furnish himself with it.

1. Labor in the word of God, the milk of Godliness, by which we grow 1 Pet.
2.2.
. The cause of all impiety is neglect of the word Psalm. 50.17
. The word is the rule and square by which we must do every thing: without
this, we can neither be, nor do godly.

2. Again to thy prayers. This means must never be left out; this thing to
write over and over again to me is not tedious, but safe. This is that which
got David so much godliness; and which (as we see in his Psalms) he would
never give over to his dying day. Reading, and hearing, will do nothing
without this. This is as harrowing or plowing after a sowing. Of this,
Chrysostom in his books of Praying, gives particular instance: Neque
pretiosis pietatis fructibus poterimus esse grauidi nisi precibus irrigemur
Chrysostom. de Orand. Deum, lib. 1.
: Prayer is as watering a thirsty ground new sown with seed, without which we
cannot be fruitful in the fruits of piety.

3. Labor for humility; this is the shortest cut to piety. An humble man
thriues more in godliness, in one year, then a proud man in an age. For God
prepares the heart of the humble Psalm. 10.17
: the meek will he teach his way Psalm. 25.9.
: he resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble Iam. 4.6.
. When we see a man conceited of himself, we may conclude, that man is at his
best. Pride is like an East wind that blasteth timely fruits; and like a
Caterpiller that feeds most upon the choicest flowers.

4. Get out of ungodly company, or never look to thrive, but go backward in
godliness. Such companions are as frosts, to nip the buds of the Spring; as
cankers, that eat to the heart of a tree; like Pharaohs lean kine that
devoured the fat. Yea, which is worse, they not only hinder our growth in
godliness, but prove dangerous corrupters and enticers to sin. We cannot
touch pitch, but we shall be defiled. We can not go with them, but we shall
learn their ways Pro. 1.15, 16.
. Which David well saw, and therefore took an order to banish them from his
society Psalm. 119.115.
, and family Psalm. 101.7
. And so must every man else, that has a mind to be godly 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. and
14.
; and then he shall be sure of godliness, and a Psalm 1.1, 2.
blessing to boot.

CHAP. VIII. Of Brotherly-kindnesse.
ANd to Godliness, Brotherly-kindnesse. Hitherto we have seen the Virtues,
necessary unto a Christian, for the ordering of those actions which chiefly
concern himself: Now we are come to those, which are useful to him, for his
carriage toward others; whether they be special persons, that is, such as are
godly, to whom belongs Brotherlykindnesse; or of the common sort of mankind,
considered as men, to whom he owes Charity.

Brotherly-kindnesse is that branch of Christian love which extends it self
to such as in the judgment of charity, truly fear God, and are actual
members of the mystical body of Christ, who is not ashamed to call them
brethren Heb. 2.11. Matthew. 12.50
.

The word (...), is not here taken only for an inward affection of the heart,
as some have supposed; because if we observe the exact signification of the
simple word (...), we shall find it to differ from (...), Arist. Eth. 9. cap.
5.
as much as affection expressed in action, from a mere well-willing. Therefore
our Translators do exactly render it Brotherly-kindnesse: because kindness is
the actuating of an affectiue love. So that it is meant Non de amore affectiuo
tantum, sed de effectiuo simul: Not of affectiue love only, but of effectiue
also: that is, of love declared by an outward act.

This being cleared, we are to know that Brotherly-kindnesse is no different
thing from Charity taken in the largest sense; for so it is a branch of
Charity. Brotherly-kindnesse is but love contracted, and limited to those who
best deserve it. Therefore to know the nature of Brotherly-kindnesse, we must
first know the nature of Love.

Love, say the Schools, is been velle amato, to will good, or bear good will
unto some party loved. But this is too curt: it being but a piece of love, or
amor affectiuus Biel. in 3. sent. did. 27. art. 1. not. 2.
. That of Aristotle defining it by the act is more full: (...) Arist. Eth. 9.
cap. 5.
. To love, is to will all that, which in our judgment we esteem good, to the
party loved; and to the utmost of our power, to procure it to him. But yet
this also wants one part of Love, and that is, a will to be united to what we
love, that so we may reap that delight, and full content we expect, in the
fruition of our love.

So that to make up a full description of Love, we must take in these three
parts.

1. A beneuolent affection. 2. An earnest expression of it, in procuring, to
our power, that good we will and wish. 3. A desire of union and fellowship with
the party loved, to take our delight and full content in the fruition of him.
And so Love in the general consideration of it, may be described to be, An
earnest affection of the heart to some person, that our reason or fancy has
drawn us to a liking of; wishing all possible good unto him, which we
earnestly endeavor to help him to; and fervently desiring to be intimately
united unto him, that so we may be unspeakable satisfied in the fruition of him.

This Love, for the nature of it, is either earthly, (which may be rather
termed cupiditas, August. de Substan Dilect. cap. 1.
a lusting) or heavenly, wrought by the Spirit of God in our hearts, and only
deserves the name of Charity.

Charity taken for a supernatural Grace, is distinguished by the object into
(...), the love of God: (...), brotherly love to the godly: (...), love of our
neighbor, as a part of the same nature, created in Gods image as well as our
selves: and (...), the love of our selves. Not that evil self-love, which
makes us love our selves inordinately, with neglect of God, and our brethren:
but that holy affection that ought to be in us toward our souls, in the first
place, willing and endeavoring to procure unto our selves that supernatural
bliss, and fruition of God which he has proposed unto us.

Thus much of love in the general description, and division of it, so far
forth as it was needful to be known, for laying a ground of the Doctrine,
that from this text arises, which is plainly this, viz. It is the duty of
every Christian, not only unfeignedly to well will, and heartily to wish, but
also to endeavor to the utmost of their power all good unto all that are godly,
above all other men, and fervently to desire union and fellowship with them for
godliness sake. This point may be further amplified by the several
particulars contained in it, which are principally five.

1. It is our duty to bear an inward unfeigned hearty affection of good will
unto them without dissimulation Romans 12.9.
, out of a pure heart 1 Pet. 1.22.
, wishing them to prosper at their soul prospers; according to that, of that
Apostle of love, to his beloved Gaius 3 Ioh. v. 2.
: who requires the same in all Christians, that so they may love, not only in
tongue and in word, but in deed, and in truth 1 Ioh. 3.18.
; that is, from the heart.

2. We must not only wish them well, by an inward entire affection; but
actually with David, seek their good Psa. 122.9
, to the utmost of our power: and that by praying for them Psa. 122.6. Heb.
13.18. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. 1 Timothy 2.1.
; instructing and building them up in their most holy faith Jude v. 20.
, as Aquila and Priscilla did Apollos, expounding unto him the way of God more
perfectly Act. 18.26.
, if we be able: exhorting Heb. 3.13.
, admonishing 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
, rebuking Leu. 19.17.
, comforting 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
, encouraging Heb. 10.24. Mal. 3.14, 15
, them, as necessity requires: administering to their necessities, in all things
Romans 12.13. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
, for this is the Apostles meaning, as Chrysostom declares in particular.
Neque enim pecunijs tantummodo, sed and verbis, and rebus, and corpore, and
alijs omnibus vult nos iuuare egenos Chrysostom. in Romans 12. hom. 21.
. He wills us to help the Saints in their need, not only with our Purse, but
with our good word, our substance, our bodily labor, and with what ever else
we are able to steed them. Yea, Nihil pro fratribus omittamus etiam eorum
quae humilia and vilia nimis videantur, sed si administratione nostra etiam
opus fuerit, quamuis tenuis atque abiectus quidem cui administratus sit,
fuerit, quamuis ardua nobis res atque laboris plena esset, etc Idem. in Matt.
hom. 18. oper. impers.
. We may omit nothing for the Brethren, no not of those Offices that seem
mean, and too base for us to perform; although the party we administer unto,
be never so contemptible in the eye of the world, and the work we perform to
him be never so difficult and painful. Nay, I will go one strain higher:
We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren 1 Ioh. 3.16.
.

3. This special kindness is to be borne unto such as are godly, about all
others. For though we must do good unto all, yet specially to the household of
faith Gal. 6.10.
, as David to the Saints Psalm. 16.2.
. When our Savior speaks of that charity, which we ought to bear unto all;
his precept is this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self Luke 10.27, 28.
. But when he calls for brotherly kindness toward the Saints; he says: This
is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you Ioh. 15, 15.
. He loved them so well, that he laid down his life for them, but not for
the rest: teaching all to do the like. Charity teaches us to prize every
thing according to the worth, and due valuation of it. And there being in a
godly man a double cause of love; Gods image in his Nature, and his Graces in
his person, he ought to be esteemed and relieved, as Benjamin by Joseph, five
times as much as any other man.

4. Yea such a fervor of affection we must have toward them, that we must
desire to be knit unto them in holy love so nearly, as in respect of gracious
inclinations, and consent of wills in all holy things, we may be all of one
heart, and one soul with them.

It is the nature of love to desire, and make unions. Charitas quasi chara
vnitas Gerson. super Magnific. tract. 9.
. This was Ierusalems praise Psa. 122.3.
: and our Saviors prayer for all his members, that they all might be one Ioh.
17.21.
. And reason good; for they are all members one of another, and make but one
body; what communion then (agreeable to the holiness of such a body) can be
too much for them to have one with another? Such a love was of old in those
primitive Saints, in the Apostles times: whose society is thus recorded by the
Holy Ghost himself to their perpetual honor. The multitude of them that
believed were of one heart and one soul: neither said any of them, that ought
of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all things common
Act. 4.32.
. This Community we must conceive to consist in such things as were agreeable
to such a society, and to such a love as knit this knot. It was a fervent
love; but out of a pure heart and a good conscience 1 Timothy 1.5.
. Such love as does not so much as think evil, or rejoice in iniquity; but
rejoices in the truth 1 Cor. 13.
. And these were the times wherein grace did abound, and Christianity was laden
with the fruits of the spirit. Whereas now Christians stand at a stay, because
they forsake the assembling of themselves together Heb. 10.24.
; contrary to the Apostles charge, which ought not to be so. For, as Iron
sharpneth Iron Pro. 27.17.
, so does one Christian quicken another by godly society, if the time of their
coming together be spent as it should.

5. All this kindness must be showed for godliness sake, or else it is worth
nothing. It is not enough to love them in truth, unless we love them for the
truths sake 2 Ioh. v. 1, 2.
. Our Savior who takes so kindly, and rewards so franckly, even a cup of
cold water (the least of all gifts) bestowed on his Members, adds this: He
that gives a cup of cold water to one of these little ones, in the name of a
Disciple Matt. 10.42.
, shall not lose his reward. Non sunt fideles in amicitia, quos munus non
gratia copulat Jsidor. Hispal. de sum. ben. lib. 3. cap. 30.
, they are no faithful friends, whom any thing but grace combines. This is
that will keep us from having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of
persons. This will make the meanest to be in our hearts to live and die
together, as well as the greatest and most wealthy. Finally this will cause our
brotherly love to continue, so long as we remain alive, to love.

This is the sum of that brotherly kindness that is due unto all Saints,
according as their necessities, our opportunities, and abilities shall require
it of us.

The equity hereof abundantly appears from the consideration of the near
conjunction between them and us in Christ. In which respect, one Christ 1 Cor.
12.12.
. By means whereof, no one member can suffer, but all the members suffer with
it Verse. 26.
: Nay Christ himself is not excluded from a part in suffering: for what member
soever suffers, He suffers in that member. The head complains of hurt, if the
foot be but trodden on. So Christ himself is persecuted Act. 9.4, 5.
, and suffers want, when any member of his body suffers Matt. 25.35.
. And Christ himself is relieved, when any of his needy members receive
relief; and will not be ashamed in the midst of all his glory at the last day,
to confess as much, before all the world Ibid. v. 40.
. This being so, the very rules of Nature teach the members to have a mutual
care one of another.

This argument the Apostle uses to the Hebrews to stir them up to fervent
prayers, and contribution to other persecuted Saints. Remember them that are in
bonds, as being bound with them: and them that suffer adversity, as being your
selves also in the body Heb. 13.3.
. This is the most piercing argument that can be brought, to stir men up unto
this duty: this will thoroughly try them indeed.

If this be so, brethren above all, hate them more then all the world besides!
How dare men, that would be accounted Christians themselves, to scoff and
scorn, and flout the brotherhood, tossing the very name of a Brother among
them, as dogs do Carrion, with more disdain then they themselves are able to
express in words? How many names of scorn and loades of reproach, have
drunken and profane beasts, to lay upon the godly, making the very title of
the Brethren, which our Lord Jesus Christ himself honors his members withal,
and is not ashamed to call them by this name, a byword of disgrace! But I have
a heavy message for them from the holy Ghost himself, who by the mouth of his
Apostle, says expressly, that they know not God 1 Ioh. 4.8.
, they are children of the Devil 1 Ioh. 3.10.
; they shall be held in the judgment of God, as murderers of their brethren,
and therefore have no eternal life 1 Ioh. 3 15.
abiding in them. This is truth, no railing; unless they will be so desperate
to tell the Apostle, yea the Spirit of God himself, he rayles.

And though all sorts of men, high and low, think it nothing to break rests
upon the godly, and to bear a distaste against them, yet let them know to
their everlasting terror, that of all sins in the world, this sin comes
nearest to that sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven. For
he that disgraceth a godly man, or any way opposes him for godliness sake,
does he not do despite to the Spirit of Grace, when he seeks the deep
disgrace of that godliness, which the Holy Ghost works in the godly?

But you will say, We do not so. You ouer-reach; who scoffs at any man for his
godliness? Ah impudence! confess the truth. Tell me; what makes you to have
a like base esteem of all Professors, if you see them zealous? if any do but
tell you; such a man is a Puritan: is not this enough to make you flout and
scoff him, although you never knew the man, or his behavior? what is the
reason that such as have most religion in them, are least about you, least
employed, least esteemed, most hated? examine the conditions of such as are
most in your books? are they not horrible swearers, filthy persons, scoffers,
flatterers, and sometimes queanes, which shall be entertained to spite the
godly? and are not these your nearest friends, and the honest men? If one man,
whom you call a Puritan, but once deceive you; is not this enough to make you
break forth against all the generation of Gods children, so as to think, and
say, there is none of them all but will lie and cosen, and play the
hypocrites? Now lay all these together, and then consider whether it be not the
very profession, and zeal of the godly controuling and condemning your filthy
lives, that makes you hate them.

If any shall yet hold face with me, and say, You do us great wrong: we love
true honest men with our hearts, as much as you, nor do we strike at them, but
at such as make a fair show, and yet are Hypocrites: This will not serve the
turn, for you scoff immediately at their exercises of religion, as at their
going to sermons, their reading, their singing of Psalms, their refraining of
oaths, yea the very gravity of their behavior, and such like: and you only
lay hypocrisy to their charge, to cover these blasphemies against religion.
Who told you they be hypocrites? do you think so of your selves? or did some
of your good Birds tell you so? Who art thou that dare to judge another man's
servant? Thou condemnest them for judging thee according to thy fruits: and yet
thou take upon thee to mount the Tribunal of God Almighty, and sit in
judgment upon their hearts, passing a sentence clean contrary to their
fruits. And if they were hypocrites; would that warrant thee to disgorge thy
filthy heart upon the sacred exercises of religion that they do, and which
thou should perform, as well, and as much as any of them. Is praying, and
hearing, and singing the worse because hypocrites take them up? is the Sun
defiled by shining upon a dunghill? No no, here is all thy project, thou
would feign have all men as bad, and careless of God and godliness, as thy
self, that all might fare alike hereafter. Which because they will not,
therefore thou speak evil of them, and all because they will not run into
the same excess of riot with thee 1 Pet. 4.4.
.

How can thou say thou love honest men, when thou do what thou can to
nip all buds of grace, where ever thou can espy them but beginning to peep
up? If any man should flout, and scoff, and rail at thee, in all companies he
comes in, and do thee all the spite and disgrace he can, in his words, his
gestures and actions; and then come and tell thee, he loves thee: could all
the Rhetorique in the world persuade thee to believe him? How then shall such
blackemouthd devils make God believe, that they hate not his servants; when it
is apparent to all, that they seek to make a prey of every one that departs
from iniquity Isa. 59.15.
?

This point is of further use to condemn the false fellowship of many,
brethren, but are far enough off from this Brotherly-kindnesse. Many there
be that make a great show of Religion, but have hearts of flint, in stead of
bowels of compassion toward those that are in misery: they study rather for
shifts to save their purses, then for liberal things: and are inquisitiue into
the life of every man, desiring hereby to have something against them rather
then to grieve at their failings. Witness their readiness to disgrace such as
are Professors where ever they come. He had need be an Angel that they have
not something to say against. Do these persons love the brethren, when they
seek not to cover, but to blaze their infirmities? Love covers a multitude
of offenses. He is no brother, but a slanderer, that thus lays open his
brothers shame.

Lastly, love the brotherhood 1 Pet, 2.17.
. Howsoever the scoffing Ishmaels of the world think of this duty; yet let us
obey God, and love the brethren as brethren 1 Pet. 3.8.
. Above all things let us, that are brethren, have fervent charity among our
selves 1 Pet. 4.8.
. Let us love, as we are taught, (...), etc. Chrisost. in Romans hom. 7 in
Moral. vide ib. plura praeclare dicta.
not only in word but in deed. Being ready to distribute, willing to
communicate to the necessity of the Saints. Either show our love, or else
confess we have none; for this is the truth. He that has this worlds good,
and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him 1 Ioh. 3.17.
? Yea where there is not actual beneficence, in Gods account, there is no
better then hatred. For that which is spoken, of not rebuking Leu. 19.17.
, is also true of the denial of every office of love.

Let us therefore beware how we neglect any service of love to the Saints: let
us cheerfully administer to their wants, especially such as are brought into
want by any public Persecution. And here I may not forget the poor French
people, that now are forced for their conscience sake to forsake houses, and
home, and goods, and Country, to fly with their lives in their hands, into
this Kingdom: especially since the gracious care of the Kings Majesty has
most religiously appeared in appointing his most honorable Privy Counselors
to direct their Letters to the most Reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, to take all possible care of their good entertainment and
relief. These ought to be relieved, harbored, and comforted to the utmost of
our power, with all cheerfulness, and tender compassion, by all that love
religion. They suffer for a common cause, that we must not only lay down our
estates, but our lives, and all in the defense of it, if God call us to it, as
he has done them. Oh that we could be moved to imitate those worthy
Corinthians, who in a great trial of affliction, of their own deep poverty,
were willing of themselves even beyond their power, to such a work as this:
and prayed the Apostle to receive their gift 2 Cor. 9.2, 3.
. This is the case wherein all outward things ought to be common between
Christians, if the necessity of the times should require it. I know, many
about LONDON have done bountifully already; and I hope that all parts of the
Land have done the like in their proportion, or the more is their shame. And
here I must not but remember the liberality of those of mine own Charge,
toward this pious work: many of them being in that Corinthian case, even in
deep poverty, that yet with great cheerfulness (beyond my expectation)
brought in more than they could well spare: yea the very children would not be
exempted from this contribution. This I speak to provoke all Christians still
to keep this cause to their hearts, and not to be weary of well doing; but
though they have already contributed something, still to consider their
brethrens pressing poverty: and as occasion shall require, and Authority
recommend their case unto our charity, not close their hands hereafter, nor
shut up the bowels of compassion from them, until they may return unto their
Land in peace.

As for such Christians as have been hindered by any means, and not showed
such bounty as the case and cause required, they should do well to raise up
themselves to a higher degree of liberality, and think of some means to let
their brethren be partakers of it. Let all men know that now Christ himself
comes in these his members, to require a supply of his necessities in theirs.
Let us then look to it that we give him cheerful entertainment; or resolve
to hear of it to our woe, at the latter day Matt. 25.
. If it were our own case; think, how well we would be content, to have
relief for a week, and want for a year. All that is given, is nothing to
maintain so many as be in present want the one half of the time that they
have been in need: how then shall they be sustained for any long continuance,
if the Lord should not speedily make way for their return? My humble suit
therefore is unto all, that this little Manual shall come unto, that for the
Lord Jesus sake who commands this service, they would rather spare, now and
then, a full meal out of their own bellies, than suffer our brethren, our
flesh, our bowels, to die in our streets, to the everlasting reproach of the
Religion we profess; as in all likelihood some of them must do, if this
course be not taken for their support. And such as are able, to take them into
their houses, when they see them wandering, and faint for want of food. These
are the true strangers that the Apostle himself commands us to lodge Heb. 13.2.
. One part of the unmerciful man's arraignment, is this: I was a stranger, and
ye took me not in Mat. 25.35.
. The poor woman of Zarephath, that had but a handful of meal in a barrel,
and a little oil in a cruze, (the last that ever she hoped to eat) intending
to bake that for her self and her son, that so they might eat it and die 1
King 17.
, through the extremity of the famine: yet she had never the less, but
abundantly more, for imparting thereof unto Eliah, before of that little, she
had served her self: this faith of hers, procured her relief enough, all the
time of that famine, when many no doubt did perish for hunger. Oh that we had
faith like hers! which if we had, we would certainly do as she did. By this
shall we prove the truth of our soundness in religion: when we have yearning
bowels toward those that suffer for religions sake: and think nothing too
much to give to them, that (to give good proof of their sincerity) have
forsaken all, and embrace the Cross. This will show our unfeigned love to all
Saints. It will assure us of our regeneration 1 John 4.7.
, and translation from death to life 1 Io. 3.14.
. Whereas he that has not this love, undoubtedly abides in death; what show
so ever he makes of a zealous faith, this fruit will abound to your account
Phil. 4.17.
, and bring much honor unto God, for your professed subjection to the Gospel
of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them 2 Cor. 9.
. This will cause their souls to bless you, all the days of their life, and
cause you that have watered others, to be watered your selves. It will be an
odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable well pleasing unto God. It is
but a loan unto the Lord, who gives the broad seal of many precious promises,
to pay us again; yea to reward it a thousand fold. For God is not unmindful
of your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his name, in
that ye have ministered unto the Saints, and do minister Heb. 6.10.
. Wherefore, dearly beloved, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels, and mercies,
think on this, and be ready unto it; not bearing it as a burden, but count it
a blessing to be counted worthy, and enabled to relieve the dear Saints of
God; yea to administer to the necessities of Christ himself. Wherefore delay
not this duty: stir up your friends; strain your selves to the utmost, with
all alacrity. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he which
sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully 2 Cor. 9.6. Directions to get
brotherly-kindnesse.
.

Thus far have I pressed the duty. It now remains that I add some
directions for the attainment of the grace it self.

1. Let us labor to be possessed with a due estimation and admiration of such
as are Brethren; not looking on them, as the world does, observing nothing but
their corruptions and failings; but rather consider in what high account the
Lord himself has them, notwithstanding all their infirmities. They are Right
Honorable Isai. 43.4.
in his Court, and of his Privy Council Psa. 25.14.
; yea his Favorites Zeph. 3.17.
, and special treasure Mal. 3.17.
, as dear unto him as the apple of his eye Zach. 2.8.
, Heirs Apparent of the kingdom of heaven proclaimed Romans 8.17.
, and in part possessed of it already 1 Ioh. 3.1.
. This would draw our love to, and delight in them, when we consider them as
the excellent of the earth Psalm. 16.2.
. Love fastneth on nothing, in which it does not conceive some excellency
Isai. 53.2.
.

2. Let us labor to purify our selves of all self-love, the moth of all
brotherly-kindnesse. He that is an admirer of himself, is never a hearty lover
of men that come near him, or outstrip him in excellency. So that the
consideration of any man's excellency, makes him the more hated of a
selfelouer. Therefore Paul, when he exhorts to unity, and amity; puts in a
caveat against all vainglory: Let nothing be done in strife or vainglory
Phil. 2.2, 3.
.

3. Labor to purify our hearts in obeying the truth through the Spirit, even
in this particular, to the unfeigned love of the brethren 1 Pet. 1.22.
Brotherly-kindnesse dwells no where, but in purified hearts. Look what
disgrace and malice the lewd wretches of the world, and heirs of hell do
daily belch out against the brethren: the same would we do also, if our hearts
were not purified from that natural malice that is within us all, against all
goodness. There is no loving of one another fervently, until we have gotten
pure hearts.

4. Labor daily to comprehend more fully the exceeding greatness of the love
of God toward our selves. For this will the more enlarge us to others. He that
finds any great Personage extraordinary kind, will give a great deal the
more respect to his servants about him, especially such as watch all
opportunities to do him any good office to their Lord. Experience tells us,
that no Christians have so large hearts, and such bowels of compassion, as they
in whom the love of God is most plentifully shed. As the pot must first be
thoroughly heated, before it will cause the liquor within it, to boil: so our
hearts must first be thoroughly warmed by the sense of Gods love to our selves,
before our love, and bounty will run over to others.

5. Be not ouer-curious in searching our the infirmities, and corruptions of
brethren, but rather mantle them with love. Solomon would not have a man lay
his ear as an euesdropper, to every word that is spoken; lest he hear his
servant cursing him Eccles. 7.21.
; and so he should fall to hate his servant, and vex himself, to no purpose.
He that has an open ear to every tale that is carried, of Professors, may
hope to love them when he comes to heaven, (if ever he come there) but not
before. The way to love, is to pass over infirmities of a brother, and to
admonish him secretly without any after repetitions. So says the Wiseman from
the Spirit of God himself: He that covers a transgression, seeks love; but
he that repeateth a matter, separateth very friends Pro. 17.9.
. Seldom is a charitable man inquisitiue, or an inquisitiue man charitable.
And he that will not cover what others find out, but rather discover what
others should not know, is an odious person to all his neighbors: and the
Town he lives in, longs for a vomit to spew him out.

6. Spend the time of meeting more profitably then men use to do. If men will
trifle out a large portion of time in idle prate, and not set themselves to
encourage, and whet, and provoke one another to love and to good works, no
marvel they be no more loving. For when they are not employed in building up
one another in their most holy faith Jude 20.
; then they fall either upon matters of State, and things too high; or else
upon some of their neighbor Professors: spending whole Orations against such
and such men; which by one means or other come to know it again; and then,
what heart-burnings, and secret boylings of passions may we see among brethren!
This is just with God, that when men come together rather for the worse then
the better; he should discover their backbitings, and smite them with
unbrotherly divisions, that may hinder their meeting at all. In dangerous times
they that fear the Lord should speak one to another, to hearten one another
in grace. This would knit their hearts together in an indissoluble knot of
durable love: as we see plainly in that of the Apostle, who ioynes the
provoking of one another to love, and to good works, together: because to
provoke one another to good works, is to provoke one another to love.

CHAP. IX. Of Charity.
ANd to Brotherly-kindnes, Charity. This is the last link of this golden
chain: and this is well set at the end, because a man had need be furnished
with all graces, before he can be furnished with this. Charity is the end of
the Law 1 Timothy 1.5.
: Finis consummationis, non consumptionis: that is, the consummation, not the
consumption of it. It is the end of the Law; as health is the end of physique
August. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 121. Chrysostom. in Romans 7.
. All the lines of the Second Table tend to this Center. He that has once
taken out this lesson, is a perfect man. But to come to the matter.

Charity is sometimes taken largely, and sometimes more strictly.

Charity taken largely, is that Theological Virtue (as they call it) whereby
we love God for himself, above all, and all others for God, and in God.

Charity taken strictly, is used in a threefold sense. 1. For that part of
charity, which is exercised in works of mercy toward those that be in
misery Heb. 6.10.
. 2. For that special measure of affection which is borne unto the godly
Ephesians. 1.15.
. 3. For that beneuolent affection, we ought to bear unto all men, considered
as men; who in respect of nature and creation are our brethren, where ever they
dwell: and in respect of commerce, and occasion of intercourse, or
administration, are our neighbors. And so the Law takes it, when it commands
us to love our neighbor as our selves.

In this place it cannot be taken for Love in the largest sense: How Charity
is taken here.
because it is distinguished from brotherly-kindnesse. Nor can it be taken for
charity toward the godly; for they are the proper object of
brotherlykindnesse. Therefore it must needs be taken for Charity toward all
men, considered as men, and capable of happiness as well as our selves;
performing all works of mercy and charity that their necessities require.
Hence observe:

The charity of a Christian must extend to all men capable of bliss, as much
as to himself. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. If thou demand; But
who is my neighbor? Our Lord himself put the answer into his mouth, who first
made the question: not only those that dwell the next door to us, or in the
same Parish; but all men created in the image of God, although they dwell in
India. The wounded man, our Savior speaks of, was a mere stranger to the
Samaritan that showed him mercy; and he charge all to go and do likewise
Luke 10.
. To which agrees the Apostles precept, Do good unto all Gal. 6.10.
.

And lest we should imagine our Saviors charge not to be universal; he
leaves not our very enemies without the range of our charity; but thus
expounds the Law: Ye have heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy. Who said so? Not God, but the blind
Pharisees, who took upon them to be teachers of the Law, understanding neither
what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. Therefore our Lord expungeth this
false Gloss, and thus inserts the mind of the Lawgiver: But I say unto you,
love your enemies. And lest we should think, that dissembled wordie love were
enough, he adds; Bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you;
and pray for them which despightfully use you, and persecute you Matthew. 5.43,
44.
. In these words Synecdochically including, that all things whatsoever we
would that men should do unto us, the same we should do unto them; for this
is the Law, and the Prophets Matt. 7.12.
.

Thus have we seen that none must be excluded our charity. But now we must
further see what this extensiue charity includes in it. Upon survey, I find
that it requires of us two things especially.

1. An unfeigned desire and prayer to God that they might be saved Romans 10.1.
. Love being a well-willing affection, must will the chiefest good, or else it
is not perfect love: and this not only from the teeth, but the heart. How can
we say, we love them, when our heart is not with them Judge. 16.15.
?

2. An earnest endeavor to procure them all the good their necessity requires;
whether they love us, or hate us. For though they hate us without a cause, yet
we are never without a cause to seek their good, because they are of the same
nature with us. Therefore remember our Saviors iniunction; Do good to them
that hate you. And that in these particulars.

1. In laboring their conversion to save their souls from death Iam. 5.19, 20.
; which to neglect, were a most bloody part of a cruel murderer 1 Ioh. 3.15.
. He that should see a man going into some dangerous place, being bound to give
warning of the danger to all that pass by him, and yet neglect it; would be
judged of all men to be guilty of his blood, that for want of warning ran
upon his ruin. Of what great sin are they then guilty of, that can suffer
many souls to pass along by them to hell, and never take pains to tell them
of the danger, and divert their course! How will men cry out to one that
unwittingly, or desperately rides into some deep river, or quicksands! How
silent are they to them that gallop upon the speed to damnation!

2. In cheerful administering to their necessities, without difference of
friends, or enemies. If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him
drink To. 12.20.
.

3. In preserving them from all manner damage in their estates. If thou
meetest thine enemies Ox, or Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it
back to him again. If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under
his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help him
Exodus 23.5, 6.
.

4. In the endeavor of his reformation to politic obedience to the government
of the Church or Commonwealth wherein he lives. First admonishing him
privately; after, more openly: and if this serve not, to bring him to the
Magistrate to receive such recompense as his obstinacy deserves Matthew 18.15,
16, 17, 18.
. This may well stand with true and fervent love. The father cannot be accused
for want of love to his son when he corrects him; not letting his soul spare
for his crying. Yea it were hatred, to suffer sin upon him, for want of
rebuke, and correction.

5. In whatsoever other offices we can perform, according as any man's
occasions require, with our purse, our hand, our good word, our substance, (if
it appear we may by any of these do them good) to the utmost of our power,
without any real wrong to our selves. Charity begins at home, but must not
end there.

And that this may no longer seem a strange or harsh doctrine to any; I will
in the next place propound sundry grounds of the equity, and necessity of
loving, 1. All men in general. 2. Our enemies in particular.

1. all men; we have these reasons to induce us.

1. 1. For the loving of all men.
We are all made of the same lump, by one and the same Creator. Now it is
natural to love all of the same nature; as it is for brethren to love all
those that are begotten of the same father and mother. This was the ground of
Jobs affection and respect unto his very servants; not daring to despise them,
knowing that God who had made all, would require it of him. Did not he that
made me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb Job
31.13.14, 15.
? As if he should say; Is he not my brother? must I not love him? And this is
the argument the Prophet uses against the deceitfulness, and
hollow-heartednesse of men toward each other. Have we not all one father? has
not one God created us? and thence he inferres, Why do we deal trecherously
every one against his brother Mal. 2.10
?

2. We are all bound to come as near unto God as possibly we can, and to
learn of him Mat. 11.29.
, who loves all, and hates none, as they be his creatures. Therefore Christ
presses us to love all, that we may be the children of our Father which is in
heaven Mat. 5.45.
: that is, by this, becoming like him, and declare hereby to the world, that
we are his children. The more universal our love, the more conformable we are
unto God. He that loves no more, but his friends, is in Christ's esteem, no
better Christian, then a powling Publican in the account of the Jews, that was
as odious to them, as a Promoter to us.

3. God has so disposed, that there is none so complete, but sometimes needs
the help and love of others in most, if not in all those things we are to
administer to others. Reason therefore wills us to do to them, as we would
have them do to us. As in the body natural, all the members need one
another, so that none can say to any, I have no need of thee; and thus God has
set them, that there may be no schism in the body, but that the members
should have a mutual care one of another: So it is in the great frame of
mankind. Dives may sometimes stand in need of Lazarus: Therefore let all men
love one another.

2. 2. For the loving of enemies.
For the loving of enemies, we have these grounds to enforce us.

1. Because there is that, in the greatest enemy, which is more cause of love,
for Gods sake, then any offense he can make against us, may be cause of not
loving him, for his own sake. For there is in him, our own nature, and the
image of God, whereby he is capable of glory as well as we. For this therefore
are we bound to love him. For his own sake, he is hateful; but for Gods
sake, and image, he is lovely.

2. Because we are bound to forgive him all his trespasses, or else we are sure
never to be forgiven our selves Matthew. 6.
. But we can never forgive him wholly, whom we love not, but hate. Therefore
the Apostle ever places love, and kindness, before forgiveness Ephesians. 4.32.
Col. 3.8, 9.
.

3. Because he that hates an enemy runs against the express charge of God
to the contrary: and so we commit a greater sin against God, by not loving,
then our enemy does against us, by offending. He sins against man, but we
desperately sin against God, in that we cast his precept behind our backs;
and tell him to his head, that flesh and blood will not endure it. Now, we are
deeper in danger then our enemy. Only our enemy was first in the
transgression; the more is our sin, if we follow. Shall we choose rather to
commit sin with our enemy, then forgive a sin to our enemy? God forbid.

For the further clearing of this point touching Charity to enemies, Questions
to clear this point.
which is one of the hardest lessons in all Christianity, I must propose and
answer sundry necessary Questions.

1. Quest. precept, or only a counsel? that is, whether does those speeches of
our Savior lay a strict command upon all men, to perform this as a duty of
necessity; or are only counsels to do it, as being better (of the two) then
not to do it?

Answ. Some resolve thus: To love enemies in inward affection is enjoined as a
precept unto all: but the expressing of it in actual beneficence, is a precept
to the perfect or grown Christians; and only a counsel, to the imperfect and
young beginners in Christianity Alex. de Hal. par. 3. q. 59. m. 5. ar. 2. in
Resolutione.
. But when our Saviors command to love enemies is general; and that is not
love, which is not showed in deeds, as before we have seen; our safest course
will be to embrace it as a charge and precept to all. All the counsels that
God gives us to duty, are equivalent to precepts.

This answer gives resolution in part to the second question, which partly
depends upon this. But I will make it a particular question by it self: to
prevent tediousness, and make the answer more full.

2. Quest. Whether is every man bound to express his love in doing good to all
his enemies?

Answ. Two things in general must be premised for answering this question.
First, we must consider who is an enemy. Secondly, we must consider an
enemy in four respects.

1. He is not an enemy that upon any occasion offends and does us
displeasure; for this our dearest friend may often do. But he is an enemy,
that of set purpose out of a maleuolent affection does causelessly wrong us, and
persist in his enmity. And of this man the question is propounded.

2. We must now consider this man in four respects; viz.

1. In respect of his present case. At all times of his necessity we are
bound to relieve him: but at other times we are not bound to prosecute him with
so much bounty, as we would a friend. If thine enemy hunger, feed him: that
is, do him good in his necessity. Praecepta affirmatiua obligant semper, sed
non ad semper.
To love our enemies is an affirmative precept, which therefore binds us at all
times to stand willing, and ready to perform any office of love, when we see
him in need: but it does not bind us to all times without exception, or
intermission, whether he be needy, or not.

2. In respect of familiar society, and intimate friendship. So we are not to
respect and countenance him as a bosom friend; because this cannot be so much
good to him, as danger to our selves, in laying our selves open to more
disadvantage. Friendship is only to be held with good men, because goodness
is the ground of friendship. No friendship is to be sought, or accepted from a
wicked person: because there can be no consent of wills between a good man,
and a bad. We see a father, yea our heavenly Father does not give like
countenance to stubborn, and obedient children. And yet he will be ready
enough to help the worst child he has, in any thing that is fit. We are
therefore to do good to enemies; but not let them come too near, but rather
banish them utterly from our society Psalm. 119.115. Pro. 1.14, 15 Pro. 22.24,
25. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
; because they will distract and hinder us in other parts of our obedience to
God. Serpentine policy, and doue-like innocence, must teach us to feed them, as
one that gives meat to a Lion.

3. In respect of reformation. So we are to do him good; not that which he
accounts good, (for he thinks nothing so good, as to be let alone in his
sin) but that which in true judgment and reason we shall see to be good for
him. A man is not bound to let alone his enemy in any sin against God,
unpunished, for fear of shaming, or putting him to smart of back or purse:
for love can punish, as well as feed; and sometimes finds a rod to be more
needful for the fools back, then meat for his belly. Indeed it is true, the
Scripture wills us to give place unto wrath. But yet (as Hales acutely) Ibid. vt
supra art. 3.
Aliud est dimittere rancorem qui comitatur vindictam, aliud dimittere
punitionem quam comitatur zelus iustitiae: It is one thing to send away that
rancor which accompanies revenge; another, to remit the chastisement
accompanied with zeal of justice. The former we must empty our selves of, but
not of the latter. A good man, and a bad, both desirous to punish, are
differenced in this: Bonus magis cupit inimicum corrigi, quam puniri, etc. The
good man desires the correction and reformation of his enemy, rather then his
smart: nor is he delighted to see his enemy skip at the lash; because he
hates him not. But yet he is pleased in the justice of God, because he is
bound to love that, and doubts not but it is the good will of God to have
justice executed upon obstinate offenders.

4. In respect of the state of our enemy between him and God. For that enemy
which we love, must be such an one as is in a state, capable of that good
which love is to will, unto all it loves. Therefore we are not tied by any
commandment, to have charity toward the Devil, and damned spirits in hell;
because they are incapable of bliss, as Bonauenture well observed Bonauent. in
3. sent. distinct. 28. q. 2.3.
. Nor are we to prosecute an enemy with love after he is laid in his grave;
because if he repented, he is with God, and has no need of our love: If he did
not repent; he is in that place, where our love can do him no good. We are
therefore to do good unto our enemies, whiles they are in this life, so long
as their space to repent and believe, and come to happiness, lasts. And
this, we see in Abraham, refusing to send Lazarus to the succor of Dives in
hell Luke 16.24, 25.
.

3. Question. Whether are we bound to wish and procure all sorts of good to our
enemy?

Answer. That already set down in the doctrine, might resolve this doubt: but
yet more particular and punctual is the answer of Lyra to this same question
Nicholaus de Lyra. in Luc. 6.
. He answers by distinguishing of the several sorts of things that be good,
thus: Good things are either, 1. Spiritual, as grace and glory, and these we
are bound to wish and procure unto them, all we can; because these are not
only good in themselves, but also such, as no man can abuse in the using of
them. A man may turn the grace of God into wantonness. But this grace is the
favor of God, not the grace that is in man. And if it were, he cannot turn
it into wantonness, by using it; but for want of using it. These therefore
Paul wishes indifferently to all Romans 10.1.
. 2. The second kind of good things is that we call natural good: such as
life, health, strength, subtilty of wit, and the like. 3. The last kind is
that we term bonum fortunae, outward good belonging to their estate, as
riches, honor, etc. these two latter sorts of good things we are not further
bound to will, or procure to an enemy, then they may serve to further his
salvation; because he may possibly abuse them. We are therefore to will and
procure them these, upon condition, and limitation; for further then this, we
may not wish them to our selves.

4. Question. Whether is a man bound to pray for all sorts of enemies?

Answ. Some there may be, for whom we are not bound to pray; as namely such
as sin against the Holy Ghost. Which the Apostle calls (...), a sin unto
death. And does not enjoin us to pray for such offenders 1 Ioh. 5.16.
. But such malefactors, through Gods goodness, very rarely appear. Our
enemies are not such. For now the question is, of our own enemies, considered
as offenders against our selves. And for these our charge to pray, is without
exception of any in this life; without they give manifest declaration of their
apostasy, and abiuration of the faith. Because as Austin, alleged by Hales to
this purpose, well speaks: De quocunque pessimo in hac vita constituto non
est desperandum: nec pro illo imprudenter exoratur, de quo non desperatur Alex.
Hales par. 3. q. 59. m. 5. ar. 7. ex Augustino lib. 1. Retract. cap. 19.
: Of the worst of men remaining in this life, we may not despair: nor is it
folly to pray for him of whom it were a breach of charity to despair.
Therefore shall we find David to have been at his prayers, and fasting in
sackcloth, for those that rewarded him evil for good, to the spoiling of his
soul Psa. 35.12, 13.
.

5. Question. no respect, may we hate an enemy?

Answ. In an enemy, there be two things, says Bonauenture Bonauent. in 3.
sent. did. 28. q. 2. ar. 3.
; Nature, and Sin. All men, in as much as they still retain some relics of
Gods image in their nature, and are capable of happiness, are to be loved. But
evil men as evil men are not to be loved, but rather loathed. For thus God
himself does; who in respect of nature, hates nothing that he has made; but
in respect of sin, they are an abomination unto him. To the same purpose,
Hales: Aliquos pie amare and odisse possumui; vt quos dilexeris, odisse, and
quos oderis, amasse conueniat Alex. Alens ibid. ar. 6.
: Some there be, whom we may piously both love, and hate: insomuch that it may
well agree to hate whom we love, and love whom we hate.

But here we must distinguish de culpa, of offense; because if it be
considered as an offense against our selves, we may not hate an enemy for
this, but only as our enemy offends against God. And this is clear: because
our enemies, strictly taken, must be loved, not hated for any thing they commit
against our selves; unless their offense stricke also at God himself: then,
we are for this last, to hate them; and so we are to hate them, not as our,
but as Gods enemies. Thus David, before us: Do not I hate them, O Lord, that
hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate
them with a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies Psalm. 139.21, 22.
. But in doing of this, we must take this caution with us: When we hate a
sinner, we must neither hate his nature, for his sin; nor his sin, for the
man: but hate sin, as sin, and love the man, for his nature; and out of
love to his nature, do what we can to destroy his sin.

6. Question. curse an enemy; as Eliah 2 Kin. 1.10, 12.
, Elisha 2 Kin. 2.24.
, David 1 Samuel 26.19. Psalm. 69.22. etc.
, and our Lord Matt. 11.21. and alibi passim.
himself have done?

Answer. That these did it lawfully, there is no question, because a curse
followed those, whom they cursed. But in what manner, and upon what warrant,
sub Iudice lis est, is all the difficulty. Some say they did it by their
Prophetical authority, answerable whereunto is that power communicated to
Ministers of the Gospel 1 Cor. 16.22.
. Others, that they did it per praedictionem quid esset futurum, non optantis
voto, sed spiritu praeuidentis: prophesying what would befall those persons,
not wishing, but only foreseeing and foretelling those evils to come upon those
accursed men. Of this opinion are Chrysostom Chrysostom. vt citatur in Gloss. in
Luc. 6.
, Austine August. sermon. dom. in Monte.
, and Hales Hales ibid. par. 3. q. 59. m. 5. ar. 6.
. But whether this, or that, were their warrant, and manner of denouncing those
curses; these, being all extraordinary persons, making imprecations upon
extraordinary occasions, they can be no Presidents for ordinary persons, in
ordinary offenses, for which impatient and godless wretches take upon them to
curse all that offend them in the least degree.

I know some do give a limited toleration; Inimicorum vitio maledicere licet,
naturae non licet Hales ibid.
: making it lawful to curse their sin, but not their nature. But me thinks,
the Apostle pares this clean away, when he thus commands: Bless them that
persecute you; bless I say, and curse not Romans 12.14.
. Cursing is a part of revenge, which is Gods, and not ours.

It is not therefore lawful for any, but such as have power of the keys, to
curse. Nor have they power to curse, for fees; (as some do, who had rather,
with the dreadful axe of Excommunication hew off a member from the Body of
Christ, and cast him into the arms of the Devil, then lose a see) this power
was only lent them, for the correction and terror of scandalous offenders 1
Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Cor. 16.22.
, and such as contemn government Matt. 18.17.
.

7. Question. Whether is a man bound so to love an enemy, so fervently, as we
do to a friend?

Answer. It is one thing to love aeque intense, in all respects alike
fervently: another thing in the act of well willing, to love actu aeque intenso
Petrus de Aliaco. in 1. sen. did. 1. q. 2. art. 1.
, with an equal intensiue act. The former notes a higher prizing, and
valuation of the thing loved, then the latter does; which only notes the same
degree of well willing such things as we equally wish both to enemies, and
friends.

Now, we may and must love enemies and friends equally in the intensiuenesse
of any act, whereby we will, or procure their good, that we are bound unto by
the law of love. But we are not tied in all respects to love an enemy, as we
love a friend, that grace makes our friend. The reason is, because a godly
friend (for of him we now speak) does actually communicate of bliss in part;
and has not only nature, but grace to advance him to an higher room in our
hearts, then any enemy may hope to aspire, because he is not yet possessed of
any part of blessedness; (I still take an enemy, for him that is a sinner
against God, as well as an offender against our selves) nor has he any grace
to make us value him at so high a rate. Yet forasmuch as love must be without
dissimulation, we must as heartily wish and will good unto the veriest enemy
we have, as to the dearest friend.

8. Quest. Whether is not a man bound to prize some persons that God has made
near unto us by nature, or wedlock (though they set against us as enemies) at
a higher rate, then others further off, that excel in grace? As for example:
Whether may a man or a woman love some Ministers or other excellent Christians,
more then a father, a wife, or a husband, that take bad courses?

Answ. Although it be true, that grace is more lovely then nature, yet grace
commands not the affections to unloose their hold from that which God himself
has fastened them to. There is a (...), or natural affection unto Parents,
that no man must be without, unless he will be impious. So there is by
marriage such a conglutination not only of bodies, but of hearts and
affections, that a man must for this cause, forsake father and mother, and
cleave to his wife Genesis 2.24.
: and that wife that estrangeth or abateth her affections from her husband,
upon any pretense, unless for adultery, does violate the Covenant of her God
Pro. 2.17.
.

We must therefore distinguish of love, which in respect of the ground, may
be termed either Natural, or Spiritual: Natural, is that entire affection
to, and valuation of such as God has knit us near unto by the bonds of
nature, or conjugal society. Spiritual love, is that sincere affection to,
and prizing of such as do excel in grace. These two compared one with
another, may be thus preferred. A man may love a gracious man, as a gracious
man, more then him that is ungracious; but one may not love a gracious man
better then a husband or a wife considered in these relations: because if a man
have never so much grace that is further off, another man's wife may not love
him with that dear love, wherewith she is to love her husband, for her
covenants sake; although she should except community of bodies. And so a
married man may not love a gracious woman that is not his wife, with that
dearness of affection, which he is to bestow on his wife, as his wife. The
reason is, because grace does not teach us to neglect or break any Covenant of
God, but rather stablish it, and stir us up to keep it with more fidelity.

Briefly we may conclude it thus. A gracious person is to be respected more in
regard of admiration and imitation: but Parents, or Husbands, or Wives, are to
be loved above all the world, in respect of observation, preservation,
entirety, loialty, and faithful performance of all duties comprised in that
Covenant of God, which he has called both parties to seal unto.

I have been large in the resolution of these eight questions, which I could
not well leave out, without leaving many scruples in some readers minds. It is
now high time to draw toward the conclusion, in an use, or two.

If this be our duty, all men, as well enemies, as friends; it is then a great
fault among us that we are so far from this duty, that scarce any do in
good earnest believe themselves bound unto it. I may give instances too many to
prove this accusation no slander. Come to most even of the richest men, for
something extraordinary for the poor; what maundring, grudging, complaining
will they keep! And in stead of being ready to distribute, and willing to
communicate, fall to cursing, and railing at those that demand it. They will
have no man master of their purses, no not God himself; they never dream of
this thing called Charity, which must master them, and command their purses
upon all occasions.

There be others of such a sour, sullen, dogged disposition, that they can
love no man heartily, but themselves. And if they do force themselves to fawn
a little, one neighbor, or two, of their own cut and humor, must have all
the love they can spare: and all the rest may go shake their ears, and go
without; as if no bond lay upon them to love any man living, but whom they
please.

Nay it were well that many were not much worse then those Publicans, (whom our
Savior vpbraided) and did not refuse to love those that love them, and do
them all the good they can. How common is it for men to mistake friends for
foes, and foes for friends; and to undo themselves by those they bestow most
love upon: like those that bestow a great deal of precious hot water upon a
dropsy that will be sure to kill them: and all because they love not any, in
conscience of that duty they owe unto God, but only for by-respects.

Have we not many that think it an impossible, and unreasonable task, to
love an enemy? What? love him that daily railes at them with such bitterness,
as if he had been as far as hell for every word that tumbles out of his
mouth against them, and does them all the spite and mischief he can possible
work them? Love this man? then love the devil himself, (think these men.)
Can flesh and blood bear this? Nay they will rather die a thousand deaths then
endure him: if they could love him, they would not. They have said enough now,
(they hope) to stop any fools mouth, that should be so silly, to persuade them
to love such an enemy; which, none but some fainthearted Priest, that trembles
at the sight of a sword, would draw them to. But know O man, from the Lord
himself, that all this will not bear thee out in not loving thy enemy. For
all that an enemy can do in matter of offense, to our staring gallants, is
but to provoke flesh and blood; it cannot make grace to hate him for it: as we
see in the examples of holy men who have loved the greatest enemies that ever
they had. Does not God do good to the unthankful and evil? Did not Christ
die for us whiles we were enemies? Did not David entirely love, and tender the
good of his most causeless bloodthirsty enemy, persecuting Saul? How many
services had David done him with the hazard of his life? Vide Chrysostom. hom.
in Psalm. 7. tom. 1.
How often did God put the life of Saul into David's hand? how tender was David
of him, notwithstanding his malice, that the man who brought tidings of his
death, received present death for a reward of such unwelcome tidings? The like
we see in Steven toward his enemies, who in the midst of that tempest of
murdering stone-shot, which cruelly beat out his brains, could find in his
heart to kneel down and pray, Lord lay not this sin to their charge Act.
7.60.
.

All this does let us see, that the cause why we cannot love an enemy, is not
so much the abundance of his hatred, as our want of grace. And therefore now it
is a clear case, what flesh and blood cannot, grace must yield unto. And take
this for a rule: He that has not grace to love an enemy, did never love
friend from his heart, for friendship sake, although he dote upon him never so
much. Fly his friendship, that cannot love an enemy; for he is certainly a
hollow hearted graceless friend: if ever thou move him, he will remove thee
for ever from his heart.

There be one sort more whose mouths must be stopped: and they are such, as
think no man can be in charity with them, that rebukes and reproues them.
Nay, Loves hand can strike, as well as stroke; and scourge, as feed; and
lance and wound as well as bind up and heal. Love, says Bernard, is a good
mother, that sometimes takes up her children, and whips them, as well as kiss
them. Pie solet saeuire, sine dolo mulcere; patienter nouit irasci, humiliter
indignari Bern. epist. 2. ad Fulcon.
: She is wont to rage piously, as well as seek to please without deceit; she
knows how to be patiently angry, and humbly frowning. The reason we have from
Solomon: Open rebuke is better then secret love. Faithful are the wounds of a
friend; but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful Pro. 27.4, 5.
. David's humility is now out of fashion, that would give any man leave to
knock him soundly with a plain admonition; assuring himself it could never
break his head: and therefore put it in his prayer unto God, that he would
ever provide him some righteous man to smite him Psalm. 141.5.
continually. He knew well enough, what many since his time have by woeful
experience found to be true; that, A flatterer is but a secret thief, that
cares for nothing but to get what he can for himself, and send the rest to the
devil. It were cruel pity, not (with all haste) to snatch a friend out of
the fire, for fear of putting some member out of joint, to save him a burning.
And God himself does not account that, love, but deadly hatred, which makes a
man forbear to rebuke his brother plainly, and so suffer sin upon him Leu.
19.17.
, for want of this duty of love. It is too plain, they extremely love their
sins, that will not endure any man should offer to pluck them from them; or
so much as speak an ill word against them. He that desires to be cured, lays
open his sore to the searching instrument; and still calls to his Chyrurgion to
be sure he go to the bottom: but he that laps it up, and keeps it warm, and
will let no body touch it, is sure of an ulcer that will rot his whole body,
if he continue in that dainty foolishness, not enduring the searching and
launcing of it.

To conclude all in charity, charitable, since it is but our duty, which all
must perform, or perish for ever. Now let us begin to try how we can love an
enemy. It is not in our power, says Chrysostom, not to have enemies; but it
is in our power not to hate enemies; and it must be our endeavor to love them.
The means I shall add to help us herein, shall only be motives (added to the
former) to induce us hereto.

1. Consider, that there is none of us all, but would be glad to be loved of
all the men in the world, if we could bring it to pass. Now what reason can we
have to expect this, when we are resolved to love but a few?

2. Remember that we daily trespass against God, more then any can trespass
against us. And we look that God should, for all this, love and forgive us,
and think never the worse of us. But it is in vain to expect this at the hands
of God, unless we do the like to our enemies. Our Savior has often auoucht
it, lest any man should think, he will be better then his word.

3. Consider that it often happens, that one cruel enemy falls at one time or
other into the hands of another, on whom he has powered most contempt. As we
see in Saul, falling often into David's power: And daily examples of men that
come within the reach of their greatest enemies, that may do them most
mischief; and then if they could not formerly find in their hearts to love
them, it were unreasonable to expect their favor, and base to desire it.

4. Consider that while we love not our enemies, we have another at our
powles, that does us more mischief then all the rest. The devil would ask no
better advantage then to settle a man in this uncharitable humor. For then he
knows it an easy matter to work him to any villainy whatsoever. We see it in
Cain, in Saul, and others, that by means of this sin, were drawn unto
murder, and all barbarous cruelty. Therefore that Item of Austin is worth our
observing: Disce diligere inimicum, si vis cauere inimicum: Augustine. in Psalm.
100.
: If thou will beware thy great enemy, love thy little one.

5. Consider, though it be more comfortable to love a friend, yet it is more
honorable to love an enemy. It is a man's glory to pass over a transgression
Pro. 19.11
, says Wisdom it self. Let any man judge, who behaved himself more
honorably, Lamech, or David? This is certain: He that loves an enemy, gets a
greater conquest, then he could do by hating him, though he should cut him in
pieces. He that follows his enemy with love, will still get ground of him,
do what he can for his heart; and bear away the honor, in the eyes of all
that look on.

6. Lastly consider: He that loves an enemy shall draw a greater revenge upon
his enemy, by his love, (if his enemy notwithstanding his love, persist in
his enmity) then he could possibly do by any other means. This is evident
from that of the Apostle: Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather
give place unto wrath; for it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay,
says the Lord To. 12.19.
. He that being wronged, if he can but have patience to leave the revenge unto
God, and go on in his love, shall be sure to have it done to his hand by the
Lord himself: who as he keeps this prerogative royal to himself alone, so
will he see that no man shall be a loser that will not presume to snatch Gods
own sword out of his hand.

Yea the way to load a persisting enemy with vengeance is to love him with all
our hearts. For this will bring the coals of fire upon his head by heaps Verse.
20.
. And take this to the vantage: Whereas if thou had not loved him, but sought
to revenge thy self upon him, thou had grievously sinned, though he had
deserved as much at thy hands; now that thou love him, he shall be met with
in another fashion then thou could have done, with all thy power: and thou
shall be free from sin in that revenge, and for thy charity, immortally
crowned with glory. He that with all this, will not be moved to love an enemy,
deserves to have enemies enough.

FINIS.

