AN ENGLISH EXPOSITOR: TEACHING THE INTERpretation of the hardest words used in
our Language.

WITH SUNDRY EXPLICATIons, Descriptions, and Discourses.

By I. B. Doctor of Physic.

(...).

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA

ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA

seal of the University of Cambridge

LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS, HIS SINGVLRA GOOD LADY, THE LADY JANE
Vicountesse Mountague, all honor and happiness.
BEing persuaded (Right Noble Lady) by some friends, for public benefit to
make this Collection of words common, which at first was intended only for
private use, (as written in my youth, at the request of a worthy Gentleman, one
whose love prevailed much with me) I could not find in heart to send it forth,
no better furnished than with a bare Title; lest like an unknown Infant, it
should be exposed to over hard usage, or peradventure scornefully rejected,
aduenturing abroad without countenance of any friend or commander. Upon sure
knowledge therefore of your most honorable disposition, and former experience
of your Ladyships favor toward me, I am emboldned to present this little
Pamphlet unto your Honor, with hope that by your Patronage it shall not only
be protected from injuries, but also find favorable entertainment, and
perhaps gracefully admitted among greatest Ladies and studious Gentlewomen, to
whose reading (I am made believe) it will not prove altogether ungrateful.
And although I may well be taxed of folly or presumption, that for credit of a
slender trifle, crave the assistance of so eminent a Person, yet such (I
confess) is my care thereof (since I must not deny it for my own) and my duty
and devotion so affected to your Honor, and all yours; that I have, (hoping of
your Ladishps pardon) wilfully repelled al reasons which might dissuade me,
choosing herein not so much what may seem most seemly, as what I suppose most
behoouefull for me.

Accept therefore I beseech your Honor, and receive under your noble tuition
this little vocabulary Treatise, which having been many years restrained of
liberty, is now glad of enlargement, especially recommended unto so worthy a
Patroness. The glorious Sun loses not the least point of his height by
liliberall lending down his light, and quickening with his influence the
lowest creatures; neither is any eminency disgraced, that easily condescendeth
to others desired good: which is also confirmed by the Poet, who says;
Conspicitur nunquam meliore potentia causa,
Quam quoties vanas non sinit esse preces.


Not thinking needful therefore to trouble your Honor with many words of
entreatie (upon assured confidence of your well known Charity and goodness) I
conclude, sincerely wishing to your Ladyship, the best that may be wished, and
resting my self ever,

Your Honors to be commanded, IO. BVLLOKAR.

To the Courteous Reader.
HEre have you (Gentle Reader) that which at first was not made for you, though
now willingly (for your benefit if you embrace it) offered to your kind
acceptance. Commend it my self I will not, lest I should give occasion to some
quick heads, to come upon me with the verse, Author opus land at etc. Yet this I
will say (and say truly) that in my younger years it has cost me some
observation, reading, study, and charge; which you may easily believe,
considering the great store of strange words, our speech does borrow, not only
from the Latin, and Greek, (and some from the ancient Hebrew) but also from
foreign vulgar Languages round about us: beside sundry old words now grown
out of use, and diverse terms of art, proper to the learned in Logic,
Philos^phy, Law, Physic. Astronomy, etc. yea, and Divinity it self, best
known to the several professors thereof. And herein I hope such learned will
deem no wrong offered to themselves or dishonor to Learning, in that I open
the signification of such words, to the capacity of the ignorant, whereby they
may conceive and use them as well as those which have bestowed lon^ study in
the languages, for considering it is familiar among best writers to usurp
strange words, (and sometime necessary by reason our speech is not sufficiently
furnished with apt terms to express all meanings) I suppose withal their
desire is that they should also be understood; which I (knowing that bonum quo
communius eo melius) have endeavored by this Book, though not exquisitely,
yet (I trust) in some reasonable measure to perform. It is easier (all know)
to find faults, then to mende them, and easier to mend faults in another work
already written, then to write any new work free from all fault. If therefore
any fault finder, or over curious Critic (for from the best learned I expect
best usage) shall to show his skill grow captious, and quarrel at my
interpretations, I will desire him to forbear bitterness, and temper a while
his choler, till having laid this work aside, he travel himself in the
same or some other new argument; and then I doubt not but he will either become
more indifferent, or give others occasion to bid him English the old Proverb,
Medice cura teipsum. But as for you (judicial or courteous Reader) whose
favor I desire, and whose counsel or friendly correction I will not refuse,
if to you (I say) any thing herein shall occur, which seems by me omitted,
mistaken, or not fully satisfactory to your expectation, (for indeed there are
almost slipped away seven years since I had any leisure as much as to look on
it) I promise that upon warning hereof given to me or the Printer, at a second
Impression it shall be amended or supplied. Meanewhile use this as you find
it, and I persuade my self your honesty will say it is worth the money you
paid for it. So committing my self and Book to your favorable good liking, I
commit you to God.

From my house at Chicester in Sussex, this 17. day of October. 1616. Your
hearty well willer, Io: Bullokar.

An Instruction to the Reader.
Have care to search every word according to the true Orthography thereof, as
for Phoenix in the Letter P. not in F. for Hypostaticall in Hy: not in Hi.
Remember also that every word marked with this mark * is an old word, only
used of some ancient writers, and now grown out of use. Lastly, if a word be
of different significations, the one easy, the other more difficult, I only
speak of interpretation of the hardest; as in the words Ten, Girl, Garter,
may appear.

ABandon. To forsake: to cast off, Abate. To make less: In our common Law it
signifies, to enter into any inheritance, before the right heir take
possession, with intent to keep the said heir out of it. Abatement. The
action or enterprise of him which abateth in the common Law. Abba. An Hebrewe
word signifying Father. Abbett. To help or assist one in evil. Abbettour. He
that counsels or comfort another to do any evil. Abbot A spiritual
Lord over a religious house of Monks. Abbreuiate. To make short: to abridge.
Abbreuiation. A making short, an abridgement. Abdicate. To refuse or forsake,
to renounce. Abeston. A stone found in Arabia, of the color of iron, which
being once set on fire, can hardly be quenched. Abject. Vile, base, of no
estimation. Abjure. To swear or forswear: a term sometime used in Law, when
one having committed a capital offense flies to a Church, or Churchyard, and
chooses rather perpetual banishment: viz. to abjure the Realm, then stand to
trial of Law. This Law was instituted by S. Edward the Confessor in favor
of life, but now is not in use. Abiuration. A renouncing by oath: see Abjure.
Ablepsie. Want of sight, blindness, unadvisedness. Ablution. A washing.
Abolition. A taking away, destroying or abolishing. Abortion. The birth of a
child before due time; or the destroying in the mothers womb. Abortiue. That
which is untimely borne. Abraham's Baume. A little tree of the kind of Withies
growing in Italy, and other hot countries, bearing round fruit like Pepper
corns. It is very hot and dry; and has a singular property to procure
chastity, for which cause Physicians have named it Agnus castus. Abridge. To
shorten, to cut off, to gather only the principal points. Abrogate. To
abolish: to disanull, by public authority to alter and make a Law, which was
in force, to be of no effect. Abrupt. Broken off. Abruptly. By peecemeale: out
of order, without observing of due circumstance. Absolve. To pardon, acquit,
or discharge. Absolute. Perfect: accomplished. Absolution. Pardon, acquitall,
forgiveness. Abstinence. A forbearing from gluttony, or unlawful taking other
men's goods. Abstinent. Sober, temperate, content with his own. Abstract. A
little book, or gathering taken out of a greater. Abstraction. A taking away:
or a short draught taken out of a greater thing. Abstruse. Hidden: secret, not
easy to understand. Absurd. Foolish, without any wit or grace. Absurdity.
Foolishness. Abusiue. That which offers abuse. Abisse. A bottomless pit,
any deepnesse so great that it cannot be sounded. Acatia. A little thorn
growing in Egypt, out of the leaves and fruit whereof they draw a juice or
black liquour, which being dried, is called Acatia, and is very astrictiue or
binding. Our Apothecaries have not the right Acatia, but instead thereof, they
use the juice of Sloes, being of the same virtue that Acatia is. Academie. A
University or great public school: the name hereof first came of a place in
Athens, called Academia, where Plato taught. Academicall. Belonging to an
University, or Academie. Academicke. A Philosopher of the sect of Plato. They
acknowledged one God, and believed the immortality of souls; Plato having
learned many things of the Hebrews, then the peculiar people of God.
Accelerate. To hasten. Acceleration. A hastening. Access. Liberty or power to
come to a place. Accessible. Which may be gone too Accessory. He that
counsels or commands another to commit any offense: or comfort, or
hides him, knowing that he has committed an offense. Accident. That which
happens by chance: sometime it signifies that which belongs to a thing,
and yet is no part of the substance, as the quantine, quality and such like.
Accidental. Happening by chance: or belonging to an Accident. Acclamation. A
crying out to one. Accomodate. To make fit: to apply. Accoutrement. Attire, or
dressing. Accoste. To draw near to one. Accrue. To grow, arise, or increase.
Accumulate. To heap up. Accumulation. A heaping together. Acerbity.
Sowrenesse. Acheeue. To perform* or bring to pass. Acolite. A Minister
serving to bring water, wine and light to the altar. Aconitum. A venomous
herb, having a root much like to a Scorpion, and shining within like
alabaster. Poets feign that Cerberus the three headed dog of hell, being
dregged up in a chain of Adamant by Hercules, did cast some of his foam upon
this herb, whereby it became so venomous. Acquire. To get, or procure.
Acquisition. A getting or purchasing. Acquit. To discharge, or free one.
Acquitall. A freeing of one from being guilty of an offense wherewith he was
charged. Action. A deed done: or the doing of any thing. In our common Law it
signifies a suite commenced against any man, and is commonly divided into
three differing kinds. viz. 1. Action personal. which is for debt, goods,
cattle. 2. Action popular: which any man may sue, as upon the breach of a
penal statute, where some advantage is allowed to him that will sue for it. 3.
Action real: when one claims title to any lands tenements, rents, or common,
in fee simple; fee tail, or for term of life.
Active. Lively, strong, nimble. Actiuitie. Strong nimblenesse. Actor. A doer,
sometime a Player. Actual. That which is done or committed. Acute. Sharp,
witty. Adage. A proverb. Adamant. A precious stone commonly called a Diamond,
brought out of Arabia and Cyprus. It is the hardest of all stones, insomuch
that it cutteth glass, and yields neither to stroke of hammer nor fire, for
which cause the Greeks name it Adamas, which in their tongue signifies
Invincible: Notwithstanding it is softened with goats blood, being steeped
therein new and warm. It is of contrary nature to the loadstone, in so much
that being laid near it, the loadstone cannot draw iron, having the virtue
thereof ouermastered by the Adamant. Addict. To apply, or give ones self much
to any thing. Additament. Any thing added. Addition. An adding or putting to.
In our common law it signifies any title given to a man beside his name which
title shows his estate, trade, course of life, and also dwelling place.
Adhere. To cleave to. Adherence. A cleaving to, or belonging to any thing.
Adherent. That which cleaves or joins close to a thing. Adjacent. That which
lies near to another thing. Adiourne. To defer or put off till another
time. Adiournement. A term in law when any Court is dissolved, and appointed
to be kept upon some other time, or at any other place. Adiunct. A quality
joined to a thing, as heat to fire, coldenesse to Snow. Adjure. To bind by
oath: to make one to swear. Adiuration. A swearing, or binding by oath.
Administer. To do service: sometime to take charge and dispose of a dead man's
goods, by appointment of the Ordinary. Administration. The doing or handling
of a business; or the disposing of a dead man's goods, that made no will.
Administrator. He to whom the Ordinary commits in charge the goods of a
man dying without will. Admire. To wonder, to honor or esteem highly.
Admiration. A wondering. Admission. A receiving or giving one leave to enter.
Admit. To let in, to allow of. Admixtion. A mingling of things together.
Admonish. To warn* Admonishment. A warning given one. Adopt. To choose one to
be his son. Adoption. The choosing and making one to be as his son to him.
Adore. To worship, to give divine reverence. Adoration. A worshipping. Adorn.
To deck, to set out, to beautify. Adornation. A decking, or trimming. Aduent.
A coming: Certain weeks before Christmas are so called, because then is made
in the Church solemn preparation for the coming of our Savior. Aduentaile. A
coat of Armor. Adverse. contrary. Aduert, To mark. Advertise. To give
knowledge of a thing. Adulation. Flattery. Adulatory. Which flattereth.
Adulterate. To corrupt or counterfeit. Advocate. He that pleads for another.
Aduouson. The right which a man and his heirs have to present a Clerk to the
Ordinary, to be admitted to a spiritual benefice when it becomes void.
Adust. Burnt, scorched. Adustion. A burning. Aedile. An officer among the
ancient Romans, who had charge to see that Temples, private houses and
highwaies, were kept in good reparation. Aegipan. A Poetical word, signifying
a monster having the body of a man and legs like a Goat. Aerie. A nest of
Hawks is so called. Aeriall. Ayrie, or of the air. Affability. Courtesy in
speech: gentleness, kindness. Affable. Courteous or kind in speech. Affect.
To love: sometime to move affection. Affectation. Too much curiosity: an
extreme laboring without discretion to imitate another, or do any thing well.
Affiance. Trust: confidence. Affianced. Betrothed. Affinity. Kindred by
marriage: sometime likeness or agreement Affirmative. Which affirms.
Affluence. Plenty: abundance. Affront. To come boldly before one: to look
boldly in ones face. Africa. One of three parts of the world, lying toward the
South; herein is Barbary and all Ethiope contained. The people of these
countries lived in times past very uncivilly, feeding much upon serpents flesh:
It is called Africa of the Greek work Phrice, which signifies Cold: and the
particle A. which in that language, being placed before a word, changes the
sense thereof: so that Africa signifies a country hot or without cold.
Agarick: A kind of mushrome or tadstoole of great account in Physic. It
grows upon the Larch tree in Italy, and is white, light, brittle, and
spongeous. It expels cold fleame and gross raw humors out of the body,
opening obstructions of the Liver, and by this means amendeth an evil color.
Aghast. Amazed with fear: dismaide. Agent. A dooer or medler in a matter.
Aggrauate. To make any thing in words more grievous, heavier or worse then it
is. Agilitie. Nimblenesse. Agitation. A shaking, iogging or moving. Agnition.
Knowledge: acknowledgement. Agnize. To acknowledge Agnus castus. See Abraham's
baume before. Agony. A torment of body and mind: great fear and trembling.
Agriculture. Tillage of land: husbandry. Alabaster. A kind of marble white and
very clear, which by reason of the natural coldness thereof does preserve
things long from corruption; and therefore they used to make boxes of it to
keep sweet ointments, and toombes to bury Princes and great Personages in.
Alacrity. Cheerfulness: courage, quickenesse. Alchymie. The art of melting
or dissoluing the nature of metals, by separating the pure from the impure
parts thereof. Alchymist. He that is skillful in Alchymie. Alcion. A small
bird that makes her nest in the sea, and then it is a sign of fair weather:
some call it a kings fisher. Alcoran. A book wherein Mahomets law and religion
is written. * Alderan. A star in the neck of the sign Leo. Algate.
Notwithstanding: if so be, seeing that. Alien. A stranger borne, an outlandish
man. Alienate. To estrange and withdraw the mind, sometime to sell.
Alienation. An estranging, a selling away. Aliment. Nourishment. Alkakengi.
Otherwise called winter cherries: An herb which bears round berries and red,
that are good against the stoppings of the Liver, the stone and gravel, and
diverse diseases of the kidneyes and bladder. Allay. To qualify or abate the
strength or violence of any thing. It is also a term of hunting, when they set
hounds in a readiness where they think a Dear will pass, and cast them off
when the rest of the Kennell comes in. Allegation. A telling of some proof or
reason of a matter. Allegiance. Obedience of a subject to his Prince.
Allegory. A sentence consisting of diverse tropes which must be understood
otherwise then the litterall interpretation shows; as when Saint John Baptist
speaking of our Savior, Matthew. 3 said: Whose fan is in his hand, and he
shall make clean his floor, and gather the wheat into his barn but the
chafe he shall burn with unquenchable fire: The meaning whereof is, that
Christ being supreme Judge of all, shall separate the good from the evil,
rewarding the one in heaven, and punishing the other in hell fire.
Allegorical. Of, or belonging to an allegory: spoken by an allegory.
Alleluia. An Hebrew word or rather two Hebrewe words joined in one, used as a
sign of exultation, and is interpreted, Praise ye our Lord. Paulus Diaconus
writes, that when the Britains were invaded by the Saxons and Picts, and on a
time ready to fight a battle against them, they were admonished by Germanus a
French Bishop, (who was sent hither with Saint Lupus to confute the Pelagian
heresy) that they should do as he did; and forthwith he cried aloude
Alleluia: which when the whole army of Britains had done, the sound thereof
struck such a terror into the enemies, that they presently fled away,
whereby the Britains had the victory. De gestis Romans lib. 15. Allie. Of kin
to one by marriage. Alliance. Kindred and affinity, league or friendship.
Allot. To appoint, or give by lotte. Allude. To speak any thing which has
resemblance, or privily is directed to touch another matter. Allusion. A
likening or privy resembling of one matter to another. See Allude. * Alnath. A
star in the horns of the sign Aries. Aloes, or Lignum Aloes. A precious
wood used in Physic, which comfort the heart, and opens obstructions. It
is knotty, brown of color, and bitter in taste. Being burned it fometh, and
yields a sweet perfume. Some affirm it to grow upon mountains in the
East, near the rising of the famous River Nilus, from which mountains falling
down, it is carried by the stream into India, where being taken up in nets,
it is cleansed, and made apt for physic. Aloesuccotrina. The juice of an
herb brought hither dry out of India; the best whereof is clear, clean and
red, like to the color of a liver. It is very bitter, but an excellent
medicine to purge choleric humors out of the stomach; yet not good to be
taken inwardly of such as are troubled with the Hemorrhoides. Alpha. The first
letter of the Greeks: wherefore it is sometime taken for the first or cheef in
any thing. Alphabet. The crosserow of letters, the A, B, C. Alphabeticall.
Belonging to the Alphabet. Alps. High mountains between France and Lombardie:
the rocks whereof Hannibal (the great Captain of the Carthaginians) softened
in diverse places with fire and vinegar, to cut out a way for his army to pass
into Italy. Altercation. An angry reasoning or wrangling in words. Alternall.
Done by turn or course, one after another. Altitude. Highth. Amate. To dismay:
to make afraid. Amazon. A woman of the Country Amazonica. Amazones were warlike
women of Scythia, which kept a Country to themselves without men, yet to have
children companied with the bordering people. Their Sons they either
destroyed or sent home to the father, but their daughters they kept, bringing
them up in hunting, ryding, shooting and feats of arms. They burned the right
breast of their children, lest it should hinder their archerie, wherefore they
had the name Amazons, which (in Greek) signifies women wanting a breast.
Ambage. A long circumstance of words. Amber. A kind of hard yellow gum,
wherewith they make beads. Mesue says, the tree whereon it grows is called
Ibex Romana; but what this tree is, I cannot yet learn. Dioscorides says,
that it falls in manner of a liquor from Poplar trees into the river Po in
Italy, where it congealeth and becomes hard, in that form as we see it.
Ambergrise. Mesue says it is the spawne of the Whale fish: Auicen affirms it
to grow in the sea. Others write only, that it is cast up on the shore, and
found cleaving to stones there: the fume thereof is good against the falling
sickness, and comfortable to the brain. Ambia. A clammy liquor of the color
of honey, brought out of India. It is said to have great virtue in healing old
aches or griefs, proceeding from cold diseases. Ambidexter. He that can use
both hands alike: a crafty follow, that can play on both parts. Ambiguitie.
Doubtfulnesse. Ambiguous. Doubtful: uncertain. Ambition. Unlawful, or
immoderate desire of sovereignty. Ambrosie. A sweet shrub or little tree,
wherewith some people were wont to make Garlands. In poetry it usually
signifies the meat of the heathen gods. It is sometime taken for immortality.
Ambulatorie. A place to walk in. Ambuscado. A company of Soldiers, hid in
some wood or other covert, to entrap their enemies unawares. Amenitie.
Pleasantness, delectablenesse. Amerce. To punish one by enioyning him to pay a
certain small sum of money, at the discretion of him that lawfully
commands it. Amercement. A punishment by the purse: See Amerce. Amethist. A
precious stone of a purple color, fit to grave any thing in, because it is not
ouerhard. It withstandeth drunkenness, as the name in Greek signifies.
Amiable. Lovely. Amity. Friendship, love. Ammoniacke. A kind of gum almost
like to Frankincense, so called because it grows in Lybia, near the place
where the Temple of Ammon was. There is also a kind of salt so called, which is
found in Africa under sand, and is like unto allume. Amorous Loving, or given
to love. Amphibolie. A speech having a doubtful sense, or which may be taken
diverse manner of ways. Amphibologie. The same that Amphibolie is. Amphiscians.
Such people as dwell under the burning Zone, near the Equinoctial line, so
called because their shadows at noone are sometimes toward the North,
sometimes toward the South. Amphitheater. A place having seats and scaffolds
in it, used among the old Romans to show spectacles and strange sights in.
Offenders condemned to dye, and Prisoners taken in war, were often brought to
this place to fight and be devoured by wild beasts, the people sitting in
safe places above, and inhumanely sporting themselves thereat: Also the
Gladiators or Sword-players did fight here. Ample. Large, great. Amplify. To
enlarge. Amplification. An enlarging. Amplitude. Largeness, greatness.
Amulet. Any thing hanged about the neck, to preserve one from enchantment.
Anagramme. An invention that by altering the places of the letters of ones
name, changes the word, and turns it to some other sense, as if for John,
one would write, Honi: there being just the same letters in them both.
Analogy. Proportion, agreement, or likeness of one thing to another.
Analysis. A resolution or explicating of an intricate matter. Anarchie. Lack
of government: all the time when the people is without a Prince or Governor.
Anathema. Any thing hanged up in a Church, as an offering to God: sometime it
signifies excommunication; or a man excommunicated and delivered to the power
of the devil. Anathematize. To hang up a thing as consecrated to God: sometime
to curse, swear, or betake to the devil. Anatomy An incision or cutting. The
art of knowing the situation, office, and nature of all the parts of man's body.
Anatomize. To cut and search every part. Anchouie. A Spanish fish less then
our Sprat, preserved in pickle, and used by Gallants to draw down drink.
Anchoresse. A religious woman that lives solitary in some close place by her
self. Anchorite. A religious man living solitary alone in some close place.
Angelical. Like an Angel. Angle. A corner. Anguish. Grief of mind: vexation.
Angust. Straight, narrow. Animaduersion. A marking. Animate. To encourage: to
harten on. Anime. A white gum or rosin brought out of the West Indies: It is
very pleasant in smell, and being cast into the fire consumes very quickly.
Animositie. Courage. Annalls. Chronicles of things done from year to year.
Annats. First fruits paid of a spiritual living. Annex. To knit or ioin to.
Annihilate. To make void, or bring to nothing. Anniuersarie. A solemnity kept
every year at a set time. Annotation. A note, mark, or exposition made upon
any writing. Annual. Yearly. Annuitie. A yearly payment of money to one, not
in way of rent, but upon some other occasion. Annull. To make void.
Annunciate. To tell or declare. Antagonist. An enemy: an adversary. Antartike
Pole. The south pole of the world. Antecedent. That which goes before.
Antheme. See Antiphone. Antichrist. An adversary to Christ: It is compounded of
the Greek preposition Anti, and Christus, which signifies contrary or against
Christ. Anticipate. To prevent: to take before another. Anticipation. A
preventing; or taking before. Antidate. The dating of a letter or other writing
on some day already past. Antidote. A medicine against poison, or which serves
to amend any distemperature of the body. Antike work. A work in painting or
caruing, of diverse shapes of beasts, birds, flowers, etc. vnperfectlie mixed and
made one out of another. Antimonie. A white stone found in silver mines.
Antipathie. A countrariety or great disagreement of qualities. Antiperistasis.
A term used in Philosophy, when heat being kept in by cold, waxes the
stronger in it self, or cold kept in by heat, grows more vehement.
Antiphone. Any verse or little sentence, which churchmen do by course sing one
after another. Antipodes. People under us that go with their feet toward
ours. Antique. Old, ancient. Antiquaric. One studious in matters of antiquity,
or well acquainted in old Histories. Antiquate. To make old, or of no account.
Antithesis. A contrariety of things placed against other; as the spokes be in
a wheel. Antlier. The lower branch of a Hearts horn. Anxietie. Carfulness,
sadness. Anxious. Careful: sad. Aphorism A short sentence, briefly
expressing the properties of a thing: or which serves as a maxim or principle
to guide a man to any knowledge, specially in Philosophy and Physic.
Apocalypse A divine book written by Saint John Evangelist, while he was
banished in the I Will Pathmos: so called because it contains many profound
mysteries there revealed unto him. In English it signifies a Revelation.
Apocrypha. That which is hidden and not known. Doubtful. Apocynon. A little
bone in the left side of a Frog, of great virtue as some think. Apogeon. A
term in Astronomy, signifying the farthest distance of a Planet from the
earth. Apology. A defense: a speech or written answer made in justification
of any person. Apologicall. That which is spoken an defense. Apophthegme. A
short quick sentence worthy the noting. Apoplexy. A very dangerous disease,
wherein a man lies without sense or motion, as if he were dead, with his eyes
close, and great difficulty in fetching his breath. It comes for the most
part of cold and gross flegmaticke humors, oppressing the brain in such sort
that the animal spirits, cannot pass from thence into the sinnewes, as they
were wont. Apostasy. A reuolting or falling away from true religion. Apostata.
He that reuolteth or falls from true religion: Iulianus one of the old
Emperors was most infamous for this crime. Apostaticall. Of or belonging to an
Apostata. Apostle. One sent in message: an Ambassador. Apostolical. Of or
belonging to an Apostle. Apozeme. A drink made with water and diverse spices
and herbs, used instead of sirupes. Appall. To make afraid: Apparent. Clear,
manifest, certain. Appariter. A sumner* he that attacheth or summoneth one to
appear at a Court. Apparition. An appearing: or vision. Appeach. To accuse:
disclose, or bewray. Appeal. A term in law, when a malefactor accuses or
discloseth those that were his confederates in the same offense or any other.
Also when the defendant refuses a Judge, and desires to have his cause tried
by a superior power, he is said then to appeal: as Saint Paul appealed from
Feslus to Caesar the Emperor. Appellant. He which appealeth. Appellation. A
naming or calling. Appendix. That which depends or hangs upon another
thing. Appertenances. That which appertains or belongs to an other thing.
Applaude. To show love or liking to a thing, by clapping the hands, or other
sign of rejoicing. Applause. A rejoicing or clapping the hands for joy.
Application. An applying of one thing to another. Apposition. A putting of one
thing to another. Approbate. To like, to allow. Approbation. An allowance, or
liking. Appropriate. To challenge to ones self: to keep to himself alone.
Appropriation. A term used when any body corporate, or private man, has the
right unto a parsonage in themselves, and may receive the profit thereof, by
maintaining a Vicar to serve in the place. Arbiter. A judge in a controversy,
chosen indifferent for both parties. Arbiterment. An agreement made between
parties, by an indifferent man to them both. Arbitrary. Belonging to
arbiterment. Arbitrate. To judge, to make an agreement Arbitratour. See
Arbiter. * Arblaster. A Crosse-bow. Architect. A chief workman. Architecture.
The art or Science of building and comely co^triuing a house. It is written
that this Science did begin in Caine, because he was the first that ever
built a city, which he called by his sons name Enoch, as appears, Genesis 4.
Ardent. Burning hot: vehement. Ardour. Heat: earnestnes. Argent. Silver or
silver color: sometime white. Argonautes. The Worthies that went into Colchos
to fetch the golden Fleece; so called of the ship Argo in which they sailed.
The chief of them were Jason, Typhis, Castor, Pollux, Hercules and Thescus.
Ariditie. Dryness. Ariopagite. A Lawyer or chief Judge in Capital matters in
the City of Athens: so called of a certain street in that city dedicated to
Mars, in which those Judges were wont to sit. They were so severe in their
judgments, that they satte to hear and determine matters in the night time,
to the end they would not behold the parties which were to be judged, but only
hear what could be objected and answered. Saint Dionisius converted to the
Christian faith by Saint Paul, was one of those judges. Aristocratie. A kind
of government, where the noble men, or chief persons bear all the sway.
Aristocraticall. Of or belonging to Aristocratie. Arithmetike. The art of
numbering: It is written that Abraham first taught this art to the Egyptians,
and that afterward Pythagoras did much increase it. Arc. In holy scripture it
signifies two things: 1. The Arc made by Noe at the commandment of God,
which was 300. cubits long: 50. cubits broad, and 30. high: Genesis 6. Secondly it
signifies a most precious and consecrated cofer or chest, called the Arc of
testament, made of the wood Sethim, and plated within and without all over with
gold: It had four corners, and in each corner a golden ring, thorough which
were put bars of the same wood Sethim, covered likewise with gold, which
served for the carriage thereof. This Arc was two cubits and a half long, one
cubit and a half broad, and one cubit and a half deep. Exodus 25. In it was
kept part of the Manna in a pot of gold, also the two Tables of the Law, and
Aarons rod that had budded: Heb. 9. Armadilio. A beast in India of the bigness
of a young pigge, covered over with small shells like unto armor; for which
cause he is called Armadilio, to wit, an armed beast. This beast lives in the
ground like a mole, and the bone of his tail has virtue to cure diseases and
noise in the head. Armipotent. Mighty, strong. Aromaticall. Sweet of savor:
smelling like spice. Arrerages. Money or rent behind, not yet paid. Arrian. An
heretic of the sect of Arrius bishop of Alexandria, who devised a blasphemous
doctrine against the divinity of our Savior. Arride. To please well, to
content with delight. Arrogancy. Pride, loftines Arrogant. Proud, boasting.
Arrogate. To challenge, proudly more honor or praise than is due. Artery. A
vein with two coats, or a hollow sinew in which the spirits of life do pass
through the body. These kind of veins proceed all from the heart, where the
vital spirits are made, and are those which pant or beat, called commonly the
pulses. Articulate. To set down articles or conditions of agreement.
Artificial. Cunning, well contrived, skillful. Articke pole. The North pole of
the world. Artillery. Great ordnance for the wars. Artisan. A handy crafts
man. Artist. He that is skillful many art. Asa foetidae. A dried gum or liquor,
brought out of Media and Syria, of a strong loathsome savor; and is sometime
applied outwardly to the body. Ascance. Sidewaies, or looking on one side.
Ascribe. To impute, apply, or account. Asia. One of the three parts of the
world bounding toward the East, in which is Pontus, Bithynia, Phrygia,
Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Palestine, or the holy land,
Arabia, Mesopotamia, (so called because it is in the midst between the two
great rivers, Tigris and Euphrates) Assyria, Media, Persia, and diverse other
countries. Aspe. A venomous Serpent of a black earthie color and sometime
yellow. The superstitious Egyptians did honor them, and their Kings used to
wear the figure of an Aspe in their Diadems. They go always two and two
together, and if it happen that one of them be killed, the other will presently
pursue him that slew his fellow, in such sort that he shall hardly escape,
unless he make great have or pass over a river. If one be bitten by this
Serpent, the best remedy is presently to cut off the member so bitten, if it be
possible; otherwise he shall fall into a deadly sleep, and within few hours
go away, as it were in a trance. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, after the death of
Marcus Antonius (whom she loved as her Husband) flue her self wilfully, by
applying one of these aspes to her body; because she would not be carried in
triumph to Rome, by Augustus Caesar; who had vanquished her and Antonie.
Aspect. Sight or the beholding of any thing. In Astronomy it signifies the
distance between the planets and heavenly signs: And there are four such
Aspects. The first called a Trine aspect (because it divides the heavens into
three even parts) is the distance of four signs from each other; as Aries
beholds Leo and Sagittarius with a Trine aspect, because these are distant
four signs, the one before, the other after Aries. The second called a
Quartill, is the distance of three signs, as Aries beholds Cancer and
Capricorn, with a Quartill aspect, because they are distant three signs from
him. The third called a Sextill aspect, is the distance of two signs, as Aries
beholds Gemini and Aquarius with this Sextill aspect, being but two signs
distant from them. The fourth called an Opposite aspect, is the farthest
distance that can be, namely a distance of six signs asunder; as Aries
beholds Librae with this opposite aspect, and Libra beholds Aries with the
same. The like is of all the other signs, or Planets placed in them. For
example; Taurus beholds Cancer and Pisces with a Sextill, Leo and Aquarius
with a Quartill, Virgo and Capricorn with a Trine, and Scorpio with an
opposite aspect. The distance of one or five signs is not called an Aspect.
Asperitie. Sharpness. Aspersion. A sprinkling. Aspire. To hope to come to a
thing: to seek advancement. Aspiration. A breathing, or pronouncing the letter
H. before a vowell. Assasinate. A robbing, spoiling, or murdering in the high
way. Assecure. To make one sure or certain, to give one assurance. Assentation
Flattery. Assertion. An affirming or auouching of any thing. Assets. A term
in the Commmon Law, when we would signify that a man has goods enough come
to his hands, to discharge a dead man's debts or legacies given by him.
Asseueration. An earnest affirming. Assiduitie. Continuance, or continual
attendance. Assign. To appoint: also one that is appointed in another
behalf. Assignation. An appointment. Assignement. An appointing or passing of
a thing over to another. Assistant. A helper. Associate. To accompany.
Association. A joining together in fellowship. Assoile. To acquit, clear, or
pardon. Assume. To take to himself. Assumpsit. When one for some consideration
given him, undertakes any thing. Assumption. A lifting or taking up.
Astipulation. An affirming; an agreement. Astriction. A binding. Astrictiue.
Which has power to bind. Astringent. The same that Astrictiue is. Astrolabe.
An instrument of Astronomy to gather the motion of the Stars by. Astrology.
See Divination. Astrologer. One skillful in Astrology. Astronomy. An art that
teaches the knowledge of the course of the planets and Stars. This art seems
to be very ancient, for Josephus: lib. prim. Antiq. writes, that the Sons of
Seth, Nephews to Adam (for Seth was Adams son) did first find it out: who
hearing their Grandfather Adam foretell of the universal flood which should
shortly drown the world, they thereupon erected two great pillars, engrauing in
them the principles of Astronomy; which pillars were the one of brick, the
other of stone; because if the water should happily wash away the brick, yet the
stone might preserve the knowledge hereof for posterity. Astronomicall.
Belonging to Astronomy. Atcheuement. A term of Heraldry, signifying the arms
of any Gentleman set out fully with all that belongs to it. Also the
performance of any great matter. Atheism. The damnable opinion of the Atheist.
Atheist. He that wickedly believes there is no God, or no rule of Religion.
Atomie. A mote flying in the sun. Any thing so small, that it cannot be made
less. Atrocitie. Cruelty: outragiousnesse. Attache. To take: to lay hands on.
Attainder. A conviction or proving one guilty of a capital offense. Attaynt.
Convicted or proved guilty of some great crime. Attentive. Diligently
harkening. Attestation. A witnessing. Attired. A term used among Heralds, when
they have occasion to speak of the horns of a Bucke or Stag. Attract. To draw
or pull to. Attraction. A drawing or pulling too. Attractiue. Drawing or which
has virtue to draw. Attrectation. A handling or feeling. Attribute. To give
to, or impute. It signifies sometime a fit title or term applied to any
thing. Attrition. Sorrow, repentance. Atturnie. He that by mutual consent
takes charge of any other man's business. Attumment. The paying of any small
piece of money by a Tenant, in token that he acknowledges the party to whom he
pays it, to be now his Landlord. Avarice. Covetousness. Aucupation. Hunting
after a thing. Audacious. Bold, hardy. Audacitie. Boldness. Audible. That
which is so spoken that it may be heard. Auditor. An Officer of accounts: It
is often taken for a hearer. Audience. A hearing or hearkening: sometime it
signifies an assembly of people harkening to some thing spoken. Auerre. To
justify, avouch or maintain a thing Auerment. A term in Law when one offers
to prove that his plea is good. Auersion. A turning away, a disliking. Auert.
To turn away. Augment. To increase. Augmentation. An increasing. Augur. See
Divination. Auiditie. Greediness. Auowable. That which one may justify and
maintain. Auow. To justify or maintain. Auowrie. A Law term, when a
Bayliffe or other Officer, auoweth or justifies the lawful taking of a
distress from any man. Auricular. Spoken in ones ear. Auripigmentum. See
Orpment. Aurora. The morning. Auspicious. Lucky: fortunate. Austere. Sharp,
severe, cruel. Austeritie. Sharpness, hard usage. Authentical. That which is
undeniable, and approved of all men. Authentike. The same as Authentica.
Autumn. Harvest time: one of the four quarters of the year; the other three
are winter, springtide, and summer. Autumnal. Of, or belonging to Autumn.
Axiom. A proposition or short sentence generally allowed to be true; as in
saying, the whole is greater than a part. It signifies also in Logic, any
perfect sentence, that affirms or denies a thing, as in saying, Caesar is
merciful, or Caesar is not merciful. * Aye. For ever Azymes. A solemnity of
seven days among the Jews, in which it was not lawful to eat leauened
bread: the Pasche or Ester of the Jews. Azure. A fine blew color.
B
BAboone. A beast much like an Ape, but greater. Bacchanals. The feasts of
Bacchus. Badger. He that buyeth corn or victual in one place, to carry into
another. It is also a beast of the bigness of a young Hog, living in the
woods, commonly called a Brock. * Bale. Sorrow: great misery. Balase. Gravel
or any thing of weight laid in the bottom of ships to make them go upright.
Balefull. Sorrowful. Balke. A little piece of ground in earable land, which by
mischance the Plough slippeth over, so that it is not ploughed at all. Ballon.
The round Globe or top of a pillar. Balm. A precious juice or liquor,
otherwise called Balsamum, or Opobalsamum. It droppeth by cutting out of a
little low plant (about a yard high) having leaves like Rue, but whiter, which
plant grows in Egypt, and some places of the holy Land. This juice is
somewhat like to oil, but more clammie, and inclining to a certain redness.
It has a strong smell, and is not pleasant in taste: Being put into a vessel
of water, it will sink down to the bottom like a round pearl, without
breaking, and may be taken up again with the point of a knife. It is an
excellent medicine to take any scar out of the body, and for diverse other
purposes, but very costly and rarely gotten. Saladinus writes that there was
but one vineyard of these in the whole world, and that belonged to the great
Turk. Balneo. A bath. Balsamum. See Balm. Baptism. It commonly signifies a
dipping or washing. Baptist. A washer. S. John the son of Zacharias was so
called, for that he first began to Baptize or wash men in the river of Jordan
to the remission of sins. Barbarism. Rudeness in speech, or behavior,
outrageous cruelty. * Bardes. Poets. * Bargaret. A kind of dance. Barrester.
He that is allowed to plead causes at the bar. Barretter. A common
quarreller: one that is ever suing and molesting others without cause.
Barricado. A warlike defense, of empty Barrels, and such like vessels, laid
at the breach of a wall to keep out the enemies. Barriers. A warlike exercise
of men fighting together with short swords, and within some appointed compass.
Barter. To bargain or exchange commodities for commodities. Base. In
Architecture it signifies the foot of a pillar, or the foundation that
supporteth any thing. Basiliske. Otherwise called a Cockatrise: the most
venomous serpent that is. It breaks stones and blasteth all plants with the
breath thereof, burning every thing that it goes over; neither can any herb
grow near the place where it lies. It is poison to poison, and drives away
all other serpents, with only hissing. If a man touch it but with a stick, it
will kill him, and if it see a man a far off, it destroys him with his
looks. This serpent is not above a foot long, of color between black and
yellow, having red eyes, a very sharp head, and a white spot thereon like a
crown wherefore he is called by some in Latin Regulus, viz. a little king. It
goes not winding like other serpents, but upright unto the middle, holding up
the breast thereof. It breeds only in the hot burning sands of Africa: Of
this Basiliske the Poet Lucane writes thus. lib. 9. Sibilaque effundens
cunctas terrentia pestes.
Ante venena nocens, late sibi submouet omne
Vulgus, and in vacua regnat Basiliscus arena.
With deadly hiss the Basiliske, all other plagues does fright.
And speedier kills then poisons can, with his infectious sight.
He Will have no neighbor dwell near him, he loves to live alone.
And tyrantlike reigns by himself, in cave of sandy stone.
Bassae. A noble man, or great Commander under the great Turk. Bastinado. A
staff: a cudgel. Baston. A staff, or cudgel: sometime it signifies an
officer of the Fleet, attending in the kings Court, with a red staff, to
convey such to ward, as are there committed. Battry. A beating or striking.
Baubee. A small coin: a farthing. * Baine. A Bathe. Bdellium. A Gum brought
out of Arabia, and the Holy land, of a sweet smell and bitter taste. It has
virtue to mollify and ripen hard swellings, and is good against the
stiffenesse of sinews or other parts, and against the biting of venomous
beasts. Beads of Saint Elline. Certain round roots brought out of Florida,
which being dry are very hard, on the outside black, and inwardly white: of a
sweet smell and good taste. They are of great virtue against griefs of the
stomach, as al so of the kidneys or reins. Beam. The maine horn of a Heart or
Stagge. Beatitude. Blessedness. Beauer. In armor it signifies that part of
the helmet which may be lifted up, to take breath the more freely: It is also a
beast of very hot nature, living much in the water. His two forefeet are like
the feet of the beast called Gattus, (as Ioannes de Sancto Amando writes:)
but what this Gattus is, I do not well understand, only I suppose it to be at
Otter. Upon these feet he has very sharp claws, wherewith he takes his
prey, and hangs upon water banks. His hinder feet are made like to the foot
of a Goose, wherewith he swimmeth. He has very sharp teeth, and does much
harm to trees, with knawing the roots and ryndes of them. It is written that
if a Beauer come into a strange place, where he has not been bred, the other
Beauers will make him their slave, to provide them meat, and pull off all the
hair from his back that he may be known. The stones of this beast are sold
in Apothecaries shoppes, by the name of Castoreum: they are much used in
Physic, being very good against palsies and cold diseases of the sinews: But
the skin is of more value then the stones. Beeglue. That which Bees do make at
the entry of their Hiue, to keep out cold. Beestings. The first milk that
comes from the Teate, after the birth of any thing. Belial. An Hebrew word
signifying a wicked naughty person. An Apostata; one without yoke, and is many
times taken for the devil. * Beliue. By and by, anon. Bellona. War, or the
goddess of War among the Heathen. Belt. A girdle. Beelzebub. An Hebrew word
compounded of Bell, which in that language signifies an Idol, and Zebub, a
Fly; so that Beelzebub signifies the Idol of Flies: notwithstanding commonly
it is taken for the devil. Benediction A blessing. Benefactor. A friend, one
that does good. Beneficence. A doing good. Beneficent. Liberal, loving.
Benevolence. Good will. Beneuolent. Loving, frie^dly, well wishing. Benign.
Friendly, gentle, favorable. Benignity. Friendlinesse: liberty, courtesy. *
Benison. A blessing. Benzwine A sweet smelling gum, good against hoarsenesse
and the cough, being dissolved in water and dronken. It has many other
excellent properties to be used in Physic. The tree upon which it grows is
not with us certainly known. Berill. A precious stone brought out of India,
cut most commonly with six corners, because otherwise it would not show so
fair, if the sticking out of the corners did not make the brightness more
manifest. It is of a greenish color, like the water of the sea. Bestiall.
Beastly: dishonest. Bestialitie. Beastliness. Beuie. A heard of row Buckes:
most commonly with us it signifies, a great number of Quails in company
together. Beuie grease. The fat of a Row Dear. Bezar stone. A stone of
excellent virtue against poison, very costly and of great account in Physic.
It is commonly of the bigness of an Acorne or Chestnut, being compounded of
certain thin scales, one upon another, like the scales of an Onion. It is
easy to be scraped or cut, and if it continue long in water, it melts. The
middle part is something hollow, and full of powder of the same substance that
the stone is of. And this is a mark to know whether the stone be fine and
true: for the Indians do counterfeite them sometimes and deceive many. This
stone is taken out of the bowels of a beast in India, much like a Heart, saving
that his horns are like a goats. The occasion of the growing of the stones
(as some write) is thus. These Hearts or wild Goats (for they resemble both)
going to the dens of Serpents in those countries, do with their breathing
compel them to come forth, and then eat them: after they go whereas water
is, and plunge themselves therein until they perceive the fury of the venom
be past, and till then they will not drink a drop: being come forth of
the water, they go into the fields, where feeding upon many healthful
herbs (known to them by natural instinct to be of virtue against poison)
they are perfectly freed from all danger; and by the mixture of these herbs
with the Serpents eaten before, these Bezar stones are very strangely (as is
said) ingendered within them: growing by little and little, as appears by the
scales thereof one folded upon an other. Bezill. The broad part of a ring, in
which the stone or signet is set. Bice. A fine blew color used by painters.
Bigamie. The marriage of two wives; not both together, but severally after the
death of the first. Bigamus. Twice married, he that has had two wives. Such an
one the Romish Church admits not to the Ministry. Bipartite. Divided in
two parts. Birgandes. A kind of wild goose. Bissextile. Leap year, so
called, because the sixth Calendes of March are in that year twice reckoned:
viz. on the 24. and 25. of February, so that leap year has one day more
than other years have. This leap year is observed every fourth year, and
was first devised by Julius Caesar, to accommodate or make the year agree with
the course of the sun. Bitumen. A kind of clay, naturally cla^my like pitch;
growing in some countries of Asia. It was of old used in physic: The best is
heavy, bright, and clear, of purple color, and having a strong smell. The
black is accounted naught. This Bitumen was used in stead of mortar, at the
building of the tower of Babel, as appears in Genesis cap. 11. There is also a
kind of Bitumen, like unto a liquour, flowing out of some fountains in the
Islland Sicilie, which is used in stead of oil to burn in lamps.
Blankemanger. A custard. Blemishes. Marks made by hunters, to show where a
dear has gone in. Blend. to mix or mingle together. Blewmantle. The name of
an office of one of the Purseuants at arms. * Blithe. Merry, frolic, joyful.
Blomarie. The first forge, through which the iron passes, after it is once
melted out of the mine. Bloudstone. A stone growing in Ethiopia and Arabia; of
nature astrictiue, stopping any issue of blood, and eating proud flesh out of
wounds. It is of a dark color, like unto congealed blood. Bole armoniacke. A
reddish stone like to ruddle, of a very binding nature, and of great virtue
against the plague. Bonayre. Gentle, mild, courteous. Bone breaker. A kind of
Eagle, having so strong a beak that therewith she breaks bones. Bolus. A
medicine which must be eaten: a mouthfull. Bonnet. A hat or cap. Boon. A
request, a suite, a demand; some time it signifies good: as a boon companion,
a good companion. Boras. A white substance like unto saltpeter; wherewith
goldsmiths use to solder gold and silver: some write it is the gum of a tree;
which is very unlikely: others affirm it to be made of old lees of oil, by
art and drying in the sun brought to be white; notwithstanding I suppose it
rather to be a mineral. Boreas. the northeast wind. Braces. In building it
signifies the pieces of timber, which bend forward on both sides, and bear up
the rafters. Brachmans. A sect of philosophers in Iudia, that lived only by
herbs, roots, and fruit. Brachygraphie. A short kind of writing, as a
letter for a word. Braket. A drink made of water and honey. Brandish. To shake,
properly a sword or such like weapon. Braynsicke. Mad, foolish, furious. *
Bretfull. Top full. Brevity. Shortness. Brigandine. A coat of defense.
Brigantine. A kind of small light ship. Brime. A term used among hunters
when the wild Boar goes to the femall. Brocage. Means used by a spokesman.
Broches. The first head or horns of a Heart or Stagge. Brocke. See Badger.
Brocket. A red Dear two year old. Brothell. A house of dishonesty.
Brothelrie. Dishonestie, bauderie. Brute. A report spread abroad. Brumall. Of
or belonging to winter. Brute. Beastly, barbarous. Brutish. The same.
Brutishness. Beastliness, barbarous behavior. Budge. A futre of a kind of
Kid in other countries. Buffe. A Beast like a Bull, with a very long mane; This
beast breeds in the woods of Germany. Bugle. The same that buffe is: sometime
a black horn. Bullion: Silver unrefined, not yet made in money. Burdon. A
deep base. Burganet. A Helmet, a Head-peece. Burglarie. The breaking and
entering into a house by night, with intent to steal or kill. Burnet. A hood or
attire for the head. Burnish. To make a thing to glister or look fair by
rubbing it. It is also a term among hunters, when Hearts spread their horns,
after they be fraied or new rubbed. * Burled. It sometimes signifies Armed.
Burly. gross, fat, great. Burre. The round roll of horn, next the head of a
Heart. Bursholder. A Headborough, or officer in a borough. Buttresses. Stays
for to bear up any building, or make it strong. Buxome. Pliant, amiable,
obedient. Buxomnes. Lowliness, humbleness.
C
CAbal. The tradition of the Jews doctrine of religion. Cabalist. One skillful
in the doctrine of the Jews religion. Cachos. An herb of red color, growing
in India, which is of virtue against the stone, and to provoke urine. Cadence.
The falling of the voice. Calaber. A little gray beast of the bigness of a
Squirrell, whose skin is used for furre. Calamarie. A fish which has his
head between his hinder part and his belly, with two bones, one like a knife,
the other like a quill, whereof he is called by some a Cutle fish. Calcinate.
To burn. Calcine. To burn. Calcination. A burning, a turning into ashes.
Calculate. To cast account, to reckon. Calculation. An account a reckoning.
Calends. It signifies properly, the first day of every month, being spoken
alone by it self. If Pridie be placed before it, then it signifies the last
day of the month going before, as Pridie Calend. Ianuarij. is the last day of
December. If any number be placed with it, it signifies that day in the
former month, which comes so much before the month named; as the tenth
Calends of March is the twentieth day of February, because if one begin at
March, and reckon backewards, that twentieth day is the tenth day before March.
In March, May, July, and October, the Calends begin at the sixeteenth day, in
other months at the fourteenth which Calends must ever bear the name of the
month following, and be numbered backward from the first day of the said
following months. Calfe. The Fawn or young one of a Red Dear. Califie. To
make warm. Calefaction. A making warm. Callette. A lewd woman. Callidditie.
Subtiltiy, craftines. Calthrope. An instrument used sometime in War. It is a
little thing made with four pricks of iron; of such a fashion, that which way
soever it be thrown, one point will always stick up like a nail, to spoil
the enemies horsefeete. Caligraphie. Fair writing. Calumniate. To slander: to
belie one shamefully. Calumniation. Slanderous lying. * Camoyse. Crooked
upward, as commonly, the noses of black Moors be. Camphire. A kind of
Gum, as Auicen writes. But Platearius affirms it to be the juice of an
herb. It is white of color, and cold and dry in operation. Cancel. To deface,
cut or blot out. * Canceline. Chamlet. Canicular. See doggedayes. Canker. A
hard swelling in the veins, being ouercharged with hot melancholy humors. It
is called a Canker, because the veins so swollen are like unto the claws of a
Crab. This disease may happen in any part of the body, but most commonly in
women's breasts; by reason of their spongie hollownesse, and great number of
veins there meeting. If it continue long it is very hard to cure, because
gentle medicines will do no good, and strong do increase the raging malice of
it. Canniball. A barbarous savage person: one that eats man's flesh. Canon. A
Greek word, properly signifying a rule or line, to make any thing straight, or
to try the straightness of it. Hereof Laws or decrees for Church government
are called Canons. And certain times of prayer used by Churchmen, were called
Canonical hours of prayer. Canonical. Approved by common or exact rule.
Canonier. He that shoots in great Ordinance. Canonize. To declare and
pronounce one for a Saint. Canonization. The solemnity of Canonizing or
pronouncing one to be a Saint. Cantharides. Certain Flies shining like gold,
breeding in the tops of Ash and Olive trees beyond Sea. They are sometime
used by Physitio^s, to raise blisters in the body; but their heads, wings, and
feet must be cast away. The juice of them is poisonous. Cape. A corner of
land shooting out into the Sea. Capabilitie. An aptness to contain, or
receive. Capable. Which can contain or hold a thing. Capacity. Aptness to
receive and hold. Capers. A prickly plant, almost like to brambles, growing in
Spain, Italy, and other hot countries. The root hereof is much used in
Physic, against obstructions of the spleen or milte. The flowers and leaves
are brought hither from Spain, preserved in brine, and are commonly eaten with
Mutton. They stir up the appetite, warm the stomach, and open the stoppings
of the liver and milt. Capital. Chief, principal; sometime deadly,
abominable. Capite. A tenure, when a man holds lands, immediately of the
king, as of his crown. Capitole. An ancient palace in Rome, so called.
Capitulate. To draw or bring into Chapters. Capriole. Leaping of a horse above
ground, called by horsemen, the Goats leap. Capstand. An instrument to wind
up things of great weight: some call it a Crane. Captious. Short, quick,
quarrelsome in demands. Captiuate. To take prisoner. Captivity. Bondage,
imprisonment. Caranna. A Gum brought out of the West Indies, of great virtue
against aches proceeding of cold causes. Carbonado. A rasher upon the coals.
Carbuncle. It has two significations, namely a precious stone, and a dangerous
sore. 1. Carbuncle stone, is bright, of the color of fire. It has many
virtues, but chiefly prevails against the danger of infectious air. The
best of these stones will shine in darkness, like a burning coal, as
Albertus writes, himself has seen. Others shine but a little, and are less
esteemed; but such as shine not at all, are scarce of any reckoning: these
stones are found in some countries of Africa 2. Carbuncle disease, is a botch
or ulcer, (otherwise called by a Greek name Anthrax) caused of gross hot
blood, which raises blisters, and burns the skin. This ulcer is ever
accompanied with a Fever.
Cardones. An herb in India, of virtue to heal sores. Carlo Sancto. A root
growing in the West Indies, of a pleasant smell and bitter taste, the rynde
whereof being chewed draws down fleame and humors from the head, and being
drunken in powder is good against diverse inward diseases. Carcanet. A small
chain. Cardinal. Chief, principal. Carnal. Fleshly. Carnalitie.
Fleshlinesse. Carol. A song: sometime a dance. Carpe. To check, taunt or
rebuke. Carreere. A short swift race with a horse, as at Iusts, Tournaments.
Carrike. A great ship of burden. Casana. India bread. Casia. It is commonly
taken for Cinnamome. Poets understand often by it, some sweet smelling herb:
as Virg. Eclog. 2. Tum Casia atque alijs intexens suauibus herbis.
Also Ovid. Quo simul ac Casias and nardi lenis aristas.
Quassaque cum fulua substr auit Cinnama myrrha,
Lactantius
also: De Phoenice. Cinnama dehine, auramque procul spirantis amomi;
Congerit and mixto balsama cum folio.
Non Casiae mitis, nec olentis vimen acanthi,
Nec thuris Lachrymae, guttaque pinguis abest.
Where we see that Casia and Cinnamome, signify two things. Some think it to
be Lauender for mine own part, I know not certainly what English name or
interpretation to give it. Cassia fistula. A fruit growing in Arabia and
Syria, which is round, black, and long, almost as ones arm, of the bigness
of a Thumb. The outside hereof is hard: within it, is contained the seed, and
a black substance soft and sweet, which is much used in Physic, as a gentle
purger of the inward parts. Cassia lignea. A sweet wood much like Cinnamome,
and of the nature of Cinnamome. Castigate. To chastise, to correct.
Castigation. A chasticing, a correction. Castleward. A payment made by some
dwelling within a certain compass of a Castle, for the maintenance of those
that do watch and ward the Castle; Also the circuit of land, which owes this
service. Castoreum. See Beuer. Casual. That which happens by chance,
doubtful, uncertain. Casualtie. Chance: fortune, hap-hazard. Catadupa. A
place in Ethiopia so called, where the great river Nilus, falls from high
Mountanous rocks with such violence, that the continual noise thereof, makes
the people there dwelling to become deaf. Catalogue. A roll, a bill, a
register of names or other things. Cataplasma. It signifies properly a
medicine, which is made of diverse herbs, either bruised or boiled in water,
and so applied outwardly to the body. If there be oil added, it is not then
called a Cataplasme, but an Emplaister. Cataract. A destillation of humors out
of the eyes. Catarrhe. A destillation of waterish humors out of the head, into
the mouth and throat, caused by a cold and sometime hot distemperature of
the brain. Catastrophe. The conclusion or end of Comedy: a sudden alteration.
Catechumen. A nouice, or one newly instructed in matters of faith, by word of
mouth. Categorie. In the Greek tongue it properly signifies an accusation. It
is also a term used in Logike, which shall after be explicated in the word
Predicament. Categoricall axiom. A simple axiom or proposition, not
compounded of any conjunction, as, Peter is a man. Cathedral. Of or belonging
to a Bishops Chair. Catholic. A Greek word, signifying universal or
general. Catoblepa. A strange beast that kill^th a man only with the sight of
it: some think it to be the Basiliske, or Cockatrise. Cauearce. A strange
meat like black soap, made, (as is said) of the Roe of a Sturgeon. Caveat. A
warning, an admonition to take heed. Cauerne. A hole or Cave in the earth.
Cauille. To mock or flout in words, to reason ouerthwartly. Cauitie.
Hollownesse. Causticke. A medicine that burns; and is used when a disease
cannot otherwise be mastered. Cautele. A taking heed. Cautelous. Wary,
circumspect. Cauterize. To burn: to sear. Caution. A warning or watchword
given to take heed: sometime a great heedfulnesse, or wary carriage in a thing.
Cedar. A tall great tree, which grows in Africa, and Syria, straight upright
like the Fur tree. The leaves are small and thick, of a sweet smell: This
Tree has fruit on it, all times of the year, which fruit is like that of the
Pine and Fur Tree, but greater and harder. Celebrate. To speak or write very
honorably in praise of any thing: also to rehearse often: and sometime to
keep a festiual day, or other time with great solemnity. Celebration. The
solemnization of a feast. Celebritie. Great resort to a place: famousnesse.
Celeritie. Swiftnes, speed. Celestial. Heavenly. Celsitude. Highness. Cement.
Mortar: Lime. Censer. A vessel to burn Frankincense in Censor. A grave
Officer having authority to controlle and correct manners. Censorean. Belonging
to a Censor. Censure. A judgment: an opinion. Centaures. People of Thessalie,
which because they first rid on horses, were supposed to be half men and half
horses. Poets feine they were begotten by Ixion upon a cloud, made in the
likeness of Juno. They warred on the Lapithes, and were overcome by Hercules.
Center. The point in the midst of a round circle, or the inward middle part of
a globe. Wherefore the earth is called the Center of the world, because it is
in the midst thereof. Centurion. A Captain over a hundred footmen. Certes.
Surely; certainly. Certificate. A writing which testifies the certainty of a
thing. Cerusse. White Lead, oftentimes used by Surgeons in ointments and
playsters Some women make painting therewith. Ceterach. Otherwise called
Fingerferne: An herb which has neither stalk, flower, nor seed. It is much
used in Physic against the black Iaundise, quartaine agues, and stopping of
the spleen. Chalons. Blankets, Couerings. Chameleon. A little beast like a
Lizard, having a rough scaly skin, straight legs, sharp claws, a slow pace
like a Torteyes, and a long wreathed tail: He changes himself quickly into
any color that he sits upon, except white and red: wherefore men that are
inconstant and fickle, are sometime called Chameleons. This beast (as is said)
is nourished only with air. Chamfering. A small gutter or furrow made by art
upon some pillars of stone or timber. Champertie. See Champertours.
Champertours. Those that stir others to go to law, and bear the charges
thereof themselves, to the end they may have part of the land, or other thing
in variance. Chancellor. A chief officer in a spiritual Court: Also the Lord
or chief Judge in the Chancerie. Chancerie. The Court of equity and good
conscience. Chantor. A singer. Chaos. A great confused and disorderly heap,
out of which Poets imagined all thing to be made. Chaplet. An attire for the
head, made of Gold, Pearl, or other costly, or curious stuff, used to be
fastened behind; in manner of a foulded roll or garland. Character. The form
of a letter. A mark, sign, or stamp made in any thing. Characterie. A writing
by Characters or by strange marks. Charles Wayne. Certain Stars winding
about the North pole of the world, in fashion like four wheels and horses
drawing it. Poets feine that Calisto, King Lycaons daughter, having had a
child by Jupiter, was by Juno in despite turned into a Bear, and that
Jupiter changing Calisto afterward, into this figure of Stars, for that
cause, in Greek it is called Arctos, which signifies a Bear. Charnell house.
A place to lay sculles, and bones of dead men in. Chart. A writing, a written
deed. Charter. A writing whereby the King makes a grant to any person or persons
of any liberty, privilege, pardon, or other thing: Also writings between
private men, are sometime so called. Chattell. A Law term, whereof there be two
kinds, namely Chattels real, and Chattels personal. Chattels real, are
beasts, or wards. Chattels personal are all moveable goods, as money, plate,
cattle, etc. Chaunter. A singer. Cheat. To cousin, to deceive. Cheating.
Cousenage. Cherubin. One of the highest Order of Angels: See Hierarchy.
Cheeftaine. A Captain. Cheek varnish. Painting used by some women.
Cheuisance. Merchandise, bargaining. China. A hard knotty root brought out of
the East Indies, of a reddish color: It is very comfortable to nature, and
used often in restoratiues and diet drinks. Chiromancie. See Divination.
Chivalry. Knighthood: the knowledge of a Knight or Nobleman in feats of arms.
Chiuancie. Chivalry: riding. Chrisme. A Greek word, signifying an Ointment:
Sometime it is taken for a white linen cloth, wrapped about an infant after it
is newly christened. Chrismatorie. A vessel to carry oil in. Christ. The
surname of our Savior, signifying anointed. Chronologer. One skillful in
Chronicles. Chronology. The knowledge of old Stories. Chrysocoll. A kind of
mineral found like Sand in the veins of some mettalles. Chrysolite. A stone
of the color of Gold, which shines brightest in the morning, and receives
harm if it be held too nere the fire. Chymera. A strange monster, having the
head and breast like a Lion, the belly like a Goat, the tail like a Dragon.
Chymicall. Of, or belonging to a Chemist. Chemist. A Physician following the
method of Paracelsus. Cimball. An old musical instrument, made in some places
of two or mo plates of brass, which with beating together made a ringing
noise. Cimisse. A noisome little worm, flat and red, which raises wheals
where it biteth: If it be broken, it yields a stinking smell. Cinoper. A
soft red stone, found in mines, otherwise called Vermilion. The Paynims did use
to paint their Idols therewith, and themselves in public feasts and
solemnitiss, as we read that Camillus when he tryumphed in Rome was painted
with this Vermilion: So Virgill speaking in his tenth Eclog, of the shepherds
God Pan, says that he was seen, Sanguineis ebuli baccis minioque rubentem.
With bloody Walwort berries staynd, and with Vermilion red.
Coique Ports. Five haven towns in our Country, which have many liberties.
They are Hasting, Romnie, Hethe, Dover, and Sandwich. Circular. That which is
round in compass. Circumcise. To cut off the foreskin of a man's privy parts:
which was a religious ceremony among all the Hebrews after Abraham, to whom
God first commanded it. Circumcision. A cutting off of the foreskinne. See
Circumcise. Circumference. The outer part of any round circle: The ring or
round compass of a wheel. Circumlocution. A long circumstance; a speaking of
many words, where few may suffice. Circumscribe. To compass round, to draw a
line about Circumscriptible. That which may be limited or contained within
bounds. Circumspect. Wise, wary, heedfull. Circumuent. To compass in; to
deceive one craftily. Cite. To warn one to appear. Citation. A warning one to
appear. Citrine. Yellow. Cittadell. A castle with a small garrison to keep a
town in awe. Ciuet. A sweet substance like musk. It is said to be the dung of
the beast Hyena. Ciuilize. To make civil. Clamor. A great cry or noise.
Clamorous. Crying out or exclaiming. Clandestine. Privy, close, secret.
Clarentius. One of the Kings of arms, whose office is to dispose the funerals
of Knights and Esquires of the southside of Trent. Clarify. To make clear.
Claritie. Nobleness, cleerenesse. Clause. A short sentence. * Cleepe. An old
word, signifying to name, or to call. Clemency. Mercy, gentleness. Clement.
Merciful, pitiful. Client. One that asks counsel of a Lawyer. Clime. See
Climate. Climactericall. A Greek word signifying an account or reckoning, made
by certain degrees or steps. Some have hereby divided the age of man's life
after this manner. The seventh year they reckon for dangerous; and by this
account the 14.21.28.35. etc. are climactericall years. Likewise the ninth
year is esteemed equally as dangerous, and by this account, the 18.27.36.
etc. are called Climactericall years. But the most noted and famous
Climactericall year, is at the age of 63. because both accounts do meet in
this number; namely 7. times 9. and 9. times 7. And this is held the most
dangerous year of all other. Climate. A term used in Cosmographie. It
signifies a portion of the world, between North and South, containing some
notable difference in the sun rising. Cloak. To cover or hide. Closhe. An
unlawful game, called by some nine pinnes, cules, or kittles. * Clum. A note
of silence. Coaction. Constraint. Coactiue. Constraining. Coadiutor. A fellow
helper. Coagulate. To turn to curde. Coca. An herb in India, the leaves
whereof being bruised and mixed with the powder of Cockles or Oysters in their
shelles burnt, the Indians use in little balls to carry in their mouths, to
preserve them from famine or great dryth. Cockatrice. See Basiliske. Coequall.
Equal in degree with another. Coessentiall. Of the same essence or substance.
Coeternall. Equal in eternity with another. Cogitation. A thinking. Cognition.
Knowledge. Cohere. To cleave, stick, or hang together. Coherence. An agreement
or hanging together. Collateral. Sidewaies, or joining to the side. Every
degree of kindred is either lineall or collateral: The lineall is that which
comes from the Grandfather to the Father, from the Father to the Son, and so
still right downward: Collateral is that which comes sidewaies, as first
between brothers and sisters, then between their children, etc. Also Uncles,
Aunts, and all Cousins are contained under this term of Collateral kindred.
Collation. A short banquet. Colleague. A companion, or one joined in office
with another. Collect. To gather together. Collection. A gathering.
Collocation. A placing together. Colloquie. A talking or conferring together.
Collusion. Deceit, cousenage. It is also a term used in law, when an action
is brought against one, by his own agreement. Collyrie. A physical term
signifying any medicine for the eyes. Colon. A mark of a sentence not fully
ended; which is made with two pricks, thus(:) Colonie. Among the Romans, when
their city was too full of inhabitants, they used to withdraw a certain
number, to dwell in some other place, which number so withdrawn, as also the
place to which they were sent, was called by the name of Colonie. Coloquintida.
A kind of wild Gourd, which the Persians name Gall of the earth, because it
destroys all herbs, near which it grows. It is round having a thin
yellow rind (when it is ripe) and the inner part open, and spongie full of
gray seed. If there grow but one upon a plant, it must be thrown away,
because it will be too violent in operation. This fruit is often used in
physic to purge slimie grosle humors from the sinnewes and joints; but must
be well prepared, for that otherwise it is very dangerous. Colosse An image or
statue of exceeding greatness, made sometime by the old Emperors of Rome.
There was one such image in the I Will of Rhodes, dedicated to the sun, of one
hundred and five foot long, the thumb of which image few men could fathom.
Columbine. Douelike. Column. A pillar. Coluri. Two imagined circles in the
heavens, drawn both through the Poles; whereof one passes through Aries and
Libra, the other through Cancer and Capricorn: So that they divide the
Zodiac, and the whole heavens into four even parts. Combat. A fight between
two, allowed by the law for trial of some controversy. Combatant. He that
fights or is to fight a Combat. Combine. To couple or join together.
Combination. A coupling or joining together. Combust. Burnt or scorched: a
planet is said to be combust, when he is under the sun beams, or within
certain degrees of them. Combustible. That which will soon be set on fire and
consumed. Combustion. A burning. Comedy. A play or interlude, the beginning
whereof is ever full of troubles, and the end joyful. Among the Greeks
Eupolis, Aristophanes and Cratinus, were the chief comicall Poets, among the
Latins Plautus and Terence. Comedian. A Player or writer of Comedies. Comet. A
blazing star. It is properly a great quantity of hot and dry exhalations
drawn up from the earth, by the attractiue virtue of stars into the highest
region of the air, where being near the Element of fire, it is inflamed, and
there moved round, according to the motion of the star, under which it is
grown, or the motion of the air, in those high parts. Comicall. That which
pertains to Comedies: also pleasant or merry. Comma. A mark often used in
writing and printing, which is made thus (,) Commemorate. To rehearse or make
mention. Commemoration. A rehearsal, a remembrance. Commence. To begin, to
enter an action against one. Commendatorie. which recommendeth one. Comment.
Notes of instruction set in some books, to expound such things as cannot
easily be understood. Sometime it is taken for a lie or feigned tale.
Commentary. See Comment. Commendatorie. That which has commendations only
written in it. Commerce. Conversation, intercourse of merchandise. Commination.
A threatening. Commiserate. To take pity or compassion upon any.
Commiseration. Pity or compassion. Commissarie. One that has spiritual
jurisdiction in some out places of a diocese, so far distant from the chief
city, that it were too great trouble to summon people to it. Commission. A
writing testifying that one or many have some authority in a matter of trust,
committed to their charge. Commissioner. He that is in authority by virtue of
a commission. Committee. He to whom a matter is committed to be decided or
ordered. Commixe. to mingle together. Commixtion. A mingling together.
Commodious. Fit, profitable. Commotion. A great stir, a hurly burly.
Communicable. That which may be imparted unto an other. Communion. A partaking
together. Community. Fellowship in partaking together. Commutation. A
changing. Compact. Hard knit, close joined together, sometime a bargain,
agreement. Compassionate. Pitiful, which grieueth at others harms.
Compendious. Brief, short, saving. Compendium. A short way, a saving course.
Competencie. Sufficiency, fitness. Competent. Convenient, fit, necessary.
Competitor. He that sueth for the same thing with an other. Compile. To make,
frame, or set together. Complement. Fullness, perfection, fine behavior.
Complete. Full, perfect. Complexion. The temperature of the humors in man's
body, which causes the color: sometime it signifies painting used by women.
Accomplices. Fellows or confederates, in lewd matters. Compose. To frame; or
set together. Composition. A joining or putting together. Compositor. He that
composeth or sets a thing in order. Comprehend. To contain, or conceive in
the mind. Comprehensible. Which may be contained or conceived. Comprehension.
A taking, a conceiving, or understanding. Comprission. A pressing together.
Compremise. An agreement made by indifferent parties chosen on both sides.
Comprise. To contain. Compulse. Constraint, enforcement. Compulsion.
Constraint. Compunction. Grief, remorse. Computate. To account, cast, or
reckon. Computation. An account, or reckoning. Comrade. A companion, a good
fellow. Concaue. Hollow. Concauitie. Hollownes. Concinnitie. Apt, fitnes, a
feate contriuing, or hansome setting a thing together. Concise. Brief, short.
Conclaue. A private room, a closet. Concoct. To digest, to boil. Concoction.
Digestion of meat in the body. Concourse. A great assembly. Concupiscence.
Lust, fleshlye desire. Concur. To meet together. Condescend. To agree, to
join together. Condign. Worthy, due, deserved. Condole. To lament with an
other, to bemone. Conduce. To help, or be profitable. Conduct. To guide one in
the way. Confection. A mingling together: or that which is mingled.
Confederate. One joined in friendship, or linked with another in any practice.
Confer. To compare together: sometime to talk or reason with another.
Conference. A reasoning together, or a comparing of one thing with another.
Confidence. Trust, credit. Confident. Very bold, assured; nothing doubtful.
Confine. To appoint bounds, to limit. Confines. The bounds or borders of a
Country. Confiscate. Forfeited: seized to the Kings use. Confiscation
Forfeiture of ones goods, or seizing them to the Kings use. Conflict. A fight,
a skirmish, a bickering. Confluence. A flowing together: a great multitude:
great store. Conform. To apply or frame ones self to any thing which is
required of him. Conformity. Likeness or agreement with another thing.
Confront. To come or stand boldly before ones face: to face one. Confuse. Mixed
together: mingled, out of order. Confusion. A disorderly mingling. Confute. To
disprove, to overthrow by argument. Congeale. To freeze, to grow stiff, or
cling together with cold. Conglutinate. To glue together: to join.
Conglutination. A glewing together. Congratulate. To rejoice in another
behalf with him: or to signify that we so rejoice. Congratulation. A
rejoicing together. Congregate. To gather together. Congruent. Agreeable, meet,
fit. Congruity. Good agreement. Coniecturall. Uncertain, which may, and may
not be. Conioyne. To join together. Conjugal. Belonging to wedlock.
Conjunction. A joining or coupling together. Conjure. To swear or conspire
together: to bind by oath, or under a great penalty. Connex. To knit or tie
together. Connection. A knitting together. Conniuence. A suffering, or winking
at a matter. Consanguinitie. Kindred by blood. Consecrate. To hallow or make
holy. Consecration. A making holy. Consequence. That which follows another
thing going before. Consequent. Following or necessarily coming after another
thing. Conserve. To preserve or keep. Conserues. The juice or substance of any
thing boiled with Sugar and so kept. Considerate. Discreet, wise. Consistory.
An assembly of Magistrates, a judgment place. Consolatorie. Comforting, which
comfort. Consolation. Comfort. Consolidate. To make firm or strong.
Consonant. Agreeable. Also every letter not being a vowell, is so called, as B,
C, D. Consort. A company: or a company of Musitions together. Conspicuous.
Bright, clear. Conspurcation. A defiling or making foul. Constellation. A
company of stars together: or the influe^ce which they work. Consternation.
Amazeme^t: a great fear. Constitute. To ordain, to appoint. Constitution. A
decree, an ordinance. Construction. A joining of words and sentences together.
Consubstantiall. Of the same substance. Consubstantialitie. Agreement in
substance: the being of the same substance that another is of. Consul. A
chief officer among the Romans: there were two chosen yearly to govern the
City: These Magistrates first began after the Kings were expelled, and were
caled Consuls, of the latin word Consulere, because they were by their office
to provide and take care for the good of the common wealth. Consult. To take
advice together. Consultation. An advice or deliberation taken together.
Consummate. To finish, to make an end. Consummation. An end, a finishing of a
matter. Consumption. A consuming: Also a disease, wherein the lungs being
exulcerated, there follows a leanness of all the body. Contagion. An
infection. Contagious. Infectious. Contammate. To defile. Contamination. A
defiling Contemn. To despise. Contemplate. To behold in the mind: to muse
upon. Contemplatio^. A beholding in mind; a thinking upon. Contemptible. Base,
vile, of no account. Contemptuous. Despiteful. Continency. Chastity,
temperatenesse. Continent. Chaste, sober, temperate. Continent land. That which
is no Island, maine land. Contingent. Casual, doubtful, uncertain: which may
and may not be. Continuate. To ioyn close together. Contract. A bargain, an
agreement made. Contraction. A shrinking together. Contradict. To gainsay or
speak against. Contradiction. A speaking against; a withstanding in words.
Contribute. To give with others; to allow as others do. Contributarie. Which
allows or gives as others do. Contribution. A giving with others, when many
give together. Contristate. To make sad or sorrowful. Contritn. Broken: very
sorrowful: heartily repentant. Contrition. Great inward sorrow for sin
committed. Controuert. To contend, strive, or be at variance about a matter.
Contumacie. Stubbornnes, disobedience: self will. Contumely. Reproach; spite,
disgrace. Contumelious Reprochful: spiteful, disgraceful. Contund. To pound
or beat in a mortar. Contusion. A beating, bruising or pounding. Convent. To
bring one before a Judge. Conuenticle. A little assembly; most commonly for an
ill purpose. Conuention. An appearing before a Judge. Converse. To use ones
company, to live with. Conversant. Using much in ones company. Conversion. A
turning from evil to good. Convict. Proved guilty of the crime whereof he is
accused. Conviction. A condemnation or proof of being guilty. Convince. To
overcome, or confute: To prove one guilty. Conuocate. To call together.
Convocation. An assembling or calling together: sometime the company assembled.
Conuulsion. A shrinking, or pulling together of the sinews; a cramp, a pang.
Cooperate. To work together; to help. Cooperation. A working with another, a
helping. Cope. A Church vestme^t much like a large cloak. Copall. A white Rosin
of much brightness brought from the West Indies: the people there were wont to
make perfumes thereof in their sacrifices. It is hot in the second degree, and
moist in the first, and is used here to be burnt against cold diseases of the
brain. Copy. Great plenty. Copious. Plentiful, abundant. Copulation. A
coupling or joining together. Coral. There are two sorts hereof, the one
white, the other red; but the red is best. It grows like a tree in the
bottom of the sea, from whence being taken, it is by the air hardened into
the form of a stone, as we see it. It is cold and dry in operation, good to be
hanged about childrens necks, as well to rub their gums, as to preserve them
from the falling sickness. Corbell. A shouldering piece cut out in stone, as
we may see in walls, to bear up a post, summer, or other weight. Corbets.
Places in walls where Images stand. Corbona. A chest or cofer in the Temple of
Jerusalem, where the treasure that served for the Priests use was kept.
Cordial. Hearty; that which comfort the heart. Cordwayner. A Shooemaker.
Corodie. An ancient term, used when the founders of Abbeys or other religious
houses, reserved a right in themselves and heirs, to appoint some person to
have allowance of meat and drink, or other maintenance out of the house; and
this allowance wa^ called a Corodie. Coronell. A Captain oner many bands.
Coronation. The crowning of a King or Queen. Corporal. Of, or belonging to the
body. Corporation. A body politic, having by the kings grant a common seal,
a chief Officer, and inferior persons belonging to it. Corpulencie.
Grossness, fatness. Corpulent. Fat and gross. Correlatiue. A term of
Logic applied to such words as cannot be spoken, but there must be supposed
some other word, which is necessarily a dependant upon it: as a Father and a
Son; a Master and a Servant; a Captain and a Soldier; a Husband and a
Wife. Correspondence. An agreeableness, or proportion answering to some other
thing. Correspondent. Agreeable, or answerable to another thing. Corrigible.
That which may be corrected or amended. Corriuall. He that is suitor with
another, to a woman for marriage. Corroborate. To strengthen, to confirm.
Corrode. To gnaw asunder. Corrosiue. A fretting plaster: any thing which laid
to the body, raises blisters and makes it sore. Cosignificatiue. Of the same
signification with another thing. Cosmographie. An art touching the description
of the whole world. This art by the distance of the circles in heaven, divides
the earth under them into her Zones and climats, and by the elevation of the
Pole, considers the length of the day and night, with the perfect
demonstration of the Suns rising and going down. Covent. The whole number of
religious men together dwelling in one house. Couerture. A covering. In the
Common Law it signifies all the time, that a man and wife are coupled in
marriage. Couchant. Couching or lying on the ground. Covert. Hidden, secret.
Couertbaron. A married wife: a woman subject to a husband. Couerture. In our
Common Law it is sometime taken for marriage. Couine. Deceit, cousenage.
Countermand. To give commandment contrary to that which was commanded before.
Countermine. To mine or dig in the earth against another. Countermure. A wall
made in defense of another wall. Counterpane. The fellow copy of a deed
indented. Counterpoise. Any thing laid in weight against another thing.
Counteruaile. To be of equal value to another thing. Coupee. Cut off. Cramp
fish. A fish whose nature is to make the hands of such as touch it, to be
benumbed or astonished, though they touch it with a long pole. Crannie. A little
hole or chinke. Crauen. A coward. Crazie. Sickly, weak, of imperfect health.
Credence. Belief, trust. Credible. That which may be believed. Creditor. He
that lends or trusts another with money, or wares. Credulity. Easines of
belief. Credulous. He which easily believes a thing. Cressant. In Heraldrie
it signifies the new Moon. Crime. An offense, or fault committed. Criminal.
Faulty: or that which belongs to a fault or accusation. Crisis. A Greek
word, which is interpreted judgment. In Physic it signifies the conflict
between nature and sickness: that is, the time, when either the patient
suddenly becomes well, or suddenly dies, or waxes better or worse,
according to the strength of his body, and violence of the disease. Crispe.
Curled. Cristall. A substance like clear glass. There are two kinds hereof.
One which grows upon extreme cold mountains, being there congealed like
ye, by the mineral virtue of the place, as Albertus writes. Another kind
grows in the earth in some places of Germany. Cristalline. Made of Cristall,
or shining like Cristall. Critical. In Physic the fourth and seventh days
are called Critical, because in them Physicians use to judge of the danger of a
disease: But the seventh is accounted the chief Critical day, and the fourth
a token or sign what the seventh day will be, if the Patient live so long.
This account must be made according to the number of weeks thus. In the first
week the fourth day is the token or Critical of the seventh day. In the second
week the eleventh is the Critical of the fourteenth. In the third the
seuenteeth is the Critical of the twentieth: for Hippocrates reckons the
twentieth day for the last of the third week: In the fourth week 24. is the
Critical of the 27. In the fifth, the 31. the Critical of the 34. In the sixth
week the 37. the Critical of the 40. And so forth to a hundred. Critic.
The same that Critical is. Also it signifies sometime, one that has
authority, or takes upon him to censure other men's acts or works written.
Crocodile. A harmefull beast living most about the River Nilus in Egypt. It is
hatched of an egg, and grows unto a wonderful greatness, sometime to
twenty or thirty foot long. This beast has no tougue, and in feeding moves
only the upper iawe: He has eyes like a Hog, and cruel sharp teeth: He
has no hair, but is made much after the fashion of an Euet, with a long
tail, a long belly, and back covered all over with scales close joined and of
great strength. Upon his feet he has strong sharp claws. In the day time
he can see far, and lives on land, in the night he is almost blind, and
keeps in the water. He is very bold upon those he sees afraid of him, and
fearful if he be assaulted. It is written that he will weep over a man's
head, when he has devoured the body, and then will eat up the head two.
Wherefore in Latin there is a proverb, Crocodili Lachrymae, Crocodiles tears,
to signify such tears as are fained, and spent only with intent to deceive,
or do harm. I saw once one of these beasts in London brought thither dead,
but in perfect form, of about three yards long. Croches. The little buds or
branches, at the top of a Hearts horn. Crossclet. A melting pot. Crotayes. Dung
of a Hare. Crownet. A little crown, also a part of a horse hoof is so called.
Crude. Raw, not well digested. Cruditie. Rawnesse: ill digestion. Cubebs. A
certain fruit sold by Apothecaries like unto Pepper. It comes out of India,
and is hot and dry in operation. It comfort the brain much, and
quickens the spirits, being held and chewed in the mouth. It is also very
good to open the stoppings of the Liver. Cubite. Half a yard: the measure
from a man's elbow to the top of his middlefinger. Cullion. The stone of any
living thing. Culpable. Faulty. Culture. Tillage, dressing of land.
Culuertaile. A strong kind of building, by fastening boards or timber, with
artificial joints, so firmly together, that they cannot fall asunder.
Cummune. An herb, the seed whereof is much used in Physic. It is hot and
dry, good to break or dissolve windiness in any part of the body. Cumulation.
A heaping up, or increasing. Cunctation. Slackenesse, delay, lingering.
Capglasse. A hollow round Glass, with a hole in the bottom, used by
Physicians sometimes, to draw blood or wind out of the body, for it sucketh
with great strength, by reason of a little flame of fire made in it. Cupiditie.
Desire, covetousness. Curfew. A bell which ringing about bedtime, gives
folks warning, to go to rest and cover their fire. Cursorilie. Swiftly: as
when one reads a book over with speed. Curtezane. A harlot. Curtilage. Any
piece of ground, as a yard, backeside, or garden plotte, adjoining to a house.
Custody. Safe keeping. Cutchoneale. A little fly (as some think) brought
from beyond the Sea, dried, wherewith diers die Stammell and colors in Grain:
but indeed it is a fruit. Cynicall, Doggish, See Cynike. Cynike. Doggish or
currish: There was in Greece an old sect of Philosophers so called, because
they did ouersharply bark at men's vices, and were not so respective in their
behavior as civility required. The chief of this sect were Antisthenes and
Diogenes. Cipher. A circle in Arithmetike like the letter O; which of it self
is of no value, but increases the value of other figures after which it is
joined: wherefore we sometime say of one, that in company of others does
nothing himself, that he stands for a Cipher. Cypress. A tree which grows
on dry mountains, very tall and slender: the timber thereof is yellowish and
of a pleasant smell, especially set near the fire. I carries no leaf, but
green small twigs.
D
* DAffe. A dastard. * Dagges. Latchets cut of Lether. Daine. To vouchsafe.
Dandruffe. Small scales that stick to the skin of the head, and often hang
about the hairs. They are caused by salt fleame, or some other corrupted
humors, piercing insensibly the pores, and then slightly congealed by the
air, and may be taken away by washing the head with salt water or vinegar
warm. Darnell. A naughty grain almost like wheat, but much less, and
grows among wheat often. It may be used in Physic, against some outward
diseases, but taken, inwardly it is harmefull, as being too hot, and making
the head giddy. Darreigne. To attempt, or challenge. Deaurate. Gilded,
glistering like gold. Debilitate. To weaken. Debilitie. Weakness. Debtor. A
debtor. Debonaire. Gentle, mild, courteous. Decad. The number of ten.
Decalog. The ten commandments. Decent. Comely, hansome. Decency. Comeliness.
Decide. To determine, or end a Controversy or doubt. Decipher. To write after
a strange fashion, that none shall read it, also to find out the meaning of a
thing so written. Decision. A determination, or end made of a controversy
Declayme. To speak evil: to reproach. Declamation. An oration or speech made
of purpose in reproach of any person or thing. Declaymer. He that makes a
declamation. Decline. To bend downward. Declination. A bending downward.
Decliuitie. A steep bending downward, as on the side of a hill. Decoct. To
seethe, to boil. Decoction. A boiling or seething. In Physic it signifies
commonly any liquor in which medicinable roots, herbs, seeds, flowers, or
any other thing has been boiled. Decollation. A beheading. Decorum. Comely,
or comeliness. Decrepit. Weak, or very feeble with age. Decressant. The Moon
in the last quarter. Decretals. Ordinances, decrees. Dedicate. To offer, give,
or appoint for some special purpose. Dedication. An offering, a giving up.
Deduce. To take away, to abate. Deduct. To take away. Deduction. A taking away.
Defamation. A defaming, a speaking ill of one. Defamatorie. Slanderous: which
defameth. Defatigation. Weariness. Defeasance. An overthrowing, or undoing
that which was formerly done. A writing testifying that some other writing
shall be of no force. Defeat. To deceive, or beguile: to take craftily from
one. Defect. A failing or want in any thing. Defection. A falling away a
reuolting. Defective. Faulty, which wants something. Defendant. He which
answers to an accusation or challenge. Defensive. That which defends, or is
spoken or done in defense. Defer. To put off, to prolong. Define. To declare,
show or describe a thing plainly. Definition. A sentence which expressly
declares what a thing is. Definitive. Which defines or concludes a matter.
Defloration. A deflouring. Defloure. To corrupt, spoil or mar. Deforme. To
disfigure, to spoil the form of any thing. Deformation. A difiguring.
Deformity. Ill fauourdnesse: uncomeliness. Defraude. To deceive, to beguile.
Deft. Little and pretty, feat and handsome. Defunct. Dead. Degenerate. To turn
out of kind. Degrade. To take away the privilege of holy orders from one.
Degradation. A taking away of Ecclesiastical authority, from a Clerk
convinced of some notorious crime. Degree. A term often used in Astronomy and
physic. In Astronomy it signifies the thirtieth part of a sign: viz. of
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc. For into so many parts or degrees are all the
signs divided. In physic it signifies a proportion of heat, cold, moisture
or dryness, in the nature of simples; and there are four such proportions or
degrees: The first degree is so small, that it can scarce be perceived. The
second, that which may be manifestly perceived without hurting the sense. The
third, that which somewhat offends the sense. The fourth, which so much
offends, that it may destroy the body. For exrmple: Sweet Almonds Rice,
Buglosse, ripe Grapes are hot in the first degree: Parsley, Saffron, Honey, in
the second degree; Cummine, Galingall, Pepper in the third degree: and Garlike,
Spourge, Euphorbium, in the fourth degree. So Barley is cold in the first
degree, cucumbers in the second, Sengreene in the third, and Hemlocke in the
fourth degree. Where note that in heat, cold, and dryness, there may be four
degrees, and in moisture but two. Dehort. To dissuade: to advise one to the
contrary. Dehortation. A persuasion or admonition to refrain from doing some
thing. Deiect. To throw down, to debase. Deiection. A throwing down, a
debasement. Deity. Godhead, or a God. Delineate. To draw the first proportion
of a thing. Delinquent. An offender. Delude. To mock, to scorn, to deceive.
Deluge. An universal ouerflowing of waters, Noes flood. Delusion. A mocking.
Demaynes. The Lords Manor house, and the lands which he and his ancestors
have always used. Demean. To behave or carry ones self. Demeanor.
Behavior. Demerit. A desert. Demise. To give or grant. Democratie. A kind of
government wherein the people bear rule without other superiors saving such as
they appoint. Democraticall. Of or belonging to the estate of Democratie.
Demolish. To pull down. Demolition. A pulling down. Demoniacke. Possessed
with a devil. Demonstrable. Which may be showed or made manifest. Demonstrate.
To show. Demonstration. A showing plain of any thing. Demurre. A pause or
stay, a standing still. Demi. Half, sometime little. Deneere. A penny, a small
piece of money. Denizen. A stranger borne, that obtains the Kings letters
patents, and becomes his Majesty's subject, enjoying thereby al privileges,
as if he were an Englishman. Denominate. To name one. Denomination. A naming.
Denotate To note or mark, to signify. Denotation. A noting or marking.
Denounce. To give warning, to declare, to threaten. * Denwere. Double. Deodand.
When a man is casually killed by a Cart, Horse, or Mill, etc. that which moved
and was thereby cause of his death, being forfeit to the King, appertains to
his Majesty's Almoner to bestow in deeds of charity, and is therefore called a
Deodand, as being to be given away for Gods sake. Depend. To hang upon an other
thing. Dependant. That which hangs upon an other thing. Deplore. To lament;
to bewail. Deploration. A lamenting. Depopulate. To waste or spoil a
country. Depopulation. A spoiling or wasting of a country. Depose. To take
away ones authority, to thrust out of his kingdom, sometime to swear.
Depositum. A pledge, any thing laid up with one to keep. Deposition. A
deposing or putting from great authority, also a laying down, sometime an oath
or testimony given by oath. Deprave. To corrupt or mar, sometime to speak
evil of one. Depresse. To crouch down, to keep under. Deprive. To take away.
Deprivation. A loss of any thing. Depute. To appoint. Deride. To mock, or
floute. Derision. A mocking. Derive. To take or draw from another thing.
Deriuatiue. That which is derived from an other thing or word. Deriuation. A
deriuing, or drawing from some thing. Derogate. To empaire, diminish, or take
away. Derogation. A taking away from ones honor or estimation. Derogatorie.
That which empaireth or hinders the credit of any one. Descend. To go
downward. Describe. To express plainly the outward form of a thing.
Description. A plain expressing of the outward form of a thing, or the manner
how a thing was done. Design. To appoint. Designement. An enterprise or
purpose which a man has. Desist. To leave off. Deteine. To keep from one.
Detect. To discover, to disclose. Detection. A discovery, a disclosing.
Detract. To speak evil of one. Detraction. Slanderous speaking. Detriment.
Loss, harm, hinderance. Deuastation. A wasting of a country. Deuest. To
unclothe. Deuiant. Far out of the way. Deuoire. Endeavor. Deuolue. To roll
down. Deuolution. A rolling along. Dewlap. The hollow part of the throat,
hanging down in some beasts. Dexter. Belonging to the right hand. Dexterity.
Nimblenes, quickness, skilfulnesse. Diabolical. Devilish. Diacatholicon. An
electuary much used in physic, so called because it serves as a gentle purge
for all humors. Diacinnamon. A physical mixture of cinnamom and diverse spices
in powder together, which helps digestion and is good against cold moist
diseases of the stomach. Diacodion. A cold sirupe made of the tops of poppies,
used in physic sometime against hot diseases, and to stay the falling down
of humors out of the head. Diacurcuma. A confection made of Saffron and diverse
other simples, used against the dropsy and old diseases of the stomach,
spleen and liver. Diadem. A Kings crown, or an attire for Princes to wear on
their heads, made of purple silk, and pearl. Diagalanga. A confection made of
Galingale and hot spices, good against the wind colicke and cold
distemperature of the inward parts. Diagridium. There is a plant called
Scammonie growing in far hot countries, the juice of the root whereof being
dried, is a very strong and violent purgative medicine, called also Scammonie:
which before it can be used in physic, must be boiled in Quinces, to abate
the malice of it: now the Scammony boiled and prepared in this sort, is called
by Apothecaries Diagridium. Dialacca. A confection made of the gum Lacca, and
diverse hot simples, good against cold diseases of the stomach, stoppings, of
the liver, and all causes that may draw one to the dropsy. Dialect. A
difference of some words, or pronunciation in any language: as in England the
Dialect or manner of speech in the North, is different from that in the South,
and the Western Dialect differing from them both. The Grecians had five
especial Dialects: as 1. The property of speech in Athens: 2. In Ionia: 3 In
Doris: 4. In Eolia: and 5. that manner of speech which was generally used of
them all. So every country has commonly in diners parts thereof some
difference of language, which is called the Dialect of that place.
Dialecticall. Of or belonging to the art of Logic. Dialog. A talk,
reasoning, or disputation between two parties or more, or a discourse written
where such a conference is set down. Diamber. A comfortable confection made of
diverse hot spices, good to be given in wine or other liquor, to strengthen the
stomach, revive the spirits, and warm the inward parts. Diameter. A straight
line which passing throught the middle of any figure, divides it in two equal
parts. Diapason. A concord in music of all. Diaphoenicon. An Electuary used
often by Physicians to purge fleame and choler. Diaper. A fine kind of linen
not wouen after the ordinary fashion but in certain works, Diamonds, knots,
or other devices. Diapred. Diuersified: of diverse colors, or garnishings.
Diaprunum. An Electuary made of Damask Prunes, and diverse other simples, good
to cool the body in hot burning Fevers. After it is made, physicians use often
to add Diagridium to it, and then it becomes very Purgatory, and is called
Diaprunum solutiuum; soluble, or laxatiue Diaprunum. Diarhodon. A comfortable
confection good to refresh and strengthen all the inward parts, after long hot
diseases. Diasena. A purging Electuary* good against quartane Agues, and all
other diseases proceeding from melancholy. Diatragacanthum. A confection made
of the Gum Tragacanth, and other simples, good against hot discases of the
breast, the cough, pleurisy and inflammation of the lungs. Diatrionpiperion. A
confection so called, because it is principally compounded of the three kinds
of Pepper, to wit, long, white and black Pepper. It is good to help digestion
when the stomach wants heat to concoct that which it has received.
Diatrionsantalon. A cold confection made of the wood Sanders, good against
burning Agues, and to refresh the inward parts inflamed with too much heat.
Diaturbith An Electuarie which principally purges flegmaticke gross humors.
Dicacitie. Much talk: or prating. Dichotomie. A dividing into two parts, or a
division made by two and two. Dicker. Ten hides of Lether. Dictate. To
endite; also that which one writes from another mouth while he speaks.
Dictator. A chief Officer among the Romans; never chosen but upon great
necessity in dangerous troubles of the common wealth. This Dictator could
continue in office but only six months, and then under pain of treason was
to give up his authority: He could be named by none but the Consul, and that
in the night time, with great silence and attention. After he was once chosen
all other Magistrates were out of office, except only the Tribune of the
people; so that the Dictator, during his time, had (as it were) a kingly
authority above al. Diffcult. Hard: uneasy. Difficulty. Hardness,
vneasinesse. Diffidence. Distrust. Diffident. Mistrustfull. Diffuse. To spread
abroad. Digamma. The letter F. so called, because he bears a form, like the
Greek Letter Gamma, made double. Digest. To dispose or set in order. Dight.
Made ready: apparrelled, dressed. Digress. To turn aside, to leave the matter
that is in hand and speak of another thing. Digression. A turning to speak of
another thing. Dilaniation. A tearing in pieces. Dilate. To spread abroad to
enlarge, to draw in length. Dilatation. A drawing in length, speaking of a
thing at large. Dilemma. A kind of argument, which conuinceth ones adversary
both ways: as in saying: If he be a good man, why do you speak evil of
him? If he be naught, why do you keep him company? Dimension. The true
measure of a thing. Diminution. A diminishing. Diminutiue. Little, small, or a
word which betokens a little thing, as, lambekinne, a little lamb.
Dinumeration A numbering, a reckoning. Dire. Fierce, cruel, terrible.
Directorie. That which directs one. Direption. A violent catching away.
Disanull. To disalowe. Disappeare. To vanish out of sight. To be seen no more.
Disastrous. Unlucky: unfortunate. Disauow. To deny or refuse by vow.
Disciple. A Scholar, one that learneth. Discipline. Instruction. Disclayme. To
deny. Disconsolate. Uncomfortable. Discordant. Disagreeing. Discrepant. Much
differing. Discuss. To examine, debate, or try a matter. Discussion An
examining, a sifting or trial of a matter. Disfranchise. To take away
freedom. Disfranchisement. A taking away of ones freedom. Disgust. Dislike.
Dislocation. A putting out of the right place. Dismal. Unlucky: grievous,
Dismantle. To unclothe: to unfurnish, to leave unprovided. Dismiss. To
discharge, to put away. Disparage. To disgrace: to join with unequal match.
Disparagement. Dishonor: disgrace, It properly signifies a shame or disgrace
done by a Guardian to his word, in marying him under years, to a woman unfit
for his calling, or to one past childe-bearing, or which has some great
deformity, lamenesse, or some horrible disease. Disparates. A term of
Logic, applied to such words as are only differing one from another, but
not contrary: as heat and cold are contraries, but heat and moisture are
Disparates: viz. two contrary qualities. Disparitie. Unlikeness: inequality.
Disperpelled. A term in Herauldrie, when any thing of soft substance, does by
falling from high shoot it self out into diverse corners or ends. Disperse. To
scatter abroad. Dispersion. A scattering abroad. Displayed. Wide spread,
opened. Disputable. Any thing that a man may dispute on. Disrobe. To unclothe:
properly of rich, or garments of estate. Dissent. To disagree. Dissheuelled.
Bare hayred, without any attire on the head, the hair hanging at length.
Dissimilitude. Unlikeness. Dissipate. To scatter, or spread abroad.
Dissipation, A scattering, a wasting. Dissolve. To undo, weaken, or destroy:
to pluck down. Dissolute. Loose, wanton, given much to vain pleasures.
Dissolution. A breaking, weakening, or pulling asunder of any thing. Dissonant.
Of a contrary sound, not agreeing. Dissuade. To persuade one from a thing.
Disswasion. A persuading of one from some thing. Distich. Two verses; or a
sentence contained in two verses. Distinguish. To put a difference between
things. Distinction. A difference put between things. Distract, To draw away:
to trouble ones mind. Distraction. A pulling asunder, or drawing away of the
mind. Distress. Any goods taken and detained for. not payment of rent, or to
enforce one to answer to a suite. Sometime it signifies great affliction, or
misery. Distribution. A diuding among many. Disturb. To trouble, to vex.
Disunion. A disioyning, a seuering. Disunite. To part, to divide, to sever.
Divert. To turn aside. Diuident. That which divides. Divine. Heavenly
belonging to God. Sometime to guess or foretell a thing to come. Divination. A
foretelling of a thing before it happens: which may (as I take it) be
divided into three different kinds; namely, supernatural, natural, and
superstitious Divination. Supernatural Divination (only revealed to man by
God,) is not properly called Divination, but prophecy, with which all the holy
Prophets have in former times been inspired. Natural Divination may be
divided into two branches; whereof the first is, that which has in former
times been practice by wicked spirits in oracles and answers given by them in
Idols, and is at this day sometime seen in possessed persons, who by
suggestion of the devil may foretell often things to come: and this is but a
natural Divination: For although to us it seem miraculous, because of our
ignorance in the causes and course of things, yet in those spirits, it is but
natural, who by their long experience and great observation, beside the
knowledge of secrets in nature, and their quick intelligence from all places,
are able to foresee much more then we by nature can. The second branch of
natural Divination, is that which a wise man may foretell by probable
conjecture, being no way offensive, so long as it is only guided by reason; and
ouerruled by submitting it self to the almighty power of GOD. And to this
second kind of Divination, may also Astrology be referred (which by the
motion and influence of Stars and Planets does promise to foretell many
things) so long as it keeps it self in due limits, and arrogateth not too
much to the certainetie thereof: into which excess of vanity if it should
break forth, it can then be no longer called natural Divination, but
superstitious and wicked: for the Stars may incline but not impose a
necessity in particular things. The third and last manner of Divination, is
that which we called superstitious, whereof there has among the Gentiles
been diverse different kinds, namely Auguration, Aruspicie, Necromancie,
Geomancie, Hydromancie, Pyromancie, Coscinomancie, Palmistrie or Chiromancie.
Auguration, was a divination made of things to come, by the flying, feeding,
and chirping of birds: the professors whereof called Augurs, were of great
account among the heathen Romans, in so much that there was a College of them
in the city; neither would the Romans undertake any public matter of
importance, without asking their assent. But the vanity hereof was well derided
by a wise Jew, named Mossolamus; as Josephus writes. For an Augur in the wars
once requiring, that the army which was then marching, might stand still a
while, till he took observation of a bird there by, to foreknow the success
of that expedition, this Jew whilst the Augur was busy in his art, shot at the
Bird with an arrow, and by chance killed her: whereat the Augur and others
being highly offended: Are you so foolish (quoth the Jew) to imagine, this
poor Bird can tell what will happen to us, that could not foresee her own
death so near at hand? Aruspicie, is a divination, which by opening and
viewing the bowels of beasts, did undertake to foretell things to come: the
professors whereof were called Aruspices. Necromancie, the worst of all others,
is that divination, which is practiced by coniuration, and calling up Devils or
dead men's Ghosts. Which manner of divination we read practiced by King Saul
(1. Reg. cap. 28.) when he required a Sorceresse to call up the spirit of
Samuel to him. Geomancie, is a kind of divination practiced by making pricks
and lines in the earth; as the name in Greek signifies. So Hydromancie, is a
divination made by some apparition in water, as Varro writes, that a Boy saw
in water, one bearing the form of Mercury, who foretold in one hundred and
fifty verses, the event of the war which the Romans had with King
Mithridates. Pyromancie is a divination made by the fire, or spirits appearing
in the fire. Coscinomancie is a ridiculous kind of divination made with a
sieue; which at this day is used by some simple women, and appears to be of
antiquity, for in the third Idylle of Theocritus there is mention made hereof.
Palmistrie or Chiromancie, is a divination practiced, by looking upon the lines
of the fingers and hands, an art still in use, among fortune tellers,
Egyptians, and iuglers. Besides these there were also other diuinations, as
namely Acromancie, that which is gathered by apparitions in the air.
Capnomancie, by the flying of smoke. Catoptromancie by visions shown in a
glass. All which being even by the Pagans themselves accounted deceitful and
vain, it remains that of Christians they be utterly rejected and abhorred.

Divorce. A separation of man and wife, which was (as our Savior witnesses)
first permitted by Moses unto the Israelites, for the hardness of their
hearts, that men might rather put their wives away, whom they grew weary of,
than use them with too great extremity, to shorten their lives, as many did.
The woman so divorced was to have of her husband, a writing (as Josephus
witnesses) to this effect. I promise, that hereafter, I will lay no claim to
thee: And this writing was called a bil of divorce. But with Christians this
custom is abrogated, saving only in case of adultery. The ancient Romans
also had a custom of divorce, and amongst them, it was as lawful for the
wives to put away their husbands, as for the husband to dismiss his wife: but
amongst the Israelites, this prerogative was only permitted to the husband.
Diureticall. That which is of virtue, to cause one to make water. Diumall. Of
or belonging to a day: Also a book, wherein daily actions or accounts are set
down. Diuturmitie. Long continuance. Diuulge. To publish, or tell abroad.
Diuulgation. A telling, or reporting abroad. Docibilitie. See docilitie.
Docible. See docill. Docill. Easy to be taught, one that will soon learn.
Docilitie. Aptness, quickness of understanding. Document. A lesson, an
instruction. Dogdayes. Certain days in July and August, so called of the
Star Canis, the Dog: which then rising with the Sun, does greatly increase
the heat thereof. Dogmaticall. Which is held or maintained in some men's
opinion. Dole. Sorrow, heaviness, grief: sometimes alms given to many poor
folks. Doleful. Heavy, sorrowful. Dolorous. Grievous, painful. Dolphine.
A fish friendly to man, and especially to children; the Females of this fish,
have breasts like to women, which are well stored with milk. They are very
faithful to one another, and bring forth young ones like whelps, after ten
months, and in Summer time. They sometime break forth of the Sea, but
presently die as soon as they touch land. Doom. A sentence pronounced: a
judgment. Doomesman. A Judge. Domestical. One of the house: or any thing
belonging to the house. Domesticke. See Domestical. Domineere. To bear rule,
or great sway. Dominicall. Belonging to sunday or our Lords day. Dominion.
Lordship, rule. Donarie. A gift; properly that which is hanged up in a Church.
Donation. A giving. Donee. He to whom a thing is given or granted. Donour. A
giver. Dormant. Sleeping. Dormitorie. A place to sleep in: or that which has
virtue to make one sleep. Dorter. A cell or chamber used only for religious
men to sleep in. Dowager. A Widow Princess, having dowry in the country
which was in subjection to her deceased husband. Doulcets. The stones of a Heart
or Stag. Drachme. See dram. Dram. A small weight, the eight part of an ounce:
It contains in it three scruples, every scruple being of the weight of
twenty Wheat corns: so that a dram is the just weight of 60. corns of
wheat. Drerie. Sorrowful: lamentable. Dromedarie. A kind of camel, having
two bunches on the back, which is very swift, and can travel two or three
days without drink. Drone. An idle Be that will not labor. Druides. Ancient
Pagane Priests in France, which lived naked in woods, giving themselves to the
study of Philosophy, and avoiding all company so much as they might. They were
of such estimation among the people, that all controversies were referred to
their determination, and a great penalty laid on such as disobeied their
sentence. They believed the immortality of souls, but supposed (with
Pythagoras) that they still passed by death from one body to another. Dryades.
Nymphs of the woods, so called of the Greek word Drys: which signifies an
Oak. Duall. Of, or belonging to two. Dubious. Doubtful. Dubitable. Doubtful.
Dulia. Seruire: a worship done to Angels and Saints. Duplication. A doubling.
Duplicitie. Doubleness. Durabilitie. Long continuance. Dwale. An herb of cold
operation, having power to make one sleep: some call it Nightshade.
E
EAglet. A young Eagle. Ebene. A tree which grows in Ethiopia, bearing neither
leaves nor fruit. It is black and has no grain like other wood, and is sharp
biting in taste: Being burned it yeildeth a pleasant smell, neither is the
smoke thereof offensive: but the green wood is so full of sap, that it will
flame like a candle. It is good against many diseases of the eyes. That which
grows in India, is spotted with white and yellow, being not in such
estimation as the Ethiopian Ebene is. Ebionits. Certain old Heretics, which
affirmed that Christ was not before his mother, the B. Virgin. Against these
Heretics, Saint John writ his Gospel, after he returned from his banishment
in the I Will Pathmos. Ebonie. See Ebene. Ebrictie. Drunkenness. Echo. A
rebounding or sounding back of any noise or voice, in a wood, valley or hollow
place. Poets feine that this Echo was a Nymphc so called, which being
rejected of one, whom she loved, pyned away for sorrow in the woods, where her
voice still remains answering the outcryes of all complaints.
Ecclesiastical. Of, or belonging to the Church. Ecclesiasticus. Of, or
belonging to a Preacher. The name of a Book in the old Testament is so
called. Eclipse. A failing or want of any thing: Commonly it signifies a want
of light; and there be two such Eclipses, namely of the Moon and of the Sun.
Eclipse of the Moon; never happens but at the full Moon, neither then
always, but when she is in such a point, that the shadow of the earth
depriueth her of the Sun beams, from whence she takes her light. Eclipse of
the Sun is not so usual, and happens only at the change of the Moon,
namely when the Moon being between the Sun and us, does with her dark body,
hide part of her light from us: which was the cause that Dionysius Areopagita,
seeing the Sun so admirably eclipsed at our Saviors passion, contrary to
all reason, when the Moon was not in any neerenesse to hinder his light, cried
out in amazement: Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut machina mundi dissoluetur.
Either the God of nature suffers, or else the frame of the world will be
destroyed. Ecliptike line. An imagined line, running thorough the midst of the
twelve signs, in which the sun always keeps his course. Eclog. It is
commonly taken for a poem containing a communication of slepherds, but the
word in Greek signifies a collection or choice gathering of things together.
Eden. An Hebrew word signifying delectation, or a place of pleasure and
delight. Paradise. Edible. Which may be eaten. Edict. An ordinance made by any
in authorithority: A proclamation or decree. Edify. To build, to frame,
sometime to instruct. Edifice. A building, a frame. Edification. A buildding:
but most commonly it is taken for an instruction, so plainly delivered that
the hearer profits by it. Edition. A setting forth or publishing. Educate. To
bring up, to nourish. Education. A bringing-vp. Effectuate. To perform
Effeminate. Womanish, nice. Efficacy. Strength, virtue, force. Efficiencie. A
bringing to pass. Efficient. Which brings to pass or performs. Effusion.
A pouring out, a large spending. Eftsoons. Again, often. Egregious. Notable,
excellent. Egresse. A going forth from any place. Egritude. Grief of mind, or
pain of body. Eiect. To cast out. Eiection. A casting out. Eiulation. A
howling, a pitiful crying out. Elaborate. Curious, done with great pains.
Elate. Lifted up, advanced, proud, lofty. Elation. A lifting up, pride,
loftiness. Elaterium. The juice of wild cucumbers dried: Being taken
inwardly, it purges waterish humors, and is good against the dropsy. But it
must be mixed with somewhat to restrain the malice of it, for otherwise it
will be painful in operation. * Eld. Old age. Elect. To choose, or one that
is chosen. Election. Choice. Electuarie. Any medicine taken inwardly, made of
diverse powders mixed together, and by tempering with some syrupes or honey,
brought to a soft liquid form. Elegancie. Finenes, neatness. Elegant. Fine,
neat, picked, trim. Elegy. A mournful song used in funerals, or other
passions of sorrow. Elegiacke Mournful. Element. The first matter of visible
substance, from whence all things take their beginning: whereof there be four,
namely, fire, air, water, and earth. Sometime it signifies a letter, as
A.B.C. sometime the first foundation, principle, or instruction of any thing.
Elementarie. Which consists of Elements. Eleemosynarie. Given in alms, or
which gives alms. Elench. A subtle argument. Eleuate. To lift up, to
advance. Elevation. A lifting up. Elixir. An Arabian word of the same
signification that Quintessence is in latin: see Quintessence. Elke. A kind
Yew to make bows with. Elocution. Utterance, eloquence. Eloine. To put, give,
or sell away. Elong. To put, or set far off. Elude. To mock or deceive.
Elusion. A mocking, a deceit. Elysian. Of or belonging to Elysium. Elysium. A
supposed place of pleasure below, where Poets imagined the souls of good men
did rest. Embalme. To anoint with baulme. Embassy. An embassage, a message
from one Prince to another. Embellish. To make beautiful. Embezill. To steal,
to convey away. Emblem. It properly signifies any fine work, cunningly set
in wood or other substance, as we see in chesse boards and tables;
notwithstanding it is commonly taken for a picture or other device, shaddowing
some matter to be learned by it. Embost. A term used by hunters, when a Dear
is so weary that he fometh at the mo^th. Embracer. A law term of him, that
when a matter is in trial, comes for reward to the bar, being no lawyer,
nor witness, and speaks in favor of one of the parties: or which labors
the Jury, or uses any unlawful practice to make them give their verdit, as he
would have them. Embrion. A child imperfect in the mothers womb. Emendation.
An amending. Emeralde. A precious stone, the greenest of all other, for which
cause it is very comfortable to the sight. The best of these stones are brought
out of Scythia. And some affirm them to be taken out of the Griffons neastes,
who do keep this stone with great cruelty. It is found by experience (as
Albertus writes) that if the Emerald be good, it inclines the bearer thereof
to chastity, and cannot endure the action of lust. There is also a disease
sounding near this word, for which see Hemorrhode. Eminence. Highness,
dignity, honor. Eminent. High, lofty, honorable. Emmanuel. An Hebrew word
expressing the dignity of our Savior, and is interpreted God with us.
Emolument. Profit, gain, advantage. Empannel^. To make up a jury of twelve,
or more men. Emphasis. An express or most plain signification of ones mind.
Emphaticall. That which is uttered with most express signification, in such
sort, that it sets forth to the full, the intent of the speaker. Empiricke.
A physician that gets skill by his own practice. Emplaster. A plaster or
salve made of herbs, powders and oil boiled together. Empleade. To sue one.
Emprimed. A term used by hunters when a Heart first forsakes the heard.
Empyriall heaven. The highest heaven above the firmament; so called (by a
Greek name) because of the bright shining of it. Emulate. To envy, to strive
to do as another does. Emulation. Envy: an earnest desire to do as an other
does. Enarration. A telling or declaring. Enchiridion. It is commonly taken for
a little book, which one may still carry in his hand. Encomium. A praise.
Encroche. To creep or press upon a man unlawfully, to get more then his due.
Encrochment. A law term when one man unlawfully presses too far upon
another, as in setting his pale oo far upon another land, the more to
enlarge his own, or in taking more rent then is due. Endorse. To write on the
outside of a Letter. Endorsed. A term of Herauldrie, when two beasts are
painted with their backs turned to each other. Energeticall. Very forcible, and
strong. Energie. Force, virtue, strength. * Enewed. Made new. Enfranchise. To
make free, to admit or receive one into any corporation. Enfranchisement. A
making free. Enhance. To advance, or make greater. Enigma. A riddle, a dark
speech. Enigmaticall. Obscure: dark, hard to understand, spoken in a riddle. *
Enmoised. Comforted. Enormitie. A going out of rule: a great disorder.
Enormous. Wicked: very bad. Enquest A Jury of twelve or more men. Ensign. A
banner borne in wars: a flagge, or any ornament serving for a mark of some
dignity. Entalented. Ingrafted. Enthymeme. A term of Logic. It signifies an
imperfect syllogism, which wants either the Mayor or Minor: as for example.
Every sin deserves correction. Every theft is a sin. Therefore every theft
deserves correction.
Now if we will leave the first part (called the Mayor) and say thus: Every
theft is a sin: Therefore Every theft deserves correction. Or omit the
second part (named the Minor) and say: Every sin deserves correction,
therefore every theft deserves correction, Then it is called an Enthymeme, to
wit, a keeping in the mind (for so the word properly signifies) because one
of these parts is understood in the mind: where note that if the two ends of
the Enthymeme are like in speech, then the Minor is wanting, if the two
beginnings be like, the Mayor is omitted, as may easily appear by the
foregoing example. Enueloped. Wrapped. Enuiron. To compass about. Enumerate.
To reckon up: to declare. Enumeration. A reckoning: a rehearsal. Enunciatiue.
Any thing pronounced or spoken. A proposition or speech, which simply affirms
or denies any thing; as Cicero is virtuous: Cicero is not virtuous. Epact. A
number which is in use every year, to find the age of the Moon by: This Epact
changes yearly, and is made by the addition of eleven to the former Epact;
both which numbers are the Epact for the following year, but always so, that
both those numbers exceed not the number of 30. For if they amount to above
30. then must you cast away the 30. and the remaining number shall be the
Epact. As for example, in this year 1616. the Epact is 22. to which if you
add eleven for the next years Epact, it makes 33. from which if you take
away 30. there will remain three; which is the Epact for the next year 1617.
Note also: when in any year the Epact is 29. you must ad 12. to find out the
next years true Epact, that casting away thirty, the Epact may come to be
eleven. In all other numbers the Epast is still made (as before) by adding
eleven. And these Epacts are ever changed on the first day of March.
Ephemerides. A book wherein day acts are registered. Commonly it is taken for a
Book of Astronomy (in use among such as erect figures to cast men's natiuities)
by which book is shown how all the Planets are placed, every day and hour
of the year. Ephi. An Hebrew measure containing about five peckes of ours.
Ephod. A holy garment worn by the high Priest of the Hebrews, when he
executed his function. It covered the back, and was curiously wrought with
gold and twisted silk of Purple, Scarlet, and Violet color. On the shoulders
there were set two great precious Onix stones, and in them graven the names of
the twelve sons of Jacob, called the twelve Patriarchs, in the right
shoulder the six eldest, and in the left the six youngest, that the High
Priest entering into the Sanctum Sanctorum (which was the holiest place of the
Temple) might bear with him the names of the people, for whom he was to pray
unto God. Epicycle. A term used in Astronomy. It signifies a lesser circle,
whose center or middle part is in the circumference of a greater circle. In the
upper part of this Epicycle, the five Planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
and Mercury, do go forward according to the course of the signs; as Aries
to Taurus, etc. in the lower part they are retrograde, that is, go backward,
as from Gemini to Taurus, from Taurus to Aries again. Between these two
motions, are said to be two stations; namely when a Planet cease going
forward, and begins to be retrograde, or coming to the farthest point of
his retrogradation, goes forward again: so that in the Epicycle, these
Planets wheel about sometime according, sometime contrary to the order of the
signs. Epicure. It is commonly taken with us, for a man given over much to
pleasure, especially in gluttony. In ancient times it signified one that
followed the sect of a Philosopher named Epicurus, who taught that the greatest
happiness was, to be without pain, and enjoy pleasure of body and mind.
Epigramme. It properly signifies a supersciption or writing set upon any
thing; now it is commonly taken for a short witty poem, which under a fained
name, does covertly praise or tax some particular person or thing. Epilepsie.
The falling sickness, whereto most commonly children and young folk are
subject. This disease is caused by some humor or vapor, suddenly stopping the
passage of spirits in the brain, which the brain striving to expel, causes
the patient to fall down, and commonly some at the mouth. Epilog. The
conclusion or end of a matter. A speech made, after an interlude or play is
ended. Epiphanie. An appearing or manifestation. The feast of Twelfe day at
Christmas is so called, because the^ the appearing of a new star did manifest
the birth of our Savior. Episcopal. Of, or belonging to a Bishop. Epitaph. An
inscription or writing set upon a toombe; most commonly in lamentation or
praise of the party there buried. Epithete. Any word or short sentence, added
to a Noune substantive, to express some quality of it: as in saying,
Barbarous cruelty, unbridled lust: anger the short madness of the mind: where
barbarous, unbridled, and the short madness of the mind, are Epithetes
expressing the quality of cruelty, lust and anger. Epitome. An abridgeme^t or
short gathering of any matter in writing. Epitomize. To make an abridgement or
short gathering. Equanimitie. Vprightnes of heart, quietness of mind.
Equinoctial. An imagined line, passing just in the midst between the two
poles of heaven, to which line, the sun coming twice a year (namely about the
xj. of March and the xj. of September) makes the days and nights of equal
length in all the world; for which cause it is called Equinoctial: The signs
Aries and Libra do both begin at this line. Equipage. Furniture or provision
for horsemanship; especially in triumphs or tournaments. Equiualence. The equal
value of one thing with another. Equivalent. Of equal value to another thing.
Equivocate. To speak or answer with a secret meaning reserved in ones own
mind; which peradventure the hearers do not understand. Equivocation. A speech
or answer made, with a secret meaning reserved in ones mind. Equiuoke. When
one word signifies two things. Erased. A term of Heraldrie, when any member
of a beast seems torn from the body. Erebus. Hell, or a river in hell. Erect.
To lift up. Erection. A lifting up. Eremite. See Hermit. Ereption. A taking
away. Ermines. A little beast less than a Squirrell, the furre whereof is very
costly, worn only by Princes or great Potentates. It has a tail of a thumb
length, and is brown. Ermine in Heraldry sometime signifies white powdered with
black, and Ermines, black powdered white. Errant. Wandering: having no certain
abode. Erroneous. Full of error: deceived. Erst. Heretofore. Erudition.
Learning, instruction. Eruption. A violent breaking out. Escheate. To be
forfeited to the King, or chief Lord. Escheater. An Officer that observes and
certifieth into the Exchequer, such things as do escheate unto the King.
Escript. A writing. Escuage. A tenure of lands, whereby the tenant is bound at
his own charge to follow his Lord into the wars: either in Scotland or
Wales: sometime in this tenure, the Tenant, only pays a yearly rent.
Escuerconera. An herb in the West Indies, so named because it is of great
virtue against the deadly stingings or bitings of certain venomous beasts,
which in that country they call Escuercos. Esperance. Hope. Essays. Trials.
Essence. The being or natural substance of any thing. Essenes. Certain
religious men among the Jews, which lived a very strict life, abstaining from
wine, flesh, and women. Essential. That which belongs to the essence of a
thing. Essoine. A term in the common Law, when a man cannot well appear at a
day appointed in court, and is therefore allowed by the Court to be absent
without penalty. Estreate. A copy which is taken of any writing. Estouers.
Plots of wood, growing in heathes, commons, and other places, where it is
lawful for tenants to take fuel, and timber to repair their tenements.
Eternal. Which has no beginning nor end. Eternity. Euerlastingnes.
Etheriall. Heavenly, or belonging to the celestial spheres. Ethikes. Books of
moral Philosophy, treating of civil behavior and manners. Ethnike. A gentill:
a Heathen: one that is no Christian. Etymology. The true exposition or reason
given of any word. Euacuate. To empty. Euacuation. An emptying. Euade. To
escape: to get away. Evangelical. Of or belonging to the Gospel: commanded
in the Gospel. Evangelist. A bringer of good tidings: wherefore Saint Matthew,
Saint Mark, S. Luke, and S. John, are called Evangelists, because they first in
writing published the joyful History of our Redemption by the Son of God.
Euaporate. To consume away in vapor. Euaporation. A vapor or smoke passing
from any thing. Evasion. An escape: a starting hole to get out. Eucharist. It
properly signifies a giving of thanks. In Ecclesiastical writings it is often
taken for the B. Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Euecke. A kind of
wild beast like a Goat. Event. The end or success of a matter. Euert. To
overthrow. Euersion. An overthrowing. Euiction. An overthrow in Law. Euitable.
Which may be avoided. Eunuche. A gelded man. Euphorbium. A gum or te are of a
strange plant, growing on the mount Atlas in Lybia. It is yellowish, clear,
and brittle. It may be used in ointments against palsies, cramps, and shrinking
of sinews: but to be taken inwardly is very dangerous, unless the malice
thereof be well corrected; for it scaldeth and is exceeding hot, near the
fourth degree. Europe. One of the three parts of the world lying toward the
West. In it are contained England, Spain, France, Germany, Italy, all Greece,
Crete, or Candy, beside many other kingdoms, great countries and Islands. Some
affirm it to be caled Europe of Europa, King Agenors daughter, whom Jupiter
(as Poets seine) in likeness of a Bull, carried over sea, into the Island
Candy. Exact. To demand with great earnestness, or with constraint: also it
signifies perfect and accomplished. Exaction. A pilling or taking up of money
by constraint. Exaggerate. To increase or amplify a matter: properly, with
words to make a thing more than it is. Exaggeration. An increasing or
amplyfying by words. Exanimate. To amaze. Exanimation. An amazement.
Exasperate. To anger, or provoke one greatly to anger. Exasperation. A
provoking or stirring one to anger. Excess. Which exceeds or is too much.
Excite. To stir up. Exclamation. A crying out. Exclude. To shut out.
Exclusion. A shutting out. Excogitate. To devise. Excommunicate. To cast out of
the communion of the Church. Excommunication. A casting out of the Church.
Excrement. Any thing which naturally growing or being in the body, may be
taken away without harm to the body. Excression. A growing out: a swelling or
bunch. Excruciate. To torment. Excursion. A running out, a light skirmish.
Excerable. Wicked, worthy to be detested. Execration. A cursing. Exemplarie.
Of, or belonging to an example. Exemplify. To declare a matter at large, to
allege examples. Exempt. Free or privileged from any payment or service.
Exemption. A freedom or a privilege from any business. Exequies. Funeral
solemnities in honor of the dead. Exhale. To cast or send forth a breath or
fume. Exhalation. A fumie smoke, hot and dry, drawn out of the earth by the
heat of the Sun, which being inflamed, is the material cause of diverse
fiery impressions in the air. Exhaust. To consume, spend, or waste. Exhibit.
To present, offer, or give. Exhilarate. To make merry, to comfort.
Exhortatorie. Which exhorts or persuades to do a thing. Exiccate. To dry,
to make dry. Exigent. A straight, a hard pinch. Exile. Banishment. Exinanite.
To make empty, to spoil, weaken, or make of no force. Exodus. A going forth.
The second Book of Moses, is so called, because it teaches of the manner how
the children of Israel went out of Egypt. Exonerate. To unburden, to acquit or
discharge. Exorable. Which may be entreated. Exorbitant. That which goes out
of due proportion, or the right way. Exorcize. To adjure, to bind by oath: to
charge one upon conscience or grievous penalty, to speak truly, or do any
thing required. Exorcisme. An adiuring or binding by oath. Exordium. The first
entrance of a sermon, oration, or such like speech. Expect. To look for before
it come. Expectation. A looking for, a longing. Expedite. Quick, ready.
Expeditate. To cut off the balls or (as some say) certain claws of great
dogs feet, which are kept near a forest, that they may not harm the Kings
Dear. The dogs so cut, are said to be expeditated. Expedition. Quick
dispatch, speed, sometime a setting forth unto war; a voyage. Expel. To
thrust out, to drive away. Experiment. An experience, proof or trial. Expert.
Cunning, skillful. Expiable. Which may be purged or satisfied for. Expiate. To
pacify, to appease, to recompense. Expiation. Pacifying, appeasing by
sacrifice. Expire. To dye, end perish, or decay. Expiration. A dying, a
breathing out, an end. Explane. To make plain, to declare plainly.
Explanation. A making plain, a declaring. Explicate. To unfold, open, or to
declare at large. Explication. An unfolding or opening. Explode. To drive out
with clapping the hands. Explosion. A driving away. Expose. To set forth: to
set to view; to put abroad in hazard. Exposition. An interpretation or
expounding. Expositour. An expounder or interpreter. Expostulate. To reason
angerly with one; to chide or complain, as finding himself grieved.
Expostulation. An angry reasoning or complaint. Expression. A wringing or
squeasing out. Exprobrate. To vpbraid, to cast in ones teeth. Exprobration. An
vpbraiding. Expugne. To conquer: to win by assault. Expugnation. A conquest: a
winning by fight. Expulse. To thrust out. Expulsion. A thrusting out, a driving
away. Exquisite. Excellent, curious. Extant. That which stands abroad or in
sight; which may be found. Extempore. Out of hand; presently, without study.
Extend. To stretch forth, to show at length. Extension. A stretching out.
Extenuate. To diminish: to make by words, a thing seem less than it is.
Extenuation. A diminishing. Exterior. Outward. Exterminate. To banish: to drive
away. Extermination. A destroying, or rooting out. Externe. Foreign: outlandish,
strange, outward. External. Outward, strange. Extinguish. To quench, to put
out. Extinct. Quenched, dead, put out. Extirpe. To destroy, To root out.
Extirpate. To root up: to destroy. Extirpation. A rooting up. Extort. To wrest
away, to take by force. Extortion. Wrong done by any officer, in taking greater
fees or rewards, for executing his office, than the laws will allow him.
Extortioner. He that commits extortion. Extract. To draw forth. Extraction.
A drawing out. Extrauagant. Wandering, disordered, when there are many
needelesse matters or words brought in beside the purpose. Extrinsecall.
Outward, or on the outside. Exulcerate. To raise blisters or sores.
Exulceration. A rising of blisters or sores in the odie. Exulte. To rejoice
greatly, to triumph over one. Exultation. A great rejoicing.
F
Fabricate. To frame, to build. Fabrike. A frame a building. Fabulous. False as
a fable. Facile. Easy. Facility. Easines. Faction. A sect or division into
sundry opinions. Factious. Contentious, troublesome, unquiet. Factor. He that
buieth and sells for a merchant, or that looks to his buisinesse. Faculty.
Power, ability, a trade or course of life, a privilege or power granted, that
a man may do something, which without such privilege he could not do.
Facundite. Eloquencie. Fage. A fable. Falding. A kind of course cloth.
Fallacy. Deceit in words. Falsitie. To counterfeit, or make false.
Falsification. A counterfeiting, or making false. Falsitie. Falsehood, deceit.
Fanaticall. Distracted, mad, frantic, out of his wits. Farcines. A disease in
beasts: it is a creeping ulcer growing in knots, and following along some
vein. Farced. Stuffed, full. Fascinate. To bewitch. Fastidious. Disdainful,
loathing, proud. Fate. Destiny, that which must of necessity come to pass,
by Gods secret appointment. Fatal. That which happens or comes to pass by
fate. Faunus. Poetical gods of the woods. Favorite. One in great favor.
Fealty. A ceremony done by some tenants to the Lord of whom they hold lands:
which is in laying their right hand upon a book, and promising fidelity to
him by oath. Feature. Hansomnesse, comeliness, beauty. Fecunditie.
Fruitfulnes. Fleere. A companion, a husband or wife. Felicity. Happiness.
Fell. A skin, sometime it signifies fierce, terrible, or frowning. Feminine.
Of or belonging to the female. Fencemonth. A month, so called, because then it
is not lawful to hunt in any forest, for that the does then do fawn. This
month begins about the ninth of June, and continues till the ninth of July.
Fengreeke. A plant or herb, the seed whereof is much used in phisike. It is
yellow, being hot in the second degree and dry in the first, and has power to
mollify and dissolve. Feodarie. An officer who is to be present with the
Escheater, at the finding of any office, and to survey wards lands, and to rate
them. Feofment. A deed witnessing the sale or gift of lands in fee simple,
with liuerie of seisine, and possession thereof. He that makes the Feofment is
called the Feofer, and the party to whom it is made, the Feofee. Ferie. Any
day of the week not kept holy. Fers. The Queen in chesse play. Fertile.
Fruitful, yielding much. Fertility. Fruitfulness. Fervent. Hot. Fervor.
Heat. Ferula. A rod, stick, or thin paulmer, wherewith children are
corrected in schools upon the hand. Fessepoint. The middle part of a scucheon,
whose breadth is divided into three even parts. Festival. Merry, joyful,
belonging to a feast. Festiuitie. Mirth rejoicing, pleasantnes, merrinesse.
Feud. Hatred, enmity, strife. Fewmets, or Fewmishing. The dung of a Dear.
Fiants. The dung of a Fox or Badger. Fiction. A feined device, a lie.
Fidelity. Faithfulness. Figment. A vain device, a lie, a counterfeit tale.
Figurative. That which figureth or serves but as a representation of another
thing. Filial. Of or belonging to a son. Filme. A fine thin skin within
the body, dividing the flesh or any near member one from another. Fine. An
end: sometime money paid when one first takes land for years. Final. Of or
belonging to an end, the last. * Finance. An end. Finite. which has an end.
Fire-drake. A fire sometime seen, flying in the night like a Dragon. Common
people think it a spirit, that keeps some treasure hid: but Philosophers
affirm it to be a great unequal ^^^alation; inflamed between two Clouds,
the one hot, the other cold (which is the reason that it also smoketh:) the
middle part whereof, according to the proportion of the hot Cloud, being
greater than the rest, makes it seem like a belly, and both ends like unto a
head and tail. Firm. Strong, stable, steadfast. Firmament. Astronomers
understand by this word, the eighth sphere, next above the spheres of the
seven Planets, in which all the fixed Stars are placed. Firmitie. Strength,
steadfastness. Fistike nuts. Outlandish nuts, brought out of Syria and other
hot Countries, not much unlike a small Hasell nut. They are very good against
the stoppings of the liver, being steeped all night in some sweet wine, and so
eaten in the morning. They are good also to unstop the lungs, and for such as
are troubled with shortness of breath, and are comfortable for the stomach;
yet they nourish but little, being taken as meat. Fistula. A dangerous ulcer
or sore still running. It goes up into the body, with a long narrow hole, like
a pipe, and is commonly hard in the outside, Fitch. The furre of the Polecat.
Fix. To fasten. Fixed. Fastened. Flagitious. Wicked, very lewd. Flamine. A
great Priest amongst the Gentiles. There were three such at Rome. One called
Flamen Dialis: The Priest of Jupiter: who ware rich vestments, and had a chair
of Estate. If his Wife chanced to dye, he thereupon went presently out of his
office: It was not lawful for him to abide one night out of the City, nor yet
to affirm any thing by oath; for his word was held of sufficient credit. The
other two Flamins, were the Flamine of Mars, and the Flamine of Romulus, called
Quirinus. Flankards. Hunters call so two knots or nuts, in the flank of a
Dear. Flebotomie. See Phlebotomie. Flegmaticke. Full of fleagme, or inclining
to fleagme. Flexibilitie. Aptnes to bend. Flexible. Pliant, easy to bend. *
Flo. An arrow. Floreine. A coin, whereof there be two sorts: one about the
value of three shillings four pence, the other about two shillings ten
pence-farthing. Fluent. which flows or abounds. Flux. A flowing or issue of
blood. Fluxibilitie. Aptnes to flow or spread abroad. Fluxible. Which is apt to
flow or run abroad. Foyling. The print of a Deers foot in grass, when it
cannot well be seen. Foemen. Enemies. F^^^es. A kind of furre brought for the
most part out of France: the top of this furre is black, and the ground
whitish: the beast that bears it, is about the bigness of a Cat. Foison.
Great plenty, store. ^o^erers. Vagabonds. Folio. A sheet or large leaf of
paper. Fomentation. In physic it properly signifies, powders or dry things
in bags, or any liquour in a sponge or bladder, applied warm to the body, to
mitigate pain, or for some other purpose. Footstall. The lower part of a
pillar, whereon it stands. Foppe. A Fool. Foppery. Foolishness, a vain
matter. Forage. Provision for horses and cattle in the wars. Forcer. A cofer,
or little chest. Forester. He that has charge to look to a forest, or some
part of it. Foreloyne. A term in hunting, when a hound meets a chase, and
goes away with it before the rest. Forlorn. Utterly undone, in a desperate
estate. Formalitie. An observing of good form or order. Formal. That which
keeps due form. Formositie. Beauty, fairness. Forestall. To buy victual
or other merchandise by the way before it come to the fair or market; to sell
it again at a dearer price. Forestaller. He that does forestall, and buy
things in such sort. Fortify. To make strong. Fortification. A hold, any place
made strong. Fortitude. Courage, strength, valor. Forewelked. Dried up.
Foster. To cherish, to bring up, to keep. Fother. A waincloade of 2000.
weight. Fracture. A breaking. Fragility. Weakness, britlenesse. Fragment. A
broken piece, a cantle. Fragrant. Sweet smelling. * Frape. A company, a
rabble. Fraternity. A brotherhood. Fraud. Deceit, cousenage. Fraudulent.
Deceitful. Fray. Hearts or stags are said to fray their heads, when they rub
them, to make the pills of their new horns come of. * Fremd. Strange.
Frequent. Often, common, also to haunt or resort much to a place.
Frequentation. A haunting or resorting to a place. Frication. A rubbing.
Friction. A rubbing. Frivolous. Vain, foolish, of no account. Froise. A
pancake, a tansie. Front. A forehead, the first part of a battle, an entrance
or beginning. Frontire. The bounds or limits of a country. Frontlet. Any
thing worn on the forehead. * Frownce. A wrinckle. Fructify. To bear fruit.
Frugall. Thriftie, sparing. Frugalitie. Thriftinesse, good husbandry.
Frustrate. To make void, to deceive, to disappoint. Fugitive. One likely to
run away, a vagrant person, a runaway Fumigation. A perfume, any thing which
being cast on hot coals, makes a sweet smell. Function. An office, a charge
which one has, a course of life. Fundamental. Of or belonging to the
foundation, or to the maine, chief, and principal point. Funeral. A solemn
burial of some great person. Furies. Three imaginary hags or spirits in hell,
having snakes growing on them in stead of hairs. Poets feyned them to be
daughters of Acheron (a river in hell) and of the night, and to have the office
of torme^ting the souls of wicked men. Their names were Alecto, Megaera, and
Tisiphone. Fusible. That may be molten. Future. That which shall be hereafter.
G
* Gab. To prate or lie. Gabbing. Lying. Gabions. Baskets of earth to keep off
great shot. Gable. The forefront or end of a house coming down right.
Gaynest. Most profitable or nearest. * Gadling. Straggling. Galangale. An herb
so called, the root whereof is hot and dry in the third degree, and much used
in physic. Galbanum. A gum or liquor drawn forth of a plant in Syria
called Metopion. It is of a strange savor, and very pure, close and firm,
neither too moist, nor too dry. It is good against an old cough, and for such
as cannot easily fetch breath: and the perfume thereof dryueth Serpents from
the place where it is burned. * Galiard. Lusty: frolike. * Galoch. A kind of
shoe. * Galpe. To belch. Grangrene. A dangerous disease when any fleshie part
of the body, after some great infla^mation or other grief, losing the natural
color, begins to grow insensible, and by degrees to wax dead. Garb. A
term in Heraldrie. It signifies sheafe of Wheat, or any other grain.
Garbell. To purify or cleanse spice or other things, from the dross or dust
which is mingled with it. Gargarize. To wash or scowre the mouth with any
Physical liquor. Gargarisme. A liquor to wash the mouth. Gargill. The same
that Gargarize. * Gargoning. Strange speaking. Garrulitie. Prattling, vain
babbling Garter. It sometime signifies the principal of our English Heralds,
called the King at arms. Gatherbag. The bag or skin, enclosing a young red
Dear in the Hyndes belly. Gauelkinde. Customs annexed unto certain lands in
Kent, called Gauelkinde lands: whereof one is, that if the Father be hanged for
felony, the Son shall enjoy all his lands and tenements holden in
Gauelkinde. Other customs there are of Gauelkind, too long to be rehearsed in
this place. Gawg^our. An officer having authority, to give a mark of
allowance, to all Tuns, Hogsheads, Pipes, Barrells, etc. of Wine, Oil, Honey,
and Butter, before they ought to be sold. * Gawre. To stare. Gehenna. It
properly signifies a place in a valley, in the Tribe of Benjamin, where the
Israelites erected abominable altars, there sacrificing their children in fire
to the Idol Moloch: notwithstanding it is usually taken for hell. Gemme. A
jewel. Genealogy. A pedigree; a declaration of ones lineage, stock, or race.
Generable. Which may be begotten. Generate. To beget. Generositie. Nobleness
of mind, Gentlemanlike courage. Generous. Noble, valiant, virtuous. Genesis. A
generation. The first Book of Moses is so called in Greek and Latin,
because it declares the creation and generation of all things. Genet. A goodly
horse of Spain. Genets. A beast almost of the bigness of a Cat breeding in
Spain. There are two colors of them, black and gray; but the furre of the
black is most esteemed. Genius. The spirit or soul: A good Angel, or a
familiar evil spirit. Gentill. Among the Jews, all were Gentiles, that were
not of one of the twelve Tribes: now we commonly call them Gentiles, that
profess not the faith of Christ. Gentilisme. The opinion or belief of the
Gentiles. Gentilitie. The same that Gentilisme is. Geographie. A description of
the earth, as we see in Maps. Geomancie. See Divination. Geometry. An art of
due proportion consisting in lineaments, forms, distances, and greatness.
There are four principles hereof: to wit, 1. A prick or point: 2. A line. 3. a
superficies or outside: 4. a body.
This art was of great estimation among the ancient Grecians. Geometrician.
One skillful in Geometry. Georgikes. Books treating of husbandry and tillage
of land. * Gerifull. Changeable: sometime cruel. * Gesseran. A breastplate.
Gesticulation. A moving of the fingers, hands or other parts, either in idle
wantonness, or to express some matter by signs, in dancing, singing, or
other such like exercise. Gestes. Deeds, noble acts. Geules. A term among
Heralds: It signifies a vermilion color. * Gippon. A doublet* a light cote. *
Gipsere. A bag or pouch. Girl. A Roe Bucke of two years. * Gisarme. A
certain weapon. * Gite. A gown. Give. A fetter or chain. Glaiue. A weapon
like an Halberd. * Glede. Fire: embers; flame, ashes: sometime a bird called a
Puttoke. * Glee. Mirth or ioyfulnesse. * Gleire. White. * Glinne. A little
village, or part of a Village. Glister. A liquour made sometime with sodden
flesh, sometime with decoction of herbs or other things, which by a pipe, is
conveyed into the lower parts of the body. It is written that the use hereof
was first learned from a Bird in Egypt, called Ibis, much like unto a Storke,
which Bird does often with her bill, open her hinder parts, when nature of her
self does not expel what is needful. Globe. A great round Bowl: or a
description of the world made in such a form. Gloss. A short exposition of
any dark speech. Glow. To be hot and red, to shine, to burn. * Gnarre. A hard
knot in wood: sometime a short thick fellow, a chub. Gnathonicall.
Flattering; deceitful in words: soothing ones humor, to get by him. * Gnoffe.
A Fool, a Churl. Goldfoile. A thin leaf of gold. Golden number. A number
which changes every year, by adding one to the golden number of the year
going before, until it grow as high as nineteen, and then the golden number
returns to one again. For example, this year 1616. the golden number is
two: the next year therefore it will be three, etc. This golden number was
devised to find out the feast of Easter. Golgotha. A Syrian word, signifying,
a place of dead men's sculles. It was a place at Jerusalem on the North side of
Mount Sion, so called because there lay the sculles of offenders put to death.
* Golierdise. He that has a foul great mouth. Gomor. The name of an Hebrew
measure, containing more than a Gallon. The Israelites when they were fed from
Heaven with Manna in the desert, received every one, this measure full for a
days allowance. * Gonfennon. A little flag. Gordian knot. A knot which cannot
be loosed. Gorgon. A terrible fighting Woman. Poets seine, there were four
such, Daughters to King Phorcus: their names were Scylla, Medusa, Stenio, and
Euryale. Gossomor. Things that fly like Copwebs in the air. Gourmand. A
glutton. Gourmandize. Gluttony: sometime to eat like a Glutton. Graces. A
poetical fiction of three Sisters, supposed the Daughters of Jupiter and
Venus. They were called Aglaia, Thalia, and Euphrosyne. The morality of this
invention was, to express the mutual love and cheerful conversation which
ought to be amongst friends: For they were painted naked, to signify that
friendship ought to be plain without dissimulation; smiling and merry, to show
that men should do good willingly; young and maide^like, to teach that
friendship should consist in honest things; and holding hands together in a
round ring, to show that a benefit bestowed, does again return to the giver.
Gradation. A going by steps, or a speaking by certain degrees. Gradual. That
which was said or sung, between the Epistle and the Gospel. Graduate. He that
has taken degree of learning in a public University. Grains of Paradise. A
little seed, brought out of Armenia, of a strong sweet smell, and somewhat
sharp in taste. It is hot and dry, of a subtle substance, and often used in
Physic. For it warmeth the inward parts, and is good against the falling
sickness, the Sciatica, the Strangurie, bytings of venomous beasts, and diverse
other diseases. * Grame. Sorrow, mishap: anger. Gramaticall. Of, or belonging
to Grammar. Granadillia. A fruit like a Pomegranat growing in India. Grand.
Great. Grandour. Greatness. * Graythed. Devised. * Gratch. Apparel.
Grateful. Thankful. Gratify. To pleasure one, to offer one a kindness. To
do a good turn. Gratification. A pleasuring of one, a good turn. Gratis.
Freely, without cost. Gratitude. Thankfulness. Gratuitie. A benefit or gift
given only for good will: sometime thankfulness, or a reward. Gratulate. To
signify that we rejoice at the prosperity of another. Gratulation. A rejoicing
for another good. A thanksgiving. Gravity. Heaviness: also sagenes, great
discretion. Graund Sergeantie. An old tenure in the Common Law, when a man
holds lands or tenements of the king, to go with him into the wars, or to
bear his banner, lead his host, or do some such like service. Graunge. A
village, or lone house in the country. * Gree. Good part. Griffine. A strange
Bird in India, with four feet armed with cruel claws, being from the breast
upward fashioned like an Eagle, but of purple color, with red fiery eyes, and
whitish wings, and in the hinder part black, made much like a Lion. This bird
neasteth in the high mountains, and is exceeding hard to be taken, except very
young; for he will adventure on any man, and is so fierce, that he often kills
Elephants and Dragons. He is most enemy to horses: for which cause Virgill in
his eight Eclog, brings in the sheppheard Damon, who wondered at a strange
marriage, speaking thus: Iunguntur iam gryphes equis: etc. The Griffins fierce
are joined with horses now. * Grith. Agreement. Gruell. Potage. Guacatane. An
herb growing in the west Indies of great virtue against the piles, or griefs
proceeding from cold or windiness. Guaiacum. A wood called by some Lignum
vitae. It is much used in physic against the French disease. Guaiauas. A
fruit growing in India much like unto apples. Guerdon. A reward. Guerdonles.
Unrewarded. * Guerring. Brawling. Gum Arabicke A kind of gum, growing on a
thorn tree, called Acacia in Egypt. Guzes. The ball of the eye. A term in
heraldrie. Gymnosophists. Certain Philosophers in India, that went always
naked, and lived solitary in woods; the first beginner of which sect, was (as
S. Hierome writes cont. Iouinian.) named Buddas. * Gyre. A trance.
H.
HAberdepoise. A pound weight which contains sixteen ounces. Habit. The
outward attire of the body, whereby one person may be distinguished from
another; as the habit of a Gentleman, is different from the habit of a
merchant, and the habit of a Handi-crafts man differing from them both.
Sometime it signifies a quality in the body or mind, not natural, but
gotten by long custom, or infused by God: as an Orator still exercised in
making orations, has gotten a habit of eloquent speaking; and the holy
Apostles had a habit to understand and speak languages without study.
Habitable. which may be dwelled in. Habitation. A dwelling place. Habitual.
Grwne to a habit by long custom. * Hailse. Charge. * Haine. Hatred. * Haketon.
A sleeuelesse iacket. Halituous. Vaporous, thin, moist, which may be voided out
by the pores. * Halse. A neck. * Halke. A corner, a valley. * Hameled. Cut
off, abated. Hamkin A pudding made upon the bones of a shoulder of mutton, all
the flesh being first taken off. Hamlet. A village in the country. Hague. A
hand-gunne of about three quarters of a yard long. Haguebut. A gunne or
harquebuse. Harbinger. One that takes up lodging for others. Hariant. A term
in herauldry when a fish is painted standing upright. Harmony. Delightful
music of many notes. Harmonious. Sweet, pleasant, delightful to the ear.
Harpyes. A poetical word. It signifies certain monstrous birds, with maiden
faces, and crooked sharp talons, so called because of their rapine which they
used. They lived in Stymphalis a lake of Arcadia, and were sent by the Gods (if
we believe Poets) to snatch away and defile the meat of Phineus, king of that
country, because he at the persuasion of his second wife, had destroyed the
children which he had by his first; they were at last driven away by Zetus, and
Calais the sons of of Boreas. These Harpyes were named, Aello, Ocypete,
Celeno, and Thyella. Harquebuze. A hand Gunne. Harquebuzier. He that shoots
in a hand Gunne. * Harrow. An old word signifying, away, fie. Haubergion. A
coat of male. Hauoire. Possession. * Hauselins. Breeches. * Hawbacke. To
return. Hawberke. A Gorget. Hearse. A burial coffin covered with black.
Hecatombe. A great sacrifice wherein were offered a hundred beasts. Hecticke.
A Fever inflaming the Heart, and soundest parts of the body. Heisugge. A bird
which hatcheth the Cuckooes eggs. Hemisphere. Half the compass of the
heavens: that part of the heavens which is still visible to us. Hemistich.
Half a verse. Hemorrhodes. A swelling of veins in the fundament like werts;
whereof some do use to bleed often, and some bleed not at all. They are
caused by superfluity of gross melancholy blood, sent to these parts from the
liver, being many times healthful to the patient, by preventing other
diseases; and therefore ought not hastily to be stopped, unless through
continuance, the body be too much weakened by them. Henchman. A page of
honor, near attendant to a Prince, or other great personage. * Hend. Gentle.
* Hent. To catch or lay hold of. Herbage. Pasture, or the feeding of cattle in
pasture Herball. A book of the nature of herbs. Herbinger. See harbinger.
Heretical. Obstinate in a false belief, belonging to an Heretic. Heretic.
He that makes his own choice, what points of religion he will believe, and
what he will not believe. Hereditarie. That which comes to one by
inheritance. Heriot. The best living beast which a Tenant has at his death,
which in some Manors is due to the lord of whom the land is holden.
Hermaphrodite. Of both natures: which is both man and woman. Hermit. One
dwelling solitary in the wilderness attending only to devotion. Hermitage. A
lone house where an hermit dwells Hermodactiles Little roots white, and
round, sold by Apothecaries. They are hot and dry in the second degree, and
are much used against all gouts, purging slimie fleame from farthest parts of
the body: but they must be taken with Ginger, Anniseed or Cummin, and a little
Masticke, or else by stirring windiness, they will ouerturne the stomach.
Heroes. Great Noble men. Heroycall. Noble, honorable, courageous. Heroike. The
same, as Heroical. Hests. Commandments or decrees. Heteroscians. Any people
dwelling under a temperate Zone: so called because their shadows at noone bend
still but one way. Hew. Color. Hewte. A little copse or grove. Heyward. A
bailiefe, or officer having charge to look to the fields. Hyacinth. See
Hyacinth. Hide of land. Some affirm it to be a hundred acres. Hidage. A tax
or payment for every hide of la^d. Hidebound. A disease in cattle when the
skin cleaves to their sides. Hideous. Terrible, ugly. Hiena. See Hyena. Hiera
picra. A bitter confectio^ made of Aloe succotrina, and other simples, often
used in Physic to purge Choler out of the stomach. Hierarchy. The holy
order of Angels, which containing nine degrees (as some affirm) is a mystical
resemblance of the B. Trinity, there being in nine, thrice three, and in every
three thrice one. So that there are three superior, three inferior, and three
middle degrees The superior are Seraphines, Cherubines, and Thrones; the
middle, Dominations, principalities, Powers: The inferior, virtues, Archangels,
and Angels. Hieroglyphikes. A dark mystical kind of writing, used chiefly in
times past among the Pagane priests and learned men of Egypt to hide their
knowledge from the vulgar sort. This writing was by making the forms of
beasts and diverse other figures, and could hardly be understood without
exposition, or great knowledge in the nature of things. For example: Eternity
or euerlastingnesse, they expressed by a round circle, which has no end: A
king, by a scepter with an eye in the top thereof: A matof haste, by a
Dolphin, the swiftest of all fishes. And a matter of deliberation or advice, by
an Anchor, which stays a ship in the waves. With a thousand such devices, not
subject to common capacities to find out. Hight. Was named. Hillocke. A little
hill. Hin. An Hebrew measure of moist things, containing (by Agricolas account)
four pottles and a quart of ours. Santes Pagninus affirms it to contain,
threescore and twelve eggs. Hip. The red berry on the bryer. Hipocrite. See
Hypocrite. Historian. A writer or teller of a History. Historical. Of or
belonging to a History. Historiographer. A writer of Histories. Historiologie.
The knowledge and telling of old Histories. Hoane. A fine kind of whetstone.
Hogsteere. A wild bore of three years old. Holocaust. A sacrifice wherein the
whole beast is offered, and no part reserved. Holt. A grove. Homage. In Court
Barons, the Jury that are sworn to enquire of matters, are so called. It
signifies also a seruil ceremony, of duty by some Tenants to their Lords,
after this manner. The Tenant that holds Lands by homage, kneeling on both
knees before the Lord (who sits and holds the Tenants hands between his)
says as follows. I become your man, from this day forward, of life and
member, and of earthly honor, and to you shall be faithful and true, and
shall bear to you faith for the Lands I claim to hold of you, saving the
faith that I owe to our Lord the King. And then the Lord sitting must kiss the
Tenant. Homager. One that does or owes homage. Homicide. A manslayer: sometime
manslaughter. Homily. A talking together: a speech, or a Sermon. Homonymie. A
term in Logic, when one word signifies diverse things: as Heart: signifying a
beast, and a principal member of the body. Honor point. In Herauldry the
upper part of a Scutcheon is so called, when the breadth thereof, is divided
into three even parts. * Hopesteres. Pilots to guide a ship. Horizon. An
imaginary line compassing the lowest part of the heavens that we can see; so
called because it limiteth our sight, dividing the heavens underneath us, from
that which is above. The Sun rising and going down is ever in this line.
Horologe. A Clock, or Dyall. Horoscope. The ascendent of ones nativity, to
wit, that part of the firmament which ascends from the East, when a child is
borne. Astrologers call it, the first house. Horride. Terrible: fearful to
look on. Horror. Great fear or trembling. * Horrow. Beastly; base
slanderous. Hosanna. An Hebrew word, which signifies, Save I beseech thee.
Hospitality. Entertainment of strangers, good house keeping. Hostage. A
pledge left in wars for performance of covenants. Hostile. Of or belonging to
an enemy: malicious, harmefull. Hostility. Enmity: hatred, open war.
Hotchpot. A term in our common Law, when a daughter which has had given unto
her any lands in Frankemarriage, clayming to be coheire after her fathers
death, to other lands with some sisters, is constrained to suffer that part of
land, given her before her fathers death, to be put in Hotchpot, that is, to
be mingled together with the lands whereof her Father dyed seized, so that an
equal division may be made of the whole. * Howgates. How. Howsell. To
minister Sacraments to a sick man in danger of death. Howten. To hollow.
Hulke. To open a hare or cony, to take out the garbage. * Hulstred. Hidden.
Huke. A Dutch attire covering the head, face, and all the body. Humane. That
which belongs or may happen to man. Humanity. Gentleness, courtesy, civil
behavior: also manhood or the nature of mankind. Humide. Moiste. Humiditie.
Moisture. Humiliate. To make humble. Humiliation. A making low or humble.
Humorous. Full of humors. * Hurtelen. To thrust, to provoke. Hyacinth. The red,
blew, or yellow lilly: also a purple flower called crow-toes. Hydra. A
monstrous serpent in the Lake Lerna, which having one head cut off, had
forthwith two other heads growing up in the place. Hercules fought with this
serpent and slew him. Hydromancie. See Divination. Hydromell. A physical
sweet drink, made of water and honey. Hyemall. Belonging to winter, winterly.
Hyena. A beast like a Wolf, having a mane and long hairs over all the body.
It is the subtillest (as some say) of all beasts, and will counterfeit the
voice of a man, to draw sheepheards out of their houses in the night, to the
end he may kill them. It is written that he changes sex often, being
sometime male, and sometime femall. Hymen. A poetical word, it is taken for
the God of marriage, son unto Bacchus and Venus; and sometime for a song at a
marriage feast. Hymn. A song to praise God. Hyperbole. A figure when one
speaks a great deal more than is precisely true. Hyperbolicall. Any thing
spoken above all belief, as in saying, higher than heaven, swifter than
lightening, etc. is called an Hyperbolicall speech. Hypocrite. It properly
signifies one that does counterfeite the gesture of an other man: but it is
commonly taken for a dissembler, that with feined holiness would seem better
than he is indeed. Hypoquistidos. In diverse hot countries there grows a
plant called Cistus, having about the root thereof, a certain Mushroome, which
being bruised yields a liquor, called by Apothecaries Hypoquistidos. This
liquour (brought hither dry) is cold of operation, and of virtue to stop all
bleedings, laskes, and fluxes of the belly. Hypostaticall. Belonging to
substance; or that which consists in the substance of a thing. Hypotheticall,
In Logike, those propositions, which have a conjunction in them, and so consist
of two parts, are called Hypotheticall propositions, as in saying. If the Sun
be in our Hemisphere, it is day. Hysteron proteron. A Greek term, sometime
used in derision of that which is spoken or done preposterously or quite
contrary. We call it in English, The cart before the horse.
I
IAcent. Lying along. Iacynth. A precious stone found in Ethiopia, whereof
there are two kinds; the one of a pale yellow color, and the other of a
clear bright yellow, which is accounted the better. It is cold of nature,
comfortable to the body, and provoke sleep. Jacobs staff. An instrument in
Geometry. Iaculatory. That which is suddenly cast from one, like a dart.
Iambes. Posts susteining both sides of the door. Iambeux. Armor for the legs.
Iasmine. A limmer weak plant, full of joints or knots, which grows in manner
of a hedge or quickset, and must be stayed up, as roses and vines are. Jasper.
A precious stone of diverse colors; but the best is green, transparent with
red veins, and shows fairest being set in silver: it is good to stop any
issue of blood. Iasponyx. A precious stone, white of color, and having red
strakes. Iazul. A precious stone of a blew azure color. Ibis. A tall strong
bird in Egypt, with a long bill, which does much good there in destroying
serpents. Icleeped. named, called. * Icond. Learned. Idea. The form or figure
of any thing conceived in the mind. Identitie. The self same thing. Idiome.
The form of speech, or property of any language. Idiote. It is commonly taken
for a fool natural: notwithstanding it sometime signifies a man unlearned.
Ides. Eight days in every month, so called, because they divide the month
almost in the middle. In March, May, July, and October, these eight days
begin at the eighth day of the month, and continue to the fifteenth: in other
months they begin at the sixth day, and continue to the thirteenth. Where note
that the last day only is called Ides, and the first of these days, the
eighth Ides, the second the seventh Ides: that is, the eighth or seventh day
before the Ides, and so of the rest. Idolaster. An Idolater. Jehovah. The
ineffable name of God, signifying his divine essence. The hebrews did not use
to read this word, when they came to it in any writing, so much reverence did
they bear unto it; but in stead thereof they pronounced Adonai, which
signifies Lord. Jesus. A Savior. * Iewise. Reward by revenge, also a gibbet.
* Ifere. Together. * Ifretten. Devoured. Ignoble. Base, that is not noble.
Ignominy. Shame, reproach, infamy. Ignominious. Shameful, vile, reproachful.
* Jkend. Known. Iliads. A book written in greek by Homer, of the destruction
of Troy. * Ilke. The same. Illation. A bringing in of a matter. Illaudable. not
worthy of praise. Illegitimate. Unlawful, not lawfully begotten. Illiberall.
Not liberal, miserable, base. Jlliberalitie. Niggardnesse: properly in a
great man, that over slightly rewards a service or courtesy done to him by
his inferior. Illiterate. Unlearned, one that is not acquainted with letters.
Illude. To mock, to deceive. Jllusion. A mockery, a cunning slight to deceive
one. Illuminate. To enlighten. Illumination. A shining or giving of light.
Jllustrate. To make famous, or noble. Illustration. A making famous or noble.
Illustrious. Famous, noble, very honorable. Imagerie. Painted or carved works
of images. Jmaginarie. That which is conceited in the mind. Imbecillitie.
Weakness. * Imeint. Mingled. Imitate. To follow. Imitation. A following.
Imitator. A follower of another. Jmmaculate. Undefiled, pure, unspotted.
Jmmanitie. Cruelty, outrageous, fierceness. Jmmarcessible. Incorruptible.
Immature. Unripe. Immaturitie. Vnripenesse. Immediate. That which comes
directly from one thing to another, without any thing between. Immedicable.
Which cannot be healed. Immemorable. Not worthy to be remembered. Immense.
Unmeasurable, which cannot be measured. Immensitie. Exceeding greatness,
unmeasurableness. Jmmoderate. Unreasonable, contrary to modesty. Immodest.
Not sober, unmannerly, saucy. Immolate. To offer in sacrifice. Immolation. An
offering of sacrifice. Immortal. Not subject to death: everlasting.
Immortality. Euerlastingnesse. Jmmunitie. Freedom, or discharge from any
public business. Jmmure. To shut up, or enclose in a wall. Immutable.
Unchangeable. Immutation A change. Impacted. Thrust hard together: couched
into. Imparitie. Vnequalnesse, unlikeness. Imparlance. When a man sued in the
common law, for debt, trespass, or such like, craves and obtains of the
Court, some respite of time, before he make his answer, this stay of making
his answer, is called an Imparlance. Impassibilitie. A Freedom from any
ability of feeling pain. Impassible. Which cannot feel any pain, or
passion. Impeach. To harm, to hinder. Impeachment. A hinderance. Impeachment
of waste. A restraint from making waste in lands, or Tenements. Impediment. A
hinderance. Impell. To thrust on, to constrain. Impenetrable. So hard that it
cannot be pierced. Imperious. That commands with authority: Lordlike,
stately. Impertinent. Not belonging to the matter. Impetrable. Which may be
obtained. Impetrate. To obtain. Impetuous. Violent: or hasty. Impiety.
Wickedness. Impious: Wicked. Implacable. Hard to be pacified, or that cannot
be appeased. Implicit. Wrapped up, hidden. Implore. To beseech, to entreat
with tears. Importance. The weight or value of a thing. Important. Of great
weight and value. Importune. To urge earnestly. Importunate. Very earnest:
which will not be answered. Importunity. Unreasonableness: too much
earnestness in asking. Impose. To lay on. Imposition. A laying on. Impost.
Custom or tallage paid at Haven towns or elsewhere. Impostume. A quantity of
evil humors, gathered into one part of the body. There are two kinds hereof.
One when inflamed blood, being turned to corrupted matter, fills some place:
the other when without any inflammation, nature thrusts those humors into
some part apt to receive them. Imposture. Deceit, cousenage: properly in
selling counterfeit wares for current, or in crafty illusions done by
Sorcerers, Egyptians and Iuglers. The party so deceiving is called an Impostor.
Impotency. Weakness. Impotent. Weak, Feeble. Imprecate. To curse and wish
evil. Imprecation. A cursing, a wishing evil. Impregnable. That which cannot
be taken or overcome. Impresa. A device painted upon a shield. Impresse. To
import the form of a thing. Imprimis. First of all. Improbabilitie.
Unlikelihood. Improbable. Unlikely to be true; that which cannot be proved
true. Improbitie. Naughtiness, lewdness, dishonesty. Impropriation. A
parsonage, or Ecclesiastical living coming to one by inheritance. Improoue.
To raise rents higher. Improuidence. Want of foresight. Improuident. Which
forecasteth not, or takes no care what shall come after. Imprudence.
Foolishness, want of wit. Imprudent. Unwise, not discreet. Impudence.
Shamelessness. Impudens. Shameless, past shame. Impugn. To assault, or fight
against. Impulse. To constrain. Impulsion. A constraint. Impunitie. Lack of
punishment. Impuritie. Uncleanness. Impute. To lay to ones charge: to ascribe.
Imputation. An imputing or laying by conjecture to ones charge. Imputative.
Which is imputed to one. Inaccessible. Which cannot be come unto,
vnapprochable. Inanitie. Emptiness. Inaugurate. To dedicate, or consecrate.
Inauspicious. Unlucky, unfortunate. Incantation. A charm. Incapable. Which
cannot conceive or contain. Incendiary. He that burns or sets any thing
on fire. Incense. To inflame, to stir up to anger: being a nowne it
signifies the best frankincense. Incest. Carnal knowledge between near
kindred. Incestuous. Wicked, which commits Incest. Inchepinne. The lower gut
of a Dear. Incident. That which happens or belongs to a thing. Incision. A
cutting: A term used in Chirurgerie, when they lance a wound, the better to
come to the bottom; or any impostume, or such like to let out evil humors.
Incite. To stir up. Incitation. A stirring up. Inclemencie. Ungentleness;
cruelty. Include. To contain, to shut in. Inclusiue. Which contains or is
contained. Incoact. Unconstrained. Incompact. Slight, not close joined.
Incompatible. Disagreeing: unreconcilable: also mischievous: not sufferable.
Incomprehensible. Which cannot be comprehended or contained. Inconcinnitie.
Unaptness: ill agreeing, disproportion. Incongruitie. Disagreement: false
speaking, disproportion. Incongruous. Disagreeable: absurd; against rule of
Grammar. Inconsiderate. Foolish, indiscreet, Inconsideration. Foolishness:
unadvisedness. Inconsolable. Comfortless. Incontinent. Unchaste: also
forthwith, by and by. Incorporate. To mix two or more substances together.
Incorrigible. That which cannot be corrected or amended. Increate. Which is not
created or made. Incredibilitie. Impossibility of belief. Incredible. Which
cannot be believed. Incredulity. Want of belief. Incredulous. One that will
not believe. Increment. An increase. Incressant. A term of Herauldry,
signifying the Moon past the prime, and not yet come to the full. Incroch. See
Encroch. Incubus. The night mare, when a man in his sleep supposes he has a
great weight lying on him, and feels himself almost strangled; in such sort
that he cannot turn himself nor sit up, nor call for help. The vulgar think
it some spirit, but the Physicians affirm it to be a natural disease, caused
by humors undigested in the stomach, which fuming up to the brain, do there
trouble the animal spirits, stopping their passage into the sinews, so that
the body cannot move. Inculcate. To repeat a thing often, thereby to make one
remember it. Jnculcation. An often repeating, a beating into the brains.
Inculpable. Blameless, without fault. Incumbent. He that is in possession of
a benefice, or spiritual living. Incursion. A running in. Jndecorum. Uncomely.
Indifinite. Not precisely expressed: undefined. Indemnity. Escaping without
damage or hurt. Index. A Table in a book. Jndico. A stone brought out of
Turkey, wherewith dyers use to die blew. Indiction. The space of fifteen
years, by which account Charters and public writings are dated at Rome: every
year still increasing one, till it come to fifteen, and then returning to one
again. Indigence. Want: poverty. Jndigestion. Want of digestion: or evil
digestion. Indignity. Disgrace, dishonor. Indiuiduum. That which cannot be
divided: A term in Logic, when we directly express, and seem to point to
that thing which we speak of: as in saying, This horse, That man: For although
the words Horse, or Man, may be applied to any horse or man, yet being so
expressly pointed at, they cannot then be drawn to signify other then those
two. Indocible. Which cannot be taught, hard to learn. Induce. To bring in.
Jnducement. That which brings or draws one in. Induction. A drawing in: or
a form of argument proceeding from particulars to universals. Indulgence.
Gentleness, too much cockering. Jndulgences. Pardons. Induration. A hardening.
Jndustrie. Diligence and painful endeauours. Industrious. Diligent:
painful. Ineffable. That which cannot be spoken, unutterable. Inevitable.
That which cannot be avoided. Inexorable. Which cannot be entreated.
Inexperience. Want of experience. Inexpiable. So grievous that one cannot make
satisfaction for it: unmerciful, deadly. Inexplicable. Which cannot be
unfolded, opened or declared. Inextricable. So confused or difficult, that a
man cannot wind himself out of it. Infallible. Certain: sure wherein one
cannot be deceived, Infamous. Lewd: ill spoken of, base, vile. Infatigable.
Vnwearyed. Infatuate. To make foolish. Infecundity. Unfruitfulness. Infelicitie.
Unhappiness. Inferior. Lower, more base. Infernal. Hellish, or belonging to
hell. Infer. To bring in by way of argument, to conclude. Inference. A
bringing in, or concluding upon somewhat going before. Infestation. A
troubling, a molesting. Infinity. Endlesnesse: unmeasurableness. Infirm.
Weak, feeble. Infixe. To fasten, or stick in. Inflammation. An inflaming: a
hot angry swelling. Inflate. To puff up: to make proud. Inflation. A puffing
up: a swelling. Inflexible. Very hard, which will not bend. Inflict. To lay
punishment, or some penalty upon one. Influence. A flowing in: most commonly
it is taken for the power which Planets and Stars have in moving of inferior
things. Information. An instruction, or giving one to understand. Infringe. To
break: to transgress. Infuse. To pour in. Infusion. A pouring in. Also a
liquor wherein any medicinable thing is laid warm to steep, that the virtue
thereof may pass into it: Physicians use these infusions often, when they have
to deal with delicate persons, that will not endure strong medicines.
Ingenerable. Which cannot be bred or begotten. Ingenious. Witty: quick
conceited. Ingenuous. Gentleman-like. Ingot. A small mass or little wedge of
fined gold. Ingrate. Unthankful. Ingratitude. Unthankfulness. Ingredience. A
going in: or that which goes into the making of a thing. Ingresse. A going in.
Ingrosse. To buy up all for himself: sometime to write a thing fair in a
book. Ingrosser. One that buyeth corn growing, or dead victual, to sell
again: except it be by retaile, as victuallers use, or buying barley for Malt;
Oats for Oatmeale, oiles or spices. Ingulfe. To drawn, to swallow up.
Ingurgitation. A swilling or swallowing in. Inhabitable. Which cannot be dwelled
in. Inherent. Cleaving too, or abiding in a thing. Inhibit. To forbid.
Inhibition. A forbidding. Inhospitable. Harbourles: not fit to entertain one.
Inhumane. Cruel, vnmanlike, uncivil. Inhume. To bury. Inhumanitie. Cruelty,
vnmanlike behavior. Iniection. A liquor which Surgeons do squirt into a deep
wound. Inimitable. Which cannot be followed. Iniunction. An inioyning or
commanding one to do a thing. Innate. Natural. Innauigable. That which cannot
be sailed upon. Innouate. To make new. Innovation. A making new: an alteration.
Inobseruable. Which cannot be observed or marked Inoculate. To graffe a bud, by
cutting a round hole in the bark of another tree, and setting it on with clay.
Inquisition. A searching. Inquisitiue. Very desirous to know: searching or
enquiring after a matter. Insatiable. Which cannot be satisfied or filled.
Inscription. A title or note written upon any thing. Inscrutable. Unsearchable:
which cannot be perfectly found out. Insculpe. To cut or carue in. Insensible.
Which cannot be perceived: or one so foolish that he perceives nothing.
Insert. To put in; to add. Insertion. A putting in. Jnsinuate. To put any
thing into ones mind cunningly and closely: also by little and little to creep
into ones favor. Insinuation. A cunning speech to creep into ones favor.
Jnsist. To continue or abide. Insition. Graffing. Insociable. Not apt to keep
company. Insolency. Pride. Insolent. Proud, presumptuous: also strange and
unwonted. Insoluble. That which cannot be loosed: unanswerable. Inspection. A
looking in. Inspersion. A sprinkling. Inspire. To breathe into; to put in ones
mind. Inspiration. An inward instruction or motion coming from God. Instance.
An example or similitude brought of a thing. Instant. Very earnest: also
quickness, speediness, present time. Instaure. To repair or build anew.
Instigate. To stir up: to provoke. Instigation. A stirring up: a provoking.
Instinct. A natural inclination. Institute. To ordain, to appoint: sometime to
teach and instruct. Institution. An appointment, an ordinance: sometime a
teaching or instruction. Insult. To vaunt proudly over one. Insultation. A
proud crowing over one. Insuperable. Which cannot be overcome. Insurrection. A
rising of many together in arms or disturbance of the peace. Integrity.
Soundness; upright dealing: honesty. Intellectual. Of, or belonging to the
understanding. Intelligence. Knowledge, understanding: sometime an Angel or
heavenly spirit. Intelligent. One that understands. Intelligible. Which may
be understood. Intentive. Which listeneth well, and is earnestly bent to a
thing. Intercede. To step between, to entreat for one. Intercept. To take by
the way before it come to him to whom it was sent. Interception. A taking of a
thing by the way, to the let or hinderance thereof. Intercesse. See Interceed.
Intercession. An entreating in ones behalf. Intercessor. He that entreats
for another. Intercourse. Passing or sending one to another. Interdict. To
forbid: to bar or keep away. Interdiction. A forbidding. Interest. Right, or
title: sometime profit made by usury. Interfeere. To knock the legs together
in going. Interim. In the mean while. Interior. Inward. Interlace. To join
withal, to mix together. Interline. To write between two written lines.
Interlocution. A speaking between. Interlude. A Play, a Comedy. Intermission.
A leaving off for a time. Intermit. To leave off for a time, to discontinue.
Intermixe. To mingle with other things. Internal. Inward: very dearly
esteemed, or familiar with one. Interpellation. An interrupting or troubling
one while he speaks. Interpose. To put between, to step in between two: to
busy himself where he needs not. Interposition. A putting between.
Interre. To bury. Interreigne. The space of time between the old king and the
new. Interrogation. An asking a question. Interrogatiue. Which asks a
question. Interrogatorie. Asking of a question: a demand. Interrupt. To break
between, to trouble one as he is speaking. Interruption. A breaking off: a
troubling. Interuall. A distance of time or place. Intestate. That dies
without making any testament or will. Intestine. Bred in the bowels: Intestine
war: Civil war. Intimate. To signify, or touch a matter closely.
Intimation. A cunning or close signifying of a matter Entire. Whole, sound,
perfect. Intolerable. Which cannot be endured. Intoxicate. To bewitch, to
amaze, or extremely dull ones spirit. Intractable. Stubborn, which cannot be
ordered or handled. * Intresse. Lyning. Intricate. Wrapped, entangled, hard to
be understood. Intrinsecall. Inward. Introduct. To lead or guide in.
Introduction. That which leads or directs one. Intrude. To thrust boldly
in. Intrusion. A thrusting in, properly into a void tenement, whereto one has
no right. Invade. To set upon: to assault. Inualiditie. Weakness, want of
strength. Invasion. A setting upon: an assault. Jnuectiue. A sharp speech made
in ones disgrace. Inueigh. To speak bitterly against one. Jnueigle. To allure,
to entice. Inueloped. Wrapped, covered. Inventory. A writing of the quality
and value of a man's goods. Inuersion. A turning in, or a turning vpside down.
Jnuert. To turn contrary to right form. Inuest. To clothe. Inueterate. Old,
ancient. Invincible. Which cannot be conquered. Inuiolate. Safe, whole, not
wronged or broken. Invisible. Which cannot be seen. Inuit. To request, to bid
to a feast. Inundation. An ouerflowing of water. Invoke. To call upon.
Invocation. A calling upon. Inuolue. To roll up in a thing: to cover.
Inuulnerable. Which cannot be wounded. Iocund. Merry, pleasant. Ioynture.
Lands or Tenements which a man assures unto his Wife, for term of her life,
or otherwise, in respect of his marrying her. * Ioleyning. Joyful. *
Ionglerie. Iugling. Iouiall. Noble, excellent; also lively, pleasant, and
merry. Ioyeux. Joyful. Irascible. Which has power to be angry. Iris. The
Rainebow. Ironie. A speaking by contraries, as in calling black, white.
Ironicall. That which is spoken in jest or mockingly; contrary to his meaning
that speaks it. Irradiation. A shining upon. Irrational. Unmeasurable.
Irrefragable. Undeniable. Irregular. Contrary to rule: sometime it signifies
one not capable of holy orders. Irregularitie. A going out of right rule. In
the old Canon Law it is taken for any impediment, which hinders a man from
taking holy Orders. As if he be base borne, or notoriously defamed of any
notable crime, or be maimed or much deformed, or have consented to procure
another death, with diverse other impediments too long to be rehearsed in this
place. Irremediable. Which cannot be remedied. Irreparable. Which cannot be
repaired. Irreprehensible. Which cannot be reproved. Irresolute. Not fully
resolved: uncertain. Irreuocable. Which cannot be called back again.
Irrision. A mocking. Irritate. To provoke: to move to anger. Irritation. A
provoking. Irruption. A breaking into. Isthmos. A narrow part of a Country
between two seas. Iterate. To repeat or do again. Iteration. A doing again, a
doing twice. * Iub. A bottle. Iubilation. A great shout for joy, a great
rejoicing. Jubilee. A public rejoicing or a great shout for joy. Among the
Hebrews every fiftith year, was called the year of Jubilee; for then were
bondmen of their own Country made free, possessions returned again to the
first owners, neither was it lawful to plant or sow any thing that year.
Among Christians this solemnity of keeping a year of Jubilee, was first
instituted by Bonifacius the eight, in the year of our Lord 1300. who ordained
that it should be observed every hundredth year. After this Clement the sixth,
instituted it to be kept every fiftith year. And lastly, Sixtus the fourth
brought it to be celebrated every five and twentieth year, beginning it first
in the year of our Lord God, 1475. Iucunditie. Pleasantnes, mirth. Iudaisme.
The religion or belief of the Jews. Judicial. Belonging to judgment: also
wise, grave, of great judgment. Judicious. See Judicial. Iuiubes. Certain
plumbs of Italy, sold here by Apothecaries. This fruit is in color white or
red, in fashion round or like an olive, in taste sweet, having a hard long
stone like an olive stone, but much less. If these plumbes be kept long, they
wax dry, and full of wrinckles. They are temperate in heat and cold, and
are good against the cough, roughnes of the throat, and against all
exulcerations and inflammations of the kidneis and bladder: but being eaten for
meat, they are of hard digestion. Iulep. A physical clear drink made of
distilled waters, and sugar, used to cool the body, or quench thirst in hot
diseases: sometime the Iuleps have sirupes or other mixtures put to them.
Iuncture. A joint, a joining together. Iuorie. The Elephants tooth; it is of a
binding nature, and the scraping thereof is good against sores, growing under
the roots of the nails. Iuridicall. Of or appertaining to judgment.
Jurisdiction. Lawful authority in any place. Justification. A justifying or
making just. * Iwympled. Muffled,
K
Kalends. See Calends. Keele. The bottom of a ship. Keen. Sharp edged. Kell.
The caul about the paunch of a Heart or Stagge. * Kernelling. A brewers
vessel. * Keep. It is sometimes taken for care or regard. * Keynard. A micher,
a hedge-creeper. * Kitchell. A kind of cake. Kintall. A certain weight of
about an hundred. Kirat. An Arabian word signifying the weight of three
grains. Kith. Acquaintance. Kithaies. The fruit of the ashen tree: they are
little narrow husks hanging together in clusters, wherein is contained the
seed of the ash which is bitter. This provoke urine, and is sought by some
for other purpose. * Knarrie. Stubbie. Knight-seruice. An ancient tenure of
lands, by which a man was bound to bear arms in war, for the defense of the
Realm.
L
LAas. A net or gynne. Laborious. Painful, full of labor. Labyrinth. An
intricate building or place made with so many turnings and windings, that
whosoever went into it,, could never get out without a perfect guide, or a
thread to direct him, the end of which thread must be tied at the door where he
enters. Some heathen Princes bestowed infinite charge, to build such devices
in a stately form. There were four principal labyrinth in the world. The
first in Egypt, made for a sepulcher of one of their Kings, or (as some write)
in honor of the sun. The second in the Island of Candie, built at the
commandment of King Minos, by the ingenious workman Dadalus, who took his
pattern, from that which he had seen in Egypt, the third in the I Will Lemnos,
the fourth in Italy built by King Porsenna, of great square stones, for his
own sepulcher. Lacca. A kind of red gum, brought out of Arabia, and sold
here by Apothecaries, good against diseases of the breast, and comfortable to
the liver. Laudanum. A yellowish gum, as some write; notwithstanding others
affirm it to be made of a dew, which falls upon a certain herb in Grecce.
Auicen says, it is taken hanging on the hair of Goats beards, that have fed
upon that plant. It is hot and dry, and sweet of smeil, if it be pure. It is
often used in pomanders, and being anointed upon the head with oil of
myrtles, it does strengthen the skin, and keeps hair from falling off.
Laike. A lay man. Laity. The estate or degree of a lay man, lay men. Lake. A
fair red color used by painters. Laire. The place where any Dear harbors
by day. Languishment. A feebleness, a fainting. Languor. Feebleness,
sickness, infirmity. Lapidarie. One that sells or polisheth precious
stones: a Ieweller. Lappise. A term used among hunters, when hounds open their
mouths in the string, or a greyhound in his course. Larch Turpentine. A kind
of Turpentine or rosen growing upon the Larch tree in Italy, used often in
ointments and emplaisters, to cleanse or heal wounds. It may be also taken
inwardly with honey, and then it cleanses the breast, loses the belly, and
expels the stone and gravel. * Larfon. Robbery. Largess. Liberality.
Lascivious. Wanton, dishonest. Lasciviousness. Wantonness. Lassitude.
Weariness. Lastage. Any heavy weight or balasse, laid in the bottom of ships
to make them go upright: It is also a term in the common law, which
signifies to be quite of a certain payment in faires and markets, for
carrying of things where a man will. Latitude. The breadth of any thing: in
Astronomy it signifies the distance, north, or southward, from the
Equinoctial line, or the distance of the Pole from the Horizon. Latria. Divine
honor. Laud. Praise. Laudable. Worthy of praise. Laureate. Crowned with
Laurel. Laurel. The Bay tree, or a garland of Bays. * Lay. A song. *
Layuers. Thongs of lether. Lazer. A Leaper, a poor man full of sores and
scabs. Lazule stone. A bluish green stone of the kind of marble, used
sometime in physic. It is in operation hot and dry, and being rightly
prepared (according to an art known to Apothecaries) is good against
melancholy diseases, and by cleansing the blood to preserve one from the
leaprosic. League. Truce, friendship, peace: sometimes it signifies a space of
three mile or thereabout. Leasing. Lying. Lector. A reader. * Lectorise. A
Deske. Lecture. A reading, a lesson. * Leede. An old name of the month of
March. Leete. A court or law-day holden commonly every half year. Legacy.
Any thing given by ones will or testament. Legal. Of or belonging to the law.
Legate. An Ambassador. Legend. A story of old matters. Legible. Which may be
read. Legion. An army of men* The Roman Legion consisted of ten bands, whereof
the first band contained 1105. footmen, and 123. horsemen; in which band the
Standard was always carried. The other nine bands had every one 555. footmen,
and 66. horsemen; so that a Legion. made up the number of 6100. footmen, and
726. horsemen. * Legisters Lawyers. Legitimate. Lawful, lawfully begotten.
Legitimation. A making of one legetimate. Lenity. Gentleness, mildness,
mercy. Lentils. A kind of small pulse growing in hot countries, round and
flat, of color sometimes black, sometimes white, and sometimes brown. Being
boiled but once, they loose the belly, but at the second boiling in another
water, they are of a binding nature, being then good to stop the bloody flixe
or any looseness of the body. Lentiske. A tree growing in diverse hot
Countries, which bears the notable Gum called Masticke: The leaves and
bark of this tree stop al looseness, and issues of blood whatsoever. Lessee.
He that takes a lease. Lesses. Dongue of a ravenous beast, as of a Bear,
Bore, etc. Lessour. He that lets lands or tenements to another. Lethargy. A
disease contrary to frenzy: for as frenzy is caused by hot humors
inflaming the brain, so is a Lethargy by cold Phlegmatic humors,
oppressing the brain in such sort, that the Patient can do nothing but
sleep, whereby he becomes forgetful, with loss (in a manner) of reason and
all the senses of his body. Lethe. A Poetical word, signifying a feyned River
in hell, the water whereof being drunken, causes forgetfulness of all that is
past. Leucoma. A fruit in India so called, much like unto a Chestnut. Leueret.
A young Hare. * Leuesell. A bush. Leuitie. Lightness. Lexicon. A Greek
Dictionarie for words. Liable. Subject to, belonging to. * Liard. Nimble,
wild. Libard. A spotted wild beast, the male of a Panther: See Panther.
Libell. A little Book: sometime a defamatorie scroll, or slanderous writing or
inuectiue written against one, without any known name of the Author.
Libertine. One of loose life, or careless of Religion. Libidinous. Lustful,
leacherous. Licenciate. One that has studied the Civil Law five years.
Licentious. Loose, wanton. Licentiousness. Too much liberty, looseness,
wantonness. Lieu. In stead or place of another thing. Lignum Aloes. See Aloes.
Lignum vitae. See Guaiacum. Limit. A bound or end. Also to set bounds.
Limitation. An appointing of bounds. Lineall. Downeright like a line.
Lineament. The form, draught, or proportion of the body. Linguist. One
skillful in languages. Lipothymie. A fainting or swounding, when the vital
spirits being suddenly oppressed, a man sinketh down, as if he were dead. Liquid.
Thin and moist. Liquefaction. A melting. Liquefie. To melt. Liquid Amber. A
sweet Rosin brought from the West Indies, comfortable to the brain, or any
grief proceeding from cold causes. Lizard. A little beast much like our Euet,
but without poison, breeding in Italy and other hot countries. The dung of this
beast is good to take away spots in the eye, and cleereth the sight. And the
head thereof being bruised and laid to, draws out thorns, or any thing
sticking within the flesh. Litanies. Prayers or supplications, so called of the
Greek verb Litaneuo, which signifies to beseech or entreat. Litargie. The
foam that rises from lead, when it is tried. It is cold of operation, and
often used by Surgeons in Ointments and Plasters, being of a gentle drying,
cleansing, and binding nature. See Lethargy. Literature. Learning: knowledge
in books. Litherlie. Slothful. Litigious. Contentious, full of strife.
Liturgy. Public service of the Church. Local. Of, or belonging to place.
Locust. A great Fly or Grasshopper with long legs, breeding in India, and
other hot Countries. There are two kinds of them: One with wings, not good to
be eaten, and the other without wings, which the inhabitants use for food. *
Lodemanage. Skill of navigations. Lodestar. A Star that guides one.
Lodestone. A stone of the color of rusty iron, which has an admirable virtue,
not only to draw iron to it self, but also to make any iron, upon which it
is rubbed, to draw Iron also. It is written notwithstanding, that being rubbed
with the juice of Garlic, it cannot then draw Iron, as likewise if a Diamond
be laid close unto it. This stone is found in the Indian Sea, and also in the
Country of Trachonitis: It is of greatest use in Navigations, for by it Sailors
find out the certain course of their voyage; the needle (in their compass)
tempered herewith, still standing directly toward the North and South.
Logician. One skillful in Logic. Logic. The art of reason. Lohoc. A
physical word; It is a thick sirupe or other soft substance, which must not
be swallowed, but suffered to melt of it self in the mouth, that so it may
gently slide down, and thereby have the more virtue against diseases of the
breast, lungs and throat. Lone. Lending: sometime single or solitary.
Longanimitie. Long sufferance or forbearance. Longitude. The length of any
thing: In Astronomy it signifies the distance of any Star or Planet from the
first degree of the sign Aries. Loquacitie. Much talk, or babbling. * Lore.
Learning, knowledge. Lorimer. One that makes bits for bridles, and such like
instruments. * Lorrell. A deuourer. * Losell. A lout, sometime a crafty
fellow. Losenger. A flatterer, a Liar. Lotion. A washing. * Louke. A fellow
receiver. Lubricitie. Slippernesse. Lucerns. A beast almost as big as a Wolf
breeding in Muscouia, and Ruscia, of color between red and brown, mingled
with black spots. Lucre. Gain, profit. Lunacie. A disease wherein one is
distracted in his wits, at certain times of the Moon. Lunaticke. Sick of a
Lunacie. Lupines. A little flat Pulse almost like a small bean, but much less
and bitter in taste. They be not very good meat, but are sometime used in
Physic against worms in children, and the decoction of them takes away spots
and freckles of the face. * Lushbrough. A base coin in the time of king Edward
the third. Luster. A shining or great brightness. Lutum. Clay. Luxury.
Riotousnesse, leacherie. Luxurious. Riotous, wanton, leacherous. Lyncuris. A
bright shining stone, and sometimes of a dark yelow color like Saffron. This
stone grows of the urine of the beast Lynx, being congealed, which urine the
Lynx hides (as Pliny writes) because men should not find it. Some say it is
good against the pain of the stomach, yellow Iaundise, and looseness of the
belly. Lynx. A spotted beast like unto a Wolf, and having a very perfect
sight. This beast breeds cheefely in countries of the East, and is often
found in the woods of Almaine and Sclauonia. Lyrike. A Poet which makes verses
to be sung unto the harp. The best of these Poets among the Grecians was
Pindarus, and among the Latins, Horace.
M
MAcerate. To steep or soake in water; sometime to afflict or vex. To make
lean. Machil. An Hebrew word; It signifies the rich Robe of the Ephod, worn
by the high Priest of the old law, having about the skirts thereof 72.
Pomegarnats of blew silk, purple and scarlet, and as many belles of gold
between the^ round about. Machination. A devising or subtle contriuing of a
matter. Machiuilian. A politic states man: a cunning Politician, such as
Machiuell was. Macrologie. Long and tedious talk. Maculate. To blemish or
blot. Madrigals. A kind of Sonnets. Magician. A cunning man: a Sorcerer, a
great learned Clark, a Coniurer. Magike. At first this word signified great
learning or knowledge in the nature of things; now it is most commonly taken
for enchantment and sorcerie. Magistracy. The bearing of office: authority,
rule, government. Magnanimity. Great courage. Magnanimous. Noble minded: one
of great courage. Magnificence. Sumptuousness: great port and stateliness.
Magnificent. Sumptuous: honorable, stately. Magnifico. Ah honorable personage.
Magnitude. Greatness. Mainpernours. Those that are sureties for a man, and
undertake that he shall appear at a certine day, before Judges in a Court.
Maineprise. The bayling of a man out of prison, upon security given, that he
shall be forth coming. Mayor. The greater or more ancient. Malady. A
disease. Malecontent. Not contented: ill pleased. Malediction. A cursing.
Malfactor. An evil doer. Maleuolent. Ill minded: spiteful, envious.
Malignant. Envious, spiteful, mischeeuous. Malign. Spiteful: or to spite and
hate. Malignitie. Spitefulness: envy, malice. Mammon. An Assyrian word of the
singular number, and Masculine Gender, as Saint Hierome affirms: It is
interpreted riches. Manage. To rule, order or handle a thing well. Mandate. A
commandment. Mandragoras. See Mandrake following. Mandrake. A strange herb,
bearing yellowe round Apples. The root of this herb is great and white like
a Radish root, and is divided into two or more parts, growing often almost like
to the legs of a man. This root, especially the bark thereof, is
extremely cold and dry, even to the fourth degree: It is therefore very
dangerous to receive inwardly, for that the least quantity too much, will
quickly kill one. Surgeons use to steep this root in Wine, and give it to
be drunken of such as they must cut, saw, or burn in any part, for the cold
operation thereof causes sleep, and makes the body insensible for a time.
Manna. In holy Scripture it signifies a delicate food, which God sent from
heaven to the Israelites, in manner of a dew, white and somewhat like Coriander
seed: with which the Israelites lived forty years in the Wilderness, till
they came to the borders of the land of Canaan. At the first sending hereof,
the people were in such admiration, that they said to each other, Manhu? viz.
What is this? Which seems to be the cause, why it was after called Manna. In
Physic it is taken for a kind of dew, which falling in hot countries upon
trees, does there congeale, almost like to crummes of whitebread, and is
gathered and choicely kept, as a gentle purger of choler. Mansion. A tarying or
abiding: also a dwelling house. Mansuetude. Gentleness: mildness. Manual.
Handy: or that which may be carried in the hand. Manumission. A making one free
from bondage. Manumitte. To make a slave or bondsman free, which was in old
time thus. The lord of the slave holding him by the head, arm, or other part,
said before witness, I will that this man go free, and in so saying, shoued
him forward out of his hand. Manure. To till, to dress land. Manuscript. A
handwriting: a written book. Marchasite. A stone participating with the nature
of some metal, yet in so small quantity, that the metal cannot be melted
from it, but will vapor away in smoke, the stone turning to ashes. These
Marchasites are commonly in color like to the metal mixed with them; whether
it be gold, silver, brass, or any other. Some affirm a Marchasite to be any
stone out of which, fire may be stricken. Marches. The bounds, or limits lying
between two countries, commonly between Wales and England, or between
England and Scotland. Marchioness. A great Lady: a Wife to a Marquess.
Marcionists. Old condemned Heretics, so called of their first master Marcion,
a stoicke Philosopher, who held a detestable opinion that Christ was not the
Son of God. Margarites. Little pearls found in the shell fish, especially in
Oisters, whereof some have holes in them, and some have none. The best are
brought out of India, yet they are also found in our English Seas, as also in
the Flemish and Almaine, and the fairest Margarits grow in young shells. Some
write that in Thunder, the Oisters do cast them up, as it were in way of
abortion, which is the cause that they are often found in the sands. They are
sometimes used by Physitio^s in cordial confections, for they comfort the
spirits, and are therefore good against swoundings, having virtue also in them
to stop issues of blood, or any looseness of the body. Margent. A brimme, or
border. Marginall. Written in the Margent. Marine. Belonging to the Sea.
Maritall. Husbandlike. Maritime. Bordring near the Sea. Mart. A great fair
or Market. Martial. Warlike. Martyr. A witness: one that dies for the
testimony of a good conscience. Martyrdom. A suffering of death or grievous
torment for constant perseverance in true religion. Martyrologie. A history of
the death of Martyrs. A book of the memory of Martyrs. Massacre. A great
slaughter or murder of many people together. Masculine. Of the male kind.
Masticke. A white and clear Gum, of a sweet savor. This Gum grows on the
Lentiske tree, especially in the Island Chios. It is temperate in heat, and of a
dry binding nature; wherefore it strengthens the stomach, stays vomiting,
and stops any issue of blood. Some do use to rub their teeth herewith, as
well to whiten them, as to fasten such as be loose. Mastuerco. An herb in
India, of great virtue to heal wounds. Material. Which has matter or
substance in it. Maternall. Motherly. Mathematician. One skillful in the
Mathematickes: sometime it is taken in a worse sense, for one that
superstitiously casts men's natiuities, or undertakes to find things lost, or
foretell what is to come. Mathematickes. A term applied to such arts, as
treat only of quantities imaginarily abstracted from bodies. The arts
commonly so called, are Arithmeticke, music, Geometry, Geography, Astronomy,
Cosmography, and Astrology. Matrimonial. Belonging to Matrimony or Wedlock.
Matrixe. The womb or place of conception. Matrone. A grave motherly woman.
Mature. Ripe. Maturitie. Ripeness. Matutine. Of or belonging to the morning.
Maugre. In despite of ones heart: whether one will or no. Maxim. A principal
matter, a maine point, a general rule. Maze. An astonishment: sometime a
device like a labyrinth made in some gardens in manner of a knot, out of which
a man cannot get easily, if he once enter in. Mazar. A broad flat standing
cup to drink in: There is also a kind of small Cherries so called.
Mecoenas. It was the proper name of a noble Roman, who being in great favor
with Augustus the Emperor, was a special friend to the Poets Virgill and
Horace, and generally a supporter of all learned men: wherefore sometime a
great friend or patron is called a Mecoenas. Mechanical. Of or belonging to
handicrafts. Mechoacan. A whitish root brought out of India, called by some
Indian or white Rubarbe. It is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree,
and purges all humors of what kind soever with much ease. It cleanses and
comfort the liver and all the inward parts. Mediate. To deal between two,
to make means of agreement, as an indifferent party to both. Mediation. A
means of agreement by a friend to both parties. Mediator. He that makes
means or speaks for another. Medicable, Which may be healed. Medicament. A
medicine. Mediocritie. A mean, a measure. Mediterrannean Sea. A sea which
divides Europe from Africa. Megasine. A storehouse for war. Melancholy. One
of the four humors in the body, the grossest of al other, which if it abound
too much, causes heaviness and sadness of mind. Melioritie. A bettering.
Mellifluous. Sweet as honey. Membrane. The vpmost thin skin in any part of the
body. Memorable. That which is worthy of remembrance. Memorandum. A term often
used, when we write of a thing which we would remember. Memorial. that which
puts one in remembrance. Mendicitie. Beggerie. Meninges. Thin skins in
which the brain is contained. There are two such skins: one called by
Physicians, Dura matter, which is the stronger of the two, and next unto the
scull. The other named Pia matter, is within this first, being more tender and
fine, and close wrapping the brain it self. If any of these skins be
wounded, it causes speedy death. Menstruous. Which has upon her the monthly
courses, or which belongs to them. Mensuration. A measuring. Mental. That
which is only thought in the mind. Mercenarie. A hireling: one that works for
hire. Mercurian. Eloquent as Mercury was. Meridian. Of or belonging to noone
day, or the South part of the world. Merit. Desert, or to deserve. Meritorious.
Which does much deserve. Messiah. The same in Hebrew, that Christ is in Greek:
to wit, Anointed. Our Lord and Savior is often so called. Metamorphise. To
change the outward shape. Metamorphosis. A change from one shape to another.
Metaphore. The changing of a word, from the natural sense, into another sense
like to it: as in saying, Covetousness is the root of all evil: Where the
word Root, is called a Metaphore, because it signifies, the cause and
beginning of all evil, even as a root is the cause, from whence a Plant
springs. Metaphorical. Spoken by a Metaphore. Metaphysikes. Arts which
lifting themselves above the changeable nature of things, do consider of such
as do subsist in their own essence, not subject to any alteration; so that
the Metaphysickes deals only with incorporall, and everlasting things; and
in this sense school Divinity is the highest part of the Metaphysickes, being
chiefly occupied in contemplatory knowledge of God, angels, and souls of men.
Meteore. Any imperfect mixed substance engendered in the air; as rain, snow,
hail, thunder, lightening, blazing stars, clouds, and wind: all which are
made of vapors or exhalations drawn up from the earth and Sea, by attractiue
virtue of the Sun. Meter. Measure, or a verse made by measure. Method. A
direct way, to teach or do any thing. Metonymie. A figure in speaking, when
the cause is put for the effect, the subject for the adiunct, or contrarily.
Metropolitan. The chief or mother city: An Archbishop. Microcosmus. It
properly signifies a little world. This term is sometime applied to man, who
is therefore called a Microcosmus or little world, because his body being
compared to the baser part of the world, and his soul to the blessed Angels,
seems to signify, that man is as it were a little world, and that the whole
world does resemble a great man. Midriffe. A sinewie skin passing ouerthwarte
in man's body, which divides the heart and lungs, from the stomach, guts,
and liver, lest the vital parts should be offended with any ill vapor coming
from them. Migraine. A disease coming by fits, either in the right or left
side of the head; caused by distemperate humors or vapors, brought thither
from the veins or arteries at certain times. Militant. Warring or which is in
warfare. Military. Warlike: or belonging to War. Mimicall. That which
belongs to scoffing behavior, or wanton gesture. Mimicke. A wanton iester, a
counterfeit fool. Minatorie. Threatening. Mineral. Metal or any thing dug
out of the earth. Miniature. A small proportion: a little figure. Miniuer. A
fine white Furre made of the bellies of Squirrils: some say it is the skin of
a little white Vermin, breeding in Muscouia. Minor. The lesser, the younger.
Minority. A man's time before he be of full age in the law, to dispose of his
goods and lands. Minotaure. A poetical monster, half like a man, half like
a Bull. This monster was kept in the Labyrinth of Candie, and fed with man's
flesh, where at last he was slain by Theseus, as Poets report. Miscreant. An
infidel, a false believer. Misprision. An offense inclinable to fellonie or
treason, but not so capital, as fellonie or treason is; in which the offendour
shall be punished by fine, loss of goods, forfeite of lands, during his life,
or perpetual imprisonment, according to the quality of his offense. Mission. A
sending. Missiue. That which witnesses ones being sent. Mistleden. A plant
which has slender branches, and green thick leaves, growing never upon the
ground but upon other trees. The best is that which grows upon an oak, and
the leaves and fruit hereof are good to soften and ripen any cold hard
swellings. Misy. A kind of yellow copperas, shining like gold, brought out of
Egypt and the I Will of Cyprus: It is of a fretting burning nature, as the common
copperas is. Mithridate. A great confection like treacle, invented by King
Mithridates, from whom it takes the name. It is of singular virtue against
poison, and has so many and strong simples in it, that it ought not to be
taken inwardly before it be above six months old. Mitigate. To assuage or
pacify. Mitigation. A pacifying, an asswaging. Mittimus. A warrant made to
convey an offender to prison. Mixture. A mingling. Mobilitie. Aptnes to move.
Moderate. Measurable, temperate, also to govern or temper with discretion.
Moderation. A due proportion, temperance, good discretion. Moderator. A
discreet governor, he that keeps both parties from being too extreme.
Modern. Living now in our age. Modicum. A little, a poor pittance.
Modulation. A pleasant tuning or sweet singing. Modwall. A bird which
destroys bees. Moitie. Half. Moleboute. A great fish which makes a grunting
noise when he is taken. Molestation. A troubling. Mollify. To make soft.
Mollification. A making soft. Moloch. The name of an Idol, in the valley of
Ennon, in the tribe of Benjamin, to which the Israelites did abhominably offer
their children, in sacrifice of fire. This Idol was made in the likeness of a
Calfe. Moment. A minute, a very little time, sometime the value or weight of a
thing. Momentanie. Of short continuance, which lasts a very little while.
Monarch. A King or Prince that rules alone, without any equal. Monarchy. The
rule of one Prince alone, or a country so governed. Monastery. A religious
house of Monks. Monastical. Solitary, belonging to a Monastery. Monition. A
warning. Monologie. A speaking still of one thing, a long tale of one matter.
Monomachie. A single fight between two, hand to hand. Monopoly. When a man
does ingrosse or get commodities into his hands, in such fashion that none can
sell them, or gain by them but himself. Moote. To argue or reason a case in
law. Moral. Of or belonging to good manners: some time one of good behavior:
sometimes the meaning of a fable. Morality. Goodness of manners, civility.
Morgage. To lay house or land to pawn, in such sort that they are forfeit, if
the money be not repayed at a certain time. Morositie. Frowardness,
waywardness. Morpheus. Sleep, or the God of sleep. Mortify. To kill:
sometime to tame, to break the courage, or take away ones delight.
Mortification. A killing, a pulling away, of ones pleasure. Mortmaine. A term
in the Law, when lands were given to a house of religion, or to a company
corporate by the Kings grant; for then such land is said to come into
Mortmaine, that is, a dead hand, and by a statue, the King or Lord of whom it
is holden may enter into it. Mortuarie. A payment due in some places for the
burial of the dead: which is four shillings and four pence, where the goods
of the deceased party are above the value of twenty nobles, and under thirty
pounds: six shillings and eight pence, where the goods exceed thirty
pounds; and ten shillings where the goods amount above the value of threescore
pounds. Mosaicall. A cunning kind of painting, which seems to be embossed
and graven in some places. Mother. A disease in women, when the womb rises
with pain upward. In this disease the smelling to all sweet savors is
harmefull, as contrarily the smelling to al strong loathsome savors,
profitable. Motion. A moving from place to place, or the moving of a matter
to have it considered of. Motive. A cause moving one to any thing. Motte. A
word, or short sentence. Mountibancke. A base deceitful merchant (especially
of Apothecaries drugs) that with impudent lying does for the most part sell
counterfeite stuff to the common people. Mugwet. See Gatherbag. Mulct. A fine
or penalty laid on one. Mullet. A kind of deynty fish: it is also a term in
heraldrie, which signifies a spot descending from high, and divided into five
corners or ends out of one drop. Mummia. A thing like pitch, sold by
Apothecaries. Some affirm it is taken out of old Toombes, being a corrupted
humor that droppeth there from embalmed bodies: others say it is made of man's
flesh boiled in pitch. It is hot in the second degree, and good against all
bruisings, spetting of blood, and diverse other diseases. Mundane. Worldly.
Mundifie. To make clean. Mundification. A making clean. Municipall. Of or
belonging to the state of a Freeman or Burgess of a City. Munificence,
Liberality. Munificent. Liberal, bountiful. Munition. Great Ordinance for the
war, great shot. Muscle. In physic it signifies a knitting together of
flesh with veins, arteries and sinnewes, serving specially for the motion of
some part of the body, by reason of sinnewes in it. Muses. The feyned goddesses
of poetry, and music, which were nine in number and daughters unto Jupiter
and Mnemosyne: Their names were Cleio, Melpomene, Thaleia, Euterpe,
Terpsichore, Erato, Calliope, Urania and Polymneia. Musk. It is brought out of
India and other hot countries, taken there from a beast like a Roe, saving
that it has two crooked teeth bending inward like two horns; within which
beast the musk grows, contained in a little bag or bladder. It is
comfortable to the heart and brain, by reason of the sweet smell thereof;
being hot and dry in operation: and it conueyeth the virtues of diverse
medicines, to those the two priccipall parts. Mutation. A change. Mute. Dumb.
Mutable. Changeable. Mutabilitie. Changeableness. Mutiny. An uproar: a
troublesome assembly of people together. Mutinous. Apt to breed quarrels, or
discord among the people. Mutual. That which passes one from another.
Mutulate. To maime, cut off, or make lame. Muzrole. A ring or band of iron, to
come over a horses nose. Myrobalanes. A fruit growing in Egypt and Syria, like
Plummes, or Damsens. There are five kinds hereof, distinguished by these
names, Citrinae, Jndae, Cepulae, Emblicae, and Belliricae. They are cold in
operation, and comfortable to nature; The first of these purges choler, the
second melancholy, and the three last fleame. Myrrh. A Gum brought out of
Arabia, and Assyria, of color between white and red, It is hot and dry in
the second degree, or as some write in the third, and is often used in
Physic, being of an opening, cleansing, and dissoluing nature. Poets feine
that Myrrh, first came by reason of a kings daughter, named Myrrha. who for a
grievous crime committed, was by the Gods turned into a little Tree, out of the
branches whereof this Gum still droppeth in manner of tears, as a token of
her repentant sorrow. Myrtle. A little low Tree growing in some hot
countries, having small dark leaves, and bearing berries, which are of a
binding nature, good to stop any issue of blood. This myrtle is a tender plant,
not able to endure cold, and was wont to be worn of the Roman captains
garland-wise in triumph, when they had obtained any victory, without slaughter
of men: Poets consecrated this Tree to Venus. Myster. Unknown: strange.
Mystical. Dark, which has a mystery in it. Mysterious. Dark spoken in a
mystery, hard to understand.
N
NAdir. That point in the heavens which is direct under our feet. Naiades. The
water Nymphs. Naperie. Linen for the Table. Narcoticall. That which has
power to provoke sleep, or to make the body insensible. * Narre. Nearer.
Narration. A declaration of the matter whereof one purposes to speak. A
report, a discourse. Native. Natural: The place where one was borne.
Naturalize. To make natural. Naue. The middle part of a wheel. Nauigable. Any
water where ships may sail. Navigations. A sailing by Sea. Nauigator. A Sayler:
a Mariner. Nazarite. In Hebrew it signifies a man separated or divided. The
Jews so called those that had vowed themselves for some time to God: And these
Nazarites, while their vow lasted, were to abstain from wine and Grapes,
either green or dry, and generally from all whatsoever came from the vine
tree, or might make a man drunk. They also cut not their hair, but suffered
it still to grow, and observed diverse other ceremonies. The date of their vow
being expired, they presented themselves to the Priest, who offered a sacrifice
for them; and then was the Nazarites hair cut, and burnt with the sacrifice.
After which time it was lawful, for the Nazarites to drink wine as before.
Necromancy. See Divination. Nectar. Poets feign it to be a delicate pleasant
liquor, which the gods used to drink. Nefarious. Very wicked. Negation. A
denying. Negative. A denial, or that which denies. Negotiate. To trafike in
merchandise: to follow much business. Negotiation. A buying and selling: a
trafike of merchandise. Neophyte. Any thing lately planted or set: wherefore it
is often taken for one, who is newly converted to the faith: a nouice, or young
learner. Nerve. A sinnew. Neuter. Neither on the one side, nor the other. An
indifferent party. Neutralitie. A retchlesse being on neither side.
Nicotiane. The herb Tobacco, so called of a French man's name who first brought
the knowledge of this Herb into France. Niefe. In our common Law, it
signifies a bond woman. Niter. A substance like Salt, but sometime of a light
red color. It is hot and dry, of a strong fretting nature: some take it to be
salt Peter. Nobilitate. To make Noble. Nocent. Hurtful. Nocturne. Psalms and
Prayers used at certain hours of the night. Nocturnall. Belonging to the
night. Noli me tangere. A disease by some so called. It is a piece of flesh
growing in the nostrill, in such sort that it often stops the wind.
Nombrill. In Heraldry it signifies the lower part of a scuchion which is
divided by the breadth, into three even parts. Nominate. To name, to appoint.
Nomination. A naming. Nonage. A childs age, under 21. years old.
Nonresidencie. Unlawful absence from the place of ones charge. Nonresident.
Absent from his charge, or where he ought to dwell. Nones. In March, May,
Iulie, and October, they are the six days, next following the first day: In
other months, they are the four days next after the first; but the last of
these days is properly called Nones, and the other reckoned backward
according to the number distant from the Nones; as the third, fourth, or fifth
Nones. They are called Nones, because they are just nine days before the Ides.
Nonplus. No more, a term sometime used, when a man can speak no further, or
make no answer to an objection. Nonsuite. The letting of a suite fall. Norroy.
One of the Herauldes, having the same authority beyond Trent northward, that
Clarentius has from Trent southward. Notice. Knowledge. Notify. To make
known. Novelty. News, a new matter. Nouice. A young learner, one that has
no experience. Nouitie. Newness. Nullifidian. Of no honesty, of no religion.
Nullitie. Nothing. Numeration. A numbering. Nuncupation. A naming. Nuptial. Of
or belonging to marriage. Nutriment. Nourishment. Nutritive. Which nourishes.
Nymphe. A Virgin, a fair young Maid.
O
OBdurate. To harden, also hard, or unrelenting. Obduration. A hardening.
Obeliske. A great square stone, broad beneath, and rising of an admirable
hight, maller and smaller, toward the top. There were diverse of these
Obeliskes in Egypt, consecrated in honor of the Sun: whereof four were
principal erected by King Sochis, of two hundred and forty yards high: In
time of the Roman Emperors, many Obeliskes were likewise set at Rome. Object.
That which is placed before ones eyes, or the thing that one labors to
attain. Objection. A laying to ones charge. Obiurgate. To chide, to reprove
sharply. Obiurgation. A chiding. Oblation. A sacrifice, an offering. Oblige.
To bind. Oblique. Crooked: overthwart. Obliquitie. Crookedness. Obliterate.
To blotout. Oblivion. Forgetfulness. Obliuious. Forgetful. Obloquie. Slander:
evil report. Obnoxious. Subject to danger. Obscene. Filthy, abominable,
dishonest. Obscenity. Filthy talk. Obscure. Dark. Obscurity. Darkness.
Obsecrate. To entreat: to beseech. Obsecration. A beseeching. Obsequie. A
Funeral: a solemn buryall. Obsequious. Dutiful: diligent, serviceable.
Observance. Diligent heed, or attendance. Obseruant. Dutifully watching,
diligent. Obsesse. To beseege: or compass about: A man is said to be obsest,
when an evil spirit follows him, troubling him diverse times and seeking
opportunity to enter into him. Obsolete. Old, stale, grown out of use.
Obstacle. A hinderance or let. Obstruction. A stopping, commonly in the
body. Obtestation. A beseeching. Obtrectation. A slandering behind ones back.
Obtrude. To thrust forth, to cast upon one. Obtuse. Dull; blunt. Occidentall.
Of or belonging to the West. Occur. To come in the way: to meet with one.
Occurrent. That which happens or comes in the way. Ocean. The universal
maine Sea, compassing the greater part of the earth. Octanes. Eight days next
after some principal feasts of the year. Ode. A song. Odious. Hateful.
Odor. A sweet smell. Odoriferous. Sweet smelling. Oeconomie. The knowledge of
well ordering matters belonging to household. Oeconomicall. Of or belonging to
household. Oecumenicall. Universal: general. Oedeme. A waterish swelling, in
the body without pain, caused by some flegmaticke or vaporous humor, and
leaving a hollow dent or pit therein, if one press it down with the finger.
Offensive. Which offends. Officious. Serviceable: willing to please.
Official. An Officer. Olibanum. The right frankincense, which is a Gum,
growing in Arabia; whereof there are two kinds: the femall or smaller
frankincense, and the male, the greater, whiter, and stronger: of which Virgill
speaks: Eclog. 8. Burn Verueine fat, and strong male frankincense. It is
hot and dry, good for perfumes to correct infectious air, and to be put in
plasters for green wounds. The weight of two or three Wheat corns swallowed
down, does help digestion, and makes the breath sweet. Where note that the
right Olibanum or Frankincense will burn like a candle, and that which is
counterfeit consume away in smoke. Oligarchie. A common wealth where a few
principal persons govern all the rest. Olympicke games. Solemn games of
running, riding, wrestling, and other feats of actiuitie, kept every fifth
year on a high hill in Greece, called Olympus. The reward to those that
overcame in these trials, was nothing but a Garland of Olive branches, least
covetousness, rather than virtue should make men strive for victory: which
was the cause that Tigranes Son of Artabanus, serving in the huge army of
King Xerxes, who then invaded Greece, said to Mardonius, who had persuaded the
King to that enterprise; against what a people have you brought us to fight,
that more esteem honor than money? Thinking it impossible to overcome such
Nations as were so affected. Omen. A hausening. Ominous. Hausening: that which
signifies some good or bad luck to ensue. Omission. A letting slip: a leaving
undone. Omit. To forbear: to leave undone. Omnipotency. Almightinesse.
Omnipotent. Almighty. Omniregencie. The having all authority in ones own
hands. Onerate. To burden or ouercharge. Onyx. A precious stone found in the
Mountains of Arabia, of the color of a man's nail. Some write, that it is
congealed of a juice dropping from a tree called Onycha, which is the cause
that it smells sweet being cast into the fire, as also that it is often found
with diverse pictures in it, being easily therein fashioned, before the stone
be thoroughly hardened. Opall. A precious stone of diverse colors, wherein
appears the fiery shining of the Carbuncle, the purple color of the
Amethyst, and the green show of the Emerald, very strangely mixed together.
Operate. To work. Operative. Which works, or has power to work.
Ophthalmie. An inflammation of the outer skin of the eye, caused by hot
fretting humors flowing thither. Opinionate. Bent to his own opinion:
selfewilled. Opium. The juice of black Poppie, sold dry by Apothecaries. It is
sometime used in Physic to make one sleep, or to assuage excessive pain;
but then it must be mixed with other things, and given with great discretion;
for taken alone it will cast one into a deadly sleep; being cold and dry in
the fourth degree. Opobalsamum. See Balm. Opopanax. A sap or liquor flowing
in some hot Countries out of a Plant called Panax. It is brought hither dry,
being of a yellow color on the outside, and white within, if it be not
ouerstale. It is good against cold shiuerings of agues, and to be drunk with
meade, of such as are squat or bruised therein. Oportunelie. Fitly, in due
time. Oppilation. A stopping. Opponent. He which apposeth, or asks questions.
Oppose. To object; to set one thing against another. Opposite. Contrary, or
placed over against. Opposition. A putting, setting, or standing against.
Opprobrious. Reproachful, naughty, wicked. Oppugn. To resist, to fight
against. Optike. Belonging to the sight. Option. A wish. Opulencie. Great
wealth, riches. Or. Gold, or golden color. Oracle. An answer or counsel given
by God. Among the Gentiles, these Oracles were but illusions of the devil, who
answered for the most part doubtfully in Idols, to questions or demands made
unto him. There were two such principal places of Oracles: One of Ammon or
Jupiter, in Lybia, which was founded upon this occasion. When Bacchus after his
conquests in India, came into the hot burning country of Lybia, and wanted
there water to relieve his Army, it is said that he prayed to his father
Jupiter to help him in that distress: whereupon there appeared a Ram unto
him, which stamping upon the ground with his foot, caused a fountain
forthwith to spring in the place. Bacchus obtaining by this means his desire,
built a temple there of exceeding huge greatness, in the middle whereof, he
erected an Idol to Jupiter, in the likeness of a Ram; which Idol afterward
gave Oracles, and was called the Oracle of Ammon; because it was situated in a
dry sandy place; for Ammos in Greek signifies Sand. The other Oracle was at
Delphi, a City of Beotia in Greece, where Apollo was said to give answers.
Oratorie. A place to pray in. Orator. One that pleads causes: an eloquent
speaker. Orb. Any perfect round circle hollow in the midst. Orbicular. Round
like an Orb. Orchall. A stone like Allume, used sometime by Diers to raise a
red color. Ordinary. A Judge that has Ordinary jurisdiction in
Ecclesiastical causes. Ordure. Dung, filth. Orgall. The lees of Wine dried,
used by Diers to make their cloth to drink in the color thoroughly. Organical.
That which consists of diverse substantial parts and members. Organist. A
player upon Organs. Organ Ling. A kind of Ling brought out of the North
Countries. Orgies. Rude ceremonies instituted by the Poet Orpheus, to be kept
every third year in the honor of Bacchus. Orient. The East. Orient Pearls.
Glistring Pearls of great price. Oriental. Of, or belonging to the East.
Orifice. The mouth of any thing, or the outward hole of a wound. Original. The
first beginning. The first of any thing. Oringos. Certain roots growing in
some places, near the Sea side. The Plant is called Sea hollie, bearing
prickly broad leaves, and round sharp prickly heads, set about with small sky
colored flowers. These roots are very long and deep into the ground, of an
ashie color in the outside and full of joints. They use, scraping of the outer
rind of these roots, and pulling out the pith, to preserve them by boiling
them with Sugar or Honey, and a little Cinnamon and Ginger; which preserve is very
good for aged people, and such as are consumed in their body, to nourish them
again. Orisons. Prayers. Ornament. A garnishing. Ornature. A garnishing, a
setting forth. Ornifie. To garnish. Orphan. He that wants Father and Mother:
friendlesse. Orpment. A soft yellow kind of Arsenik, like unto Brimstone: It is
commonly taken for Rats-bane. Orthodoxall. That which belongs to a true and
right faith, or Religion. Orthographie. The art of writing words truly; as
Son of man, with an O: Sun that shines, with the vowell V. Orthographist.
He that professes or is skillful in Orthographie. Osanna. See Hosanna.
Osprey. A kind of ravenous Foul, which houereth over pooles to take Fish.
Ostentation. Boasting; vain craking or vaunting. A proud setting forth to
show. Ostiarie. An officer having authority to keep unworthy persons out of the
Church. Ostracisme. A banishment among the Athenians for ten years, so called
because they used to write the names of the party so condemned, in Oyster
shelles. This punishment was cheefely used, to abate the ouergreat power of
noble men. Ouall. A long round circle made like an egg. such as pictures are
sometimes drawn in. Ouerture. An ouerturning, a sudden change. Oxgang.
Thirteen acres of land. Oxymell. A sirupe made of Honey, Vinegar and water,
good to cut and cleanse gross phlegmatic humors: sometime there are boiled
certain roots and seeds with it; and then is it called Oxymel compositum:
sometime it is made with Honey, Vinegar, and the Sea Onion, and then it is named
Oxymel Scylliticum: which also is of two sorts, to wit, simple and compound.
P
PAcal. A tree in India so called. Pacification. An appeasing or pacifying.
Pacificatorie. Which appeaseth or pacifieth. Pact. A bargain. Page. A written
side of a leaf of paper. Pagan. A Heathen: an infidel. Paganism. The belief
of the Pagans. Paico. An herb in India, good against the grief of the stone
in the Kidneys, which comes of windiness or cold causes. Palate. The upper
hollow part of the mouth, wherein lies the sense of tasting, as in the tongue.
Palestricall. Of, or belonging to wrestling. Also that which is done decently
with comely gesture of the body. Palinode. A recantation or denying of an
opinion formerly maintained. * Palliard. A Whooremonger. * Palliardise.
Whooredome. Palliate. To cloak, to cover. Pallizado. Great posts set up in the
entry to a Camp, for a defense against great shot. Palm. The tree which
bears Dates, growing plentifully in the holy land. There are of these trees
found also in some parts of Egypt, but they bear no fruit, or if they bear
any it is unpleasant. The branches of this tree, were wont to be carried as a
token of victory, because they are of that nature, that they will still shoot
upward, though oppressed with never so great weight, and the leaves thereof
never fall. Of this tree there is male and female: the male bears only
blossoms and no fruit, but the female bears both. In old times, some people
used to write with Paper, made of leaves of the Palm tree. Palmer. A poor
Pilgrim, that visits all holy places. Palmister. He that tells ones
fortune by looking in his hand. Palmistrie. See Divination. Palpable. That
which may be felt with the fingers: manifest, notorious. Pamphlet. A little
book. Pandar. A base fellow that keeps or attends upon Harlots. Pandect. A
book treating of all matters: also the Volume of the Civil Law called
Digests, is so called. Panegyricall. That which is spoken flatteringly in
praise of some great person: Also it signifies, stately, honorable,
magnificent, or a speech made of many great matters together. Panther. A fierce
wild beast, having a sweet smell, and a fair spotted skin, wherewith she
allureth other beasts to look on her; hiding her head lest it should make them
afraid, and by this means, gets her prey more easily. The male of this
beast is the libard. The panthers (as is written) have on their shoulder a
spot, which grows and waineth like the moon. This beast is so fearful of
the Hyena, that in his presence she dares not do any thing; in so much that
if one have but a piece of the skin of a Hyena, the panther will not touch
him, and it is said, that if both their skins be hanged together, the hair
of the Panthers skin will fall of. Panyme. A heathen, a gentile. Parable. A
similitude or resemblance made of a thing. Paracelsian. A physician that
follows the method of Paracelsus, and his manner of curing, which was by
exceeding strong oils and waters extracted out of the nature of things.
Paraclete. A comforter. Paradise. A garden or pleasant place. Paradox. An
opinion maintained contrary to the common allowed opinion, as if one affirm
that the earth does move round, and the heavens stand still. Paragon A
beautiful piece, a lovely creature. Paragraph. It properly signifies any
mark set in a margent, to note the different discourses in a book, or long
chapter, wherefore such divisions in writing, are commonly called Paragraphs.
Paralipomenon. Omitted, or not spoken of: There are two books in the old
testament so called, because many worthy histories omitted in the books of
Kings, are there related. Parallels. Lines running of an equal distance from
each other, which can never meet, though they be drawn infinitely in length,
thus, --. In astronomy there are five such imagined lines, running circlewise
about the round compass of the heavens. The first is the Equinoctial line
just in the middle of the world between the two Poles. The second northward
from the Equinoctial, is the Tropike of Cancer, to which line the sun
comes about the the twelfth day of June. The third (yet more northward) is
the northern circle, within 23. degrees and 50. minutes. of the North Pole. The
fourth line is the Tropike of Capricorn, declining southward from the
Equinoctial, as much as the Tropike of Cancer does northward, and to this line
the sun comes about the twelfth of December. The fifth and last line is the
southern circle, being as near the South pole, as the northern circle
(before spoken of) is to the North pole.

Paralogisme. A deceitful syllogism, a manner of arguing which seems true,
when it is not: as in saying, He that affirms William to be a living
creature, says true. He that affirms William to be a Horse, affirms him to
be a living creature.

Therefore he that affirms William to be a Horse says true.

Paramounte. The chieft Lord of the fee. Paramour. A Sweeteheart, one dearly
beloved. Paraphrase. A free manner of translation or interpretation, wherein a
man does not tie himself to express every word as it lies in the coppie, but
to explicate and adorn the matter more at large, and to abridge some things,
yet still keeping the sense of the Author, any such translation is called a
Paraphrasticall translation. Parasite. A Flatterer, a trencher friend. One that
is still hanging on some rich man, and flatteringlie feeds his humor because
he would be partaker of his good cheer. Parcitie. Sparingnesse,
niggardliness. Parenthesis. Any word or sentence, thrust into an other
sentence, in such sort that it may be left out in speaking, and yet the sense
of the matter still remain whole. Such word or sentence is commonly marked
with two half circles (thus.) Paricide. One that has killed his own Father
or Mother. Among the ancient Romans if any committed so horrible a crime, he
was sowed alive in a leather bag, with a Cock, an Ape, and an Adder put to him
(and as some write, a Dog) and so were thrown together into the river Tyber,
where the miserable Caytife must needs die a lingering death, being deprived
of the use of all elements, save only a little air, to draw his wretched life
in torment the longer. Paritie. Equality, likeness. Parley. A talking
together. Paroxysme. The sharp assault or fit of an ague. Parsimonie.
Thriftines, good husbandry. Parsimonious. Thriftie, sparing. Particularise. To
draw or divide things in speaking, into certain particulars or small parcels.
Partisan. A weapon like a Halberd. Paschall. Of or belonging to the feast of
Easter. Pasche. The feast of Easter. Passant. Walking, passing along. Passible.
Which may suffer, or feel pain. Passion. A suffering. Pastor. A shepherd.
Pastoral. Of or belonging to a shepherd. Paternall. Fatherly. Patheticall.
Passionate, or that which moves passions in a man. Patriarch. A great
auncestour, a great Bishop or father. Patrimony. Goods or lands left one by
his father, or some other auncestour. Patron. A defender, a great friend that
supporteth one. Patronage. Defense. Patronize. To defend. Paucitie. Fewness.
Pauice. A great large shield that covers the whole body. Pauilion. A tent
for war. Paunage. The feeding of swine in any forest, wood, or other place
with mast. Peccaui. I have offended. Pectorall. Belonging to the breast, or
which hangs before the breast. Pecuniarie. Of or belonging to money.
Pelican. A bird that wanting food, feeds her young ones (as is said) with her
own blood. Pellmell. Confusedly, running disorderly together. Penal. Of or
belonging to pain or punishment. Pendant. Hanging, downward. Penetrable. Which
may be pearsed through. Penetrate. To pearse thorough. Penitential. Belonging
to penance or repentance. Penitent. He that is heartily sorry and repents.
Penon. An ensign or banner borne in war. Pension. A yearly fee or wages for
some service done. Pensive. Sad, heavy. Pentateuch. The five books of Moses,
to wit, Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, and Deuteronomie. Pentecost. The
feast of Whitsontide, so called because it is fifty days after Easter. For
Pentecost in Greek signifies the fiftieth. Penury. Want, poverty.
Penurious. Poor, in want. Perambulation. A walking. Perceptible. Which may be
perceived. Perch. A kind of fish, It signifies also a rod or long pole used
in measuring of land, being of 16. foot and a half in length, and in some
places more. Percullis. The name of an office of one of the Pursiuants at
arms. Percussion. A striking. Perdition. Destruction. Perdurable. Lasting, of
long continuance. Peregrination. A traveling into a strange land. Peremptory.
Resolute, short, quick. Perennitie. Long continuance. Perfidious. Treacherous,
not to be trusted. Perfidiousnesse. Treachery, disloyalty. Perfunctorie.
Carelessly don. Perigeon. The nearest distance of the Planets from the earth.
Period. The perfect end of a sentence, marked commonly with a full point thus
(.) Peripatetickes. Philosophers of the sect of Aristotle: so called because
they walked in their readings and disputations: for Peripateo, in Greek,
signifies to walk. Periphrasis. A long speaking, a speaking of one word by
many. Periscians. People dwelling so near either of the two Poles, that their
shadows go round about them like a wheel. Perjury. A forswearing.
Permission. Sufferance; leave. Permutation. A changing. Pernicious. Deadly,
dangerous. Peroration. The conclusion of a long speech or Oration.
Perpendicular. Directly down right. Perpetrate. To commit any unlawful
thing. Perpetuity. Euerlastingnesse. Perplexity. Great doubtfulnesse,
intanglednesse. Perquisits. Profits coming to Lords of manors by casualtie,
or uncertainly, as escheats, heriots, releefes, strayes, forfeitures. Persist.
To continue to the end. Personate. To represent the person of another.
Perspicuitie. Cleerenesse, plainness Perspicuous. Clear, plain, manifest.
Perswasiue. Which does or may persuade. Pertinacie. Stubbornnes, wilfulness.
Perturbe. To trouble. Perturbation. A trouble, a great disquietnesse. Perverse.
Froward, contrary. Pervert. To corrupt or mar: to turn one from good to
bad. Pestiferous. Mortal, deadly, poisonous. Petition. A suite, a demand, a
request. Petroll. A substance strained out of the natural Bitumen spoken of
before. It is for the most part white, and sometime black, and being once set on
fire, can hardly be quenched. Petty. Being placed before other words, it
signifies little. Petty Sergeantie. A tenure of lands, holden of the King, by
yiedling to him, a Buckler, Arrow, Bow, or such like service. Petulancy.
Wanton sauciness, malepart boldness. Phantasme. A vision or imagined
appearance. Pharisee. A sect of Jews, professing more holiness than the
common sort did. They wore on their foreheads little scrols, wherein were
written the ten commandments; and were called Pharisees, of the Hebrew word
Phares, which signifies to divide or separate, because by their feined
devotion they seemed to separate themselves from the other people. Pheere. See
Feere. Phoenix. The rarest Bird in the world. It is written, that there was
never any but one of this kind living at one time, and that only in Arabia; of
the bigness of an Eagle, of a purple color, having a bright color of gold
about his neck, a goodly fair tail, and a tuft of feathers upon his head. He
lives above 600. years. and being old, builds him a nest of Cinnamom and the
twigs of Frankincense, which he fills with spices, and then with the
laboring of his wings in the Sun, setting it on fire, is there consumed in it;
out of whose Ashes there grows a Worm, and of the worm another Phoenix.
Pheon. A term in Heraldrie: It signifies the head of a Dart. Philosopher. A
lover of wisdom. It is commonly used for a learned man, of great knowledge in
the nature of things. Philosophy. The study of wisdom: a deep knowledge in
the nature of things. There are three different kinds hereof. 1. Rational
Philosophy, including, Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric. 2. Natural Philosophy
teaching the nature of all things, and containing besides Arithmetic, Music,
Geometry and Astronomy. 3. Moral Philosophy, which consists in the knowledge
and practice of civility and good behavior. Philtre. An amorous potion: a
drink to procure love. Phlebotomie. Letting of blood. Physicians (as is
written) learned this practice first of a beast called Hyppopotamus, living in
the river Nilus; which being of a ravenous nature, and therefore often
ouercharged with much eating, is wont to seek in the banks, for some sharp
stub of a Reed; upon which pricking his leg, he thereby eases his full body,
stopping the bleeding afterward with mud. Phlegmon A hot swelling of inflamed
blood. Phrase. A manner of speaking. Phylacterie. A scroll of parchment which
the Pharisees wore on their foreheads, having the ten commandments written in
it. Physiognomie. An art to judge of ones nature or conditions by his visage
and form of his body. Phytonisse. A woman possessed with a spirit, and
thereby foretelling things to come. Pia matter. The inmost skin which incloseth
the brain round about. Pickage. Money paid at Faires for breaking the ground
to set up boothes. Piety. Godliness. Pigment. A painting. Pight. Set or
placed. Pine tree. A tall strong tree not subject to worms or rottenness, and
therefore much used, where it grows to make ships. The leaves of this tree
are hard pointed, sharp and narrow, continuing green all the year, and the
shadow thereof will not suffer any plant to grow under it. Pinipinichi. A
milkie juice drawn out of certain trees in India* It is somewhat thick and
clammy, and with great vehemence purges cholerike humors. Pinnas. A fruit
growing in India, good for the stomach and heart. Pioner. A labourer in an
army, used to cast trenches or undermine fortes. Pious. Godly, virtuous. Pipe.
A measure of half a Tun; that is, 126. Gallons. Piepowders. A court held in
faires for redress of disorders there committed. Pirate. A robber by sea.
Pistacke. See Fistiknuts. Placable. Gentle, mild, that will soon be pacified.
Placabilitie. Gentleness, mildness. Placard. A license to maintain unlawful
games. Plaintiff. He that complains. Plane tree. A tree wide spreading, with
broad leaves, in times past greatly esteemed in Italy only for the shadow
thereof, in so much that they often bedewed it with wine to make it grow. The
Romans were wont to banquet much under these trees. Planet. A wandering Star
moved only in a sphere by himself: there are seven such Stars, to wit, the
Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. They are called
Planets of a greek word signifying to wander or go astray, because these
Stars pass through the twelve signs, and are sometimes wide distant,
sometimes near to each other. Plaudite. A sign of rejoicing: a clapping of
the hands. Plausible. That which greatly pleases or rejoices. Plebeian. One
of the common people. Pleget. A linen cloth dipped in any water to wash, or
lay to a sore place. Plenarie. Full, whole, entire. Plenitude. Fullness.
Pleuresie. A disease when the inward skin of the ribs in man's body, is inflamed
with too much blood, flowing unnaturally to it. In this disease there is a
hardness to fetch breath, a cough, a continual ague, and a pricking pain
about the ribs. Plonkets. A kind of woollen cloth. Plume. A Feather. Plural.
More than one. Plurality. The being or having more than one. Poem. Any short
matter, wittingly contrived in verse. Poesy. The writing of a Poet; a Poets
work. Poet. One that writes well in verse. Poetaster. A counterfeit Poet: a
bad Poet. Poetical. Like a Poet: belonging to a Poet. Poetize. To write like a
Poet. Poetry. The same that Poesy is. Poise. Weight, heaviness. Pole. The end
of the axle-tree whereon the heavens do move; that part or point of the
heavens, which never moves. There are two such Poles of the world; one called
the North pole, visible to us in the North, far above the earth: the other
caled the south pole, far out of our sight, being as much under the earth in
the South, as the North Pole is above it. Polish. To make fair or bright.
Polite. Bright, trim, fine. Pollute. To defile. Pollution. A defiling, an
uncleanness. Polygamie. The having of more Wives than one: often marriage.
Polype. A fish having many feet, and changing color often: wherefore
inconstant persons are sometimes said to be Polypes. Polypodium. Okeferne: a
kind of herb like Fern, growing much about the roots of oaks: The root of
this herb is used in Physic to purge melancholic, gross, and phlegmatic
humors. Pomp. A great show, a solemn train. Pompous. Stately, very solemn.
Ponderous. Heavy, of great weight. Pontage. Money paid toward the maintenance
and repayring of bridges. Pontificacie. Popedom. Pontifical. Stately,
honorable, Bishoplike. Popular. In great favor with the common people.
Populous. Full of people. Pores. Little holes in the skin, out of which sweat
droppeth, or vapors breath out of the body. Porphyrie. A kind of red marble.
Port. A haven, or haven town, sometime a stately train or behavior.
Portable. Which may easily be carried. Portage. Carriage, transporting. Portend.
To foreshew, or signify before hand. Portent. A monstrous thing which
foresheweth some great matter. Portcullise. A falling gate to keep out enemies
from a City, or keep them in. Portgreue. A chief officer in certain Port
towns. Portrature. An image, a picture. Portsale. A selling at the haven.
Pose. A rheum or humor which falls into the nose, stopping the nostrills and
hindering the voice. Position. A setting or placing: sometimes a sentence
propounded. Positive. Expressly set down and decreed. Postscript. That which is
written in the end after another thing. Posterior. The later, the hinder part.
Postilion: A speedy post or messenger. Postulation. A demand, a request.
Potent. Mighty, strong, able. Potentate. A prince, a great ruler. Potion. A
Physical drink. Pourcontrell. The same that Polype is. Poundage. A Subsidy
granted to the kings Majesty, of tweluepence in the pound, for all
merchandise, brought hither, or carried away by every mercha^t denizen, or
alien. Practical. Of or belonging to practice. Practique. The same that
practical is. Prauity. Leudnes, naughtiness. Preamble. A speech, spoken
before we enter into a discourse, a flourish or entrance into a matter.
Prebend. A portion of maintenance, which every member or Canon of a Cathedral
Church receives in the right of his place. Prebendarie. He which has a
Prebend, or yearly maintenance, out of the lands of a Cathedral Church, and
is member of the same Church. Precede. To go before. Precedent. Going before.
Precept. A commandment. Precinct. The compass, or circuit of a place.
Precipitate. To throw down headlong. It is also the name of a corosiue
powder, commonly called, red Mercury, used by Chirurgians, to eat corrupted
flesh. Precontract. A former bargain, or contract. Precursor. A forerunner, a
foregoer. Predestinate. To appoint before hand, what shall follow after.
Predestination. An appointment beforehand what shall follow. Predecessor. He
that was in place or office before another. Predicable. That which may be
reported or spoken of. In Logic it signifies certain general words, or
universalities; whereof there are five, to wit, Genus, Species, Differenria,
Proprium, and Accidens. Predicament. A term of Logic: It signifies a
different order in the nature of things, or certain general heads, to which
they may he referred; and there are commonly reckoned ten such predicaments The
first called Substance, includes all substances whatsoever, as the four
Elements, and all other creatures. The second named Quantity, contains all
quantities, as ten, twenty, a yard, a furlong, a mile. The third called
Quality, has under it all qualities, as wisdom, art, fortitude, diligence,
sloth. The fourth named Relation, is properly of such words, as depend mutually
one upon another, as a husband and wife, a master and servant, a father and
child. The other six are, 5. Action or doing: 6. Passion or suffering: 7.
Where: 8. When: 9. Situation or placing: 10. the Habit or outward covering of a
thing. Predicate. To tell abroad, to report. In Logic, it signifies the
later part of a proposition, as in saying, Paul is an Apostle: The word Apostle
is called predicate, because it is spoken or affirmed of the subject Paul.
Prediction. A foretelling. Predominant. That rules or bears sway. Preface.
That which is spoken or written before. Prefect. A chief Magistrate, a
Governor. Prefigure. See prefigurate. Prefigurate. To foreshew any thing by a
figure. Prefiguration. A foreshewing by a figure. Prefixe. To fasten before, or
to appoint a time aforehand. Pregnant. Quickewitted, that will soon conceive.
Pregnancy. Quickewittednesse. Preiudicate. To judge rashly, without due trial.
Preiudication. A judging before hand. Prejudice. A judgment given before due
trial, or a judgment formerly given of the same matter: sometime it
signifies harm, or hinderance. Prejudicial. Which judges before due time,
sometime hurtful, or evil. Prelate. A Bishop, a great Clergy man.
Premeditate. To think before hand. Premeditation. A thinking, or musing upon a
thing aforehand. Premise. To send before, to speak before. Promonish. To warn
before. Praemunire. A punishment wherein the offender loses all his goods for
ever, and liberty during life. Preordaine. To ordain before hand.
Preordinate. Ordained before Preposterous. Disorderly, untoward, contrary to
due course. Prepose. To prefer, to set before. Prepuce. The foreskinne of a
man's yard, which the Hebrews used to cut off in circumcision. Prerogative.
Privilege or authority above other. Presage. A foretelling, or conjecture made
of a thing beforehand. Presbytery. Priesthood, eldershippe. Prescience. A
knowing beforehand. Prescript. A commandment or appointment by writing.
Prescription. Possession and use of a thing, time out of mind. Preservative.
Which preserves or defends from sickness. President. A chief Judge or
ruler. Pressure. An oppression. Prestigious. Deceitful: blinding the sight.
Pretermisson. A letting pass, a leaving out. Pretermit. To ouerpasse. Pretext.
A colorable excuse, or pretense. Praetor. A chief Judge, a great officer.
Preuarication. Deceit, false dealing: when he that seems to help a man's
cause, does craftily seek to hinder it. Pricker. A Huntsman on horseback.
Pricket. A Fallow Dear two years old. Pricking. The print of a Hares foot on
the ground. Prigge. to filch, to steal. Prigging. Stealing. Prime. The
morning: sometime the spring, sometime the chief. Primacie. Chief authority,
or jurisdiction. Primate. An Archbishop. Primitive. The first, the most
ancient. Prioritie. The more excellent state or dignity. Pristine. Old,
ancient. Privation. A depriving, or taking away. Probable. Which may be
proved. Probation. A proof, a trial. Probatum. Proved, tried. Probitie.
Honesty, goodness. Problem. A dark sentence, with a question joined unto it.
Procliue. Inclining, or bent to a thing. Procliuity. An inclination, a bending
to. Proconsull. A deputy unto a Consul, or one endewed with a Consuls
authority. Procrastination. A delaying, a prolonging. Procreate. To breed, to
bring forth. Procreation. A breeding, a bringing forth. Procurator. A steward,
he that takes charge to ouersee another business. Prodigy. A rare thing
seldom seen, which signifies that some strange matter shall after follow.
Prodigious. Strange, wonderful. Prodition. A betraying. Produce. To bring
forth, to draw at length. Profane. To put holy things to a common use.
Profanation. A putting of holy things to common uses. Proficient. One that has
well profited. Profligate. To overthrow, to drive away. Profunditie. The depth
of a thing. Profuse. Waste full, lavish in spending. Progeny A generation, an
offspring, a stock, or kindred. Progenitor. An Ancester, a forefather.
Prognosticate. To know or conjecture before hand. Progress. A going forward.
Progression. A going forward. Proheme. A beginning of a matter: a preface
before a book. Prohibit. To forbid. Prohibition. A forbidding. Project. A
plot, or the contriuing of any thing. Prolix. Long, or large: tedious.
Prolixitie. Length, or largeness, tediousness. Prolocutour. The first
speaker. Prologue. A preface, a forespeech. Promoscuous. Confused, mingled one
with another. Promontorie. A hill lying out, like an elbow into the Sea.
Promote. To advance, to lift up. Promoter. He which accuses another, for the
breach of some law, and has thereby part of the penalty for his pain.
Prompe. Ready, or quick: sometime to tell one privily, to teach what he should
say. Promptitude. Readiness, Promulgate. To publish, to speak abroad.
Promulgation. A publishing of a Law or Decree. Prone. Stooping downward: also
bending or inclined to a thing. Propagate. To spread abroad, enlarge, or
multiply. Propagation. An increasing, or breeding. Propense. Ready, apt, or
given to a thing. Prophetical. Of or belonging to a Prophet. Propinquitie.
Neerenesse, sometime kindred. Propitiation. An obtaining of pardon, or a
sacrifice to appease Gods displeasure. Propitiatory. A table set on the Arc
of the Old Testament; on either side whereof was a Cherubin of gold, with the
wings spread over the Propitiatory, and their faces looking one toward
another. Propitious. Gentle, favorable, merciful. Propose. To set forth, to
offer, to appoint. Proposition. A short sentence containing the sum of what
we will speak. Proprietarie. He that has the fruits of a Benefice, to him
and his heirs or successors. Propulse. To beat off, to put away by force.
Prorogue. To prolong: to delay, to continue. Prorogation. A prolonging.
Proscription. Banishment, or open sale made of goods being forfet. Prosecute.
To follow: to pursue. Proselyte. A stranger converted to our religion.
Prosodie. True pronouncing of words. Prospect. A large sight, or a place where
one may see far. Prostitute, To set to open sale: to offer to every man for
money. Prostrate. To fall down, at ones feet. Protest. To affirm earnestly.
Protestation. A declaration of ones mind. Protomartyr. The first Martyr.
Prototypon. The first copy or pattern of a thing. Protract. To draw in
length, to prolong. Prouiso. A provision or condition made in any writing.
Proule. To go about in the night: to pilfer or steal small things. Prowe. The
forepart of a ship. Prowess. Strength, manhood, courage. Proximitie.
Neerenesse. Prudent. Discreet, wise. Prunellas. A fruit like small Figs,
good for restoratiue, and to comfort the heart. Psalmist. A maker or singer of
Psalms. Psalmodie. A singing of Psalms. Psalterie. A sweet instrument like a
Harp. Pseudo. Note, that words which begin with Pseudo, signify counterfeit
or false, as Pseudo-martyr, a false Martyr, or witness: Pseudoprophet, a false
prophet. Psisane. A Physical drink of Barley, and cold herbs sod together.
Publicane. He that hyreth the revenues or common profits of the CITY at a
certain Rent. This was an odious name among the Jews, because they were
commonly men of ill conscience, which exercised that office. Public. Common,
open abroad. Pulcritude. Beauty, fairness. Pulpe. The fleshie part of any
thing. Pulse. A beating vein: also pease, beans, lupines, and such other
Grain are so called. Puluerisated. Beaten to powder. Punctual. Not missing a
hairs breadth: which is short, and direct to the purpose. Pupil. A Ward, a
young Scholar, one under age. Purgative. Which has virtue to purge.
Purgatory. A place of purging. Purlue. A place near mining to a Forest,
where it is lawful for the owner of the ground to hunt, if he can dispend
forty shillings by the year of freeland. Purporte. A purpose, or meaning.
Pusillanimitie. Littlenes of courage, faintheartednesse. Pustule. A wheale, or
bladder risen in the body. Putrefaction. A rottenness or corruption. Putrify.
To be rotten or corrupted. Pygmies. Little people in India, not above a foot
and a half long: their women bring forth children at five years and at eight
are accounted old. They have continual war with Cranes, who do often put
them to the worst. Pyramides. A steeple or pillar, broad and square beneath,
and sharp above. Pyromancie. See Divination. Python A spirit which possesses
one; or a man possessed with a spirit.
Q
Quadrangle. A figure made with four corners. Quadrant. four square, or the
fourth part of a thing. Quadripartite. Divided into four parts.
Quadruplication. A fourefolde doubling. Quaint. Fine and strange. Quarentine. A
term in the common law, when a woman after the death of her husband remains
forty days in the chief Manor place, within which time her dower shall be
assigned. Quarrie. A place or pit where stones are dug. Among hunters it
signifies a reward given to Hounds after they have hunted, or the Venison
which is taken by hunting. Quauiuer. A sea Dragon. Quaternion. Four, or any
thing divided by the number of four. Queach. A thick bushie plot.
Querimonious. Full of complaining. Querulous. Complaining. Quest. A search or
inquiry. Quidditie. A short dark speech, an intricate question. Quiddanet. A
sweet mixture thicker than a sirupe, and not so thick nor stiff as marmalet.
Quid pro quo. A term amongst all Apothecaries, when in stead of one thing they
use another of the same nature. Quintessence. The fist substance. That which
remains in any thing after the corruptible Elements are taken from it.
Quippe. A quick check, a pretty taunt. Quotidian. Daily.
R
Rabbine. A Master, a Lord, a great Doctor, a teacher. Racha. An Hebrew word
of reproach, never spoken but in extreme anger. Radiant. Bright shining,
glistering with beams. Radiation. A glistering, a casting of beams. Radical.
Of or belonging to the root, natural. Radical moisture. The natural
moisture spread like a dew in all parts of the body; wherewith such parts are
nourished; which moisture being once wasted can never be restored. Raindeere.
A beast like a Heart, but having his head fuller of Antliers. Rampant. A term
of Herauldry, when a beast is painted ramping upright with the forefeete.
Rancor. Hatred, malice. Rape. A violent rauishing of a woman against her will.
There is also a root like a Turnep so called. Sometime it signifies a
division made in some shires; as the county of Sussex is divided into six
Rapes, to wit, the Rape of Chichester, of Arundell, of Bramber, of Lewis, of
Peuensie, and of Hastings. Rapacitie. A ravening, a violent catching.
Rapiditie. A snatching, a catching. Rapine. Robbery, catching, extortion.
Rapsodi. A joining of diverse verses together. Rarifaction. A making of that
thin, which is thick or close joined together. Rarifie. To make thin, to pull
a thing abroad. Raritie. Fewness, thinness. Rasure. A shauing away. Ratify.
To confirm, to allow. Rational. Reasonable. It signifies also an ornament,
which the high Priest of the Jews ware on his breast, when he executed his
function, being four square, of the length of a span, made curiously of gold
and twisted silk of diverse colors, wherein were set twelve precious stones in
four ranks of gold, and in every stone graven one of the names of the twelve
sons of Jacob. Real. Which is in very deed. Reassume. To take again.
Recant. To deny an opinion formerly by himself maintained. Recapitulate. To
rehearse briefly that which was spoken before. Recapitulation. A brief
rehearsal of that which has been formerly spoken at large. Receptacle. A
place of receipt, or any vessel to receive a thing in. Recesse. A bye-place, a
going back or aside. Recidiuation. A backesliding, or falling back again.
Reciprocal. That which returns back, or has respect to some thing going
before. Reclaim. To win, to make gentle. Recluse. Shut up. Recognisance. An
acknowledgment. A band wherein a man before a lawful Judge, acknowledges
himself to owe a certain sum of money to the King, if he fail in
performance of a condition thereto joined. Recoile. To fly back. Recollect.
To gather again, to call his wits together. Rectify. To direct, to make
straight. Recreant. He that denies his own challenge, he that goes from
what he has said, or eats his word. Rector. A Ruler, a Governor. Recurre.
To run back. Recursion. A running back. Recusant. He that refuses to do any
thing. Redolent. Sweet in smell. Redoubted. Greatly reverenced, most noble.
Redound. To abound, or ouerflow. Redobbour. He that wittingly buieth stolen
cloth, and turns it into some other fashion. Reduce. To bring back, to
restore. Reduction. A bringing back. Reedifie. To build again, to repair.
Reenter. To enter again. Reentrie. An entrance again. Reeue. An old name of
an officer in Lordshippes, much like to those that we call Bayliffes now.
Refection. A refreshing. Refectorie. A place to refresh ones self, or to take
ones diet in. Refell. To disprove, to prove false. Reflect. To turn or cast
back again. Reflection. A rebounding back: or turning back again. Reform.
To amend, to correct. Refractorie. Stubborn, which will not bend. Refuge. A
place of succor. Refute. To disprooue, to coufound by sense and reason.
Refutation. A disprouing, a confuting. Regal. Kingly; belonging to a King.
Regalitie. The estate or authority of a King. Regardant. A term in Heraldrie,
when a beast is painted, looking backewards at one. Regenerate. To bear
again in birth, to renew. Regeneration. A new birth Regent. A Prince, Ruler or
Governor. Regiment. A government, or the place where one has authority.
Register. Writings of record kept for memory. Also he that keeps such
writings in a spiritual Court. Regratour. He that in a fair or market, buyeth
any dead victual whatsoever, and sells the same again in any fair or
market kept there, or within four miles thereof. Regresse. A going back
again. Regression. The same. Regular. Under rule, or living according to a set
rule. Reject. To cast off, to despise. Reioynder. A second answer made by the
defendant, after his first answer has been replied unto. Reiterate. To do
again, to do a thing often. Relapse. A back slyding. Relate. To tell, to
declare. Relation. A rehearsal or telling of a matter. Relaxation. A
releasing, a refreshing or setting at liberty. Relay. A term of hunting,
when they set hounds in readiness, where they think a Dear will pass, and
cast them off after the other hounds are past by. Relief. A payment which some
Heirs make (after the death of their Auncestour) to the Lord of whom their
lands are holden. Relent. To wax soft, to yeilde. Relinquish. To leave off, to
forsake. Relics. Things left or remaining. Most commonly it is taken for the
bodies, or some part of the bodies, or somewhat which has touched the bodies of
Saints now in heaven. Remainder. A possibility in any, to enjoy lands,
tenements, or rents, after another estate is ended. Remiss. Slack, negligent
or careless. Remit. To send back: sometime to release or forgive. Remora. A
little Fish which cleaving to the bottom of a ship, does very strangely
stay the ship that she cannot move. Remorse. Doubtfulnesse in conscience,
to do a thing: a staggering in mind: sometime pittifulnesse or repentance of
a bad done. Remote. Far distant. Remunerate. To reward. Remuneration. A
reward, a requital. Renouate. To renew. Renouation. A renewing. Repast. Food.
Repeal. To call back again, to disallow. Repel. To thrust back.
Repercussiue. That which strikes back again, or reboundeth back.
Repetition. A new rehearsal. Repleuine. A Warrant sent from the Sheriff or
his Bayliffe, that a man shall have his cattle or a distress taken from him,
restored to him again; upon surety found to answer the party grieved, in the
Law. Replication. The answer made to the defendant after the defendant has
answered. Repose. To lay upon: sometime to take rest. Repositorie. A
storehouse, a place to lay up things in. Repossede. To possess again.
Reprehend. To reprove. Reprehension. A reproouing. Repress. To stay back, to
keep down by force. Reprises. All payments and charges that issue yearly
out of a manor. Reprobate. One past grace: a wicked person, a cast away.
Republike. A Commonwealth. Repudiate. To refuse a properly to put away ones
Wife. Repugne. To resist. Repugnancie. Disagreement, contrariety. Repugnant.
Contrary or resisting. Repute. To esteem, to account. Reputation. Estimation
or account. Requiem. Rest: ceasing from labor. Rereward. The hindemost part of
a battle. Rescouse. A forcible delivery or setting at liberty of one that
has been arrested. Reserve. To keep by it self, to keep for some purpose.
Reservation. A keeping of some thing apart. Reside. To alight, sink down, or
to abide in a place. Resident. Abiding in a place. Resign. To give or yield
up. Resignation. A yielding up of a thing to another. Resolve. To open, to
weaken, to make loose: sometime to expound and declare. Resolute. Determinately
bent to do any thing. Respective. Awful, which bears great respect to one.
Respiration. A fetching of breath. Resplendent. Bright, clear, shining.
Respondent. He that answers. Response. An answer. Restoration. A repayring,
a making again. Restie. Dull, heavy. Restitution. A restoring back.
Restriction. A restrayning, or holding back. Result. To rebound, to leap
back. Resume. To take again. Resurrection. A rising again. Resuscitation. A
stirring up again. Retaile. To sell in small parcels: that which was formerly
bought. Retention. A keeping. Retentiue. Having power to bind, retain, or
keep. Retire. To return backward. Retort. To throw, or shoot back again.
Retract. To call back again, to revoke. Retractation. A calling back, a
recanting, a denying of a thing before affirmed. Retreat. A calling back of
Soldiers from fight: a returning or going back. Retribution. A reward, a
recompense. Retriue. A seeking again. Retrograde. That which goes backward. A
planet is said to be retrograde, when he goes backward contrary to the course
of the signs, as from Taurus to Aries etc. Retrogradation. A going backward.
Revels. Players and dancings, with other pleasant devices, used sometimes in
the Kings Court, and elsewhere in great houses. Reuenew. Yearly rent received
for lands or tenements. Reuerberation. A beating back again. Reuersed. A
term in Heraldrie when a man's arms is given him, turned the lower part
upward. Reuert. To reurne. Reuise. To peruse, to look over again. Reunite. To
join together again. Reuocable. Which may be called back again. Reuocation.
A calling back again. Revoke. To call back. Revolt. To forsake ones captain
or company, and go to another. Reuolue To toss up and down in ones mind: to
muse or think much of a matter. Revolution. A turning or winding about:
especially in the course of time. Rhetoric. The art of eloquent speaking.
Rheubarb. See Rubarb. Ridiculous. Worthy to be laughed at: foolish; without
wit. Rigid. Stiff, hard, stubborn. Rigor. Hardness, stiffenesse, extreme
dealing. Rigorous. Hard, cruel, unmerciful. Rhyme. A mist or foggie dew.
Ringwalke. A round walk made by Hunters. Rinocere. A great beast, having a
horn in his nose, bending upward, which he whetteth often against rocks, to
fight therewith against the Elephant. Riot. In the law it signifies when three
or more persons, being assembled to commit forcibly an unlawful act, do
accordingly execute the same. Rite. A ceremony, a custom. Rival. One that
sueth for the same thing with another. Robustious. Strong. Roode. In land it
signifies a quarter of an acre. It is sometime taken for the picture of our
Savior upon the Cross. Rotunditie. Roundnesse. Rougecrosse. The name of an
office of one of the Purseuants at arms. Rougedragon. The name of an office of
one of the Purseuants at arms. Route. A disorderly assembly of three or more
persons moving forward to commit by force an unlawful act. It signifies also
a heard or great company of wolves together. Rubarbe. A costly root much used
in Physic to purge choler, and is brought hither out of Barbary. Being
toasted and dried it is then good against the bloody flixe, and all manner of
laskes; if it be so drunk with some binding liquor, as the juice of
Plantaine, red Wine, and such like. Rubrike. An order or rule written.
Rubricated. Marked with red; or written in red letters. Rudiments. The first
grounds or principles of an art or any knowledge. Ruin. Utter overthrow,
destruction. Ruminate. To chew over again as beasts do, that chew the cud:
wherefore it is often taken for to study and think much of a matter. Running
of the reins. A disease when by reason of weakness, seed passes often from
one against his will. Ruption. A breaking. Rupture. A breaking. Rural. Of or
belonging to the country. Rusticall. Countrey-like, homely, rude. Rusticitie.
Rudeness: clownish behavior.
S
Sabbath. Hosts or armies of men. Sable. In armorie it signifies black. It
is also a rich Furre of a beast so called, which beast is made like a polecat,
of color between black, and brown, and breeds in Russia, but most in
Tartaria. Sabbath. A day of rest. Saciety. Fullness. Sacrament. A mystical
ceremony instituted by our Savior. Sacred. Holy. Sacrilege. The robbing of a
Church: the stealing of holy things, or abusing of Sacraments or holy
mysteries. Sacrilegious. Very wicked and abominable. Saduce. An Heretical sect
among the Jews, which denied the resurrection: they called themselves Saduces
of the Hebrew word Tsedek.: Which signifies Justice, because they took
themselves to live more uprightly, and iuster then other men. Safeconduite. A
security and protection given by a Prince or any other person in authority,
for a man's safe coming or going to or from a place. Sagacitie. Quickenesse of
understanding; wittiness. Sage. Grave, wise, discreet. Sagapenum. The sap
or Gum of a plant growing in Media, of a yellowish color without, and white
within. It is hot and dry, of a strong smell like garlic, and is used in
Physic against diverse cold diseases. Saint Antonies fire. A disease rising of
hot choleric blood, which beginning first with a blister, grows after to a
sore, or scab like a tetter. Salamander. A little beast like a lisard, with
four feet and a short tail, having diverse spots in the body thereof. It is
of a biting venomous nature, and (as some affirm) will abide in the fire
without harm, and at last put it clear out. Salarie. Wages, or hyre.
Salgemma. A clear kind of salt like Crystal, used sometime in Physic, and
is found plentifully in Hungaria. Saliant. A term in Herauldry, when a beast
seems rampand, but lifts not the fore paws so high, as the rampande does.
Salubritie. Healthfulnesse. Sanctify. To make holy. Sanctification. A making
holy. Sanctimonie. Holiness. Sanctity. Holiness. Sanctuary. A place whither
offenders, or indebted persons may fly for succor, from being punished or
arested. Sanctum Sanctorum. The holiest place of the Jews temple, where the
Arc was kept, and whither none entered but the high Priest every year.
Sandall. An ancient kind of shoe. Sanders. A precious wood brought out of
India, whereof there are three kinds, to wit, red, yellow, and white Sanders.
They are all of a cooling nature, especially the red, which is often used in
Physic against hot diseases. Sanglier. A wild Bore, five years old.
Sanguine. In Herauldry it signifies a murrey color: but commonly it
signifies a complexion most inclining toward blood. Sanguinolent. Bloody.
Sanity. Health. Sapphire. A precious stone brought out of East India: of a
clear sky color, and the best sort of them has as it were clouds therein,
inclining to a certain redness. This stone is said to be of a cold nature.
Sapience. Wisdom, knowledge. Sarcaparillia. A plant of India, the root whereof
is often used in diet drinks, against the French, and other diseases.
Sarcocolla. A Gum brought out of Persia, which is red, and bitter in taste.
It is of a healing nature, and therefore often used to close up wounds, and
fill corrupted ulcers with new flesh. For which cause it is named in Greek
Sarcocolla, which signifies a glewer or healer up of the flesh. Sassafras. A
tree of great virtue, which grows in the Florida of the West Indies: the
rind hereof has a sweet smell like Cinnamome. It comfort the liver, and
stomach, and opens obstructions of the inward parts, being hot and dry in
the second degree. The best of the Tree is the root, next the boughs, then
the body, but the principal goodness of all rests in the ryndes. Satan. An
enemy. Satiate. To fill. Satiety. Fullness. Saturitie. Fullness. Satyr. A
strange monster in India, having the body of a man all hairy, with legs and
feet like a Goat: which monsters the ancient Poets were wont to call gods of
the woods. It signifies also a sharp biting kind of verse, wherein men's vices
were laid open. Satyricall. Sharp or biting, as Satyrs were commonly written.
Sauine. A little low tree, bearing leaves almost like Tamariske, and of a hot
scowring nature. Saults. Iumpes, leapes. Saunce. Without. Saw. An old saying.
Saxifrage. An herb bearing seed like Parsley seed, but more hot and biting,
which seed or the root being boiled in wine and drunken, breaks the stone
of the kidneyes and bladder. Scalpe. The hair skin of the head. Scammonie.
The juice of the root of an herb, brought hither dry out of Asia, and Mysia.
It is a violent purger of choler, and dangerous to take inward, unless it be
well prepared. See Diagridium. Scandal. An offense, or that which causes one
to fall, stumble, or take offense. Scandalize. To offend by evil example, or
give one occasion to be offended. Scarifie. To scrape, cut, lance, or open a
sore. Scarification. A scraping, or cutting. Scedule. A little roll, or
written bill. Scene. A play, a Comody, a Tragedy, or the division of a play
into certain parts. In old time it signified a place covered with boughs, or
the room where the players made them ready. Scheme. A figure in speaking.
Shisme. Division or strife in matters of religion. Schismatic. Divided in
fellowship from the other part: erroneous. Schismaticke. One divided from the
unity of the Church. Scholasticall. Learned, belonging to Scholars. Sciatica.
A gout in the hippe, caused by gross and flegmaticke humors, gathered in the
hollownes of the joint thereof. Science. Knowledge. Scolopendra. A fish that
feeling himself taken with a hook, casts out his bowels, until he has
unloosed the hook, and then swalloweth them up again. Scope. The end or mark
that one aims at. Scorpion. A venomous worm with seven feet, bearing his
sting in his tail; with which he strikes mischieuously. They are of diverse
colors, and the femall is the greater, having withal a sharper sting then the
male. They way be killed with fasting spittle of a sound man. There are also
great Scorpions with wings, which are carried in some hot countries with the
wind from one place to another. Scoute. One sent out to epsy and bring
tidings of the enemies purpose, or of any danger likely to happen. Scribe. A
writer, a Clerk a public notarie. Scruple. Doubt, difficulty: In Physic it
signifies a small weight of twenty wheat corns; the third part or a dram.
Scrupulositie. Doubtfulnesse* difficulty. Scrupulous. Doubtful, fearful one
that casts many doubts. Scrutinie. Search: inquiry. Scull. A great company
of fish swimming together. Sculpture. A caruing, a grauing. Scurrill. Scoffing,
beastly, dishonest, filthy. Scurrilitie. Saucy scoffing, ribauldry.
Scurrillous. The same that Scurrill is. Scut. The tail of a Hare or cony.
Seacalfe. Great fishes that bellow like oxen, and have their bodies covered
with hair. They breed like beasts on the land, and sleep there often in the
night. Sealamprie. A fish called by some Remora, which stays a ship under a
sail. Sebestens. Little plums brought out of Italy, of a bluish color and
sweet in taste. They are cold and moist in operation, and are often used by
Physicians in hot agues and inward inflammations of the body. Seclude. To
shut apart, to shut out. Seclusion. A shutting apart. Sect. A particular
opinion of some few. Sectarie. One that follows private opinions in religion.
Section. A division or cutting off. Secular. Worldly, or belonging to the
world. Secundine. The after birth, the skin, wherein a child is wrapped in
his mothers womb. Secure. Careless, void of fear. Security. Assurance from
fear or danger. Sediment. The dregs of any liquor which sinketh to the
bottom. Seduce. To deceive, to misleade. Sedulity. Diligence, carfulness.
Segregate. To divide, to sever. Seiant. A term in Herauldrie, when a beast is
painted sitting upright. Select. To choose, to pick out. Semblable. Like.
Semblance. A show, a color. Semblant. Like. Semicircle. Half a circle.
Seminary. A seed plot. Semitarie. A crooked sword: a faucheon. Sempiternall.
Everlasting. Sena. A little plant growing in Italy and other hot countries,
but the best is brought from Alexandria. It is hot and dry, and the leaves
thereof are often boiled in Physic, to purge the body of melancholicke gross
humors, and to cleanse the blood: but there must be Annisseede, Cinnamom or
Ginger added to it, for that otherwise it will provoke windiness, and gripings
in the belly. Senate. The Counsel house, where the Magistrates of a city
assemble themselves. Senator. An Alderman, or grave Magistrate of a city.
Senior. The Elder. Sensible. That may be felt or perceived: sometime witty or
of good conceit. Sensual. That pleases the senses, wanton, given to please
the flesh. Sensuality. Bodily pleasure: wanton delight. Sentinel. A man
standing in some convenient place to discry what company comes near an army
or town of war. Sententious. Full of sentences, or wise speeches.
Septentrionall. Of, or belonging to the North. Septuagints. Seventy learned men
which translated the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek. Sepulture.
Burial. Sequel. That which follows the matter following. Sequester. To
divide, to withdraw. To put by it self. Sequestration. A putting apart: a
placing in several by it self. Seraine. A foggy mist or dampish vapor
falling in Italy about sun set, at which time it is unwholesome to be abroad
especially bareheaded. Seraphicall. Inflamed with divine love like a Seraphin.
Seraphin. The highest order of Angels: See Hierarchy. Serenitie. Fair and
clear weather. Sergreant. A term applied in Heraldry only to the Griffine
which is so called. Serious. Earnest, weighty, of great importance. Serpentine.
Of the nature of a Serpent. Servile. Base, slavish, belonging to a bondsman or
servant. Seruilitie. Bondage; base estate. Servitude. Bondage. Sessions. A
sitting of Judges. Sethim. A kind of tree like a white Thorn, the timber
whereof never rotteth. Of this tree was made the holy Arc of the Old
Testament. Severe. Just, grave, hard. Severity. Gravity, great constancy in
ministering justice. Sewell. A Paper, clout, or any thing hanged up to keep a
Dear from entering into a place. Sewer. He that goes before the meat of a
Prince or great personage, to place it on the table: also one that has
authority to ouerlooke water courses. Shamoise. A wild Goat keeping the
mountains. Shankes. The skin of the shanke of a kind of Kidde. Shingles. A
disease about the breast, belly, or back, wherein the place affected looks
red, increasing circle wise more and more. It is chiefly cured with Cats
blood; or if it go round the body, it kills. Shrew A kind of field Mouse,
which if he go over a beasts back, will make him lame in the chine; and if he
bite, the beast swells to the heart, and dies. Shrine. A Toombe or place
where the body of some Saint is buried or remains. Siatica. See Sciatica
before. Sibbe. One of kin. Sibyll. A woman inspired with a spirit of
prophecy; so called of the greek words Sios, which signifies God, and
Boil, which signifies counsel, because such women had knowledge (as was
said) of the counsel of God. There were ten Sibylls famous above the rest. The
first was Sibylla of Persia, the second of Lybia, the third of the city
Delphos in Greece, the fourth of Cuma, a city in Aeolis, the fifth of Erythrae,
a city of Asia, the sixth of the I Will, Samos, the seventh of Cumae, a city of
Campania in Italy. This Sibylla of Cumae, (as is written) came on a time to
Tarquine King of Rome, in the habit of a strange old woman, offering to sell
him nine books, full (as she said) of divine oracles; for which she demanded
three hundred crowns of gold: the King not much regarding, and beside thinking
them too dear at that price, she burned three of them before his face, and
then asked if he would have the other six, for which she demanded no less,
than she had done at first for the nine. Hereat the King deriding her and
thinking her half made, she burned three more of them, and told him that he
should give her the same price for those three that were left. The King much
wondering at the woman's constant earnestness, and therefore thinking the
books contained no common matter, commanded three hundred crowns to be given
her for them, which she receiving, presently vanished out of sight. These
books were after kept by the Romans very carefully, who in great matters of
doubt, always had recourse to them, as to an assured oracle. The eighth
Sibyll, was called Sibylla of Helespontus in Greece; the ninth was of Phrygia;
the tenth and last of Tybur, a city near Rome in Italy. All these Sibylls
prophesied of the incarnation of our Savior Christ. Sicle. In coin it
signifies four sterling groates of eight to an ounce: in weight it is half
an ounce. Sidelayes. Dogs laid in the way to be let slip at a Dear, as he
passes by. Signet. A seal. Significatiue. Which expresses a matter plainly.
Signiorie. A Lordship. Silence. Holding ones peace. Similitude. A likeness.
Simonie The selling of spiritual things for money. This name first was derived
from one Simon a sorcerer of Samaria, who offered money to the Apostles that he
might have power to give the holy Ghost unto any that he should lay his hands
on; for which cause he was sharply reproved by Saint Peter. Simulachre. A
picture or image. Simulation. Dissembling. Sincere. Upright, plain, without
dissimulation. Sindon. Fine linen cloth. Single. The tail of a Sagge or other
Dear. Singularity. Private opinion, a desire to be odd from other men.
Sinister. Unhappy, naughty, lewd, harmefull. Sinoper. A kind of red stone
which some call rudle. Siren. A Mer-mayde: Poets feine there were three
Mer-mayds or Sirens, in the upper part like maidens, and in the lower part
fishes: which dwelling in the sea of Sicilie, would allure Sailors to them, and
afterward destroy them; being first brought asleep with harkening to their
sweet singing. Their names were Parthenope, Lygia, and Leucasia; wherefore
sometime alluring women are said to be Sirens. Site. The setting or standing of
a place. Situation. The same that Site is. Slot. The view or print of a Stags
foot in the ground. Slowth. A heard or company of wild Boares together. Sluse.
A frame or device to keep water in any ground, or let it out. Smaragde. A
precious stone called an Emerald: See Emerald. Socage. An ancient tenure of
land, by doing some inferior service of husbandry to the Lord of the fee.
Sociable. Kind, loving, one that will keep company, or is courteous in
company. Society. Fellowship. Sole. Alone, only. Solecisme. A false manner of
speaking, contrary to rules of Grammar. Solegroue. An old name of the month of
February. Solicit. To urge, to move, to provoke. Solicitude. Carfulness.
Solid. Whole, firm, not hollow. Soliditie. Wholenesse, massiuenesse,
soundness. Solitary. Alone, without company. Solitude. A desert place, a
wilderness. Solstice. The stay of the Sun when he cannot go higher and
lower, which is (with us) in summer about mid June, and in Winter about the
middle of December. Soluble. Loose, not bound Solue. To untie, to open, to
expound. Solution. A payment or an expounding. Sophister. A subtle cauiller in
words, a crafty disputer, which will make a false matter seem true.
Sophisme. A false argument. Sophistical. Deceitful: captious. Sophisticate.
To counterfeit, to deceive. Sophistry. A false kind of argument seeming true
when it is not. Sore. To fly up aloft: also it signifies a Fallow Dear four
years old. Sorell. A Fallow Dear three years old. Source. A wave of the
sea. Sownder. A company of wild Bores together. Spaide. A Red Dear three
years old. Spacious. Large and wide. Species. The differing kind of every
thing. Spectator. A beholder. Speculation. The inward knowledge, or beholding
of a thing. Speculatiue. That which belongs to Speculation, Sperme. Seed.
Spermaceti. The seed of the Whale fish: It is used in Physic against squats
and bruisings of the body. Spermaticall. Of or belonging to seed: or the
veins which contain the seed. Sphere. A round circle; It is commonly taken
for the circled round compass of the heavens. Sphericall Round like a sphere.
Spikenard A kind of sweet herb like Lauender. Spleen. The milte of man or
beast: which is like a long narrow tongue, lying under the short ribs on
the left side, and has this office of nature, to purge the liver of
superfluous melancholicke blood: sometime it signifies anger or choler.
Splendor. Brightness. Splendent. Bright shining. Spongeous. Hollow, like a
Sponge. Spousals. A marriage. Spraints. Dung of an Otter. * Sprent. To
sprinkle. Spume. Foam or froth. Squadron. Asquare form in a battle.
Squinanth. A kind of round rush, which is sweet, and has flowers very
medicinable. Squincy. A swelling disease in the throat. Stabilitie.
Steadfastness: constancy. Stacte. A sweet oil or liquor which is drawn out
of new myrrh, by bruising and strayning it according to art. Staggerd. A red
male Dear, four years old. Stanchhound. An old hound well experienced.
Stannaries. Mines of Tin. Staple. Any town or city appointed for merchants
of England to carry their Wool, Cloth, Lead, Tin, or such like commodities
unto, for the better sale of them to other merchants by the great. State. It is
sometime taken for urine of man's body. Station. A standing or resting place.
Statue. A carved, or cast image, made in proportion like a man. Stauesaker. An
herb bearing a three cornered seed of a hot burning nature, which being
beaten to powder, and mingled with oil, destroys lice, and cures all itchy
mangines. Stechados. A beautiful herb, bearing fair knops or ears, which
being boiled and drunken, do open the stoppings of all inward parts, and are
very good against the pain of the head, and diseases of the breast. Sterill.
Barren. Sterilitie. Barrenness: unfruitfulness. Stigmaticall. See
Stigmaticke. Stigmaticke. A notorious leude fellow, which has been burnt with
a hot iron, or bears other marks about him, as a token of his punishment.
Style. A manner or form of writing, or speaking. Stillyard. A place in London
where the Easterling merchants of Hawnse and Almane, were wont to abide.
Stipend. Wages, or hire given one. Stipendarie. He that receives yearly
wages, or is hired to do a thing for a certain price. Stipulation. A solemn
covenant or bargain. Stoicall. Of or belonging to the Stoikes. Stoike. A
sever* sect of Philosophers at Athens which followed the doctrine of Zeno, who
taught that a wise man ought to be free from all passions. and never to be
moved either with joy or grief. They were called Stoikes, of the Greek word
Stoa, (which signifies a porch) because Zeno taught his followers in a common
porch of the city. Storax. A kind of sweet Gum, good against hoarsnesse,
and the cough. Storke. A bird famous for natural love toward his parents, whom
he feeds being old and impotent, as they fed him, being young. The
Egyptians so esteemed this bird, that there was a great penalty laid upon any
that should kill him. Strangurion. A disease when one cannot make water, but by
drops, and that with great pain. Stratageme. A policy or subtle device in
war, whereby the enemy is often vanquished. Strict. Hard, straight, severe.
Structure. A building. Student. One that studieth. Studious. Given to study.
Stupid. Blockish, without wit: dull. Stupiditie. Blockishnesse, dullness:
astonishment. Stupifaction. A making dull or senseless. Stygian. Belonging to
the river Styx. Styx. A feined River in hell, by which the heathen gods did use
to swear: And if they swore falsely, they were deprived of their godhead, for
one hundred years after. Suauitie. Sweetness. Subalterne. Placed under
another: or that which succeeds another by course. Subalternation. A
succeeding by course. Subject. That which does support qualities belonging unto
it: as the body is the subject in which is health, or sickness, and the mind
the subject that receives into it virtues or vices. Sublime. High, lofty,
honorable. Sublimatum. A strong corosiue powder called white Mercury, used by
Chirurgians to eat and consume corrupted flesh. Sublimitie. Highness,
loftiness. Submisse. Lowly, humble. Subordinate. Placed in office under
another Subordination. An appointing or placing of one thing under another.
Suborne. To bring one in for a false witness: to instruct one privily how to
deceive another. Subpoena. A Writ whereby one is summoned to appear in the
Chancery at a certain time, upon a great penalty, if the fail in appearance.
Subscribe. To write under. Subscription. A writing under. Subsist. To abide or
continue in his own being. Subsistence. The abiding or continuance of a thing
in it own estate. Substitute. To appoint an inferior officer: also he that is
in authority under another, or which rules in steed of another. Subterfuge. A
refuge, a sauegard; a place to hide or save one in. Subversion. An overthrow.
Subvert. To overthrow, to destroy. Succinct. Brief, short. Suffocate. To
strangle: choke. Suffocation. A choking: a strangling. Suffrage. Favorable,
voices in our behalf, as at the choosing of officers or Magistrates. Suggest.
To put closely into ones mind. Suggestion. A prompting or putting of a thing
into ones mind. Sulphur. Brimstone. Summarie. A brief gathering together; an
abridgment containing the whole effect of a matter in few words. Summarilie.
Briefly: touching only the chief points. Summitie. The height or top of a
thing. Superabound. To abound very much; to be in great plenty. Supereminence.
Authority, or dignity above others. Supererogation. Laying out of more then
one has received; or the doing of more then a man is of necessity bound to
do. Superficial. Going no farther then the outside; slight, bearing show
only in the outside, without any goodness within. Superficies. The outside of
every thing, which is always in sight. Superfluity. More then needs to be,
overmuch. Superfluous. That which is too much: also vain or unprofitable.
Superlatiue. The highest. Superior. Higher, above another. Supernall. That
which comes from above. Superscription. A writing set upon any thing, as on
the outside of a letter. Supersedeas. In our common Law it signifies a
commandment sent by writing, forbidding an officer from the doing of that,
which otherwise he might and ought to do. Superstition. An excess of
ceremonious worship, false worship, or honor given to God. Supplant. To trip
one, or to overthrow him craftily. Supplement. That which supplyeth or makes
up what is wanting. Supply. To fill up or add too. Suppliant. He that makes a
supplication, or humbly entreats another. Supplicate. To beseech humbly.
Suppository. Any thing put up into the Fundament, to make the body soluble. It
is commonly made of honey boiled till it grow thick, and so made into an apt
form for that purpose; whereto sometime is added the yolke of an egg, or
salt, when we will have it to work the effect more speedily. Suppress. To
keep down; to beat under: sometime to conceal or keep close. Supputation.
An account or reckoning. Supreme. Chief, highest, most excellent. Surcease. To
give over, leave off or cease. * Surcote. A gown with a hood of the same.
Surplusage. Overplus, more then needs. Surprise. To come unawares: to take upon
a sudden. Surprisall. A taking unawares. * Surquidrie. Presumption. Surrender.
To yielde up lands or tenements to another. Surreption. A privy taking away.
Surround. To compass round about. Survey. To ouerlooke, or ouersee. Surueyer.
He that has the oversight, of the kings or some great personages lands or
works. Survive. To ouerliue, or live after another. Suruiuer. He that lives
after another. Suspend. To stay one by authority for a time, from executing
his office: to delay, to defer. Suspense. Doubtfulnesse, uncertainty.
Suspiration. A breathing or sighing. Swallows tail. In building it
signifies, a fastening of two pieces of timber so strongly together, that they
cannot fall asunder. Swain. A Servant. Swaynemote. A Court kept thrice a
year, touching matters belonging to a forest. * Sweuen. A dream. * Swynker.
A labourer. Sycomore. A tree like a fig tree, having great branches, and large
leaves like a Mulberrie. It bears fruit three or four times in a year, much
like a wild Fig, but without any seeds within. The fruit grows upon the
very body of the tree, and the great maine boughs, and will never be ripe
except it be scraped with an iron tool. It is found plentifully in Caria,
Egypt, and the I Will of Rhodes; especially in such places, where Wheat will not
grow. Sycophant. A Talebearer, a slandererer, a false accuser. Syllogism. An
Argument consisting of three parts, whereby something is necessarily proved,
as thus: Every virtue is honorable: Patience is a virtue.

Thererefore Patience is honorable.

The first part of a syllogism is called the Proposition or Mayor; the second
the Assumption or Minor; and the third, the Conclusion.

Syluane. Of, or belonging to the woods. Symbol. A short gathering of
principal points together. Symmetrie. Due proportion of one part with another.
Symmetrian. He that considers the due proportion of a thing; and how well
the parts agree with the whole. Sympathy. A likeness in quantity; or a like
disposition or affection of one thing to another. Symphonie. Harmony or consent
in Music. Symptom. Any passion or grief following a disease, or sensibly
joined with it: as headache with an Ague, a pricking in the side with a
Pleurisy, and such like. Synagogue. A Congregation or assembly: commonly it
signifies a church of the Jews. Synteresie. The inward conscience. or a
natural quality ingrafted in the soul, which inwardly informs a man,
whether he do well or ill. Synod. A general council, a general or universal
assembly. Synoper. Sec Cinoper. Synopsie. A sight or full view of a thing.
T
* TAas. An heap. Tabernacle. A shelter or a room made abroad, with boords
and boughs of trees. There was of old among the Israelites, a feast commanded
by God, called the feast of Tabernacles; which began on the fifteenth day of
the seventh month, and continued seven days, during which time the
Israelites lived abroad in Tabernacles, in remembrance, that their Fathers a
long time so lived, after God had delivered them out of the land of Egypt.
Tacamahaza. A Rosin brought out of the West Indies, of great virtue against
any cold humors, rising of the Mother, Toothach, and diverse other griefs.
Talent. A certain value of money. Among the Greeks there were two kinds of
talents, the greater and the less: The greater contained about two hundred
thirty three pounds sterling: the less about an hundred seventy five pounds.
Among the Hebrews the greater Talent of the Sanctuary contained 400. pounds,
the lesser Talent half so much. Tallage. Custom: freight. Tamarinds. A fruit
brought hither out of India, like unto green Damsens. They are cold in
operation, and therefore good against burning Feauers and all inward diseases,
proceeding of heat and choler. Tamariske. A little tree bearing leaves not
much unlike to heath; the decoction whereof in Wine and a little Vinegar being
drunken, is of great virtue against the hardness or stopping of the spleen or
Milt. This tree does by nature so wast the Milt, that Swine which have been
daily fed out of a vessel made thereof, have been found to have no Milt at
all. * Tapinage. Secrecy, slilinesse. Tarantula. A little beast like a Lizard,
having spots in his neck like stars. Tardie. Slow. Tartar. Leeze of wine.
Tautologie. A repeating of one speech or matter often. Tax. To appoint what
one shall pay to the Prince: sometime to reprove. Tearce. A measure of moist
things being the sixth part of a tun, and the third part of a pipe. * Teene.
Sorrow. Temerarious. Rash, hasty. Temeritie. Rashness. Templaries. Certain
Christian soldiers dwelling about the Temple at Jerusalem, whose office was
to entertain Christian strangers that came thither for devotion, and to guard
them in safety when they went to visit the places of the holy Land: They wore
by their Order a white Cloak or upper Garment, with a red Cross. Temporal.
That which endures but a time. Temporary. The same that Temporal is.
Temporize. To follow the time: To seek to please the time. Tenacitie. A
holding fast, a niggardnesse. Tenderlings. The soft tops of a Deeres horns
when they are in blood. Tendrells. Little sprigs of Vines or other Plants,
wherewith they take hold to grow or stay themselves up. Ten. A term used
among Heralds, signifying an Orange or tawny color. Tenon. That part of a post
which is put into a mortise hole, to make it stand upright, or to bear it up.
Tenuitie. Littleness, slenderness. Tergiuersation. Wrangling, overthwart
dealing. A seeming to run away and yet fight still. Termination. An ending or
last part of a word. Terrene. Earthly. Terrestrial. Earthly. Terrify. To make
afraid. Territory. Land lying within the bounds of a City. Terror. Fear,
dread. Tertian. The third, or returning every third day. Testament. A written
will. Testator. He that works a will. Testify. To bear witness.
Testification. A witnessing. Tetragrammaton. Having four Letters. The Hebrews
so called the great name of God Jehovah, because in their language it was
written with four letters. Tetrarch. A Prince that rules the fourth part of a
kingdom. Theater. A place made half round where people sat to behold solemn
plays and games. Theatricall. Of, or belonging to the Theater. Theme. A
sentence or argument whereupon one speaks. Theology. Divinity: the
knowledge of Divine things. Theological virtues. Faith, Hope and Charity are
so called, because they have their object and end in God. Theoretical. That
which belongs to contemplation or inward knowledge of a thing. Theorick. The
inward knowledge or contemplation of a thing. * Thilke. The same. * Thirle. To
pearce. Thorpe. A village. Thrasonicall. Vainglorious, full of boasting as
Thraso was. Threnes. Lamentations: mournings. * Threpe. To affirm. Thummim. An
Hebrew word signifying perfection. See Vrim. Tiara. A rich cap or hat of silk
used by Kings and Priests of Persia: It covered not the whole head before, but
was fastened with ribbins behind, so that it could not easily fall off. Tiger.
A fierce wild beast in India and Hyrcania. This beast is the swiftest of all
other, wherefore they are taken very young in the dams absence, and carried
away by men on horseback; who hearing the cry of the old Tiger following
swiftly after them, do of purpose let fall one of the young whelps, that
while she bears that back, they in the mean time may escape safe with the
other to the ship. Timorous. Fearful. Timiditie. Fearfulness. Tincture. A
dipping, coloring, or stayning of a thing. Titular. Which bears only a
Title. Toft. A place where a house has stood. Tolerate. To endure or suffer.
Toleration. An enduring; a sufferance. Tome. A part or division. Tone. A tune,
note, or accent of the voice. Tonnage. A payment due for merchandise carried in
tuns or such like vessels, after a certain rate in every tun. Tonsure. A
clipping or cutting of the hair. Topase. A precious stone whereof there are two
kinds: One of the color of gold, and the other of a Saffron color, not so
good as the first. It is written that this stone being put into seething water,
does so cool it, that one may presently take it out with his hand. Topikes.
Places to find arguments. Topographie. A description of a place. Torrent. A
little stream, a brook that runs swiftly. Torride. Burning, exceeding hot.
Torteauxes. Cakes of bread: a term used in Heraldrie. Total. The whole.
Trace. To follow by the steps. Traces. The print of feet in beasts of rauine,
as wild Boares, Bears, and such like. Tract. A discourse, a drawing in
length. Tractable. Easy to be ruled and handled: gentle, easy to be
persuaded. Tradition. A delivery: that which is delivered us from others.
Traduce. To speak evil of one, to defame, to reproach. Tragacanth. A kind of
Gum, the best whereof is clear, and somewhat sweet in taste: It is often used
against coughes, and rough hoarsenesse of the throat. Tragedy. A play or
History ending with great sorrow and bloodshed. Tragedian. A Player or Writer
of Tragedies. Tragical. Mournful, lamentable, deadly, which ends like a
Tragedy. Tranquillity. Quietness of mind, calmness. Transcendent. That
which clymeth over, and surmounteth another thing: In Logic it signifies a
word of such nature that it cannot be included in any of the ten
predicaments. Transcript. A writing or a coppying out. Transfer. To carry or
convey from one place to another. Transfiguration. An altering of the form or
figure. Transformation. A changing into another form. Transition. A passing
over from one thing to another. Transitory. Soon passing, of short
continuance. Translucent. Clear, bright, which may be seen through.
Transmigration. A removing to dwell, from one place to another. Transmitte. To
send over or away. Transmutation. A changing. Transparent. Clear, that may be
seen through. Transport. To send over by ship. Transpose. To change or alter
the order of a thing. Transubstantiation. A changing of one substance into
another. Trasonings. The crossings or doublings of a Row bucke before the
hounds. Traue. A treuise to shoe a wild horse in. Trauerse. To march up and
down or to move the feet with proportion, as in dancing. In our common Law it
signifies to make contradiction, or to deny the chief point of the matter
wherewith one is charged. Treble. Threefold, or to make a thing thrice so great
as it is: sometime it signifies the highest note in music. Tremour. A
trembling. Trepandiron. An instrument used by surgeons to cut out a small bone
withal. Tresses. Hair. Triangled. Three cornered. Tribe. A kindered; or
company that dwells together in one ward. Tribune. The name of two chief
officers in Rome. The first was Tribune of the people, who was to defend their
liberties, and had therefore the gates of his house standing always open day
and night. The other was called Tribune of the soldiers, who had charge to
see them well armed, and ordered, being as the Knight marshall is with us.
Tribunal. A judgment seat. Tributarie. which paieth tribute. Trine. The
number of three. Trinity. Three joined in one, or three together. Tripartite.
Divided into three parts. Tripp. A heard or flock of goats. Triplicicie.
Threefolde being. Triuiall. Base, vile, of no estimation, common every where.
Triumuirate. The office of three together. Trociskes. Little flat cakes sold
by Apothecaries, made of diverse simple medicines mingled together. Trope. The
changing of a word; or a figurative manner of speaking. Trophie. Any thing set
up in token of victory. This custom first began among the Greeks who used in
that place, where the enemies were vanquished, to cut down the boughs of
great trees, and in the stocks or bodies of them to hang up armor, or other
spoils taken from the enemies. Tropicall. That which is spoken by a trope or
figure. Tropikes. Two imagined circles in the sphere, of equal distance on
either side from the Equinoctial line. The one is called the Tropike of
Cancer, the other the Tropike of Capricorn. To the first the Sun comes in
June, to the other in December. They are called Tropikes of the Greek word
Trepo, which signifies to turn, because when the Sun comes to either of
them, he turns his course another way. Troy weight. A pound weight of twelve
ounces, by which gold, silver, precious stones, jewels and bread are weighed.
Trucheman. An interpreter. Truculent. Fierce, cruel and terrible. Trunk. The
body of a tree. Tuition. Defense, protection. Tumor. A swelling. Tumult. A
sedition or trouble, some gathering together of the people. Tumultuous.
Seditious, full of buisinesse, or trouble. Tun. A measure of 252. gallons. In
weight it signifies twenty hundred. Turbith. A root much used in Physic, to
purge slimie fleame out of the body. The best is white and hollow, and is
commonly taken with a little ginger, for then it will work the effect with
more ease. Turbith mineral. A certain red powder (made according to the
Paracelsian practice) which is used against the French disease. Turbulent.
Troublesome, unquiet. Turkise. A precious stone of a silk blew color.
Turpentine A fair, clear, and moist kind of rosin, which issues out of the
Larx and Turpentine tree. It is good to be put into ointments and emplaisters,
for it gleweth, cleanses and heals wounds. It may be also licked in with
honey, and then it cleanses the breast, and gently loses the belly, provoking
urine and driving out the stone and gravel. Turpitude. Filthiness, dishonesty.
Turtle dove. A bird less than a pigeon, famous for continency in widows
estate. If the male or femall of this bird die, the other ever remains single,
as it were in continual sorrow. In the Spring time they are scarce seen,
because they then loose their feathers: when they drink, they lift not up their
heads backward as other birds use. They live commonly eight years, and do
breed twyce a year, not above three eggs at a time. Tutmouthed. He that has
the chin and nether iaw sticking out farther than the upper. Tutour. A
defender, he that has charge to bring up a child. Twibill. An instrument used
by Carpenters to make mortise holes. Tympanie. A disease wherein the body
waxing lean, the belly swells up, having great store of wind and windy
humors gathered together between the inner skin thereof and the guts. Type.
A figure, form or likeness of any thing. Typical. mystical, or that which
serves as a shadow and figure of an other thing. Tyrant. A cruel Prince, One
that rules unjustly. Tyrannize. To play the tyrant, to govern with cruelty.
V
VAcant. Void, empty; without buisines Vacation. A ceasing from labor.
Vacuitie. Emptines. Vacuum. Emptines. Veil bonet. To put off the hatt, to
strike sail, to give sign of submission. Valentinians. Certain heretics so
called by the name of their first master Valentinianus; who held opinion that
our Savior received not his flesh of the blessed virgin Mary. Validity.
Force, or strength. Variable. Changeable, which alters often. Variation. An
altering, or changing. Vaste. Huge and great. Vastation. A wasting or spoiling
of a country. Vastitie. Exceeding greatness: also waste or spoil done to a
country. Vauessour. A Lord. Vauntcourers. Forerunners. Vauntlay. A term of
hunting, when they set hounds in readynes, where they think a chase will
pass, and cast them off before the rest of the kennell come in. Vaward. The
foremost part of a battle. Vbiquitie. The presence of a person in all places
at once. * Vechons. Hedgehogs. Vegetiue. That which lives and grows as
plants doc. Vehemency. Earnestnes. Veil. To hide or cover: also any thing
which hides or covers. Velitations. Skirmishes, fightings. Velocitie.
Swiftnes. Velume. Fine parchment of calves skynnes. Vendible. Saleable, which
will quickly be sold. Venerable. Reverent, grave, worshipful. Veneration. A
worshipping. Venery. Hunting: sometime fleshly wantonness. Veneriall. See
venerious. Venerious. Fleshly: given to lechery. Venie. A touch in the body at
playing with weapons. Venial. Which may easily be pardoned. Ventoy. A fan
for a woman. Ventosity. Windiness. Ventricle. The stomach of any living
thing. Ventroloquie. A hollow inward speaking of a spirit in a possessed body.
Ver. The spring time. Verbal. Of or belonging to words. Verbatim. Word by word,
that which is precisely spoken, according as something was spoken before.
Verbositie. Much talk, many words. Verdegrease. A green substance, made of
the rust of brass or copper, which has been hanged certain days over
strong vinegar; It is of a fretting nature, and therefore to be used with great
discretion. Verdour. The name of a chief officer in a Forest: sometime it
signifies greenenesse. Verge. A rod or wanne. Verger. He that carries a white
wande before a great officer. Verify. To prove, to make true. Verity. Truth.
Vermilion. See Cinoper. Vernall. Of or belonging to the spring. Versifie. To
make verses. Verte. A term in Herauldry: it signifies a green color.
Vesper. The Evening. Vestals. Certain virgins among the ancient Romans,
consecrated to the Goddess Vesta. They were always chosen between six and
ten years of age, and continued thirty years in their office; whereof the
first ten years they bestowed in learning the ceremonies of their order, the
second they employed in execution thereof, and the last ten in teaching
others, after it was lawful for them to marry if they would. Their chief
office was to keep fire continually burning in a round temple at Rome in
honor of Vesta, and if it chanced to go out, they were to renew it again
with no usual fire, but such as they could get by art from the Sun beams.
They were greatly honored in the City, and had diverse privileges: for they
were carried in Chariots, and the chiefest Magistrates would do reverence to
them. They had officers going before them, as the Consuls had, and if they met
any who was led to be put to death, they had authority to deliver him,
taking an oath that they came not that way of purpose but by chance. They might
also make a will, and dispose of their goods as they pleased. But if any of
them were found to live unchaste, she was openly carried with sad silence to the
gate called Collina, where being put into into a deep pit, she was presently
buried alive. These Vestals were first instituted by Numa Pompilius, or as some
write, by Romulus. Vestment. A garment or clothing. * Viands. Victuals.
Viaticum. Money or any necessary provision for a traveler. Viciate. To
corrupt, to defile. Vicegerent. A deputy, one that supplieth the place of an
other man. Vicinitie. Neighborhood. Vicissitude. An interchangeable course of
things, now one way, now an other. Victime. A sacrifice, a beast offered in
sacrifice. Victimate. To offer in sacrifice, to kill and sacrifice. Victor. A
conqueror. Victorious. That has gotten the victory. Videlicet. To wit, that
is to say. View. The print of the foot of a fallow Dear in the ground.
Vigilancie. Watchfulnes. Vigilant. Watchful. Vigill. The eeue or day next
before a great festival day. It signifies also a portion of the night divided
into four equal parts, the first Vigill began at six of the clock in the
evening, and continued till nine. The second Vigill began at nine, and
continued till twelve. The third was from twelve till three. And the fourth was
from three, till six of the clock in the morning. Vigor. Strength,
liveliness, force. Vigorous. Lively, strong, lusty. Vilify. To make base.
Vilitie. Baseness. Vindictiue. Reuengefull, or apt to revenge. Vintage. The
time of year when wine is made. Violate. To offer violence, to corrupt or
defile, to transgress or break a law. Violation. An offering of violence, a
breaking. Viper. A venomous serpent in some hot countries lying much in the
earth, having a short tail, which grateth and makes a noise as he goes. They
are of a yellow color, and sometime red. The male has but one tooth in every
side, but the female has more. It is written that when they engender, the
female biteth off the males head, which he puts into her mouth, and that the
young ones do gnaw the dams belly, and so kill her to get forth the sooner.
Virago. A stout woman of manly courage. Virginal. Of or belonging to a Virgin.
Virilitie. Man's estate. Virulent. Poisonous, deadly, infectious. Visible. Which
may be seen. Visibilitie. The ability or power of seeing. Vital. Living, or
appertaining to life. Vitiate. To corrupt or defile. Vicious. Full of vice,
lewd, wicked. Vitriol. Copperas: It is of a middle nature between stone and
metal. Vituperate. To reproach, blame, or dispraise. Vituperation. A blaming,
a rebuking. Viuacitie. Long life, liveliness. Vivification. A quickening, a
reviving. Ulcer. A sore, or botch. Vlcerate. To make sores or blisters to
arise. Vlcerous. Full of sores. Vmbilike. The Navel, the middle part.
Vmbrated. Shadowed. Inaccessible. Vnapprochable, which cannot be come unto.
Unanimity. One consent of mind, concord, agreement. Uncouth. Strange.
Unction. An anointing. * Uneath. Scarce, hardly, with difficulty. Unguent. An
ointment. Uniform. Of one form and fashion. Uniformity. One form and
fashion. Unintelligible. Which cannot be understood. Union. A joining together,
concord, agreement: also there is a precious pearl so called. Unity. Concord,
agreement. Universal. The whole, all in general. Universality. The whole
state, all in general. Insatiable. Which cannot be filled or satisfied.
Vocabularie. Of or belonging to words, which consists only of words. Vocal.
Of or belonging to the voice. Vocation. A calling, or course of life that one
is called to. Volant. Flying. Volubilitie. The quick turning of any thing:
inconstancy, changeablenes. Voluntary. Willing. * Voluper. A Kercher.
Voluptuous. Given to pleasure, wanton. Voluptuousness. Pleasure of body,
wantonness. Vomit. To cast, to rid the stomach. Voracity. A devouring.
Votarie. He that makes a vow, or binds himself by vow. Vowell. A letter
which makes a perfect sound of it self, as a, e, i, o, u. Vrbanitie.
Courtesy in speech or behavior, civility, gentlnesse. Urgent. Which urges
or compels a man to go about a matter. Vreters. The water pipes or conduits
by which the urine passes from the kidneys to the bladder. Vrim. An Hebrew
word, which the high Priest of the Jews wore with the word Thummim, in the
plaits of the Rational upon his breast: Saint Hierome interprets it,
Learning. Urine. Water of man or beast. Vrne. A box, or little vessel. Vtas. The
eighth day following any term or feast. Vtenfils. Necessaries belonging to a
house or ship. Vtility. Profit, commodity. Vulgar. Common or much used of the
common people. Vultur. A ravenous fellow, a cruel Cormorant. Vuula. A little
piece of flesh in the inmost roof of the mouth, which sometime hangs loose
downward, and hinders from speaking and swallowing the meat.
W
VVAife. Goods that a Fellon flying, leaves for haste behind him, which
commonly are forfet to the lord of the soil, if the right owner be not
known. Waiue. In our common law it signifies a woman that is outlawed. *
Wanger. A male or bouget. * Warison. Reward. Wariangles. A kind of ravenous
birds. Warpe. The thread that goes in the length of the cloth. * Wastell
bread. Fine Cimnell. * Waymeming. Lamenting. Weasand. The throat or passage
into the stomach. * Ween. To think. * Welked. Withered. Welkine. The whole
compass of the heavens: the Firmament, the heavens. * Wend. To go. Whilke.
Which. Whilome. Whilst. sometime once, or in time past. Whirlebone. A round bone
upon the knee, which may be moved up and down. Whorlebat. A weapon having
plummets of Lead tied to the end of it. Wile. Deceit, craftiness. Wily
Subtle, crafty. Wisard. A Wise man, a Witch, a cunning man. Withername. When
he that has taken a distress carries it to such a place, where the Sheriff
may not make deliverance upon a a Repleuine, then the party distrayned may
have a Writ to the Sheriff, that he take as many beasts, or as much goods of
the other in his keeping, till that he has made deliverance of the first
distress, and this is called a Writ of Withername. * Wone. Store. * Won. To
dwell, or abide. * Woodshaw. Woodside or shadow. Woofe. That thread in weauing
which goes a cross. Wooldriuer. He that buyeth wool in the Country, and
carries it away on horseback to sell it again. Wrethe. The tail of a wild
Boar. Wrecke. The loss of a-ship at Sea by drowning: also goods so lost and
cast up on the sea shore. * Wreme. To compass about. Wright. A Carpenter. *
Wimple. A Kercher. Wyuer. A serpent much like a Dragon.
X
XYloaloes. See Lignum Aloes. Xylobalsamum (...) sweet wood out of wh^^^ balm
droppeth. See ^^^me.
Y
YAr^^^^. In some place^ ^t is 20. Acres of land (...) some, 24. and in some*
^0. ^^^row. Fearful, fainth^^^ted. Also there is an ^^^be so called, good to
^^op any bleeding. Yate. A Gate. Ycleeped. Called, named. Yearne. To cry and
bark as Beagles do at their prey. * Yede. Went. Yexing. Sobbing. Yore. Long
ago, of old. Yuca. An herb in India, wherewith they use to make bread.
Z
ZAnie. A foolish imitator to a tumbler, or such like. Zenith. That part of the
heavens which is direct over our head. Zephirus. The Weste wind. Zodiake. An
imaginary winding circle in the heavens, under which the planets are still
moved, and in which the twelve signs are placed. Zone. A girdle In
Cosmographie, it signifies a division made of the heavens into five parts,
whereof one is extreme hot, two extreme cold, and two temperate. The hot Zone,
otherwise called the burning Zone, is all that part of the heavens, which is
contained between the two Tropickes of Cancer and Capricorn, in which Zone,
continually the Sun keeps his course. The two cold Zones are under the two
Poles of the world, or within 23. degrees near them. The two temperate are the
Zones between the farthest extreme cold and the middle burning Zone. And with
these five Zones of the heavens, does the earth under, agree in heat, cold
temperature.
FINIS

