The whole Sum of Christian Religion, given forth by two several Methodes
or Forms: the one higher, for the better learned, the other applied to the
capacity of the common multitude, and meet for all: yet both of them such, as
in some respect do knit them selves together in one.

By EDMUND BVNNY Bacheler of Divinity.

It is God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness. who also has
shined in our hearts, to give forth the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

See thou (therefore) that thou have a pattern of sound doctrine: that thou
may always be ready, to give an answer to every man, that asks thee a
reason of the hope that is in thee.

2. Cor. 4. a. 6. 2. Tim. 1. c. 13. 1. Pet. 3. c. 15. Jmprinted at London by
Thomas Purfoote, for Lucas Harison and George Bishop, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard. 1576.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God, his very good Lord and Master, Edmunde,
by the providence of God Archbishop of Caunterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan.
SInce the time THAT IT HAS PLEAsed the goodness of God, that in our days
Religion or the Faith of Christ should be delivered from the chains of
darkness, and come forth again with her wonted glory, many of the learned and
godly disposed have done their endeavor, to make so plain a way as they could,
to bring the same to the knowledge of others. whose endeavor and godly purpose
although I gladly grant to be such, as is to be of all men not only received,
but also with all duetifull reverence embraced: yet for the truths sake must
I needs add thus much thereunto, that although diverse of the^ have done very
well, yet none has so absolutely performed the same in all respectets; but
that others also may think of helping it forward; and put to their hand to do
what they can. Not that hereby I charge any of the^ with error in some points
of their doctrine: but only that I find not in then so good a Method or manner
of teaching, as on the behalf of all beginners were generally of us all to be
wished. And although I may seem, in the judgment of some, to make this
complaint without any cause: yet have I the warrant of mine own conscience,
both that there is cause vrge^t enough; and that the complaint ought rather to
be made on the behalf of the truth, the^ to be suppressed in some private
respect. Of this am I sure, that so long as we tie our selves to the very steps
or footings of others, neither can we use the fredome of our own pace, neither
do we admit the benefit of a better way.

Upon which occasion, as I have been a while since persuaded, that I could not
better bestow my labor, to the use of those that would gladly have a ground of
religion, then if I should both contract and interpret the institutio^s of M.
Calvin (who in my mind has come nerest to his purpose: saving only that he
is partly to long, but especially to hard for a beginner); and thervpo^ set in
hand with the work, and accomplished the same so well as I could: so have I
since that time, upon further advice of that matter, me self co^triued the
Sum of all religion (so far as it has pleased God to prosper the same in my
hands) much shorter, and playner in my opinion, the^ the other by any means
might have been brought unto, following the order that he has left us. and
because the methods or forms of compacting religion together that yet are
forth, are not (as I take it) come to that perfection that were to be wished:
therefore have I straightly followed none that yet is extant; but coasted over
to the au^cie^t high way, so nere as I could aesteming religion so precious a
thing, that no man ca^ bestow his labor better, the^ by adorning it so much as
he can; and by making it plain unto others: whether he shall do it by the
level of those that have written before him, or by some other way of his own;
so long as in substance he never swarueth from the ancient truth.

The misliking that I have of those other Methodes that yet are given forth, is
not so absolute as some may take it: and, in effect, is no more but this. Of
Methodes we have two principal sorts. The first is the same which goes by
the order of the Cathechisme: the other, that which the learned do (for the
most part) follow, in their Institutions or common places of Christian
religion. That kind of Method that follows the order of the Cathechisme,
does in deed disclose unto all, after their manner, what is meant by the ten
Commandments by the articles of the Faith, and by the Lords prayer: and by
occasion thereof, does also discourse of all Religion, in such sort as
occasion there is offered. But seeing that the matter of these does very much
mingle together, the treatise that shall go by their level, must needs come
short of a perfect Method. Nevertheless, they do very well geeue forth the
true sense of the chiefest points: and because these three things before
recited are in a manner the only books of the common people, they are no doubt
in that respect to singular use, for that they open those things unto them.
That which the learned do commonly follow in their Institutions and common
places, does come much nerer to the nature of a just method; but yet does not
fully attain thereunto, so far as I am able to judge: many of the^
discoursing but of particulars, not sufficiently tied together; and the others
following so much the received order, that they also do not aptly enough sort
every member to his propre place. examples vvherof I could give ynovv, but that
so doing I might be tedious. my conclusion therefore shall be this, that although
both these sorts are to very good purpose, and do very well disclose unto us
the very substance of Religion: yet for the Method or manner of delivering the
same; they have yet so far missed the mark that they shot at, that there is
row me for others to stick betwixt them and the mark, who soever ca^ hit it.
and although it be an easier matter to find that there is winning, the^ to shed
those that are gone before: yet what should let, but that every one may do his
devour, howsoever it shall fall out in the end.

As for me self, although I know my skill and judgment to be but mean; yet me
think I have espied a couple of ways, whereby religion might be given forth
some what more orderly the^ yet it is. And because it has pleased god to bring
the same to my knowledge, I thought it my duty to impart the same unto others,
not only that I be not found, to have hidden my tale^t: but also to the end,
that such as God shall better furnish, may put to their hands and help it
forward.

The former of those is somewhat higher, and such as does not easily come under
the capacity of the common sort: for that throughout the whole discourse, it
does ever set by man, and gathers all, whatsoever is done, and the glory
thereof only to God. which kind of teaching, though to us it be harder, yet is
it (in respect of the cause it self) a great deal more natural, and has his
vvarrant in the word of God.

The other is of an easier kind, and passes after the same manner, that the
holy ghost we see does use, when he submits his speech unto us, and applies
his talk to our capacity: ever directing the talk unto man, and making him as
it were an agent in all those matters that belong thereunto. which kind of
teaching the common sort do account more meet for them.

Howbeit in my mind it is much better to have both together, the^ to have
either apart by it self. First because the nature of the cause is such, as
that either of them does often give a very good supply to the other: and each of
the^ so linketh with other, that they cannot well be parted a sunder. Then also,
because al men are not always beginners, but many pressing on to further
perfection. some coveting no more but to crepe below: others desiring to get
somewhat higher. some having so weak a sight, that the sun best likes the^,
when clouds intercept the brightness thereof: others lo^ging to have those clouds
break, and to enjoy all the whole brightness, that the su^ne is able to yield
the^. which two no doubt were the very causes, that the holy Ghost has so
tempered his speech, that each of these may ever have whereon to feed.

In which respect, thus much I have to desire of both, that either of the^
taking what is their own, or prepared for them, they content them selves that
others also may have their portion. Those that are stronger, and able to walk
the harder way, may so bestow the^ selves if they list. But yet in the midste
of their strength, let them remember, that some others are vveake: and so not
be grieved, that the vveake also have to serve their turn. So on the other
side, the vveake must know, that others are strong. if them selves may have
what is meet for them, they may not repine, that others have a lesson beyond
them. Let every one take his own to him self: the rest let him gladly leave
unto others. Let God be good and gracious to all: let him provide asvvell for
the one, as for the other, let him soiourne on the earth, with those that are
not able yet to rise higher: and let him take up those with him, whom his
vvisdome has framed meet thereunto.

These causes therefore moving, I have thought good to couple these two
methodes together, to set them abroad, and to present your Grace therevvith.
and, if it please you, the one for your farewell from the Sea of York: the
other, I say not, so much to the welcome unto the other (let those do that,
that have gained thereby) as that, although your Grace be now removed from us
of this your former province of York, not only in person, but also from the
peculiar charge thereof: yet that your Grace would ever be ready (as we
nothing doubt but you will) to do us good as occasion shall serve. How good
oportunities your Grace has to do good unto many, as others do very gladly
behold them; so your self also may so far unfold them before your eyes, as
best may encourage you ever to take the advantage of them. First how much God
has done for you, and what good gifts he has laid up in you, to the use of
his Church here with us, it is a thing better known, then that it needs
any report of me. But this may I say, that her Majesty that occupies the
place of God next under him in these her dominions, has not been behind in
clothing with honor these good and commendable graces of God: aduauncing you
to so high estate, that using the opportunity thereof, your Grace may do very
much good, not only where your proper charge lies, but also throughout the
whole Realm. The favor of the people (generally of the better sort) so
embraces the same, that whence your G. departure is made, thence do we hear
co^playnts of loss: whither the advantage is fallen, there do we see tokens
of joy, and a countenance of a gain obtained. These are no small helps of
doing much good. when wisdom and zeal are both at home to order and govern
all things aright; whom the authority and favor of the Prince does so well
accompany and commend unto others; to whom the people are so well affected,
that they gladly like of, and embrace his doings: that man may do much; and
is well encouraged, not to spare for any pains to be doing good. and as on the
one side it would be offensive to the justice of god, and therevvithall provoke
over grievous a vengeance, to ouerslip such oportunities, when as the Church
so much does need, that they should be taken: so on the otherside, it is a
thing so welcome unto him, to see al his talents put to such use, especially
when the case does more specially so require, that he crowns the same with
everlasting peace.

God be thanked, that we have the Gospel among us, so well as we have it: and
I pray God we may long enjoy it. Nevertheless, whosoever examineth the matter
more narrowly, me think, he may find, that the Scepter of Christ's kingdom,
is not so advanced among us as were expedient: but rather in some ^hinges
caused to stoop, and restray^ed more, then is seemly for the ma^estie of it.
Religion with us (I fear) may be in case of that plant, that for a ^hile
having harbored Jonas, was stro^e^ to the ha^t with so naughty a worm, that
quickly it withered, and left him again to the heat of the sun. Sure I am,
that there is work enough to be done, to occupy all. Let those therefore
that si^ at the stern, take heed least if now while they dravve to the
Rocks, they correct not their course, it be ere long to late for them to wish
they had done it

God continue and increase his grace toward you: give you eyes, ever to se^
what is to be done; strength, and readiness, to perform the same: now to
repair the ruins of Zion, and at length to rest in heavenly Jerusalem.

Your Graces most humble servant in Christ Edmunde Bunny.

The Preface to the Reader.
Having already made declaration of my purpose and meaning in setting forth
these two Sums of Christian Religion (as appears in the Preface that goes
before) I shall not need; gentle Reader, to recite any part thereof again unto
thee. Nevertheless some things there are, wherein it shall not be amise, to
direct my pen a little to thee.

First of all therefore I nothing doubt, but that some there will be, that will
hardly like, that Religion should be given forth after the manner of these two
Methodes. Because the former does so precisely put by man for any agent in
those matters, and gathers the whole glory of all only to God: the other,
lying within the bounds of the ten-Commaundementes, will seem unto them to be
no more but only some part, in no wise the whole by any good order. Thou
therefore perhaps wilt look, that I should join hereunto some defense of my
doing. and in deed I do not deny, but that, not only the eyes of the common
multitude do as yet remain so dazeled, that they are not able to perceive
either of these very plainly: but also, that certain hostile minds cannot in
any wise be content to yield to the former of them, or, in these matters of
spiritual glory, that they should have none, and God should have all. Howbeit,
because I will not be tedious to thee, I will hold of my hand from that kind
of labor, and say no more but this only: that whenever it shall please God
to open the eyes of the one, and to kill the cankre of pride in the hearts of
the other, then shall they also plainly perceive, that they have here no cause
of misliking. Till that time, we leese but our labor, if we look that the
blind should see; or that the proud should freely give all glory to God.

An other thing, wherein I thought it somewhat needeful to content thy mind,
is to prevent a doubt, that otherwise might happily arise unto thee. For I
think thou will look, that I should have furnished my Margent with so
convenient a number of Scriptures, as were sufficient to confirm the truth
that is here set down: as it is the manner of many to do. as touching which
matter, thus much I say, that I do account such dealing, then especially to be
needful, when we deliver such points of doctrine, as are hardly received of
every one. For who seeks proof in a matter that is apparent enough? Seeing
therefore that in these two treatises I write no new thing, but only gather to
an other Method such things as others have already sufficiently proved; and are
now (almost) of all men received, that have a good will and love to the
truth: I wot not, how I might have given an account unto God, if either now
I had bestowed my time therein, when I have other more needful business; or
should have kept in this that I have done, until ^eysure might have served to
have done the other. Nevertheless my purpose is, if it shall please God to
give me strength and opportunity thereunto, and if none other shall well
prevent me, not only to ^estowe some usual number of quotatio^s on it: but to
geeue the attempt, to reduce the whole scriptures thereunto, and the effect of
every membre thereof to some part of it. that so it may be a more profitable
method to those that shall study it more exactly. But as I am not able as yet
to do it (especially till I have gotten some other things out of mine hands)
because I know the work will grow to a great labor, and require no small
quantity of time thereunto: so I do not think it best in any other respect, to
be so hasty for that matter. that so I may win a further time of deliberation
of the method it self. trusting that time, and the help of others, shall at
length bring it to better perfection: and so make it meter to be furnished with
quotations. In the mean season, since now I have not opportunity to do it as
I would, or to mine own co^tentatio^, I can be very well content altogether
to hold off my hands from it. if any others to their private use shall in their
reading, sort the scriptures and other good authors thereunto, on their
behalf, and to their encouragement, thus much will I not stick to say, that,
vnless^ I be far deceived, their pains shall return with so happy increase,
that ney^her shall they ever repent them of it, nor ^asily find, how they
might otherwise ^aue bestowed their labor to much better purpose. And
whenever a student ^hal find any part of al scripture, or of any ^ther good
author, or any example or te^timonie of others, that can not aptly be ^educed,
to some part of this method, ^hen let him be sure of one of these two, that
either the method is imperfect, ^r else him self does not understand ^t.
which sorting of the Scriptures ^hervnto, will also he a very good way to
^erfect the method. For so sone as we ^ght on any place, yt we can not perceive
^o come within the compass of it, then fin^ing out where it ought to be, we
may be ^olde to conclude, that in that place it (...) imperfect. But so far
as me self can ^et see, I am not advised of any part of Scripture, that may
not very aptly be re^uced to some part or other of this me^hod. Neither could
I content me self ^ith it, till I had brought it to that order.

And therefore to speak something more ^irectly of the use of it, I trust that
the use thereof may be double. whereof the first is universal, or common to all
that have no^ yet atteined to sufficient knowledge of the Christian faith. And
that is this; to geu^ the^ a general sight of all religion, and to lay in them
the foundation of it. For my hop^ is, that whosoever shall well digest these
two little books (a thing we may see of no great labor) he, by the help
thereof may be so well grounded in Christian religion, that there cannot
lightly be moved a point of any great importance, but that he shall be able to
go to the truth thereof and to see the place whence it does arise to the
better confirmation of his judgment therein: as also it shall ease a good part
of ye pains in reading ye holy scriptures, yt otherwise would be found
therein, whosoever shall first be grounded in ye whole body of religion, either
by these, o^ by any other to the like effect. The other use hereof is more
special: but such as is of good importance. It does apperteine to all those,
that specially shall give themselves to ye study of Divinity. For whosoever
shall so do, they shall find it a thing very needful, not only to have a
notebooke, whereinto they may gather the flower of their reading, and the
titles thereof prescribed unto them: but also to have those titles so to be
devised and disposed, as may be aptest to comprehend the thing that they seek.
and therefore many have labored to gratify students in this behalf: and in
that respect have deserved very well of the^. As touching which matter, I for
my part do not see, how a student of Divinity might better furnishe his
note-booke with titles, then to set down the members hereof in order as they
follow: doing the same with aduisement in choice, and leaving to every one
such as a proportion of space, as he shall guess yt matter will need. No matter
of diffcultie (to speak of) to such as know what a note-booke means. And my
trust is, yt there are not many matters of importance, not only, not ^n the
scriptures, but also, not in the doctors, or in other good writers,
apperteining to the substance of religion, that may not aptly and naturally be
referred to some such title as is contained in these two books.

For the better accomplishment of this matter, as also for the better
provocation of al others to search out the sense of these little books, I have
annexed hereunto such a demonstration thereof and so lively a representation to
the eye of ye principal parts, and of every particular point contained therein,
as I was able to devise in so small a rome, expressing ye former book under ye
form of a tree root; and the latter by a couple of other trees. The former
have I made the root, for that it is by nature the very ground work of the
other: as may appear in the opening of the first commandment. In which
Root every principal Master-Roote does express the chief and principal
parts of the whole discourse: as also the lesser do betoken inferior
members, even to the last and least of all. And as for the Trees, my meaning
is this. the one of them represents such things as are forbidden by the
commandments, and therefore is called the tree of death: the other, such
things as they require, and therefore is called the tree of life. The root
aforesaid, diversely taken, is root unto both. For the ignorance of those
things yt it contains, is root unto the tree of death: and the knowledge of
them, the root unto the tree of life. And therefore have I somewhat bared ye
roots of both these trees: yt (so far as ye discourse thereof does lead) every
one may see it to be the self same root, yt before is described. This also I
have provided both in the Root, and in the trees, that there be neither mo,
nor fewer divisions or branches of any, then there are several parts or
members in the discourses that belong thereunto: nor otherwise growing or
issuing forth, thou the divisions or members of these discourses do arise one
upon an other. As it shall be an easy matter for those to epsy, that will
confer them and the book together: so that ever they remember to keep this
order, (which I have continually observed) to begin at their left hand in
all Divisions, and to go to the right.

Which that they may the better find out, I have not only left my trees
without either fruit or leaves (as in deed the tree of life has seldom any
store of fruit among us: and then why should not the tree of death be so much
the rather spoiled of this?) that so the Branches them selves may better
appear how many they are and how they arise: but also have added certain
letters both to the Root, and to ye Trees to bring ye demo^stration and the
books together. that so, not only those that will more diligently study
religion, may sooner epsy what titles to choose: but all others also, that will
but read these books with aduisement, may better perceive, what points
religion gives forth unto the^ to be considered. But herewithall must they
know, that this demonstration does not extend to the Preface, conclusion, or
marginall notes in either of the books: nor to those things yt in the text are
added to the second, third, fourth, and fifte commandments, in ye latter
book. Otherwise there is not (to my remembrance) any one member of either of
these books, that has not his proper demo^stratio^, either in ye root, or in
one of ye Trees: and that in such sort, as I trust will be welcome to the
diligent reader, for the light yt it does carry with it. As also I dare be bold
to say thus much, that if any of those that love imbrodering or nedle work,
shall think good to borrow their flowers or Branches hence, sure I am that
the best of us all may here have inow, to put in napkins to wipe our noses.

As for the songs that are set hereunto, they do so resemble ye matter it
self, that every one may see my meaning therein. The former of them is made
upon ye song of the Angel that brought ye shepheardes word of ye birth of
Christ, giving ye glory of that our rede^ptio^ only to God: a thing that
comes very near to the argument of the former book. The other goes upon the
sense of ye ten-co^mau^dements, and does more precisely comprehend the effect
of ye whole latter book: teaching the way that we should walk. Seeing therefore
yt sometimes we are naturally bent to refreshe our selves with song, and some,
not only are desirous to sing by themselves, but also covet to have others to
sing with the^, and therwithall to have such recreation as the harmony of
music can bring thereunto (which is very much to most men's nature) whereas
before I had a note of a friend of mine in four parts, which well agreth to
this kind of making, and is not unworthy of the author of it, I thought it good
to set all those parts down to the one, and to procure the like for the
other: that, if so it shall please thee, thou also may have the use of them.
and if thy heart shall go with thy song, then dare I promise thee, that god him
self shall like thy melody.

These (gentle Reader) are the things that I had to imparte unto there. These if
thou take with the books them selves, thou have therwithall my whole meaning.
Of what account it shall be with some others, as yet I know not, so also I care
not. But whosoever shall give forth better, I shall be as glad to receive that,
as I was ready in the same respect to publishe this. God give us al grace, to
be thankful to him for this great light, that it has pleased him to command,
to shine out of darkness in these our days: and while we have it, to walk as
becomes the children of light. The night (me thinks) approaches near,
then shall we hardly be able to walk. Time must be taken, when time is offered.
for time will away. And so in the Lord I bid thee heartily well to fare. this 20
of April. 1576.

Certain other aduertisementes to the Reader, of some notes to be set down,
and some faltes and points to be amended, before that he read the book it
self, so to make him to understand it the better.
In the first book.
Fol. 1. b. lin. 4. put out, by. 2. a. in the title where as it is Son, it
should be Father. 2. b. li. 21. for Thirdly, that he is etc. say, Thirdly,
that in the Godhead, etc. as it follows: and so strike out those 3 lines
betwixt. 3. a. li. 14. for Fifthly, that etc. say Fourthly, and last of all,
that. etc. line 21. strike out Sixtely and all that follows to alteration,
four lines in all. fol. 8. a. lin. 22. make a full point at him. 10. a. li. 14.
for his, put in Gods. 10. b. lin. 17. for the, put in these. lin. 21. put this
point, at murder, and remove that part of the parenthesis, to life in the next
line. 11. a. li. 5. and 6. thus point it, to god, he etc sin: yet etc 15. a.
15. point it thus, adoption; 15. b. point it thus, li. 9. Jews, lin. 11.
estimation: lin. 13. ensuing: Fo. 16. a. for world, point it world: 17. a. in
the title for the holy Ghost put ye Son: for 19, put 17. 18. a. for fo. 20.
put fo. 18. li. last, for them. put them: 18. b. lin 21. put our after
touching. 19. a for 17. put 19. and in the margent against the sixte line, thou
must put a note, that that treatice which lasts till thend of the third
page, comprehends ye whole discourse of the sconde book. 19. b. li, 1, for
of ye Son, put of God the father, the Son, lin 11. for man on the. etc.
put, man, and all other creatures in heaven, earth, and hell on the one side;
and al fantasies of our own brain on the other etc. 20. a. for 18. put 20.
21. a. lin. 12. put, works it in them. lin 18. for inward: put inward; 22 b
in the margent for cases put causes. 24 b lin 8. put, of ill; lin. 12. nothing;
25. a. put them (when 26 a lin. 21. you may put this note in the margent. Fol
19 a b 20 a. But afterward more largely in the second book, in the Tree of
life. b. against the fourth line you may set this note in the margent: Which
also are more largely set forth in the next book in the Tree of Death. lin.
15. for put by man etc. say, put by either the creatures of God, or so much as
their own fancies, that so etc. 27 a. lin 2, for selves or other, put selves,
or others b. lin. 20. for setting, put settling. 29. for 31. put 29. b. The text
of Scripture apperteineth not to that only place, but to ye whole book, and
should have been set last of all.
In the second book.
30. after the text of scripture, in such books as books as have not the
place quoted, put in Eccle. 13. d. 12. 13. 31. for 29 put 31. b lin 21, for
Region, put Religion. 33 lin 9, for selves; point it selves. b lin 7, spring:
34 a lin 10, at It req. begin a new section. 20. Saints: 21, selves, 34 b,
in the title, The first Commandment. Which falt thou must amend once more
in that commaun. and twice in the second. 35, b, lin, 1, for mankind on etc.
put in, mankind, and all other creatures on the one side; and all conceits of
our own, on the other, We give etc. In the margente read, mankind and all
other creatures on the one side, that others, etc. 39 b lin 6, for law, put
law; 40 a li 8 for as put and. blast line, for Eercises put Exercises. 43 b,
in the 12 line of the note put sense. 44 b, lin 6, put out in. 46 b in the note
lin. 24. read thus, nor to them neither, 47 b. lin 2. done: 49 a lin. for.
put: lin, 15, these. lin 16 this, lin, 23, for ben, put bent. 51, b, for rest.
put rest; 52, a, lin, 15, for, put. 53, b, in the margent, lin, 29, for both in
etc, put in, the Branches of both the Trees that bet. etc. 55, a, li, 4, for;
put: li, 5, for the second; put: 56, a, lin, 20, for: put. 62, b, lin, 24, for
L put l. 64, b, in the title for sixth put seventh.
A SHORT SVMME of Christian Religion under the consideration of the three
persons in the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Isa. 44. d. 24. Mat. 28. c. 19.

I the Lord do all things me self alone. Go ye therefore, and teach all
Nations, baptizyng them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost.

A short Sum of Christian Religion, under the consideration of the three
persons in the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
AS it is very true that God only is the Lord, and the only doer or worker
of al: so may ye whole body of Christian Religion be given forth in such a
method or form, as that the whole glory of all may well be gathered only to
him. In so much that as there are three distinct Persons in the Godhead; so
likewise may the effect or sum of all Religion be distributed into three such
principal parts, as may very fitly be sorted to every of them: and so, the
whole glory of all, left only to God. And those principal parres of Religion
which we mean to attribute, one to the Father, an other to the Son, the
third unto the holy Ghost, are; First the secret purpose of God; or, what he
should mean in ordering this world and all things therein, in such sort as he
has: secondarily the bringing forth of that his purpose, or the manifestation
of it: thirdly by the working of the same in others; directing, or framing all
things to the due accomplishment thereof.

The Person of the Father.
Unto the Person of the Father I attribute the secret counsel, or intent, or
purpose of the Godhead, as touching his ordering this world and all things
therein, in such sort as it has pleased him to ordeine them. Which purpose of
his was (as the sequel thereof, and many places of scripture declare) to make
known, not man, or other creatures; but only him self. As touching which
knowledge, or making of him self known, there are threee principal things
to be considered. First, what manner of knowledge of him it is, that he would
give forth of him self. Secondarily, in whom he would be known. Thirdly, and
last of all, by what degrees he would have this knowledge of him to be in man.

As touching the first and principal of ^hese three, we have to consider that
it is not that absolute, or most full and perfect knowledge of him, which can
be in none ^ut only in him self: but a certain me^iocritie, or such as
might come under ^ur capacity. For that he meant not to give forth that
absolute knowledge of ^im in the workmanship of this world, ^t may
sufficiently appear, for that, neither is the workemanshippe of this world a
sufficient demonstration of it: neither are we of that creation or nature, that
we are able so much as to conceive ^t. That I deny the workemanshippe of ^his
world to be a sufficient demonstra^ion of it, the reason is this; because it is
^f so small continuance, that it can not ^herin express the eternity of the
God^ead: and of so small compass, that it can ^ot therein express his
Vbiquitie, or vn^easurablenes.

That I deny us to be of that capacity tha^ we are able to conceive it, the
reason is, because we can in no wise be able cythe^ in the shortness of our
days to measure his eternity; or in the narrownes of our understanding, to
comprehend him tha^ is Infinite.

The mediocritie of this knowledge tha^ I speak of, or such as may come vnde^
our capacity, may for a further playnenes sake, be distributed into these
three parts the first of such things as most properly concern the person of
the Godhead. the second of certain other excellencies which are somewhat
further of from the substance of his person. the third o^ such things as
concern his will and pleasure.

Of the first sort are these, First that there is a God. Secondarily, that
there is no other but He alone. Thirdly, that he is not of any set compass,
bodily shape, o^ earthly nature: but Infinite, Spiritual, and Invisible.
Fourthly, that in the Godhead there be three distinct Persons. whereof the
first is of the Father: under which we consider the Godhead as he is in his
own nature, not yet being made manifest, or declaring him self. The second
of the Son: under which Person we consider the self same Godhead made
manifest, or opening him self to be known of others; who therefore is called
the Speech, the Image, and the Son of the Father. The third of the holy
Ghost: under which we consider the self same God, but working in others, that
the Father may be known in his Son, or (which is the same) that the
Godheade may be seen in his Image. Fiftely, that these three Persons are but
one, and the self same God: for that there is none that can express the
Godhead, or bring to pass that he be known in others (which are the
properties of the Son, and the holy Ghost) but only God, and the selfsame
which in other respect is the Father. Sixthly, or last of all, that the Godhead
is Eternal or Everlasting: that is, has ever been without beginning; can never
have any ending; neither yet any change, or alteration.

Of the second sort, that is, of those other excellencies, that are ever
somewhat farther of from the substance of his person, and yet can never be
separated from the Godhead, are very many: but yet are such, as may very well
come under one chief and general title; which is of his most excellent
majesty, or incomparable glory. and this inestimable glory of his appears
two manner of ways. First, because him self is incomprehensible: then because
he is of unspeakable goodness. Incomprehensible he is found to be, for that he
is, not of bodily shape, earthly nature, or set compass; but invisible,
spiritual, and infinite. Good also he is two manner of ways. first in him
self: then toward others. In the former respect he is sound to be good,
for that he is full of all perfection: most holy, most mighty, most rich,
and euer-lasting. His holiness is such, as that neither is therein him self
any steyne, or possibility to fall thereinto: neither can he like of any sin
in others; neither in the worse, not in the better. As touching his power,
there be two things to be considered. how great or large it is: and, what
are the branches thereof. The largeness of his power appears in these four
points. that he made, mayneteyneth, and guydeth, what so ever creatures there
are in heaven, on earth, or in hell: has all things ever before his eyes,
whether paste, present, or yet to come; whether open, or hid: has all powers
subject unto him, in heaven, earth, and hell: and him self is almighty, or,
so fully able to do what soever stands with his good pleasure, that worthily
he may be termed (as in deed he is, and none but he) the only Lord, or
Master of all. The branches of his power, are these two. his unsearchable
wisdom in diuising, and ordering of all things: and his invincible strength
in bringing to pass, that every thing falls out, as his wisdom before
ordained. His Riches or treasures are most inestimable, for that him self
alone has all good things in his own hands: whether Bodily, or Ghostly;
momentaine, or eternal. Eternal or euer-lastinge needs must he be: for
that he never had any Beginning; never can have any ending; neither yet is
subject to any change, or alteration. As touching his goodness in the other
respect, that is, as it issues forth toward others, there be two principal
branches thereof: his justice, and mercy. Unto his justice it does apperteyne,
that he is Ielous on his own behalf: and Righteous toward others, that is,
true in his sayings; upright in his judgments; in his vengeance severe with
convenient moderation. Unto his mercy do apperteyne these three: his patience
or suffering, when the offense is either great, or else deserves speedy
vengeance; his free pardoning; and all other his favorable dealing. His
favorable dealing stretches to all, but by diverse degrees: very much to all
inferior creatures; much more to all mankind; but most of al to his chosen
people.

Of the third and last sort are such things as apperteine to his will or
pleasure. which will of his has a double consideration. First, what it is in
it self? which is for the most part unknown unto us: but yet is the rule of
absolute equity. Then what it is toward others, that he would ordeyne to
guide according thereunto. which also is declared to us two manner of ways.
First Summarily, or briefly: then more at large, or more particularly.
Summarily his will is set forth unto us in the Ten-Commaundementes, and in
other abridgementes, or short sums. Which kind of teaching he sometimes
uses, both that it may the better appear what is the effect of particulars;
and better remain in fresh remembrance. More at large he instructs us in
the same, throughout all the Scripture besides: and that to this end, that we
may the better understand those short sums; and know how much matter
there is in them, if they be rightly understood.

As touching the second, that is, in who^ he would be known, we have to
consider, that this glorious knowledge of him can never go out of him self,
until he have made wherein it shall shine; and him self cast thither, or
thereupon, or thereinto rather the beams of his glory. And we find that his
purpose was to have two sorts of creatures, in whom this knowledge of him
should be. Some there should be, that should have it but printed on the^: and
so should be in steed of books unto others. as all other creatures are
besides man: whether they be Celestial; Terrestrial; or Infernal. Others there
should be, that should not only have this knowledge imprinted on them: but also
should have the same in such sort invested or grounded within them, that they
should have power, both in them selves, and in others, to behold the Godhead.
Of this sort (keeping within the bounds of ye workmanship of this world) we find
As for Angels and Devils, although we know, that those also are ye creatures of
god and perceive ye in those god would have a certain knowledge of him: yet we
do not find them to apperteyne to the workemanshippe of this world. So are
they to us, but part of those our aforesaid books.
none but mankind alone. But as he would have this knowledge in man, so it is
therwithal to be known, that in some (to whom it should be to less use, who^
we term Reprobates) he would have it but in very imperfect, and confused
manner: in others (the chosen I mean, yt should reap thereby everlasting
blessedness) he would have it more soundly, and in greater perfection.

Concerning the third and last, that is, by what degrees his purpose was to
have it in those that should have this knowledge in them after the sounder and
perfecter manner, we find his purpose to have been, that in this world they
should have it more darkely; and yet in great certainty without doubting, and
ever increasing to a clearer light: in the world to come they should have it
more clearly; and in as great perfection and glory, as possibly may be in
such a Creature.

The Person of the Son.
Unto the Person of the Son we attribute, the bringing forth of this his
purpose, out of the bosom or secret counsel of the Father; or, in what sort
it is made manifest. as touching which we have more specially to consider
these two things: first, what is that work wherein he has made him self
known: then, what are the principal parts thereof.

Concerning the former of these two, it is to be known, that we have to cast
our eyes but to the workmanshippe of mankind, and of all other Creatures that
are ordained to the use of man. For though it should be so, that he had many
other worlds besides this of ours, and many other works as fair, and fayrer
then this: yet this only, and none other is ordained to us, wherein he will be
known unto us.

Concerning the other, that is, to find out what are the principal parts of
this manifestation of him self, this is a large and a worthy matter. And the
parts thereof are these three; the beginning: the continuing: and the finishing
of it.

That we may the better see in what sort it was begun, there are four
principal things to be considered. First, how he made the world and all
things therein, before that ever he made man. Secondarily, in what sort he
made man. Thirdly, how he dealt with him, after that he had so made him. Last
of all, how God having finished all that his work, rested the Seventh day,
and hallowed it.

The first of these is, not only an example of his Prouidende, providing for us
before that we were: but also, an argument of his goodness, preventing us;
because thereby we perceive he loved us, before that ever we could deserve any
jot of his kindness.

The second leads us to consider, what kind of one he made us, first in
Body; then in Soul. As touching our Body or earthly nature, he made man of an
homely piece of earth. Which is, a sufficient proof of Gods power: a
preservative against pride that might arise when he should behold the
excellencies wherwithall shortly after he should be indewed: and a figure of
the excellent work of Redemption, that afterward should be raised, out of
the base estate of the flesh, or manhood of Christ. The woman he made of a
ribbe taken out of Adams side being cast asleep. Which is, a singular
prepratiue truly to love: and a figure of the Church of God, which is, and
can be none other, but only it, which is raised out of the passion of our Adam,
Christ. As touching our Soul, he endewed both the man and the woman with
notable excellencies (so to make them a more lively image of him self) as may
appear by these four things. First, that he made it to endure for ever.
Secondarily, that he furnished it with a notable light of knowledge, not only
in these inferior matters of the world, both natural and civil: but also with
whatsoever apperteineth to the true worship of God, or to his spiritual
kingdom. Thirdly, that he made him clean without any steine of sin; and
fully able to fulfill the Law that afterward was given, or, to follow the
rule of perfect righteousness; in deed, word, and thought. Last of all, that
he left him in so perfect freedom of his will, that both he might still
have done good, till of his own accord he had turned aside: and yet, that
when as it should come to pass, that needs he would, he should both leave the
way of righteousness and peace; and fall away to all iniquity, and to a most
wretched estate. so, both to keep him self without steine, when man should
fall: and to make a way to the declaration of his Justice and mercy.

The third, that is, the consideration how he dealt with man after that he
had made him so excellent a creature, rests in two principal points.
first, how he does before prepare him to bring forth the force of those his
excellencies to the keeping of his Commandment, when it should be given:
then, how he gives the commandment it self. Concerning the former of
these, there are three points that belong thereunto. For first he gave him the
use and soueraintie of all other creatures, that he might the rather, never
turn aside his obedience or service to them: and have therewithal both to
provoke him to the service of God; and also to mainteyne him therein.
Secondarily he gave him to understand, that he was a most blessed creature,
both by the place wherein he set him, that pleasant Paradise; and especially,
by the Tree of life that he left him, which Tree of life was left unto him to
feed on, as a Sacrament of his blessed estate: and that, in the midste of the
Garden, ever to be before his eyes. Out of both which, man might have gathered,
that he was marvelous much beholding to God: and that, although now he
stood, yet in process of time he might fall. Last of all, he fensed him
about with the exercise of bodily labor; giving him charge to keep and dress
the garden. out of which also he might have gathered, not only that labor was
a needful exercise for him: but also that he had need to preserve him self
in the estate that God had given him. As touching the latter of them, that is,
the giving of the Commandment it self, we have to consider three things.
First, what the Commandment it self was: that is, to forbear one tree,
that it pleased God to exempte. which was but obedience: and that, but in a
small matter. Then how he directs him to keep it. which he does, both by
denouncing unto him most certain, and extreme wretchedness, when soever he
should break it: and therewithal interpreting the name unto him, that
otherwise might have been very dangerous. Last of all, seeing that there is no
service of God, till a commandment be given; and as yet this commandment
was not given till this present, that here is an other argument, that the
goodness of God ever preuenteth our deserts.

The fourth and last, which is, how he rested the seventh day, may first of all
be a figure of our rest in Christ: in this world begun; finished in the
world to come. Secondarily, it is an argument or pledge, that we are
sanctified, not by our selves, or by any other: but only by the Lord him self.
Thirdly, it ought to be an example unto us to do the like: so to take time; to
the consideration of Gods works; and to other godly meditations. Last of al,
it may be, that God thereby would signify, that he did then hold off his
hands; and gave room and leave to the Temptor.

Having seen how it pleased God to begin, now have we to seek out, how
he went forward with the same, or the continuance and process of the matter,
or of this work so begun. In which there be two principal points to be
considered. first in what sort he brought to pass, that man fell away from
his innocence, and happy estate. then in what sort he brought in the work
of redemption, or ye remedy ordained before.

In the former of these, there are five special points to be considered.
First, what the estate of mankind became thereby. as touching which, we have
to know, that first concerning his Soul the principal part of him, his
natural gifts were not clean lost: but very much decayed. as for his other
excellencies which we may term Supernatural, first his Immortality was
pouldred with eternal torments. and as for the rest, first them selves were
so clean lost, that for those points there remained in man's nature no
goodness at all. then also in place of the^ he had, for pefect knowledge, stark
blindness, and error: for ability to fulfill ye law, not so much power left, as
to think one good thought, but was fully replenished with all iniquity: for
freedom of will, most miserable bondage of ye same, and therein the power of
Satan wholly advanced. Then also to come to the body, it became most
miserable. partly in this world, both in it self, by disfigurings,
distemperature, diseases, griefs, and natural death; and by ye curse that was
cast on other creatures, that were for the use of man: but especially in the
world to come, being subject then to everlasting wretchedness. Secondarily, that
this wretched estate was from our first parents derived to all their
posterity: and three reasons may be given therefore. First, because they stood
for us all, to have and to lose, for us or from us, what soever was bestowed on
them. The^, because the sin was so great, that it could not be sufficiently
punished, unless it were cast on their posterity also: especially, if we cast
our eyes to the absolute perfection of his holiness and righteousness. The third
and last, because we have experience, that the said corruption is invested in
us. Thirdly, whether God were the worker of this their overthrow or not.
Concerning which it is to be known, first, yt he did it: and that it must
needs so be, for yt there is no other agent, or working power in all ye world,
but his alone. then, that he did it not immediately by him self: but by his
executioner the devil; and the ready inclination of man him self. Fourthly,
to what end he should do it. which was, to work forth ye purpose of the
Father; to show forth especially, both his just vengeance on those, whom he
would not vouchsafe to raise up again: and his mercy on those, whom he
would recover. The fifth and last is, to search out, how this work may be
attributed to God, and yet he not made thereby the author of sin. Concerning
which it is to be known, first of all, that all the works of God are so
righteous, and him self so well able to answer for him self, that neither
ca^ he do any ill; neither does he need our defense. Then also, that whereas
in all things that are done, there is a double consideration, one of the deed
it self; the other of the quality, or form, or manner of it: to distinguishe
betwixt the two, brings a sufficient light to the matter. so that ever we
attribute the deed it self, without any exception, to God alone (as in
murder) the bereeuing a man of his life: the quality, if it be good (as the
lawful putting a man to death for his deserts) to God also; if it be
indifferent (as in natural death) to the course of nature which God has
set: which notwithstanding ever is at the beck of God. If the quality be ill
(as unlawfully to take a man's life from him) and so might seem to streyne the
deed so far, that if the deed should be adscribed to God: he also should
be the author of sin, yet are these two things therewithal to be known.
First, that as it is the work of God, he ever has some other quality or
form apperteyning thereunto that is good. Then also, that the ill quality or
form of the ill deed, is not either eternal with God (because the diuill him
self the author of it, was him self the creature of God) or to him derived
from God at his creation (for that the goodness of God is such, as that no ill
can proceed of it: no more then darkness can come of light; of health, sickness;
of life, death, etc.): But of the devil as of his own, afterward obtained
because he did not abide in the truth. Sin being by nature but the decay of
righteousness: as darkness is, but ye want of light; sickness no more but the
want of health; and death no more but want of life. So that Sin might very
well first begin in him, when first he fell.

In the latter, that is, in the bringing in of ye remedy yt was before
ordained, there are three things to be considered. first, how he prepared
mankind to receive it before that fully he brought it in. then, how he brought
forth the work it self. thirdly, how he has ever since maintained and
advanced the same.

To begin with the first of these three, we find yt he did it diversely:
somewhat otherwise in ye first age of ye world, then in ye second. In the first
age of ye world (till the calling of Abraham) he did altogether (to speak of)
estraunge him self to the world: and yet therewithal gave notable tokens of a
reconciliation made in the secret purpose of God, and that the work thereof
should be accomplished when time should come. as touching ye estraunginge of
him self, we have to consider in what manner it was: and to what end it was
done. The manner of it appears in these three points. First, yt he drove out
of Paradise our first au^cestors, immediately after ye fall; and from the
fruition of the Tree of life. Secondarily, yt afterward he chose unto him no
one people or nation in all the world: but only a few particular men of diverse
families. Last of all, that unto those particulars also he did not give any set
form of religion, or manifestation of his will: but only delte with them by
the law written in their hearts; and by extraordinary revelation. The end, or
cause wherefore it was done, was to teach them how odious they were in the
most holy judgments of God. both to drive them from that natural heresy of
man, to have some good opinion of their own righteousness: and to provoke them
to seek for help by the way of mercy. As touching the tokens of the
reconciliation that I spoke of, we have in like manner to see, what they were:
and why he did vouchsafe to give them. Of those tokens there were two sorts.
some that insued immediately after the fall: and some that were found in the
process of time that followed. Immediately after the fall, he came to raise
them up again: sought them out where they were hid: put them in mind of the
cause of their misery: cursed the serpent for their sakes: promised them a
conquest over him: cast upon them but a gentle discipline, although their sin
were marvelous great: and made them garments to cover their nakedness. In the
process of time that followed in that age, he so blessed their act of
generation, that in convenient time the earth was replenished with people: gave
them things needful for their bodies: clothed many of them with notable
virtues, and political excellencies: and gave unto some, the most comfortable
seal of adoption. The end or cause wherefore he gave them, was, both to
comfort them against the bitterness of that estraunging of him self: and also,
by such fatherly dealing, the better to allure them unto him. In the second
age of the world, or in all that space of time, that was betwixt the calling of
Abraham, until the coming of Christ, the preparation that he used, consists
in four principal points. First, that he chose unto him one people, the
children of Israel out of all the world. Which is so to be taken, as that we
have out of the same to gather, that for all that time, as for any Church or
people of adoption, he had no other Nation, or whole Family (that we know of)
in all the world, but them alone: and yet that ever he had diverse particular
men of other Nations, whom he had secretly sealed, and sometimes joined unto
them, in their profession. And as for other favorable dealing, though he dealt
very graciously with others, also: yet was he ever most gracious to them.
Secondarily, by giving the^ a farther knowledge of whatsoever apperteyned to
the work of Redemption that was in hand, by that form of Religion which is
termed the Law; the Prophets opening and urging the same. as touching which we
have to consider, first, what was therein exhibited unto them: then, how he
did apply the same to their use. There were exhibited unto them a couple of
Couenau^ts. The one that if they should perform the rule of absolute
righteousness, to them in the Law prescribed, they should be able to live
thereby: or, which is the same, they should be able to stand in the judgment
of God, by the virtue of their own merits. The other, that forbecause no body
was able to perform it, therefore him self had provided him of an other that
should perform the same; and would send him into ye world when the time
should come: on whom whosoever should fully rest, and seek no further, they
should be able to stand by him, and by the virtue of his merits. He applied
the same to their use two manner of ways. First, by giving forth the rule of
absolute righteousness, and requiring the full performaunce of it: or else
letting them understand, that nothing should be able to stand before him. so
to chase them away from the opinion of their own righteousness, that natural
heresy of all mankind. Then, for that by the Prophets he both gave them to
understand, that there was an other way of salvation ordained (by the latter
Covenant); and that there was no other but it: and also by often renewing of
his promise did very well strengthen them, both against doubtfulnesse on the
one side; and against the impaciencie of long waiting, on the other side.
Thirdely, by the figures and shadows of the Leuiticall ceremonies: whereby he
did notably describe the Savior; and the whole work of Redemption by him.
Last of all, about four hundred years before that the Savior should come,
he did as it were provoke their appetite to covet him: both by giving no
Prophet or Vision unto them, as before he was wont; and by plunging their
State or Commonwealth in deep distress.

To come to the second, that is, the bringing forth of the work of Redemption
it self, there be four principal things to be considered. first, what time it
came in. secondarily, what kind of one he was, and must needs have been, that
should perform it. thirdly, how he has performed ye matter. last of all, how
comfortable his name is unto us. The time wherein he personally came, was the
latter end of ye second age, when ye fulness of time was come. so to perform
his promise to ye nation, before that they should be cast of from being his
peculiar people. Our Savior was, and needs must have been both God and man. It
behooved him to be god, that he might be the person yt were able to do
whatsoever apperteined to ye work of Redemption. It behooved him to be man, that
so he might be the party that only was chargeable, or that might lawfully do
it, which could be no other but only man. In which his manhood he had
experience of our infirmities of nature: but was never steined with any spotte
of sin. The performance of his work rests in two principal points. First,
that he has on our behalf sustained in his manhood, whatsoever weight of
vengeance was due to our sin: so to answer the Justice of God. and yet him
self perished not, as we should have done, for that he was able to cast it of
when he would. Then, that he has wrought on our behalf whatsoever
righteousness, or perfection the justice of God requires of those that should
be left into the kingdom of God: that so we might be able, by ye virtue of
his merits, to come thereunto. As touching his name, the matter is this, that
to our comfort, and to the strengthening of our faith, he would be called
Jesus Christ. Jesus being an Hebrewe word, and signifying a Savior: Christ
being a Greek word, and signifying Anointed. Which Annoynting (being an
old ceremony of the Leuitical Law, fulfilled and abrogated by Christ) does
in him signify, that he was both ordained of God, to be our savior: and also
furnished with ability to save. And therefore that he is in this sort (most
effectually) anointed our Priest, Prophet, and King: that of his fulness we
might all receive whatsoever were needful. that is, that he being our
Priest, might make the atonement for ever betwixt God and us: he being our
Prophet or Teacher, might instruct us in all things for us to know: he being
our king, might govern, both within us by his grace, or spirit of adoption:
and without us by his power in all things else, that nothing hurt us.

The third remains, that is to find out, after what manner this our Savior,
having finished all for the which he came into the world, in this third and
last age of the world has ever maintained, and notably aduau^ced this work
of Redemption. wherein there are three principal things to be considered. The
first is, that notwithstanding diverse lets or hindrances that were in the way:
yet it pleased God to advance the publication of this work of Redemption in
such sort, that in time convenient it was known and received throughout the
world. and so, all nations invited to the kingdom of God: or, the kingdom of
God set open, not to one nation now, but to all believers. The lettes that I
speak of, were especially three. The nation of the Jews: their Temple, and
ceremonies yet remaining in estimation. Most bitter Persecution for a long time
after, immediately ensuing. And, when it was ceased, most grievous variaunce,
and Heresies, that did then arise out of the peace and quietness of the
Church. The second, that after this, when the people began generally to be
weerie of the word of life, it pleased him, so to avenge the contempt thereof
throughout the earth, that (as since we have found) he did in deed darken
this fair day marvelous much. in the East, and much of the Southe, by the
abomination of Mahomet: in the West and much of the North, by that most
Idolatrous vanity of the Church of Rome. But yet he ever reserved unto him
self a sufficient number of witnesses, to testify the truth to the wicked
world, even in the corruptest time of all, or whenever the power of darkness
most prevailed. The third and last, that now to the comfort of all his
people, he does gloriously advance the Gospel again, to wake us up against
his coming: and every day, more and more does notably purge it from the ruste
and cancre, that corruption of time had brought unto it; and mightily enlarges
the beams of the truth, to lighte^ al, in all things nedeful.

Having so declared, both in what sort he began, and after what manner
hitherto he proceeded in this manifestation of himself, now have we to search
out, what must be the accomplishment, or finishing of it. Concerning which, he
has given us before hand to understand, that when the time appointed shall
come, then shall be the day of general judgment, wherein he will finishe the
whole work. Here therefore have we particularly to consider these five
principal things. First, what is ye time appointed, then, who they are that
must come to judgment. thirdly, in what manner the judgment shall be. fourthly,
what kind of execution shall follow. last of all, how Christ shall then
resign or give up his kingdom to his Father again.

As touching the time that I speak of, first of all we have certain
likelihoodes, that it is like to be now very nere. Then also, we have this
undoubted knowledge, that it shall be, so sone as God shall have brought in the
full number of his chosen people; and finished all things else that he had in
his purpose to do.

Those that must come to judgment, are, even all, and every one, without
exception of dignity, sex, age, or such like, that ever were, are, or shall be
hereafter to that present day. al which (by yt time yt the whole account be
made) may come under a couple of sorts. The first is of those that are
departed before that time. who must all, whether their souls were in
wretchedness, or in blessed estate, have their own bodies restored to them
again. to the end, that as Soul and Body have communicated together in such
things as they have done: so may they both together have their judgment. The
other is of those that shall live at that present. who shall, first suddenly be
changed and made such, as those are, that are risen again: and then with the
rest receive their judgment.

As touching the manner of that judgment, we are given to understand, that,
our Savior shall come in great glory: the heavens and the earth shall pass
at his presence: all mankind shall be divided or sundred into a couple of
several parts: and the hearts of all being plainly opened, he shall
pronounce, everlasting joys or blessedness to the one; everlasting torments
or wretchedness to the other.

The execution that shall be done, shall be according to the sentence pronounced.
the one sort cast down, with the devils to hell: the other taken up, with
him self to heaven. The resignatio^ of his kingdom is, that so having
finished all, he shall from that day forward rule no more as mediator (because
he has finished that work): but ever notwithstanding as he is God, and equal
to the Father.

The Person of the Holy Ghost.
VVto the Person of the holy Ghost we attribute the working of his purpose
aforesaid in us, and in all other creatures of the world, as his wisdom
knows to be most agreeable to that his purpose, and to the bringing forth of
the same to his own glory. Of this working of gods holy spirit, I find two
principal sorts. whereof the former is that general working of his, whereby
the universal society of all things in this world continues in such sort
as we see that it does. The other is that whereby he is occupied in some
special kind.

Of that his general working withal, the principal actions are, that
whatsoever there is in the world, from the highest to the lowest, that does he
first uphold and maintain, until the time appointed do come that he will
have the same dissolved. Secondarily he does direct, guide, and order the same;
that all things fall out, not at adventure: but as God him self in his secret
purpose has ordained; as well for the time; as also for the manner of issue.
Thirdly that he does unite, couple, or knit together all in one, with certain
bands of mutual society, so far as the kind or nature of every one may
bear. and that on the needful behalf, both of the whole; and of every membre
or part.

Of his working with some special kind, there are three principal sorts. The
first and principal is the same that he bestows on his chosen or peculiar
people. the second, that which he casts upon the reprobate, or castaway
seed, the third, the same whereby he works in all inferior creatures.

As touching his working with the chosen, there are five principal things to
be considered. first, what the work it self is that he works in them:
secondarily, how far he works in them the same yt he works: thirdly, by
what degrees he does it: fourthly, by what power: last of all to what end or
purpose.

To find out what the work it self is, we have to consider how he works
in them. first as they are men; then as they are his elect nombre, or
choyceflocke.

As they are men, his work in them is no more, but that which consists in
those three points of his general working with all: that so he may make the^
in those things also, convenient members of their common society with all
things else. Which is that he, according as he thinks good, does uphold and
maintain them; guide and order them; and knit them together as behooves.

As we are his choyce-flocke, he bestows on us an excellent work. For seeing
that we are ordained or chosen to be an holy people, a peculiar inheritance, a
kingdom of priests, and citizens of the kingdom of God, therefore does he
frame us to be such as may become so holy a calling. And yet in such sort,
that first as touching natural corruption he leaves the same wholly unto us.
wherein notwithstanding is to be considered, that as by the force of it we both
ever are given unto sin; and also much and often offend: so on the other
side, does he so mightily bridle ye same, that it does not reign in us, or is
not so strong against us, that it prevails to our destruction. Then as
touching the spiritual working of his grace that we may be decked with
convenient beauty, and such excellencies as our selves have not, he does both
lay as it were the foundation thereof; and also rayseth up a goodly building
upon the same. The foundation that he lays, is that he does effectually
call us, or begette us again, or renew our minds. which consists in two
principal points. first, that he does notably translate us from the barreine
and corrupt moulde where before we griewe, the original corruption of our
nature, and that, not against, or without our wills: but with hearty
misliking of our former reprobate ways. Then, that he planteth us in Jesus
Christ: or graffeth us into him, or into his flesh, or manhood by mistical
union. The building that is laid upon this foundation consists of many
notable virtues. whereof some are Capital, or more general: others more
special, or such as arise out of those others. The general virtues are these
first, a good and a sound knowledge of the Son, and the holy ghost then, a
settled and a confirmed judgment (in such things as concern our salvation)
forthwith arising out of this knowledge. thirdly, a fervent and a singular
love of God, for yt we find him to be such as he is. fourthly, to settle our
selves wholly in him, both for ye whole work of our redemption; and for
whatsoever else we need. last of all, such obedience, humility, or pliablenes
of mind, as yt putting by, both man one the one side; and all other creatures in
heaven, or earth on the other side: we do a kind of spiritual Homage, or
sovereign service to God, giving over our selves wholly to him, to do
whatsoever we shall find that he requires. Those other virtues that are more
special, or go more directly to some point of our duty, are of two sorts or
companies. such as do concern that part of our duty that the spirit of
God in us works forth to Gods own person: and such as it works forth
toward the common society wherein we live. Of the first sort there are
three. First that we worship him, not as our selves, or others think good:
but only as him self has appointed. The second, yt the same manner of our
worshipping be not counterfeit or dissembled: but sincere, or inwardely such,
as outwardely, we do pretend. The third, that to the end we may attain
thereunto, we be not either altogether careless of the same; or, but after a
common manner bent unto it: but that we be so earnestly set therevppon, as that
we do very diligently use such things as lead thereunto. Of the other sort
there are likewise other three. which are, inwardly to bear such a love or
affection to all and to every one as that first we unite or knitte our selves
together to all and to every one, in such sort as God shall appoint: whether
they be Strangers, unworthy, or our enemies. Secondarily, yt we study the
preservation of all and of every one. and that not only Generally, that in all
things it be well with them: but also more specially in these three points,
his wedlock, Substance, and good Name, last of all that we so content our
selves with our own estate whatsoever it be, that we never covet to step
into any others.

As touching the second point, that is, how far he works in them these most
excellent graces, we have to consider these two things. First, yt in ye person
of Christ all these things be most absolutely wrought: not one jot of them
all wanting. so that as we are in him, we have most perfect righteousness
wrought: if not in us; yet for us, and on our behalf. Then, that as we
consider our selves aparte (and yet as we are in Christ) it pleases God to
work in us, not all those things above rehearsed; nor any great perfection
that comes near thereunto: but only a certain mediocritie that is very
far distant in every point (even in those whereunto we come nerest of all)
from the perfection that here is described. and this, in some more, in some
less, and for the most part marvelous little. when he works these things
more abundantly, it is to show forth how little ye corruption of our nature is
able to prevail against ye power of his grace, whensoever he is disposed
effectually to work thereby. when he works these things so sparingly, it is
yt ye glory of his free gift be less darkened by the goodness that he should
work in us.

Concerning the third point, that is, by what degrees he works these things
in the chosen or faithful so far as it pleases him to work them, we have to
understand; First of all, that he gives the motion, or brings to mind that
which he is disposed to work in them. Secondarily, that he kindles in them a
liking of the same. Thirdly, that he trameth in their wills a consent and
readiness to do it. Lastly, that he works in them: or, brings forth that
motion, liking, and readiness to do it, to the deed it self.

As touching the fourth point, that is, by what power he works the same, we
have to consider, that there are a couple of kinds thereof: the one inward:
the other outward. That which is inward, is the principal: and is that
merciful power of God, which also is called the grace of Jesus Christ. which
having in us, mystically, the like function, office, or nature, as the blood
has with the body, or the sap with the tree, does so make us fruitful in
such things as are acceptable and welcome to God. That which is outward, is
the same that he puts forth in those Means, and Helps, whereby he works.

Concerning the means that I speak of, we have to consider these two
things. first, what the means are: then, how it pleases the holy Ghost to
work by them. The means are four, the word; the Sacraments; the Church;
and Government. Under the word is to be understood, principally the holy
Scriptures, that is, the Old, and the New Testamentes: then also whatsoever
other instruction agrees therwithall; whether it be Public, or Private.
Public instruction is that which is given in open audience, or by public
authority: as ordinary Service, Homilies, Sermons. Private is that which
passes in mutual conference, between one man an an other. The two
Sacraments, or Pledges, or Visible witnessinges of the Covenant of Adoption
made by god with all true beleuers, are Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Whereof
the one does witness that we are made clean, and graffed into the body of
Christ: the other that we have in him all manner of fullness, or sufficiency
for our Redemption. The Church is no more, but the society or fellowshippe of
those that do profess the faith of Christ, and therefore ever have among them
his word, and Sacraments, in high estimation. which, as we esteem it one of
the Means, whereby the holy Ghost works in us such things as apperteyne to
our Redemption, is The meaning of this limitation is this first that we take
not into this account that part of the Church which is Triumphant, because
they are severed from us, and we have no warrant that in these things it
pleases God to help us by them: but Militaunt, or those that are in their
warfare here on the earth. Secondarily, that we do not discontent our selves,
if we can not lay before our eyes the universal or whole Church at once, for
that so we could have no dealing at all with them: but content our selves with
the National Church that is about us, for that we may have dealing with it,
and by it (if it be such as is described) be knitte to the whole. Thirdly,
that this Church need not be that which is termed invisible, consisting
only of the truer members, which are known only to God, and not unto us:
but that we need no other whereby the holy Ghost should work, but only that
which is visible, or those that profess Christianity, whether it be truly,
or not: for that by their outward profession, the holy Ghost can well enough
bring us to the truth.
Militaunt, National, and Visible. Of Government there be three sorts. First,
that which is established in every State, and is distributed from the
fountain three manner of ways, and so takes the name of Ecclesiastical is ye
which is occupied about the adnaunceme^t or mainteinaunce of religion. Civil
it is, as it is occupied in cases of common equity, in a peaceable and quiet
state. Martial, or armed it is, as it sees to ye defense of the commonwelth,
by land, and sea, at home, and abroad.
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Martial. Secondarily, that which is merely
spiritual, and is taken up in any congregation of their own accord, and is
called discipline, or the use of the keys. Wherein are three principal things
to be considered, the form, the force, and the use thereof. Unto the form
apperteineth the consideration of these three. First, of the persons in whose
hands it is: which are of the better and godlyer sort; and such as them
selves can like of to be ruled by. Secondarily, by what they govern: which
is, by no manner of civil correction: but only by the wise and right applying
of the word, and the Sacraments, when it is done by the ordinary minister;
otherwise, only by applying the word in mutual conference. Thirdly, what
direction is left the^ to lead them aright: which is no more, but sometimes
their own conscience or judgment; sometimes certain canons, decrees, or rules
agreed upon among the^ al. The force of it is, neither to wrap offenders in any
civil and worldly vengeance; nor to reward well-doers with any civil and
worldly recompense: but to pearce into the conscience of both; and to show
them in what case they stand before God in spiritual account: and so
restrayneth, not the wilful, or such as have not the fear of God; but only
the willing, and such as have the touch of conscience. The use of this kind
of government is. not only when the other government established is against
Christ; but also when it goes not in all points with the sincerity of the
word. and therefore, needful in all states; and ever in ure with the godlyer:
and yet not going against the other government established; nor any thing at al
prejudicial thereunto. Thirdly, that which we see in every good family: which
we may term domestical. Whereby parents govern their children,
Scholemasters their scholars, and masters their servants.

The manner of the holy Ghostes working by these is this. By the word he
directs us in all things needful. For as touching doctrine, he riddeth us
from all damnable opinions: and teaches us all needful truth. In manners, he
does so cleanse us from ill, that also we loath it: and does so frame us to
goodness, that he inclines our hearts toward it. By the Sacraments he
confirms unto us the Couenaunte of mercy, and establishes our faith in the
same: so to reap the fruit thereof. by Baptism, that we are made the children
of God, and knit unto Christ; and that ever our hold therein is renewed, as
need requires: by the Lords Supper, that we have plentiful Redemption in
Christ Jesus; and that we seek it only in him. By the society that we have
with the Church, because him self does most presently rule there, and has
the Scepter of his kingdom among them, by it he brings us to some proof.
For besides the benefit of the word and the Sacraments which we find
among them; he otherwise gets us forward, and carries us up to further
perfection. for that, by their good example he frames us to do the like: by
their government keeps us in order: and by their consent, company, and
fellowship does much stre^gthen us in many things. By those three sorts of
government, he restrayneth our unruly nature: incourageth us in the way of
godliness: keeps us in, that we break not out: orders us in good and
seemly manner: and leads us the way to everlasting peace.

Concerning those helps that I speak of, we have in like sort to see,
First, what they are: then, how it pleases God to work by them. The Helps
are three: Watchinge, Fasting, and Prayer. Watchinge is, diligently too keep
our souls, or to see to our selves. and therefore to be well aduysed of these
two things: what may hinder us in the way of godliness; and what may
further us in the same. Fasting is either Public, or Private. Public is
either a general mourning in the time of some Calamity, either appearing, or
present: or else a general endeavor or styrring up of our selves when some
weighty matter is too be attempted. Pryuate is either Ordinary, or
Extraordinary. Ordinary fasting is, all our whole life to live soberly, or to
use great moderation, partly in things needful: but especially in such things
as apperteine to delectation. Extraordinary is, when we have found our
selves more prone unto sin, or flow to goodness then we were wont, then to
avoid the occasions of ill, and to use the occasions of goodness. Prayer is the
lifting up of the hearts unto God, when we have sensibly found, our selves to
be nothing. him only to be all in all.

The manner of his working by these, is this. By watching, that we do epsy
what things may hinder us; what things may further us. By Fasting that avoiding
the occasions of ill, we avoid the ill too: and using the occasions of well
doing, we also win to the thing it self. By Prayer he gives, (as need
is) from above, that which we have not here beneath.

The last point of his working in the Chosen is to consider, to what end or
purpose he so works in them. Which is, not to show forth how good they are
in comparison of others (as though by their goodness he were first provoked so
to deal with them; when as in deed these were at the first no better then ye
Reprobates): but to show forth, as mete it was, him self only. that is, his
secret purpose as touching them: the depth of his mercy: and many other
points of his Glory.

The second point of his special working, is the same which he bestows on
the Reprobate. As touching which, we have in like sort to consider, first,
what he works in them: secondarily, in what quantity or measure he works
the same: thirdly, by what degrees he works it in them: fourthly, how he
does it, or by what power or means: last of al, to what end or purpose he so
works in them.

To find out what he works in them, we have to enter into a double
consideration. first, what he works in them as they are Men: then, what he
works in them as they are Reprobates.

As they are Men, and so a part of our common society so long as they live,
he works so in them, as that they may be conueniente members of our
Society, every one as he is ordained to be: whether it be to lead them to
that which they should do; or to restrain them from that which they should not
do. and therefore mainteineth, unites, and guides them also.

As they are Reprobates, and so not ordained to have any portion with Christ,
but to go on their own way to everlasting perdition, the effect of his
working with them rests in two principal points. that is to consider, what
goodness on ye the one side he works in the^: and on ye other side, what
iniquity of their own he works forth out of the^, or brings to light.
Concerning the goodness that he works in them, we have to know, that first as
touching any true godliness, such as shall be accepted with God, he never
planteth them in Christ, nor translateth them from the corruption of their own
nature. and so consequently, never works in them, either those Capital
virtues before rehearsed: or those other Branches that should proceed out of
the same. So that these, all their whole life time, be their years never so
many, have not one jot of true godliness in Deed, word, or Thought. Then as
touching a secondarie kind of goodness, he does in deed both bring to pass, yt
whatsoever they do (even their most wicked sins of all) shall some way or
other do good unto others, or be to very good use how soever it fall: and also
works in them two sorts of things, that are to good commendation unto them
in the eye of man. First, diverse worthy and notable qualities: either Natural,
or Civil. Then also certain apparances or likelyhoodes of those spiritual,
and sound graces that he works in the chosen; or those graces imperfect or
maimed. as namely, a certain kind or likeness of our union with Christ: a
certain kind or show of those Capital virtues; knowledge; soundnes of
Judgment; Love; Faith; and pliablenes of mind: and a certain kind or show
of al those other particular virtues, that are before sufficiently recited.
Concerning the other, that is, what iniquity he works forth out of them, or
how he hardens them in their own corruption, or leaves the same forcible
against themselves, we have to consider, that first as touching the Capital
vices that are contrary to those Capital virtues before set down, he
hampereth them in their own snares, or sullieth them with their own
uncleanness. which is, first, a deep Ignorance (and that very wilful) of God
the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost. Secondarily, a co^fused judgment,
and a monstrous opinion in all things. Thirdly, an inward and a natural
lothing of God, so far as they dare; or are not restrained by earthly
benefits. Fourthly, Infidelity, or, not soundly to rest in him. Last of all,
an invincible frowardnes or hardness of heart, or a proud loftines of mind:
utterly refusing to put by man, and other creatures, that so they might give
them selves wholly and only unto the Lord: and ever coupling all together in
such sort, that although in their fond fancy they esteem them not all alike;
yet do they both make those others no better then Idolles, and wickedly rob
God of his glory. Then as touching a couple of. Branches that are contrary to
those before recited, and do grow or spring out of those Capital vices?
first, as touching those that go directly against the honor of Gods own
person, to worship him as themselves or other like them selves, will: to have
very saucy or vnreuerent hearts before him: and to be careless of sound
devotion. then, concerning the others that do apperteine to the common Society
that god has set among us, disdainefully to despise the same, little rogarding
how notably they are inuired thereunto: to have no care of preservation, as in
general, so likewise particularlye, neither of their neighbors wedlock; nor
of his substance, nor of his good name or estimation: and ever to be
disco^tent with such present estate, as it pleased God to cast upon them.

The second point of his working with the Reprobate as they are Rebrobates,
is to find out, in what quantity or measure he works forth this their
iniquity. which he does, in some more: in some less: in every one, and in all
together, as his wisdom has found most expedient, either to execute on them
his just judgments; or by them to exercise his chosen; or otherwise to do
his will and pleasure.

Thirdly, we have to examine by what degrees he works in them. which are all
one with those others that we spoke of before. For out of their own stoare he
styrreth up or brings forth, first the Motion: secondarily the lyking:
thirdly a Readiness to do it: last of all, the Committing of the act it self.

Fourthly, we have to consider in what manner, or by what power or means he
works this same in the^. which also has a double consideration. Inwardly he
does it two ways. partly by the ministry of Satan: and partly by their own
redines to ill. By both which he deals with them two manner of ways. The one
is, by making strong or forcible upon them their own natural corruption,
giving them over to be lead thereby, as before is described. The other is by
setting them (as them selves also weigh thereunto) in those shows or shadows
of sound excellencies before recited (as if they were the things them selves)
till their destruction come upon them before they be ware. Outwardly,
instrumentally, or in respect of the outward action he does it by two points
of their own corruption. The one is the great contempt that they have as well
of those ordinary Means, the Word, the Sacraments, the Church, and
Government: as also of the Helps before recyted, Watching, Fasting, and
Prayer. The other is that high and immoderate estimation that they have of
deceiptfull grounds: which are naught else but Flesh and Blood, or an arm of
Flesh. as the ouer-lashing opinion which in these days a number of them have
of their own judgment, the wisdom of man, Antiquity, Universality,
Doctors, Councels, Succession of Bishops, Tradition of elders, Church of Rome,
Peter's faith, and such like.

Last of al is to be seen, to what end he does so work in them. which never
is, either for the sins sake to help forward sin; or to bring upon them
other iniquity then them selves would willingly fall into: but ever to bring
upon them, in the way of just vengeance, the fruits of their own ungracious
ways; to execute his own righteous Judgments; and to show forth his
patience or longe-suffering, and other points of his glory besides.

The third and last point of his special working is the same whereby he
deals with all inferior Creatures ordained to the use of man. In which
(considering that which is said already of his general work withal) we
have but these two things to consider. first, what is the manner of his working
in them: and then the end whereunto it tends. The manner of his working in
them, is either by the common course of nature which he has already set or
appointed to every one: or by some Extraordinary or secret power, besides the
course of nature; or else clean contrary thereunto. The end whereunto this his
working tends is, either to do that whereunto by course of nature those things
are ordained: or else to do some extraordinary thing otherwise then the course
of nature leads them unto. Which lightly is, either to the help of the
afflicted: or to the punishment of malefactors: or to the setting forth of
Gods glory.

The Conclusion.
SO we see, that as touching the whole work of our redemption, or whatsoever
good thing is wrought in the chosen, although in the time of darkness we have
taken much to our selves, and ever by nature covet so to do in these things
above all others: yet does it all, and every jot apperteine unto God. For
first, as touching that part of it, that is attributed to the Father, we see
very plainly, that man can have nothing to do with it. The election or purpose
must needs be of God alone: no jot of it can any way apperteine unto man.
Then, as touching the second part, which was the working forth of that his
election or purpose; that must needs be attributed to the Son: and is such
a thing, as can not in any wise come under the fingering of man. Last of all,
concerning the third part which was the working of the same in us; that is of
such a nature, and so far passes the strength of flesh and blood, that no
part thereof can properly be attributed to man but only unto the holy
Nevertheless, although there is no good thing at all wrought in us (be it
never so little: even to the least thought of all) but that in respect of the
substance of it, or doing the same, does only apperteine to the Spirit of
God, as to the only author thereof: yet diverse things that do apperteine to
this last part, God does in his word (after a sort, or in some respect)
entitle to man as namely, first, because they are wrought in us, as in the
shoppes or working houses of the holy Ghost. secondarily, because the holy
Ghost does ever first frame our wills to go therewithal. last of all,
because we shall have the reward that apperteineth thereunto by the promise
of God. And yet not so, that he betrayeth his own glory, wrongfully giving the
same to whom it does not apperteine (being ever ready, if so it be taken, to
challenge it wholly unto him self): but only, either to our comfort, for that
so he gives us hope of Retribulation or reward: or to our encouragement, for
that so giving us the name to have done somewhat, or giving us the praise of
the deed, he does allure us with better chiere to go on forward.
Ghost.

Of him, and through him, and for him are all things. to whom be glory for
ever. Amen.

Romans 11. E. 36.

A SHORT SVMME of Christian Religion under the consideration of the
Ten-Commandementes.
There is none end of making many books: and much reading is a werines of the
flesh. Let us hear the end of al. Fear god and keep his Commandments:
For this is the Whole duty of man.

A SHORT SVMME of Christian religion under the consideration of the ten
Commandments. The general discourse of all together.
THat piece of scripture which commonly goes under the name of the ten
Commandments, as is written in the twenteth Chapter of Exodus, from the
beginning of the second, unto the end of the seue^tienth verse, may well be
divided into a couple of principal parts. whereof the former is the Preface, or
fore-speache unto the Commandments: the other the Commandments them selves.

In the Preface, I am the Lord thy God: which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage, we have to consider two things: to whom
he speaks; and what it is that he says unto them. Concerning the former of
them, it is no more but this: that literally he speaks to the Israelites
only: Implicatiuely, or, in sense and meaning, to us also, and to all the
faithful, or to all Christians that have been since in all ages. Concerning the
other, first in plain words he does not only say or affirm, that, he is
the lord our God: but also proves ye same, for yt, as he brought ye Israelites
literally out of ye land of Egypt, the house of bondage; so has he mistically
in in like sort brought both them and us out of perdition, from the power of
the devil under whom we should otherwise have been: a more wretched bondage
then any ma^s heart could ever conceive. Then, besides his plain words he
seems to implie, first for his own part, that He is such, as may very well
command us; and we such, as ought by good right obey him: so to make plain
unto us before hand, that if he shall now give or prescribe unto us laws of
religion, it is no more then he may lawfully do. then for all others
whatsoever, that they have no authority to prescribe us any laws of religion;
and, if needs they will, yet need not we obey them, nor may if we would:
because they are not able to challenge that kind of duty by any such title;
and are not able truly to say, I am the Lord thy God. etc.

The Commandments them selves may in like manner be divided into a couple of
principal parts: setting the first by it self: and all the rest likewise
aparte by them selves, but (in this respect) all coupled together.

The first Commandment does give forth the Sum of all Religion Generally,
or in few words compryseth the whole: bringing all to this one point: To
worship, or esteem as God, the only true God, and lyuinge Lord.

The other do more Specially entreat of the same: dividing this whole duty of
man, or this whole sum of sound Region into a couple of principal parts.

The former of them is that part of our duty, that immediately respects God
him self: or, the worship that he reserueth to his own Person. unto which,
the three next commandments do apperteine. Of which three, the first
declares what kind of worship it must be, as touching the nature, or manner,
or substance of it: that is, to worship him as he has appointed, and none
otherwise. The second teaches us that we may not rest in any outward show
of worshipping: but that we should inwardly have so notable a reverence of
God, as that such worship as the former describes, should ever be pouldred
with true sincerity. The last requires a fervent zeal, or an unfeigned and
an hearty desire to attain thereunto, by keeping holy the Sabbath day.

The other respects that part of our duty that concerns our mutual or
common society, or the order of our life one with an other. which also is our
duty to God: because he has enjoined the same; and we otherwise stand bound
to none but to him. Of which the other ^ixe Commandments do entreat. and
that in such sort, that, first they all considered together do plainly
im^^ly, that first we must have an inward Love, or an hearty affection,
both to the whole, and to every membre thereof: then that we must bring forth
the same three manner of ways. Whereof the the first is, that we knit or link
together one with an other, in such order, as it shall appear that God him
self from time to time does set among us: unto which apperteineth the fifte
Commandment. The second, that unto this knitting together by honoring each
other, we also bring with us a true and faithful care of preservation, to be
spread forth unto all, and to every one. This does God commend unto us two
manner of ways. first generally, or in few words comprising the whole charge:
whereunto apperteineth the sixth commandment. then more specially, or
descending to some particulars: unto which apperteine those three that next
follow. whereof the first, requires so good regard of every one, as that we
anoy none in their wedlock; or, that our selves walk not so inordinately in
that kind of vice, that it be, either the overthrowing or else ye daungering of
others: the second likewise, so unfeigned a care of our neighbor, that we
seek not wrongfully to get from him any thing that is his: the third in like
manner, so good aduicement on his behalf, that we ever seek to uphold our
neighbors good name and estimation. The third and last is, that we be ever
fully content with our estate: that so our common Society may be less
violated by any inordinate dealing to better our selves; unto which the last
Commandment does apperteine, and therewithal makes the way more easy to the
observing of all the rest.

The particular discourse of every one.
The first Commandment.
THe first Commandment, as before is declared, does give forth the whole
duty of man, or the whole sum of Christian Religion Generally: bringing the
whole, within the compass of these few words; To have no other Gods in the
sight of the only true and living Lord. But for the further opening of it, we
have to consider these two things. first, what it forbids: then, what it
requires.

It forbids, first the vice it self, that here is named: then also the
Root thereof, and whatsoever increase comes out of the same first, that so
this vice may out of it afterward more naturally spring, and last of all the
soil wherein it grows. The vice that here is named is, to have mo Gods, then
him that is in deed ye only God: whether they be creatures in deed; or but
fictions of their own devise. The Root is, and needs must be, the Ignorance
of God; the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Which what it is, as
touching the The particulars are but touched briefly in that which follows.
but largely in the former book, which goth altogether he^vpon.
particulars thereof, may be more conveniently gathered out of ye knowledge anon
to be set down. Out of this ignorance does spring that which is commonly
called unbelief, or hardness of heart, or impenitencie (when we take those
words more largely): which in effect is, first a co^fused and a wrong
judgment in all things that apperteine to sound Religion: secondarily, little
or nothing to esteem of God: thirdly, never soundly to rest in him, but still to
press on further, we wot not whither: last of al so stubberne and so froward
an heart, that refusing to submit our selves wholly to God, we huddle him and
others together, as we think good; and so give forth nothing but yt which is,
either plainly wicked, or else, under the show of holiness, as bad. The soil or
ground wherein it grows is the corruption of our nature. which corruption
reigns in all Infidels: not only with the worst; but also with those that are
the very best among them.

It requires, first the virtue it self that here is named: then also both
the Root out of which it comes, and whatsoever other increase grows out
of the same, before that this virtue can naturally spring: and last of all the
ground wherein it grows. The virtue is, to put by all others, and to have the
true God only to be our god. Those that we have to put by, are first all manner
of creatures. Whether Celestial, as Angels, or Saints: or of this world, as
our selves, or others, our own, or other folks excelle^cies, the sun, the
moon, beasts, birds, fishes, plants, images, and such like: or Infernal,
as the devils or ill spirits; and damned souls Then also all chimers, or
fictions, or imaginations, or conceiptes of our own brain: as when the
Heathenishe people of old imagined gods of the woods, of the hills, of dales;
and such like innumerable: and we of late (not far behind) imagined either
Angels or Saints, beyond the warrant of Gods word, to flee unto in time of
need: or when yet we imagine some things to be in our selves, or others to do
us good, which in deed are not to be found. all which things we have to put
by, and to press on, to give our selves wholly unto the Lord. The Root is
the knowledge of God; the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. as namely;
under the person of the Father, to know what the Godhead is in his own
nature, not yet come forth or uttered unto us. and therein more specially to
inquire, first of such things as most properly concern his Person: then of
certain other Excellencies that are somewhat farther of from the consideration
of his Person, or substance, and yet can never be separated from the Godhead:
last of all, of his will and pleasure. Under the person of the Son, to know
how the self same Godhead has declared or uttered him self to be known of
others. and therein, first in what sort he began this manifestation of him
self: secondarily, in what sort he did from time to time proceed with the
same: thirdly, in what sort it must be accomplished or finished. Under the
Person of the holy Ghost to find out in what manner the self same Godhead
works in others, that he may be known in his demonstration. and therein,
first how he works generally with all: and how more specially he works
with diverse kinds. first with the Chosen: then with Reprobates: last of all,
with all other inferior Creatures. Out of which knowledge does spring that
which sometimes is called Faith, sometimes Repentance, (when we take those
words generally) and by diverse names besides. which is in effect, first, a
sound, and a settled judgment in such things as concern true Religion: then
a fervent, and a singular love of God, for that we find him to be such as he
is: thirdly, to settle our selves wholly in him, and never to seek to any
other: last of al, so obedient, so humble, and so pliable a mind, in all things
to be at the beck of God, that putting by That by these means we are said to
put by ma^kinde on the one side, and all other creatures on ye other side, that
others may be more easily persuaded therein, they must learn to know, that
ye knowledge of god carries such a light with it, as that thereby we do in
deed very plainly perceive, that neither the one, nor the other of those are
meet to have any such honor. And first as touching mankind, if we
Mankind on the one side, and al other That by these means we are said to put
by ma^kinde on the one side, and all other creatures on ye other side, that
others may be more easily persuaded therein, they must learn to know, that
ye knowledge of god carries such a light with it, as that thereby we do in
deed very plainly perceive, that neither the one, nor the other of those are
meet to have any such honor. And first as touching mankind, if we
Creatures on the other, we give over our selves wholly to God, by a kind of
spiritual Homage or sovereign honor. the particulars whereof do more
properly apperteyne to the other Commandments. The ground, or moulde where
this knowledge will grow, is never any other, but either the former integrity
of our nature, which now is paste our reach for ever: or else, Jesus Christ,
by mystical union to be incarnate with him. which way only is left unto us
whereby we may be able to do any good.

should give this honor to any, it must needs be, our selves, or others. If it
be our selves, then is there at al no place of worship, which by nature does
never pass but from the lesser unto the greater. Which inequality is never
found betwixt our selves on the one side, and no more but our selves on the
other. If it be others, then must it be such as have already finished their
race in this present world: or else those that yet remain here on the earth. If
they be of the former sort, or have already ended their present life, first
they are not perfect men, for that their bodies and souls are sundred each
from other. secondarily, their bodies (a very few only excepted by special
prerogative) are yet in the bowels of the earth, not able to do the functions
of a body, but subject to rottennes, and to corruption. last of all, their
souls must needs be, either at rest and blessed (and then exempted from the
sense and knowledge of our misery here) or in pains and miserable, and so,
not at leisure, nor able to give any blessedness to us. If they be such as yet
are on earth in this present world, either they are utterly feuered from us by
distaunce of place (and then can they do us neither good nor hurt): or else
they are here among us, and then are affected toward us, either well and
Christianlyke (and then it is the work of Gods spirit in them); or evil and
wickedly (and then is the power of the Devil, and their own naughtiness
coupled together. but then as they are unwilling to do us good, so are they
unable to do us hurt); or indifferently (and then neither are they of any
deserts toward us, neither are they in dignity but our equals, or of the
same mould with us.) So that whether they be saints in heaven, or damned
souls in hell, or men living on earth, as they are not able to help or hurt
us, so are they neither Lords nor Ladies to us in this account. Concerning
other Creatures, needs must they be either Angels of heaven; or wicked
spirits, and devils of hell; or others of these corruptible creatures. if they
be Angels in heaven, then are they ordained to serve us, as God from time to
time shall employ them: are but fellow servants with us: and have neither
authority over us; nor any power against us, or with us. if they be of those
devils, or wicked spirits, then can they not have but an ill will toward us:
and yet have they at all no power against us. if they be of other corruptible
creatures, either in the firmament or elements above, or else on the earth, or
in the waters beneath, the^ are they in deed the good creatures of god:
ordained to our use; but yet all our inferiors, made to do their service to
us: otherwise in their own nature but weak, and able to do us no pleasure at
all, but when it pleases God to work by them. So that these also are neither
Lords nor Ladies to us.

The second Commandment.
THe second Commandment does show what kind of worship it must needs
be (as touching the substance, or matter of it) wherewithal God must be
served of us, so long as we live here in this present world. that is, To
worship him as he has appointed; and none otherwise. But of that piece of
scripture, that goes under the name of the second commandment, there be two
principal parts. the former is the Commandment it self: the other is the
Reason added in the end, to stir us up to keep this commandment.

In the Commandment it self we have likewise to search out, first what it
forbids: then what it requires.

It forbids, first as touching images a couple of Branches: then also the
By this word root we henceforwarde understand yt knot or joint, out of which
ye Branch grows.
Root of them, and whatsoever other Branches come out of the same. The former
of ye two Branches that by name are forbidden, is to make to our selves, or to
our use any graven image or the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above,
on earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth (and yet not altogether; as
namely, when they are but historical and civil: but) when they are made to
some superstitious end. as, either to express the Godheade: or, by that
means to bring him somewhat nerer to us, or to our use: or, to stir up, or
kindle in us any kind of devotion, or, as we commonly say, to put us in a good
mind. The other is (if it happen we have made any such, or otherwise light on
them) to bow down unto them, or to worship them. which may be done either
for their own sakes; which is the grosser error: or for others whom they are
made to represent; which also is badde enough. And we may bow down unto them,
or worship them two manner of ways. either by giving some actual reverence
unto them; as giving a cross the right hand: or, if in fancy we make any
account of them, or have them in any estimation. The Root is a principal
part of infidelity, or of the increase that comes of it, which we may call
a desperate or a careless mind: not so soundly resting in the works of Gods
wisdom, but that we fear the devil will run away with all, or at least
very much doubt how the matter will go, unless we add somewhat more thereunto;
or else have so little care of his direction, yt very easily we go before it. The
other Branches that are in like sort forbidden, are many and diverse: but
such as may all be reduced to a couple of sorts. For whereas our worship
must needs be either Internal, or else External, howsoever we shall happen to
worship amiss, it must neds apperteyne to one of these kinds. But whereas our
Internal, or inward, or spiritual worship has likewise a couple of
Branches, the one of Honor, the other of Service, we have here to take so
much more heed how we sort together those Branches that belong thereunto.
Branches that go against his Honor, are, when we do either conceive any
such fancies or opinions as are contrary thereunto: or having ones conceived
any such, begin to have an estimation or a lyking of them. As for example,
To think otherwise of God in any point, then he has opened him self unto us:
to have other opinions in points of Religion, then are set forth in his word:
to have other ways to help our selves, either in the work of our Redemption,
in the whole, or in part; or in other things that we need: to imagine that
things come by hap or chance, or that some others bear a sway in them; and
do not attribute al unto god: to swear by any other: or such like. Branches
that go against the Service that we owe unto him, are likewise of two sorts.
first when we are not in a redines to do him service: then when we miss in
the deed it self. Out of a redines may we put our selves, if either we hamper
our selves unadvisedly, by Vows, Marriage, Bonds, or Service: or if we do
impair our selves, in Mind, Body, or Goods. As touching the deed it self,
that also is double. first, that which belongs to our Common Calling, as we
are Christians: then, that which belongs to our several Trades, or kinds of
life. In the former of these we offend, when we either enter into a wrong
profession (as both the Jews, and Turks do): or when as having entered well,
and taken upon us the right profession, we do such things as we are not
charged with all. as, Superstitious, or Pope-holy persons use to do, when they
do their own, or other folks works: Coniurours, Exorcistes, Witches,
Charmers, and such like when they go about without any calling to call up,
inquier of, command, cast out, bind or hamper devils or spirits; or any
other such feats of theirs. In the latter of these we offend, when as either
we choose our Trade amiss; not regarding therein the calling of God, but our
own corrupt affections: or else having rightly chosen, do otherwise under the
name of our calling, then our calling allows, or will bear us out. External
respects the outward action. Against it we offend, when as either we use
any other rites or Ceremonies then are taught us or warranted by the word of
God (whether they be borrowed of the abrogate Leuiticall law, or devised by our
selves; or taken of others, by Tradition, Custom, or writing) or else when we
shrink from the open profession of him or his truth, in word or deed; for
fear, or favor.

It Requires, first the present Branches: then also the Root, and whatsoever
other Branches come out of the same. The present Branches are heartely to
detest all such images, either to worship the^; or else but to devise, or make
the^, or have them. The Root is, so fully to settle our selves in the works
of Gods wisdom, and so highly to esteem of ye same, that never we go about to
do any part of our own devise in those matters. The other Branches that arise
out of the same, are to be taken in the self same order that before is set
down. As touching the former part of our Inward worship, which respects
the Honor that we owe unto God, first that we think or conceive of God in
every point as he has opened him self unto us: that we conform our opinions
and judgment in matters of Religion to the prescript of Gods word: yt we do
so fully content our selves in him, that in all matters, as in all cases we
ever depend of, and rest only in him, as well for the whole work of our
Redemption, as he has wrought it in Jesus Christ; as also for what soever else
we need in this present world: that we attribute all things unto God; and
seek unto him in all our necessities: that when soever we are justly
occasioned to take an oath, then, because he only is sufficient to witness a
truth, that we ever call him to witness, and swear only by him: and
whatsoever others are of this kind. As touching the other part, which is the
Service that we owe unto him, there be two sorts of Branches that apperteine
thereunto. the first, as touching our preparation to do him Service: the
other as touching the deed it self. unto our preparation apperteyneth, first
that we ever keep in our hands all such liberty and freedom as it shall
please God to afforde us: then that we keep up and maintain our selves in
good plight; in Mind, in Body, in Goods, that so we may do our Deed the
better. Unto the Deed it self do in like sort apperteine two sorts of
Branches. first, as touching our Common Calling, that we both carefully
reserve our selves to such things only as shall be enjoined, or hold of our
hands from all, till we are very well assured what is to be done: and also
when we shall thoroughly see what is to be done, remove all lets, set our selves
to the deed, and continue therein. then as touching our several Trades of life,
first that we choose arighte: then that faithfully we walk therein. Concerning
that kind of worship that I termed External, and said to respect the
outward action, the Branches are, first that we duly use such Sacraments,
Ceremonies, and other Exercises, of our faith, as the word of God has
commended unto us: and such Ceremonies, and other godly Eercices, as shall
from time to time be found mete for us, and rightly by those that are in
authority commended unto us. then also that we ever profess our faith in this
naughty world, in word and deed, as occasion shall at any time serve.

As touching the reason that he adds in the end, to stir us up to keep
this Commandment, it is double. For first he denounces his judgments
against those that break it: and then vnfouldeth his mercy toward them that
observe it.

In the denuntiation of his Judgments there are diverse things to be
considered. First that he is The Lord our God: and therefore ought to be had in
so much reverence, as the keeping of this commandment requires. Then that
he is Jealous and therefore can not abide, that we should turn to the devises
of others. Thirdly that he visits the Sins of the fathers upon their
children, unto the third and fourth generation. whereby he gives us to
understand, not, what he ever does: but in what case such do stand in respect
of their own reprobate ways. That is, that Idolatrous parents, are in
manifest danger to have, both their idolatry and superstition cast on their
children (and the^ those children need not so much to triumph or glory to
continue so obstinate in their fathers ways: but rather acknowledge it to be
the hand of God, and his fearful vengeance, that they have no better grace.
which also is not the least cause, that this present generation of ours,
descended for the most part of Popish parents, is yet so froward as it is): And
their other sins likewise so cast upon them, that for their sakes they shall
be either accursed clean, or much punished, and diversely plagued; though not in
such sort, but that their own deserts shall also require it together with the
other. Last of all, that he terms them, that having Images and such other
toys break this commandment, no one jot better then Haters of him.

Having so denounced, then he strecheth out his arms of mercy to embrace all
those, even unto thousands, that give the^ selves to observe this
commandment. wherein are three principal things to be considered. First,
that he will be merciful to them. Secondarily, that howsoever the foolish and
frantike world account otherwise of them, that abhor to give godly honor to
Saints and Images; or, in their own devises to be as superstitious as they:
yet God him self terms the^ Lovers of him. Thirdly, that he coupleth
together these two things, to love God, and to keep his commandments. by
occasion whereof we may learn this one thing, that neither can we be found to
love him, unless we endeavor our selves to keep his commandments (a ready
bar for all hypocrites) neither can we keep his commandments, unless we
love him (that al Image-worshippers may see them selves plainly excluded).

Let Popery beware, that it never come to be examined by this commandment. It
is no marvel, that they would so gladly have stolen it out.

The third Commandment.
THe third does teach us, that we should inwardly have so notable a reverence
of God, as that this worship before described should ever be pouldre^ with
true sincerity. And it has two principal parts. first the Commaundemen^ it
self: then the threatening that is added thereunto.

In the Commandment it self w^ have to consider, first what it forbids
(...) then what it requires.

It forbids, first one Branch: the^ also ye Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of ye same. The Branch is* to take ye name of the Lord our
god ydly* or in vain. either by swearing ydly by him; or howsoever else we
talk of him a^ a venture, or to no purpose. The Root is Vnreuerencie toward
God. The other Branches that come out of this Root are many of them as had as
this, and some much worse, and all together very many in nombre: but such as
may very well be reduced to a couple of sorts. whereof the former is of those
whereby we break this Commandment as we are Christians, or in respect of our
common Calling. the other of those wereby it is broken in certain of our
particular Callings or Trades of life. Of the first sort are, first
Hypocrisy: that is, under the name of Gods servant, either not to receive
Christian Religion, in the whole, or in some material point: or not to have
it our endeavor to live accordingly. either in the whole, or in some part.
Secondarily in swearing, when we swear either by God, either contrary to our
knowledge, falsely; or when we know it not certainly to be as we say; or but
vainly, when there is no urgent necessity: or by the Manhodde of Christ, or
some part thereof, either cursedly and outragiously; or in such sort as before
is set down of God: or by any other. Thirdly in our Public Service, if
either those to whom the administration thereof is committed, behave them
selves irreverently, or otherwise then becomes them that in these things
represent the person of God, either in the word; or in the Sacraments; or in
their Discipline or spiritual Censure; or in other Ecclesiastical functions:
or such as are partakers thereof, either receive them; or behave them selves
there in, otherwise then they ought to do, or as becomes those that are
before the eyes of God. Fourthly, if at any other time we abuse As it is the
manner, first of profane or ungodly persons: sometimes wresting the scriptures
to a wicked, or a trifling sense, sometimes iangling or jesting of them, and
other holy mysteries. then also of Co^iurers, witches, Sorcerers and Charmers,
using (or abusing rather) those holy things in their wicked and dyuelish^
doings. last of all of Papists in many of their doings: abusing the
Scriptures very much, applying the Sacraments after the same manner, as
Baptism to bells, the Lords Supper to dead men, and halowing of dead
elements to their trifling, or wicked purposes.
holy things: as the Scripture, or any parcel thereof; either of the two
Sacraments; good prayers; or blessings; the name of God; Hallowinges also; or
such like.

Last of all when we counterfete, or take to our use, or make common such As
the miraculous fast of Christ: Spitle: Ephata: extreme unction: Sacrificers:
Masse-gestures. etc.
extraordinary miracles or other excellencies as it has pleased the Godheade
to show forth either in Christ or other ways, not to our imitation, but to
the beautifying of him self, or his word. Of the other sort are diverse; but
such as do apperteine unto those that are, either in authority, or dignity
over others: and in that respect represent unto others the person of God. Of
the former are Princes, vnder-magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Husbands,
Scholemasters, and Masters of howshouldes: and whosoever else have any
authority over others. The Branches that do apperteine to those, are, first
as touching their life and conversation, if they do not their endeavor, even in
their Persons to represent the holiness; and the reverend majesty of God. Then
as touching the manner of their government or ordering of those that are under
their charge, first if they will rule by will without any laws: secondarily if
their laws be ill: thirdly, if, when their laws are good, they do not execute
ye same. Their laws may be ill, and unmeet for the judgment seat of god, if
either they tend not to that end, yt god has prescribed: or do it not with
ye same equabilitie or moderation. The End whereunto their laws and orders must
tend is double. first to make the^ ever more and more ye citizens or subjects
of gods kingdom, in religion and virtuous life: the^ yt they live an orderly,
peaceable, and prosperous life one with an other. The moderation is, yt in
punishment of faults, they be neither more rigorous, nor remiss: in rewarding
of well-doing, neither more hard, nor liberal, then God, has prescribed by
the direction of his word. Their execution will likewise be faulty, if either
they pardon in the whole, or in part, such as are in fallen within the sense
and meaning of the law: or punish those in the whole, or in part, that are
not found to have transgressed. Of the latter, that is of those that are but
in Dignity preferred before others, are the more learned, the more aged, the
more noble, the more cunning, and the richer sort. The Branch that
apperteineth to these, is no more but this, if they walk not before God and
men in such sort, as becomes those whom it has pleased God to cloth with
so honorable garments before many others; and to choose them from among the
rest, to bear his treasures and precious jewels.

It requires, first the contrary Branch: then also the Root it self, and,
whatsoever other Branches come out of the same. The Branch is, whenever we
talk of god, to do it with reverence. The Root is a singular Reverence of
God. The Branches that apperteine hereunto by virtue of our common Calling,
are, first as touching our profession to receive Christian Religion in every
point: and unfeignedly to endeavor our selves to live accordingly in all
things. As for swearing, first, that whenever we swear we ever swear by
our holy God: then also in such sort as we ought to do. first so truly, that
there be in our oath, not only no plain falshoode; but also no manner of
dissimulation: then also, that we do not swear so neither, but when we are by
good occasion urged thereunto. As touching our divine service, that such as
minister, do so behave them selves, as best may show forth, how holy those
things are; and the very truth, and majesty of them: that such as be
partakers of them, receive them as at the hands of God; and behave them selves
as in his presence. As touching those other holy things, that we have such an
estimation of the holiness and majesty of God, that we abhor more then a
thousand deaths, to use his most blessed name, his Scriptures his
Sacraments, or good prayers which should also be his, but to most holy and
godly uses, such as him self has ordained them for. Last of all, that in no
wise we draw to our imitation any such excellencies as we find done to his
own glory, or the commendation of his honor: but that with reverence we set
them by, and leave them wholly unto him self. The Branches that do apperteine
hereunto by virtue of those several estates, are, first for those that are in
authority, that first as touching their conversation among men, that they so
behave them selves, as may resemble, so near as they can, both the holiness and
majesty of God: then as touching the form of their government, that their
Laws be good, as well in end, as moderation; that they govern by the
prescript thereof; and ever put them in diligent execution. Then as touching
them that are in dignity before others, that they walk in such sort as
becomes those whom God has honored, and chosen to carry so precious things.

In the Threatening annexed thereunto, we have to behold, that howsoever we may
account it but a small matter so lightly to take into our mouths the name of
our most holy God: yet the Lord, in his Justice, finds it to be so great a
sin, as that he must needs condemn for it. And then does there an heavy
judgment remain for those that are the worst sort of this kind of sinners.

The fourth Commandment.
THe fourth Commandment requires that we walk those ways that it has
pleased God to lay forth to bring us to this worship before described. But
the piece of Scripture that belongs thereunto, may be divided into three
principal parts. The first to be the Commandment it self, of the seventh
days rest: the second, the concession or allowaunce of six days working:
the third and last, by what reason he persuades us to keep this rest.

As touching the commaundemet it self we have to consider, somewhat otherwise
then in the others, first what it requires: then what it forbids.

It requires first one Branch yt here is named: then also the Root, and
whatsoever other Branches come out of the same. The Branch is no more but
this, that we keep As touching this first and principal Branch it is to be
considered, that first as touching the precise necessity for the outward
observation thereof, which was cast upon the Israelites till the coming of
Christ, that is not so laid upon us, but yt we may very well employ that day
also to our usual labor, if at any time the rule of charity or Christian
duty shall so requyer, upon some extraordinary occasion. Then as touching a
certain free observation of it, that it does yet remain in force with us. The
reasons that are commonly given are these. First to express the spiritual
rest that we have in Christ. Concerning which, it is very true that we have a
notable rest in him. Nevertheless to keep the Sabbath to that end, did
apperteine to the Israelites alone till Christ came in the flesh: not unto
us, nor to them neither since now he is come, and howsoever the Jews can not
yet leave their superstition therein: yet full little does it become Christians,
being now past children, still notwithstanding to go by the wall. Secondarily
to make the estate of servant and cattle, that are under worldly Masters,
more tolerable. Concerning which it seems rather to be an accidental
comoditie, that the observation of ye Sabbath brings with it: then an
essential purpose whereunto it was ordained: although in ye eternal Rest of
ours, not only servants, but all other creatures shall likewise have rest.
Nevertheless, seeing that God him self did often point the Israelites
thereunto, he is not I warrant you any Christian, that has not a just
consideration of it also: partly for that he has not that moderation: but
specally because that so he keeps his servants, from the means of their
salvation. The third and the principal reason is, that it may serve our
needful use: that both by the godly exercise that we have in our public
assemblies, and by our private meditation, God may in deed work our
sanctification and soperforme the thing that we seek. Besides these reasons,
which are by others commonly given, the Scripture notes one other, which is
that the Sabbath day should be a token unto the^, that (not they them selves or
any other, but) the Lord only wrought their sanctification. to which end,
although that we are not bound to observe it, because that so taken it is a
figure abrogate: yet may we sou^dly gather out of it these two points that we
also are santified by no other means: and that it becomes us plainly to
acknowledge it, and ever to keep it in fresh remembrance.
holy the seventh day, resting from our usual labors therein. The Root is, to
be godly minded; or, to have an unfeigned, and an earneste desire to attain to
this worship before described; and so thoroughly to be sanctified by the
gracious work of God in us, that every day more and more we may cease from
our own natural works which ever are naught, and be occupied in his, that
so we may worship him aright. The other Branches that do grow out of his
Root, are many and diverse. First, such as do apperteine to the keeping holy
or right use of the Sabbath day, besides that other which is already set
down. as namely, to spend the whole Sabbath day, either in Public exercise,
as in ordinary service, or Sermons: or in private meditaio^, examining in what
case we are, and lifting up our hearts unto God in thankesgeuing, or prayer as
occasion is offered; and prescribing to our selves whatsoever is of us to be
done. or in such other works of charity, as by just occasion we shall be at
any time called unto. Then also whereas it is known well enough, that God
works that worship before said in us by secondary causes, we may out of it
easily gather, that by the virtue of this commandment we are led to seek out
the benefit of them, and to take it unto our selves. Of these secondarie
causes I find two sorts. whereof the former may well be termed Ordinary means
whereby it pleases god to work: the other are more properly Helps, for the
better working of those means. So, these other Branches, which do appertain
to this Com. may well be reduced unto a couple of principal sorts. the former
of those that do apperteine to these Ordinary means: the latter of those
that do apperteine to those other Helps.

As touching both which there are three principal things that in this place
were to be considred. first what they are: secondarily how God works by them:
thirdly in what sort we have to meet with the working of God, or how to take
the benefit of them. But because the first and the second of these three are
already set down in the former book whereunto they do more properly
apperteine, here we shall need to talk but of the third, that is, how we ought
to take the benefit of them.

Therefore to come to those Ordinary means, the word, the Sacraments, the
Church, and Government, this is our duty in every one. First, as touching the
word we ought so highly to esteem of it, yt not only we study it by our
selves; and diligently give ear to the same being read unto us: but also, yt
we ever maintain ye ministry, so far as ye direction of God does lead us. The
mystery of the Sacraments have we often to unfold before our eyes, ever
striving thereby to maintain and better our vnio^ with Christ: and co^tenting
our selves, once to have received the one; often to quicke^ up our faith by
the other. As touching the Church we must in deed be one of them: and yet we
must take good head unto the^. As touching the former of these two points,
because they are the people of God, we have to associate our selves unto them;
and among them, so nere as we can (not dividing our selves from the rest) to
the better sort: when once we are come together, not to part again without
just occasion; nor to give them occasion to cast us out; or to sunder
themselves from us: but ever keeping with them, diligently to reap from time
to time, whatsoever spiritual commodity we may have by them. As touching the
latter, because they are but Men, we must beware, least if they happen to
fall from the truth, either in the whole as the Jews, and Turks; or but in
part, as the church of Rome very foully has don, they carry us also with them.
Last of all, that we may reap the benefit of Government, first we have to
submit our selves willingly to draw in the yoke thereof: not only when our
Magistrates them selves are good; and their laws very easy: but also when
the^ selves are bad and tyrannous; and their laws very grievous. so long as the
greuousnes of them consists, not in commanding such things as are ill; nor
in forbidding such things as are good either in nature, or in circumstance as
the case stands: but only in restreining our outward liberty, in things
indifferent. Then also we must do our endeavor to maineteine and uphold them
with our Counsel, Prayer, Body, and Goods: whether them selves be good or
badde; so long as they are our lawful Magistrates.

The Helps that I speak of, which it has pleased the wisdom of God to
commend unto us for our better furtherance in those means (and therefore to be
joined with them) are these three: watching, Fasting, and Prayer. Concerning
which, we have in like sort, but the third point to consider. that is, how
we should help our selves by these which every one may see to be this. that we
ought diligently to occupy our selves therein, in them all, and in every of
them. or in a few more words, first that we advise our selves with all
possible circu^spection, what it is we have to do: what may hinder, or further
the same. Secondarily that we be so earnestly ben to do what we should, that we
busily avoid whatsoever may turn us out of the way, or but hinder us therein:
and redily use whatsoever may set us through the way, or never so little help
us forward. Last of all that we have so lively a feeling of our own
wretchedness and weakness on the one side, and of the abu^daunce and gracious
kindness that is in God on the other side, that to the performaunce of these
things, we seek unto god with feruencie of mind. and, to the end that our
prayers may better speed, we ever purge our selves from our sin, least that
by the reason of it we become odious unto him: and never freight our heads so
full of worldly fancies, but yt we may be able to keep our minds unto our
prayers.

It forbids, first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch is, to be occupied in our usual
affairs on the Sabbath day. The Root is, to be worldly minded: or, to have so
little account of our inward sanctification, that we do not much care though
still we remain as bad as before, and ever be occupied in the works of our
own corrupt nature. The other Branches yt do spring out of the same are
diverse. First such as do apperteine to the Sabbath day it self, if we bestow
it, or any part of it in ydlenes, goodfelowshippe, inordinate feastinge,
drinking, gamning, or such like: or if we absent our selves from the ordinary
Divine Service: or if we either cause, or suffer others that are under our
charge, so to do. Secondarily, as touching those Ordinary means before set
down, if we have so little care to be godly, that we behave our selves clean
contrary to that which is before set down. As namely, first as touching
the word, if either we do flatly despise and abhor; or else not singularly
regard, either the reading or the hearing of it: or if either we do clean
pluck down the Ministry; or by our niggardly allowaunce, but steal away
the force thereof. as for the Sacraments, if either altogether we shun them:
or but in some points after our manner abuse them: buryinge the one in deep
obliuyon: and coming to the other, either irreverently; or very seldom; or
not at all, but for fear of cyuile coercion, or shame of the world.
Concerning the Church, or in it the better sort, if either we never join
unto them; or quickly start out again; or make them weary of our company; or
take not to us the benefit of them. And as for Government, if we be so much
given to live after our licentious will, that either we go about to overthrow
it one way or other; or else live not by the rule of it, at least when we hope
that we are in secret. Last of all as touching those Helps, if we do not use
them as is described. First concerning watching, if either we do not advice
our selves of those things aforesaid: or, if they happen to come into our
heads, forthwith suppress them, and lull our selves a sleep in security
again. As for fasting, if we use not occasions of goodness; nor avoid
occasions of naughtines: but tenderly spare our labor in the one, and
licentiously give over our selves to the other: and in the mean season set
down our selves in some wicked, or vain toy in the name of Fasting. Last of
all as touching Prayer, the Branches are, either never to trouble our selves
therewith, either not at all, or not in our own person; but to put over that
charge unto others: or else, if our selves will take a little pains sometimes
therein, to be sure of this, that either we slip a side from God, and steal
to some Saint; or have our prayers in a tongue that we do not understand; or
make but a lip-labor of them, putting our heart and mind to other uses, and
leaving our lips and fingers ends only to them.

The Concession or granting of six days labor is now to be seen.
Concerning which we have to consider, first that it is no part of the
Commandment it self (speaking properly) but only a permission, or an
allowance: Secondarily that seeing it is so liberal allowaunce as it is, it
ought to persuade us, in no wise to meddle with the seventh day to any such use.
Thirdly that it is not so to be taken, but that we may have other holy days
besides (as they may be used) notwithstanding this: the nature of an allowau^ce
being such, as that it stands of force but so far, as it is not restrained
by some other law of as great authority. Last of all, that seeing God charge
us with For as for those other feasts that were appointed to ye Jews for ye
time, (which diverse interpreters, not sufficiently advised of the principal
end or use of the^, allotted unto this commandment) they stood for their
time by virtue of the second commandment, and not by virtue of this for ever:
and so are now abolished with other ceremonies.
no more, it may seem not to be so very needful to have any more but only this.

Concerning the last part, which is the reason whereupon the observation of this
Com. is grounded, the same is double. The first reason is, because god him
self, having finished his work in those six days that went before, did rest
the Seventh. Which seems to conclude two things. The first very plain: that
seeing he has given us example to do that, whereunto his word does directly
call us, we as natural children ought in this point to follow our fathers
example. The other more dark, and more uncertain in it self: nevertheless so
well helped otherwise, that it also may come before our eyes. which is no
more but this: that if as the world was made in six days, and the seventh was
a day of rest, so is it likely to stand toward the point of six thousand
years, and then immediately the eternal rest in glory to begin (which not
only diverse of the learned have said, and great likelihoods do import: but
also the scriptures do seem to witness both by the whole and universal course
of them, and also by certain particular places) then may a man in the seventh
days rest more sensibly perceive, that now our Redemption, to so many as
labor, is nere at hand: and therefore that it is time to lift up our
heads, both because we are already come to the sixte days afternoon; and
hope that of those years which yet remain, a good nombre shall be cut off.
Insomuch that hence arises double instruction. first to those that will not
cease from their own works here, that they must in the world to come
labor in eternal torments: so that they can not with any sound comfort
behold the Seventh days rest, then that those that here cease from their
own works, that they shall rest in the world to come: so that they may most
joyfully behold the Seventh days rest, that is unto them so comfortable a
messenger, of so blessed an estate, so near at hand. The other reason is, for
that God blessed the Seventh day, and hallowed it. which also gives double
instruction. First that such as truly endeavor them selves to observe this
Seventh days rest in such sort as is prescribed, shall no doubt become
godly, because God has blessed it to that end: then also that it is no
marvel, that such as so little account as they do, to observe it as they ought
to do, are so ungodly and wicked as they are; because they refuse this blessing
of God that should make them better.

The fifth Commaundedement.
THe fifth Commandment teaches us to link together one with an other in such
order as we find that God him self from time to time does set among us. For
seeing that it requires, that all infe^iors honor their superiors, or
submit themselves unto them, and all are inferiors in some respect, even the
highest of al: we may boldly conclude, that this commandment knitteth us all
together in one, and so lays the very foundation (next after our duty to
Gods own Person) of every State or commonwealth. And in deed, there is
nothing that so knitteth together, as for to acknowledge this subjection, and
gladly to honor and reverence each other. But of this Commandment there are
likewise two principal parts. first the Commandment it self: then the
promise annexed thereunto.

In the Commandment it self we have to consider, first what it requires:
then what it forbids.

It requires first the Branch; then also the Root, and whatsoever other
branches come out of the same. The Branch of which first it speaks, is, to
honor our natural parents. The Root out of which this Branch does grow,
is a serious, and a diligent consideration, how good things it has pleased
God to give forth in the world to our use: and namely (so much as apperteineth
to this present Branch) how great good things he has bestowed on us by our
natural The good things that by them he bestows on us, are, sometimes good
education, lands, and goods: if none of those, yet perhaps a good will to
have done al these things for us, and a natural love continuing toward us. if
not this neither, yet, at least, that by the^ we live. Which is, both in it
self a precious thing: and to the faithful, an earnest of a better estate,
and away or passage unto the same. So comes it to pass, that although we
never received any thing else of our Parents, though they were the worst, and
the most unnatural that ever lived: yet even for this only ought they to be
had in special honor. and that, not only of those that find them selves to
be sealed to that better estate in the world to come: but also of those that
yet perceive no such thing in them selves. because that either hereafter they
may: or else if never they come to that prerogative, yet had they as much of
their parents as others.
Parents. The other Branches that come out of this Root, are, in like manner
to honor all others to whom we find our selves to be bound for the like good
things: wherewith it has pleased god to our use to furnishe them, and therein
to make the^ in effect our parents. But because there are very many that by
this account must be had in reverence of us (though not all alike) it shall be
needful, first to see who they are: and then what kind of honor apperteineth
to every of the^. Beginning therefore to search out who they are, whom it has
pleased god in this respect to make our Parents, here must we needs begin
with the Here is to be noted that both in the Trees, and in the Branches that
belong to this Commandment, the first division (which is into five parts)
represents the persons to whom this honor is due: all the rest that spring
out of the same, the honor that is due unto them.
man Jesus Christ. in whom it has pleased the Godheade, that all fulness
should dwell; and that in him should be laid up for us all the inestimable
treasures of Gods gooodnes. that as he should be ye head of his Church, and
therefore the very foundation, or the corner stone of our mutual Society one
with an other: so might we find in him, that which might sufficiently commend
him unto us in that respect, and have him fuly furnished thereunto. From
Christ descending to men on earth we find of them two sorts. first, those
unto whom we are specially bound: then all others. we are specially bound
unto three sorts, first to those that are in authority over us: as Parents,
Princes, vnder-magistrates, spiritual Pastors and Masters. Secondarily, to
those that are in dignity preferred before us: as (besides those before
rehearsed) the Learned, the aged, the honorable or worshipful, the Rich, and
those that are skillful or cunning in their Sciences or Trades of life.
Thirdly, to those that have a care of us, or bear good will unto us: as
kinsfolk, neighbors, and all other friends. All others likewise come under
this account, for that they are, or at least may be (for ought that we know)
even the farthest and meanest of all, to very great use unto us. Thirdly,
having so taken in all living men, we have yet to stretch forth this
consideration to many others: Angels; dead men; and other Creatures. First, as
touching Angels, they are to be taken into this account, for that it pleases
God to use their ministry or service to our use here in this world. Of dead
men that belong hereunto, there are two sorts. the former is of those that
perhaps are departed long since, and yet have so bestowed their time while they
lived, that they are in remembrance with us; for that they have advanced the
Gospel, or the knowledge and faith of Christ, either by their learning, or by
their life, or by their death: or else some other way have done good to their
posterity in earthly matters. the other is of those our kinsfolk, neighbors
or friends that are newly departed. Those other creatures that belong hereunto,
are all these, whereby it pleases God in any respect to do good unto us.

As touching the Honor that apperteineth to these, the same is not alike unto
al. But whatsoever it is, it apperteyneth to one of these three Branches;
Obedience, Mainteinaunce, or Reverence. Unto Christ Jesus are they all due:
obedience unto his word; mainteinaunce to his cause; and to his members on
earth; reverence to him, and all his, and that absolutely, or without
exception; and most fully, or after the largest manner. Unto those that are in
authority over us are they likewise all due; but with limitation. For first as
touching obedience, it is due unto them so far as they do not command any
thing contrary to the word of God, either in it self; or as the case
stands in other respects. As for mainteinaunce by body or goods, if they
be public persons, or have in hand the government of the State, then have
we to yield what they charge us withal to the uttermost penie of our
ability, without First, for that they are Public persons, and demand it to
our common use, or for the mainteinaunce of the whole: then also for that we
being but private men, and knowing no more but some part, can not be competent
Judges of the whole, whereof we are ignorant.
discussing whether they take to much or not. If they be but Private men (as
spiritual pastors, Parents, and Masters) then may we use our own discretion
therein: but yet maintain them to our power so long as we see, first on their
parts, that they do in deed need it to good, and needful uses: then on
ours, that we are able to perform it, both in respect of our substance; and in
respect of our estate, or vocatition, or ye business that we have otherwise to
do. Reverence is due to them all: but, degrees to be used therein; and none to
be reuere^ced above measure, as though they were some certain gods, or nere
thereunto. Unto those that are but in dignity preferred before us, nothing
peculiarly to them in that respect, but only reverence is due: that is, to make
that account of them inwardly; and outwardly to have them in that estimation
that belongs unto them. Unto those that bear us good will these points of
Reverence; duly to esteem of their good will: and to have the like in store
for them again. Unto al others, reverence likewise, or so highly to esteem of
them, as that we make no other account of any, then as of notable vessels of
the treasures of god. and this, although they be unknown to us; or seem to
have nothing at al in them; or be maliciously bent against us. Unto Angels
likewise, unto the dead, and to other Creatures, a certain kind of Reverence
likewise, and nothing else. As namely, that we esteem of the angels, as of the
excellent creatures of God, ordained to our use, and doing their office
accordingly: and if we have any set memorial of the^ (for edifying, without
superstion appointed unto us) to perform the same with due Reverence. As
touching those of the dead long since that have given go^d testimony of their
faith, and are attained to their triumph in heaven, that we have them in
reverend and thankful remembrance, whether it be for their writings, or
lives, or deaths: as at all times else; so especially when we have any set
memorial of them, to provoke us to be thankful to God on their behalf, or
our selves to follow their virtuous examples: as for the others by whom we
receive but some earthly blessing, yet to have them also in their degree in
very reverend and thankful remembrance. As for those that are newly
departed, yt we bring them semely unto ye ground; keep up their good name so
well as we may; and do for those that are left behind them. As for all
inferior Creatures, that we have them also in that account, that we allow them
that place and estate that God has given them; and that whenever we have
occasion to use them, we do it with sobriety and reverence.

It forbids, first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch is to dishonor our natural
Parents. The Root is to drown or neglect the consideration of those good
things that it has pleased god to lay up in others to our use: as though
either there were no such in them; or otherwise that we could do well enough
without them. The other Branches that come out of ye same, are many and
diverse. First of all, as touching Christ, the Father of our eternal
brotherhoode, either not all to yield him those points of honor; or not so
fully as we ought to do. As touching those two sorts of men, and first of all
them to whom we are more specially bound, and among them, those that are in
authority over us, either to disobey them in such things as in which they go
not against the word of God, either openly; or covertly: or to depose their
persons; maintain or set up an other against them, or over them; or to deny
them sufficent maintenance of our gooddes or lands: or but to have them in
any contempt; or not so great reverence as is due unto the^, in thought, word,
or deed. Secondarily as touching those that are but in dignity before us,
either in heart, or else by some open fact altogether to disesteme or despise
them: or not to acknowledge them such as they are, but to diminish or keep in
some part of their due estimation. Thirdly as touching those others yt bear us
good will, either to make but small account of their good will: or to show our
selves unthankful when occasion is offered. Then as touching all others, if by
a wicked prejudice or secretly with our selves we condemn any, either for
very ill persons; or but to be to little purpose or else in outward appearaunce
show our selves to have them in that account. Last of all as touching Angels,
dead men, and inferior Creatures, if we have the^ not in that reverence every
sort in their degree as we ought to have. As for Angels, if we have them in
any contempt: or if irreverently we solemnize such good memorials as we have or
may have of them. As for Saints, or those dead men that have left notable
monumentes of their faith behind them, if likewise we disesteme either them
selves, or their good things that they have left unto us, defacing their
writings, their doings, or their momuments, being other wise good or allowable
enough: or if we irreverently solemnize those good memorials of the^, that to
our use and to the glory of God are, or may be well ordained. As touching
those that have left us but some earthly blessing, if we have not them also in
very thankful remembrance; if we deface their doings, diminishe of their
glory, or raze their momuments. As touching those that are lately departed, if
we suffer them to lie unburied; or bury them disorderly; or impeach their good
name; or neglect those that they leave behind them. As touching all inferior
Creatures, if insolently we behave our selves toward them: or wantonly use
them.

So we have in this order to knit unto Concerning this knitting together to
all, whereas notwithstanding many of us in every Comm-wealth are very ill and
corrupt members, it may be doubted, how we may knit unto them, without some
steine to our selves, or breach of our duty. As touching which it is to be
known, first that it may very well stand together, that we utterly mislyke
whatsoever is ill in them: and yet notwithstanding ever carefully maineteine
and vp-hold our mutual or common society with them. Then also, that there is
none so ill, but that either already there is some good thing in him, that may
be commodious unto us, or, of him shall come some plant, that shall be of great
price: or, if neither of these be, yet for ought that we know, they may be: or
else, though it were possible, that there were nothing but naughtines in him,
yet might he be a good pattern of the great goodness of God toward us, that
he has not made us such as we take him to be. Which things ought to be of
such acompt with us, as that in this case we should ever keep this moderation,
so to keep nerer to the better sort, that yet we sunder not our selves
altogether from the worst of all.
all: and to sunder our selves from Concerning this knitting together to all,
whereas notwithstanding many of us in every Comm-wealth are very ill and
corrupt members, it may be doubted, how we may knit unto them, without some
steine to our selves, or breach of our duty. As touching which it is to be
known, first that it may very well stand together, that we utterly mislyke
whatsoever is ill in them: and yet notwithstanding ever carefully maineteine
and vp-hold our mutual or common society with them. Then also, that there is
none so ill, but that either already there is some good thing in him, that may
be commodious unto us, or, of him shall come some plant, that shall be of great
price: or, if neither of these be, yet for ought that we know, they may be: or
else, though it were possible, that there were nothing but naughtines in him,
yet might he be a good pattern of the great goodness of God toward us, that
he has not made us such as we take him to be. Which things ought to be of
such acompt with us, as that in this case we should ever keep this moderation,
so to keep nerer to the better sort, that yet we sunder not our selves
altogether from the worst of all.
none.

The promise annexed thereunto, does partly respect particular persons; but
especially, the whole people. As it respects particular persons, though the
words seem to promise long life in this world without exception: yet are
they so to be taken, as that they promise it in this world, as it shall be
most expedient; in the world to come, without exception or limitation. and
that the obseruers thereof, if they have not the performance of this promise in
this world (as in deed there is no time appointed) then, because god is true,
and just, they are sure to have it in the world to come. For it is not ever
seen, that good subjects are most cherished: but sometimes wrongfully, and
unnaturally cut off very sone. howbeit their hope to have this promise
performed, is not therefore cut off therewithal: but much enlarged. So
likewise on the other side it does so threaten such as break it, to have their
days cut off, that nevertheless they are in this world oftymes ouerslipped:
but then, so much the more sure to be cut off from that long, and blessed life
in the world to come. As it respects the whole people, it does in like sort
not only promise unto them, that they shall peaceably enjoy their own la^d,
so long as they shall thus link together, by honoring each other, as they
ought to do: but also threatens, that they shall be rooted out thence,
whenever they shall start from those bands of unity, and sunder, or divide
them selves from cache other. Which also came to pass among the Israelites,
after that the greatest part of them, divided them selves from the house of
David, to whom the Crown was appointed of God. Out of which, all States have
in like sort to gather, that if they shall in manner aforesaid knit together,
then shall they also long enjoy their country, in peace, and prosperity: if
contrariwise they fall a sunder, then do they lay them selves open to the
spoil, and give their land occasion to cast them out, as unnatural, and
ouerchargeable burdens for the earth to bear.

The sixth Commaundedement.
BY the sixte Commandment are we taught, that unto this kniting together by
honoring each other, we also bring with us a singular care of preservation, to
be spread forth unto all, and to every one. But whereas the three next
Commandments do treat of diverse special points of this care for each
other, that by this is required, we may best take this to treat of it
generally: leaving those special points to the others. And so to proceed, we
have to consider, that first it forbids; then it requires.

It forbids, first the Branch: then the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch is murder. The Root is, the
neglecting of, or not caring for our neighbors good estate. The other
Branches that proceed out of the same are very many. but yet such, as that
(deducting those that do properly apperteine to those three Commandments
that next follow) all may be brought into a couple of principal sorts.
Whereof the former is, whereby we annoy our neighbor in our Common Calling, or,
as all men generally may do. the other is, whereby we annoy him in our
several estates or trades of life: behauing our selves therein, contrary to
that which their nature requires.

Of the former sort are these. First, when wittingly, or of set purpose, we
bend our selves against him or against his good estate, either in deed; or
in word; or else but in thought. Secondarily when we are not so well advised of
our doings, but that, although we mean him no hurt, yet we are occasion,
unto him of stumbling in the way of his duty: either by word, as when we
directly entice him to sin, or to some other inconvenience; or but utter such
things, as may inwardly corrupt him, or otherwise be some hurt unto him: or by
deed, when we walk so inordinately before him, that by our ill example, and
other doings, we enbolden him to some evil; or do him some hurt. Last of all
when we lead our lives in such sort, that they are not profitable unto our
neighbors, as when we live in no honest labor at al: or else not so profitable
as we might make them, as when we live in some such trade as is not so
needful as others that we might betake our selves unto: or having any good
trade, do not faithfully labor therein.

Of the other sort there be so many that that it is hard to reckon them up.
but it shall be sufficient to note a few principal examples. Among Princes
there are found of these Branches, when as either they suffer by their fault
usurpers to take by violence their authority from them: or fondly yield it over
to any foreign power: or put such in anthoritie under them, as are not meet
for the place: or them selves be careless in their charge not regarding either
to have any laws; or, how vicious, or weak they are; or, how slenderly
their good laws be put in execution, either by want of diligence therein, or
by extending their prerogative to go directly against the meaning of them.
Among all inferior Magistrates (whether Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Martial)
when they are either false, or negligent in their charge (so long as they have
received in charge to do no more then lawefully they may) as also on the other
side if they pronounce sentence, or do execution according as they are put
in trust, or as the Laws direct, so often as their charge, or the Laws of
the Realm are contrary to the word of God. Among Spiritual Pastors or
ministers, when they have so little care of their flock, that either them
selves are not resident, or usually among them: or being there, deliver unto
them unwholesome doctrine: or, if it be wholesome, let them not have it (otherwise
occupied, or loving their ease) plentifully enough: or be utterly so void of
all discretion or consideration, that they put not their spiritual Censure in
ure; both by their word, and by their Sacraments, to give sinners to
understand in what case they are before God: or behave them selves
irreverently in their function: or live ungodly: or without any sufficient
calling leave their cure (for a greater living) they care not to whom. Among
Parents, when they have so little care of their Children, that they do not
sufficiently to their power relieve their bodily necessities: or pamper them
overmuch: or teach them not the knowledge or fear of God: or do not invre
them to labor in some godly trade, whereby they may be able to live: or put
them off from their hands they care not how, for keeping, and furthering of
them in the fear of God: or withholde them from marriage, when time is they
should marie: or force them to mary for their own profit, or pleasure, such
as they can not sou^dly fancy. Among Scholemasters or teachers, when they
corrupt those children of God that are under their hands, by reading unto them
such authors as may infect them either with Heathenish, or Popish religion; or
bring to their knowledge any other such naughtiness: or otherwise suffer them
to decline to loosenes of life: or put not so much unto them in matters of good
learning, as they are able to deal withal: or be over heavy and grievous
unto them. Among Godfathers and Godmothers, or those that are sureties for
children when they are christened, when as they do so lightly pass over their
charge to the parents again: or do not very diligently endeavor them selves
to teach them, first the principles of religion; then also the higher matters
of greater perfection, so far as is nedeful for them to know. Among masters
and dames, when they do not diligently train up their servants in religion,
and virtue: when they suffer them to be idle: when they employ them ill, or
teach them some naughtines: when they set them about their own bellies: or
other worldly affairs on ye Sabbath day; especially then, or at any time else,
when of right they should be at Service, or Sermons: when they suffer them to
outray in wastfull spe^ding, whether in apparel for their masters honor, or
worship; or howsoever else: or, when they occasion them by their straighte
allowaunce, to seek out ill ways to maintain them selves. Among Artificers,
when they lend forth their hand, or their cunning to help forward sin;
or, but to content the vanity of men. Among the Richer sort, when as by their
riches they do not endeavor them selves, to relieve the necessities of their
neighbors about them: whether to the instruction of their souls, by
preaching, and scholing: or to the relief of their bodies, with food,
apparel, harbor, physic, surgery, etc: or to their defense, and
maynteinau^ce in their right, against those that would bear them down. Last
of all (and to pass over many) among Subjects, when as they have so little
regard to the Common-welth, that either they do without license contrary
thereunto: or else for their own profit or pleasure, procure license to do
otherwise, then them selves do see that it may bear.

It requires first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
branches come out of the same. The Branch is, to preserve the life of others.
The Root is a carefulnes for our neighbors good estate. The other Branches
are many and diverse: but of those two sorts before described. First as
touching our general Calling, that whatsoever we determine toward him of
set purpose, in deed, word, or thought, it wholly tend to his preservation,
and bettering. then that by our word we do both occasion him to goodness, and
also directly provoke him thereunto: by our deed or outward behavior and
conversation we do the like in both those points. Last of all, to the end
that our life may be most profitable unto him, that we enter into that trade
of life, whereby we may do most good; and faithfully occupy our selves therein.
Then as touching every ones special degree or calling, that Princes keep
their kingdoms; and the government of them in their own hands: that they see
that their laws be good, tending to the same end that Gods word prescribes;
and doing it with the same equabilitie or moderation: that they be so careful
to see them duly put in execution, as that neither them selves do use, or
claim any such prerogative, as does not help it forward; neither place such
under them (so nere as they can) as have not that their full purpose; nor
suffer the^ to continue in authority still, that do degenerate. That al
inferior magistrates do their duty according to the charge committed unto them
(so long as it varieth not from the word of God, neither by nature, nor yet by
circumstance) truly, and diligently: otherwise flatly and plainly refuse,
either to give sentence; or to do execution. That spiritual Pastors be
resident where their charge is: break unto them the word of God soundly, and
sufficiently: use their keys to go together, whether it be to open, or to
shut: keep to the charge committed unto them, unless God shall call them to
some other. That Parents moderately relieve the bodily necessities of their
children: soundly instruct them in true religion: teach them virtuous and
godly behavior: train the^ up in some trade, whereby they may do most good:
put them not of from their hands, but so as they see good likelihood, of
keeping, and bettering the^ in the way of godliness: when they see it needful
for the^ to marie, that they do both help the^ forward; and that where
themselves can best like in the fear of God. That Scholemasters put by all such
Authors as may infect their scholars, either with Heathenish, or popish
corruption: teach the^ the principles of sound religion: train the^ up in
civil and virtuous behavior: and as for their manner of teaching, first see
that it be good; and the^ follow it with diligence, and moderation. That
Suerties for children at their christening, do not pass over their charge to
others: but the^ selves see that they be trained up as they ought, first in the
principles; then in all other needful points. That Masters and Dames instruct
their servant in Religion: see that they bestow not ye Sabbath day, nor any
such other time lawfully exempted in worldly affairs; but in divine service,
and such other works, as become such opportunities: keep them ever sufficiently
occupied: teach them in all their doings faithfulness and truth: see that they
spend not, but as they may bear it: and that they the^ selves allow the^ so
liberally, that both they may be able to maynteine their service; and also have
some reasonable continual increase thereby. That Artificers bestow their labor
and cunning in such things only, as are to our nedeful and sober use. That the
Richer sort do their best endeavor to help their neighbors to instruction for
their souls; relief for their bodies; and mainteinaunce in their right. Last
of all that Subjects break no good and needful laws though they have
license; nor procure license so to do, in any matter that goes against the
Commonwealth.

The seventh Commandment.
THe seventh Commandment requires so good regard of every one, as that we
do in no wise annoy our neighbor in his wedlock; nor our selves walk so
inordinatly in that kind of vice, that it be either the overthrowing, or the
daungering of any other. As touching which we have in like sort to consider,
first what it forbids; the^ what it requires.

It forbids, first the Branch: then the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch that here is spoken of, is
Adultery. The root is an unchaste mind, or no sound care to keep our selves
chaste. The other Branches that come out of the same, are diverse: but some more
principal Branches then others. Those that are of the former sort, are first
and foremost, all unlawful and unclean copulations: secondarily, all other
unclean deeds that are of that kind: thirdly, unclean talk: and last of al,
unclean thoughts. Of the other sort are these: ydlenes: companying with
harlots, or light persons: viewing of beauty: harkening to wanton talk:
deintie fare, or pampering of the body: any kind of voluptuous living: the
vow of single life: not to marie when need requires: if we be married, much
to absent our selves one from an other; or any way to suffer the love and
lyking that is betwixt us to decay.

It requires, first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch is to vp-holde and preserve our
neighbors chastity, that they do not commit adultrie. The other Branches
are diverse: but as I said before some more principal then others. Of the
first sort are these, yt we utterly abhor all such copulation; and that all
be chaste and clean, in deed; in word; and in thought. Of the other sort are
these, to be occupied: to keep company with chaste and clean persons: to
turn a side our eyes from the beauty of others: to stop our ears to
dangerous talk, and to rebuke it: to live an austere, and painful life: to
keep our fredome in this point: to marie whenever need requires: if we be
married, not to absent our selves much but to keep together: and by all possible
means to maintain our mutual love or liking one of an other.

The eight Commandment.
THe eight Commandment does in like sort requier so unfeigned a care of our
neighbor, that we seek not wrongfully to get from him any thing that is
his. As touching which we have in like sort to consider, first what it
forbids; then what it requires.

It forbids first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch is to Steal. The Root is to have
no care of our neighbors substance, or unrighteousness in getting of wealth;
not to regard how we come by such things, so long as any way we may get
them. The other Branches are diverse: but some more principal, then some
others. Of the former sort are those whereby any wrong is done to our neighbor
in some part of his substance, or such things as belong thereunto. Which wrong
may be done three manner of ways. first by doing the deed it self. The
deed it self may be injurious two ways. first if it go directly against the
word of God, whether the laws of our Princes go therewithal (as in many
kinds of our Extortion; Vsuries; Deceites; Defraudinges of heirs, or
successors; and such like): or whether it be but the law of God only, going
As very many injuries yt daily pass among us. and namely the common manner of
with-holdinge the Church lyuinges by right of impropriation in the hands of
thos^ yt are, either at al not occupied in ye ministry of the word or not in
such sort as they ought so far as they are able. Whereunto also may be added
(so far as I can see) almost all such letting of Church lyuinges by lease, as
is for a farther commodity, then falls with in the time of the lessor, and
the procuring of things so to be let, or the enjoying of the same: likewise the
making away, or diminishing by excessive spending, either lands or goods,
from those to whom they ought to come, and such like.
further, and to greater perfection, then oftymes the laws of Princes regard.
Then if it go but against the laws of Princes, in such things as the word
of God has it self left indifferent, but has therewithal left liberty unto
Magistrates to restrain the same, as they from time to time shall find
expedient: as namely, to take to our selves any other allowaunce in apparel,
fare, pastime, price, hier, wages or such like, then our laws do allow us to
do. The second kind of wrong is, if we do but consent to others that do it; or
conceal the same. The third, not to make restitutio^, and recompense for such
injuries as we have done. Of the other sort are, to live an idle and an
unoccupied life: to have no sufficient trade whereby we and ours may live: not
to be content with our estate: prodigality, or superfluous, and vain expenses.

It requires, first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches grow out of the same. The Branch is, to be true and just,
concerning that kind of theft that commonly goes under that name: or, so
heartely to detest it, that we rather choose to die, then to succor our selves
by it. The Root is, the love of equity in all such cases: or, when a man has
a care of his neighbors commodity, in no wise to touch it, but to leave it
wholly unto him self. The other Branches that do proceed of the same Root,
are also diverse: but some more principal, then others. The former sort may be
thus contracted. First our selves to take heed, yt we meddle with nothing yt is
not our own. As for others, if any would proloine away his goods or by open
violence ouerlay him for the^, not to suffer any such so near as we can: if
any have already done it that we know of, to help him to his right again to
the vttermoste of our power. If in times paste we have done him wrong, whether
warranted by the laws of our country, or not, first to make to him, or his a
full restitution: then also to make to him or his a sufficient recompense for
his want thereof, so far (at the least) as we are able. The latter sort are,
ever to be occupied in some godly labor: our selves to have such a trade (so
nere as we can) as is sufficient maintenance for us, not iniuring any: to be
faithfully occupied therein: and to be very spare and moderate in all our own
private expenses.

The nynth Commandment.
THe nynth Commandment in like sort requires so good aduisment on his
behalf, yt we ever seek to uphold our ne^ghbours good name. But as touching
this also, we have to consider, first what it forbids; then what requires.

It forbids, first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch is, the bearing of false witness
against our neighbor. The root is when a man has no sound care of his
neighbors good name or estimation. The other Branches yt come out of ye same
are, to be inquisitiue (being but private me^, or doing it but to feed our
humors) of our neighbors faults: to minister occasion to talk of the same:
to disclose them to others to his shame: to speak the truth of him, to
reproach him withal: to revile, mock, or taunt him, with open rebukes, plain
scoffs, or secret quippes; so to abase or discredit him, or but to make
others merry: to bear with others that so do, and not to show forth a
misliking of it: and over lightly to pass over our selves, not considering
that we have been, or may be as bad as the worst.

It requires, first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch is so to abhor false witness,
that on the other side we be ready to say the whole truth on our neighbors
behalf. The Root is, to be studious to uphold a good report of our neighbor
so far as we may conveniently. The other Branches are, to be ready to cover
his nakedness, and faults: gladly to acknowledge such virtues, and other good
qualities as he has, how ill soever he be otherwise: redely to give him, as
occasion shall serve, his just commendation: if at any time we be disposed in
the way of honest mirth to speak pleasantly of him, to be sure that it tend to
no ill: if we be in place where he is reproched, to defend him so well as we
may; and to turn the talk either altogether from him, or so much as we may to
his commendation: and last of all to cast our eyes upon our selves, and our
own doings, that so finding, that we would be loath to have our own faults
written in our foreheads, we may be the more desirous to cover our neighbors.
Herewithall it is good to consider, that as this vice before described does
become all men very ill, but much more those that are of some account, as the
learned, aged, honorable, or such like, and most of all those that sit in
place of judgment, especially when they are on their judgment seats: so on
the other side the contrary virtue does become all men well, at all times and
in all places, but much more those that are in better account, then the rest,
and most of all Judges to whom is committed the sentence of equity, to be
pronounced by their mouths, especially when they are in place of judgment.
that so the reverence of their persons, the excellency of their office, and
the majesty of their judgment seats may the less be blemished, and shine
more clearly.


The tenth Commandment.
THe last, or tenth Commandment charge every one to be content with his
estate: and so consequently requires so notable a moderation to be grounded in
us, as may very well, both help forward our Common Society; and also prepare
a man the better to walk the hard and painful way of these Commandments.
But as touching it, we have also to consider, first what it forbids; then
what it requires.

It forbids, first the Branch: then also the Root, and whatsoever other
Branches come out of the same. The Branch that first he speaks of, is to
covet. As touching this coveting it is to be noted that he speaks not of
coveting any thing wrongfully or to have any of those things while the right
of the^ apperteyneth to our neighbor (for so should it be confounded with the
eight, and parsley with the seventh commandment: but of coveting or wishing
rightfully to have, for ye bettering of our estate, somewhat that as yet
apperteineth to our neibour.
the example is given of our neighbors house more specially are forbiddden
diverse members: as to covet his wife, his man-seruaunt, his maid-seruaunt, his
Ox, his Ass, or any thing else. The Root is the misliking, or not an hearty
liking of the estate that it has pleased God to cast upon us: and yet no
further, but that we covet no better, unless by lawefull means (as we call
them) we might come thereunto. Of the other Branches that come our of the same
there be two sorts. In time of adversity when the Cross is laid upon us,
or when things fall not out as we would have them, to be so disquieted in
mind, that first we clean forget the hope that we have of a better estate in
the world to come; or else forsake the hold of it, or (at least) a good part
thereof. then coming down to our selves, in our impaciencie either destroy
our selves: or furiously do our selves, or others some hurt: or open our
mouths to blasphemy and cursing: or languishe away in the grief of our
mind: or in secret mutter, or murmr at it: or seek to prevent it, or get
it away by inordinate means (as by wishing, or seeking out hidden treasure in
the sea or land: or any such like.) In time of Prosperity, or when things
fall out as we would have them, to be so puffed up with inordinate joy, that
first, we either clean forget; or make little account of that which hereafter
is to come, the very substance of our hope. Then coming down to our earthly
Paradise, either wholly set our hearts on it: or by means thereof become very
wantons (forgetting our selves in many points of our duties): or lay so
fast hold of it, that we declare our selves thereby, that we should be very
loathe to part with it again, whenever it should please God to take it away.

It requires, first the contrary Branch: then also the Root, and
whatsoever other Branches come out of the same. The Branches is, in all our
secret and in most thoughts, to leave unto all men, whatsoever presently is
theirs, to them and theirs for ever. The Root is a sound and an hearty lyking
of whatsoever estate it pleases God at any time to cast upon us: not so much
as once in heart wishing to have it bettered any one jot.

Of the other Branches that come out of the same, there are likewise two
sorts. In time of adversity, or when the Cross is laid upon us, or when
things fall out otherwise then we would have wished, to be of so quiet, so
pacient, and settled minds, that we first cast up our eyes unto the blessed
estate, that is prepared for those that suffer for righteousness sake here; and
ever keep a fast hold thereof. then coming down to our burden here, that we
quietly bear it, so long as it pleases god it shall be our portion: heartily
thank him for it also, as well as for better: rather choose to bear it, then
to be without it (so long as so it pleases God) though otherwise it were left
to our own choice. In time of prosperity, or when we are in such a case as
does very well please us, to be of that stay and moderation therwithall, that
first we account it nothing, in comparison of that other that is laid up for
us against the world to come: and that ever we endeavor our selves to look
through it, unto the other, that it take not from us the sight thereof. Then
as touching the thing it self, that we neither take occasion thereby to slip
aside from our moderation, to some point of vanity: nor in heart cleave so fast
thereunto, but that we can be content to part with it again with right good
will, if it please God to take it from us.

Could this Commandment be well kept of us, neither should we so much
streine our common society: neither should we think it so hard and so
painful a matter, to endure the way of Gods Commandments.

The Conclusion of the whole: of the end and use of this Law.
By all these considered together it may sufficiently appear, that seeing this
most holy Law requires so absolute perfection (an other manner of thing
then mortal men are able to come unto any thing near, since that they fell)
and has a most fearful curse, or sentence of eternal damnation to those
that shall break any jot thereof (excepting none others, but those that seek
the accomplishmente thereof on their behalf in Jesus Christ) therefore is
this Law given, to those that are Ignoraunte of their ability, or estate, to
teach them that this way, that is, by the righteousness of works, there is
no salvation to be had, for that they are not able to perform the same. so to
drive them all to the other, to seek their justification by Faith: that is, by
the death and merits of Jesus Christ. To those that do come unto Christ, to
give them to understand, from how great impossibility he has delivered them,
who has performed the same to their use: how fully he has answered the
justice of God, in that he has wrought for us so perfect righteousness; and so
consequently how substancially he has wrought our salvation: and what is the
way, or what are the works, wherein we should walk and bestow our labor;
and that, not unprofitably, although we be not able to walk in such sort as
it requires. To those that will not so take hold of Christ, but that they
will needs be saved, either in the whole, or in some part, by their own
halfe-faced works, or by some other way besides, or else not at all, to teach
them, that as for their best endeavor (when they have done but what they can,
and not all, or every jot) neither it, nor any other help will be able to
serve their purpose in this matter: but that either they must do all, and
every jot, even the vttermoste farthing that is due by these Commandments,
or else be damned without redemption. For that it has not pleased God (as also
it could not stand with his Justice) to save by their best endeavor, or any
way else: but by taking hold of, or putting their trust, only, and soundly in
Jesus Christ. That so they may know, that because they do not utterly
renounce their own works, and whatsoever else; nor can abide to be saved, only
by their Faith in Christ: therefore do they worthily perish.

FINIS.
Deuteronomy. 4. a. 5-9.
Behold, I have taught you ordinances and laws, such as the Lord my god
commanded me, that ye should do so in the land vvhither ye go to possess
it. Keep them therefore, and do them. For that is your wisdom and understanding
in the sight of other nations: that they may hear all these ordinances, and
say; Surely, it is a wise and understanding people: it is a great nation. For
what other nation is so great, that have their gods come so nigh unto them, as
the Lord our God is nigh unto us in all things, as often as we call unto him?
Yea and what nation is so great, that has ordinances and laws so righteous,
as all this law which I set before you this day? Take heed to thee self
therefore, and keep thy soul diligently, that thou forget not the things that
thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not out of thine heart all the
days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons.


