AN ANSWER TO A POPISH LIBELL Entitled A Petition to the Bishops, Preachers,
and Gospellers, lately spread abroad in the North parts, By FRANCIS BVNNY
Prebendary of Durham; sometimes fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford.

Thus says the Lord: stand in the ways and behold and ask for the old
ways, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your souls. Ierem. 6.26. AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, Printer to the
University. 1607.

TO ALL POPISH REcusants who desire to know the truth, F.B. wishes grace to
see and to be sorry for their ignorance and error.
THE Prophet David complayneth grievously of some, whose words were softer
then butter, Psalm. 55.22.
yet war was in their heart: they were more gentle then oil, yet they were
swords. Wherein he seems to me, to paint out in some lively colors, the
Recusants of our days who having blood in their minds, and most savage
purposes still in hammering: yet to blind men's eyes, or to turn away their
hearts from any care of preventing their danger, deal by Petition and Request,
as if they were very loiall and reasonable subjects. To this end (by that
which has followed we may judge) was that Petition in September last sent
abroad, To the Bishops, Preachers, and Gospellers, that being deceived by their
words of charity, we should not once doubt of any uncharitable purpose that
they would have, and so should be taken in the snares which they had privilie
laid. But how so ever they smoothly dawbed over their most monstrous
designs, and covered with show of sugared words their most barbarous intent:
yet the event has showed, that under the wings of that Popish dissimulation,
was hatched the most strange and unnatural treason, that heart of man could
think of; in respect whereof, the massacre of France though inhumane, the
purpose of Haman though very cruel, the murder committed by Simeon and Levi of
the Shechemits, though exceeding bloody; yea the Attempt of Pope Lucius the 2.
though monstrous enough, and coming nearest to this of our Recusants, yet have
some honest color of excuse. For in that of France, the King being seduced by
bad Counsel, was made to believe that by no other means he could execute
Justice (as they termed it) on his subjects, and therein not many of great
reckoning died. Haman sought the destruction of strangers; The children of
Jacob had their sister abused by Hamours son who was Lord of that Country;
and the attempt of Lucius against the Praetor and all the Senators of Rome, was
by open force, and not by such dastardly or cowardly practices. But this
Popish design, was to the destruction of almost all the noble, learned either
in divinity or Law, wise and worshipful in the Land, only to attain to
their own wicked desires without cause of just wrath not of forainers, but of
Contriemen and kinsfolk, and that in a most treacherous and sudden manner. It
shall not therefore hencforth be strange to me, that our Learned Antiquarie
writes of certain springs with us, Camden in Brit.
that turn wood into stone: neither yet that of Circe fabled to change men
into swine: since that we see the Popish humor, makes the hearts of men to be
harder then flint: and Romish Circes by their enchantments, can cause them who
before had humane and pitiful affections like others to neighbors, frinds
prince, and country, to cast of al natural love or duty to all, having hearts
more hard then stones, and being in cruelty worse then Tigers. Oh Sr. will
some men say, not al Papists were acquainted with this conspiracy. I am of
that mind too. But withal this is my resolution, that all perfect Papists, and
such as are reconciled to the Pope, though they knew not of it yet being
called upon, would have been assista^ts therein. For that subiecting of the^
selves to the Pope, as their Head and directour, and vowing their obedience to
his commandments, which if he say they be to the furtherance of the Catholic
faith, they dare not but execute them if they be able; makes us justly to
doubt of their faith and loialtie to our dread Sovereign. And if all knew not
the very mystery of this Iniquity, and the depth of of this purpose, namely
in what sort, or at what hour it was intended to be executed: yet in the North
parts, where this Petition perchance was framed; yea and in other places too,
as I have been credibly informed, there was such boldness and contempt of law,
so little fear to offend, and such open resort to their Idolatrous service:
that many good me^ judge nether are deceived (J suppose) therein, that most of
the Recusa^ts, had at the least some great expectation, of an Alteration of the
Estate. Nether is it much to be regarded that the Priests tell us, that in
Civil matters, and if the Pope should be against the wealth of our Country,
they would not obey; as VVatsons Treason him self being a Priest, and a
Teacher of that lesson, did prove unto us. For I am sure he could not make it a
matter of Religion (except of Popish Religion) to murder his prince, to whom
he owed all subjection. And who knows not, that it is an easy matter for
the Pope, whose voice Papists take as the voice of God, to make his favorites
to believe, that all things tend to Religion, that will enlarge his Authority?
And what will he not commend as a thing Religious, that compared the
murdering of Henry the 3. the French King, to that Miraculous work of Christ
his Incarnation and Resurrection? Can we imagine that they who dare utter such
abominable blasphemies, will shame to affirm any thing? And these so dangerous
subjects, because their consciences will not suffer the^to come to our Churches,
must crave either to be resolved that it is lawful to come to our service (which
they are fully bent never to be, for they will nether hear us, nor read our
writings) or else be freed from such punishments as Laws impose upon
Recusants. A strange conscience it is that many of them have, who would be
thought to be more singular, and to have more feeling and fear to offend then
the common sort, and yet if we try their conversation, they are not to be
reckoned among the best sort of such as follow noe other direction for
Religion, then to be obedient unto his Majesty's Laws, with out respect unto
that God commands. Not to speak of their usual whoredoms, oppressions,
malice toward others, and such like good qualities which daily are seen and
known to be among them: let the fifth of November be a witness whilst that
day shall be numbered in the Calenders, of the more then Turkish cruelty of
Popery. Have they a conscience to steal, to live in adultery, to deal
hardly with their Tenants or neighbors against Gods laws: and will not their
conscience suffer them to hear that Service wherein themselves confess there
is no evil? Stand not any more upon such terms O ye seduced Papists. Leave
that Romish Synagogue whose doctrine concerning the worship of God, is
superstitious and besides the Word, 1. Tim. 4.8.
whose devotion consists in toies and trifles, and bodily exercise that
profits little. Leave I say that crew that warranteth, nay makes meritorious
and honorable the deposing or killing of Princes and Pote^tates. Depart from
that church whereof to be is but discredit; For the chief Teachers of Popery
assure us, that to be of the Romish Church, there needs no Internal virtue,
but only to believe that faith that the Papists teach, and to acknowledge the
Pope to be supreme head. The Devil himself may be of that Church: what
credit gain you by being of that company? Be ashamed of them that teach you
neither to keep oath nor promise, to such as they call heretics. To be
short, seeing that church, has so put upon her the face of a harlot, that she
shameth not to be accounted, in corrupting Scriptures, and the writings of the
fathers most ve^turous, in treacheries most dangerous, in cruelty most
barbarous, and in all odious and unnatural atte^pts, most audacious: Apoc. 18.4.
Go out of her, that you be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues. O Romish Recusants (for Catholics I may not call you, it
is not a name that you may truly claim) you have forsaken your first love,
or at the least that love, Apoc. 2.4.
that you seemd once to bear to the truth: Remember from whence you are fallen,
5. Esa. 51.1.
repent, and do your first works. And as Esaias the Prophet calls the Jews to
consider of Abraham in whom they were first chosen to be Gods Peculiar people:
so do I most earnestly entreat you, Philip. 2.1.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, even of your own
souls, that you look not from hence forth unto the glittering show of
external pride in a Mortal man; Heb. 12.2.
but unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith. Mark well what he in
his word comma^deth that you may do it, what worship he requires that you
may yield it, what duties he teaches that you may learn and obey the same.
So shall you find the right true ways to your feet, and peace unto your
souls: Esa. 50.11.
whereas if you still walk in the sparks of the fire which you have kindled
(to your selves) This shall you have at Gods hand, you shall lie down in sorrow.

An Answer to a Popish Petition.
ADoniah the son of David by Haggith, 2. Sam. 3.4.
when he saw he could not by might and violence obtain to be king (though he
attempted it, 1. King. 1.5.
David yet living,) sought by subtilty to attain thereto, in causing Bethsabe
the mother of Solomon, 1. King. 2.17.
(David being now dead) to sue to her son, that he might have Abishag the
Sunamite to wife. The Romish Catholics (for so they will be termed,) have
sought by many violent means, and those most barbarous and cruel to bear the
sway in this Church and Commonwealth, but God not giving success answerable
to their desires, but frustrating their many wicked hopes, they prove whether
by false flattery they can deceive, since by violence and might they can do
nothing. To this end have they presented their supplications, both to our late
gracious Governesse and Queen of everliving memory, and also since to our
most dread Sovereign, that since by murder and mischief they cannot perform
their designs, they may make trial, if by his graces good leave, (in
granting them their desired Toleration) they may subject this noble Realm, to
the Vicar of Rome.

Diverse petitions have to this end bin scattered abroad, some also delivered
to his Majesty's hands; but God hitherto has mercifully preserved him, so that
he has not suffered himself to be taken in those their snares, neither
overreached by their crafty enchantments. But now of late have they framed
another petition, more reasonable then their former supplications have been,
both in respect of the manner, more mild and in show more humble; and in
regard of the matter too, because it requires not a Toleration of Popery, or
immunitie from penalties by law imposed, as the rest of them (that I have
seen) do, simply and without condition: but the drift thereof is (as by the
words I can gather) at the least to insinuate, that if good reasons may be
showed, how they of the Romish Religion, without danger of deadly sin may
resort to our Churches, they would be most ready so to do.

More reasonable, I say, it is the^ others, which may rather be called
comminations then supplications: in this yet an unreasonable demand, that the
thing so often and so thoroughly performed, by sundry learned treatises, is yet
now again required at our hands, and that with such confidence, as that the
Petitioner seems to assure himself, that his desire herein cannot be
satisfied. And in truth I am almost of his mind too; not because the thing he
requires, is hard in it self to be done; but because their hearts are for the
most part so hardened against the infallible truth of Gods undoubted word,
that that seed can hardly take any root with them.

Seeing therefore this petition is in a manner a challenge to provoke us to
encounter him, and carries perchance a great show among his favorits, that wrote
it, as if the cause must needs be good, that has so confident a patron or
proctour to defend the same: I think it not amiss to examine the same as
briefly as I can, and to buckle my self to answer by Gods grace the proud
brag of this Popish Goliath. Who though he rail not so plainly as did that
Philistine, upon the host of the living God; yet covertly he promises
himself the victory, and by his overboldnes of words, hops to assure his
friends that al is on his side cock sure, and no peril at al.

And having considered with my self of the sum of this Petition, I find
three general points thereof, unto some one whereof, all that is said may be
referred. For first there is a complaint of the hard case the Recusants are in.
Then follows a narration or report of the means by the^ used, to redress
the same. In the third place comes the suit it self or petition, with some
show of reason to persuade and move the reader. And though my purpose is to
handle every of these parts: yet so, as that I will follow the very trace of
his words. 1^. Pars.
Thus therefore his petition begins, and with this inscription.

A Petition to the Bishops, Preachers, and Gospellers. That he makes petition
unto Bisshops anb preachers concerning instruction, were not to be misliked,
because it is intended that such men both in respect of their learning are best
able, and for their place and office, should be most ready and willing to
perform such duties. But that so many sufficient satisfactions of this
demand, seem to him insufficient, shows that the Petitioner either will not
read that is written, or reads it with a preiudicate opinion, and therefore
that he has a purpose not to be satisfied: but that he rather asks questions
of our Bishops and preachers, as the Scribs and Pharisees did of Christ often,
not to inform themselves, but to entrap him in his words, or to try if
possibly they might have put him to silence.

And as touching the Gospellers here spoken of, if by that term he mean the
professors of that Religion which the said preachers teach, (as J suppose he
does) I am then glad that he imagines there should in our Lay people such
abundance of knowledge be found, that they as well as others, should be required
to satisfy, the learned divines among the Papists, in points of religion. For
it is no reason they should deny that to their own Layitie, that they require
in ours: and then shall they not from henceforth hang altogether at the lips
of ignorant Priests their blind guides, but shall be better able to instruct and
inform themselves.

Nether will I judge that this petitioner uses this name Gospeller, in
Ironicall scorn and mockery, as some other of that Sect do. Tabui. 3. vi.
gene. haeres.
So does Lindanus that scorneful companion, both against the Gospel it self,
speaking of some who says he, detest certain things, haud secus, atque a puro
Lutheranismo (Euangelio dico) alienissima: as if they were quite contrary to
pure Lutheranisme (I mean the Gospel:) and also against the professors
thereof: Ibid.
Apostrophe lectoris catholici ad Euangelicos istos: An Apostrophe of the
catholic reader to these gospellers with such a like spirit does profane
Eckius call such, Enchirid. de script.
Theologos atramentales, Inky divines. Nether is the blasphemy of Capreolus
here to be omitted, Capreol. l. 5. Elench. haeret. Act. 24.5. and 14. (...).
Hos. lin. 1. de haeres.
who (as Tertullus dealt with S. Paul, branding him with the name of heretic
for embracing and teaching this selfsame Gospel) reckons among his
Heretics Evangelicos Gospellers, as before him also did Hosius, and as he
also cites Lindanus in his dubita^tio, dialog. 2

But howsoever these Enemies to the Gospel of Christ and his undoubted word,
speak or write, reprochfully or blasphemously of that glorious Gospel, Romans
1.1^.
yet as we are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of
God unto salvation to every on that believes: so do we not deny the name, or
take in evil part to be called Gospellers, since that we know it to be the
instrument of our regeneration: For in Christ Jesus (faith S. Paul to the
Corinthians) I have begotten you through the Gospel. 2. Cor. 4.15.
And the same Apostle testifies to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.14. 2.
Cor. 6.7. Jacob. 1.18. 2. Cor. 5.18 19. Phil. 2.16.
that God has called them to the faith of truth, by the Gospel. Therefore is
it called the word of truth by S. Paul and by S. James too: as also, the word
or ministry of reconciliation; and the word of life.

Nether deny we but that we may more justly make claim to that title, the^ all the Papists in the world ca^ do: for that our preaching and doctrine is
according to that Gospel, whereas the teachers in the Romish Synagogue, worship
God in vain, Mat. 15.9.
teaching for doctrines man's precepts, and instead of the sound and wholesome
food of gods undoubted word, they feed them that follow them, with empty husks
of men's traditions. Howsoever therefore our adversaries mean when they call us
by that name, yet we have just cause to rejoice therein. because thereby we are
assured, that the foundation of our hope is certain and sure, being built upon
so firm a ground as the gospel is. Now after this title or inscription, he
comes unto the matter itself, and first (as I said) begins with the
accusation or complaint in this sort.

Whereas we your Suppliants have long time endured, and do daily receive many
disgraces, imprisonments, and losses, to our great impouerishing, yea to the
utter vndoeing of a great many of us: to the which our afflictions there is at
this time by your LL. added the heavy ce^sure of Excommunication: and withal
we do find our selves daily (to the inexplicable grief of our hearts) deeper to
incur the aversion and indignation of his majesty, more heavy and greiuous
unto us, then all our temporal losses and afflictions: and all those calamities
to have only their being, in regard only of our Recusancie and constant
persevering in the Religion we have received from our forefathers, as they from
theirs etc. In this complaint the Petitioner shows first the supposed greifes
and vexations of the Recusants, then also the cause of their afflictions. Their
vexations as he sets them down, are of sundry sorts; in the first rank he
places such losses and disgraces as they would seem to suffer; then they find
themselves greiued with the Ecclesiastical censure of excommunication: thirdly
that his majesty does not so favorably respect them, as they would he should.

The disgraces that this Petitioner co^plaineth of, I cannot certainly speak
of, because the complaint is so indefinite, without coming to any particulars.
It may be that he accompteth it a disgrace, that Recusants have not that grace
and credit, that themselves desire, or that authority in the common wealth that
they would have. But that is not properly a disgracing of them, because nothing
is done therein to bring them into contempt; but only a not adding of titles or
offices to them, for their further reputation. And who would think it fit
that any state should be managed, and the rudder of that ship governed, by such
as are of a contrary Religion to the same? So that if this were true, yet is
there no just cause of complaint therefore.

But there are of them but too many in grace and reputation, whereby they have
great means to discourage the simple people over whom they have government;
and to make more obstinate against true obedience to god and Prince, such as
are of themselves but too ready, to start aside from the right way. And the
further that they are from the Sovereign authority, the more dangerous is any
office that is committed to them: because the eye of him, that is to answer
for the evil that comes by bad Officers, which he permits or reformeth
not, is far from such, that it cannot behold their doings. It were therefore
not only to be wished, but by earnest prayer to be sued for, that God would in
this point more and more lighten the heart of our most Gracious Sovereign, in
any wise to take heed that the enemies to Gods truth, have no credit, I mean
for office or authority in the common wealth; especially in these North parts,
where it will be hard for him truly to know what hurt comes by such unto the
truth, what danger to the state.

Oh that that golden sentence of the wisest man that ever was, and a king too,
were written on the back of the right hand of all Kings and Princes that have
sovereign authority, that it might be in their eye when they sign the Bills
whereby they grant authority to any under the^: When the wicked rise up,
Provreb. 28.
men hide themselves; but when they perish, the righteous increase. Or that
other much like the former, Prou. 25.2.
When the righteous are in authoriy the people rejoice, but when the wicked
bears rule, the people sigh. For there can be no greater hart-breaking to the
godly, then to have wicked men to bear the swaie or to them that are zealous
for the truth, then when enemies to the same, may do what they list. Good
therefore is the council of Solomon elsewhere, and such as Kings should
carefully follow, forhe no doubt learned it by experience. Take away the wicked
from the King (from being partakers under him of his authority) and his throne
shall be established in righteousness.

For this gracing then, his majesty is to have a special regard that it be not
bestowed upon any, (if he have a due care of Gods glory and the good of his
people) but only upon such as are favorours of the Gospel, and furtherers of
all good; following that most godly pattern, which David, a King, sets
before al such as are of his rank, Ps. 101.
and have the government of Kingdoms and contries. So that they being so
opposite as they are, to the state as now it is, may not in any discretion
complain, if greater authority be not committed to them, then may stand either
with the furtherance of Gods truth, or with the safty of the weal public.

What is then the disgracing here mentioned? Or rather what are the
disgracinges? For so he speaks as if they were disgraced sundry ways. If the
Petitioner complain of disgracings, because some few of them, are, after long
time of Recusancy, and after diverse presumptious actions against the Laws of
this Realm, and ordinances of this Church, conuented before Authority: he
should have called to remembrance, that we holding, yea certainly knowing,
that Religion which we profess, to be the undoubted Truth, can do no less in
defense of that Truth, then to call upon the^ that despise the same, to know
what moves them to reject the same. But when they appear before authority,
they are not sharply rebuked (unless themselves give greater occasion thereof)
much less are they by approbrious terms disgraced, or by any unseemly
punishments, not fit and convenient for their persons reproached: with mild
and christian exhortations moved to hear such as themselves will choose to be
farther instructed by. And I trust in all this there is no disgracing.

But I would this Petitioner would look back unto those days not long since
bypast. Many of our Recusa^ts may remember the days of Queen Mary, wherein
they that complain so much that they are disgraced (though untruly) did
indeed by what means they could, disgrace such Godly Martyrs as came before
the^, by stocking and base usage of many, who though they had bin in an error,
(which their adversaries could never prove against them) yet in regard of their
parentage, degree, or place that they had in the Church and common wealth,
should not have been so disgracefully so cruelly dealt withal. And what was
the beating of Tho: Hinshaw, and John Milles and diverse others with rods? Did
not that blodie Bishop Boner disgrace them thereby as much as he might? To be
accoumpted an Heretic is a thing odious and of great disgrace: yet was it
then and still is, a common name that the Romish Synagogue bestowed upon us,
though nether they nor yet their fathers, could prove any heresy in our
doctrine. To be called Schismatics is a great reproach: yet dare they stain
therewith us, who are always ready to show by good warrant and sufficient
testimony that we swerve not from the true, holy, Catholic and Apostolic
Church. Thus they who most accuse us, as if we disgraced them, may more justly
be charged that they disgrace us.

And herein the Petitioner offers great wrong unto the state, in seeking to
make the world believe, that we wish the disgrace of them, for whose want of
grace we rather sigh and mourn, in that their eyes are so blinded, and their
hearts so harde^ed against the ma^ifest light of truth, that they will not use
any means to try the spirits (that come in secret unto them) whether they be
of God or not, 1. Ioh. 4.1
although S. John expressly advises all so to do: but rather wittingly yea
and wilfully too, they suffer their blind guides to lead the^ into the
bottomless pit of eternal perdition. This part therefore of this complaint
may seem rather to tend to this end, that our state be the stain of cruelty
may be made odious, to such as will believe this Petitioner, and their case
seem a great deal worse then it is; rather I say the^ for any just cause that
is given him, to use such words.

And whereas the petition, seems to make these, and the other supposed
vexations after mentioned, to be common to them all, (for I take the Petitioner
to be a suitor for all Recusants) it is most certain that a great number of
them are so far from suffering any disgrace in respect of their Recusancy, that
it is the greatest ornament they have among their fauorits that they are
accounted Recusants; as if they by that name would seem to have some
conscience in Religion, who otherwise in all their behavior, show plainly
enough, that they have nether conscience, nor honesty, but have utterly cast
of all fear of god and shame of me^: and having obtained the report to be
Recusants or Romish Catholics, it is a cloak that covers all faults.

The next part of this complaint is touching their imprisonment, wherein as in
the former, his accusation seems to be more general, then is their
imprisonment. For unless the Recusants in other countries be more obedient
unto Law then in these North parts, wherein they have no regard at all of any
Summones, but show themselves too contemptuous of all lawful authority: I
suppose J may be bold to say that not the hundredth Recusant indureth this
vexation. Nay of sundry whole families in a manner, perchance not one can be
convented. And therefore were it greatly to be wished, that for the better
execution of godly laws, some more forcible and effectual order might be
taken for the bringing before authority, such as yet make a mock of gods
truth, despise all good ordinances, and scorn all lawful authority.

And if any being found very obstinat, in so much as nether they will
conform themselves according to the Christian laws of this Realm in that
case provided, nether will, or can give any sound reason of such their
obstinacy; nether yet hear others who can instruct them (even such of our
profession, as themselves can best like of) be for such contumacie committed to
some prison: yet is there not any Papist that has just cause to complain of
such imprisonment, seeing that our correction that we lay upon Recusants, is
but with rodds, whereas Papists whipp with Scorpions, we stock the^ not, we
hinder them not, but that they may be releiued of their own (if they have it)
or by their friends, if they will bestow any thing upon them. We permit them
to have light or fire, or any other thing necessary for them: al which things
were denied unto many of the godly, in the late bloody persecution, as sundry
of the Recusants may yet remember. So that we may truly say that the little
finger of the Papists toward us, has bin heavier then our loins toward
them: their gentlest dealing more sharp for matters of Religion only, the^ our
greatest punishments that we impose upon them.

But why do they account imprisonment such a vexation, who thought the most
cruel death little enough for those of our profession? Let our Petitioner call
to remembrance the mercylesse racking of Mistress Anne Askew by him that was
then L. Chancelour, to cause her to bewray others of her profession; the
barbarous burning of the hand of Tho. Tomkins, Rose Alin, and a blind harper
in Queen Mary's days; the forcible drawing of an arrowe through the fingers
of Cutbert Simpson hard tied together so that the blood sprung out. Let him I
say consider of these and such like vnchristia^ usage of Christian men,
whereby they would have constrained them, either to have accused others, or to
deny their faith.

And though the Popish rabble, take exception (I know) to the story wherein
these things are reported, yet the Author of that book, brings so good proofs
of that he writes, that they who will deny these things, shall rather show a
mind they have to darke^ the light of truth, that their shame may not appear,
then any good reason that they can bring, to impair the credit thereof. These
stories the^ being extant, and in eyes of al men to read and know, and in the
memories of many men who yet living can testify the truth thereof, may stop
the mouths of all Papists for complaining of any great vexation for their
imprisonment.

But what would the Petitioner have us to do in this case? The Recusants are
contrary to us in Religion, they tra^sgresse our Laws, and break al godly
ordinances that are made, for the edifying and instruction of al his Majesty's
subjects: they will not hear, but stubbornlie refuse all council and teaching,
unless it be such as their blind guides do afford them. (I will not here say,
they are also very dangerous to the state, for that follows after to be
discussed, when I come to the cause that this Petitioner yields, why they are
thus vexed.) If it be the truth that we teach, (as we are most assured it is)
is it any reason we should suffer others to be lead away by deceitful words,
of intising and seducing false teachers, and not seek by all means we can to
reclaim them? It is our part, if possible we may, to bring again to the
sheepfold, those wa^dering sheep. And if gentle and mild persuasions will not
serve, we must compel the^ by more sharp chasticement. Luc. 14.23.
This I know the most mild Papists in the world, would think they should do
to the professors of the Gospel, if authority were with them, as now it is
with us.

We see then, that it is not for Papists (whose cruelty is, I suppose far
greater, against such as are not of their profession then any other religion
whatsoever does use) to complain of such gentle impriso^ment as is imposed
upon them for Recufancie; unless they will think it fit, that in a well
governed and settled state, laws may be broken without due punishment, or
offenses may be winked at, and impunitie should be esteemed to bring safty to a
common wealth, that is pestred with obstinate subjects. Which to imagine, is to
let loose the raines of liberty, to al disorder and disobedience, and to
trouble the quiet estate of a common wealth.

S. Augustine was once of that mind as himself confesses, that it liked him
nothing, Retract. 2 cap. 5
Vllius secularis potestatis impetu schismaticos ad communionem, violenter,
vehementerque arctari; that schismatickes should by the force of any secular
power, be violently, and earnestly constrained to communicate, meaning in
Religion with the godly. But he in that place acknowledges, that it was his
error, quia nondu^ expertus eram, vel quantum mali eorum auderet impunitas,
vel quantum eis in melius mutandis confer posset diligentia disciplinae;
because (says he) as yet I had not proved, either to what audacious mischief
their impunitie would draw them, or how much it would further their amendment
to use the diligence of discipline and severity toward them.

The same Father therefore writing to Vincentius, Epist. 48.
and reporting of the Donatists, as we have found, the Papists to be;
Donatistae nimiu^ inquieti sunt, the Donatists (says he, the Papists may we
say) are too factious and combersome, adds, quos per ordinatas a Deo
potestates cohiberi atque corrigi, mihi non videtur invtile: Who that by such
powers as are ordained of God they should be restrained and corrected, it
seems good to me. And afterward he shows how greatly he reioiceth at the
amendment of many of them by such sharpnes, who would not otherwise have
been bettered. To this end also he alleges that place of the gospel, Luke
14.23
Compel such as you find, to come in. Quia (says he) vt phrenetici ligantur,
sic Haeretici; men in error of Religion are like Lunatic or mad men, they must
be bound and tied, and as it were by the Physic of discipline brought from
the deadlye disease of their dying souls. And afterward declaring, how
diverse men spoke of diverse occasions, whereby they were hindered from coming
to the Catholic faith, but being reformed, they gave thanks to God, who in
mercy reclaimed them by such chastisementes: Among others he brings in some
saying, as most of our Recusants no doubt may say, Nos falsis rumoribus
terrebamur intrare, quos falsos esse nesciremus, nisi intraremus, nec
intraremus, nisicogeremur. Gratias Domino, qui trepidationem nostram flagello
abstulit, expertos docuit quam vana and inania de Ecclesia sua mendax fama
iacta verit: that is, we by false reports were scarred from entering, which
reports we should not know to be false, unless we entered: neither would we
enter, but being constrained. Thanks be unto the Lord, who by a scourge took
away our fear, teaching us by experience, how vain and false rumors, lying
fame had spread of his Church.

How many are discouraged from our Churches, by untrue reports, that we are
schismatics, our Religion is Heresy; to follow us, is to leave the Church? We
are (say they) enemies to good works, we speak against fasting and prayer; our
Gospel is a Gospel of liberty, and many such like most false slanders, do
they scatter abroad among their favorites: and al to make the simple and
ignorant afraid, to resort to our assemblies. And when they have once taken
them in the snares of Recusancie, and bound them in the chains of promise,
oath, and reconciliation, to the Romish Church; then must they not in any wise
hear us preach, or our Service read; they must not read our books, least
their eyes being opened, they should see the mystery of iniquity, that
works in, and by Popery. But as in St. Augustines time many even in the
city of Hippo, where he was Bishop, were by punishment converted from being
Donatists, and became Catholics: so no doubt sundry of our Recusants, if
good means and sufficient might be obtained, to bring them before authority,
would easily be compelled to come in, and being come into our Churches, would
of themselves discover the false reports, that they have hard of our Religion.

Not only Augustine is of this mind, but sundry other of the Fathers too; as
Basil, Gregory, (for his excellency called the Divine) and many mo sought
for restraint of such as troubled the Church, by authority of the sword, as
may sufficiently (if it were needful) be proved out of their own writings.
But to knit up this matter, of it self not hard, but by that which has bin
already said, most plain, the Scriptures themselves afford us sufficient
proof hereof, especially in that notable story of Josiah that good king of
Judah, who after the book of the Law was found, he read therein before all the
people, and made a covenant before the Lord, 2. Chro. 34 31.32.
to walk after the Lord. And he caused all that were found in Jerusalem and
Benjamin to stand to it. Mark that it is said he caused the^, that is, the
people, to stand to the covenant that he had made: and yet it is further to
his immortal praise recorded of him in Gods Register book, 33
that he compelled all that were found in Israel, to serve the Lord their God:
so all his days they turned not back from the Lord God of their fathers.

May good king Josiah make his people to stand to the covenant, that he made
with God: and may not our godly King James do the like? May he compel them
to serve the Lord God, yea and that in such sort, that all his days (though
no doubt of themselves prone enough to Idolatry) they durst not turn back
from the God of their fathers; and shall we so manacle the hands of our most
gracious Sovereign, or of his Magistrates under him, that they may not use
such means to force and compel, to the true service of God, as our laws have
appointed? Shall the king of Judah, have the testimony of Gods spirit to his
eternal commendation in holy writ, for this his godly severitie in Gods cause:
and can it be thought a thing worthy to be complained of, and too severe, if
the king of Great Britain shall follow his zeal? No, no, the same God that
the^ approved the zeal to Gods glory, that was in that Mirror of all
Christian Kings, good king Josiah: the same God (I say) does still allow,
especially in all Princes and Magistrates, a Christian care, and fervent desire,
to have his honor advanced within their dominions, by seting forth and
maintaining the true worship of God, and compelling all their subjects to yield
thereto. Nay if they do not with care and courage perform this service, let
them remember the time shall come, when this voice shall sound full shrill in
the ear of their consciences to their great terror, Luke 16.2.
yield an account of thy Stewardship.

For horribly and suddenly will God appear unto you (O you mighty monarchs
if you use not well your greatness) For a hard judgment shall they have that bear
rule. Wisd. 6.5.
For he that is most low is worthy mercy: 6.
but the mighty shall be mightily tormented; 7.
For he that is Lord over al will spare no person, nether shall he fear any
greatness: for he has made the small and great, and cares for all alik. 8.
But for the mighty abides the sorer trial. And as God hates in great ones,
al neglect of duty: so especially to be cold and careless in the things that
properly concern his Glory, he will not suffer unpunished. For this cause, in
the stories of the Kings over Gods people, as there is nothing so much
commended in them as their zeal in Gods cause; so are not any their vices in a
manner set down, (though they were no doubt subject to many, as by the
Prophets it may be gathered) but their Idolatries, or carelessenes in the
service of God: so that it is a common stain even to the good Kings, the high
places, hill-altars, or groves were not put down. Which glass if Princes
would often look into, they might therein see, not only that by their office
they may, but also that of duty they ought, as Elias says he was, 1. Kings
19.10.
to be very ielous for the Lord God of Hosts: and that the maintaineing of the
truth, and abolishing of superstition is a principal charge belonging unto
them. This appears plainly enough, in that it is required of kings, that
they be much exercised in Gods book, He shall read therein all the days of his
life, Deuteronomy. 17.19
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of
this law, and these ordinances (not to know them only) for to do them.

Now the last of the vexations (for so he terms their mild and meek
corrections) which he speaks of, of this rank, is their losses. And in
deed, Recusants have great and grievous losses, (I confess) and such, as if
they could consider of them aright, would make the hair of their heads to
stand on end, and their very hearts to melt and bleed for sorrow. Oh that they
were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29 Luke 19.42
the^ would they understand this, they would consider their latter end. O if
they had known at the least in this their day, those things which belong unto
their peace: but now are they hid from their eyes. They complain of their
vexations, Prove. 1.31. Ier. 17.10. Esa. 50.11.
but they are most of all vexed with their own inventions; and their fruitless
and wicked imaginations, are chief cause of their endless sorrow.

They have losses; it is most true. They have lost the reputation of dutiful
subjects. And how can it be otherwise, since they have vowed themselves to the
obedience of him, who is an enemy to al Sovereignty besides his own. Mat.
6.24
As noe man can serve two masters (for so our Savior Christ tells us) For
either he shall hate the one and love the other, or else shall he lean to the
one and despise the other: so noe man certainly, can promise and perform
subjection to two such Monarchs, as are of that nature, that the one of them
overthrows the state of the other. They who are subject to the Romish Bishop,
whose greatest care is to maintain superstition and his own pride, that he may
be exalted above the greatest Potentats upon the earth: can never truly serve
him (whatsoever in words they do pretend) who opposes himself against all
such will-worships, and will not subeict his Sovereign power, to the ambitious
will of that Romish Priest.

Yea they have lost the hearts of dutiful Subjects; For the Romish Thief who
robs God of his honor, Princes of their obedience, and subjects of their
salvation, has by his enchantments stole^ away the hearts of Recusants from
their natural Princes, and dread Sovereigns. So that they rest upon his will,
and do but wait for his commandment, if it be, to oppose them selves against
their friends, their Sovereign, yea and their Native Country too. For
Recusants are not to be reckoned in that rank, neither are they accounted of
among the Papists themselves, until they have promised obedience unto him, who
under color of being Head of the Church (for that unjust title he
challenges) robs the greatest members of the Church, of their due honor
and allegiance.

They leese also the benefit of the word, which in our Churches sounds in
such a tongue and language, as the ignorantest may understand, so that they
thereby may be edified and instructed, their souls fed and nourished to
eternal life: yea that they may have that sword of the Spirit in readiness, the
better to be enabled, to withstand the dangerous assaults of Satan. And by
this loss of the word of God, they are also deprived of the knowledge of the
truth, and of the true service of God; they make shipwreck of faith; they want
the true light of conscience, the sweet comfort of Gods most comfortable
promises. These (I say) and many such like heavenly graces they leese, and in
recompense of these so great losses, they gain from Rome (if it may be called
gain, which they buy with so dear a price as those things cost them, and with
so evident peril to their souls,) they gain (I say) Pardons, Agnus-Deis,
blessed grains, consecrated crosses, with other such trash and trumperie,
things of no worth; though esteemed by them most dear and precious, if any
their seducers bring them news from Rome, telling them the holy Father,
himself did consecrate the same, and heaved his holy hands over them.

But these are not the losses that grieve our Recusants or whereof the
Petitioner complains. we daily receive losses (say they) to our great
impouerishing, yea to the vndoeing of a great many of us. First for the common
sort who are the greatest number, for ought I know, few of them are any way
touched to their loss. Some few, and those very few indeed, are sometime
conuented, perchance also impriso^ment for their great stubbornnes, and
offensive example that they give of disobedience. But this withal I dare
affirm, that many of them gain by their Recusa^cie, so far are they from
leesing thereby. For having no good mean to live, there are that sort
themselves with these disobedient persons obtaineing thereby better
maintenance, then otherwise their own state would afford them.

I could also name if I would one, who (as I have credibly hard) being
imprisoned in York Castle, lived so by this loss, that he gained whereby to
purchase la^d worth one hundred pound by the year. It is a common thing and
used of very many of good reckoning, under color of their trouble for their
Recusancy, to lesse^ their charge, and live far under that state, that their
ancestors have heretofore lived and they might live in saueing much thereby, for
ought the world can judge, whether to some good purpose or not, the Lord best
knows. Yea that is also many times a colorable pretense, for racking of
rents, and dealing hardly, either with Tenants or with any other, with whom they
have to deal.

So that if some of the greater sort do pay to his Majesty's coffers somewhat:
yet ca^ many of them find means enough to make that payment very little in
comparison of that should be paid, and more the^ that little, they ca^ raise by
such means as J have mentioned, to keep them from loss. Our Petitioner
therefore cannot perswaid us, that generally their loss is such as that they
need so to complain of impouerishing, much less of utter undoing.

But grant their losses to be greater the^ they are. I am sure they are no
heavier then the law it self does impose; no not so sharp by far. And if any
man will think our laws to be too severe, he must consider, that nether we
only, nether first of all, have made Pecuniarie punishments to restrain such
as are of contrary Religion. Epist. 50.
St. Augustine likes well of a law made by Theodosius that godly Emperor,
generally against all Heretics, that their Bishops or Clerks whersoeuer they
were found should be find in ten pounds, and wishes it might be more
particularly made against the Donatists, because they denied themselves to be
Heretics.

And because of some outrages after committed by the Donatists, Ibid.
a more sharp law was decreed, that they who were of that sect, should be
pu^ished by the purse, But their Bishops or Ministers should be banished: vt
ta^tae immanitatis haeresis Donatistarum; (cui crudelius parci videbatur qua^
ipsa saeuicbat) non tantum violentae esse, sed omnino esse non sineretur
impune: that is, That the Heresy of the Donatists being of so great cruelty
that the sparing thereof might well seem to be greater cruelty, should not
only not be suffered to be so fierce, but not to be at al vnpu^ished. whereby
sufficiently it appears tstat Christian Princes, give no just cause to
Recusants of complaint, if by the purse, or other moderate and reasonable
punishments, they do not only restrain the overboldnes of such as dare
infringe their godly laws, but also force the^ to come to their Churches,

Hither to we have seen that the losses of Recusants are not so great as they
would have them esteemed; and though they were such; it is plain they were
justifiable, before any of indifferent judgment. But what are the losses that
Recusants can speak of, in respect of the loss, not of some goods only, but
of liberty also, and of life too? In the Persecution that was in the days of
Queen Mary, against the Professors of the Gospel, the fathers and mothers
lost their children? the children their parents, the husbands lost their wives,
and wives their husbands, and dearest friends were taken the one, from the
other. These were losses indeed, and such as were very grievous and gave just
cause of complaint. But to have some restraint of liberty, or a small
Pecuniarie punishment, is no heavy burden for a man to bear for conscience
sake.

In the late days of persecution, which even now I spoke of, a great number of
godly Martyrs would have accounted such disgraces as are here complained of,
great glory, such imprisonment, great liberty and freedom, yea such losses,
an exceeding great gain; if in a mean state of life, though in prison, they
might have been free to serve their God. It cannot cannot therefore but seem a
thing to me very strange, and to all other too of indifferent judgment, that
they, who when they had the Law and the sword in their own hands, omitted
almost no kind of cruelty, against such as upon good grounds and such as
their adversaries themselves could not tell how to disprove, dissented from them
in Religion; should now upon so light occasion, make so great complaint, as if
some great cruelty were showed upon them. And whereas then these imprisonments
and losses, were laid upon all that they could hear of, that loved the Gospel,
with sharp inquiry and cruel constraining of many, to accuse others: yet now
we know, and daily see before our eyes, sundry whom we know to be Recusants,
and yet do not use that extremity against them that we might but rather
look for their conversion, being nothing so forward to take them, as they
were to burn us.

But by whom have our Recusants such losses, as are to the impoverishing, yea
the utter undoing of many of them? The kings coffers get not much, as has bin
showed and that which goes that way, is taken of such as are well able to pay.
If the^ their losses be so great, let them consider well with themseues by
whom their loss co^eth. The Jesuits, the Great Masters of al out Recusa^ts,
how proud they are in their followers, apparel, and diet, and in things that
belong unto them, Quod lib.
William VVatso^ that traitorous Priest, and other Popish Priests can tell us,
in a Memorial of Accusations (thought to be devised by one Fisher) in the 4
Paragraph of it, Reply to Fa. Parsons Libell. fol. 14.
thus says Noe Jesuit goes to visit any in England, or trauelleth from on
place to another, but he is richly appareled, and atte^ded on with a great
train of servants, as if he were a Baron or a Earl. And the Reply of Parso^s
Libell tells us of Fa^ Garnett, whose expenses could not be less the^ 500.
pounds by the year, And of Master John Gerard the worth of whose apparel he
shameth to report, whose Geldings also were of great price and many. And one
Oldcorne whom he calls but a pety Jesuit, he knows his apparel to be
seldom less worth then 30. or 40. yea a Jesuit girdle and ha^gers of 30l
price. Letters of A. C. p. 65
pound and he had 8 good Geldings at one time. I would that our Petitioner
should consider, from whe^c maintenance must be had for these irregular Regular
spendthrifts, and prodigal lauishers of other men's goods: is it not from
Recusants? If it be; let the^ not charg the state with their losses, but their
own Traitorous hearts who upon their charge maintain such unprofitable burdens
of of the Commonwealth, such dangerous Canker worms to the state.

Yea and further the same reply tells us that in the College of Jesuits at
St. Odemars (notwithstanding all their Pensions from the King and others) there
be few English youths there, whose parents do not largly pay for their
educations; nether can any poor youth be admitted thither (for all their
pensions) but he must either have anual stipe^d of 20. marks plus minus by the
year, or 40. 50. or 60. pou^ds portion in gross sum. Such continual
portions to be bestowed upon Recusants Children sent to their Seminaries, are
indeed the impouerishing of them, nay the cause of a great want in the whole
Realm, from which so many sums are transported. In the mean season, have
the Priests who tell us these tales nothing? They have bellies to fill, and
backs to cloth, and that is done not of the worst. Many a wife robbing and
undoing their own Husbands, to cherish (such is their hot devotion) these
their Corner-friends; who when they are seen abroad, are taken and repu^ed for
Courtiers and Gallants, Watson and others of them complain that the Jesuits
are nothing liberal to them. Of whom then have they their finding? Of whom,
but of Recusants? These are great means to impoverish men of good ability, to
mainetaine such a number of Caterpillars or Grasshoppers worse the^ those of
Egypt.

Besides these things William Watson in the Quodlibets, and the Reply to the
foresaid libell especially tells us, that they have many more ways to get
from Recusants: there are Legacies in Pios vsus, Reply fol. 24.
yearly alms, extraordinary gifts, restitutions de bonis incertis,
dispensations in diverse cases, alienations, advowsons, etc. and that the
Legacies in Pios Vsus have within few years come to 2000. or 3000. pound. And
declares also how John Gerard a Jesuit got of one Gentl. at one time 200.
pound, at another time 700, and the bestowing of an 100. pound by year: of
another 160. pound, of another 500. pound and of a Gent. and his Mother 1000.
marks. Is not this good getting for one man? I need not here report what is
testified in the Quodlibets concerning many notable pillings of men and women
by the Jesuits and especially by that cheating Letcher Gerrard, Quod lib. 2
art. 5. Quod. lib. 3 art. 10.
who besides his ordinary cousening of women, (with which sex he was most
intimat,) drew 3500li. at one clap from one man. But very probably we may
think, that if not all, yet much of that that our English men have abroad,
comes from our Recusants, and no doubt, such as are at home are nourished by
the^. Is it any marvel if the very veins of their riches be drawn, Quodlib.
3. art. 10. From H. Dru^y 3500 A. Rowse 1000l. E. VVolpool. 1000^^. Hudlestone.
1000l. etc. Anat. of T. B. l. 3. advis. ^,
who have so many Horsteaches to suck the same? Add unto these their Holy
exercises, whereof the Priests make report, and you shall find the Jesuits the
most cunning cony catchers. I think in the world to abuse folk and cousin them
of their wealth.

So that our Recusants we see, may indeed by Jesuits and Priests marvelously
be impoverished, though slow enough they be, to bear any burdens of the
Commonwealth. For when such things are demanded of them, then will they allege
their paiments they make to the Prince, when he shall perchance not get the
sixth part of that which is their due. But as if nothing were gotten from them,
but that which by godly Laws is justly claimed from some few of them, for
their obstinate recusancie, they cry out of their losses and impoverishing,
yea of their undoing, as if what the Prince has, or the Law requires of them,
went to a wrong purse: but what Traitorous seducers get from them, be it much
more, is al well bestowed.

We see then that the penalties that Law imposes are not so grievous as the
Petitioner would it should be thought: they are not imposed upon many, and
that they should be more imposed then they are it is necessary; and has
example from former ages, with the godly approbation of St. Augustine. And to
be short it is most evident, that the favor that they bear to the Enemies of
God and the State, is greater cause of their impouerishing, yea and of the
undoing of a great number of them, then is any execution of Law against them,
only in respect of their Recusancie. For if their contempt of Law, which is to
great in them, by penalties be, if not reformed, yet chastised; their
obstinacy therein, not their Recusancie, is fined.

To the which our afflictions there is at this time added by your LL. the
heavy censure of Excommunication. This is the second part of the Petitioners
complaint, that Recusants be excommunicated. And is this Censure so heavy unto
Recusants. They willingly and obstinatlie refuse our Assemblies, fly from our
Churches, disdain our prayers, contemn our administration of Sacraments; to
be short they will be none of us, and yet are grieved that they are not
accounted among us. Nay when they hear of their Excommunication, there are of
them that can say, it is their desire so to be; they are even as they would
be. And yet to aggravat the vexations that Recusants suffer, this is added as a
thing that much troubles them, that they are Excommunicated, this is now a
heavy censure. What, is it more grievous that our Bishops pronounce them to be
none of our Church then that themselves abandon themselves from the same? May
they despise all power, abuse all authority, break al good order, and
separate themselves from God and godly Exercises of our Christian profession,
and our Bishops and we look on in the mean time, and use no discipline to
reform disordered persons?

I am glad that Excommunication is now judged to be a heavy censure, even that
excommunication that is done orderly and as it ought to be; the parties upon
whom it is to be inflicted, being iudicially called and that unto such places,
as they may come without danger. For hereby appears what just occasion of
complaint those Romish Censures have given to us, who have ere now Interdicted
this Realm, Excommunicated our Princes, not being their lawful judges, Even
as at this time they deal with the state of Venice.
not calling them iudicially to place convenient, not hearing no not careing to
hear what they could say in their defense. It seems they are of that mind
that whatsoever those surly Censures of Rome do against us, must go for good,
and whatsoever we do against them, must be holden too severe and heavy. A
Heavy Censure (I warrant you) to put the^ out of the Church, whom we ca^ by
no means fair or foul bring to the Church, much like as if truantlie and
stubburne Scholars should say they find themselves greiued, because their
Master charge them to come no more to Schole, or if a loitering lubber should
find fault, that he is not set to work.

But if this law were so executed as it might be, it would indeed be much the
heavier and give them inster cause either of complaint, or of amendment. For (as
I take it) they who stand excommunicate, are deprived of all benefit of
Subjects, or of defense by Law, against such wrongs as are offered unto them.
But we are not of the Popish spirit, to seek by all mischief and malice, to
wreake them, as they would us. No, some of us are rather content to suffer
their many wrongs, then to offer them such hard measure. Neither do I
remember, that I have ever hard that advantage taken against any of the^,
saving that in Northumberland (as is reported) one Recusant thought to plead
that against another of that Sect: But he against whom it should be pleaded,
understanding of his purpose, came to the Church, and so avoided his intent.
But to end this point, we know and confess that the Censure of Excommunication
is indeed heavy and grievous unto the godly, and such as are of the Church:
but because Recusants are out of our Churches, and will not be of our
Assemblies, this complaint therefore is of it self nothing, but added only as
a cipher to make the number of vexations seem greater.

The third vexatio^ that this Petitioner co^plaineth of, is uttered in these
words: and withal we do find our selves daily (to the inexplicable grief
of our hearts) deeper to incur the aversion and indignation of his Majesty,
more heavy and grievous unto us, then all our temporal losses and
afflictions. In deed if this be considered as it ought to be, it is just cause
of grief. For the wisest that ever was, has set it down in writing, Prove. 19.
i2
that, The kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion: as on the other side, his
favor is like the dew upon the grass. And again, Prove. 20.2.
The fear of the king, is like the roaring of a Lion, he that provokes him to
anger, sins against his own soul. And yet again in another place, Pro.
16.14.
The wrath of a king is as messe^gers of death; but a wise man will pacify it.
In the later of which places we see, what advice king Solomon gives unto them,
who feel the displeasure of their Sovereign, heavy and grievous; namely,
that they if they be wise, should frame themselves to pacify the same.

His aversion (you say) and indignation is grievous. Indeed Recusants have
just cause to fear it. For if his Majesty should deal according to rigor of
Law, as Recusants diverse times provoke him to do, not only by their
stubbornes, but also by their strange and saucy, yea and barbarous attempts:
their case would be yet much harder then hitherto it has been, and their
punishments more sharp.

But you are grieved you say, how shall your grief be remedied? Must the king
yield unto your unlawful and unchristian desire, to grant Toleratio^? Is it
not rather fit that you should co^descend to his Majesty's most godly and
Christian laws, and agree with him in his most holy Profession? His Religion
is such, as is directly opposite to Popish superstitions and Idolatries,
neither may he, unless he will incur gods displeasure, permit or suffer any
Popish abominatio^s within his dominions, as perchance may hereafter be
sufficiently proved, when I come to the third general point of this Petition.
Seeing therefore he cannot condescend to you, unless he will go against the
light of his Conscience, and neglect the necessary duty of a Christian king:
if you will look for ease of your grief, it is reason you conform your
selves to his godly laws.

And that the rather, because Recusants very justly give cause of his
Majesty's aversion and indignation, in that they hold a contrary Religion, his
being so infalliblie grounded upon Gods undoubted written Word; they think
themselves bound to obey the Popes will, though against the King and this
State, vowing their service unto that proud and presumptuous Man of sin, that
abuses all Authority and Majesty whatsoever. Lib. sacr. Ceremon.
He makes Emperors and kings hold his stirrup, lead his horse, naie to be his
foot stools, to power the water when he washes, to serve him at his table,
to kiss his feet, and in Councils to sit no higher then his feet; Pontifical.
de inaug. Reg.
yea, he makes them swear Canonical obedience to him. He takes upon him to
depose them at his pleasure, to give their right and inheritance to whom it
pleases him, to discharge subjects of oath and obedience. Has his Majesty,
or any other Prince that has any wise care of his estate, any cause to like
or love such subjects?

Your answer I know is ready, that you will be subject to the Pope for Religion
only. But who shall be judge therein; the Pope or you? If he says that it
belongs to the cause of Religion to depose an Heretic, (as he terms all
that love the Gospel) you dare not say, it is not so. In such case his Majesty
has noe cause to hope well of so doubtful subjects. Therefore if you would have
his cheerful countenance, join not with him who is an Enemy to our gracious
Sovereign, and al others that maintain the truth. Nether can your words
persuade us, that your obedience to the Bishop of Rome shall extend no further
then you promise, so long as you retain and maintain among you Jesuits and
Priests such firebrands of mischeife, and trumpets of Rebellion; of whose
mischievous purposes and practices against this their Native country, as the
Priests in their many books extant are good witnesses against the Jesuits; so
the late conspiracy of Watson, and many other mischeiuous intents and
meanings by them before plotted and intended, do plainly declare, how
dangerous your Priests are too. Is it not then for the safty of his Majesty to
have indignation against those Hoasts, that intertaine such guests?

Moreover his Majesty has yet greatter cause of indignation, when he calls
to rememberance, how wholly the Scriptures charge subjects, to honor and obey
their Kings and Princes. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Romans
13. i.
For there is noe power but of God, Romans 13.1.
and the powers that be, are ordained of God. etc. And the same Apostle
vvriting unto Titus, put them (of Creta, says he) in remembrance, that they be
subject unto principalities and powers, Tit. 3. i.
and that they be obedient. S. Peter likewise, submit your selves to al manner
ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2.13.
whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior, 14.
or unto governors, 17.
as unto them that are sent of him. Fear God, Honor the King. These I say,
and many such like places, prove that we owe this duty to him.

But for the Pope there is not one, I say not one testimony in all the
Scriptures, to prove that universal power that he challenges; universal J
term it, because he extends his jurisdiction, by force and subtletie, not
only over al Persons and causes Ecclesiastical, in all places whatsoever, but
also medleth so far with Princes too, that they who are under his slavish
obedience, may not but by his leave presume to enter upon their lawful right
and inheritance. Yet this man, whose Authority is so lawless, and so
destitute of all good ground, bears so great a swaie in the hearts of
Recusants, that if he command, they easily forget all duty and alegeance, that
the law of God and man requires of them.

Give therefore to Caesar the things that Mat. 22.2.
are Caesar's, and give unto God those things which are gods. Rob not Potentates
and Princes of their authority, deny the^ not their due obedience, acknowledge
not any above them, or equal to them, in the affaiers of their own dominis.
By such means you shall more persuade his Majesty, and assure him of your
loving and loiall affections, then by all the fair show of words wherewith you
gloze.

Nether is there any cause you should fear, to cast of your yoke of bondage
and servitude to that Romish Priest, who (as I said) has not any warrant of
gods word, to take upon him as Head of the universal Church. The first that
got that title was Boniface the 3. who was at the least 600. years after
Christ; and he that gave that superiority, was that wicked Phocas, who murdered
his Master to obtain the Empire. He it was that granted, Vt Episcopus Romanus,
vocaretur, and haberetur caput omnium Ecclesiarum, that the Bishop of Rome,
Plat in Bonaf. 3.
should be counted and called head of all Churches, as Platina and other
stories report. The Headship over the Church being thus obtained, by the means
of that wicked Emperor; Boniface the 8. afterward, Benevenuti August. in
Alberto.
he who was called papa famosus, The famous Pope, not for any goodness I warrant
you, and Magnificus tyra^nus sacerdotu^, The stately Tira^t of Priests, (for
indeed he used them very cruelly, so did he Princes too) he who appearing on
day like a Pope, the next day attired as Emperor, with the Imperial diade^ on
his head, and a sword by his silly side, cried, Ego su^ Caesar, I am Emperor
(for he thought the matter being so unlikely, noe man would have believed that
he was Emperor, unless he spak so) others (as Friar Rioch) report his words
thus, Rioch in Alberto.
Ego solus Caesar, I am only Emperor; he I say caused it to be holden a thing
de necessitate salutis necessary to salvation to believe the Church of Rome to
be the head of all Churches. Which also more then 120. years after was decreed
in the Council of Florence. Whereby it appears, that it is very lately set
down to be a matter of faith and that it may evede^tly thereby be gathered,
that the Popes supremacy is not by Gods law, but by man's devise established,
and therefore that it may by man also be rejected.

Jf therefore Recusa^ts vvil still be slaves to that Romish Priest, who usurps
Authority without any warrant, and whose headship over the Church, was not
needful to be believed until within these 160 years or there about; then may
we justly charge them, to be the causers of their own griefs, and the
workers of their own vvoe, in that they are obedient to a foreign power,
upon so small or rather no ground, if he command the^: against that duty that
the law of Nature, the law of Nations, and the Law of God requires of al
Subjects. The Petitioner therefore in vain makes their case herein so
lamentable, and their grief so great, as if nothing were greater corsiue or
discomfort to them, then the want of his Majesty's favor, if to obtain it,
they will not yield to that, which so easily, so lawfully, so honestly may
be done: yea which of necessity and in conscience they ought to do: I mean
if abandoning al foreign Power whatsoever, that will not wholly employ and vow
their service to their and our Dread Sovereign. For whatsoever they pretend to
be, or how much soever they say they will do in his cause, if like the Gadits,
they had faces like lions, Chro. 12.8.
and were like the R^oes in the mountains in swiftnes, 14.
If one of the least of the^ could resist a hundred, and the greatest a
thousand yet is it not for his Majesty to trust any but such as are like to
them of Zabulon mentioned in that chapter, 33.
that had not a double heart. One heart for the King, another for the Pope, I
like not.

Thus have we seen, how they (in comparison of the persecutions which they
have laid upon others) complain of ease and make as if their burdens were not
to be borne, though upon others they did lay heavier by many degrees. Now let
us consider to what cause they impute all these vexations. And all these
calamities to have only their being, in regard only of our Recusancie (says
this Petitioner) and constant perseuering in the Religion we have received
from our forefathers, as they from theirs.

He seems to touch two causes of these their supposed vexations; The one is
their Recusancy, the other their Constancy. Their Recusancy is a refusing to be
partakars with us in the word, Sacraments, and Prayers, and such excercises of
our Religion: the other is a Resolute perseverance in their Popery.

It ought not seem strange unto Papists, if for Recusancy only, they endure
the griefs before mentioned, since they for matter of Religion only, have
tyrannized in most grievous manner, and tormented even unto death, far better
the^ any of them that I hear of. Was it not a common snare to take al true
Professors of the Gospel in those bloody days of Queen Mary, what say you
to the sacrament of the altar? And if therein they would not believe as they
did, and say as they said (though their absurdity in ihat point was exceeding
gross) was it not then thought cause sufficient to bring them to the fire and
stake. The stories are for this point so many, that I need not particularly
to allege any: they are so testified most of them in their Bishops own
Registers, and by so good proof, as that justly they cannot be doubted of.

Yea has it not bin cause sufficient in the times of Popery, greiuouslie to
persecute such as only had, or hard read unto them, some piece of Scripture in
the English tongue? Let the Register book of Longland Bishop of Lincoln,
testify hearin against such as will not believe the truth: For their shall they
find that An. 1521. many had that objected against them, as sufficient cause
of shameful penance or cruel death. Nether was any matter of State, but of
Religion only laid to the Charge of Richard Baifeild sometime Monk of Bury, but
after a Martyr for the truth of the Gospel, most cruelly dealt withal in the
Lollards tower, being hanged by the neck, middle, and legs, his hands also
manicled, Art. and Mon ex Regest. Longlandi^.
against whom among other articles this was one, That in the year of our Lord,
1528. He was detected and accused, to Cutb. then Bish. of London, for affirming
and holding certain articles contrary to the holy Church, and specially that
all land and praise should be given to God alone, and not to Saints or
creatures.

No doubt if S. Paul had been brought before Bishop Longland and his fellows,
he should have had the reward of an heretic, for saying unto the king
everlasting, 1. Tim. 1.17.
immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be honor and glory for ever and
ever. The like he has also in another place; 1. Ti. 15.16..6
but especially for teaching such doctrine, or rather such heresy (in the
Romish language. Heb. 13.15.
) Let us therefore by him (Christ) offer the sacrifice of praise always to God.
Jf praise must always be offered to God, what time shall we have to offer
that sacrifice to Saints? And yet the Apostle is not alone in this heresy,
Revel. 4.9. Re. 5.11.12
but the 4. Beasts in the Revelation also, yea and the thousand thousands of
Angels (because Papists like so well of multitude) give honor and praise, and
power, to him that sits upon the throne and to the Lamb. And the 24. elders
yield this reason why they also did the like, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive, glory, honor and power, For thou have created all things. Now
because we cannot truly say so of Saints and Creatures, it seems they by
that reason will conclude, that Saints and Creatures must not have that sacred
honor and praise ascribed unto them. So that their song of thanksgiving, is
quite contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome; and very co^sonant to
that which Papists call heresy. Now if the Professors of the truth, have
been bloodily persecuted by Papists for hearing only, or reading the Word
of Truth for their instruction: why should Recusants think their Punishment
for obstinate Recusancie so hard a matter?

But Recusants besides that they are Enemies to our profession and faith; are
also dangerous subjects, more ways then one, as before I said. First in that
they intertaine, yea and think it needful under color of perfourming the
exercises of their Religion, that they should have among them such, as when
occasion serves, must put them in mind of their obedience to that Profane
Wretch, who^ they term most Holy Father, and thereby withdraw them from the
kings obedience. Then also in that they take him to be the head of their
Church, and so have their hearts bent on him, howsoever their body and goods,
are for a time liable to the Princes will. And yet also they can find means
to make a state of all they possess, to defraude his Majesty of his right:
and can find such as would be loath to be accounted bad subjects, who can be
content to be used as cloakes and skonces, in these their treacherous shifts.

Recusancie only then, how little so ever the Petitioner makes reckoning
thereof, is cause sufficient to make them endure disgraces, losses, and
imprisonme^ts, with such other penalties as law imposes though as before I
have said, very few in comparison of the number of Recusants, are so dealte
with all I say the abstaining from our Churches (J mean in the time of divine
Service) which is properly to be accounted recusancy, imports a further
matter, as namely because they will not be of our Church, that therefore they
are of so^e other. And if of any, the^ of the Romish, which has for many
hundred of years bin a Schole and nursery, of treaso^s and treacheries of
poisonings, and murderings, of disobedience and Rebellio^s, and al such
dangerous attempts against Princes and Commonwealths.

The case then standing thus, that many of his Majesty's subjects are stolen
away by the inchaunting and sugared speeches, of the Romish Syrenes; I would
suppose it were wise Policy, but I am sure it were good Christianity, to
cause the People to swear not to Supremacy of our Gracious Sovereign only,
(a thing in these days very needful) but to the maintenance of Rligio^ too. A
thing not strange or void of example of former times For Asa and the people
with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.12.
made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart,
and with all their soul; 13.
and that who soever will not seek the Lord God of Israel shall be slain,
whether he were small or great, man or woema^ And they swear unto the Lord with
a loud voice, 14.
and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets. We see here an oath
solemnly taken for the Service of God, whereby the People thought themselves
more straightly bound to perform the same. And when Esdra would reform the
transgressio^ of them that had married strange wives (as our Recusants are
wedded to the Italian head) he caused the chief priests, and Levits, and all
Israel, to swear that they would do according to this word, 1. Ezra. i0. 5
(of putting away their strange wives) so they swore.

Yea it seems the self same oath was put in practice in his Majesty's Realm
of Scotland, The general band.
Anno. (as J take it) 1588. by a general band, wherein, in the presence of
Almighty god, and with his Majesty's authorizing and allowance, the Nobles and
other that subscribed to the same, faithfully promised and solemnly swore, like
as (say they) hereby we faithfully and sole^ly swear and promise to take ane
true, cafauld and plain part with his Majesty among is our selves, for
averting of the apearand danger, threatened to the said Religion etc. So that we
may understand hereby, that examples of the godly practice of Zealous Kings,
both old and new, may teach us this godly and Christian policy, to provide as
well as we can, for the continuance of Gods truth among us: which if we would
in devour as did Ezechiah, no doubt god shall bless our atte^pts as he did his.
In all the works that he began for the service of the house of God, 2. Chro.
31 21.
both in the Law and in the coma^ndeme^ts to seek his God; he did it with all
his h^rt, 2. Cor. 7.
and prospered. For as God loves a cheerful giver, so he best accepts
obedience, that is done with cheerfulnes and courage; not this faint service,
or such as is done with unwillingness and grudging.

In the former examples of Asa and Ezra, we see also, that there was a Covenant
made for the Service of God, besides the oathe that they took. Agreeable
whereunto was (in my judgment) not only that General band before mentio^ed
wherein very many in Scotland bound the^ selves to defend the Religion professed
then, and now also within that Country: but also that Subscription to a
confession of the faith, whereunto the Kings Majesty and al his Household did
subscribe; which subscription also, is upon sufficient penalty commanded unto
al Ministers, that they should require the same of their Parochians, and with
all diligence and speed to certify the Refusers of such subscription; as may
appear by the Confession of faith, and his Majesty's charge concerning it,
Ano. 1580, Which courses if they were taken within his Majesty's dominions,
with some execution of punishment against the obstinate; J nothing doubt, but a
great number would leave Recusa^cy, and would with heart and mouth protest
against the same, and with their hand also (that might be an abiding witness)
show their mislike.

And why should Papists themselves mislike of such a course, seeing they also
do practice the same? The leaguers in their Association do swear, to restore
Religion according to the form of the Catholic Rom: Church, as appears in
a book entitled, In Henry 3
An historical collectio^ of the most memorable accidents and tragical
massacres of France; where also is to be seen, that Henry the third the
French king, instituting an order of the holy Ghost bound them by solemn oath
to such conditions, as only pleased Catholic minds, Anno 1579. Nay the late
king of Spain ordained, that all his hairs and successors in the Estate of
the Low Countries, shall for ever upon their entry into those Signiories, take
an oath for the maintenance of the Papacy and that Religion; as is reported
in a treatise lately published, under the title of A relation of the religion
used in the west part of the world. And the Prince of Parma too, Governor for
the said Philip in the Low Countries, made the Cities subject to his
government, swear to certain Articles of the Romish Religion, set forth by
the appointment of John Houchin Archb. of Machelen; which Articles being
printed, Anno 1585. contain the sum of that is taught in the Popish Church,
both for the Pope, and popery; which they did swear to maintain even to
death, as much as in them should lie, by council or instruction. Shall this
course then seem strange to any, that has so many examples? Or can it be
thought vain or needelesse, in these so dangerous times? Shall we be less
zealous for the truth, then they for falsehood? Or shall they be found more
circumspect to maintain superstition, and men's Traditions, then we for Gods
true and acceptable service, and the undoubted written word? God forbid.

O therefore that it would please our gracious God in mercy to look upon us
in moving his Majesty's Heart to use the self same means throughout al his
Dominions, either to compel the back-sliders unto the true Service of God, or
to discover such false hearts, as would make us believe they build with us, as
did the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, and seek the Lord our God, as we
do; Ezra 4.2.
though indeed they desire nothing more, then to establish again among us the
Popes Authority, and to bring into our Churches those Popish abominations.

Another cause of their vexations, say they, is their constant persevering in
the religion received from their forefathers, as they from theirs. But that
which the Petitioner terms consta^cie, may much more aptly be called
wilfulnes or obstinacy. For I find Constancy thus defined, Iac. Hertel. de
finit Theolog.
that it is, Virtus, quae vera, iusta, and necessaria, constanter, id est,
eodem modo and perpetuo, dicit and facit: a virtue that says and does the
things that are true, just, and necessary, constantly, that is after one
manner, and always. It is therefore required that men should first be sure of
the Truth and Necessity of the things they hold, before they set themselves
firmly to believe the same. But for Popish doctrines, as it is certain that
many of them being tried by the true Touchstone of Gods Word, are found but
Copper and counterfeit: so sundry points also, which they esteem as matters of
great importance, are mere toies and trifles, fitter for fools and children
to sport them withal, then for Christians to use in Gods service. I pray you
then what constancy is in maintaining such trumperie?

That such wilfulnes may well be called obstinacy, partly in respect of the
fountain from whence it flows, and partly in respect of the bad effect it
works in Recusants, may easily appear. For from whence springs this
stubbornes? Ask S. Bernard he will show it. Bernard. in cap. ieiuni^ ser. 2.
Inde cordis duritia, (says he) indementis obstinatio, quia meditatur quis non
legem Domini, sed propriam volu^tatem. From hence comes hardness of heart, from
hence springs obstinacy of mind, that a man does not meditate upon Gods
law, but on his own will. How well this painteth out the whole rabble of
Papists, I would they had eyes to see. For Gods word is little respected among
the^, but they are so wedded to their own opinions, that hardly will they
suffer themselves to be divorced from the same. And if you desire to taste of
the bad fruit, that this corrupt tree yields, Tertul. de paenit.
learn of Tertullian. Neque enim timorem alia res quam contumacia subvertit,
says he, There is not any other thing that overthrows fear; then
contumacie or stubbornes.

We find by experience this to be most true. For obstinacy makes silly
Recusants, who are able to say nothing at al in defense of their opinions,
neither are acquainted with the very Principles, no not of their own
Religion, (whereof to be ignorant, is a great shame for any that professes
Christianity,) I say their obstinacy is cause that they fear no Law, no
Magistrate, no punishment, no peril of utter destruction of body and soul,
but run on headlong to their own perdition, like men senseless, because they
are become fearlesse. Yea my self could name some, that being conferred
withal, have made so little reckoning of any threatenings of Gods wrath,
against such manifest contemners of his word, as if they thought it a good
sport to go to the Devil, for company of such as they rely upon.

Another infallible note of their obstinacy is, that they will not hear, they
refuse to confer. If any thing for their good and edifying be spoken unto
them, they stand mute much like their Images, that have ears and hear not,
mouths and speak not. And if with much a do, you wring some words from them,
their common excuse is, they are ignorant, they cannot reason: if I may call
it an excuse, that is their greatest accusation. For whereas Christ teachech us,
that ignorance is the cause of error, Mat. 22.29.
You err or are deceived, because you know not the Scriptures, nor the power
of God; they should thereby be made more desirous to learn, if they will avoid
error: but they being settled, yea frozen in the lees of their superstition,
will not suffer themselves to be reformed in any wise, contenting themselves
with these stubborn answers, I am resolved, I am satisfied, my conscience is
persuaded. As if God having commended unto his Church the Ministry of his
Word as the only waigh-scales, and true Touchstone of all Doctrins: and
withal having given a general charge to every member of of his Church to
try the spirits whether they be of God or not, 1. John. 4.1.
because there are as well spirits of Error, as of Truth: yet it should be
accounted a high point of good Christianity, to receive and stiflie to hold
whatsoever their Popish Priests shall say unto them, (for so they al teach,
that spiritualis a Nemine iudicatur) without any trial thereof, by weight or
touch.

But what is it wherein they persevere so constantly say they, so stubbornlie
say I? In the religion they have received from their forefathers, as they from
theirs. Confitentem habemus Reum. The Petitioner, in uttering his Grief,
confesses his Error; his own mouth judges him and his fellows; his own
words condemn the^. They have their Religion from their fathers, that is to
say, from men: we have ours from God. For we are said to be (...) taught of
God, not only in respect of having Gods Spirit our inward Schoolmaster to
direct our hearts, but also in regard that our Religion is by inspiration from
him, 2 Timothy 3. i6.
as S. Paul teaches Timothy. It is therefore a sufficient disprofe of the
Religion that Recusants profess, that it is received from their forefathers,
as they received it from theirs, though the Petitioner brings it as an
ornament and beauty to Popery, and a sure argument of the truth thereof.

Esa. 29.13.
Their fear toward me (says God by his Prophet Esaie of the People of the
Jews) is taught by the precepts of men. As if he said; they worship and serve
me, not as I have commanded, but as men have taught. Grievous is the accusation
wherein God lays to the charge of his people, that they follow the corruption
of their fathers. Eze. 20.30.
Are you not polluted (says he by his Prophet) with the customs of your
fathers, and commit you not whoredom after their abominations? Mat. 15.3.
Why transgress you the commandment of God, by your Tradition, says our
blessed Savior to the Scribes and Pharisees? And because it has always been
the fashion of hypocrites to excuse their Idolatries and superstitions, by that
which their forefathers have done before them: therefore God by his Prophet
gives this caveat, Eze. 20.18
Walk not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their manners,
nor defile your selves with their Idols. And the Apostle exhorts the
Colossians: Coloss. 2, ^
Beware least there be any man that spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceit, through the Traditions of Men. And S. Peter charge the Jews with
vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
received by the Traditions of fathers.

Yea in Matters of Religion, to hang upon the doings or faith of forefathers,
or of any men, is altogether unlawful and against Gods express commandment;
Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it, Deuter. 12.30.
thou shall put nothing thereto, or take ought there from. If then Gods
commandment must be obayed, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
without turning to the right hand, or to the left, as else where is said
without adding any thing to it, or taking any thing from it, as here God by
his servant Moses charge; there is no liberty given to us to follow our
forefathers, but God only; who has also appointed Christ to be our only
Master. Mar 23.8.10.
And therefore Tertullian that ancient writer most notably testifies, that no
men may make choice what they will believe, no not the Apostles themselves
might teach as they would, Tert. ipraescript.
sed acceptam a Christo doctrinam fideliter nationibus annuntiarunt; That which
they had learned of Christ, they taught the people faithfully. And then after
teaches us how to know the truth or true Religion, not by looking unto our
forefathers, but holding that which Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo,
Christus a Deo suscepit, Ibidem.
the Churches received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from
God.

Godly therefore is the wish of Iustine the Martyr, more ancient then
Tertullia^; For he lived not much more then 100. Just. Marc. colloq. cum Tryp.
Iudaeo.
years after Christ; Optarim (says he) candem mentem and cateris, ne a
seruatoris verbis discederent. Possunt enim religionem incutere, a via recta
deflectentibus, and meditantes ipsa, quiet reficere incundissima. I would wish
that others also were of that mind that they would not depart from the words of
our Savior. For they ca^ work Religion, in such as turn from the right way,
and refresh with most sweet rest, such as meditate thereupon. And as he wishes
that others would do, so him self gives example therein, insomuch as Tryphon
the Jew having experience thereof by the reasoning which they had together, thus
speaks unto him: Iam ante dixite semper Scripturis haerere quo incedas
tutior: I have said before, that you allwaies stick to the Scriptures, that you
may walk more safly. The^ afterward he yields it as a reason why he will set
down their talk and conference in writing, Nec enim sequor homines, Justin.
Mar. Ibi. post. me.
aut doctrinas humamanas, sed Deum, et quae ille docuit. For nether do I
follow men, or the doctrines of men, but God and that he teaches.

Thus then we see, that the commendation that the Petitioner gives unto their
Popish Religion, that they received it from their forefathers, is a sufficient
argument to reject the same, unless they can fetch further the original of
it, then from their forefathers, or their forefathers forefathers. And when
they have gone as far as they can, to claim all Antiquity of Man yet the
Truth is that only, that comes from God. If they therefore will persuade us,
that their Religion is good, they must show it out of Gods Book; they must
give it this praise, that it is in Gods written word: which if they can, we
will rather believe one sentence rightly alleged, according to the
circumstances of the place out of Scriptures: then all that they ca^ speak of
their forefathers to many generations. Herein we have good warrant out of the
sacred word as I have showed; this was the practice of the Primitive Churches,
as partly is proved, and may very plentifully be confirmed.

Neither must it be granted unto the Petitioner, that Recusants endure such
vexations as they complain of, only for their ancient Religion. For as there
has been other cause of making both of the ancient and newer Laws, against
many of the things wherewith they may be touched; so is there other cause,
why those laws should be put in Execution: namely to keep under dangerous
and doubtful subjects to the Estate. For even that point of their Religion,
whereby without any good ground they subject themselves to the Pope, an utter
Enemy to al Soveraigntie in Princes, makes them to be such, as must carefully
be looked unto. And yet that is not the Religion they received from their
forefathers, and they from theirs, seeing it was never decreed as a thing to be
believed, in any Council before that of Florence, which was kept, Anno. 1439.

We know also, as has before been said, that they who are the daily Plotters
of all mischieffes and more then Pagan villainies against this flourishing
Realm, ( Jesuits I mean and Priests,) are fostered and maintained by
Recusants, yea so honored and embraced by them, as that both their will and
their wealth is at their disposing: and that they prepare the^ against their
long looked for day, that Cardinal Alen spoke of (in a letter to a friend of
his which is to be seen,) and diverse other since him, Weston de tripl. stat.
in P^rorat.
do inculcate, that upon any fit occasion they may join with them, in their
mischievous attempts. That is also confessed by one of the Scottish Jesuits in
a letter he writes to the Prince of Parma (as I remember for I have not the
book now by me, but they are yet to be seen) wherein having reported what good
success they have of their labors, he shows also what they endeavor, namely
with Religion, Discou. p. 7. Answ. to a Iesuited Gent. Quodiib. 2. art. 7.
Jnfanta's intertain. in the English Coll. at Val Iedolid. Jesuit. cat. l. 3. c
16. Import. consid. p. 25. Reply to Pars. li f. 65 Quodlib. 6 art. 10.
to plant in them an affection to the Catholic king. And to that end do they
still teach, that the Catholic Religion and the Catholic king are so linked,
that one cannot take footing here without the other; yea, that it is an
Honorable Action to plant Religion here by Conquest. And though that
smooth-tongued Traitor Ric. Southwell the Jesuit, confessed from the Duke of
Medina's own mouth, that so room might be made in England for the king
Catholic, little care would be had what became of other Catholics: yet our
Recusants, rather then this Romish plot should fail, will not only hazard
their own estates and persons here at home; but also send their Sons abroad
to places purposely erected for our Countries Conquest; Engl. Sem. at Siuil.
valled. S Lucar^, etc. Quodlib. 8. art. 10.
where they are sure to prove Jesuitical firebrarnds, never to return but to
ruinate their Native soil. And must we yet think these men are only for
Religion vexed, who show themselves so many ways, so dangerous subjects? No,
no, as their Religion is not the plant that God Mat. 15.13.
has planted and therefore must be rooted up, so are their doings such as make
the^ justly deserve to be rooted out together with it.

The complaint of this Petitioner being in some sort considered of: it
follows also that we examine the Remedies which they say they have used.

The second part of the Petition.
Which ( supposed vexations for Religion) moved us before the end of the last
parliament, by our supplication delivered to his Majesty, after declaration of
our most dutiful allegiance, and protestation, that our Recusancy proceeded
from no other ground but fear to offend god: to offer (as before by a like
supplication delivered to our late deceased Queen in the 27 year of her
reign we had done) that if LL. Bishops or other of singular note of learning
among them at those times should be able to prove to the learned divines of our
Religion, that we being of the Catholic Roman faith, might without
committing deadly sin repair to their Churches, and be there present at the
exercising of your Religion (it being different from that we profess) we would
have been most ready and willing to have performed their desiers therein This
is the second general point handled in this Petition, and touches the
Remedies which the Recusants have (as he says) used, to ease them of their
troubles. But the Petitio^er might have dealt some what more plainly, if he
had showed all the ways they proved to shak of the yoke of their obedience;
but indeed that Narration would have deserved little favor. For they have used
many more ways the^ are good, to effect this their desire. They have sometime
burst forth into open Rebellions, as the stirs here in the North, the 11.
year of her Majesty's reign, that is now past all their practices, at rest
with god; and the sundry troubles of Ireland do testify. They have had also
diverse secret purposes of poisening, and murdering by any means they could
devise, the sacred person of their Sovereign not fearing Gods wrath, either
against murderers or against the dispisers of Gods ordinance. Jesuit. Catech.
3. c. 16.
J speak not of the Invasion, nor of that thrice diabolical powder Treason
that was by them and their Teachers procured, whereby they showed that rather
they would endanger the state of the whole Realm, then not seek to bring
their purposes to pass; of which the Romanists of France seemed to prophecy,
when they writ that the Jesuits cared not to destroy a soul, a King, a
paradise, the Church al at one blow, Jesuit catech. 1. 3. c. 13. etc. 18.
to make way to their Spanish and half paga^ designeme^ts.

These and such like their unnatural and unchristian plots and purposes, the
Petitioner had good reason to pass over with silence: and he makes mention
of that only, that without discredit he may speak of, namely of some
supplications, which he says, they preferred both unto our Late Gracious
Queen of most happy memory, and also to our most Renowned King, vvho^ God in
his great mercy has given unto us. That which was delivered (as he says) to
our Late Queen J never saw, nether (I think) have hard of. But unto the Kings
most excellent Majesty that now reigns (whose government also the Lord for
his goodness lengthen and prosper many years over us) I have seen sundry,
whether should I call them Comminations or railing Libels; for some of them are
noe other; and therefore supplications I cannot truly term them.

But whatsoever they are, I mean not further to deal with them, then this
Petition shall occasion me. Our Petitioner complains afterward that they
received no answer to the former supplications. Jf that to Queen Elizabeth,
were like unto most of those that J have seen to his Majesty (for four have
come to my hands) they deserved no favorable answer. It is too saucie a part
for subjects to pretend humble suit, and yet closly to threaten if their
desiers be not satisfied; as does the one especially of their papers, by
setting before his Majesty's eyes, the departing of the Ten tribes from
Rehoboam his government, for that his answer to them was otherwise then they
would have it. And howsoever they will seem to profess more loyalty, then
they did show: yet is it hard trusting the^ of their word, seeing many
deeds done by them of that faction, have been dangerous and troublesome to the
state, how smoothly soever now they speak, that they may by that means
speed.

And what good can they mean by avowing, that God approved that departing of
the Ten tribes for Rehobohams denying their just petitions, unless they mean
to defend that Popish Paradox (and do thereafter too, if they be able) which
is called by Sigebertus, Sigebertus in Chron. Ano Dom. 1088.
Novella haeresis, a new heresy; quod malis Regibus nullam debeant
subiectionem, and licet sacrame^tum fidelitatis fecerint, nullam tame^ debeant
fidelitatem, nec periuri dicantur, qui contra regem senserint; imn o qui regi
paruerit pro exco^municato habeatur: qui co^tra regem fecerit, a noxa
iniustitiae and periurij absolvatur; that is, That they owe no subjection or
obedience to evil kings (and who are good or evil kings, must be thought as
it pleases them to judge) and though they have sworn to be faithful, yet owe
they no obedience, neither are they to be called perjured, if they be against
the king: but who so obeys the king is to be accounted for excommunicated:
but who so is against him is absolved from the fault of evil dealing or
perjury.

Nether is this new haeresie, as he calls it, an opinion of those times only
whereof he then wrote: but that heresy is still maintained in the Popish Church,
as Iansonius (no Enemy to Popery, I warrant you) tells us. Mercur. Gal lib.
2. Annus 1589.
For when the French King Henry the third, had for saving his own life (or at
least his Crown as the Priests confess) killed the Duke of Guise; the Divines
of Parise in a solemn Convocation did conclude, Quod lib. 9. art. 4.
that the subjects were freed from his obedience, and their oath, they might
levy money against their King, conspire, bear armor and fight. And this their
devilish Conclusion they sent to Rome to get it ratified. Much like was this
Position, Anthon. Collinet. li. 2. Trag. Hist
unto that which a Bacchelaur of divinity maintained in Disputation, some four
years before in the College of Sorbone, That it was lawful for any man,
private or otherwise, to depose or kill any kings or Princes, which were wicked,
evil men, or heretics.

Anthon. Colinet trag hist. li. 6.
True it is, that the Senate of Parise refused to ratify the bloody Conclusion
of the Divines of Sorbone, and required respit; but some seditious persons by
force took them, cast them into prison, chose a new Council. But how well the
Pope allowed thereof, may appear by the event: for the king was murdered,
Quod lib. 9. art. 4.
(by the Jesuits practices, as Watson the Priest confesses) the Pope by a
most blasphemous speech commended the fact, and in token of his good
approbation thereof, that Beastly wretch Sixtus Quintus, was not ashamed to
compare the Miraculousnes of the murder, with the Incarnation and Resurrection
of Christ Jesus, and to affirm that that Spirit guided the king-killing Friar,
that guided the Prophets and Apostles. Ant. Colyn. trag. hist. li. 7. Lib.
intit De iusta abdicatione. He^ 31. Anno. 1602 Mark. 7. Reply to Parsons lib.
An. to cap. 4.
But what will you more? He canonized for a Saint that bloody Beast, and made
him the God of the Parisians. And for farther cou^tenancing of that holy
murder, the Jesuits set forth a discourse, wherein they maintain, that Any man
might lawfully kill a Tyrant (and such must every one be reckoned who^ they
dislike,) though there be neither sentence of Church, or kingdom against him.
Neither is this taught for good Popish Divinity, in France only or Rome, but
also in His dominion, who is termed the Catholic king, is this worse then
heathnish lesson, holden for sound and good, as your Priests themselves assure
us. For in Salamanca it was concluded by the Professors of Divinity in that
University, and the Preacher in the College of the Society of Jesus at Tire,
that the Catholics in Ireland, might favor the Earl of Tiron (when he was a
Rebel and Traitor) in his wars, and that with great merit, and hope of
eternal reward, as though they warred against the Turks. And that al
Catholics sin mortallie, that take part with the English against Tyrone, and
can neither be saved, nor absolved from their sins by any Priest, unless
they repent and leave the English. Moreover, They are in the same case that
shall help the English with any victuals, or any such like thing. Lastly,
that the most worthy Prince Hugh O Neale and other Catholics of Ireland, that
fight against the Queen, are by no co^struction Rebels. I am not ignorant that
the Priests charge the Jesuits, with this doctrine: but the Pope has also
confirmed the same as before is said, and therefore if ever opportunity to
execute the same would serve their turn, Jmport: co^sid. p. 23. 24.
what Papists hands would not be bloody? Especially since they are taught
that in wars for Religion, every Catholic is bound to do as the Pope
directs without regard to his Temporal Sovereign: Parsons Philopater. De
iusta abdicat. H. 3. Bannes in Thomam Aquin. Quod lib. 9. art. 4.
and that though they may make show of obedience for a time yet as soon as
they can get strength to make a part, they may and ought put down an
Heretical king.

To this most impious, detestable, and dangerous Heresy these humble
Supplicatours (as they would be thought) sing their Amen as I take it, in
saying, that departing from Roboam his government by the Israelites, was by the
approbation of God as it seems. As if their departing from their lawful
king, could be liked of God. But S. August. brings this among others as an
example whereby he will prove Gods just judgment in punishing sin by sin,
not Gods approving the fact. De gra. and. lib. Arbit. cap. 21.


Yet these men that defend such dangerous points of doctrine, in another
Supplication, go about to persuade his Majesty, that they are the true and
faithful subjects who obey for conscience sake: they (I say) who are at the
commandment of him, that is a plague to all Princes; they who have already
sundry ways tainted their credit, and showed their disobedience; not content
to entreat for the^selus, pronounce (as untruly, as boldly) that Protestants,
only for moral honesty of life, or instinct of nature, or for fear of some
some te^porall punishment, do pretend true obedience. As if we, who are better
acquainted with the duty we owe unto the powers that are ordained of God, out
of Gods Book, by far then they are, and deny his authority who takes upon
him to command the Mightiest Monarchs upon earth, acknowledging our Gracious
King within his Dominions, to be Supreme Governor under God; can be deemed
so undutiful, as they that neither be acquainted with those sacred
Scriptures, and are devoted to that Romish Priest and believe and acknowledge
his supreme power to command.

I vvil not speak how leavvdly they seek to dishonor and disgrace as much as
they dare the sacred Majesty of our King, and the most honorable Senate of
sage counselors, in making resemblance between him and Roboam, unless he
yield to their requests, and between his Majesty's most wise Council, and the
youths, whose advise Salomons son followed. Nether will I speak of the
multitudes or many thousands that they speak of to be of their mind as if
thereby they would make his Majesty afraid to deny that, which so many request
at his hands. But in charging his Majesty's meek and merciful government with
cruelty as they do, they show themselves to be of that crew, 2. Pe. 2.10.
Jude. 8.
that fears not to speak evil of the^ that are in dignity, but despise
government. These and many such Reasons may be alleged, why their
Supplications, might not seem worthy to be ansvvered but buried rather in
silence.

But to return to the words of our Petitioner he says that in the former
supplication they have protested, that their Recusancy proceeded from no other
ground but fear to offend God. The ground we confess to be good, if the
cause of fear be just; otherwise not. And I pray you what cause is there of
being affraide to offend God by coming to our service? Will he be offended if
he only be prayed unto, as in our Churches we use to do? I trow not; He has
given us that commandment, he will not be angry if we obey it. Psalm. 50.15.
David calls him a hearer of prayers; Thou hearer of prayers, Ps. 65.2.
to thee shall all flesh come, which property because we cannot say it can
belong to any but God, we therefore dare not pray to any, but to him. And
that which I have said of prayer and and craving of such things as we stand in
need of at Gods hands, is also to be understood of Giving thanks for the things
we receive. Iac. 1.17.
For seeing Every good gift comes from him, we acknowledge our selves
beholding to him for the same, and thank him for it.

We have the Sacraments administered according to Christ's institution, which we
have justified against your learnedest divines, and are still ready to do. The
rest of our Service is nothing else, but that which your selves will confess
to be the Scriptures. In all this there is no sufficient cause of fear, why
God should be offended, but rather well pleased. But indeed just cause you
have to fear his heavy wrath, because of your abominable Idolatries and
Superstitions, whereby you pollute the name of God, and defile his worship.

The substance of their former Supplication which he speaks of, stands
upon two Points, a Suite, and a Promis. The former is uttered thus, that the
LL. Bishops, or other of singular note of learning should prove to their
learned divines, that Romish Catholics might resort to our churches, and be
present at the exercise of our Religion, it being different from that they
profess.

Here first I would ask the Question, why their Request was, that their
learned Divines should have this proved to the^? It behooves every one of you
to be satisfied for your own selves and persuaded in your own consciences,
2. Habac. 4.
For the just shall live by his own (not an other man's) faith. And you
Recusants, must answer (not your Priests for you) for your disobedience to the
Laws that you show against God and man. Reply to the Apol. c. 6.
Yea and a reply made by a Priest to a Libell called a brief Apology, shows
that sundry learned men of the Popish Religion, have been of that mind, that
Recusants might come to our Churches; So did Fa. Langdole also. Dialog. p. 97.
98
And that Bosgraue himself a Jesuit refused not our Churches, but came to
them. Why then is it now required that your learned Divines should be taught
that lesson, which long since they had learned?

It was (say the Priests) sometime lawful, but it is now made unlawful,
because it is a sign distinctiue, whereby a Catholic is known from one who
is no Catholic. Well, then there is in our Service nothing that makes it
unlawful, there is not in our Churches, to make Recusants abstain from them.
All the matter is, that Papists must be known to be Papists, and their not
going to the Church is this sign distinctiue, whereby they are known; in so
much as the writer of the Reply, Repl. to the Libel. c. 6.
in the chapter and place before named, says thus, it was somewhat more to be
lamented percha^ce (speaking of Papists coming to church) then to be blamed,
before it became to be a sign distinctiue. And the^ he adds, For this
consideration only, in the judgment of the Jesuits in their Romans College, made
the going to Church, unlawful in England.

Thus may our Petitioner see that their Learned Divines agree in this point,
that if it had not been the sign distinctiue to know a Romish Catholic from
a True Christian, they might have come to Church. Now if I should ask of our
Masters of this new learning, where they did learn in Gods Book, that this
sign distinctiue is a thing so necessary, that in regard thereof it is required
that a Subject should break his Princes godly Laws, and such as command
presence at such Service, as themselves cannot find any fault withal; it
would I suppose trouble both Jesuits and Priests, to make a direct answer. For
the Apostles of our Savior Christ, though the Ceremonies were abolished, and
therefore the Jews Service and Rites not to be used of Christians; yet came
into their Synagogues, and so could not but be present at their Service.

And yet their difference in Religion was such, as that S. Paul writes to the
Galatians plainly, Gal. 5.2.
If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; 4.
Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the law, ye are
fallen from grace. But notwithstanding this diversity of Religion that was now
between Jews and Christians, it was not made a sign distinctiue, whereby a
Christian should be known, that he might not resort to their Synagogues.
Art. 13. 13. 14
No one the contrary, Paul and they who were with him, entered into the
Synagogue (of the Jews) on the Sabbath day, and sat down. Neither did the
Jews know any such sign distinctiue, 15.
but after the lecture of the Law and Prophets, The Rulers of the Synagogue
sent unto them saying, ye men and brethren, if you have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on. Now if Christians were not the^ charged, to
obstaine from Jewish Synagogues, where such were as held a Religion that would
quite deprive them of the Grace of Christ: I trust our Recusants have noe cause
of fear to come to our Churches, where themselves confess that in our Service
is nothing but good, and godly.

Nether was there any sign distinctiue that Christians were bound to use,
whereby they should be known from Pagans, or from Heretics such as were the
Arrians and others. For this is easy to be gathered, in that they had at Rome
their secret Conventicles, and some of Nero his Court resorted to them, but
they kept the^ selves as much as they could unknown, because they knew that
being detected, they should be cruelly dealt withal. They therefore never so
much as dreamed upon any sign distinctiue, but rather destered to appear
like other men, saving only in such things, as were aginst the true Service of
God. And Catholic and Orthodoxe Christians, in the time of the Arrians, were
feign to hide themselves in Caves and corners, as themselves confess, seeking
to be unknown rather then known.

And why do these Pharisees J mean Jesuits and Priests, lay such burdens upon
the Lay Recusants, as themselves will not touch with their little finger?
They disguise themselves in their apparel, and use what means they can, not to
be discovered for such as they are. Why should there not be as well a sign
distinctiue of the order, as of the Profession? It seems Priests and Jesuits
are well content, the Lay Recusants should show themselves in the fore front,
and they will take part with him that said Ego cro post principia. For he
knevv the end of the fraie, was the safest part thereof.

Again if it be lawful for Jesuits and Preistes in their Schools to appointe
what shall be a Sign distinctiue, why may not rather our King and the States
of the Realm in Parliament command that Papists shall come, the Men with shaven
crowns, the woeman covered with vayles like to Nuns, or al of them with some
other badge or Mark into our Churches, that thereby they might be known what
they are. Will they then come, if there may be such a Sign distinctiue? It were
not amiss they were proved whether they would or not.

And I am verily persuaded, that if such order should be taken, their Romish
Teachers would find out some other new cause, why they should not come at our
Churches. For it is not (if truth were known) a sign distinctiue that they so
much regard, as a ba^d rete^tiue, whereby they may be holden in their blindness
still. It is Ieroboams policy, that makes the blind guids of our Recusants,
keep their followeres from our Churches, of whom the Scripture thus testifies.
1. Kings 12.26.27.
And Jeroboam thought in his heart, now shall the kingdom return to the house
of David, if this people go up and do sacrifice, in the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again to their Lord, even
to Rehoboam king of Judah. And therefore, as after follows in the story, the
King by advise of his Council, made and set up Calves at Dan, and Bethel, and
got Priests, fit for the purpose, and so kept them from going to Jerusalem to
worship there.

The Pope and Popish divines know, that if Recusants might have free liberty
to come to our Churches, they would soon grow into mislike of their
superstitious toys, and gross Idolatries, howsoever diverse through their
intising words, are for a time holden in ignorance, and mislik not popery.
And for that cause they dare not so much as permit their Recusa^ts to co^ferre
with Protestants, forfeare least in the end, they leaving the^, should make
choice of the undoubted Truth. Reply to a li. cap. 6.
For even Conference the Priests hold as unlawful, as repairing to our Churches
for ought I see.

Thus then I reason, to satisfy in some part the Request of the Suppliants
hear mentioned: The Popish divines are resolved that coming to our Churches
is not unlawful, but only that it is now accounted a sign distinctiue, to
know a Papists from a Protestant: but other signs distinctiue may be devised
besides that, therefore it is not necessary that that sign should be retained,
and so by consequent it may be left. Nay seeing it is but the sign
distinctiue that they stand upon, and other signs of distinction may be used,
less repugnant to our Godly laws, and whereby Papists shall not be found, so
disobedient Subjects as now they are: I therefore may be bold to affirm, that
if Recusants Teachers had that loialtie to their Sovereign, and obedient
affection to the Sat, that here they do and elsewhere they will pretend; they
would teach them a new lesson, and perswad them, that using some other sign,
in this they should not be Rebellious against God and man. For the more
offensive that they are (especially to the Powers ordained of God) the more
they sin, and the greater shall be their condemnation.

Again whereas signs distinctiue are but Accidental and belong not to the
very Substance of our Religion, as in this point in question is plain, seeing
that it is by learned divines among Papists resolved that once Papists might
lawfully have come to our Churches, until so^e me^ made their not coming, a
sign to know a Papist by, I may thereof thus reason; No external sign or
observation must make us leave necessary duties, that belong to the Substance
of our obedience, but the sign distinctiue, is such an external observation,
therefore for it we must not leave such necessary duties, as belong to the
substance of our obedience: and by conseque^t the Kings Majesty's Laws are not
for it to be broken.

The first two Arguments are so gathered out of the very words of the Priests
and Jesuits, and so grounded upon good reason agreeable to the word that I hope
I need not prove them. In this Third Argument, the Mayor is confirmed by that
which God commanded Samuel to say to Saul, when he had broken Gods
commandment, 1 Samuel 15.22.
in sparing Agag King of Ameleck and some of the best of their cattle, to obey
is better then Sacrifice, and to harken, is better then the fatt of Rams. I
desired mercy and not Sacrifice, says God by his Prophet Hosea and the
knowledge of God, Hos. 6.6.
is more then burnt offerings. If that external service that God commanded,
be not regarded in respect of obedience: what shall we the^ say of this sign
distinctiue, which some Politic head of a Popish Jesuit, has found out?

Now the Minor Proposition, which is that Recusants not coming to our Churches
is such an external observatio^, whereby their fellows may know them to be
Papists, that which I have alleged out of the Reply to the Libel, teaches
us to be true, and for that cause they call it a sign distinctiue.

Again; The hearing of the Word, and Receiving of the Sacraments, is not to be
omitted for any sign distinctiue, as the Example of Christ himself and his
Apostles, who entered into the Jewish Synagogues, though they were Enemies to
the doctrine that Christ and his Apostles taught, may sufficiently confirm
unto us. And yet our Adversaries neither ca^ nor do say, that our doctrine,
especially in our Book of Common Prayer, is more faulty then theirs was: nay
they confess therein no fault to be found: therefore much better may Papists
resort to our Church, without in curring any danger of deadly sin. For what
deadly sin can be so much as suspected to be, in coming to the Churches
where there is first, Confession of our sins, Prayer unto God for forgiveness
and other his Graces, Thanks giving for his benefits, Hearing of the word of
God, Receiving of the Sacraments, and such like Godly excerscies?

But for the better satisfaction of the Petitioner his demand, I would have
the Learned divines of the Popish Sect, to answer the Reasons that M. Bell a
Papist, alleged in a certain discourse, wherein he defends it to be lawful
for Recusants to resort to the exercises of our Religion so it be with
protestation. By which reasons it seemed the Jesuits were persuaded to set
down their Resolution before mentioned, that only (mark only) the
consideration of this sign distinctiue, made Recusants coming to Church in
England, unlawful. And because the Reply to the Libell seems to be of that
mind too, as I have showed, therefore having spoken somewhat to that, I think
it needless to go through the nine Reasons that Howlet brings, Martin of
Schism.
or the nineteenth that Greg. Martin has, whereby they would prove their
coming to our Churches unlawful partly because in so short a discourse as
this is, it cannot be performed, but chiefly because it seems that the
matter being better examined, that sign of distinction is in their opinions
the only let. But that being but a devise of Man to have such difference, is
not sufficient to discharge any Subject of their Obedience to their Sovereign
and his Laws commanded by God.

Now somewhat having been spoken concerning their Petition to answer it:
their promise was, to have been more ready and willing to have performed (said
the Suppliants) their desires therein, that is, in coming to our churches.
Which promis how easily it may be performed out of that which has bin said,
may be gathred. For we call the^ not to Idolatrous service, or any
superstitious or will worship: we know to come to such, it is utterly unlawful.
We will them not to hear a tongue that they know not, a language that they
understand not, as in Popish Churches they do. But they are by Law commanded,
and therefore in things so lawful and honest, their obedience is of duty
required, they are commanded (I say) to come to Churches, where God only is
served, and to hear his word in such a tongue, as they that will hear may also
learn such duties, as God requires of them. The Petitioner thus goes
forward.

And for that we received none answer to either of the said petitions, the
defect whereof as we are in charity to think, proceeded in regard of the LL.
Bishops then being, nor your LL. were not made acquainted therewith: we now
deemed it very behoofefull, yea necessary for us, to tender and prostrate the
same offer to your LL. most humbly beseeching your Honors, that we may
receive some satisfying answer therein, from your LL. The Petitioner not
finding the former Supplications to have that effect that Recusants desired,
now tendereth this Petition especially unto such as are of chief place, and
best account among the Clergy in the Church of England. And as he does
charitably interpret, the not receiving answer of the former Requests: so does
he also in my judgment demand but that which is reasonable in his Suit, if it
were not that he requires a satisfying answer, in that matter, that has
been spoken to so often, and so fully, that it is much to be doubted, that they
who cannot be satisfied with that which has already been set down, will not
think any answer a fit satisfaction to their demands. But yet because they
assure us of their yielding to our desires, which is in effect nothing else, but
that they would be entreated to be reconciled unto God, as Paul writes to
the Corinthia^s, 2 Cor. 5.10
for we seek not theirs, but them: therefore will J endeavor to perform what
they request. And thus it follows.

Assuring you, that if it may be proved in manner as is before mentioned, that
we may go to any such Church without committing deadly sin; or that which
we do now profess, is not the same which we received from our forefathers,
and that which they received from theirs successively, ever since the
conversio^ of this country to Christianity, that we will then be ready to
satisfy your desires therein. The third part.
We are now come to that which in the beginning I said, was the third and last
part of this Petition which is the Request it self. But this has sundry
branches. For first the demand is uttered by way of condition, with promise of
performing our desires, if the Request be accomplished. But upon a secret
supposall, that it cannot be done that is required, they would hope not to be
prosecuted by Ecclesiastical Censures, but rather that our BB. should be
means to His Majesty for them, or else they assure us it will much encourage
their followers as in that which follows in the Petition, they profess.

Now then to come to the Conditions here first proposed; they are two. The
first is this: If (say they) it may be proved in manner as is before mentioned,
that we may go to any such Church, without committing deadly sin: Concerning
this their condition I suppose I have already spoken sufficiently, considering
that the Reply to the Libell called a breife Apology, written by a Priest,
very lately (for it was printed Anus. 1063.) says in plain words (as before
I have alleged) that Catholics coming to Church was so^what more to be
lamented perchance, Reply. c. 6.
then to be blamed before it was a sign distinctiue. Now that it is not
needful that there should be any such distinction, or if any should be, yet
that any other rather then this may serve that turn, yea that this being so
offensive as it is, may not be used, J have already touched al these points.

To be short Bells discourse, and the Jesuits determination tend al to that end
too. So that this point J will shut up with this one Argument. That which is
agreed upon to be lawful, by consent of their Learned Divines on their side,
saving in respect of a thing that may easily, yea must necessarily be altered,
they may do without committing deadly sin: Bur Recusants coming to Church
is such as is lawful, but only in respect of that distinction which they
suppose should by this means appear, which may and must be altered: therefore
their coming to our Churches may well be without deadly sin. The Mayor
cannot be denied; But for the better understanding of the Minor proposition, it
must be somewhat unfolded.

The distinctiue sign that is hitherto spoken of, is either to be taken, in
respect of Recusants themselves, as that one of them may by it know another,
in which sense J have hitherto spoken of it: And after this taking of a
distinctiue sign, my Minor is sufficiently proved before, in that such signs
are not needful, nether have been used in the time of Christ, and his
Apostles, yea they are many ways offensive, and for that cause to be
abolished. Or else, the distinctiue sign is to be understood, as that we
thereby know the^ to be Romish Catholics. If in this sense they speak of a
distinctiue sign, then J give them to understand, that this sign we trust
not. For the Priests tell us in the Reply to a breife Apology, Reply. cap. 17.
and 18.
that the Jesuits taught that lesson in Scotland (we doubt not also but in
England too) that a man might lock up his conscience, after he had hard mass,
and then go to the Protestants Churches, which we suppose too many do
believe and practice; whereof also comes that name of Church Papists. Therefore
coming to our Churches, is not a sign whereby we esteem them that so do,
to be Recusants. Since therefore by that sign we do not know al Papists; no,
nether yet Papists only abstain from our Churches, but sundry others also, who
have as little agreement with Papists, as Papists have with the Truth that is
not a true sign distinctiue between Romish Catholics, and professors of the
Gospel, whereupon your Learned divines conclude, your going to our churches not
to be unlawful or ungodly.

What is performed for the first condition let the indifferent Reader judge.
The second follows: Or (if it be proved that) that which we now profess,
(says he) is not the same which we Received from our forefathers, and that
which they received from theirs successively, ever since the conversio^ of this
country to Christianity etc. Concerning the Argument whereby the Petitioner
supposes he co^me^deth their Religion, because they received it from their
forefathers, I have before spoken sufficiently. But here he goes somewhat
further, challenging this doctrine that now they have in the Romish Church, to
have continued and come to them successively, from the first conversio^ of this
Country to Christianity: or as the former Petition to his Majesty says, from
the Conversion of Donaldus, which was king of the Scotts, and became a
Christian about the year of Christ 203.

And has the Romish Religion that now is, wherein we dissent from them so
great Antiquity, as from the first time that England received Christianity?
No; neither yet from the time of Donaldus, who came to the knowledge of Christ,
more then a hundred years after this part of this I Will of Britain did. For
though many of our Chronicles, report, Lucius, who reigned over us about the
year of our Lord, 156. first to have received Christianity into this Island:
Caes. Bar. ^0. 1. p. 286.
yet Barronius (whom I hope our Petitioner will trust,) tells us that Joseph
of Aramathia who begged the Body of Christ and buried it, came hither out of
France, and planted the Gospel, being sent by Philip the Apostle, Patricij Hib
epist. Caes. Baro. tom. 1. p. 286. Doroth. Synops.
of whose pla^ting the Gospel about Glascenburie, there are many testimonies
approved by Papists themselves.

Yea there are that affirm, that Simon Zelotes came hither, and here was
crucified; and that Aristobulus of whom St. Paul to the Romans makes mention,
Niceph. Theod. Soph.
was Episcopus Britanniae factus, made Bishop of Britain. Yea there be also,
and they very ancient, that write that Peter and Paul preached here; so that
it cannot be doubted of, but our Conversion unto Christianity, was in the time
of the Apostles themselves. And has Romish Religion continued from them
successively? It will not prove so.

To go through all the doctrine which they profess, were a matter of greater
labor then is requisite; and yet because the Petitioner so faithfully does
assure us, that if either the one, or the other of these may be proved by us,
they will be ready to yield to our desire in coming to the Church; as I have
already assaide to do the one of the things they require: so doubt I
nothing, but that I shall satisfy the other part of their demand, and so
bind them as by a double bond, to do as they promise. And that the matter may
be more plain, eve^ unto the meanest of that sort, I purpose only to speak of
those points, which are chiefly required of them.

And first of the very props that Popery stands on, and the feet whereby
it creeps forward: that is, the Supremacy, and Traditions. It is a doctrine
which Popish Catholics do hold most firmly, that the Bishop of Rome is
supreme head of the Church: yea if we will give any credit to Boniface the
eighth Pope of that name, Extra. de Mayor and obedient. vna^
It is necessary to salvation to believe, that every creature is subject to
the Bishop of Rome. But how will it be proved, that they, or any of them that
planted Christianity in this Realm, taught any such thing, that it might
come from them successively? It is certain the Apostles knew no such
Supremacy belonging to Peter. For if they had, it being so necessary to
salvation, as Pope Good-face tells us, they had been unfaithful Stewards in
not delivering that doctrine: yea by their doings they teach us there was no
such thing. For the Apostles hearing that Samaria had received the Word of
God, being careful to have the^ confirmed therein, Act. 8.14.
sent unto them Peter and John. If he had known himself to have been
supreme head over them, he would have directed them, they should not have
appointed him to go.

And did not Paul withstand him to his face, Gal. 2.11.
because he was to be blamed? It would be thought a saucy part for any body
to do so to the Pope now. But let any man look with an indifferent eye
throughout the whole New Testament, and he shall never find any such
Authority granted unto Peter, from whom they would persuade the world that
they have this supremacy. I know there are some places wrested to serve that
turn, which also are so fully answered in sundry learned books, that all
the Papists in the world, will never be able out of them to prove, the Romish
Vicar to be Supreme Head of the Church. I therefore will but point unto that,
which the Fathers of the purer Age of the Church thought hereof, whereby we may
truly gather, whether they thought this superiority of the Pope, to have any
good ground in Gods book or not. Howsoever Cardinal Bellarmine, more boldly
then truly does pronounce, De Romans Pontif. lib. 1. cap 10.
Est revera non simplex error, sed pernitiosa haeresis, negare B. Petri
primatum a Christo institutum: It is (says the Cardinal) in deed no simple
error, but a pernicious heresy, to deny that the Supremacy of S. Peter, was
instituted by Christ.

Was then the 6. Conc. Carth 6. capit. 6.
Council of Carthage an Heretical Council, or did they hold a pernicious
heresy, when they decreed that the Bishops of Alexandria, and Antioch, should
have their proper privileges reserved to them, as well as the Bishop of Rome
had his? Faustinus, and others whom Boniface 1. sent thither for him, did what
they could by alleging false Canons of the Council of Nice, to have
reserved a superiority to Rome, but they could not prevail. Neither could
the Popes best friends then say, that either Christ had given him such
preeminence, or the Apostles had taught it, but only they alleged a false
Canon of the Council, to have deceived the world withal, as the story of that
Council shows.

Preamb. Council. Chal.
And when Valentinian the Emperor, and Placidia also and Endoxia Emperesses,
wrote to Theodosius that a Council might be assembled within Italy, being
moved thereto by Leo himself (then Bishop of Rome) as is there confessed; and
they were disposed to speak as much as they could, for credit of that See, yet
all they could write was, that to him principatum Sacerdotij super omnes,
antiquitas contulit. Antiquity bestowed upon the Bishop of Rome, to be chief
over Priests. They therefore entreated, vt locum habeat and facultatem, de fide
and Sacerdotibus iudicare: that he might have place and power, to judge of the
faith, and of Priests. A very unequal request, made as it seems by the
instigation of Leo himself, perchance pretending the errors that were in many
of the Eastern Churches, and the soundness which yet the Romans Church
retained, as partly also appears he did.

But the Council of Chalcedon which was the fourth General Council, smelling
out the purpose of Leo as it seems, did plainly decree that the Archbish.
of Co^sta^tinople should have as good privilege as had the Bishop of Rome.
Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
And do Paschasinus the Popes Legate what he could, by alleging again, a
false Canon of the Nicene Council, Quod Ecclesia Romana semper habuit
primatum, that the Church of Rome, has always had the supremacy, (so you
see, forgerie and false dealing has bin an old practice of the Romish Church)
yet the Council would needs so decree, crying with one consent, Haec iusta
sententia, haec omnes dicimus, haec omnibus placent, haec omnes dicimus, hoc
iustum decretum, Quae constituta sunt valiant: It is a just sentence, we all
say thus; we are all pleased with this: we all say thus. It is a good decree,
As it is said, so let it stand. And thus is it plain enough, that since
nether Faustinus and they who were joined with him as Legates in the Counsel of
Carthage; neither Paschasinus and his Associates in the Council of Chalcedon,
neither the Emperor and Emperesses in their Epistle, written at Leo his own
Request, and by likelyhoode upon his Information; neither lastly the 630.
Bishops in that Council assembled, could once allege any Scripture for the
Popes Superiority, but that the Council decreed against the same; it is (I
say) manifest, that for 455. years after Christ, the Scriptures which now
they wring to prove the same, were not supposed to avowe the Popes Supremacy.

So that Succession of this Doctrine will never be brought from the time of the
Conversion of this Land to Christianity: no there was no such doctrine for
many hu^dreds of years after Christ. But in deed the first ground of that
doctrine must be sought for, in the time of Phocas that Cruel Murderer, who
(as before I said) because by so evil means he came to the Empire, that he
might with more approbation keep his place, he was content to gratify
Boniface Bishop of Rome, with an unwonted, but not undesired honor: Magna
contentione (says Platina) obtinuit a Phoca, Plat. in Bonifac. 3.
vt haberetur and diceretur ab omnibus, Romana Ecclesia, caput omnium
Ecclesiarum. Palmerius.
An addition unto Eusebius his Cronicle says, Id consentient^ Phoca institutum
esse: that with much a do (as says Platina) Boniface the third obtained of
Phocas, that the Church of Rome, should be accounted and called, the head of
all Churches, and as Palmerius in his Addition says, Phocas was content that
should be ordained. And another story says that Phocas first obtaie^d,
Benevenuti. Augustal. in Phoca.
(mark first obtained) this title to the Church of Rome.

So that now, somewhat more the^ 600 years after Christ began the Claim to
this Title to be somewhat worth, if the unjust honor, given by a bloody Usurper
of the Empire, may make a good claim. But notwithstanding all that Phocas his
decree could prevail, the Bishops of Constantinople, and the Patriarchs also
of Ravenna and sundry others, yea all the Greek church held out, nether would
acknowledge any such Supremacy in the Pope, though it cost some of them full
dear, Pla. in Leo 2
and namely the Patriarche of Ravenna. In the end comes Boniface 8. in
honesty much like the first fou^der of the Papacy, Extra de Mayor. and obed.
vnam sanctam.
Phocas, and he lays the second stone of this foundation, making it as before
you hard, a matter necessary to salvation to believe this so evil a proved
Article.

And yet for all this the Church of Rome thought their ambitious Title not well
grounded, nether that men would for all Pope Boniface his decree, that came
almost 1300. years after Christ, believe the Pope to be such a one: therefore
in the Council of Florence about some 8. or. 9. score years since, they got it
and some other such substantial and sound pieces of doctrine, Bartho. Garranza
su^ma council.
ratified and confirmed, in these words, Definimus sanctam Apostolicam sedem,
and Romanum pontificem, in vniversum orbem tenere primatum. Thus now some
1400. years after our Conversion to Christianity, is this principal point of
doctrine in the Romish Church, come to that honor, to be accounted a doctrine
to be believed, For until the Council had decreed it, it might not properly
have that credit. I trust then, it appears to any indifferent judgment, that
this first doctrine which our Recusants hold, wants at the least 1400.
years, of the consent of the Romish Church it self, of that succession which
our Recusants imagine it has.

The other Propp of the Romish Church, is the doctrine of Traditions, which
that wicked conventicle at Trent, Council. Trident Sess. 4 decret. de Script.
cano^.
is not asha^ed to make equal to the undoubted word of God, Traditiones ipsas,
tum ad fidem, tu^ admores pertinentes tanqua^ vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a
spiritu sancto dictatas, and co^tinua successione in Ecclesia Catholica
seruatas, pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit and veneratur. This
council say they with like honor and affection, does receive and reverence
even the Traditions as well belonging to faith, as to manners, as if they had
been pronounced from Christ's own mouth, or from the holy Ghost. A decree
subject to that reprofe of our Sauivour Christ, why do ye transgress the
commandment of God, Mat. 15.3.
by your traditions? For in very many things, does the Church of Rome
expreslie against Gods written word, under color of those unwritten verities,
as they falsely term them, as anon I trust it shall appear by the
indifferent Reader.

But here my purpose is only to examine whether Traditions be a fit Touchstone
to try our doctrines by, and especially, whether we have received this Rule or
Trial of our Religion, successively from the Apostels or not? But the matter is
plain, though the Apostle sometime na^eeth Traditions, yet has he noe meaning
to deliver us any Article of faith, or lesson belonging to our salvation, but
only such as are contained in the written word. For this cause the Apostle to
Timothy calls it depositum more then once, 1 Timothy 6.^^.
that is, a thing committed, and already delivered, that we should not look
daielie for new Tradition thereof. And St. Jude speaks thereof much to the
purpose, exhorting thus strive earnestly for the says once delivered to the
Saints, Jude. 3.
meaning that our Religion is not like unto men's laws, which must always, as
inco^venie^ces are espied, be reformed: but once it is delivered, and that
which already we have received, we must not change.

Keep (says S. Paul) the true pattern of the wholesome words, 2. Tm. 1.13.
which thou have hard of me. So that we see they had a Pattern from which they
might not swerve. And necessary it was so to be, that they might the better
observe the Exhortation of the same Apostle elsewhere, who would not have us
henceforth any more as Children carried about, Ephesians. 4.14.
and wavering with every wind of doctrine, which in noe wise ca^ be avoided,
if Traditions should be the Touchstone. But as in the matter of Supremacy, so
in this also let us see what the Fathers did when any question of Religion was
to be descussed. For thereby shall it appear unto us, whether they judge the
Scriptures or Traditions, the fittest mean to try our Religion by. Nether do
I purpose here to trouble the Reader with infinite numbers of Sentences, which
might be gathered out of the Fathers touching this point. For there is not any
thing so common in them, as Teach this out of the Gospels and the writings of
the Apostles; or prove this out of the law, the Prophets, and the Evangelists
and Apostels writings. J say nothing more common in sundry of them, then these
or such like sentences.

I therefore purpose but to point to so^e general things which in their
practice for this matter may be observed, whereupon may be inferred, that the
Fathers did not so understand that which in the writtings of the Apostles may
be read of keeping that which they have delivered, as if it were meant of any
secret doctrines, or other lessons then are set down in writing. For by
Scriptures especially did they disprove heresies, August. in Apoc. Hom. 10.
as all stories plainly teach. Occiduntur haereses per Catholicos (says S.
Augustine) cum in scripturarum testimonijs opprimuntur. Heresies are killed by
Catholics, when they are ouerlaied with testimonies of Scriptures. Theodoret
hist. li. 1. cap 8.
And Theodoret in one Chap. records twice, how Eusebius. of Nicomedia and other
Arrians were by the Scriptures confuted. But this is in the Ecclesiastical
histories and writings of the Fathers, so plain and common, that it is
needless to bring many proofs thereof. I will therefore conclude with that
notable Testimony of S. Augustine: Aug. in epi. Joh. tract. 2
contra insidiosos errores, Dominus voluit ponerefundamentu^ in Scripturis: The
Lord would lay in the Scriptures a foundation or ground work, against
deceitful errors.

But as in private writings, Heresies were by Scriptures, not by Traditions
besides the Scriptures, confuted: so in Councils too. Jn the Council of Nice,
Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 7.
there was a charge given by Constantine the Great and good Emperor, that they
should determine and debate such matters, as should be in controversy among
them, literarum diuinitus inspiratarum testimonijs: by the testimony of
Scriptures given by inspiration; which he immediately before called the Books
of the Evangelists, Apostles, and Prophets. S. Augustine being desierous that a
good end should be made, and a quiet order taken, between the Catholics and
the Donatists, writes to a Bishop of their Sect called Fortunius, requiring
that some peaceable course may be thought upon, and some indifferent place
appointed, August. epist 63.
where they may have a council or conference but with this condition, Faciamus
Codices Canonicos praesto esse, let us take order that the books of Canonical
Scriptures be there ready, much like is that which is reported of Meletius,
Samb. Council. Consta^tinop. per Cralb.
between whom and Pauling there was some question, In sede ponatur sacrum
Evangelium, et nos ex vtraque part sedeamus: let the holy gospel be laid upon
the seat, and let us fit on either side.

These things I have breiflie touched, which sundry others have fully and
largly handled, that Recusants may see, that the Fathers of the purer time, did
not so understand these words of the Apostle, or any such like, ^ The, 2.15
Stand fast, and keep the instructions or traditions, which you have bin taught
either by word or by our Epistle; as if he delivered one thing by writing and
another by word of mouth: For they acknowledge no other Rule of faith or
Religion, the^ that which in the written word is contained, and therefore do
they so co^monlie urge the Heretics, to show that they teach out of the
writings of the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles: Thereby declaring, that the
written word (for that only is to be said that it may be showed whereas words
not written are not seen but hard) may be Judge in matters of Religion. And
therefore S. Augustine calls This word the waigh-scales of Truth very aptly,
as also the Scriptures are even for this cause called Canonical, because they
are the Cano^ or Rule according to which our life and Faith must be framed.
August de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 2 cap. 6.
Adferamus (says he) stateram canonicam de scripturis sa^ctis ta^qua^ de the
sauris dominicis, and in illis quid sit grauius appe^damus, imo non appendam
us, sed a domino appe^sa recognoscamus. Let us bring the Canonical weigh
scale out of holy Scripture, as out of the Lords treasure and, let us waighin
the^ what bears weight: or rather let not us weigh them, but acknowledge
that, which the Lord has waighed.

Jn prescript aduers. Haeret.
Indeed Tertullian makes mention of certain Heretics that said that Christ
and the Apostles delivered not al their doctrine openly, but some in secret,
just as now our Papists do, but they have that note of Heretics for their
labor, and are written against both by him, and Irenei also, Iren lib. 1. c.
24. Jre^. li. 3. c. 2.
who was before him. And Irenei charge the Carpocratians with that Heresy,
and the Valentinians too. So that though the Fathers did not so understand
those words, keep the Traditions, etc. as do the Papists; yet you see, who
did understand them so, of whom I trust you will be ashamed to be accounted
followers, seeing that you seem by your Petition so desirous to be satisfied
for such points. It appears by that which I have said, that not Traditions,
but only the written word, must both decide al controversies in Religion, and
also be the ground, whereupon they must be built.

Now that I may yield some Reason of that which before I said, that the
Persuasion they have of the Popes Supremacy, and this their doctrine, that
Traditions are of equal Authority with the written word of God, are the very
props that uphold Popish Religion; you must confide, that when Fathers yea and
Scriptures too, are so plain against them, that they can in no wise wrest them
to serve their turn, neither have any reasonable color of Answer, to such
Arguments as out of them are framed against Popery: then do they either fly to
the Popes Authority and Privilege, to allow and Interpret whatsoever is
written; or to this orher shift of Traditions, whereby they would persuade, that
they have it from the Apostles, and so they bring some show of Truth, to that
which is otherwise, and indeed, most false.

To stand upon every particular doctrine which is in the Church of Rome
received, it were too tedious: Yet needful it is that Recusants should be
satisfied in this their Reasonable Request, whether the Religion that they
profess, have been from the Conversion of this Land or not. For performance
hereof, let them ask of their learned Divines, Whitaker. co^ crov 1 quest ^. c.
5.
whether Master Whitaker has truly reported, out of the writings of Peter a
Soto a Papist of no small reckoning, Canisius, Lindan, and Peresius, al great
vpholders of the Popish Religion, of such doctrines, as themselves acknowledge,
they receive from Tradition. For if he have written truly (as indeed he
has) the^ the learned Divines that have been of the Papists in our age,
whose Books the Priests or Jesuits now are not worthy to carry, do confess
that which now our Recusants profess, almost in every point, is grounded not
upon Gods word, but upon Traditions, yea and some of them late too: and
therefore not that faith, which was at the first conversion of this Country.

Pet. Soto co^tra. Brentiu^.
Out of Peter a Soto he reckons these The offering of the sacrifice of the
Altar, Invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, The supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome, hallowing of water in baptism; The whole Sacrament of Confirmation,
Order, Matrimony, penance, annoyling, merit of works, necessity of
satisfaction, numbering of our sins to the Priest. Out of Canisius he
reckons these, Canis. catechis. cap. 5. Lind. pan^. pl. li. 4. c. 10.
worship of Images, certain times of fasting, lent, all that is in the Mass,
prayer and offering for the dead. Out of Lindane, that Peter was at Rome, and
his supremacy, Tabul. 6.
yea and the seven Sacraments too, are (says he) by tradition, consecration
of oil and water in baptism, real presence, Communion in one kind, that the
Eucharist is a sacrifice, that it must be kept and worshipped, private Mass,
Confession of sins, satisfaction, Indulgencies, Purgatory; Peers. part
And Peresius adds, that single life of Priests, is by Tradition. So that,
if these Learned Divines of the Papists say true, our Recusants may easily
understand, that all their Religion is built, not upon the Rock of Truth, but
upon the Quick-sand, of Men's Traditions and Inventions.

Yea and Canus, who may well be reckoned among the learned Divines, Canus de
trad. Aposto li. 3. ca. 3. Fu^dament. 2.
that Papists have had in our times and our Fathers days too, confesses
Transubstantiation, Fundamen 3
not to be taught in Scriptures plainly: yea Invocation of Martyrs for help,
celebrating of their memories, worshipping of Images, In the sacrifice of the
Eucharist, that the Priests must make and receive with the body the blood also,
that the Sacrament of Confirmation and Orders are not to be reiterated; these
things (says he) and many such like, are neither plainly, nor closely
contained in Holy writ. But what stand I upon this? Fisher sometime Bishop of
Rochester, well known to the Recusants of our time, and accounted a learned
Divine in his time: grants that Purgatory and Indulgences, Assert. Luther.
confut. Artic. 18.
are but of late found out.

Now therefore I suppose our Recusants Request is satisfied. It is plainly
showed, that whereas this our Realm was brought to the knowledge of the truth
in the days of the Apostles, if not by the Apostles themselves: yet all that
ever the Church of Rome holds, is of Tradition, and not out of the word of
God: yea and for sundry points thereof very late too, as out of Fisher I have
showed for Purgatory and Pardons, as for the number of 7. Sacraments, the
Supremacy, yea and Purgatory, they had their approbation but in the
Florentine Council, almost in our Fathers days. But for those other, that are
fathered upon the Apostles, as many of the rest of the Popish opinions are: it
is plain enough that the Ancient Fathers in the Primitive and purer Age of the
Church, never acknowledged any such for material points of Religion, which
must of necessity be believed, neither would receive any thing, but out of the
written word.

Yet I grant they use also often the name of Tradition; sometimes thereby
signifying, that which in the Scriptures is written for our learning and
instruction, not men's Traditions or devises: And in this sense it is commonly
used by Irenei and others: Ire^, li. 3. c. 1
as when he says, ab Apostolis traditum est veritatis Evangeliu^, the Gospel
of truth is delivered from the Apostles. Now the Gospel we know to be written.
Yea three times in one chap. he uses this word tradiderunt, Lib. 3. cap. 1
they delivered (from whence comes the word Tradition) speaking of the
writing of Gods word. Sometime also they use it in the sense wherein it is now
most common, for unwritten doctrines. This I note, that such as wittingly would
not be deceived, may know that not every place wherein any of the Ancient
Fathers name Tradition, must make for the Traditions, for which the Romish
Church strives so earnestly, and of which they make so great reckoning.

But for the Recusants sake, thus I reason: whatsoever doctrine was not taught
and proved out of the written word, the Fathers for 4. or 5. hundred years
after Christ, did not receive as the doctrine of the Church: But the doctrine
the Recusa^ts now profess, (as out of their learned Divines before is showed,)
is not prooved out of the Scriptures: therefore the Fathers for 4. or 5.
hundred years after Christ did not allow it to be the doctrine of the Church;
and so it follows that their forefathers successively from the Conversion of
this land, that is, from the Apostles times, have not been taught that
doctrine.

We now look for performance of promise, whereby you have assured us, that
either of the Conditions being performed, as I trust both are: you will be
ready to satisfy our desires in coming to Church. We would have some hope
that you would be as good as your word, but that your Blinde-guides, have
graven (I think) with a pen of steel in your hearts, a most sottish and
Unchristian persuasion, that you must not see, but by their eyes, nor hear,
but by their ears; you must not know any thing, but that they will have you to
know: and then be you sure you shall know nothing, that may bring their
credit into any question, or their doctrine into any trial. Well said
Tertullian, and most truly, of the laws that were made against Christians,
and fitly it may be applied unto the matter in question, Suspecta lex est,
Tertul. in Apolog^^.
quae probari se non vult; improba autem, si non probata, dominetur. The Law is
to be suspected, that will not suffer it self to be tried: but it is wicked,
if not being tried it bear the sway. For I am sure, that no man would think
he meant to warrant his gold to be good, that would charge him that receives
it, that in any wise he must not try it, either by Scale or Touch. Yet
Recusa^ts, in matters of Salvation, are content to trust such as will let them
try nothing.

By this means, howsoever our answering of this or any other Petition, may be
of it self sufficient, yet if they whom you take to be your Learned Divines,
say it is not answered, you must trust them, and continue still in Ignorance.
And who can hope that they, that partly upon discontentednes, partly upon
vain intisments, have entered by undutiful disloialtie, into great danger and
disfavor, will leese you, if by any means they may hold you one their side,
by whom only they are mainetained, in their unsatisfied humor. So that
Recusants are (J must needs confess) through their own wilfulnes or folly,
much to be pitied; because they are not only lead aside from the right way,
but also are co^te^t to be lead so by them, that will never let them return
into it again. Therefore howsoever your Petition, may be deemed reasonable:
yet I fear you shall find alwais (if God would give you eyes to see it) your
Priests dealing with you herein not unreasonably only, but also damnable.

But if upon such mature discussion it shall appear, that we can noe way go
to your Churches without incurring god his wrath, and the damnation of our
selves; we hope that your LL, will the^ forbear to prosecute us with any
spiritual censure, but rather mediate, in respects well known to your selves,
or restoring again into his Majesty's favor, and the mittigation of such
penalties and vexations, as for our Recusa^cie are daily imposed upon us. Upon
an absurd Supposition, the Petitioner frames a twofold Request, the one that
our Bishops should not oppose themselves against them by Censures
Ecclesiastical; the other that they should be means to procure his Majesty's
favor. But the Petitioner here offers great wrong to Bishops, Preachers,
and Gospellers to all whom his Petition is directed, in that he imagines,
that, they, who have this 47. years, preached, taught and maintained the truth
of the Gospel, should all this time never have used mature discussio^ of the
same until now they should be rouszed, as it were out of a slumber, by this
Remembra^cer, whereas intruth every point of Popery, has so often been
discoursed, and discussed too; in so many learned Treatises the impiety thereof
so discovered, that all that their Jesuits and Priests can do, can never cover
and hide the nakedness thereof again.

Yea the more we unfold the plaites of Popery, the more cause we see to detest
the sa^e, and to pray that our king and rulers should have a watchful eye over
the favorers thereof. For what is Popery but a Religion pached up of Men's
Inventions, as is before showed, a sea of superstition and Idolatries, of
will-worships; a Religion contrary to the word, that must be, and is the
ground of True Religion: wherein trifles and toys, are accounted as acceptable
worship of God; wherein God is dishonored, by undue honor given to the
Creatures; A Religion that teaches to disobay Princes, who^ God has set in
the throne, to disobay Magistrates and them that have Authority, to poison,
murder and kill, by what means they can, whosoever they imagine to withstand
their designements? These and such like stains we find in Popery, when with
mature discussion we try the same.

For your coming to our Churches, we know nothing in our Religion, why any
Christian may not resort to our Church, without danger of sinning; nay one
the contrary we dare affirm, that without danger of Gods heavy displeasure,
you may not absent your selves from our Churches because Christians are bound
to hear Gods word, which is there read, yourselues cannot deny it. Secondly,
because the Laws of the Realm require it, against which (unless they require
things ungodly) al disobedience is sin: and there can be noe ungodliness,
in heareing Gods word, and godly prayers. Thirdly, the not coming to our
Churches, is a condemning of our coming to be not good; which is uncharitable,
unless it be grounded upon a better foundation, then any that I hear
Recusants can lay. Fourthly in coming, they come not to that which is evil
(for that is confessed even of the greatest Recusants that I know) But of this
before.

But how falls it out that there is here not one word of the Claim of
Antiquity of your Religion? Before you said that if it might be proved that you
might without incurring deadly sin, go to Church: or your Religion
professed now by you, not to be of such Antiquity as there you claim etc. Now
here this Latter is quite left out, as if you rued, you made that former offer.
If it be because you stand in doubt (as justly you may) whether upon mature
discussio^, that which you now profess, will be found to be al on with that
which at the first was taught in this Land, repent in time, and leave them that
have so long deceived you. But we knowing our faith to be no other, then that
which was hear at the first taught (for the Apostles nether any other who^
they thought fit to instruct us, would teach any other then according to that
true pattern of wholesome words, 2. Tim. 1. i3
which was delivered to them) think it great reason, that such as wittinglie
withstand the Truth, or refuse to come to that great supper, should be for our
parts, by such Ecclesiastical Censures as we have, compelled to come to the
Gospel of Salvation.

And to confess the truth, I suppose that we are rather to be reproved, for
being to cold in this work of the Lord, the^ for being to sharpo, against you,
who so stubburnlie refuse the offer of Salvation and abuse the clemency that
has been showed. But what means this, that you would not we should
persecute you with any spiritual Censure? Stand you so much in fear of
Excommunication? These your words and your doings are as two strings quite out
of tune. Here you would not in any wise be Excommunicated, and yet indeed you
will not in any wise come to our Churches. You will not come to them your selus,
nether would you have us put you out of them. But this I tell you, when any of
you come, we will not keep you out. For your returning to god, and to his
Church, is it that we desire earnestly, and hartelie pray for, that God will
work it in you.

Now if our selves see no reason to remit the Censures against you: less cause
is there for us to mediate unto his Majesty, that such dangerous Subjects, as
your very Religion makes you to be, should without controlement of Law, live
within his Dominion^. It is fitter for us to make such suit to his Majesty
against you, as S. Augustine, (a man of singular learning, and nothing given to
cruelty,) did very often make unto such as were Governors about him, that by
punishments (so that not by death) they would repress the Donatists, those
heretics; Epi. 127. Epi. 129. Ep. 158 159
as in his Epistles to Donatus who was Proconsull in Aphrica, to Olimpius, also
to Marcellinus a Tribune, and many other, it may appear. So that the Causes
that we can think upon, which may induce us to move any thing in this
matter, are as you see, altogether against your Request. For indeed by that
which already we have seen, and by all likelihood we may look for at your
hands, so virulent dealing is in most of you, and so unbridled a course you
think you should run, and you so snuff if you by any means be stopped,
that I am verily persuaded, that if fear of Laws did not curb you, you would
be (if already you be not) much more unruly then ever were the Donatists in
Aphrica. And therefore I cannot conjecture, what you should mean by those
words that we should mediate for you, for respects best known unto our selves.

If this just and most equal kind of trial shall be denied unto us ( says the
Petitioner) or this our petition (like to the two former) be suppressed
without a satisfying answer; your wisdoms cannot then but know it will
assure us, that in your own judgments the cause of our Recusancie, and
constant persevering in our Religion, are not by learned Divines to be
disproved, which will add confidence in the justice of our cause, and give
notice to the world, how little we deserve the opprobrious name of
obstinacy, or other odious terms, daily imposed upon us: and it may give
cause that many will think, that our goods or lands, and the undoing of us
and our posterity, is the things more sought, the^ the eternal salvation of
our souls. Sed meliora speramus. The Petitioner to make us the more willing to
regard his Petition, does here insinuate, what disadvantage may grow unto us,
if this just and most equal kind of trial shall be denied, says he. Because
this trial has heretofore often already been made by writing, and yet the
Petitioner still urges further trial: it may well be that he means it
should be by some Public disputation. And indeed some Popish Thrasoes have
made as great vaunts against the truth, as did that proud Philistine against
the Host of the Lord God of Israel, and with much like success. As Campian,
Camp. 10. Rat.
a silly man for such an Encounter, who challenges the Universities of Oxford
and Cambridge, as if he (more mighty and puissant then Hercules) were able to
overmatch so many. So did Dureus too And so do many, less able the^ these,
(though these are found too weak to perform their Challendge) rather in hope
that it will not be granted to them, then for any confidence they have in their
cause, if it were granted.

In the beginning of her Majesty's days before the State of Religion was
settled, the Popish Bishops and others were in this tune too. And when as good
order was taken to have an Equal Trial indeed, and that indiffere^cie should
be used, for searching out of the Truth: though Bears may by means be brought
to the stake, yet by no means would they be made to dispute: but now by one
Allegation, then by another, always shifted of the matter. And when
disputations have bin, Papists have gained so little thereby, as that the
Cardinal of Loraigne (no friend to Protestants I trow) having hard Beza in the
Disputation at Poissy, in the presence of the French King and all the Great
Peers there assembled, An. hist. Collect of France Chart. 9.
was hard to say, I would either this man had been dumb, or we had been
all deaf.

But what reason is there why this now should be counted a just and most equal
kind of Trial, which was by Clement the 7. (when the Emperor Charles the 5.
and Frauncis the first French king, required a free General Council for
deciding the questions in Religion) called, Gentiles. e^ an. Council. Trid. li.
1.
res periculo sa pravique exempli: a dangerous matter and of evil example? It
is no more just and equal, now to call into question a settled and well
grounded Religion in any State: then it was, to bring the Popish doctrines,
which are builte of no sure foundation to a due trial: no, nor so just by
far.

And what further trial would our Petitioner require of the things he
proposes? He would have it proved to their divines, that without danger of
deadly sin they may resort to the Exercises of our Religion. I have before
showed that this is made so clear to the Jesuits and Priests too, who are the
learned Divines that they have, by Mr. Bell, that they are resolved that it
is lawful, so that it be not a sign distinctiue, as they suppose it is, but
indeed it is not; for since many Papists come to the Church, and are called
Church-Papists and so we reckon of the^, that they are as dangerous as they
that come not: and likewise many honester then any Papists, come not to our
Churches, moved upon an indiscreet zeal. Jf then neither Papists only abstain
from our Churches neither yet al they, it cannot be a sign distinctiue, and so
no hindera^ce for their coming to Church.

Moreover, for proof of Popish Religion, that it has not been from the
beginning of the Conversion of this land from Gentilisme, it is strongly proved
by confession of sundry Arch-Papistes who acknowledge almost all that they
teach to be taken from Tradition and not out of the Scriptures; and sundry of
those Traditions as I have showed, are of so late time, that he must needs show
himself very partial, that can once imagine they have such Antiquity. So I
trust his former dema^ds are sufficiently answered, with that which formerly
has bin alleged, which (were it not for prolixitie) I could demonstrate in
the particular practice of our own country, as in especial may appear in
the point of the Sacrament (for which they chiefly except against our Service)
the very same doctrine which we now profess, Homil. manuscript. in the
Libra. of Oxford Exeter Worcester Lincoln. Beda Hist. Eccle. Petr. Cluniac. in
ep. ad. Bern.
being generally retained in this la^d in the Saxons time, with express
reiection of all feigned Transubstantiation, as plainly may appear by their
Homilies yet extant in the Saxons tongue. As likewise I could have showed by
the Rites of the Eastern Churches, which both Britans and Saxons many hundred
of years observed, that the first co^versio^ of this Isla^d was not by any of
the Roman Profession.

Now what he means by a satisfying answer to this Petition it may be a
question. For some other of their Petitions, require either Toleration of their
Religion for exercise thereof, or at the least, Immunitie from punishment, if
they come not to our Churches. But a Christian King borne and brought up in the
Light of the Truth, and beautified with the ornaments of true learning; who
acknowledges Gods unspeakable goodness toward him self, in advancing him to
so great honor, preserving him from so many perils, crowning him with so many
blessings; whose Religion teaches him to pray to God only, by the Mediation of
Christ alone and to offer unto him for his graces, the Calves of his lips,
praise and thanksgiving: such a king (I say) cannot be ignorant, that to
tolerate, a Sect of People in his dominions, that should call upon Saints and
Angels, and so darken Gods honor, profane his Name, and despise his Word, may
provoke against him, and his, the heavy Indignation of him, who being king of
kings, does require of them this Royal service of preserving inviolable the
sincerity of his Truth and worship in their kingdoms.

And look how many co^mandeme^ts there are to root out Idolatry, destroy
Idolaters, abolish their groves, their Altars to shun conversing or marrying
with them; how many threatenings against the^ that perform not these offices;
how many examples of the Godly, commended for doing them: so many Arguments
there are against, not only Toleration but even connive^cie a such
superstitions.

And therefore to satisfy them, who^ you term your Learned Divines we think
it a thing most easy, in respect of the cause, yet most impossible in respect
of the persons. For it stands them upon not to be satisfied, especially they
being, such as rather respect their own maintenance, then your salvation,
whatsoever they pretend. If they should confess, that our Reasons satisfy
them, and you thereupon resort to our Churches, your liking of them will soon
decay, and their state must needs be much impaired, which by their good wills I
warrant you shall never be

But if any Recusant being desirous to know the Truth, repair to our Bishops,
or other in our Church of singular note of Learning (as you speak) for
resolution of any point in controversy between us and your Divines; if
sufficient reasons be not yielded out of Gods book, and the purer Fathers, of
that doctrine we profess, and against that that you hold, even such as your
Learned Divines shall not be able to answer them then I confess, you have just
cause to speak of the goodness of your cause, and to allege your perseuering
therein. But your cause being of it self not good, as we shall always by Gods
grace, be ready to justify: you have no more cause to brag of your sufferings
and constancy, nor so much neither, as had the Donatists, at whose wilful yea
and desired deaths, St. Augustine, S. Aug. in. epist.
marueileth.

The Scriptures therefore, and consent of Antiquity being as in part I have
showed in this short Answer, so plain with us as they are, neither can you in
continuing Recusants, avoid the note of obstinacy: or others once deem, that
so corrupt a Religion as the Romish is, cannot sufficiently by godly and
Christian learning, be disproued. As for that you affirm, that (unless your
Requests be granted) cause will be given to many to think your lands and goods
are sought for, and the undoing of you and your posterity, rather then your
salvation, it may well be that such undutiful surmises are often in your
hearts, and such malicious reports in your mouths. But is there so much as any
color why any should so think?

Leaving therefore the iuster examination of this unjust charge, to try whether
we seek their goods and undoing or not, to him who knows the secrets of all
hearts, and shall one day reveal and reward such uncharitable surmises: we wish
unto the Petitioner and al Recusants, that it would please God to indue them
with better grace, that seeing the Errors wherinto they are lead, and rightly
considering of the blind devotions, wherewith they are delighted, they may
detest such abominations, and forsaking both the Pope and Popery cleave
sou^dlie and sincerlie both to our God and to our Sovereign, that they and we
with one voice and heart, may singe the songs of Sion to the Lord our God.
This is the only way to hope for better things here, and to obtain the best
things elsewhere.

FINIS.

