A CENSVRE OF SIMONIE, OR A most important case of Conscience concerning
Simonie Briefly discussed, not altogether perhaps vnparallel for the Meridian
of these Times.

By H. BVRTON, Rector of little Saint Matthewes in Friday-street London.

Caveat Mercator.

MAR. 8.36. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?

LONDON Printed by William Stansby, for Edmund Weauer and John Smethwicke. 1624.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, PRINCE OF WALES, DVKE of CORNWALL and
YORK, Earl of Chester, etc.
My gracious LORD and MASTER.
IF greatest vessels, and the most storm proof, yet require the strongest
guard, when they carry such a freight, as Pirates seek to make their Prey and
Prize: then let me crave your HIGHNESS pardon, for putting this my small
Bark under your Castle Wall, as fearing both storm and shot; such Merchandise
being imbarkt therein, as may provoke the whole Fleet of Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Merchants (Pirates rather, floating every where upon the
Catholic, yea Narrow Seas, and not suffering any, bound for the Holy Land, to
pass, but such as will Trucke and Trade with them) to surprise and prey upon
me. I know the Cause is good, though I acknowledge the Actor weak. And
although this be a kind of fruit, naturally sharp and tarte (especially to
aguish palates, and queasie stomachs) as also accidentally, for want of a good
season to give it a competent ripeness; having, since first it began to bud,
grown slowly by succisiue and intermissiue hours, borrowed from my
Court-seruice, and my Church Cure; and, till now, lain close covered under the
late Frostie barren Winter, now revived, as the Plants with the vernall Sun:
it cannot choose but receive a great addition of ripeness and relish, if
(besides the universal influence of this comfortable season) it enjoy but a
special reflection of your HIGHNESS gracious Countenance upon it. The rather,
it being a Subject, not unworthy the knowledge of godly Christian Princes, who
account the care of Religion as the richest gemme in all their Diadem. A care,
which has made the Diadem of your Noble Father, his sacred MAJESTY more
glorious, then all the Kings in Christendom, and which (J trust) shall
propagate his glory to perpetuity; unto the which ear also (as unto a
Crown) Gods good grace, and the myrrour of his MAJESTY'S example, wherein you
daily look, have already entitled you, as the most hopeful heir apparent.

And here give me leave, most Gracious PRINCE, to relate a pithie, and pious
exhortation of that learned and godly Bishop Jewel, to Queen ELIZABETH of
blessed memory, upon the like occasion. A speech, which because it does
immediately and primarily reflect upon his MAJESTY her happy Successor, I
cannot wish a worthier Jewel, then your HIGHNESS, to recommend it.

O that your Grace did behold the miserable disorder of Gods Church, or that
you might foresee the calamities, which will follow! It is a part of your
Kingdom, and such a part, as is the principal proppe and stay of the rest. I
will say to your Majesty, as Cyrillus sometimes said to the godly Emperors,
Theodosius and Valentinian: Ab ea, quae erga Deum est, pietate, reipublicae
vestrae status pendet. You are our Governor, you are the Nurse of Gods Church*
We must open this grief before you. God knows if it may be redressed, it is
run so far. But if it may be redressed, there is no other besides your
Highness, that can redress it. God has endued your Grace with many graces
and favors: O turn and employ these to the glory of God, that God may
confirm in your Grace the thing, which he has begun. To this end has God
placed Kings and Princes in their State, as David says, That they serve the
Lord, that they may see, and cause others to see to the furniture of the
Church. The good Emperor Justinian cared for this, as much as for his life.
Constantine, Theodosius, and Valentinian, and other godly Princes, called
themselves Vasallos, the subjects and bond servants of God. They remembered that
God furnished them in their houses, and were not unmindful to furnish his
house. Thus and much more this good Bishop, to the same purpose. And turning
himself to the Assembly, having also reproved Sacrilege and Symonie
immediately before, he adds those words: Have patience, if any such be here,
as I well know there are, whom these things touch. Suffer me to speak the
truth, it is Gods cause* The livings of such as are in the Ministry, are not
in their hands, to whom they are due, All other Laborers and Artificers, have
their hire increased double as much as it was wont to be: only the poor man
that labors and sweateth in the Vinyard of the Lord of Hosts, has his hyre
abridged and abated. I speak not of the Curates, but of the Parsonages and
Vicaridges, that is, of the places which are the Castles and Towers of fence
for the Lords Temple. They seldom pass now a days from the Patron, if he be
no better then a Gentleman, but either for the Lease, or for present money.
Such merchants are broken into the Church of God, a great deal more
intolerable then were they, whom Christ whipped and chased out of the Temple.
Thus they that should be careful for Gods Church, that should be Patrons to
provide for the Consciences of the People, and to place among them a learned
Minister. who might be able to Preach the word unto them, out of season and in
season, and to fulfill his ministry, seek their own, and not that which is
Jesus Christ's: They serve not Jesus Christ, but their belly. And this is done
not in one place, nor in one City, but throughout England. A Gentleman cannot
keep his house, unless he have a Parsonage or two in Farm for his provision.
O merciful God! whereto will this grow at last? If the misery, which this
plague works, would reach but to our age, it were the more tolerable; but it
will be a plague to the posterity, it will be the decay and desolation of
Gods Church, and it. So this good Bishop.

It needs no application. Only let me crave leave to Petition your
HIGHNESS, that you would be pleased to solicit his sacred MAJESTY for two
things. The first is: that a competent proportion may be allotted out of
every Impropriation (especially where the Vicaridge endowed is incompetent or
none at all) for the maintenance of a sufficient Minister. The second is, that
some remedy may be used, for the more exact prevention of Simonie. These are
two things well beseeming our great Defender of the Faith. His wisdom can best
give direction, and his authority life, to Acts of such difficulty. The great
Ship of Good hope, having those two goodly Deckes, the Upper and the Lower, so
well Manned, so well Rigged, having such a wise experienced Pilot, as his
MAJESTY, to command; such a Masters Mate as your HIGHNESS, to persuade; such
unanimous Mariners to obey the beck of their Governor, what Fort of vice
shall withstand her ba^terie? What force or fraud of foes shall dare to
affront her, or be able to board her? What Port of friends will not open its
amplissimum sinum, to intertaine free Traffic with her? What Impropriator
will not freely come in, and return a liberal share into Gods Sanctuary?
What Simonist shall dare to show his head, much less his golden hands, where
once his MAJESTY, and that Honorable Court of Parliament, have concluded the
contrary? Yea, what not? What so happy, that we may not hope? Or what so
just, which the grand Adversary, even Satan himself may not fear? if these
hopeful beginnings may but attain to a fair conclusion. And Satan's malice
shall never be able to prevent it, if our sins do not. The Lord bless his
MAJESTY with many happy halcyon-dayes, and bless your HIGHNESS in a daily
growth of Grace, and love of the Truth, that the estate of this Church and
Commonwealth may flourish under the King, and his Royal offspring in all
peace and truth, until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. AMEN.

Your Highness most humble servant Henry Burton.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
CHristian Reader, as this small Treatise is generally intended for the good of
Gods Church: so in particular there is no man of what degree or estate soever,
whom it may not in some sort or other nearly concern, to entertain it into
his most serious consideration. There is nothing amongst men more common, then
to to buy and sell. And lightly sin is the Stickler or Broker between both.
It is naught, says the buyer; It is pure good, says the seller: when both the
simulation of the one, and the dissimulation of the other, is the worst part of
the commodity. Yet I speak of such commodities, as are a lawful Mart, and
Market-able, as we say; I speak not of stolen goods, whereof the very actual
buying and selling is unjust; and proves even dangerous to the Parties, often
Fellonious. If therefore every man should be careful not only (in regard of
Gods law) how, but (also of man's Law) what he buy or sell in the open Markets
or elsewhere, though it be a thing of common prise: How much more then in such
things, as are not of a common nature, and the very act of buying and selling
thereof is questionable for the lawfulness of it, or rather out of question
unlawful? Of such things only I would here warn all buyers and sellers; no
less then if a man proscribing his house to sale, should cause to be
proclaimed, Cic. Offic. lib. 3.
Domum pestilentem vendo, I would sell a house infected with the Plague. Yet
such a house may come to be purged again. But if a man should proclaim* I
sell a House or Land, having a cracked Title, the sale whereof I cannot warrant
to be good (which too many can make sale of, without proclaiming any such
thing) where would he find a Chapman to give him his prise, unless such,
whose brains were as cracked, as his Title is. Or if a man wittingly sell, and
another ignorantly buy a cracked Title, it is but so much damage to the one,
but how great damnation to the other! But lo I warn you here of a House, the
condition and title whereof is worth the inquiring after, before we go about
to buy it. This house is Gods house. Which, if it be infected with the
Pestilence, consider; if the Title of it, and of the Demaines be cracked, for
matter of sale, consult. It is a special case of conscience; for resolution
whereof, I entreat thy pains and patience in the perusing of this small
Treatise. Read it, as I have writ it, for conscience, and not for curiosity.
Wherein I take not upon me to determine, but only have impanelled a graund
Jury of ancient and learned Doctors, whose joint Verdict is here delivered.
Nor have I hookt in all the out branches, that the Learned have observed to
grow from the same Tree of Simonie; I have gathered only the maine, leaving
the remains for Gleanings.

Ob. But many one will say, what is this to me? This is a subject out of the
common Road-way of my Reading. I am no Minister, says one: I am no Patron,
says another; etc. and therefore what is Simonie to me?

I answer (as I said before) I know no man of what condition soever, whether
he be high or low, rich, yea or yet poor, whom this Treatise does not either
directly and immediately, or else indirectly and by way of necessary
consequence concern. As for all Patrons, it concerns them directly: it
concerns all Ministers directly, whither actually Ministers, or such as deuote
their minds that way. It concerns all other persons, such as are neither
Patrons, nor yet capable of the Ministry, if any have but children and
portions to bestow on them; that he would consult with this little Book,
whither it be Lawful for him, or no (as the too common fashion of the world
is) to lay out his money for a Benefice for his Son. Yea, it may concern all
such Courtiers, or Noblemens Stewards, or great Officers Clerks or
Secretaries, who though they be no Patrons themselves, yet perhaps have some
faculty to deal as Patrons. If any Read, and reap any profit hereby, either
by preventing what may be misdone, or by repenting of what is done, I have my
desire and reward. And for this Censure of Simonie, if it must needs procure
the Simonists censure, let him turn the edge the right way, upon himself, not
upon me; except he had rather in malice cut me, then in mercy cure himself.

Farewell.
The Contents of the several Chapters of this Treatise.
CHAP. I. SImonie defined, first, generally and largely, then more strictly.
page 1. CHAP. II. The definitions cleared from certain objections, and nice
distinctions. page 4. CHAP. III. Other shifts and euasions met withal. page 6.
CHAP. IIII. Tithes in the New Testament proved to be equally sacred with those
in the Old: against the Simonists objection; and consequently the definition of
Simonie concluded according to the former, by the Schools and Canons. page 9.
CHAP. V. Other starting holes stopped. Objections answered. page 14. CHAP. VI.
Simonists convicted by the universal voice of common fame. page 16. CHAP. VII.
A demonstration of Simonie by our Positive Laws, and by Ecclesiastical
Canons, and (...) by the (...) and confession of the Simonist himself. page
20. CHAP. VIII. Of six euasions of the Simonist, whereby he thinks to elude
the Oath. page 26. CHAP. IX. Of the kinds of the Simonists in general. page
29. CHAP. X. Of the sundry ways and wiles of committing Simonie. page 37.
CHAP. XI. Of the highest degree of Simonie committed in Ordination. page 47.
CHAP. XII. Reasons showing the unreasonableness of Simonie, in general. page
59. CHAP. XIII. Of the unreasonableness of Simonie, particularly in regard of
the Office and Function of a Bishop, or Minister of the Gospel. page 66. CHAP.
XIIII. Of the Censures and Penalties of Simonie and Simonists. page 79. CHAP.
XV. Of the miserable fruits and effects of Simonie. p. 93. CHAP. XVI. Of the
cutting off, or curing of Simonie. page 107. The Corollarie, directed
especially to all Lay-Patrons, and Lay purchasers of the sacred Portion. Page
114. To the high and honorable Court of Parliament now ass^^bled. page 125. The
humble Petition of the Author, in behalf of many poor Souls, that perish for
want of food. ibid. The Authors Conclusion containing his ingenuous
Protestation, and zealous Gratulation.
A CENSVRE OF SIMONIE.
HEre first I may seem to usurp the Mathematicians privilege, in begging a
Suppositum, that such a thing there is, a^ Simony. For in the opinion of many,
Simony has lost its being, in rerum natura, as being long ago antiquated, and
out of date, dead and buried with Simon himself. And if (as Chrysostom says)
the gift of giving the Holy Ghost, was peculiar to the Apostles, so that not
even Philip baptizing, Coel. Rhod. le^t. antiq l. 8. c. 3. Chrysostom. in Act.
Apost. cap. 8. hom. 18. (...).
gave the Holy Ghost withal; For this gift was proper only to the twelve: and
if Simony be surnamed of Simon the Sire, and Simons Sin was about the buying
of the Holy Ghost: then that gift ceasing, and Simon being deceased, where is
there left so much as the name of Simony, to lend a title to our intended
Treatise? The Germans have very good Laws to punish drunkenness, but they
find it very hard to define what drunkenness is. So in England, we have good
Laws to punish adultery, but we find a great difficulty in conuincing any of
committing the act of adultery. So it may be said of Simony. First therefore
let us see what Simony is.

CHAP. I.
Wherein Simony is defined, first, generally and largely, then more strictly
and exactly.

FOr the Definition of Simony, briefly, we may reduce it to the Authority and
Testimony of two especially: to wit, the Canonists and Schoolmen; who have
been the most exact obseruers and Collectors of what has been delivered by
the most learned Doctors of the Church from time to time touching the nature of
this matter. For the C^nonists, let Gratian speak, who says, Simonia est
studiosa cupiditas, Can. 1. p. 2. qu. 1. gloss.
vel volunta^ emendi vel vendendi aliquid Spirituale: Simony, is an intentive
desire, or purpose to buy or sell some spiritual thing. And in another place
he adds, Can. 1. p. 2. qu. 3. gloss.
Simonia est, emere vel v^ndere res Corporales Ecclesia. It is Simony to buy or
sell the Corporal goods of the Church. For Schoolmen, let Thomas Aquinas
speak, who succeeded about one hundred years after Gratian, he says in
effect the same: Aqu. 21. q. 100.1.
Simonia est studiosa voluntas emendi vel vendendi aliquid Spirituale, vel
Spiritual^ annexum. Simony is an earnest desire of buying or selling any
spiritual thing, or that which is annexed to that which is spiritual. On
these two Definitions (in effect One) depends the whole Law of Simony, having
the testimony of the whole Church from the Primitive age thereof, till this
present. Zanchie using the very same Definition concludes. Zanch. de (...).
Sic definierunt Theologi. All Divines and Doctors have so defined it. And not
without good reason: For in these two Definitions is concluded whatsoever may
be said of Simony, whither we respect the Object, or the Subject of it; in the
Object, whether we understand the Spiritual gifts, or Corporal goods of the
Church* in the Subject (I mean not the Subject of Predication, as Logitians
speak, but of Inherence) whither we vnderdend the Affection only, or the
Action also; Be it Actual, or be it only Intentionall. All is Simony. As
Gratian also says, Simonia committitur and circa ordinem, and circa
Beneficium; Simony is committed both in respect of Orders, Ibid. Qui studet.
Council. Constable Sess. 43. D^^retum contra Simoniam. Can. 1. qu. 6.
and in respect of the Benefice it self. The Council of Constance has decreed
the same, That Simony is as well committed in the Title, as in the Order. But
hereunto Gratian puts an objection: Non videntur Spiritus Sancti donum emere,
qui non pro consecratione, sed pro electione munera larg^^^tur: cum nullius
spiritualis gratia aliquos faciat electio participes: that is* They seem not
to buy the gift of the Holy Ghost, who bestow their rewards, not for the
Consecration, but for the Election. But he adds the answer: Sed ficut
Ecclesiasticarum rerum ^^ptores simoniaci iudicantur, quia Ecclesiasticis
officijs (...) adiunctae sunt, vt alter^^ (...) aliero ali^ui non proueniat:
ita quia per electionem peruenit^r ad consecrationem, perinde simoniacus
habetur, qui pro Electione praemia largitur, ac si pro consecratione munera
dedisset; But (says he) as buyers of Ecclesiastical things, are judged
simonicall, because those things are so annexed to Ecclesiastical duties, as
one cannot have the one without the other: so because by election a man comes
to his consecration, he is accounted no less a Simonist, who bestows gifts
for the Election, then if he had gi-his money for Consecration.

Now if the former Definitions seem too large; especially to such, as would
feign pack up all Simony in the same fardell, with the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, as Commodities of one and the same kind: to gratify these, we might
reduce All to the same terms, and say, Simony is a Desire or Act of buying or
selling the gifts of the Holy Ghost. So Master Calvin (in Act. 8.) approues
this to be the most proper Definition of Simony. Only the Question is, Calvin.
in Act. 8.
what kinds of gifts of the holy Ghost may be here implied, the Merchandising
and Chafering whereof, either is, or may well be called either Simony, or at
least a branch of it. Lyra. in Act. 8.
Lyra (in Act. 8.) says, Simon volebat emere potestatem dandi Spiritum
Sanctum, intention Lucri inde recipiendi: propter quod ab ipso nominatur
vitium Simoniae, quo aliquis vendit aut (...) Spiritualia; Simon would buy the
power of giving the Holy Ghost, with intention of gaining thereby: as Saint
Augustine says: Aug. in Job. Tract. 10.
Quod venderet, emere volebat. He would buy that, which he purposed to sell
again.

For which respect from him is named the sin of Simony; when any man buyeth
or sells Spiritual things. Now we may reduce all those gifts of the Holy
Ghost concerning his Ministers (for these only are pertinent to our purpose in
hand) to these two heads: either those gifts given by imposition of hands in
Ordination, whereby Ministers receive a ministerial power to preach the Word,
to administer the Sacraments, to remit and retain sins, which is the
dispensation of the Keys: Or else those, whereby a Minister receives a
particular Charge over this or that flock, which being done by canonical and
orderly calling, it is a gift no less ascribed to the Holy Ghost, then that
other of Ordination. So the Apostle expresses in his charge to the Clergy of
Ephesus ( Act. 20.28.) Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock of
God, Whereof the Holy Ghost has made you Episcopos, or Overseers. See here, to
be an Ouerseer, whether Episcopus, by a note of Excellency, as the Superior
Ouerseer, or Superintendent over all particular both flocks and Pastors in his
peculiar Diocese: Or else every inferior and subordinate Minister in his
several Parish, Sub nomine Episcoparum intelliguntur alij Ecclesiae Ministri.
Lyra.
placed as an Ouerseer or Watchman over his flock, as Lyra also
understands. This is the gift of the Holy Ghost. Now then to buy this gift,
to be made a Bishop over such a See, or a Pastor, or Rector of such a flock,
does it not iumpe with this definition of Simony? For Simony is a trucking of
the gifts of the holy Ghost: but such an Ouerseership is a gift of the Holy
Ghost. Therefore to buy this gift, is Simony.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the former definitions are cleared from certain objections and nice
distinctions.

But for answer to our former Argument, The sophistical Simonist, or
simoniacall Sophister, distinguishes, Inter Beneficium and beneficium,
between the Benefice, and the benefit; Or more distinctly, Beneficium em^t,
non officium: He buyeth the profit, not the office: Non Curam, Sed curam not
the Cure of others souls, but the Cure and provision for his own body.
Paschalis P. answers this objection: Si quis obiecerit non consecrationes
emi, (...). 1. p. 2. q. 3.
Sed res qua ex consecratione proueniunt, penitu^ desiper^ probatur; Nam cum
corporalis Ecclesia, aut Episcopus, etc. If any shall object that he buyeth
not the Consecrations, but those things which follow and attend the
Consecration, he is a manifest Do^ard. For seeing a Corpse of a Church, or a
Bishop, or such, cannot subsist or be maintained, without things Corporal* no
more then the soul can live corporally without the body; whoso^^er sells the
one of these, without which the other cannot go alone, he leaves neither
unsold. Whereupon Gratian says, Quando quis promouendus est ad Ecclesiam vel
ordinem, Ibid.
fructus proueniunt iure ordinis; and ideo non licite emit. When a man is to be
promoted to a Church or Bishopric, or to the order and office of it, the
fruits do follow by right of order, and therefore the purchase it not lawful.
Both Pascals comparison, and Gratians reason, are apt and good. For there is
such a mutual and immediate relation, yea, combination and union between the
Ministry and the Maintenance, as one cannot Subsist without the Support of the
other, no more the^ the soul can exercise sundry faculties (especially those
sensitive offices) without the instrument of the body, or the body can do her
Duty, without her ordinary Diet. And as Boaz tendered to his kinsman the
purchase of El^^^lechs Lands, which at first offer he was willing to buy; Ruth.
4.
but told him withal, that he must purchase it of Naomi by marrying Ruth,
both must go together: So he that will buy the lands or inheritance of the
Church and of the Ministry, he must make account to buy Ruth* with it. The
maintenance and the ruthful, and careful office of the Ministry go hand in
hand together; buy the one, and buy the other too. Therefore anciently
Ordination did use to carry the title with it; as Council. Chal. Can. 6. So that
he who would buy the Maintenance, must buy also the Ordinance. And is not as
well the Maintenance, as the ordinance of the Ministry, a gift of the Holy
Ghost? Does not the Lord say, I have given the tithes to the Levites? and are
not these tithes holy? And who can give a holy gift, Number. 18.21.
or make a gift holy, but the Holy Ghost? Whence I infer this Conclusion:
Simony is a Desire, or Act of buying or selling the gifts of the Holy Ghost:
but tithes, holy tithes are a gift of the Holy Ghost: Therefore, the Desire or
Act of buying or selling holy tithes (by which I understand all Church
Maintenance) is Simony.

So that the Simonists former distinction serves only to distinguish between
right reason, and his own fond imagination, which are no way compatible, but
must needs make him, vt cum ratione insani^t. And truly I very easily believe,
that he speaks as he thinks? For few such Merchants would be at that cost,
to purchase such a Cure, Chr. in Act. 1. Hom. 3.
were it not for the Commodity, as Chrysostom says, I suppose no man, though
never so thirsty of glory, would ever be made a Bishop, unless necessity
called him thereunto; For who is sufficient for these things? Remains. p. 232.
And Cardinal Poole, being charged by a Cardinal of the adverse faction, with
ambion in ouer-hasty seeking after the Popedom, answered, That he thought not
the burden of that great office to be so light, but that he was of the mind,
that it was rather to be feared, then desired. But later times are so pregnant,
producing such sky-soaring spirits, as now, who is not sufficient for these
things? And what reason has any man of reason to think, that these sufficient
men should have such leaden heads, as once to vouchsafe to reach out their
golden hands, to the end to purchase and pull upon themselves the burden of
such a Cure: no more then he would think, that such would ever be content (if
it were possible) to become ioynt-purchasers with Christ, whose Bishopric
cost him the shedding of his most precious blood; no nor ever imitate Saint
Paul's example, Phil. 2.17. or obey Saint John's precept, 1. Ioh. 3.16.

CHAP. III.
Wherein other shifts and euasions are met withal.

But what is become of my Simonist? I thought I had catched him fast even now
with my Sillogisme. But Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nod^? How shall I
hold this shifting Proteus? with what Cords or Wyths shall I bind this
Sampson-like Simon? Emit, non Emit: beneficium, non Beneficium: curam, non
Curam. But at the last, he must confess (and therein he mockes not) that he
has certain Lock^, whereon never (...) Razor; that is, certain Flocks or
^leeces never yet polled from the Church, or not touched (at least in his own
sleepie sense and apprehension) with the Razor of Conviction under the name of
Simony. The temporal benefit indeed he has bought, to wit, the Glebe, the
Tithe, and the like: prove this to be Simony, and then I shall be as other
men. And in this his conceit, he is as strong as Sampson: yea, so confident,
that he dare say, that Tithes are mere Temporalls, Lay Fees. But as Sampson,
after his locks were shaven, never thought that his strength was gone, till by
woeful proof he found it: So our Simon here, thinks all is well with him, so
long as he strongly imagines that his Tithes are but Temporalls; and so long,
no Simonist, not as other men.

But now Sampson, the Philistines be upon thee; yea, stronger then the
Philistines, A Troop of Truths does beset thee. What? Tithes temporal? In what
Grammar have you learned to join this Substantive and Adjective together? I am
sure not in Gods Book? There is no such incongruitie, no Solecisme, no false
construction there. There he deserves the Feruia, the Rod, a vae, that
incongruously calls sower, Sweet: and Sweet, Sower; Good, Evil: and Evil,
Good: And shall he escape, that calls Sacred, Secular? Tithes, Temporalls? Or
he, who says, Give unto Caesar the things that are Gods? Let me but a little
shake Aarons Rod, and Christ's many-corded Whip, at our indisciplined Simon, to
make him at least attentive to what the Scripture says. Tithes, I am sure,
were once Sacred; and what God has once Sacred, call not thou Common. But when
Sacred? When? Why not, when Adam was first Created? When he was endued with
the ten Moralls of the Law? And is it not more then probable, that among the
ten, the Lord allotted a Tithe, for the maintenance of his service: Seeing
among the ten he appointed a time for his service, even the Sabbath Day, the
Sanctification whereof, Tithes were properly to attend upon? Tithes then, no
doubt, were sacred from the beginning of Adams creation. For else, when did
Abraham learn to pay tithe of All to Melchisedech, the Priest of the most high
God? Or what moved Jacob to vow the paying of Tithes? Was it only from the
Example of his grandfather? Or were his Tithes only voluntary and arbitrary,
till by vow made necessary? Why not then his other service, which he then
vowed, which he was bound to perform, though he had not vowed it at all? His
vow was but a stronger Bond to hold and help him, to the better performance of
that duty, which notwithstanding was due without a vow. As our solemn vow in
Baptism is but a stronger Bond to tie us to that obedience to God, which we
ought most carefully to perform, no less, then if we had not vowed at all.

But if as yet you deny Tithes to be Consecrate and Sacred, by divine instinct
or institution, as wanting express precept: yet at least you your self cannot
but confess they began then to be sacred, when God said ( Leuit. 27.30.) All
the Tithe of the Land, both of the Seed of the ground, and the fruit of the
Trees, is the Lords; it is holy to the Lord. Yea, so holy, so sacred, that (as
in the next Verse) If any man shall redeem any of his Tithe, he shall add the
fifth part thereto. And every Tithe of Bullock, and of Sheep, and of all that
goes under the Rod, The tenth shall be holy unto the Lord, v. 32. Yea, so
holy, as v. 33. He shall not look if it be good or bad, neither shall he
change it, else if he change it, both it, and that it was changed with all,
shall be holy, and it shall not be redeemed. Lo then, how sacred Tithes be
ratified by a double Tense, They are holy, and, They shall be holy to the
Lord: As Jacob confirmed his sons blessing, I have blessed him, and he shall
be blessed. And where it is said, That the Tenth Is holy to the Lord, D.
Carleton Bishop of Chichester.
a Learned and Reverend Prelate of our Church in his Book of Tithes, has out
of the Present Tense, drawn this observation, That the Tenth began not now to
be sacred, or consecrated, but only to be appropriathe for the time to the
Levites, concluding the Ordinance to be morally perpetual from the Creation.

CHAP. IIII.
Tithes in the New Testament proved to be equally Sacred with those in the Old,
against the Simonists objection: and consequently the definition of Simony,
concluded according to the former definitions of it, by the Schools and Canons.

YEa, says our Simon, I deny not, but that the tenth was holy and sacred
during the time of the Old Testament, but it cease to be so now in the New. O
Heresy, worthy of Simon himself! O Folly, well beseeming the Aramites! who
being already overcome in the Mountains, promised to themselves the Victory
in the Valley, Saying, The Lord is the God of the Mountains, and not God of the
Vallyes: And is the Lord the God of the Old Testament* 1. Kings 10.
and not God of the New? Yes, even of the New also. For Mark: The Tithes were
not said to be holy to the Levites, but to the Lord; Nor, that they were the
Levites, but the Lords? The Tithes is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord, Leuit.
27.30. Therefore the Lord rebuking the Jews for neglecting the payment of
their Tithes, he takes the wrong as done to himself, saying, Ye have robbed
Me. Mal. 3.8. He says not, Ye have spoiled the Leuite, and the Priest, but,
ye have spoiled Me. If then the Lord himself, and not the Leuite be
entitled and interessed in the proper right of Tithes, then certainly they are
as sacred now in the New Testament, as ever they were in the Old. The Tithes
are holy to the Lord. Leuit. 27.28. and they shall be holy to the Lord, v. 32.
They are holy (it was said then) to the Lord of the Old Testament, and they
shall be holy to the Lord of the New Testament: And to us there is but one
Lord.

And tell me, foolish self deceiving Simonist, whosoever thou art, tell me
when and where Tithes ceased to be sacred? and if thou can not tell, how
dare thou call them Temporalls? But let me tell thee by the Word of the Lord,
that Tithes are perpetually sacred. Search the Scriptures. Go learn what that
means, Abraham gave Melchisedech Tithe of all. If thou understand it not,
ask the Apostle: and it is worth the consideration, For Consider (says he)
how great this man was, Heb. 7.4.
unto whom even the Patriark Abraham gave Tithe of the Spoils. Abraham, the
Father of all the Faithful, not of the Jews only, but of us Gentiles also,
paid Tithe of All. To whom? To Melchisedeck. And what was this Melchisedeck?
Priest of the most high God, King of Righteousness, King of Salem: in all, a
perfect Type of Christ our eternal high Priest, the Lord our righteousness,
Prince of Peace. Did Abraham then the Father of the Faithful, yea, the Type of
Gods fathfull Church, in the Loins of whose faith (as I may say) were all the
faithful, give the Tithe of all to Melchisedeck, the true Type of Christ our
eternal high Priest, and the Minister of a better Testament? and shall we
doubt to tread in the steps of faithful Abraham, except we will be Bastards
and not Sons? And if the Apostle use it as an Argument to prove Christ's
Priesthood more excellent then Aarons* inasmuch as even Leui in the Loins of
Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedeck: How do we then uphold and maintain this
Prerogative of Christ's Priesthood, while we either deny or diminish his right
of Tithes in the Ministry of the New Testament. Since Aaron, who was far
inferior, received Tithes in the Old; yea, rather, if the Leuiticall
Priesthood, being inferior, received Tithes: then the Evangelical, being
superior, much more. And why is Leui said in the Loins of Abraham to have
paid Tithes to Melchisedeck? but plainly to give us to understand that this
payment implied an acknowledgement of Christ their Sovereign Lord and true
high Priest, as in whose only title and right they also received Tithes. Hence
is it, that all the Levites paid the tenth of their Tenths to Aaron the high
Priest, and to his Successors; Number. 18.28.
He being also a Veri^^^ res pertinet ad Christum, sed vmbr^ ad Legem Aqu. in
Col. 2.17. Et Ca^u. ibi^. substantia illarum rerum qua^ Ceremon^ae ol^m
figurabant nobis exposita^stante oculo^ in Christo quia in se continet,
quicquid illae futurum defignabant.
Type of Christ. Le^ even the spirit of contradiction it self, but note how
frequently and how effectually the Apostle presses the right of Tithes
resident in Christ, as a notable proof of the eternity of his Priesthood. For
in the seventh Chapter to the Hebrews, the Apostle mentions this argument of
Tithes no less then six or seven times; as, Verse 2.4.5, 6, 8, 9. He
therefore that denies Tithes to be due to Christ in the Ministry of the New
Testament: what does he else but deny the eternity of Christ's Priesthood, the
ministration whereof must continue til time shall be no more. Yea, he must also
deny, that Melchisedeck was a true type of Christ, by virtue of receiving
tithes: if now Tithes be not really due to Christ in the New Testament, as
they were typically prefigured in the Old.

Again, when began Tithes first to be paid? Was it not so long before the Law
was given, or the Levites borne? Could the Leuiticall Law then disannull the
nature of Tithes, that they should not for ever continue sacred, being before
the Law consecrated in Act by our Father Abraham, the Type of Christ's Church,
unto Melchisedech the Type of our eternal high Priest Christ Jesus? Council.
Magunt. ca. 3 8. de decimis.
Decimas Deo, and Sacerdotibus Dei dandas Abraham factis, and Jacob promissis
insinuat; and omnes Sancti Doctores commemorant. That Tithes are to be given
to God, and to the Priests of God, both Abraham by fact, and Jacob by vow does
insinuate: and all holy Doctors do avouch it. Admonemus vel praecipimus, vt
Decima de omnibus Dari non negligatur quia Deus ipse sibi Dari constituit, etc.
We admonish and command, that the tenth of all things be not neglected to be
paid, because God himself has ordained it to be given to himself. And the
perpetuity of Christ's Ppiesthood is proved by Tything, as Heb. 7.8. There he
receives Tithes, of whom it is witnessed that he lives. Or let the Simonist
go learn what that means, Even so has the Lord ordained, 1. Cor. 9.14.
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Who sees not,
that the Apostle there, does parallel the Leuiticall maintenance, and the Lords
Ordinance, the Altar, and the Gospel together. And does not the Apostle there
challenge to himself a power in such maintenance, as well as others? Mark; a
power. And whence, but from the Lords Ordinance? And where appears the
general practice of this Ordinance, but in the Leuiticall Maintenance? And
where has this Maintenance the first foundation and institution (besides the
Creation) but in Christ, figured in Melchisedech, who received Tithes of
Abraham, the father and figure of all the faithful, the Church of God? And
shall not Tithes then be for ever sacred? And if sacred, is not he a profane
Simonist, that offers to buy them? Yea moreover, are not the Ministers of the
Gospel called the sons of Leui? Mal. 3.3. The text is pregnant, and plain,
and Interpreters subscribe to the truth of it. Christ was to fine the sons of
Leui, that they might offer to the Lord in righteousness; that is, his
Apostles and Disciples of the Gospel. These are called the sons of Leui,
because they succeed Leui, in the Ministry. And if we be Leuies sons, who
shall deny us Leuies inheritance; seeing we are Levites to the same Lord, the
perpetuity of whose Priesthood, the payment of Tithes to his Levites are a
pregnant argument of. And if ye deny him Tithes, you must of necessity deny
him the Priesthood too, and so with the Jews conspire to kill him, that the
inheritance may be yours. Yea, we are Leuies sons, fined and purged from the
refuse of Legal Types and Ceremonies: and shall our Tithes be less sacred?

Object. But some will say: We have no express Precept in the Gospel for
paying of Tithes. I answer, There are demonstrations enough, and those most
strong. But what needs any express Precept? The Precept is express enough in
the Law. He that is more seen in the Law, then in the Gospel, and stands more
upon Antiquities, then Verities; If the God of this world had not blinded his
eyes, might acknowledge the antiquity of this Precept in the Law to be so
plain, as it needs no further explication or reestabliment in the Gospel. The
Tithe is the Lords, says the Law. And does not the Gospel ratify the same,
saying, Give unto God those things that are Gods? Is not this an express
Precept. Indeed Christ and his Apostles being busy in founding a new Church,
suspended the practice of receiving Tithes, until the decrepite Synogogue of
the Leuiticall Ordinance expired, and the final obsequies thereof were fully
ended. But they left abundant evidence in their Gospels, to euict the right of
Tithes to Christ's Ministers, in the succeeding ages of the Church.

To conclude this point, That Tithes and all Church maintenance (call it what
you will) benefit, or Benefice, profits, or corporal goods, they are holy, and
of a spiritual nature, because they are consecrate to a holy use: I do not
say, that Res decimarum, the things whereof Tithes consist, are in their own
nature spiritual: but qua Decima, as they are Tithes, consecrate to a holy
end, and use, they put on a spiritual nature. For even as the bread in the
Sacrament before it be consecrate, and sanctified by the Word, it is common;
but after the consecration, it becomes Sacramental and spiritual bread (which
is that change the ancient Fathers so usually speak of, not that bastard
substantial change, which the Pontificians would falsely father upon them) in
which respect the Apostle calls the Manna, and the water of the Rock, 1.
Cor. 10.
in regard of their typical signification, spiritual meat, and spiritual
drink: So those things whereof Tithes and all Church maintenance consist, in
their own nature, are temporal and common, but being dedicated to God to a
holy use and end, they are not to be holden any longer for temporal, but
spiritual, I say in regard of their spiritual end and use, for which they are
consecrated. And what is the end and use, of such consecrate things? Is it not
for the maintenance of Christ's Ministers? and are not they in their persons, in
their profession, by calling spiritual? and of what nature then can their
maintenance be, but Spiritual? For Omne nutritur a Simili, Spiritual men, and
spiritual ^eate: both of a like nature, both a like consecrated to God. So
then Tithes, or Church livings, coming within the Verge of the definition of
Simony, as being not only annexed unto spiritual things, but spiritual
things themselves: it follows necessarily, that to buy or sell such
spiritual things, is Simonie. The definition then of the Schoolmen and
Canonists formerly cited, stands firm and good, having all the terms and
parts of a perfect definition, accoding to the rules of Logic: which in
brief may be reduced to a syllogism thus: Emptio vel venditio rei spiritualis
est simonia: sed decimae sunt res spirituales: ^rg^ emptio vel venditi^
decimarum est simonia. Emptio and venditi^, is the Genus: Simonia, is the
Species: and res Spiritualis, is the Differentia. As Homo est animal rationale:
is a perfect definition: having the Genus, the Species, and Differentia.
Therefore according to the definition of Simonie, to buy or sell any spiritual
thing, is Simonie. In which respect Judas in selling Christ, is said to commit
Simonie: Non solum plagium commisit, Cau. 1. p. 2. qu. 1. gloss.
quod liberum hominem: sed and Simoniam, in eo quod rem sacram vendidit: He
committed not only the sin of man-stealing, by selling a freeman: but also
of Simonie, in selling a thing sacred or spiritual.

CHAP. V.
Other euasions or starting holes stopped. Objections answered.

But the Simonist has yet another usual starting hole, whereinto he creeps,
when he is pursued with the Hue and Cry of Simonie: he confesses indeed,
because he cannot deny it, that Tithes are perpetually consecrate, and so,
spiritual; and therefore to buy or sell them is Simonie: but he says, he
buyeth not the Tithes, but either the Gleebe, or the Temporalls annexed to his
Benefice, or Bishopric. Well, to answer this, we will not take the benefit
and advantage of the definition of Simonie, which includes as well those
things annexed to spiritual things, as the Spiritual things themselves; but
we say, that such Gleebe and such Temporalls are now Spiritualls, as Tithes
be. For as well the Free Will offerings and Oblations, as the Tithes were
called holy. If a man dedicate to the Lord any ground of his inheritance,
Leuit. 27.21.
the field shall be holy to the Lord, when it goes out in the Iubile, as a
field separate from common uses; the possession thereof shall be the Priests.
Such Gleebs therefore and Lands commonly called Temporalls, are indeed not
temporal, being once freely and solemnly given by vow of our noble
Predecessors unto the Lord, for the more honorable maintenance of his Church;
but they are now spiritual, sanctified and separate from common use, as Tithes
be, they are holy to the Lord. Therefore, as it is a snare to devour that
which is thus sanctified, and after such vows to enquire: Prou. 20.^5.
So the Simonist does but entangle himself in a ^nare, as the Conny is in her
own Burrow, when he makes this his starting h^le; that so long as he buyeth
but the Temporal lands of the Church, he commits no Simonie. Sed cominus res
agat^r. Simoniace, quid emisti? Glebam inquis, aut (te arbitro) Temporalia.
Quanti emisti? Tanti. Agedum. Permittatur i^m arbitrio calculorum, quantum inde
(...) ^ucratus, and number te negoti^torem satis prudentem cautumque praestiteris.
Ann^^ glebae tuae reditus aestimantur forte 20. li. aut supra; ducentis vero,
aut trecentis, aut quadringentis libris emisti. Nae tu, haereditatem tibi ac
posteris, tandidem emere potuisses. Summa igitur, si computetur, huc recidit,
quod hoc tuo mercimonio teipsum prodideris aut puerilem mercatorem, aut (quod
magis suspicor) egregium veteratorem. Excute vero tuam tantae causae nimium
indo^ mientem conscientiam, and fatebere tandem, non te glebam tanti, nisi
decimarum mayor fuisset ratio, emisse. Vel sicut siquis domicitium chariu^
emit, bonae viciniae gratia. Eadem prorsus ratio latifundiorum Episcopalium,
vulgo Temporalium, habenda est. Emit quis, non Episcopatum, sed Temporalia, non
quod sacrum est, sed quod seculare. Ista aut^m Temporalia partim ex latifu^dij
vtilitate, partim ex dominij dignitate aestimantur. Quanti antem constet
Ecclesiasticus honor, mihi non constat. N^c quenquam arburer (...) seu (...)
pr^ se tantum laturum, vt dicat se honorem Ecclesiasticum emere. Si vero quod
reliqu^^ est Temp^ralium emat, viderit Emptor, ne quantum rem empta^ pretium
superat, tantum ipsum se honorem non neglexisse videatur. Nec quamquam existimo
eo processurum a^daciae, vt dicat, tantundem esse, honorem Ecclesiasticum, and
ciuilem emere. Nihil addo amplius. Sati^ est quod hic noster mercator ex sua
ipsius conscientia arguatur. Nec sibi ca^ere poterit, quin in istorum
scopulorum alterum, Direct, vel Indirecte, misere impingat. But let this
suffice to have shown, both by evidence of Holy Scriptures, and testimonies of
Ecclesiasticke Doctors, and learned Divines, that all buying and selling any
Church ^referments, upon what pretense soever, is gross Simonie, how finely
and artificially soever conveyed.

CHAP. VI.
Simonists convicted by the universal voice of common Fame.

IF Gods Word were altogether silent in the Law of Tithes, leaving them as a
thing indifferent to be paid or not, according to men's fancies and wills; and
that the Scriptures had consequently no show of arguments to convince
Simonists, as we have heard: yet even the general voice of common fame (me
thinks) should be sufficient to cry down Simonie, and to present it in the
Spiritual Court, or to procure a Decre^e against it in the high Court of
Conscience. And here before the Bar of this impartial Court, let me by Writ
Summon the Simonist to appear. Thou have bought some Benefice; or other
Ecclesiastical preferment in the Church* but have so carried and conuei^d the
matter, as the world cannot be witness how much thou have given: yet so, and
so much thou have given, as by some circumstance or other, general notice is
taken of it (for such corruption will soon cast abroad a savor) whereupon a
common fame is raised upon thee, that thou art a Simonist. So that if thou will
be tried by God and the Country, thou art sure to be condemned for a
Simonist. For vox popidi, v^x Dei, every one says thou art a Simonist;
therefore thou art one. Even as an intemperate or incontinent person in a
Parish; the one is commonly drunk, the other follows harlots, every boy in
the street points at them; There goes a Drunkard* There goes a Whoore-master;
But yet for all this, neither will the one confess himself a Drunkard,
because he keeps his feet; he wallowes not in the kennell, he can use his
tongue, and the like; Nor the other will be an Adulterer, because he thanks
God, he medleth not with other men's wives, but uses only for recreation to
meet with merry company, although in suspected places, to see their
fashions, and to learn rather to hate women, then to love them. Mature vt cum
cognorint, perpetuo oderint* Terent.
And if he enter into more familiarity with them, it is but simple
fornication at the worst, and (according to Romane-Catholike Doctrine) a
Venial sin, which his nature is now and then necessitated unto, for his
healths sake: Just so, is our common Simonist. He has devoured pluralities of
preferments, as so many full cups; he has deflowred so many, once Virgin
Churches, the Patron perhaps, or some for him being the Pandor; so that every
one can point with the finger, There goes one who paid so much for such a
Benefice, such a D. such a B. Yet for all this he will be no Simonist,
because, forsooth, he has not bought the Holy Ghost; nor by way of Lapse
entered upon another Living, as is were, another man's wife, which some flaw in
this wife, not fault in the Incumbent, has brought into the lapse, and so now
free for any to sue out a Divorce, and marry her, though so, as he commits
adultery with her.

But thou will say, It is one thing to be called, and another thing to be;
Though the ignorant vulgar call me so, yet it therefore follows not, that I
am so. Things are to be measured not by report, but by reason; and the vulgar
can give no other reason of calling me a Simonist, but only because Simon
bought the gifts of the holy Ghost, and I only buy the corporal commodities
of the Church. Well, yet if there were no other respect, but this, how ought
every Minister especially to be careful of preserving the credit of his holy
calling and profession: As Saint Hierome writing, Hieron ad Nepotiani^, Epist.
2.
De vita Clericorum and Sacerdotum, says. Caueto omnes, suspitiones, and
quicquid probabiliter fingipotest, ne fingatur, ante deuita. Avoid all
suspicions, and whatsoever may be probably forged, prevent it first, that it
may not be forged. For as every good Christian ought not only to abhor
Adultery and all unclean Acts; but also to direct his conversation so, as he
may preserve his good name from the least suspicion of lightness and
dishonestie: so every good Minister of Christ should so much detest the sin
of Simon himself, as to decline whatsoever has any similitude or affinity
therewith. Abstain (says the Apostle) from all appearance of evil. ^. Thessalonians.
5.22.


And if there were no other reason to ground common fame upon, but this, that
merchandising of Church-liuings is called Simonie, because Simons sin in
offering to buy the gifts of the holy Ghost, is truly called Simonie: it were
even proof good enough. As Theopompus called a drunken murder, Cilicismus, of
the barbarous manners of the Cilicians: and lascivious lust, Canobismus, of the
filthy Canobites. Coelius Rhod. lect. antiq. li. 8. cap. 3.

So Judas is called a Devil, for being like him. Herod, a Fox, for his craft;
The Church of Antichrist, a Whore, for her whoorish conditions; and many a man
is called a Simonist, for resembling Simon. As Saint Augustine marshalleth
Simon, and all Ecclesiastical Merchants in the same rank together: Simon erat
de talibus, qui in Templum intrant ad emendum and vendendum; Simon is one of
those, that enter into the Temple, Aug. in Ps. 130.
to buy and sell. In Ps. 130. And see what a similitude there is between
Simon, and the Simonist. Simon would have bought the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
this man buyeth the goods of the Holy Ghost, which are the gifts of God to his
Ministers. Simon offered money, not so much for the gift, as for the Lyra.
Zanch. August.
gain; this Man, not only offers, but gives his money, not perhaps for his
Ordination, not for that most careful Cure of Souls, not for that most
watchful and weighty (Angelorum humeris tremendum Onu^) office of an
Antistes: I dare say; what then? if neither, to make himself the more rich and
honorable in the world, and consequently the more capable of a greater
preferment^ all probable conjecture were at a stand. Blame not then even the
common vulgar, for calling thee a Simonist after the name of Simon, whom thou
do so nearly resemble in thy manners, and which thou have so dearly
purchased with thy moneys.

Again, They that have but in a mediocritie attained the grounds of their
Catechism (whereof there are enough to make up a common fame) are able thus to
conclude against common Simonie. The Commandment says, Thou shall not Kill.
Is therefore only the Act of Murder here forbidden? Is not also the envious,
the back-bi^er, the hater of his brother, a Murderer? He that hates his
brother is a Manslayer. The Commandment says, 1. John 3.15.
Thou shall not commit Adultery; Is only the Act forbidden? Is not also the
affection? the lust? the look? He that looks on a woman, and lusts after
her, has committed Adultery with her a^readie in his heart. Even so, Thou
shall not commit Simonie: Matthew. 5.28.
Therefore is only the buying and selling of the most proper gifts and graces
of the Holy Ghost so heinous, as to deserve that odious name of Simonie: and
shall not the buying and sel^ling of Church preferments (being also the Holy
Ghosts gifts, but of an inferior nature) (that which Simon himself had most
respect unto, when he offered his money) deserve also the name of Simonie? And
why should not the buying and selling of Church livings be called Simonie: as
well as a lustful look be called Adultery? For he that uses lustful
looks, and wanton gestures, is not only an Adulterer in his heart, but the
likelier and nearer to commit it in the act: So he that will not stick to buy
a Benefice, be it but an Aduowson, before he have taken some Orders, is he
not the likelier to buy his Orders too, especially being some rusticke
Pedanticke, that so he may enjoy his former bargain? For every one that
buyeth a preferment of this nature, does undoubtedly prefer it before the
honor of his Calling (for he that truly honors this holy Calling, is of
that holy mind, as to despise all base means to advance himself in this
calling) and consequently will make small conscience to buy holy Orders, which
he accounts but as accessories, when as he has made shipwreck of conscience
already in purchasing the profits, which he deemeth as the Principal. And
upon these reasons, not only the Common fame of this our Church, and of the
present time, but of the whole Catholic Church from time to time, is grounded.
So that the very fame of it being so universal, if there were no other
reason, me thinks it should make any common Christian both ashamed, and
afraid to oppose either his private opinion, or practice, against such a
stream and cloud of witnesses.

CHAP. VII.
Simonie demonstrated by our positive Laws, and by Ecclesiastical Canons: and
in fine, by the conviction, and confession of the Simonist himself.

BEsides all the former conuictions, yea, even without them all, the same Laws
which have appointed and imposed the Oath of Simonie, may serve for sufficient
and competent Judges in the case of Simonie. And it stands with good reason,
that the same Law which forbids and punishes Simonie, should be its own
Interpreter, what it means by Simonie. And so, That is justly censured for
Simonie, which the Law understands to be Simonie. Now the words of the Statute
showing what Simony is, be these: And for the avoiding of Simonie and
Corruptions in Presentations, 31. Elizab^th. Chap. 6.
Collations, and Donations, of, and, to Benefices, Dignities, Prebends, and
other livings and Promotions Ecclesiastical, and in admissions, institutions
and inductions to the same: Be it further enacted, etc. See here what our
Statutes call Simonie. And according to the Interpretation of this Statute,
does the Oath take place. For upon this impregnable Bulwark of the Law
positive, is mounted the Canon of the Church, full charged upon Simonists with
powder and shot, to batter down this high towering conceit of all those, that
stand out in defiance of all opposition, and in defense of their ungodly
merchandise. The charge of this Canon is heavier then Lead, and harder then
Iron, and so planted against the Simonist, that he m^st of force receive it
into his very mouth; I mean, that most fearful Oath of Simonie. But the
Simonists Motto is, Iuraui lingua, mentem iniuratam gero: The Oath may well
touch the tip of his tongue, but it shall not come near his heart; he has
some evasion, some reservation, or trick (...) elude the Oath, either by
giving it a false gloss, o^ by looking the face of his conscience in a false
glass, unless by way* of commutation he decline it, as other offenders do
the wearing of the White Sheet; but never any by commuting, or call it what
you will, is able to shift off his winding sheet: Many may avoid the mouth of
the Canon, but when it comes once to the ryding of the Canon, that will be
sure to pay his ryder. For to bring it home to the conscience, let me borrow
an example of a Simoniacall Bishop from Rome, whereof that now stepmother
Church is fruitful, and may spare enough to stand for sea-markes for our better
direction. Imagine you see him entering the Chancell of Saint Peter's in Rome, to
receive his consecration in all his Pontificalls, and standing in the midst
of such a congregation as at least themselves account most sacred: To this man
let that dreadful and direful Oath (which our Church has religiously
provided as a wholesome remedy and preservative against this dangerous disease
of Simonie) be administered. And before he take it, let some powerful voice
(such as came to Balaam, to forbid him to go to Balack for the wages of
iniquity, or as came to Abimelech, to forbid him to touch Abraham's wife)
summon and rowse his conscience, as on this wife. Come now, O Roman Prelate,
who have purchased a Bishopric, as the Centurion did his Burgeship, for a
great sum: I dispute not now about the manner, it makes no matter a purchase
it is: But now thou art come to the place of thy Consecration (take heed it
prove not thy Execration:) Now thou stand in the midst of an assembly of
Prelates and Priests, on a day, in a place, all sacred: the service sacred,
praying, praising, preaching, communicating; expecting also the presence of the
Holy Ghost, with his manifold gifts to be conferred upon thee by imposition of
hands: now thou art set in the presence of Men and Angels, who stand about thee
as so many eye and ear witnesses of this days deed. All these weighty
circumstances considered, might be of force to put thee to a stand; and because
I have known that a desperate fellow coming before a Judge in open Court,
armed with a strong and obstinate resolution to take a solemn oath in the
maintenance of a wrong cause, which the Judge having smelled out, first, wisely
admonished him to be well advised what he would do, laying before him the
fearfulness of an oath wrongfully taken: He thereupon, feeling the remorse
of conscience, openly confessed the whole truth of the business: Therefore be
advised before thou come to take thine oath; first to read the Oath, that
weighing the tenure of it, thou may rather timely prevent the danger, then
afterward repent thee when it is too late. The words of the Canon prefixed
stand thus: To avoid the detestable sin of Simonie, Canons and Constitutions
40.
because buying and selling of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Functions,
Offices, Promotions, Dignities, and Livings, is execrable before God: Therefore
the Archbishop, and all and every Bishop or Bishops, or any other person or
persons, having authority to admit, institute, collate, install, or to
confirm the election of any Archbishop, Bishop, or any other person or persons
to any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Function, Dignity, Promotion, Title,
Office, Jurisdiction, Place, or Benefice, with Cure, or without Cure, or to any
Ecclesiastical Living whatsoever, shall before every such Admission,
Institution, Collation, Installation, or Confirmation of election, respectively
minister to every person hereafter to be admitted, instituted, collated,
installed, or confirmed, in, or to, any Archbishopricke, Bishopric, or other
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Function, Dignity, Promotion, Title, Office,
Jurisdiction, Place or Benefice, with Cure, or without Cure, or in any
Ecclesiastical living whatsoever; This Oath in manner and form following, The
same to be taken by every one whom it concerns in his own person, and not by
a Proctor: The words of the Oath. I N. N. do swear, That I have made no
Simoniacall payment, contract, or promise, directly or indirectly, by my self,
or by any other to my knowledge, or with my consent, to any person, or persons
whatsoever, for, or concerning the procuring and obtaining of this
Ecclesiastical dignity (to wit, the Bishopric of, etc.) Nor will at any
time hereafter perform, or satisfy any such kind of payment, contract or
promise made by any other, without my knowledge or consent; So help me God,
through Jesus Christ.

Have thou now duly and seriously weighed the substance and circumstances of
this most solemn Oath? Then let it summon and assemble thy saddest thoughts in
counsel together, all moving thee thus to argue with thy self. I am now in a
place sacred, in the open view of Men and Angels, all Spectators, all Expecters
of what I am to do: Here I come to be consecrated a Bishop, a great honor,
but a greater burden, which taking upon me, I must ouer-top many here
present, and many more absent, all deserving this honor far before me; So
that I pull upon my self, and that justly, the most insupportable burden of
Envy: yea more, if this Bishopric had fallen unto me by Lot, as that fell
upon Mathias, or had been cast or enforced upon me, as Vide Esp^nsaeum de
Episcopatus suga and recusatiou^, Lib. 3. digr^ssionum. cap. 4.5* ^. and 7.
Bishoprics were once wont to be upon good men in the time of the Churches
innocence, I might better bear and brook it, yea, it would diminish all the
Envy: But my conscience tells me, yea, and others also can too well witness
(for ambition is not hid in a corner) how eagerly? how ambitiously, how
unbeseeming the gravity and modesty of a Priest, yea, the ingenuitie of any
honest man, by cap and knee, by soothing and flattery, by often visiting and
long attending the Court, when I should have been at my sheepe-coat, have I at
length attained to this reverent Dignity: Nay more, though the world perhaps
know it not (as yet) my conscience fails not to charge me, what a sum of
money I have and am to pay for it (that which my kindred and friends may one
day rue, if the lease of my momentanie lent life be not all the longer) besides
the fair and goodly livings I have parted withal into the bargain: yet if
this were all, it were the more tolerable. But alas? here is an Oath, a
direful, a dreadful Oath (alas!) which I must take: I must, there is no
evasion, no redemption, no baulking of it, I can no more escape it, then a dead
man his winding sheet, and taking it upon me, it will be worse then
Deianira's enchanted shirt, sitting close to my conscience, and tormenting it
with the fire of hell. This will be worse unto me then the ryding of the
Cannon, for it will shake and shatter my soul and conscience all to pieces.
How should I then take this fearful Oath, and so sin against God, the
Judge: sin against this sacred Assembly, the Grand Jury passing upon me?
sin against the Church? against my profession, which is sacred, against the
dignity of a Bishop, which is venerable; and lastly against my own soul, the
subject of all this sin, and the object of all those inevitable judgments of
that just God hanging over my head? And what shall it advantage me, thus to win
a Bishopric, and lose mine own soul? What advantage? Nay what disadvantage
will it bring unto me? For what joy or inioyment can I have in my Bishopric,
when my conscience shall be still dogging me at the heels, yea biting me at
the heart, and vpbraiding me with Simonie and Perjury: what honor shall the
title of Lord be unto me, when my Simonie and Perjury (too manifest to the
world) shall make me a table talk, a byword, a scornful Parable in every man's
mouth, a contemptible object in every man's eyes? The Rotchet being an embl^me
of the pure linen righteousness and innocence of Saints, so often as I shall
put it on, what does it but put me in mind to apply that saying to my self,
being one of those false Apostles, who transform my self into the Apostle of
Christ, 1. Cor. 11.13.
as Satan is transformed into an Angel of Light? And what benefit shall my
Bishopric be unto me, being so dearly bought, that I must lay the burden of
my Simonie, upon my poor Clergy, rack my rents, sell my Presentations, keep
a miserable house, and all, and more then all these, to patch up a poor
bargain, and to heap more burdens upon my conscience, enduring more already,
then I am able to bear? were it not much better for me rather to forgo
Bishopric and all, and to prevent all those matchless mischiefs, that
depend and attend upon the conditions of accepting it: then by going on, to
plunge my soul into infinite calamities, and wrap my self in endless and
remediless miseries? For that Oath, that Oath, O that fearful Oath (alas)
admitting no evasion, no mental reservation, no equivocation; that Oath, being
once taken, becomes a great gulf for ever set between my conscience, and
comfort, between my soul, and salvation, between me and bliss: And what can
I exspect, but that my tongue, for being but an instrument in pronouncing this
Oath, shall be tormented in a greater flame then that of poor Dives in hell
fire? And then, and there, what shall it boot me to disclaim the name of
Simonie, when I now suffer for it? or to say, I bought the benefit, and
dignity, not the Office of a Bishop, when now my false and foolish
equivocation is found out? when as my conscious Agents, and all that
confederate crew, the Usurer, the Scriuener, the Solicitor, and the like, shall
vpbraid and accuse me, for being an accessory, yea, a principal occasion of
their sin? For had not I been so forward to give, they had not participated
with me in my sin, and so not in my punishment; mine own conscience never
ceasing her hideous and hellish clamors upon me, tormenting me for my
desperate perjury, for my deep hypocrisy, for playing the Chop-Church, which
my punishment shall then tell me, is either Simonie, or some other crime worse
then it, if worse can be imagined.

Now shall not these considerations move such a man, yea, even a Romish
Simonist, to a timely prevention of Simoniacall perjury, or of becoming a
perjured Simoniack? And rather then desparately proceed to take the direful
Oath, be content to remain stripped of all his other promotions, and bidding
adue to Bishopric and all, go vow himself to a perpetual monasticke life,
there to do penance, if it were only for making such a bold attempt.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the six euasions of the Simonist, whereby he thinks to elude the Oath.

But there is a new found Well, which may well be called after that ancient
River Orcus (yet far unlike that ancient Beersheba) the Well of that Oath,
between Abraham and Abimelech; it having six porches: which at a certain
time, being stirred by an Angel (called Legion) whatsoever diseased
Ecclesiastical person steppeth in first, and in stead of washing, takes a
draught of this Well (it springing from the River Styx, by which, as Poets
feign, the Gods drinking thereof were wont to swear) he passes forth at any
of these Ports or Porches a whole and sound man. (...). Orcus, signifies an
Oath, and differs only in aspiration from H^ll.

Here to seems Homer to allude. Iliad. (...).

So sometimes a ^ower oa^h may prove a stre^me of the river Styx.

(...) cu^us turare timent and fallere (...).


The Moral is this: this Orcus, is the Oath of Simonie: the Angel, called
L^gion, is easily known by his name, what metal he is of: He that first
steps in upon the Angels motion, is the corrupt and diseased Simonist: This
sick and ill affected person taking a draught of this black Stygian water,
the Oath of Simony passes out at six Porches, by six euasions by himself
invented, perfectly cured (as he conceiueth) of two most desperate diseases;
Simonie, and Perjury, and all other Symptoms of the same. Now all these six
Porches, tend to make a clear passage for one word in the Oath Simoniacall,
wherein consists the whole power of the Oath.

First therefore, they plead Not-guiltie of Simonie, and so consequently, not
of perjury, because they buy only the Temporalls. This, I touched before: But
now I retort it upon themselves. They buy the temporal Benefit, therefore it
is Simoniacall. For even Simon had a respect that way: Mercari vult, quod
pluris reuendat, He would buy, to sell the dearer, says Erasmus. So
Augustine; Aug. in Ps. 130. Calvin in Act. 8.
Emere volebat, quod vendere disponebat. Calvin also confesses the same
temporal respect to be Simoniacall. For to imitate Simon in any such respect,
is sufficient to prove the Act Simoniacall.

Secondly not Simoniacall (say they) because they bargain not with the Patron.
Why? no more did Simon: for Peter was not the Patron of the Holy Ghost, but
God; Act. 8.15.
Peter prayed, and God gave. But this shift is all one, as if the Chap-man
should deny he bought such a Merchants wares, because he dealt only with his
Factor, and therefore no lawful bargain. Thy Solicitor in thy name and stead
procures it of the Patron, thou payest thy money to thy Solicitor. And will thou swear thy purchase had no relation to thy Patron? Though I could cut off
all thy reasons at one blow, with Phocion Axe, to wit, Directly, or Indirectly.

Thirdly, not Simoniacall (say they) because what they gave, was but
respectively to their Solicitors, for their pains employed therein. But is not
his pains valued according to the preferment, as it is more or less worth? as
Clients fee their Lawyers, according to the value of their suit in hand? If so,
is it not Simoniacal? But attendants must live, either by their service, or by
suits. So it has been the custom of the Court of Rome, that Simonie should
go under the name of Subsidiary or El^emosynary pension, Hist. Council. Trident.
either for the Popes Courtiers, or Cofers; But far be it from the Court of
England. What befell Gehezi? call Simonie a gratuitie, or what plausible name
you will, yet it alters not his nature; no more then the calling and ranking
Father Garnet among the Saints and Martyrs of the Church of Rome, will alter him
from a Traitor* or the painting of him among the Saints in Heaven, free him
from the fire of Hell. And does not such a gratuitie or alms, reflect upon the
Patron, as an implicit compact of Simonie, when the Patron respectively
pleasures his servant, and thy Solicitor, with the Collation of such a living,
by means whereof he holds his servant well appaid and recompensed for his
service?

Fourthly, not Simoniacall: for the preferment came not by purchase, but by
wager, as it were casually, or by buying a horse, to pay for him so much at the
day of marriage. But who sees not this horse to interfer between Directly and
Indirectly? who sees not, that this Merchant laid, purposely to lose? But
enough of such horse-play.

Fifthly, not Simoniacall, since he had the favor to obtain, under an implicit
Faith, without explicit or express conditions; to save his Oath and honesty,
Quippe qui non adeo sit plumbei tardique cerebri, vt foro vti nesciat, and as
we say, Do reason. Verbum enim sapienti. O, for a Phocion, refusing
Alexanders Presents (though sent him, because he was an honest man) and saying,
(...): Let him suffer me to be an honest man still. Pauper Fabricius quartam a
Pyrrho regni partem sibi oblatam recusauit, ne fidem suam Romanam temeraret.
Poor Fabricius refused the fourth part of Pyrrhus his Kingdom offered him,
least he should dishonor his Roman fidelity. But this Roman fidelity was,
in diebus illis, when Rome was heathen. And Damianus says, Simoniaci sunt, non
solum qui paciscuntur, sed etiam qui pecuniam non pactam postulant: more
Gihezi. Simonists are they, not only that bargain, but also that require money,
not of compact: as Gihez^ did. For the condition, be it implicit, or be it
explicit, Simoniacall it is, directly, or indirectly. Yea, this is met withal
in the conclusion of the Oath, which forbids to perform any contract made by
another, Eutrop. Romans hist. li. 2. Epist. 2. lib. 2.
though without thy knowledge: how much more should a man renonce all purpose
to perform an implicit contract or condition, which his own heart is
conscious of, and privy to?

Sixthly, not Simoniacall, because this was obtained before it fell, as it were
in the nature of an Aduowson, by promise; which differs from an Aduowson
only, as a word of mouth, from writing. And an Aduowson is no Simonie. For
answer: first, promise and Aduowson in common estimate and practice, differ
much; for promise is expressly excepted against in the Oath; otherwise, what
needed there be any Simonie, when as promise might prevent it? For Aduowsons, I
refer to a more proper place, yet this I will say by way of anticipation,
that if buying of an Aduowson (it passing under hand and seal) be no Simonie:
what reason is there, why a contract made only by word of Mouth, should be
accounted Simoniacall? Thus have we hunted the Simonist out of his six Meshes:
and if he have or find any more, we will set him for him Directly, or
Indirectly, which will be sure to catch this Fox, and all his Cubs.

CHAP. IX.
Of the kinds of Simonists in general.

We have seen what a Simonist is: Now let us see who, and of how many sorts
they be. It was a wicked and impious decree of Pope Hildebrand, Gregory the
seventh, to draw all Kings and Princes, and Lay-persons into the rank of
Simonists, only for presenting to Bishoprics and Benefices, although they
did it most freely and honestly. But the maine drift of this grand founder of
Antichristian usurpation over Christian Princes, was both to enrich his
Coffers, and to fortify his Papal See, by oblieging the whole Prelacie, and
Clergy to his Pontifical Chair. But all Simonists are either buyers or
sellers. The common fame indeed runs only upon the buyers, as if they only
were the Simonists: but if the buyer be one, the seller must needs be another,
by the Law of Relatiues. Of sellers, Esau is reckoned for the first, who sold
his Birthright, and with it the Priesthood. For the birthright had annexed
unto it Dominion; double portion, and the Priesthood. So that with his
Birthright selling the Priesthood, the most sacred Prerogative, Heb. 12.16.
he is justly called profane Esau.

Object. Some here may object, that reciprocally Jacob also in buying the
Birthright, committed Simonie. But Lyra answers well, Not so; for the
Birthright belonging to Jacob by Gods own designement and donation ( Genesis
25.23.) Esau therefore having lost his right to it, by selling it, committed
Simonie: whereas Jacob, by buying that which by the best title was his own
already, intended, Non emere rem Sacram, sed redimere vexationem suam, Only
to buy his own peace.

Object. If Jacob in so buying committed no Simonie, because he bought but his
own: then why may not a Minister buy, and yet commit no Simonie, since Tithes
do as well appertain to the Minister, as the Birthright did to Jacob, both,
by Gods donation. But the case is not alike. For, although Tithes are by Gods
own intitling tied and intailed to his Ministry: yet this or that Minister
has no title to this or that Tithe, till he be lawfully possessed and
invested in them. And when he is so, if he meet with a crafty or cruel
Patron, a profane Esau, who either fraudulently vsurpe^h, or forceably
detaineth any part of the Tithes, then may he lawfully and laudably imitate
Jacobs wise Example, Non emere rem Sacram, iam suam, sed redimere vexationem
suam. Yet, if there were any such well minded Jacobs, Gods Ministers, that
could and would redeem Church goods to the true heir, they should draw upon
themselves a Blessing, and not a Curse. Although I confess the Council of
Ments says, Decimas, quas populus dare non vult, Council. Mogunts. (...). 16.
p. 2. q. 7.
nisi quolibet munere ab eo redimantur, ab Episcopis prohibendum est, ne fiat.
Those Tithes, which the people (or any Patron) will not pay, unless they be
redeemed of them by some reward, the Bishops ought to forbid such dealing. But
some say, It is not lawful for a man to redeem his Spiritual right, because
it is Simonie. But I think few will be so forward so to redeem, as to need
the Bishops prohibition. Or if they were, the mischief is, the Market is so
raised, that a Mess of B^oth will not serve the turn, to satisfy hungry
Esau. It is a pot, not of Red broth, but of precious Red earth, which all Edoms
so much hunger after. Auri sacra fames? The time was once indeed, when our
great Jacob, made a noble and gracious tender to the Church, to have redeemed
her patrimony at easy and honorable conditions, if she would, which had
been a most happy purchase.

Another Simoniacall seller was Gehezi, of some taken for the first Simonist in
the Old Testament. Gehezi primo in veteri Testimento Simoniam inuenit. Hereupon
all such sellers were wont to be called Gehezites, as buyers, Simonists.
Gloss.
But Simon has obtained to bear the bell, and to carry the name away for
both; since the money so given and taken becomes Sin-money, bearing the image
and superscription of Simon. Sin sticks so jointly between these two, the
Buyer and the Seller, as a Ecclus. 27.2.
nail between the joints of the stones. And as Chrysostom. Qui emit and vendit,
sine periurio esse non potest: He that buyeth and sells, cannot be without
perjury. Which might well be applied indifferently to both, the Merchant and
Chap-man in Simonie, if they did both indifferently take the Oath. Therefore
our Lord whipped all out of the Temple, as well the Sellers, as Buyers; which
Gregory applying to Simony, says, Columb^^ vendere, est de Spiritu Sancto
Commodum temporale percipere: To sell Doves, is to reap a temporal benefit of
the Holy Ghost. Sellers therefore are as deep in Simonie, as buyers.

It is the common error of many Patrons, to account the Benefices, within their
Presentatiue power, as their goods and chattels, as a part and parcel of their
Patrimony; whether deuolued upon them by inheritance, or purchased with their
money; whereupon they resolve, that being their own, they may do with them as
they list; Vendere iure potest, emerat ille priu^; He sells, but that he
bought. Hence it is, that so many hunt after the purchase of Patronages* as
being, in their estimate, none of the worst markets. But herein, such men
miserably misdeeme the matter: at least if all be true, which the Canonists,
and Schoolmen, yea and the ancient Fathers, have delivered touching these
things. Iu^ patronatus per sevendi non potest, ^ec in feudum dari, sed transit
cum villa, que venditur, vel conceditur, 22. q. 100.4.3. Can. 6.4.7. p. 2.
gloss.
For Aquinas says, That right of Patronage cannot be sold, nor given in fee,
but passes with the Village; which is sold, or set over. Gratian gives the
reason; Because the right of Patronage is neither simply Temporal, nor
Spiritual, such a Layman may have it: (to wit, Ius patronatus) and leave it
to his heirs: not Temporal, because it cannot be sold. Saint Hierome to
Damascus writing about a point, bordering upon our present purpose, says, Quia
Beatitudo tua quaesiuit, vtrum vsus Decimarum and oblationum secularibus
prouenire possit: nouit vestra sanctitas omnino non licere: Protestantibus hoc
Diuinis Authoritatibus Paternorum Canonum. Because your Blessedness demanded,
whether the use of Tithes and Oblations might be derived to Laymen: your
Holiness may know, it is altogether unlawful. And divine Authorities of
ancient Councels auouching the same. Gratian adds the reason: Non licere: Hoc
est certum, quod Ius Decimarum Laicus possidere non potest, cum sit Spirituale:
This is certain, that a Layman may not possess the right of Tithes, seeing
it is Spiritual. Distinguishing between the right of the patronage, and the
right of the personage. And for this cause, De sola gratia non de mero iure
Laico, tali ex sundatio^e seu constructione de iure permittitur Ius patronatus.
Extra tit. 1. de elect. gloss.
De sola gratia, etc. Only of favor, not of mere lay-right or claim, the Ius
Patronatus, or right of Patronage was conferred upon the Lay-founders, or
Indowers, or Builders; according to that Verse, Patronum faciunt Dos,
Aedificatio, Fundus.

Gratian, says moreover, Sunt autem tria, quae consequ^tur patronus, honorem,
onus, and vtilitatem. Honorem habet in present^ndo: ^nus* in desendendo
Ecclesiam, nequis Dila^idet ^am; vtilitatem quia si vergit ad inopiam
prouidebit ei Ecclesia abundantius quidem qua^ coeteris pauperibus. Can. 16 p.
2. q 7.
Sunt autem tria, etc.: There be three things which the Patron attaineth,
Honor, Charge, and Profit: Honor in presenting: Charge or burden in
defending the Church from Dilapidations: Profit, because if he fall into
poverty, the Church shall provide for him; and that in a more ample manner and
measure, then for other poor.

As olso Council. Tolet. 9 Can. 2 Decernimus vt quandiu fundat^res Ecclesiarum
in hac vita superstites fuerint, pr^ eisdem locis curam habeant Solicitam,
itaque Rec^ores ido^eos in eisdem Basilicis ijdem ipsi Episcopo efferant
ordinand^s.
Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 37. has so provided.

Further, the ninth Toletan Council has decreed, Vt quam diu, etc. That so
long as the founders of Churches (as the Patrons) shall live, they should have
a so^icitous care of those places; therefore let them present fit Rectors or
Parsons unto the Bishop for the same Churches. Patrons then, having a power
conferred upon them by the Church to present and commend a person, not simply
to bestow and collate the personage, this being a distinct thing from the right
of Presentation; yea, though Presentation be called sometimes a Collation, yet
this Collation is not Donation, because a Sexti de reg. iuris. lib. 5. Benef.
Eccles. gloss. and de offi^. vic. li. 1. tit. 13.
Donation is of free liberality, without compulsion; but Collation is joined
with compulsion, when as the Collator must present within six months, else
his power is then lost: Then Patrons have no power to sell that, which (to
speak simply) they have no power to give. Hereupon Aquinas says. Aqu. 22. q^.
100.
Any act is naturally evil, when it falls upon an undue subject. Now a
spiritual thing (says he) is an undue subject of buying and selling; and
that for these three reasons. First, because a spiritual thing cannot be
equalized, or made equivalent with any terrene price: Thy money perish with
thee, because thou think the gift of God may be obtained with money; as it
was said to Simon. Secondly, because that cannot be a due matter of sale,
whereof the seller is not master or owner; As a Prelate of the Church is not
Lord of spiritual things, but only a dispenser or steward: 2. Cor. 4.
Thirdly, because selling is opposite to the original property of spiritual
things, which proceed of the free mere gift of God; freely ye have received,
freely give: Talia ergo emere vel vendere est peccatum irreligiositatis:
Therefore to buy or sell such things, is a sin of irreligion. So he. Whereupon
Zan. li. 1. de vitijs externi cultus^
Zanchie: His rationibus Luce clarius efficitur, Simoniam admitti non posse,
sine maxima in spiritum sanctum, eiusque dona, adeoque in res omnes spirituales
iniuria, and irreuerentia; eoque Simoniam ad (...) pertinere: By these reasons
(says he) it is made more clear then the light, that Simonie cannot be
committed without exceeding great injury, and irreuerence toward the Holy
Ghost and his gifts, and so toward all spiritual things. Therefore devout
Bern de Confi. l. 4. c. 4.
Bernard to Pope Eugenius writes thus, concerning placing of Priests in
Benefices: Sunt quaedam, etc. There be some things, which either importunity
of suitors does extort, or necessity does merit necessarily of us; but it must
be in those things which are our own: But where it is not lawful for me to
do as I would, what place is left for the suitor? unless happily the suitor
entreat this of me, that what himself would have, it may be lawful for me
to be the more willing not to do it. Sunt adulatores potius quam Doctores,
qui do cent Papam Beneficiorum omnium esse Dominum, ac ideo cum Dominus iure
vendat id quod suum est, necessario sequi in cum non cadere Simoniam. Ex hoc
font tot in Dei Ecclesiam abusus and grauissimos morb^s irrupisse, quibus ad
salutis ea desperationem fere laboret, and quorum fama ad infideles vsque
dimanet, hanc praecipue ob causam Christianisinum deridentes, atque
blasphemantes. Espens. in Epist. ad Titum in tit. 2. Turpilucri. pa. 480.
Lutetiae Paris 1619.
Espensaeus says: Sunt adulatores potius, quam Doctores, qui, etc. They be
rather flatterers then teachers, who teach that the Pope is Lord of all
Benefices: and therefore seeing as Lord, be does by right sell that which is
his own, it necessarily follows, that Simonie cannot be imputed to him.
Belike the Holy Ghost, with his gifts are also his own; were they not as well
Peter's? Yet if he had sold, he had been a Simonist. Sed nemo potest retinere,
quod vendidit; vt Judas Christum: But no man can retain that, which he has
retaild: as Judas selling Christ, lost Christ* Greg. Naz. Great. We will
conclude this with that of Saint In Epist. ad Tit. cap. 1. in tit. 2.
Turpilucri.
Ambrose: Sunt quidem Decimae Depositum seruorum Dei in Ecclesia seruatae:
Tithes are kept in the Church in trust for Gods servants. Now for a man to take
upon him to be a disposer of that to his own benefit, which as a pledge is
committed to him of trust to be delivered to the true owner, when it should be
required; what this is, let any reasonable man judge.

In the Canon Law, all Aduousons, as being contained under Ius Patronatus, The
right of Patronage, were forbidden to be bought and sold: as Gregory says (
D^cret. lib. 3. De Iure Patronatus, tit. 38. cap. 6.) calling Aduowsons,
Aduocatias, Ius Patronatus, or Aduocationes, or Vice-dominatus, or Custodias,
or Guardias: Quia Clerici quidam Aduocatias Ecclesiarum comparant, vel
quocunque modo possunt, acquirunt, vt postmodum little filij, vel nepotes, ad
easdem Ecclesias presententur, praecipimus vt id arctius inhibeatur; eosdem
aduocationibus taliter acquifitis, appellatione postposita, spoliando. So that
the Canon Law forbiddes merchandising of Adnowsons.

Now let us see in a word, upon what reason that which has been delivered by
the Canonists and Schoolmen, and learned Divines concerning this point, is
grounded: The right of Patronage (say they) may not be sold. Why? Not only in
regard of the nature, and condition of such dedicate things, which are
spiritual; and therefore incompetent matter of Sale: but also of the
necessary effects, and inconveniences which must needs follow upon such Sale.
For, grant a liberty that it be lawful to sell a Patronage: then it
follows, that it will be as lawful to sell a Presentation; and then an
Aduowson: And then I would feign know, why it should not be as lawful to sell
the Benefice, when it is vacant? But because men make no great question about
the lawfulness of selling, either in the Vacancie, or much less before it;
consider we the lawfulness or unlawfulness of buying. To buy an Aduowson
passes current for lawful: and yet to buy the Vacancie, is judged Simonie,
both by our Statute Laws, and Church Canons. Well, I thus infer, and so
conclude: if it be Simoniacall to buy a Benefice, when it is vacant: why then
should it not be equally Simoniacall to buy the Aduowson? and so of the
Presentation? and so of the Patronage? Or if it be lawful to buy the
Aduowson, why should it not be as lawful every whit to buy the Benefice?
yea, of the two I should think it rather lawful to buy in the Vacancie, then
before. Because it may seem an injurious thing, as to take another man's Lease,
so another man's Living over his head: And it is unlawful to contract for
another man's wife, before her husband be dead. But it is an infallible rule:
Quod Aqu. 22. q. 110.3. c.
est secundum se malum ex genere, nullo modo potest esse bonum and licitum. It
is Aquinas speech, which he applies to disprove the lawfulness of a lie for
any respect. That which in its own nature and kind is evil, can by no means
be good and lawful; or that which is substantially evil, cannot be made
good by any circumstance. To buy things of a spiritual nature, is naturally
evil, as was said before: Any act is naturally evil, when it falls upon an
undue subject; if therefore it be evil to buy a Benefice in the Vacancie, then
it is evil to buy the same, either in the Aduowson, or in the Presentation, or
in the Patronage. And if it be evil to buy: then by the Law of Correlation,
it is evil to sell in all these respects. And if the buyer be Simoniacall,
the seller must be so too. Again, as it is unlawful so to buy and sell, in
regard of the nature of such things, being spiritual: so also in regard of the
common effects and fruits of such merchandise. For tell me: when ye buy an
Aduowson, or Patronage of an Ecclesiastical Living; to what end is it? To
bestow it freely and faithfully upon some worthy able Minister, for the good of
Gods Church, without any Temporal respect? It were to be wished, this were
your end. But do you not intend to gain by such a bargain, either by placing
some of your kin, or by selling it in the Vacancie to him that will be your
best Chap-man? Is not this the general practice? Nor do I hereby condemn our
Law, for allowing such things, as Aduowsons and Patronages to be bought and
sold: Seeing it also disalloweth Simoniacall, or by respects, which being taken
away, either few or none would meddle with such merchandise, or else they
should not so justly incur the Censure of Simonie, as so commonly they do.

Yet here I put a difference between the purchase of an Aduowson, and of the
entire Patronage. And again, I put a difference between the purchasing of a
Patronage by a private man, and by a College in the University. For the
purchase of a single Aduowson does too commonly aim at some temporal or
carnal respect, or commodity, whereas some may happily purchase the perpetual
Patronage, to leave it as an honor to his House, or posterity, while he and
his heirs, according to his intention and will, become the instruments of Gods
glory in the judicious and ingenuous bestowing the Benefice frank and free at
every Vacancie. But this being very rare, although I neither deny, nor envy
the right of Patronage to be resident in private men, so it be rightly used:
yet I confess I could wish (for the avoiding of that general corruption, and
abuse in the collation of Benefices) that Colleges in each University were
possessed of as many, Patronages in this Land, as possibly they could procure,
or purchase, redeeming them out of many hucksters hands, which would be an
excellent means, to increase Learned Divines, to repress Simoniacall
Pedanticks, to refresh the Colleges by continual interchange of Students, to
provide for many able men to be exercised in the Church, whose gifts, for want
of such means, often lie buried in a College life. Yet I deny not, but
sometimes corruption may creep in at the College gates, but the strict Laws
of Colleges, well executed, may, as a careful Porter, either whip, or keep
it out. This were (in my opinion) the likeliest way to prevent Simonie, and to
provide a good Ministry. And some Colleges (I know) are careful this way,
both in Cambridge and Oxford, whose example I could wish all the rest would be
as careful to follow. But so much of purchasing.

CHAP. X.
Of the sundry ways and wyles of committing Simonie.

AS all Simonists are either Buyers or Sellers: So, out of these we may
observe the sundry sorts of Simoniacall Contracts. For Simonie is grown such
a Trade, wherein so many great Merchants do traffic, as it may challenge as
good a Charter for a Hall to make it a Corporation or Society in the Church,
as the Worshipful Company of Cut-purses are said to usurp in the City. Many,
well toward the trade, openly professing, that were it not for the Oath, they
hold it as lawful to buy a Benefice, as a horse in Smithfield. But let us see
this ^edlers pack opened.

The most beaten highway of Simonists is by Silver Cross; Money, or money
worth, at two or three years purchase, or by reservation of some tithes,
whether by express contract, or by long concealment, or by strong hand.
Whereupon Aquinas says, Aqu. 22 q. 100.
Si Patronus, etc. If the Patron require of him, on whom he conferres the
Benefice, any of the fruits thereof, it is all one, as if he exacted some
Bribe; and this is Simoniacall. Sometimes he deals by his Factor; or gives
such a Benefice to his servant for a Reward and Salari^ of his service, to make
his best Market of it: To this purpose the said Author says, Si aliquis, etc.
If any give an Ecclesiastical Benefice to one, with this condition or
intention, that thereby he may provide for his Kindred, it is manifest
Simonie: As for a Patron to bestow his Benefice upon his kinsman, for alliance
sake, it is Simonie. Nam potest, etc. For there may be Simonie in the
intention, if not the worthiness of the Person, but humane favor be
respected; says Aquinas. So many parents buy a Presentation or Aduowson, that
in time to come it may fall to be a portion to one of their children, prove
he at all adventure fit, or unfit, good, or bad, Scholar, or man, Greg.
Decret. de Simon. l. 5. tit. 3.
Quanquam, etc. Though according to the Decrees of Ancient Canons, children,
which through the covetousness of their parents, have obtained Churches by
money, are bound to forgo them again; yea, and to loose their money too.
Pecunia tua, etc. Thy money perish with thee; as Aquinas also says, Simoniacus
nullum ius habet, pecuniam suam turpiter collatam unjust detentam, repetendi:
A Simonist has no right to plead the restitution of his money corruptly
disbursed, and unjustly detained.

Some other Pedanticke will needs ride gallop to the Devil, by buying a horse
of the Patron, and so he will come as freely by the Benefice, as he that was
invited of free cost to a fat goose, paying only for the sauce. Others, Vili
obsequio, aut corporali seruitio Simoniam perpetrant; which is not the cheapest
rate. Aquinas.
Manifestum est autem, quod obsequium hominis ad aliquam vtilitatem ordinatur
quae potest precio pecuniae aestimari. Ecclesiasticke Doctors propound three
kinds of Simonie: first, manus: secondly, obsequij: thirdly, linguae: that of
the hand they account inferior to the other two. Petrus Domianus l. 2. Epist.
1.
D^mianus says: Oportet Pontificem esse boni operis sectatorem. Nam bonum opus
desiderat. Excute manus ab omni dono. At non excutit, sed implicasse
conuincitur, qui nanciscendae dignitatis ambitu; Potestatum subl^mium castra
sectant. Nam d^m in vehiculis acquirendis, diuer sorumque sumptuum apparatibus,
non modica summa profunditur, hic proculdubio data pocamia^ obnoxious inuenitur.
Qui etiam, nulli dubium, quin ei and obsoqu^um prabeat, cui factus assecla, sub
tanto labor^s, and itin^ris fasce desudat. Postremo, dum Domino suo blandiri,
^iusque voluntati per omnia congruere nititur, saepe fibi quibas dam
adat^^orijs fanoribus assentatur. Porro autem, quis quis in dandis
accipiendisue dignitatibus Ecclesiasticis, vna d^ntaxat ^arum, quae pradictae
sunt, peste corrumpitur (nempe (...), obsequij, (...)) Simoniacae haereseus
teneri crimine iudicatur. Veruntamen iactant se, and eo gloriantur innoxios,
quia nullum Talenti summam pro suscipiendis honoribus se pe pigere daturos. Sed
dic mihi o Clerice, quisquis es, siredempto quolibet aureo vase, ve^ praedio,
distractor exigeret, vt retenti apud ^^ vice pretij huiusmodi sib^ sedulitatis
impendium exhiberes, nunquid non post^odum constanter assereres, te, quod
acceptum est, iusto pretio comparasse? Non videlicet, quia pecuniam
persolui^ti, sed quin seruitiu^ praebuisti. Diceres enim, and non hoc for^^ssis
impudent^r astrueres, charius emi, dum tanto me labor vexarem, dum toties
facultatum mearum sumptus expenderem, quam si semel praefixae quantitatis
pecuniam numerarem. Nequaquam ergo sibi innocentiam spondeant, and a Simoniacae
haerese^t macu^^s se mundos esse confidant, qui licet metalla vibrantia non
appendunt, pretium tamen pro suscipiendis honoribus per subiectionis and
obsequij quaedam quasi Talentae persoluunt. And in his third Epistle of the
same Book he alleges a strange example of a Curiall Bishop of Bononia, who
having got much preferment by his Cour^ly obsequiousness, he straight way
fell dumb, and for seven years space, so long as he lived, continued a
paralytick, and speechless. A fearful example, yet now adays not found so
rare, especially in Transmaritim Courts, as the Court of Rome, where
preferments and Prelacies purchased by obsequiousness, or otherwise by
indirect means, deprive the Parties promoted, of the right use of their
tongue, in the prime execution of their Episcopal function.

But far be it from any to tax worthy Scholars and Preachers, entertained
as Chaplains in honorable houses, which place together with any ensuing
preferment, their own modesty and good merits rather found, then sought,
rather accepted, then sued for; being rather humble Passiues, then ambitious
Actiues in their preferment, Great. Ca^. 1. q. 1. p. 2. gloss.
Si quis direct habeat animum ad Beneficium, cum seruit, est Simoniacus. But
all ambitious suing is of the ancient learned Divines judged and condemned for
Simoniacall. Devout Bernard Bern. de Consc. ad Lug^n. l. 4. c. 4
to Eugenius gives this advise: Pro quo rogaris, sit suspectus: qui ipse rogat
pro se, iam indicatus est. Clericum curiam frequentantem, qui non sit de Curia,
ad idem noris pertinere ambientium genus. Adulantem and ad placitum eniusque
loquentem, vnum de rogantibus puta, etiamsi nihil rogauerit. Non volentes,
neque Currentes assumito, sed cunctantes, and r^nuentes. Isti sunt tui socij
and collaterales. Ne te dixeris sanum, dolentem latera; ne te dixeris bonum,
malis innitentem. ^reg. Epist. 110
Gregory thus: Sicut is qui inuitatus renuit, quae situs refugit, sacris est
altaribus admouendus: sic qui vltro ambit, vel importune se ingerit, est procul
dubio repellendus, etc. Ans^l. in Heb. 5.4.
Anselm. in Heb. 5.4. Nemo sibi honorem sumit, etc. Percutiuntur hac sententia,
qui honores E^clesiasticos, ad quos Diuinitus non vocantur, arripere cupiunt.
Qui enim se ingerit, and propriam gloriam quarit, non sumit honorem, Praelatus
factus: Sed gratiae Dei rapinam facicus, ius alienum vsurpat. Et ideo non
accipit benedictionem, sed maledictionem. Qui autem recte and Canonice vocatur,
a Deo vocatur. Chore voluit sibi sumere honorem, and ideo Diuinam sensit
vltionem. I conclude this with that of Chrysostom. in Act. Ap. cap. 1. ^o. 3.
Chrysostom* What skils it, if thou give not sheere money, but in stead
thereof do flatter, suborne, and keep a stir? Thy money p^rish with thee,
was said to Simon: and so these it shall be said, Thy ambition perish with
thee, To the same purpose Grego^y.
because thou have thought the gift of God may be obtained by man's ambition.
It was one of the heavy curses upon Elies posterity, that they should crouch,
and say, Put me I pray thee into one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a
piece of bread. 1. Sam. 2.36.

Some commit Simonie, by selling their faith and religion for preferment; when
with discontent they fly out beyond Seas, expecting to be lu^ed home again
with some high preferment. Of such, Cyprian in his 72. Epistle speaks
copiously and very aptly; Cypr. Epist. 72.
where he advises that after their reurne from their Heresies, they should not
by and by be admitted to place of preferment in the Church, but first be proved
by long humiliation: he gives the reason; because oftentimes they prove
dangerous, since they cannot easily cast up the poison of Heresy, which they
have once drunk in; so that they should be content only to be pardoned, and
received into the peace of the Church, and so remain till they have given
sufficient trial and testimony of their sound repentance and reformation.
Council. Ele^. Can. 22.
Council. Elebert. can. 22. says of such; Placuit huic poenitentiam non esse
denegandam, eo quod cognouerit peccatum suum, qui ^tiam december annis agat
poenitentiam: nisi I^fantes fuissent transducti: We are pleased not to deny
penance to such a one, since he has acknowledged his sin, who also let him do
ten years penance. Unless they had been carried away in their infancy.
(Though such are most incurable; as the Poet says, Quo semel est imbuta recens
seruabit odorem Testa diu. When they do cum lact^ nutricis errorem surgere,
suck error from the Nurse, it sticks by them. As we see the Jesuitical milk
does, whereby men coming to some growth, their nurcerie becomes a second
nature.) Otherwise, as Boniface said well, Null^^ precio est inuitandus ad
conuersionem: None is by reward to be invited to conversion. For, as Seneca
says, Precio parata, soluitur pretio fides: Bought faith, is easily sold
again.

Others are said to commit Simonie, when by mutual stipulation or covenant
they make an exchance of Benefices or Prebends, making their match according to
the value of the things. And if this be Simonie, as the Ancients have defined
it to be, it were to be wished that the exchange, at least were free from
stipulation, and that the maine end of such permutations did aim principally
at the common good of the Church. Yea, I have heard of a strange kind of
Simonie in fashion beyond the Seas, which they call, Sacrum-aucupium, in
English, Sermon-simoni^. When the fratres praedicantes, being about to
purchase, have in a readiness some exquisite masterpiece, the merit whereof
challenging no mean advancement, serves only to cover and color over, or as
a purse, to carry and convey the more closely the set price of the preferment,
at least to take away the smell of Simonie, that so the Patron may be as free
from suspicion of Simonie, as the adulterous woman, when she has wiped her
lips, and says, I have not committed iniquity. So says the P^tron, I have
bestowed it upon a worthy and rare Preacher* so rare, as it is thought he spent
more sweat in that one Sermon, about the getting, then ever he m^anes to spend
again in all his Sermons he ma^es, while he keeps his preferment. Now what
should move this Friar predicaent, thus to color and gild over his Simonie
with such a sacred gold, is hard to say, unless some false Gloss upon the
Proverbs has made him believe, that such preaching to such ends, is to speak
a word in season, which is, Like apples of gold in pictures of silver, as
Solomon says. But the Gloss is ill turned into a Gloss. The Apostle forbids
such merchandise of the Word for filthy lucre sake. [2. Cor. 2.17. 1. Pet. 5.2.]

What should I speak of that more then common custom of Matrimonial Simonie,
no less odious then the rest, when a B^nefice, or other Ecclesiastical
dignity, must become the portion of some daughter or Kinswoman, at the least,
an honest woman? And so if that gloss be true, that a Bishop must be the
huband of one wife, that is, of one Benefice (as the Romish Church expounds
it, not for any zeal they bear to singularity of Benefices, but for the
hatred they have against the universality of Priests marriages) then also may
it be as true, that a man making such a match for a Benefice, should marry
two wives at once.

I have also heard of another base kind of Simonie in practice: That the Patron
admits not his Incumbent, but with a stong Obligation or Bond, to tie the
Incumbent to quit the Benefice at three months warning* whenever the Patron
shall require, or hold up his finger: as Masters use to give their servants a
quarters warning, when they are weary of them. By this device the Patron holds
the Incumbent in a miserable servitude, as being his Tenant at will; while in
the mean time the Patron may Lord it as he list without control: for the
Incumbent is bound not to reprove any thing his good Master does, or says, but
must say Amen to all, or else farewell All. The Patron has also another d^ift
in this, that wanting for the present a good Chap-man, to gain time, and a
better thing, he puts in his Bondman, till he be provided to his liking.

All unpreaching Ministers possessing any good Benefice, are by strong
presumption deep Simonists. For let them tell me, for what respects, or good
gifts they were so preferred: except it be that they and all their good gifts,
shook hands, and parted, so soon as they and their fat Benefice met.

Some, by mental reservation commit Simonie, when both the Patron expects to
receive, and the Presentee purposes to give some gratuitie afterward, without
any express promise or pre-contract, only upon trust, that so he may save his
Oath. This is a mock-Simonie, and mock-Oath. For is not this Gehezie's sin?
Of which the Gloss (says) Hoc exemplum est Argumentum contra eos, Gloss.
qui non exigunt, seu accipiunt, ante Collationem Beneficij. Gehezi asked but a
gratuitie after the healing; or say, It was his fee: For servants must l^ue.
But he had his grutuitie with a vengeance. Is this a time to receive silver
and gold? The leprosy therefore of Naaman clea^e unto thee, and to thy seed
for ever. Away with such gratuit^e. Indeed if a Benefice were a temporal
benefit, it might require a temporal requital: But being of a spiritual
nature, what gratuitie or thankfulness should the Patron expect, or the
Incumbent perform, but a painful and faithful discharge of that Cure of
Souls committed to his trust? This is to give spiritual thanks, for a
spiritual gift. As Gratian says; Semper premium aliquid debet interuenire,
spirituale scilicet meritu^ hominis: There ought always some gift to
inter^ene, to wit, a man's spiritual merit. Such a spiritual gift, as the
Apostle longed to bestow upon his Romans, Romans 1.11. But of any other gift the
very expectation is in danger of Simonie. I have heard of Temporal men, who
have refused after-gifts of their servants, whom they had preferred freely to
some temporal Office, taking the very offer very indignely: How much more
should this purity be preserved in spiritual preferments?

But here some may object.

Ob. But having received a temporal benefit, shall I not, or may I not in some
sort recompense it with some temporal signification of thankfulness? I
answer, That this benefit is not of a temporal nature, but spiritual, as we
said before. Or allow it to be so far temporal, as it may require some
temporal requital: yet it must be with certain limitations. Decret. Gregor.
De Simon. li. 5. tit. 3. ca. 18.
Alexander the third, writing to the Archbishop of Strygon concerning a horse,
which his brother unwitting to him gave to P. the Popes Legate, for his
election after it was done, which notwithstanding was a scruple in the
Archbishops conscience, resolves him thus: In giving or receiving, three
things are to be observed: first, The quality of the persons, of, and to whom
it is given, whether poor or rich: secondly, The quantity of the gift:
thirdly, The time of giving, whether in time of necessity, or otherwise. If
therefore, says he, we respect the conditions of the foresaid parties, the
Cardinal and your brother, it was no great matter for the one to send the
other a horse, which happily such a rich man as that would give to a Iester,
without requesting it. But if we consider the necessity of the time, it
appears it was done with no other intention, then to supply the Cardinals
want at that time, when in an vnquoth place he was unprovided of a horse. And
forasmuch (says he) as it is written, Beatus qui excutit manus ab omni
munere: Blessed is he, that shakes his hands from every bribe: it is spoken
of those gifts, which are went to allure and pervert the mind of the receiver.
But such gifts, as without compact the elected gives to his Patron; or so, as
the quantity of them be not of force to incline or move the will of the
Receiver; No^ interpre^ari (...) Eccl. To. accipientem, in his Delinquere, v^l
d^^antem: In these things, the Roman Church does not use to interpret the
Receiver, or the giver to offend. So he. Note here the tenderness of this
Archbishops conscience; his brother gave but a horse unwitting to him, without
any precompact, and that after the Election, and in the Cardinals need at that
time. And yet I read not that this horse was not of any extraordinary price,
not worth five hundred, or a thousand pound; as Patrons horses are estimated
elsewhere.

Not much unlike to this, is a kind of Simonie, not vnfrequent in the world;
but so fine, a^ it disclaimeth and disdaineth all affinity with Simonie. A man
has fairly and incorruply (at least for any money matter) obtained of the
Patron a free grant of some Ecclesiastical preferment: but after the grant,
before it pass the seals, the suitor must pass the pikes of much
difficulty, yea and danger too, least through some neglect, or delay, some
other get between him and home. As the Spider having entangled some sturdie
Fly in her subtle net, be stirs her nimble joints, to make the weakest
places sure, where is any danger of enuasion. But the Scholar being of an
ingenuous disposition, one that cannot dance attendance at every door, and
that blusheth to appear an importunate suitor, and that in such places, where
all Scholars, being not in ordinary attendance, are suspected: to cut off all
impatience of delay, and fear of dangers, chooses rather, R^dimere vexationem
suam quam queat minim^; si nequeat paul^^^, ac quantuli queat; Say it be, etc.
This case was put to me by a learned man, to know what I thought of it. I told
him ingenuously, that for my part, I could be content to redeem the credit of
a Ministers modesty, in such attendance with any reasonable ransom. But to
give such a round sum, not only to redeem impatience, but to prevent the
peril of loosing the preferment for lack of provident, yea importunate
pursuing: it was in my judgment like the Secundine, or afterbirth of Simonie.
A moderate and modest diligence, and sober vigilancie (especially, vbi Viuitur
ex rapt^ non hospes ab hospite tutus, etc.) is not disallowed for such a
dispa^ch, performed either by himself, or rather by his honest friend, or
servant: But to come off so roundly (say it be to some Courtier) what does it,
but imply, that either the grand Patrons grant is of small validity, without
it be seconded with the favor of some special servant about him, whose favor
must be purchased: or that the suitor had a purpose rather to have given, then
gone without: or at least, some implicit condition must be performed. For I
would ask this suitor, or rather now in a manner, speeder, whether before the
obtaining of the Benefice, this sum, whatsoever it is (not nothing) were not
implied, if not expressed, to be (for the shifting off of Simonie) thus
bestowed: without which, why should not the suitor as well have come short of
his preferment, before the grant, as now for want of ^aking out his arm with
a silver hand, not reaching the seal, to be in danger to be ouer-reached by a
longer arm. For so, Multa cadunt inter calicem, supremaque labra.

Another has found out a pretty way of Simonie; for the Patron, and he, are
agreed for the Vacant Benefice, that it shall come gratis; But with a prouiso,
That he shall buy the next Presentation, which pays for all.

I might here speak of many other B^anches of this cursed Tree; as if there
should be any buying or selling, chopping and changing for See Satute in
Ecclesiastical persons of Simonie.
College Fellowships (wherein Simonie lays her first foundation, and
hatcheth her first egg; for who fitter to trade in the Church, then he that
has begun in a College) yea trucking for a Porters, a Bell-ringers place, in
College or Church: For Gratian.
Simoniacum est emere officium ostiarij, seu pulsandi campanam: It is Simonie
to buy a Doore-keepers, or a Bel-ringers place. But because every branch
bearing the same fruit, is known to be of the same tree: therefore it shall
be as superfluous to speak of more, as it would be infinite and impossible
for an unexperienced Simplicity to diue into the Mystery of this iniquity,
and sound all the deepes of it.

As for Impropriations, though they were originally maine brances of the
Leuiticall Stock, and so the merchandising of them also might claim kindred
with Simonie: yet because they are slips broken off, and transplanted out of
the Garden and Paradise of God: the Learned Treatise of that godly Scottish
knight, Sir James Semple* as also that other of Sir Henry Spelman, an English
Knight, both of the Lay Tribe, two noble and pregnant witnesses, does more
justly entitle it self to this Argument. Only, I would to God these two
worthy Treati^es were thoroughly studied, and conscionably applied, and printed
in the hearts and consciences of all Impropriators, to their eternal
salua^ion; by being conscionably persuaded to shake their hands of such sacred
things, restoring them to Christ, the only true Proprietary the wronging of
whom in this kind will one day prove fearful sacrilege, whatsoever men
think of it now.

CHAP. XI.
Of the highest degree of Simonie, committed in Ordination.

COncerning Simonie committed in Ordination, although happily the money given for
a simple Ordination be but small, unless it be for some egregious Dunce, to
which, as Solomon says of a dull-edged instrument, a man must put the more
strength; and, as it were, Eccl. 10.10.
the more weight to the lighter scale. Yet of all other kinds of Simonie, this
is the most pernicious and damnable: yea, the less a man gives or receives
in this respect, it is an argument of the less esteem he makes of so holy and
excellent a Calling. As the Lord says of Judas his selling of Christ for
thirty pieces of silver: Zach. 11.13.
A goodly price that I was prized at of them. Now this is so properly Simonie,
as it is the very sin of Simon himself, which is to buy the gifts of the
Holy Ghost. A sin so detestable, as that the Church of Rome it self (though
now the Mother and Nurse of abominations) has cried out against This sin.
For we must put a great difference between the now Church of Rome, and that
which it has been formerly, and that even within these three or four hundred
years. For in former times, as that Church hatched and fostered many
enormities, both of Doctrine and Manners, which by degrees crept in, till
Antichrist should come to his full stature* yet there was place left for
reproof, devout and learned men might speak and write freely of the abuses of
it. But now, within less then these hundred years, since the Council of
Trent, this Church is grown to that superciliousnesse and height of pride,
that no man may once mention the least spe^k or blemish of that foolish Virgin,
or rather, filthy Whore; nay those that have already in their writings left
any record or Monuments of Romes sin, and in espe^ial, of this of Simonie, it
must pass through the fire of their Index Expurgatorius. Take one example
among other. Clau-Espencaeus, in his Commentaries upon his Epistle to Titus;
where he touches the corruptions of the Church of Rome in matter of Simonie,
See the Index Expurgatorius, in quarto, according to the copy printed at
Madrid, by Alph^^sus Gomezius, the Kings Printer, 1584.

The copy printed at Salmur, by Tho. P^rtaw. 1601.


there he must be purged. For the purpose, in that Impression at Paris, by
Michael Sonnius, Page 65. Deleatur ab illis verbis, sed annon (...), vsque ad,
Idque adeo in confesso est. And Page 74. Circa medium deleantur ill^ verba*
Adeo Romanam Curiam repurgare sibi non permisit. And Page 76. Deleatur ab illis
verbis, Vinere qui capitis, vque ad, Sacra sunt vaenalia Romae. and page 78.
lin. 8. Deleatur ab illis verbis, Et cum alia venda^t alij, vsque ad, Coelum
est vaenale, Deusque. Which places, because they are not obuious to every
Reader, and that it may appear how their Index cannot so blur the truth, or
bleere men's eyes, but that the Whoores filthiness will be discovered: I have
thought good to set down the former alleged places at large; saving where
whole pages are expurged, too long here to be ins^^ted. In the first place
those Verses out of (...) are to be cashered. Si quid Roma dabit, nugas dabit,
accipit curum,
Verba dat, heu Romae nunc sol^ pecunia regnat.
Hoc est Roma viris, auibus quod noctua. i. captatrix.
If Rome gives ought, it is trislles; gold she takes,
G^ues words, at Rome (alack) now money makes
Alone the market. Rome is that to men,
Which th'owle is to the birds.
Where also other most beastly stuff, such ^s my Author says, breeds horror
in the very mention, all contained in the Roman Taxa Camerae, where all sorts
of most horrible sins are dispensed withal, at such a rate, as
Presbytericide, or Priest killing, Parricide, Matricide, or killing of ones
parents, though willingly, also Simonie, as deserving to be ranked among such
sins, all which, and much more are not only dispensed with for so much
money; but the offenders made capable of any honor or preferment in the
Church: all that rabble must be expurged out of the Author; notwithstanding
the Taxa Camer^ remains still in force, and none of all these reformed; as the
Author says, which must also be expurged, Adeo Roma^am Curiam repurgare sibi
non permisit, etc. no reformation will be endured. Again, these Verses must
out: so famous in many Authors: Vinere qui capitis Sancte, discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceat, non licet esse bonum.
All you that would live holy, hence from Rome:
Where all things else, but goodness, find a room.
And these also related by my Author, must out: Quis quis opes sacras nummo
reperire profano
Qu^rit, eat Romam, sacra sunt vaenalia Romae.
Who sacred grath seeks with unhallowed gold:
Get him to Rome, where sacred things are sold.
And this which follows: Et cum alia vendaut alij: And whereas others sell
other things -- vaenalia ^obis Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignes, Thura, Pr^ces, Coelum est vanale, Deusque.
-- We do sell
Temples, Priests, Altars, Sacrifices, Crowns,
Fires, Incense, Prayers, Heaven, God, are sold for crowns.


But it is labor in vain, for Rome to go about thus to purge out of men's
writings, the memory of her inbred corruptions; out of which source, whatsoever
Simonie is now in any part of the Church, has issued. Enough to stigmatize and
bran^ this sin with the greater note of infamy, if it should be found as
well in Judah, where religion i^ maintained in her integrity; as in that
Idolatrous revolted Israel, where that grand Jeroboam of Rome, for base bribes,
admits into the Priesthood the basest of the people. I love not to be an v^guis
in this ulcer: yet being to speak of this sin, as it is committed in the
highest degree, to wit, in Ordination, leaving it to Cham to diuulge his own
Fathers nakedness, if any such nakedness were; it shall suffice to do
herein, as Lycurgus of old, who to deter the Lacedemonian lads, from that
more then beastly vice of drunkenness, caused their drunken slaves to be made
a spectacle unto them, by whose example they might take the deeper impression
of dislike and hatred against that sin. So let us take, though a brief view of
the Church of Romes sin in this kind; omitting particular instances, and
contenting our selves with generals; their good laws being occasioned by
their evil manners.

Ex malis moribus, bone leges. Gratian. causa. 1 2. pars. quaest. 1. (...).
Pope Leo says: Gratia si non gratis datur, (...) accipitur, gratia non est.
Simonia^i autem non gratis accipiunt. Quid ergo dant? profecto quod habent.
Quid habent? Spiritum vtiqus mendacij. Quomodo hoc probamus? Quia si spiritus
veritatis (testante ipsa veritate, de qua procedit) gratis accipitur: procul
dubio spiritus mendacij esse conuincitur; qui non gratis accipitur, vel datur.
If grace, says he (speaking of the grace that is conferred by imposition of
hands in Ordination) be not given or received freely, it is no grace. But
Simoniacks do^ not receive freely. What give they (...)? Surely such as they
(...). What have they? Verily the spirit of lies. How (...) this? Because if
the Spirit of truth (the Truth it self being witness, from whom it
proceeds) is received freely: then doubtlesly it is convinced to be the
spirit of lye^, which is not received or given freely. And Gregory, ibidem:
Gregorius S^^grio Episcope Augustodunensi.
Quic (...) stu^et p^r protij d^tionem sacrum ordinem accipere, Sace^ dos non
est: sed (...) (...) dic^ concupiscit. Whos^euer affects to receive holy
orders by the gif^ of money, be is no Priest: ^ut courts only to be called by
a^ empty title. And a little after, Quisquis per pecuniam (...), ad hoc, vt
fiat h^retics^^, promo^etur. Whosoever is ordained by money, is even hereunto
promoted to be an heretick^. And Pope G^latius: Q^^s constiterit, etc. If it
shall appear that any unworthy persons has bought the sacred Dignity with
money, being convict, let him be deprived. But what if some worthy man buy
with his money? I answer, That cannot be, if he be worthy. But let him be
what he will, if he buy, it argues unworthiness.

Also Saint Ambros^ is alleged: Reperiuntur quamplurimi, negotiatione muneris
mer^ari ve^le gratiam Spiritus Sancti, Ambros. de P^^^r^li cura.
dum illi pretium do^a^t, vt Pontificalis Ordinis sublimicatem accipiant, etc.
There are found many, that by the merchandise of money would buy the grace of
the Holy Ghost, while they give money, to receive the dignity of the
Pontifical Order. Whereupon a fearful Anathema is decreed to such, as so
give or take. Likewise it is cited out of the Council of Chalcedon: Si quis
Episcopus per pecuniam Ordinationem fecerit, etc. Council. Chalced.
If any Bishop shall Ordain for money, and shall purchase the grace of the
Holy Ghost at a price, which indeed cannot be sold: and shall for money
ordain a Priest or Deacon, or shall promote any degree or order within the
Verge of the Clergy for filthy lucre, he that shall attempt this, let him
upon conviction be deprived of all. Si quis vero mediator, etc. And if any
shall be a mediator or stickler, for such foul and nefarious corruption in
giving and receiving; of a Clerk, let him be degraded: and if a Laick,
accursed. And out of the eight Synod: Qui per pecuniam, etc. He that shall
consecrate any for money, or is consecrated of another, let him be cashe^red
from the Priesthood. And many other authorities are there alleged to this
purpose. And Ambrose says; Inexpiabi^is est culpa venditi Ministerij, and
vindicta gratiae coelestis transit in Posteros. Ambros. ibid.
The sin of selling the Ministry is unpardonable, and the revenge of Divine
grace passes along to the posterity, like Gehezies leprosy.

But as it is objected, ibid. Ventum est. Simoniaci, etc. Simoniacks, though
they think that the grace of the Holy Ghost is vendible, yet they profess the
faith, and true religion, and consequently are no Heretics. It is answered:
Simoniaci, etc. Simoniackes, although they seem to hold the faith: yet they
are inthralled to the perdition of infidelity: as Gregory says; Cum omnis
auaritia, etc. Since all avarice is Idolatry, Greg. in regist.
whosoever does not carefully avoid this, and especially in bestowing of
Ecclesiastical dignities, is subject to the perdition of infidelity: although
he seem to hold the faith in words, which in deeds he denies. And after;
Cum omnis. Those that impose for money, are accounted more intolerable
Heretics then the Macedonians, who denying the Deity of the Holy Ghost,
grossly affirmed him to be only the Servant of the Father and the Son: but
these make him to be their servant. And also worse then those Jews, that
blasphemed the Holy Ghost, in ascribing Christ's miracles to the power of
Beelzebub. And to speak truly, Iudae comparantur Proditori qui Iudaeis
occisoribus Christum vendidit: They are compared to Judas the Traitor, who sold
Christ to the murtherous Jews. And therefore, Ex Concilio Bracharensi;
Placuit. It seems good unto us, Council. Brachar.
that for ordination of Clerks, Bishops take no rewards, and that the grace of
God by imposition of hands be not sold for money, but given freely, as the
Lord has commanded. For it is an ancient Decree of the Fathers, Anathema sit
danti and accipienti: Ibid.
Cursed be the giver and the receiver.

Ob. But some object: It was usual in times past, to bring the reward of
southsaying to the Prophet: as Balack sent to Balaam: and Saul came to Samuel
with a gift in his hand. Now prophe^ie is a gift of the Holy Ghost. But that in
the Old Testament was wont to be sold.

Answ. We never read that the good Prophets took any reward at the hands of
those that brought it. Elisha flatly refused any part of those riches which
Naaman would have presented him with. It was enough for Balaam, and such wicked
Prophets, to prophecy for rewards; as the Lord complains of such, saying,
The Prophets divine for money: but we read not, Mich. 3.11.
that the good Prophets did receive any such rewards. Yea, in stead of
receiving any thing, Samuel feasted Saul, and his. Sed fac eum accepisse, say
he did receive it. What was it? The fourth part of a Sicle, a matter of twenty
half-penies: so Saul's reward he brought to Samuel came but to five
half-pennies. Which yet if Samuel did at all receive, St^pes magis sunt
estimand^ tabernaculi, quam munera Propheta: They are rather to be esteemed
the maintenance of the Tabernacle, then rewards of the Prophet. Et haec magis
in sumptum Propheta, quam muneri Prophetiae reputanda sunt: licet potuerunt hi,
qui ariolos, etc. Though they that accustomed to go to southsayers, might out
of an evil custom think that the Prophets would do so, to wit, receive
gifts. But Gratian concludes upon that fourth part of a Sicle, containing five
half-pennies, which Saul carried to Samuel: Nostri ergo Sacerdotes si volunt
vendere prophetiam, and columbam in Cathedris suis proponere, quas Dominus
flagell^ subuertit: quinque tantum obolorum sint mercede contents: qui vtinam
non pr^tium villarum, sed quinque obolos acciperent: Therefore our Priests
(says he) if they will sell the gift of prophecy, and set the Dove (to wit,
the Holy Ghost) to sale in their Cathedralls, or Seats which the Lord overthrew
with his whip, let them be content with the reward of five half-pennies only;
I would they would not receive the worth of whole Villages, but only five
half-pennies. In a word, Greg. Epist. 114. Theodorico and Theoberto Rogib.
Francorum.
Gregory speaking against Simoniacall ordination reigning in France, our next
neighbor, and exhorting Theodoricke and Theobert then reigning there, to call
a Synod for the reformation of such Simoniacall Heresy and corruption, says,
In Sacerdotibus fides sit eligenda, cum vita. Quae autem opera esse valiant
Sacerdotis, qui honorem tanti (...) qua r^ agitur, vt ipsi quoque qui sacros
Ordines apperunt, non ^eta^ corrigere, non (...) sacet e^^tur, sa^agant
congreg^^e. Hinc fi^ (...) peers a Sacris ordimbus prohibi^^, despectique
resili^^t. Et (...) innocentia displicet, dubium non est, quod (...) delicta
commendet; quia vbi aur^m places, ibi and vitium. Hinc igitur non s^lu^ in
Ordinatoris and Ordinati (...), verum etiam excellenti^ ve^trae regnam
Episcoper^m culpa, quorum magis intercessionibus (...) de ^uerat, pregraua^ur.
Si enim dignus is Sacerd^^i^ creditur, cui non actionis ^ur^^a, sed pram^^r^m
copia suffragatur, restat vt nihil sibi in honores Ecclesiastico^ gra^itas,
(...), sed totum (...) obtineat. Et (...) Sacerdotes non proficere, sed perire
p^ti^^ indicantur. Let faith with good l^f^ be made choice of in Priests. But
what works can a Priest (...), who is convicted of obtaining the honor of so
great a Sacrament by rewards. By which means it comes to pass, that even they
which desire holy Orders, take no care to correct their life, or to compose
their manners; but labor t^^th and (...) to gather riches, wherewith the
sacred honor is purchased. And hence also it comes, that innocent and poor
men, being prohibited and despised, start back from holy Orders. And while
innocence is not set by, no doubt but there a bribe does promote vices:
because where gold is in request, there also vice is entertained. And hereupon
not only a deadly wound is inflicted upon the soul of the Ordainer, and
Ordained, but also the Kingdom of your Excellence, is burdened and oppressed
through the (...) of Bishops, by whose intercessions rather it should be
relieved. For if he be thought worthy of the Priesthood, whom not his good
merits, but ample gifts promoted, it remains that gravity, that ind^stry can
ple^d no right at all for it self unto Ecclesiastical dignities, but that the
profane love of gold possesses all. But while vices are recompensed with
honor, well may Priests be judged no^ to prosper, but to perish rather. And
he conclu^es with an exhortation to the two Kings. Proinde Paterno salutantes
affect^^ Non^um ver (...), Praecipimus and mandamus.
petimu^ excellentissimi Filij, vt hoc tam detestabil^ (...) de regni ve^tri
stud^atis fluibus pro^i^^r^, and nulla apud vos exc^satio, nulla contra animam
vestram suggestio locum inueniat: quia facientis pr^culdubi^ culpam habet, qui
quod potest carrigere, negligit emendare. Wherefore (says he) greeting you
with a fatherly affection, We pray you most excellent sons, that you study
to banish this detestable mischief out of the coasts of your Kingdom, and
latin excuse or pretense, let no suggestion find place with you against your
own soul: because he is doubtless guilty of the deed it self, that having
power to correct it, neglects to reform it.

Well, to conclude this point, whether this (...) gallicus were so purged, and
banished one of the coast of France as no relics remain, I know not. But if
it were, I pray God, that for the nee^nesse of the neighborhood it have not
^^iled over (as many other French fashions have done) and set footing on the
Albion shore, there to spread the infection. I well hope, that the Cinque
Ports are so well fortified, as they will not suffer such base wares to come to
be entered at the Custom-house, and so to pass vendible here: where Religion is
purely plan^ed, Faith truly professed, the practice of Piety so freq^ently
pr^ssed, and well charged Canons mounted. The cinque Ports are the five Senses,
which Religion so guardeth, as no such Simoniacall corruption can enter at any
one Port. Would it enter at the Port of sight, the Eye? That, has learned to
turn away from such vanity, or not to look with delight, or not to be
dazzled, much leffe blinded with such glittering objects* or to be en^moured
with the beauty of fair white and red earth. Or at the Port of touch, the
Hand? That, has learned (not in superstition, Touch not: but) in sincerity,
Touch no unclean thing; yea, though a gift should leap and fasten it self
upon the hand, yet to shake it off into the fire, as Paul d^d the Viper,
without any hurt, or swelling at all. Or at the Port of hearing, the Ear? A
religious ear loves not male audire, as to be charmed with any such
siluer-sounding music, though for Time, Number, and Measure, it be never so
complete. Or at the Port of the Smell? It, takes the Incense of any such
sa^rifice in snuff and high disdain. Or at the Port of Taste? It cannot
rel^sh such (...), bitter-sweets, though sweet in the mouth, yet bitter in the
belly, which the stomach of Conscience can never digest, or away with all, as
the Apostle said, concerning the incest committed by one among the Corinthians,
that they had altogether proved themselves to be clear in that business: 1.
Cor. 7.11.
so, may not any man say, that the Church of England is altogether free from
this kind of Simonie? How many may say that truly, which Saul did fainedly, I
have kept the Lords Commandment, in this point. But some will say, as Samuel
said, 1. Sam. 15.
What m^aneth then the ble^ting of the sheep, and the bellowing of the Oxen
which I bear? There ^oes a rumor of I know not what. Some false fame. How?
Simonie committed in giving and taking holy Orders? Absit. In France indeed,
our neighbor Nation: but the Sea is between, enough to drown such Simonie,
and so never suffer it to arrive at us. When Saint Ambrose spoke of this sin,
Ambros. de dignit. Sacerdot. cap. 5.
saying of a Simoniacall Bishop, Ab Archiep^scopo (...) nuper Episcopus
ordinatus, centumque ei solidos ded^, vt Episcopalem gratiam consequi
mer^^ssem; quos si (...) dedissem, ^odi^ Episcopus non essem; vnde mihi melius
est aurum de saccello inuehere, quam tantum Sacerdotium perdere, aurum ded^,
and Episcopum comparau^; qu^s tamen solidos si viuo, recepturum me illico non
diffido; Ordino Presbyteros, consecro Diaconos, and accipio aurum, nam and de
alijs nihilominus Ordinibus pecunia quaestum profligare confido, etc. does any
man think that this holy man ever me^nt or thought of any such Simoniacall
Bishop beyond any part of the Sea from Millan? much less, Vt penitus toto
diuisos orb Britannos
Simoniae argueret tantae? --
Far^e be S^int Ambrose instance from England, as we are from Mill^n, where he
was then Bishop. I hope, nay I dare say that there is no Bishop in England,
though of small means, who accompteth Ordination-fees among his revenues.
Absit. ^mo absint, qui talia somniant. We disdain to stoop to any such Lure,
or base Lucre. Aquila non capit musca^.
Let no man take us for such rude Artists, as that while we teach others the
way to heaven with our tongues, we should commit such a solecisme, as to point
to the earth with our hand. Or such shallow Divines, that, as if we had never
been trained up in University studies, we should make such a gloss upon the
holy Text, Let not thy left hand know, what thy right hand does: that a man may
therefore practice piety with the one hand, and Simonie with the other. But if
such there should chance to be, that dare sell the holy Ghost, as there was
even among the twelve one Judas, that did sell his Lord and Master Christ: What
then? What success had Judas? after restitution, suspension. Ecclesiastical
suspension were too good for such. When Esau had sold his birthright, wherein
was included the Priesthood, he was so desperately cut off from the blessing,
that he found no place for repentance to obtain so much as one blessing,
though he sought it with tears: Have thou not one blessing, Heb. 12.^7.
my father? Not one. The blessing remained with Jacob, to whom God had
promised, and given it with the Priesthood. Yet profane Esau lived, and inioyed
the fatness of the earth, and the d^aw of heaven. True. But how? He must live
by his bow; by killing and destroying. The very life of Simoniacall ordainers,
and ordained: like the Thief which cl^ming up into the sheep fold another way,
comes not, but to steal, to kill, Ioh. 10.10. Genesis 31.
and to destroy. While Jacob, he that is called by God to the Priesthood, and
to be a Shepherd, keeps and feeds the flock, but kills none; insomuch as
Laban missed none of all his sheep, while they were in Jacobs keeping. Gihezi
for his though after-selling, 2. King. 5.
purchased Naamans leprosy to himself, and to his posterity for ever; all
selling ordainers are Gihezites, and therefore leapers, and so shut out by Gods
Law from his holy Congregation, even the communion of Saints, as unhallowed and
unclean persons. Simons do^ me was, Thy money perish with thee: thou have no
part, Act 8.
nor lot in this business: thy heart is not right; thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Here is a hard choice for all
Simonists, especially Simoniacall ordainers, that sell (quantum in se est,
Spiritus Sancti, quod certe nihil est) the holy Ghost, they may choose whether
they will have Esaus curse, or Naamans leprosy, or Judas his suspension, or
Simons perdition: or rather all of these together, since such Simoniacks are of
Edoms line, Gihezies posterity, successors of Judas, and Simons own sons.
But how can such a fair body, of so sound a constitution, as is this noble
Church of England, ever hatch or harbor tales vomicas, such impostum^ted
humors, and not vomit them out of her mouth? Impossible it is, that such
weeds should grow in this Garden, the very Paradise of God. But if they
should, the Lord root them out, and ever preserve this his Eden with the
flaming sword of the fiery Cherubims, that never any Simoniacall Ordainer, or
Ordained, may dare to set his filthy foot on this holy ground, or thrust in his
foul hand, to take of the Tree of Life, to purchase to himself that power of
Christ, of which he said to his Disciples, Freely you have received, freely
give. I will conclude with that of Cyprian: Cypr. de Spiritu Sanct^ in fine.
Dominus Gihezi mercenarium lepra condemnat, and Iereboam vend^ntem Sacerdotia
cum Apostatis locat. Hic Simonem gratiae Dei nundinatorem a Sanctorum consorti^
exheredat, cuiu^ detestabiles ausus vltrix ruina confundit and quassat. Hic
Balaam ad maledicendum conducto silentium imponit; and per Asinam redargutum,
colliso ad parietem pede vacuum pecunia, oneratum coutumelia, claudicantem ad
propria remisit confusum: The Lord does condemn mercenarie Gihezi with the
leprosy, and ranketh Iereboam, selling the Priesthood, with Apostataes. He
dis-inheriteth Simon from the communion of Saints for bartering of the grace of
God, whose detestable darings a reuengefull ruin does confound and shake. He
imposes silence upon Balaam, being hired to curse: and being reproved by his
Ass, dashing his foot against the wall, he sent him back confounded, empty of
money, laden with infamy, and returning halting home.

CHAP. XII.
Reasons showing the unreasonableness of Simonie. Objections answered.

AS every sin is in its own nature unreasonable, as being repugnant even to
the Dictate of natural reason: So Simonie, for this reason, may challenge a
place and rank among other sins.

First, Simonie is unreasonable, because it is sacrilege, it robs God of his
right. Will a man rob his gods, Mal. 3.^.
to usurp upon Tithes, by buying and selling (for buying and selling Tithes is
an usurping upon Tithes) is to rob God. For to buy of the Patron, is to
subscribe that the right of Tithes is interessed in him, and not in God, and so
to ascribe the power and property of tithes to the Patron that sels them, not
to God, who gave them, still retayning the propriety of them in himself.
Whence we may conclude, all those to be either Simonists, or Favorers of
them, that deny Tithes to be due Iure Diuino. For why deny they this, but
flattering themselves, that thus they may the more licentiously buy and sell
them, and so hold the poor Ministers nose to the grindstone; whereas although
they had been dedicate only by Man, yet ought they not so to be profaned.

Secondly, Simonie is unreasonable, because it debaseth and vilifieth that
which is honorable, as is the gift of God. And Tithes are the gift of God;
therefore honorably to be esteemed. Peter said to Simon, Thy money perish with
thee, because thou think the gift of God may be obtained with money. He
vilified Gods gift, and therefore he was set light by the Apostle. Wherefore,
and what was Belshazzars punishment? He set light by the holy Vessels of Gods
Temple, when profanely he presumed to drink in them, He and his Concubines:
and was he not well requited, when while he was drinking, he saw that
handwriting upon the wall, Thou art weighed in the balance and found too
light? Dan. 5.27. He set light by Gods consecrate things, and God sets light by
him, he finds him too light. Let all spiritual merchants both Patrons and
Parsons, be struck with terror of this example, as Belshazzar was with the
handwriting. And he must needs be culpable of this sin, that sets any
terrene price upon a spiritual thing.

A third reason, why Simonie is unreasonable, is because it makes the Simonist
besides himself. For he comes as a Minister to buy: but buying, he
professes and proves himself to be no Minister of God. For as God gave the
Tithes anciently to the Levites, he gave them freely, and a free gift ought not
to be bought: So he has given the same to his Ministers of the new Testament
as freely; whatsoever Minister therefore shall offer to buy these Tithes, must
either confess that they are not the free gift of God, or that he himself
has no interest in them, as the Minister of God, and so no Minister of God. If
therefore holy Tithes belong properly and of right to Ministers, why do they
buy them? And if they buy them, what right had they unto them?

Fourthly, it is against reason to commit treason; but Simonie is treason. For
as Judas conspiring with the Jews by buying and selling, betrayed the person
of Christ: So Simonists conspiring together through buying and selling, betray
the Church of Christ, yea betray the body of Christ, the members of Christ; as
shall appear more at large, when we come to show the effects of Simonie.

But the Simonist obiecteth. I am feign to buy, because All, or Most are set a
buying; So that if I buy not I am like to have nothing. This is as good a
reason, as if he said, I must sin, because it is the fashion of All, or
Most, so to do. This man will go to the Devil for company. But let me tell
thee, if it were not for such as thou art, we should shortly have no Simonists
at all. For thou buyest, because others buy; Well: Do but thou, and all such
as thou art, who thus sin by others example, hold your hand a while, and in
short time defluet (...)* the Brook at last of such examples will be quite
dried up, when it cease to be fed and supplied with such headie Currents. For
else, by following such examples, thou, and such as thou art, become examples
to draw others after thee, and so each for his part both maintayneth and
increases that wicked Trade, each striving who can run fastest to the
Devil. Another says, he buyeth of force, that he may have a place in the
Church to exercise those gifts God has bestowed upon him, for the good of his
Church. And if he buy not, those gifts shall lie buried in the earth. That were
great pity. But what gifts? I doubt whether any sanctified and true Priestly
gifts, that will so easily be corrupted with Simonie. But as the King of Gath
said to David, counterfaiting madness; 1. Sam. 21.15.
Have we need of mad men? So, have we need of Simonists in the Church? Or
as Philip King of Macedon, seeing his son Alexander by large gifts to woo
the good will of the Macedonians, writ unto him in an Epistle: Cic. offic. lib.
2.
Quae te malum inquit, ratio in istam spem induxit, vt eos tibi fideles putares
fore, quos pecunia corrupisses? An id agis, vt Macedones non te Regem suum, sed
Ministrum and praebitorem put^nt, quo quid Sordidius Regi? So we may inuert it
upon our Simonist thus: Quae te malum ratio in istam spem induxit, vt populo te
fidelem putares fore Pastorem, cum tuam ipse conscientiam pecunia tua
corrupisses? An id agis, vt populus Dei non te Pastorem suum, sed Depastorem,
non Concionatorem sed Corruptorem putent, quo quid Sordidius Rectori? But if
thou have such a desire to exercise thy gifts, audiamus disertum: bestow them
there, where is most need, where the people perish for want of prophecy, and
prophecy fails there, because the Tithes are impropriate. Sed nullus ad
amissas, ibit Amicus opes. But thou will say: Dignus est operarius Mercede sua.
True: But either bewray not thy Hypocrisy, by seeking the richest and most
eminent places and preferments in the Church (for scarce any else please thee)
to exercise thy gifts in: or else make proof of thy sincerity, by desiring so
to employ thy gifts in Gods Church, as for that end thou will rather content
thy self with a mean Living honestly attained, then to aspire to a greater by
corrupt means. For it is a question, which is the worst of the two, for the
Church to want a Minister, or to be served with a Simonist.

Another obiecteth: I see the Church of God in great danger, the chief places
are intruded into by such as will make no conscience of their duty, as is
manifest by those lesser charges and places, wherein they have been most
negligent and unfaithful; and so the ship of the Church shall be in danger of
casting away, being governed by careless Pilots: Therefore for the love and
care I bear to the Church, being conscious of my good conscience, that I aim
chiefly at the good thereof: why may I not redeem the danger of it with my
money? A plausible reason, I confess; for our very lives are not too dear,
much less our livings, to be spent and sacrificed for the Church of God. It
was the Apostles joy and rejoicing, To be offered up upon the sacrifice and
service of the Philippians faith. And this ought to be the joy of every
faithful Minister of Christ, Phil. 2.17.
lawfully called, and canonically placed in this or that place in the Church.
But in this the case is otherwise. A man as yet is not called lawfully and
orderly to this or that charge in the Church. Well, the Church wants a good
Pastor; Wolves seek to enter. Shall I to prevent them, climb up another way
into the Sheepfold, and not by the Door? What benefit will this be to the
Flock, when the Thief and the Robber comes to prevent the Wolf? Yea, Caveat
Emptor. Why was 2. Sam. 6 7.
Vzza, being no Priest, smitten? was it not for laying his 1. Chro. 13.10.
hand upon the A^ke? contrary to Gods Commandment, Numb. 4.15. They shall not
touch any holy thing, least they dye? But the Arc was shaken with the Oxen,
and he did but stay it; well, he had his payment for his offic^ousnesse. So
thou see (at least in thy apprehension) in stead of the true Levites, the
Arc to be drawn by Oxen, the Church to be swayed by whom it ought not, and
so the state of it to be shaken, and to be in ieopardie. Yet take heed thou
put not forth thy hand, thy Simoniacall hand to the end to save the Church from
ruin. So, to touch holy things, is death; Thy money perish with thee. If
Simonie be unlawful, and so condemned of all: if it be a sin, commit it not,
yea, though thou could thereby procure the safety of the whole Church of
God. For men to say, Let us do evil, that good may come thereof: their
damnation is just. Romans 3.8.
Shall I destroy mine own soul (for every sin slays the soul) to save
others souls? Yea, says Job, Job. 13.7.
Will ye speak wickedly for Gods defense? and talk deceitfully for his
cause? Whereupon Mercerus notes, saying, Mercerus in ^unc locum.
Deus hac vestra Defensione non indiget, neque ita se defends postulat cum
alterius Detrimento, vt interim proximo fiat Iniuria. If God then will not have
his cause defended to any man's wrong: neither will he have his Church saved by
any man's destruction. It is against the order of charity, to lose my own
soul for the saving of others. Let such a man rather resolve thus; If God will
have me to help to preserve his Church, he will offer means lawful for me
to attain this charge. Yea, in such a case the means for us to use is, Pray
the Lord of the Harvest, Matthew. 9.38.
that he would send forth Laborers into his Harvest.

And whereas a man may pretend, yea and promise to himself, if he were
promoted to such a place, to become a profitable member in the Church: let such
a one examine himself by that which Gregory says: Perhaps (says he) he that
desires Prelacie in the Church, has a purpose to do good. Greg. Mag. Past.
curae. pars 1. c. 9.
Sed cum percepti Principatus officio perfrui seculariter coepit, libenter
obliuiscitur, quicquid religiose cogitauit. Quia nequaquam valet in culmine
humilitatem discere, qui in imis positus non desinit superbire. Nam plerunque
in occupatione regiminis, ipse quoque boni operis vsus perditur, qui in
tranquillitate tenebatur: quia quieto mari recte nauem and imperitus se nauta
dirigit: turbato autem tempestatis fluctibus, etiam peritus se nau^a confundit.
Quid namque est potestas culminis, nisi tempestas mentis? Inter haec itaque
quid sequendum est, quid tenendum, nisi vt virtutibus pollens, coactus ad
regimen veniat, virtutibus va^^us ne coactus accedat? But when he has begun,
worldly to enjoy the office of his received principality, he willingly
forgets, whatsoever ^ee religiously purposed. Because he cannot learn
humility when he is aloft, who while he was below ceased not to be proud.
For commonly in the negotiation of Government, the very use of good works is
also lost, which in the tranquillity of a private life was preserved. Since in
a calm sea, even at inexpert Mariner can direct and guide his ship, and
himself: but in a tempestuous sea, even a skillful Pilot confounds himself.
For what else is the power of regiment, but the tempest of the mind? Therefore
in these cases, what is to be followed, what to be observed, but that he which
excels in virtues, should come to place of government by compulsion, but he
that is destitute of vertue^, should upon no terms, no not by compulsion be
drawn unto (...). And he concludes: Considerandum est ei, qui curam populi
electu^ Praesul suscipit, quia quasi ad aegrum medicus accedit. Si ergo in eius
opere passiones viuunt, qua presumptione percussum mederi properat, qui in
facie vulnus portat? Therefore (says he) the elect Prelate, which takes upon
him the care of the people, must consider, that he comes as a Physician to a
sick Patient. If therefore passions do yet live in his practice, with what
presumption does he hasten to heal the diseased, when he carries his wound
in his own face?

But will some say, 1. Tim. 3.1. Greg. ibid. cap. 8.
Qui Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus desiderat. Ergo licet mihi Episcopatum
desiderare. He that desires a Bishopric, desires a worthy work. Therefore
it is lawful for me to desire a Bishopric. Let the same Gregory make
answer, upon the very same words, in his eight Chapter of the foresaid Book,
which he intituleth thus: De ijs, qui praeesse concupiscunt, and ad vsum suae
libidinis instrumentum Apostolici sermonis arripiunt: Ti. 3.1. Notandum (says
he) quod illo in tempore hoc dicitur* quo quisquis praeerat, primus ad
martyrij tormenta ducebatur. Tunc ergo laudabile fuit Episcopatum quaerere,
quando per hunc, quemquam dubium non erat ad supplicia grauiora per^enisse.
Vnde ipsum quoque Episcopatus Officium boni operis expressione definitur, cum
d^citur, si quis Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus desiderat. Ipse ergo sibi
testis est, quia Episcopatum non appetit, qui non per hunc, boni operis
Ministerium, sed honoris, gloriam quaerit. Qui^ repent subiungit Apostolus:
Opertet autem Episcopum irreprehensibilem esse. Et fauet ergo ex desiderio, and
terret ex praecepto, acsi aperte dicat, laudo quod quaeritis, sed prius
discite, quid quaeratis: ne dum vosmet ipsos metiri negligitis, tanto foedior
vestra reprehensibilitas appareat quanto, and a cunctis conspici in honoris
arce festimatis. Sacrum quippe Officium non solum, non diligit omnino, sed
nescit, qui ad culmen regiminus anhelans in occulta meditatione cogitationis
coeterorum subiectione pascitur: laud propria laetatur: ad honorem coreleuat:
rerum affluentium abundantia exultat. Mundi ergo lucrum quaeritur, sub eius
honoris specie, quo mundi destrui lucra debuerant. Cumque men's humilitatis
culmen arripere ad elationem cogitat: quod foris appetit, intus immutat. It is
to be noted (says he) that this was spoken at that time, when every Prelate
was the first that was drawn to the torments of martyrdom. Then it was
commendable to desire a Bishopric, when by it a man was sure to come to more
grievous torments, etc. But that man does not only not love, but not
understand the sacred Function at all, who breathing to climb to the top of
government, does in his private thoughts feed upon the subjection of others,
flatter himself in his own praise, exalt his heart unto honor, and exult in
the abundandance of his wealth. Therefore the lucre of the world is sought
under the show of that Honor, by which the emoluments and gainers of the world
should have been destroyed.

Another objection does here cross my way on the Patrons behalf, Sir, you
need not be so rigid against giving and receiving for a Spiritual preferment:
For, for my part, I have a good intent to convert such money to some charitable
use, as to bestow it in Alms, etc. Can. 1. q. 1. p. 2.
Indeed this has been an old shift in the Court of Rome. But Gratian says,
Non potest fieri Eleemosyna ex pecunia Simoniace acquisita. Alms may not be
given of money Simoniacally gotten. And Gregor. Epist. 110. to certain BB.
does condemn this sin thus. Nimis Declinandem est, dilectissimi fratres, sub
obtentu Eleemosynae peccata Simoniacae haereseos perpetrare. Nam aliud est
propter peccata Eleemosynas facere, aliud propter Eleemosynas peccata
committere. We are to be exceeding careful, beloved brethren, not to commit
the sins of Simoniacall h^resie, under pretense of alms. For it is one thing
to do alms for sin sake, another thing to commit sin for alms sake. This
is like Saul's sacrifice; reproved and rejected by Samuel. 1. Sam. 15. Or like
the high Priests Charity, who with Judas treason-money, by some called
Simonie, bought, forsooth, a field to bury Strangers in. But for all this
charitable work, by divine Ordination (as Lyrae says) the field got such a
Name, as could never be washed off. For it is called, the field of blood to
this day. Matthew. 27.8. And might such charitable works, as they are done by
Simonie, so for ever bear the brand of Simonie. As a famous Curtizan in Rome,
having built a fair house, caused this Motto to be set over the front of the
gate, well beseeming her own shameless front, Aedificauerunt Peccatrices:
Curtizans built this house.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the unreasonableness of Simonie, particularly in regard of the Office and
Function of a B. or Minister of the Gospel.

THe Apostle, 1. Tim. 3.1. says, This is a true saying; if a man desire the
Office of a Bishop (or Minister of the Gospel) he desires a good work. Now
such is the Office of a Bishop, and Minister of Christ, as if it be well
weighed, a man will be well advised how he seeks or sues for such an Office,
much less be at the cost to purchase it with any price. For the Office of the
sacred Order of Bishops is not altogether so easy, as the world takes it to
be. Origin says, Qui defiderat Episcopi munus, Origin. in Matt. cap. 15.
ob parandam apud homines gloriam, aut ab hominibus adulationem, aut ob quastum
capiendum ex his, qui accedunt verbo, dantque causa pietatis: talis Episcopus
non desiderat bonum opus, neque potest esse sine erimine, neque vigilans, neque
sobriu^, quum sit ebrius gloria, qua se intemperanter ^^gurgitanit. He that
desires the Office of a Bishop, to purchase glory and estimation with men, or
to be called of men Rabbi, or to get gain of those that come to the Word, and
do give for (...) sake: such a Bishop desires not a good work, nor can he
be without crime, neither vigilant, neither sober, bring drunk with glory,
wherein he has intemperately drenched himself. And in his twenty four Tract
upon Matthew: Origin. in Matt. Tract. ^4.
Quidam plurima machinantur vt Episcopi vocentur ab hominibus, quod est Rabbi:
quum deberent intelligere, Episcopum fieri oportere irreprehensibilem, and
caetera quae sequuntur, vt si non dicatur ab hominibus esse Episcopus, tamen
sit apud Deum: Some do attempt many ways to be called of men Bishops, that is
Rabbi: when in the mean time they should understand, that a Bishop must be
unreprovable, and so forth, as follows in the 1. Ti. 3.2. etc. Cyril. Epist.
6.
Apostles description, so as although of men he be not called a Bishop, yet
with God he is a Bishop. And Cyril says, speaking of the Office of Ministers:
If so be we execute this Office aright, we shall receive a reward, yea and
praise too: but if otherwise, if peruersly, what flames shall be sufficient to
punish us? We shall hear that voice, Thou have destroyed mine heritage, thou
have slain my people. As for Laymen, they shall indeed render every one a
particular account for his own life: But we who bear the burden of
Sacerdotall offices, we shall answer, not only for our selves, but also for
all believers in Christ. Aug. Valeri^. Epist. 148.
And Saint Augustine writing to Valerius, whom he calls his loving Father,
says, Ante omnia peto, vt cogitet religiosa prudentia tua, nihil esse in hac
vita, and maxim hoc tempore facilius, and laetius, and hominibus
acceptabilius, Episcopi, aut Presbyteri, aut Diaconi Officio, si perfunctorie
atque adulatorie res agatur: sed nihil apud Deum miserius, and tristius, and
damnabilius. Item nihil esse in hac vita and maxim hoc tempore difficilius,
laboriosius, periculosius Episcopi, aut Presbyteri, aut Diaconi Officio: sed
apud Deum nihil beatius, si eo modo militetur, quo ^^oster Imperator iubet. Et
hinc erant Lachrymae illae, quas me fundere in ciuitate Ordinationis meae
tempore nonnulli fratres animaduerterunt, nescuntes causam doloris me^, etc.
Above all things I desire (says he) that your religious prudence would
consider, that there is nothing in this life, and most of all at this time,
more easy, more pleasant, and more acceptable to men, then the Office of a
Bishop, or a Priest, or Deacon, if the Office be carelessly, or men-pleasingly
performed: but with God nothing more miserable, woeful, and damnable. Also that
there is nothing in this life, and most of all at this time, more difficult,
painful, and perilous, then the Office of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon: but
with God nothing more blessed, if the combat be so managed, as our Captain
commands. And hence were those many tears, which certain brethren, not
knowing the cause, saw me shed in the City, in the time of mine Ordination.
Aug. de Ciuit. De^. lib. 19. c. 19.
And the same Father elsewhere says: upon the words of the Apostle, Qui
Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus desiderat: Exponere voluis, quid sit
Episcopatus; quia nomen est operis, non honoris: vt intelligat non se esse
Episcopum qui praeesse dilexerit, non prodesse. And a little after he says,
Locus superior, sine quo regi populus non potest, et si ita teneatur, atque
administretur, vt decet, tam^n indecenter appetitur. The superior place (of
the B.p) without which the people cannot be governed, although it be so
maintained and managed, as is meet, yet (...) is unseemly for a man to hunt
after it. So that (says he) Ocium sanctum quaerit charitas veritatis; negotium
iustum suscipit necessitas charitatis. Quam Sarcinam si nullus imponit,
percipiendae atque intuendae vacandum est veritati: si autem imponitur,
suscipienda est propter charitatis necessitatem: In this case, says he, The
love of truth seeks a holy retiredness: and it is the necessity of charity
that undergoes a just employment. Which burden if no man impose it, then a
man is the more vacant to exercise his private life in the study of the Truth:
Chrysostom. in Act. 1. homil. ^.

(...).


but if it be imposed, it must be undergone for very necessity of charity.
Saint Chrysostom says: I suppose no man, though never so thirsty of glory
would ever be made a Bishop, unless necessity imposed it upon him. For who is
sufficient for these things. For as that holy man further says: If thou
knew (says he) that the Bishop ought to bear the burden of all; that if
others be angry, they are pardoned, but not he: that others sinning may have
excuse, but not he: thou would not so hasten, thou would not so run to
the Prelacy. For he (the Bishop) is exposed to all tongues, is subject to all
censures, both of the wise and unwise: he is perplexed with perpetual cares,
night and day. He is envied of many, he is observed of many. Do not tell me of
those, who are ambitious of favor, that love to sleep, that come to their
Episcopal office, as to a bed of rest. I speak not of these: but of those,
which watch for your souls, which prefer the salvation of their people
before their own safety. Tell me, if a man have but ten children under his
government, living continually with him, he is forced without intermission to
take care of them: what then shall not be suffer, that has so many, not
domestics, but such as have others also under their authority? But he is in
great honor, say they. What honor? (...).
Three halfe-peny wretches do rail upon him in the market place. Why does he
not then stop their mouths? A proper reason. For now you are far wide of the
office of a Bishop. Moreover, unless he give himself to please all, both
those that live idly, and those that follow their business, he hears a
thousand accusations on every side. None is afraid to accuse and traduce him.
For they are afraid to speak evil of Princes, but not of Bishops, because the
fear of God is of no force with them. Who can express their sollicitous care
in preaching and teaching? Who can tell what plunges they are put to in their
elections? His mind differs nothing from a ship tossed with waves. He is
pressed on every side with his friends, and with his foes, with his own
kindred, and with forreners. If he be vehement and zealous, they say, he is
cruel: if not vehement, they say, he is cold. But these two contraries must
concur, that so he may neither be contemned, nor hated. How is he
prevented, how pressed with business? How many is he enforced to offend,
volens nolens? (...), etc.
How many must he rebuke, will he, nill he. I speak not unadvisedly, but as I
am affected, and as I think. I do not think, that among Priests there are
many, that shall be saved, but far more that shall perish. The reason is,
because this Office requires an high and excellent spirit. For there be many
occasions to drive him from his own disposition, and he has need of many
eyes. Do ye not see how many things are behoofull for a Bishop to have, that
he be apt to teach, that he be patient in suffering of evils, that he be
constant and faithful in the Doctrine of the Word? What a difficulty is this?
And when others sin, it is imputed to him. I need say on more (says he) if
but one depart this life, v^i^itiated, or unbaptized, is he not altogether
condemned? For the destruction of one only soul is such a loss, as it cannot
possibly be estimated. For if the salvation of one soul was so precious, that
for this the Son of God became Man and suffered so great things: consider
then what punishment the destruction of one soul will bring. Do not tell me
therefore. The Priest has sinned, or the Deacon^ all their sins redound upon
the head of those, that chose them. Therefore ^f any shall approach to the
chief Priesthood (to wit, a Bishopric) (...) to a function full of care and
trouble, no man will easily undertake it. But now we do no otherwise affect
this Dignity, then as civil Magistracies, namely, that we may be magnified
and honored with m^n, while we are cast out of favor with God. What gain
does this honor bring? How does it appear to be nothing? (...). etc.
When thou shall desire the Priesthood, set before thee on the one side those
accusations, which it necessarily must suffer; on the other side a life free
from public employment, and compare the measure of the punishment. For if thou
sinnest the sin of a private man, thou shall not suffer so great punishment in
comparison: but if thou sinnest in the Priesthood, thou art undone. A Bishop
cannot sin privily. For it is well with him, if not offending, he-can be
free from slanders, much less if he do offend, can he escape. If either he
be angry, or laugh, or desire a little sleep to refresh him, there be many
ready to taunt him, many that will be offended, many that will censure him,
and prescribe Laws unto him, many that will renew the memory of former
Bishops, and despise the present, and they do it not to praise them, but to
pinch him. (...).
War is sweet to the inexpert. For we fight not against those, who by might
oppress the poor, nor have we the courage to stand in defense of the flock:
but after the example of those shepherds, whom Ezechiel mentions, We kill and
devour. Which of us is so careful and sollicitous for the sheep of Christ, as
Jacob was for Laban^ flock? Who can express what cold he suffered by night?
And do not tell me of any night-watchings, or any such care taken. It is
altogether contrary. Princes and Rulers (...) not so great honor, as he that
is a Prelate of the Church. If he go into the Kings Court, who has the
precedence of him? There is an universal decay and corruption. Those things I
speak, (...), etc. (...).
not to enforce shame upon you, but to refrain your eager desires. But perhaps
there is none such: God grant it* that so our words may vanish into the ^ire,
and prove (...) words; and so may prove a^ potions, which being prevented by
the Patients instant recovery, are thrown away. For considering the w^ight of
a Bishops office, and the weakness of many advanced to high places, I cannot
imagine, says he, that any man, though never so ambitious, unless mere
necessity constrain him, would ever be consecrated a Bishop. Thus far this
holy and good Bishop Saint Chrysostom.

The same Father in another place, says: Not only civil Magistrates, Chrysostom.
ex varijs in Matthew. locis, hom. 20.
but also Prelates of the Churches must render an account of their
administration: and that a more strict and mighty account, then any other. For
to whom the ministry of the Word is committed there shall be a rigid
examination: whether he has neither through slothfulness, nor envy omitted to
speak any thing which he ought to have spoken, and has declared by his
deeds that he has taught all good duties, and has concealed nothing from
his hearers, which might be profitable for them. Again, He that has obtained
a Bishopric, the more highly he is exalted to the top of honor, the more
strict reckoning shall be required of him, not only of his doctrine, and care
for the poor, but also of his examination of those that are to be ordained
Ministers and of infinite other duties. And in his Commentary upon Titus:
Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Tit. cap. 2. hom. 1.
The higher the dignity is, the greater are the dangers of a Minister. To omit
other things, which fall out daily* if at any time it happen, that either a
friend, or some ^ther occas^^^ ^ee a means to promote an unworthy person to
the dignity of a Bishopric, and commit unto him the weighty government of a
City, into what tormenting fires does he throw himself? For he that in his
more private manner of life has not been religious; certainly he must needs
be much worse, when he comes to ^ndertake the government of the Church.
Therefore it is by all means to be wished, that he that has been formerly
endued with (...), he may remain so still, having taken upon him such a
ministerial function. For now, both vain glory does more eagerly haunt him,
together with the love of many, and superci^ious pride: whenas Domination it
self begets a licentiousness of being offensive, and contumelious, and to
give ill language, and innumerable other. And if he that offends one soul,
had better have a millstone hanged about his neck, and be drowned in the
bottom of the Sea: then he that shall scandalize so many Souls, and whole
Cities, and People, Men, Women, Children, Citizens, Countr^men, his neighbors,
and others further off, which are under his charge, what shall he suffer?
Therefore such a man has more need of the grace and peace of God; for unless
these be the prop of his government, all must perish, and fall to the ground.
For although thou be never so expert in governing, unless in this thy
government, thou have that grace and peace which is of God: the storm will
inuolue and drown in the deep, both thy ship, and those that sail with thee.
For which cause, I am possessed with a great admiration of those men, which are
so desirous of such burdens. Thou most unhappy and miserable of all men, do
thou not see what that is, which thou so desire? If a man diligently weigh
the truth of the matter, such a one is not advanced to a Lordship, but rather
he is a servant to innumerable Lords, which do continually covet, and speak
contrary things. So he and much more to this purpose. And upon the Epistle to
the Colossians* Chrysostom. ^n Epist. ad Coloss. c. 1. hom. 3.
We do execute an Embassage. But we desire not this honor for our selves, God
forbid: for we know the vileness of it: but for your sakes, that those things
which are uttered by us, you may the more diligently attend unto, that you may
receive profit thereby, lest you hear slothfully and negligently the things
which are delivered. Let no man attend to me, but to the dignity of my
Embassage. So this holy Bishop.

Erasmus.
In a word, Erasmus in his Epistle Dedicatorie, before Saint Chrysostomes
Commentary upon that Epistle to the Galatians, says, that a Bishop sustaines
three persons: one, of a Father, in his Sacerdotall authority: another* of a
Mother, in the desire of bringing forth, and bringing up her children: a third,
of a Nurse, in feeding the Soul with (...) Doctrine. And as Aaron might not
enter into the Tabernacle and Sanctuary, but with his golden Bells, or else he
must die: so the Minister of the Gospel must have the golden Bells of the
Gospel always (...) in his mouth, whereby the sheep of Christ may be fed.

Seeing then that the office of a Bishop is a^^ended with so many cares,
exercised with so many duties, inuolued in so many dangers, exposed to so many
storms, obnoxious to so heavy judgments liable to such sharp censures: who
can blame Saint Chrysostom for admiring, how any man should ambitiously seek
and pursue after such place^, much less be at the cost to purchase them? Yea,
how many, w^ighing with themselves the insupportable burden of this Office,
which would make the shoulders of Angels to stoop under it, have not only
refused it being offered (and that not with a formal N^l^, (...)) but have hid
themselves; and ^unne from it as far as they could. How often did Nilamm^^, a
holy man of God, seriously and really refuse a Bishopric so often urged upon
him? Zozom. ^col. hist. lib. 8. c. 19.
who at length in the midst of his fervent prayer, which he offered up to
God, yielded up his spirit to him that gave it. Besides, sundry of the
Fathers, Claud. Espens. de Episc. fuga.
and those whom Claudius Espencaus mentions, de fuga Episcopatus, that
shunned those high places, as measuring them rather by their weight, then by
their height: we could produce examples at home, as of that learned Deane
Nowell, of reverend memory, and that learned and godly Gilpin, who both lived
within the memory of this present age, when both there was so much grace in
the World, as freely to offer, and in them as constantly, as modestly to refuse.

Gaspar Contarenus, a learned Cardinal, one that lived, and was one in the
Council of Trent, but who was much more honest then many of his fellows,
Gaspar Contar. Card. de Offici^ Episcopi, lib. 1.
writing of the office of a Bishop, has these words: Episcopus medius est
inter diuinos spiritus, and humanum genus. Ex quo perspicuum est, Oportere
Episcopum tum Angelicae, tum humanae naturae quadam ratione participem esse:
quod cum de se nullus, quanquam virtutibus ornatissimus, polliceri possit:
idcirco Episcopatum optare, absque arrogantiae crimine, aut auaritiae, aut
ambitionis, nequit vllus. A Bishop (says he) is a middle person between the
divine Spirits, and humane kind. Whence it is plain, that a Bishop in some
regard ought to partake both of the Angelical, and the humane Nature: which
thing, seeing no man, although the most virtuous, can promise of himself:
therefore for any to desire a Bishopric, he cannot do it without suspicion
of arrogance, or of avarice, or of ambition. But the want of the due
consideration of the waightinesse of a Bishops office, having opened a wide
window in the Church for such arrogant, auaricious, and ambitious climing
spirits to enter at, that come not in by the door, gave the same Author
occasion a little after in the same Book, to utter this lamentation of that
present state of the Church of Rome: Contar. ibid.
Non possum hoc in loco non magnopere miserari nostra tempestatis calamitatem,
cum paucos admodum Christiani popul^ moderatores comperias, qui degant in
ciuitatibus fidei eorum commissis. Verum satis officio suo fecisse putant, si
procuratori regendam vrbem tradiderint, ipsi vero reditibus potiantur; ac magni
quidem cuiusdam in Romana Curia pompam comitantur, regnorumque tractant, ac
bellorum negotia; de populo vero, cui prasunt, an in Christiana Religione
proficiat, an deficiat, ne nuncium quidem accipiunt, egenosque gregis sui
omnino negligunt and ignorant: Hoccine est Episcopum gerere? hoccine Discipulos
Christi imitari, praeceptaque Euangelica seruare? Probus ergo Episcopus operam
dabit, ne alteri tradat gregem suum curandum, sed quam breuissimo tempore ab
ouili aberit, nisi aliqua ratione a Pontifice euocatus alicui officio
inseruiat, quod ad emolumentum Christianae Reipublicae spectet. Verum non hanc
dari sibi occasionem op^et, neque tale quid ambiat; sed aegre ac fere inuitus
huiusmodi onus suscipiat; quo expedito non aliud procuret, sed quam c^tissime
ad gregem redeat. I cannot here (says he) but greatly pity the calamity of
our time, when you shall find very few Governors of the Christian people,
that reside in those Cities committed to their charge; but think they have
performed their duty sufficiently, if they shall commit the government of the
City to a Proctor, while themselves enjoy the revenues; and they accompany
the pomp and train of some great one in the Court of Rome, and do manage the
affairs of States, and of the Wars, but of the people over whom they bear
rule, whither they go forward, or backward in Christian Religion, they do not
so much as hear one message; and for the poor of their flock, they are
altogether negligent and ignorant of them. Is this to be a Bishop? Is this to
imitate the Disciples of Christ, and to observe the Evangelical precepts?
Therefore a good Bishop shall labor, not to commit his flock to another
Cure, but to be absent from the Fold as little space as may be, unless for
some reason he be called away by the Pope for some special service, for the
good of the Christian commonwealth. But let him not wish or desire this
occasion to be given him, nor let him make suite for any such thing; but let
him very hardly, and in a manner unwillingly undertake this task; which being
dispatched, let him not procure another, but with all speed let him return to
his flock: so he. As Cardinal Poole, being entreated by a Bishop for one
months absence from his flock, notwithstanding he had admonished him
formerly not to leave his flock: answered (giving him leave, Remains.
but for no longer time) I shall take this comfort by your departure, that you
shall be beaten the less. This Cardinal also being in election and
nomination for the Pope dome, and being charged with ambition in ouer-hastie
aspiring to that Dignity: answered, Ibid.
That he thought not the burden of that great office to be so light, but that
he was of the mind, that it was rather to be feared, then desired. As for
them, which understood not, and thought more basely of so great a place, he
lamented their case, and was sorry for them.

Devout Bernard complaining also of the course of his times, says, among many
other things, in his Ser. ad Cler. Quem dabis mihi de numero Episcoporum, qui
non plus inuigilet subditorum euacuandis marsupijs, quam vi^ijs extirpandis?
Bernard. sermo ad Clerum.
Vbi est, qui flect at iram? Vbi est, qui pradicet annum pl^cabilem Domino?
Propterea relinquamus istos, quia non sunt Pastores, sed traditores, and
imitemur illos, qui viuentes in carne, plantauerunt Ecclesiam sanguine suo. Et
quidem isti sortiti sunt Ministerij locum, sed non zelum. Successores omnes
cupiunt esse, imitatores panci. Vtinam tam vigiles reperirentur ad curam, quam
alacres currunt ad Cathedram, etc. Whom will thou show me^ among all the row of
Bishops, who is not more vigilant in emptying his peoples purses, then in
rooting out their vices? Where is one that pacifieth wrath? Where is he, that
preaches the acceptable year of the Lord? Therefore relinquish we these,
because they are no Tutors, but Traitors, and imitate we those, who while they
lived in the flesh, planted the Church with their blood. These indeed have
chosen the place of the Ministry, but not the zeal. All affect to be
Successors, few Imitators. I would to God they were found as watchful over
their Cure, as hasty to run to the Chair, etc. And again in the same
Sermon, he says: Quatuor his qui praesunt in Ecclesia Dei, necessaria esse pra
omnibus reor: videlicet, vt per ostium intrent, vt in humilitate se contineant,
anaritiam declinent, munditiam tam cord, quam corpore seruare studeant. Sed
quid prodest, si Canonice eligantur (quod est per ostium intrare) and non
Canonice viuant? Dixit D^minus ad duodecim, Nonne ego vos duodecim elegi, and
vnus ex vobis diabolus est? Domine Jesus, cum esset electio illa in manu tua,
and non haberes aliquem contradicentem and reclamant^^ tibi, quare elegisti
diabolum Episcopum? Cur bone Jesus non elegisti bonum, and instum, and sanctum,
sicut Petrus bonus, and instus, and sanctus fuit? Vel si elegisti diabolum, cur
te i^ctas elegisse? Fratres, sic facit Jesus body, eligens sibi multos
diab^^^s Episcopos. Vbi (proh dolor!) reperiemus Episcopos, qui post adeptam
dignitatem, in humilitate se contineant? Nempe superbia eis occasio est, vt ad
tantam dignitatem aspirent, vt in Ouile Christi impudenter irrumpant, cum tamen
per Psalmistam Dominus dicat, Non habitabit in medio domus mea, qui facit
superbiam. Vae mihi Domine Jesus, si tecum ere in d^mo tua, and non in medio
domus tua; nan tu semper in medio os. At isti non sic. Sunt quidem cum Jesus,
sed non in medio domus eius, quia amant, and faciunt superbiam, parents suos
extollentes, pauperes antem negligentes, and deprimentes. Male vinunt, and
subiectos male vinere volunt, Et idcirco comparantur Apostata Angelo, qui dixit
in cord suo, P^nam sedem meam ad Aquilonem etc. Quid est Diabolum ad Aquilonem
sedem velle ponere, nisi superbum quempiam and impium, super suos similes, a
charitatis calore, vel sapientiae, luco alienos principatum appetere, vel
adeptum tenere? etc. For those (says he) that bear rule in the Church, four
things are principally necessary: to wit, That they enter in by the door,
that they contain themselves in humility, that they eschew avarice, that they
study to keep cleanness as well in heart, as in body. But what does it
avail to be canonically chosen (which is to enter in by the door) and not to
live canonically? The Lord said to the twelve, Have not I chosen you twelve,
and one of you is a Devil? Lord Jesus, seeing the election was in thine own
power, and thou had none to contradict, or control thee, why did thou
choose a Devil? Why, good Jesus, did thou not choose a good, a just, and a
holy man, such as Peter was? Or if thou ^busest a Devil, why do thou boast
of it? Brethren, so does Jesus now, choosing many Deuil-bishops. Where (alas!)
shall we find Bishops, who after they have got the dignity, contain
themselves in humility? For pride prouokes them to aspire to so great a
dignity, to make an impudent irruption into Christ's sheepefold; though
notwithstanding the Lord says by the Psalmist, The proud man shall not dwell
in the midst of my house. W^e is (...), O Lord Jesus, if I shall be in thy
house, and not in the midst of thy house: for thou art always in the midst.
But those not so. They are with Jesus, but not in the midst of his house,
because they love and live in pride, extolling their Parents that promoted
them, but despising and depressing the poor. They live a naughty life, and
would have their people to live so too. And therefore they are compared to the
Apostate Angel, which said in his heart, I will plant my Seat upon the North
Pole. What is this, that the Devil will pitch his Seat upon the North? But that
every proud and impious man, does either aspire or usurp principality over
such as be like him, such as are remote from the heat of charity, and from
the light of wisdom? This and much more this devout man.

Now to draw all that has been said in this Chapter, by those holy and
ancient men of the Church, to a corollary, or conclusion: If such be the Office
of a Bishop; if (as Origin says) it makes the ambitious drunk with
vainglory: If (as Saint Cyril) to be punished with fearful flames; if he
must render a strict account for himself, and for all under his jurisdiction:
If (as Saint Augustine) nothing be more easy, pleasant, contentfull to men, if
perfunctorily and carelessly performed; but nothing more unhappy, miserable,
damnadle with God, for which that holy man wept at his Ordination; If a Bishop
be a name rather of labor, then honor, and of duty, rather then dominion;
If not to be sought, nor undertaken, but for mere charity sake, when
necessity compels: If (as Saint Chrysostom) he bear the burden of all,
be most inexcusable, exposed to all tongues, distracted with daily and nightly
cares, subject to all censures, liable to all judgments; if others sins be
imputed to his misgouernment; if the loss of each soul, so precious, shall
be required of him; if to affect it, be to cast him out of Gods favor; if a
private life be much more sweet, more secure and safe; if it be not a bed of
rest, but of break-sleepe; if their preaching be most solicitous, most
assiduous; if he be like a ship continually tossed with waves, and driven with
contrary winds; if not many Ministers be saved, but much more do perish; if
subject, even in despite oftentimes to be diuerted and driven from his own
disposition; if only pride in such, be enough to cause an universal decay and
corruption; if their account be most severe, both for their doctrine, what, and
how, with what diligence, with what devotion performed; and for their life, how
answerable to their doctrine, how holy, how religious, how every way exemplary
to their flock; how careful in relieuing the poor, how circumspect in
electing good Ministers, in rejecting the unworthy; if this Office make men
rather greater, then better, hoysing up the sails of each passion to all winds
of temptation, especially when it finds pride, avarice, ambition, and the
like: If (as Erasmus) a Bishop put on the person of a Father, a Mother, a
Nurse, all importing manifold Offices: If, as Aaron with his Bells, he must be
ever sounding forth the word of Truth: if, for the multiplicitie and
difficulty of the duties of this calling, Ca^enatosque (...), Mutandos (...)
grau^oribus. A^son.
chained one within another, many wise and grave men of God have shrunk their
shoulders from it: if (as Contarenus) a Bishop must be above a man, of an
Angelical spirit; if the very desire and seeking of it, imply arrogancy,
avarice, and ambition; if it be not enough to serve his Cure by a deputy; if
it give him no dispensation to be a Courtier, and Negotiatour; if thus he be
unlike Christ, and his Apostles: If (as Poole) it be so dangerous to be
Non-resident; if a Bishoppricke be rather to be feared, then desired: If (as
Bernard) it be usually made rather a secular merchandise, then a spiritual
means to gain souls unto God; if such be to be abandoned, as betrayers, not
shepherds; having the seat, not the zeal; being successors, not imitators; if
any ambitious Bishop be a Judas, a Devil, an Apostate Angel, that would have
all like himself to domineere over: if thus he be excluded from inioying of
Christ: if this Office be a Ministration, not a domination: then to say no
more, but what so many holy, grave, learned Fathers have said already: What
reason can any reasonable man pretend, to excuse not only the purchase, but
the least pursuit of such a preferment, from the imputation of extreme
unreasonableness?

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Censures, and Penalties of Simonie and Simonists.

COme we now to observe the censures and penalties, which have been generally
imposed upon Simonie, and Simoniacks. Aquinas following his Ancients, calls
Simonie, Haeresi^ quaedam. Gregory calls it, The prime Heresy in the Primitive
Church. Altar vel Decimas, Greg. in Regist. 1* q. ca. 3.
vel Spiritum Sanctum emere vel vendere, Simoniacam Haeresin esse nullus
fidelium ignorant: To buy or sell the Altar (as the Sacrificer does his Mass)
or Tithes, or the Holy Ghost, there is none of all the faithful, that knows
not this to be Simoniacall Heresy. Irenaeus calls Simon Magus, The Father of
all Heretics Yea, (...). in prae^at. l. 2. aduers. Hereses.

Sic. Aug. l. 2. con. adue^s. leg. and Proph. ca. 12. Yet Aug. in Psa. 54.
s^ith, that the error of the Capernaites, was the first Heresy in the
P^imi^^ue Church: but he c^lls it not a Mother^heresie, as not dream^ng then of
succeeding times wherein have been bred ^uch a Mass of Romish Caper^^ites: as
Dan^us obserue^h upon his first Chapter of Heresies.


says Aquinas, The impious Heresy, of the Macedonians, and of those of his
Sect, impugners of the Deity of the Holy Ghost, is more tolerable, then that
of the Simonists: For those in their dotage, yet confessed, that the Holy Ghost
was a Creature, and servant of the Father and the Son: But these do make the
same Holy Ghost to be their own servant. For he that takes upon him to buy or
sell any thing, takes upon him also to be the master and proprietary of that,
which he so buyeth or sells. Yea, so odious is the sin of Simonie, that
Pope Deodate said. Greg. Decr. de Sim. tit. 3. S^ Dominus.
That no Catholic is to be refused, but, for auouching the Truth, and to make
known the madness of Simonie is to be exhorted with most earnest entreaty.
For, says he, none is so vile or infamous, which may not be admitted for a
competent witness against a Simoniacke, as being the most vile and infamous of
all men. Therefore even a bond-slaue, a whore, a criminal person, may accuse
a Simonist, yea, even a servant his master. And every sinful man may sing a
Mass, But a Simonist may not. So he.

But some will say, This is but the Brutum Fulmen of a Pope. Yea, it ought so
much the more to make us, whom the condition of so many Popes has made to
abominate the very name of Pope, to be afraid, and to startle at the very
name of Simonie, more then at a crack of Thunder. If Heathenish Abimelech so
highly honor Marriage, and the sacred Laws thereof, as he sharply reproues
Abraham, for hazarding his fair wife: how shall not faithful Abraham and Sara
blush the more at such a Man's reproof? Genesis 20.


Gregory says: Specialiter, etc. Let both the Clergy and people, Greg Epist
67. It was Grimaldu^ his complaint in E^i. 6 his time, in hi^ eloquent Oration
to the Bishops, and the rest of the Convocation at Paul's: Vt Distrabuntur opes
Ecclesiastic^! Sacerdotiorum quam frequen^ est nundinatio! (...) templa sun^
venales Ecclesiae. Libet exclamare: Non est improbe, do^us non ager homo est,
quem emisti Hominem voras, vel potius hominum multitudutem. Est ergo Simoniac^^
plagiarius.
the Electors, specially and absolutely know, that that man is not only
unworthy of the Priesthood, but will be found also obnox^us and culpable of
other crimes, whosoever he be that p^^sumeth to buy the gift of God with
money. So that the like punishment and penalty is equally due, both to the
elected, and to the Electors, Can. Apost. 30.
if they shall ass^y to violate the sincerity of Priesthood with a
sacrilegious inten^. So he.

Whence we may learn, Aqu. ^^ q. 100. art. 6.
that the sin of Simonie never goes alone, whether in the Buyer, or in the
Seller: but as the Master Be, it is attended with a swarm of other
enormities. Greg. de^ret. de rerum tit. 9.
In the Canons of the Apostles (so called) Si quis Episcopus, etc. If any
Bishop or Priest, or Deacon shall obtain this dignity by money, Gra. Gloss
cau. 1 q. 1. p. 2.
let both him and his Ordainers be degraded and quite cut off from the
communion of Saints, as Simon Magus was by Peter. Aquinas says; No man upon
any respect ought to receive Ordination by a Bishop, whom he knows to have
been Simoniacally promoted. And if he be ordained by him, he receives not
the Execution of his Order, although he wist not the Bishop to be a
Simoniacke, but has need of a dispensation: Yea, says another; He that is ae
Simoniack in Order, albeit he be a Bishop, none can dispense with him, no not
our Lord the Pope (vt ajunt) because such has a cracked Character, which being
notwithstanding indoleble, he cannot renounce, and so the sin cannot be
purged. (Although Gratian say, that the Pope may as well dispense with i^, as
with a Thief, though he restore not the theft.) So that the case of Simonie
in Ordination, may seem not much unlike the Popish Transubstantiation, which
stands upon such tickle points, ^ffs, and Ands, as if the That which so much
puzzled the Council of Trent, that at last this Canon was charged, Si quis
dixerit in Minist^is, dum sacramenta con^ficiunt, and conferunt, non requiri
intentionem saltem faciendi, quod facit Ecclesia. Anathema sit. If any shall say
that while the Ministers or Priests are about the consecrating of the
Sacr^ments it is not required that they have an intention at least of doing
that, which the Church does: (as much to say, as, Create their Creator or so)
Let him be an Anathema. Council. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 11.
intention of the Priest, just at the word of their consecration, be wanting,
or wandering some other way, as Baals Ghost was, while his prophets prayed unto
him; or if the Bishop, that gave that Priest Ordination, had not in the time
thereof a right intention; or if the Bishop, that consecrated that Bishop,
wanted in the very act a right intention, and so upwards; If (as they say) any
of these have failed, there is like to be no Creator created of the Creature,
no Transubstantiation. So in Simonie: If a man obtain a Bishopric by
Simonie, he receives not the power of the execution of his Order, and
consequently he can confer no power upon any whom he shall ordain,
because, Nihil Dat, quod non habet. And being so, it should follow, that all
the Ministry ordained by him, and so successively downward becomes a mere
nullitie. Whereupon Gregory in the Gloss says: Can a man receive Orders of
him, whom he knows to be Simoniacally promoted to his Bishopric? Dico,
quod non. Yea, although he knew it not: and by receiving Orders of him, he
receives not withal the Execution, since the Ordinator has none himself. And
a man (says he) ought rather to suffer Excommunication, then receive
Ordination of such a one. If it be so, then what a flaw and breach does
Simonie make in a Ministry? Yet Pope Urban does somewhat mitigate the matter.
Si qui, etc. If any be ordained of Simoniackes not Greg. de Sim. tit. 3* l. 5.
Simoniacally, and can prove, that when they were ordained, they knew not their
Ordeiners to be Simoniackes in Order; and that at that time, the Ordinations
of such were holden in the Church for Canonical, we mercifully bear with
them, so as they live worthily. But they that wittingly suffer themselves to
be consecrated (or rather execrated) of Simoniackes, we adiudge their
Consecration to be altogether void. So he. Also Nic. Junior and Alex. 2. De
caetero Statuimus, etc. We do further enact, that if any hence forward shall
suffer himself to be consecrated of him, whom he doubts not to be a
Simoniacke (in Order) both the Consecrater, and the Consecrated shall undergo
like damnation, and both of them being deposed, let them repent and do
penance, and so remain deprived of their proper dignity. And again, Erga
Simoniacos, etc. Toward Simoniackes we have decreed, that no mercy be
extended for the retaining of their Dignity, but according to Canonical
Sanctions and Decrees of Holy Fathers, We do by Apostolic Authority
adiudge them to be altogether condemned and deposed. What terrible thunder
claps be here. Now if the case be so, as the Disciples said about Divorce,
Then it is not good to Marry: So some man might say, Then it is not good to be
a Minister. Matthew. 19.10.
But as our Lord said upon another purpose in the s^id Chapter ( Matthew. 19.)
when his Disciples said, Who then can be saved? He answe^ed, With men it is
impossible, but with God all things are possible. But every one shall bear his
own burden. I will conclude with the Conclusion of the second Canon of the
Council of Calcedon: Council. Chal. c. 4.
Si quis, etc. If any should mediate by any filthy and wicked giving or
receiving, if he be a Clerk, Let him be degraded: If a Layicke, anathematized.
Also the second Council of Orleance, Can. 4. Si quis Sacerdotium, etc. Council.
Aurel. c. 4
If any shall through execrable ambition, by money-market seek the Priesthood,
Let him be a reprobate castaway; because the sentence of the Apostle
teaches, That the gift of God ought not to be obtained by the balance of
Money. Not a Council almost, Extrana. com. l. 3
but has a Thunderbolt against this sin. Mediatores etiam Simoniae eadem
censura Ligantur; qui a solo Papa absoluentur: Paulus venetus. p. 2.
The Mediators also of Simonie are liable to the same censure, and they cannot
be absolved, but only of the Pope. A most inexpiable and heinous sin, I
wisse which only the Pope can absolve. We will shut up this, with that which
is fathered upon Saint Augustine, Ser. 37. ad Fratres in Eremo (though those
Sermons be confessed ^o be none of his) Qui Sacramentum emit vel Ecclesiam, vel
Prebendas, vel Ecclesiarum introitus, vel seculari protentia hoc pro se
procurarit, sciat quod cum Gehezi and Iud^ iam condemnatus est, iam Leprosus
factus, iam de Templo Domini expellendu^ est. He that buyeth the Sacrament, or
a Church, or a Prebend, or his admission into the Church, or has procured this
for himself by secular power; let him know, that with Gehezi and Judas he is
already condemned, now become a Leper, and now to be expelled out of the
Lords Temple.

And if we should go about to collect the Exemplary pun^shments inflicted by
divine hand upon Simoniacall offenders, it would fill a whole Volume; yea, if
we could only observe many of the judgments of God, which have remarkeably
fallen upon Sacrilegious Usurpers and Simoniacall Traders, even in this our
Church, how, not only Tithes improperly detained, but Patronages purchased, are
posted off from man to man as God's Ark among the Philistines (for what can rest
out of the proper place?) from City to City, bringing a plague with it,
whithersoeuer it come: How many Patrons have been driven to sell away their
own Inheritance for abusing Gods Inheritance, and taking to themselves the
houses of God in possession; Psalm. 83.12.
How many Ecclesiastical Chapmen of all degrees live and die beggars, leaving
their beggarly families and friends behind them, themselves cut off by untimely
death, before they could recover their Simoniacall debts, to consider those
many examples, no marvel if some have been of the mind to take the palnes,
to make a Collection of them throughout the Land, and so compile them into one
book, which would be a worthy work. And as the plague ceased not among the
Philistims, until the Lord's Ark was sent back (and that not empti^, even by
the advice of their own Priests and Soothsayers, but with a Sinne-offering)
unto Bethshemesh: So never let any Simoniacal or Sacrilegious detayning Pa^^on
expect immunitie and freedom from Plagues and punishments, until the Lords
Tithes belonging to the Lord's Ark his Church, be without any Simoniacall
contract freely and faithfully rend^ed unto the Church, and that with a
sinne-offering of repentance and restitution, they be brought home to (...)
Solis domus. Et Christi E^c^e^^a est domus Christi, qui est Sol ^ustitiae. Mal.
4.2.
Bethshemesh, to the house of the Sun of Righteousness, to the Church of
Jesus Christ.

But to leave the common examples of Divine revenge in this kind to some
others diligent collection, and in the mean time to the sad consideration of
those that feel them, and to the rest, that may as justly fear them: (for God
is no respect^r of persons) and it is the Apostles admonition immediately
inferred upon his exhortation to the paying of Tithes, Gal. 6.7. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap^;
suffice it to keep within the V^rg^ of Scr^pture examples. Wherein, when I
shall name Sacrilege for Simonie, let no man marvel, or impute impertinencie
to this Discourse; since all Simoniaci dicuntur sacrilegi, Can. 1. q 1 p. 1.
Sunt quidem Gloss.
Simonie is a kind of sacrilege, and they are so inuolued one within another,
as they may easily be taken one for another, yet without any great mistaking,
at least in those examples, which I shall allege. And so it shall not be
improper to begin with the example of Cain (whom Saint Ambrose ranketh among
such sacrilegious persons) who because he offered sparingly, Ambros. de
Paradiso, cap. 14.
de fructu, of the fruit, not fruit^ in the plural, as Abel offered, de
primoge^itis, of the firstlings: Secondly, contemptuously, of the meanest,
opposite to Abels fatlings. Thirdly, with an auerse or impious mind: for Cain
brought, not Cain ipse, as it is said of Abel, Abel ipse, Abel himself
brought, that is, with all his heart; for animus cuinsque* is est quisque; A
man's soul is himself: Fourthly, proudly, as scorning himself to carry his
Offering, therefore Cain ipse, is not expressed (as the learned note) as Abel
ipse attulit: For this (I say) for offering sparingly, contemptuously,
impiously, proudly, Cain was rejected, the Lord had no respect to him, and his
offering. So that this impious mind of his toward God, begetting other
sins, did quite cast him out from the presence of Gods grace and favor, the
greatest punishment in the world, as he himself confessed and complained of.
Gehezi and his whole posterity, how fearfully were they branded with an
hereditarie leprosy, for the fathers only sin of selling his Masters gift of
healing. A stupendous example, and the more, if we do but weigh the
circumstances. For Gehezi received his two talents of Naaman only after the
cure, and not by any pre-contract, or fore-condition: also he was not so
covetous, as to take or demand All, that Naaman brought to present his Master
withal; yea, more was forced upon him, then he required. Again, Naaman was a
Syrian, a stranger, one whom perhaps he should never fee more, and one rich
enough to spare such a small reward, as Gehezi thought he might as well take,
as let him go away free: Behold (says he to himself) my Master has spared
this Aramite Naaman: as the Lord lives, I will run after him, and take
something of him. But indeed he lied to Naaman, and returning lied again to
his Master (and perhaps he would have most courageously taken the Oath of
Simonie upon it: For the sin of Simonie never goes alone) yet his taking, it
was, that was expressly objected unto him, and for which he was smitten with an
inexpiable leprosy, that smitted and smote his whole Race. Now, if so direful
were his doom, but for so doing: what shall become of all those Patrons, who
stand not upon a bare promise or intimation of gratuitie, but make their
bargain sure upon the Nail, or upon the Seal; as Judas would not sell and
betray Christ, before he saw and felt the money: that take all that comme^h,
and more too, if they can compass it, and suffer their servants also to make
their best advantage, so it be not to their own hindrance? That respect not
whether the Chapman be rich or poor, Syrian or Christian, good or bad, All is
fish that comes to his Net? Or this example of Gehezi may terrify all such
servants of the Prophet, or of any Patron, who, howsoever their Master make a
conscience of receiving ought at the hands of Ministers, yet these, forsooth,
must have a feeling in the business, else it shall go but slowly forward. To
omit Achans example, as being only sacrilegious, not Simoniacall, but his
punishment was fearful. What a general judgment of dearth was upon all the
Land of the Jews, for only defrauding God of his Tithes? And is not selling a
Benefice, or Ecclesiastical preferment equivalent to sacrilegious detayning of
Tithes, and so a defrauding of God? For it is a snare to devour that which is
sanctified, Pro. 20.25. Mal. 3.
and after the vows to enquire. Ye^ are cursed with a curse, even this whole
Nation. Why? Ye have spoiled me, says the Lord. Wherein? In Tithes and
Offerings: therefore I have cursed your blessings. O fearful curse! But bring
ye all the Tithes into the storehouse: Mark, all the Tithes; abate none,
either by way of Fine, or of Rent, either by manual payment in gross, or by
annual deduction. Else the curse will not away. Yea I will curse your
blessings, says God. What is this to us? Surely when I consider, how like
Tantalus we are perplexed amidst prosperity, how pinched in the midst of
plenty; How our Farmers (the staffes of State) never complained more of want
and penury, then now, when their Barnes be most full, and their Fields most
fruitful; Yea more, when in such abundance of that celestial Bread, that
bread of Life, the blessed Word of God, yet the souls of men in general are
so hunger-starued, so ill thriuen, like Pharaohs lean Kine; when in such
plenty of preaching and teaching I see so little, little or no practice: May
we not see, and may we not say, that this curse is befallen Us, I have cursed
your blessings? What might be the cause? Is there any other cause, but one? No
other cause, but one, can we read of, for which, the Lord says, I have
cursed your blessings; or, I have cursed you with a curse. If Sacrilege and
Simonie on all sides may be the cause: Has not God cause enough to deal thus
with us? The Lord amend us, that so he may both lighten his heavy hand upon
us, which we cannot but feel for the present, and stay his heaued-vp hand,
which we cannot but see threatening us with greater judgments (if greater
judgments can be, then the cursing of our blessings) except we repent. And
repent we do not, unless we obey the Lords voice, who says there, Bring
ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house
and prove me now herewith, says the Lord, if I will not open the windows of
Heaven, and power you out a blessing without measure. A Blessing without a
Cursing. This the good King Hezechias and his whole Kingdom proved, when upon
the bringing in of al their Tithes and Offerings faithfully, they found such
abundance, 2. Chron. 13.10.
as Hezechias maruailed at the heaps: And Azarias the Priest answered him,
that since the People brought their Tithes and Offerings, the Lord has blessed
his people, and this abundance is left. What should I here insert Baltasars
profane drinking in the sacred Bowls, who in the midst of his jollitie saw
that fearful handwriting upon the wall? Dan. 5. And shall our Sacrilegists,
or Simonists so securely carowse not only in sacred bowls, but even the blood
of men's souls, by either their Sacrilegious detayning in gross, or their
Simoniacall purloyning by peece-meale the maintenance of the Ministry, which
God has ordained for the salvation of the souls of his people?

Come we to the examples of the New Testament. With what a divine zeal and
fiery indignation was that meek Lamb of God inflamed, when he whipped those
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, calling them Thieves, and cutting them
off from partaking with his Temple? For as Nazianzen says: Quos Christus
eiecit de Templo, nunqu^m Spiritus Christi sibi faciet Templ^^. Those whom
Christ cast out of the Temple the Spirit of Christ will never make his Temple;
as being destitute and void of the grace of the holy Ghost. As Saint Jerome
says: In Simoniacis nulla spiritualis gratia operatur: In Simonists no
spiritual grace has any operation. Non enim operatur Spiritus Sanctus
spiritualiter in perfidis morcimonijs a^aritiae: For the holy Spirit does not
spiritually work in the perfidious merchandise of covetousness. And
Innocentius has a sentence no less fearful: Can. 1. p. 2. q. 1.
Simoniaci etsi fidem tenere videantur, infidelitatis tamen perditioni
subijciuntur: Simoniacks, although they seem to be of the true Faith, yet they
lie under the perdition of Infidelity. And Saint Ambrose: Simoniaci
integritatem, Ambr. lib. 1. de Poenit ad Nouat.
and conscientiam puram fidei non habent: Simonists have not the integrity,
and pure conscience of Faith.

What shall I speak of Ananias and Saphira? How scarfully and dreadfully were
they struck, Act. 5.
for detayning part of that, which they had dedicated and devoted to God, and
to his Congregation, yea to the maintenance of the Apostles? (...). 8.
And what should I speak of Simons curse, exemplarie indeed, but such as
rather the Conscience, then the Sense apprehends, as being rather spiritual,
then temporal; and yet both: For such Ecclesiastical Chapmen pull upon
themselves an universal curse, upon their souls, by a deprivation even of
common grace, and ministerial abilities: upon their bodies and goods, by a
diminution of strength and stay, health and wealth, life and liuelihood;
nothing thriueth with them, all contained in this, Thy money perish with thee,
Thou have (...), neither part, nor lot in this matter. A Simonist is no
Min^ster, by Saint Peter's Doctrine.

And if we add hereunto the example of Heliadorus in the third Chapter of the
second of Macchabees, let none blame it, because it is Apocryphal. For as
Saint Jerome instructing the Lady Le^a about the education of her daughter
Paula, Hieron. Epist. 7. ^ Let^m.
says, Caveat omnia Apocrypha, quae non ad dogmatum veritatem, sed ad signorum
re^erentiam legate: Let her beware of all Apocryphal books, which yet she may
read, not for truth of Doctrines, but for the reverence of the examples in the
story: So of the truth of this example, let no man doubt. Saint Ambrose also
mentions it upon the like occasion. This Heliodorus being sent by King
Soleucus to rob the Temple, when no humble entreaties of the Priests and
people would dissuade him from his impious enterprise, he was miraculously
assaulted by a man on horseback in gilt armor; yea moreover, he was fiercely
set upon, whipped, and scourged by two (in show) young men; So that with much
difficulty recovering from a deadly stound, and at the Priests prayers
escaping with his life, He returns home with this answer to his King, that if
the King had any Enemies or Traitors, whom he would have well punished, he
should but send them thither where he had been. Josephus reports, Joseph. de
bello Iud. lib. 2. cap. 6.
how Marcus Crassus having spoiled the Temple at Jerusalem of all that mass
of treasure, which pious Pompey had forborne once to touch, was therefore
himself and his whole Army utterly overthrown at the passage of Euphrates.
And in his sixth book of the same, and sixteenth Chapter, he shows in the
example of John, one of the Seditions, that sacrilege committed by him in
robbing the Temple of the Priests maintenance, was one of those forerunning
sins, which hastened the final and fatal ruin of the holy City. I might
add to these, many examples in profane stories, religiously observed of
Heathens themselves, inflicted by Divine revenge upon their sacrilegious
persons. But Esop may serve to sum them all up in his Apologue of the Eagle,
which snatching away the Sacrifice from off the Altar, catched withal a coal,
which, carried with the Sacrifice to her Nest, set both her Nest and self on
fire. The moral applies it self. And I pray God all sacrilegious Simonists
may so apply it, and lay it to their hearts, that they may prevent hell fire
prepared for the Devil, and his angels, for Simon and all his Angels.

Now all th^se exemplarie punishments and judgments that we may prevent in
our selves, let us hearken to that which Saint Augustine says: Aug. de Tempor^
ser. 219.
Decima tributa sunt egentium animaru^. Quod si Decimam dederis (he says not,
Si vendideris) non solum abundantiam fructuum recipies, sed etiam sanitatem
corporis and animae consequeris. Non igitur Dominus Deus pramium postulat, sed
honorem. Deus enim noster, qui dignatus est totum dare, Decimam a nobis
dignatus est recipere, non sibi, sed nobis sine dubio profuturam. Sed si
tardius dare peccatum est, quanto magis peius est peccatum non dedisse? De
militia, de negot^o, and de artificio redd^ Decimas. Cum enim Decimas dando,
and terrena, and coelestia possis praemia promereri: quare pro auaritia duplice
benedictione fraudaris? Haec est enim Dei iustissima consuetudo, vt si tu ills
Decimam non dederis, tu ad Decimam reuoceris: dabis impio militi, quod non vis
dare Sacerdoti. Benefacere Deus semper paratus est, sed hominum malitis
prohibetur. Decimae enim ex debito requiruntur, and qui eas dare noluerint, res
alienas inuadunt. Et quot pauperes in loci^ suis, vbi ipse habitat, illo
Decimas non dante, same mortui fuerint, tot homicidiorum reus ante aeternum
Iudicis Tribunal apparebit, quia rem a Deo pauperibus delegatam suis vsibus
reseruauit. Qui igitur sibi, aut pramium comparare, aut peccatorum desiderat
indulgentiam promereri, reddat Decimam; etiam de nouem partibus studeat
eleemozynam dare pauperibus. Tithes (says he) are the tributes of poor
souls: If thou give thy Tithe (he says not, if thou sellest it) thou shall
not only receive abundance of fruits, but also shall obtain health of body
and soul. Nor does the Lord God require a reward, but honor. For our God who
has vouchsafed to give us the whole, has also vouchsafed to receive of us a
Tenth, not for his own profit, but without question for ours. But if it be a
sin to give slowly, how much more grievous a sin is it not to give at all,
or not to give all the Tithes of thy warfare, of thy trade, of thy craft. For
when as thou may by paying thy Tithes obtain both earthly and heavenly
rewards, why art thou defrauded of this double blessing through thy
covetousness? For this is a most just and common Law with God, that if thou
bring not thy Tenths, thou should be brought to a Tenth; thou shall give
to the impious Soldier, that which thou will not give to the Priest. God is
always ready to bless, but he is hindered by the malice of men. For Tithes
are required of du^: and they who will not pay them, do invade others goods.
And look how many poor souls in that Parish, where he dwells that pays
not his Tithes, shall perish for hunger, of so many murders shall be stand
guilty, before the Tribunal of the eternal Judge: because that which God
has allotted for the poor, he has reserved to his own uses. He therefore
who desires either to purchase to himself a reward, or to procure the pardon
of his sins, let him pay his Tithes: Also let him not be negligent to give
alms of the Nine parts to the poor. Thus this holy Father.

Now for a Corollarie or Conclusion of this point touching the Censures of
sacrilegious Simonists, I will make a brief relation of those observations
which Rebuffus has collected in his last question of his Tract of Tithes. I
omit to set down his Authors quoted by him, referring that to the Reader at
his pleasure, or leisure. He that pays not his Tithes, but either sells
them or detayneth any part of them, he fights against God. Secondly, He
shall be always poor. In times past when four kinds of Tithes were duly
paid, men grew rich; Now when one is not well paid, men are brought to a Tenth,
And the Lord does not remove their plagues. Thirdly, They are cursed of God
with penury, with pestilence, with sudden death, and with a perishing name.
Fourthly, They shall want necessaries, that deny God their duties. Fifthly,
They are the heirs of eternal death. Sixthly, They shall be subject to bodily
infirmities and diseases. Seventhly, They shall be associated with the Devils,
which (as some say) are the Tenth part of the Angels. Eighthly, He that will
not give his due to God, shall give that to the profane Soldier, which he will
not give to the Priest. Ninthly, Such is a Thief, and infamous person.
Tenthly, Such shall be guilty before Gods Tribunal, of murdering so many
poor souls, as have perished for want of not paying the Minister maintenance.
Eleuenthly, Such are sacrilegious persons, and consequently liable to eternal
damnation, and ought every Lords day to be denounced by the Minister,
excommunicate. Twelfthly, defrauders of Tithes ought to want Christian burial.
Thirteen, If such cannot be compelled by Ecclesiastical Censures, the
Secular sword is to be implored. Fourteen, He that owes his Tithes, cannot
deny them upon pretext of any debt due unto Him; because Tithes admit no such
compensation, nor any appeal. In a word, all Detayners or Defrauders of
Tithes, in what manner soever, whether it be Sacrilegious, Andr. Hisp. in
regula plu Dec.
or Ser^oniacall, are the sons of perdition, notwithstanding any custom,
usurpation, or violent occupation; They are in the state of damnation, and all
that partake with them, either by counsel, aid, consent, or defense, directly
or indirectly; They are all of them thieves, and robbers of Gods goods, Pillars
and Pollers of the Saints, Church-robbers, and excommunicate persons, excluded
from the benefit of Prayer, remission of sins, and all benefit of the Church:
and without restitution before death, no receiving of the Sacrament, no
Confession of sins, no absolution of the Priest, will do them any good: But
with Judas they are traitors and robbers of Gods treasure. They are Infidels,
and ungracious ungrateful persons, and shall be eternally damned in hell. And
as the Philistines were punished with Mico and Locusts, with Emrods and manifold
miseries, so long as they detayned the Lord's Ark: So shall the Defrauders of
Tithes be continually exercised with punishments, and wax old in miseries,
until they make a full restitution. For such are well worthy to be smitten
with Divine revenge, to be punished with Gods own iudgeing hands, as either to
be punished with wicked children, or to die a sudden death, or to be slain,
or to have their house and goods consumed with fire from heaven. Such is the
reward of sacrilegious Simonie, or simoniacall Sacrilege. But he that shall
use no fraud or couen in his Tithes, shall be rewarded of God with eternal
life, which the Father, Son, and holy Ghost vouchsafe to grant unto us. Amen.
So he. Whence we may observe how detestable the sin of Sacrilege and
Simonie is; although otherwise, I do not approve of every particular passage
cited by my Author, as some of them smelling of the Romish Caske. But let it
suffice to make such sins the more odious to all lovers of the Truth.

CHAP. XV.
Of the miserable fruits and effects of Simonie.

THe effects and fruits of Simonie are no less miserable, then the Censures
are grievous, and the punishments thereof intolerable. For as Simon is the
Father of all Simonists: So Simonie is the Mother of all Mischiefs in the
Church. For Simonie does usually poison and corrupt two Well-heads, whence the
streams of good life do generally flow unto all the people; that is, the
Parson, and the Patron. These be, as the two great Lights in the Firmament of
the Church, from whom the sublunary and subordinate people receive the
direction and conduct of their life.

Now for the Parson or Minister, he is the Salt of the earth, the Light of the
world, the Guide of the simple. But whom Simonie makes unsavory, darkneth,
blinds: Wherefore as Saint Chrysostom says, When the Candle is
extinguished, when the Pilot is drowned, when the Chrysostom. in Matt. ca. 6. Hom.
21.
Captain is captiued, what remains for the remnant? Let no man despise thy
youth, said the Apostle to Timothy. Why? Because nothing does more impeach and
disadvantage a Ministers labors, and frustrate all the fruit of his calling,
then contempt justly contracted upon his person. And nothing makes him more
contemptible, then Simonie. And what so captiuates their spiritual Captains,
what makes them so mute in Gods cause? what does so euirate their masculine
profession, that they dare not do their duty, when necessity commands it? If
not Simonie? For as Saint Cyril says, A good Pastor, entering into the Fold,
Cyril. in Job. li 7. ca. 1. per Job. Clicht.
by the Authority of the Holy Ghost, as of the Porter, the Sheep hear his
voice, and willingly obey him, as knowing and acknowledging the goodness and
integrity of their Shepherd: But when they find that their Pastor came not
in by the door, but climbed up another way: Neither do they so much esteem
of his exhortations to virtue, nor so readily obey his precepts, because his
violent intrusion into the Sheepefold diminishes much of his Reverence and
Dignity, and causes them less to love him, and more lightly to set by him.
So he. And Gregory, Epist. 113. Ad Brunichildam: Hinc igitur agitur, vt
Sacerdotij dignitas in despectu, and Sanctus sit honor in crimine. Perit vtique
reuerentia, ad^mitur disciplina; quia qui culpas debuit em^ndare, committit:
and nefaria ambitione honorabilis Sacerdotij ducitur in deprauatione censura.
Nam quis denuo veneretur, quod venditur? aut quis non vile putet esse, quod
emitur? So that Simonie is as the dead Fly corrupting the box of ointment: it
marreth not only the good nature, but the good name of a Minister, which
should be as a precious ointment powered forth, perfuming the whole house of
God, and causing others to Post te Curremus inodorem vnguenterum t^^rum. Cant.
1.3. vulg. Ambro. de dignitat. Sacerd. cap. 5.
run after the sweet smell of it. Saint Ambrose compares the Minister to the
head, saying, Sicut validioribus morbis capite vitiato, reliquum necesse est
corpus inundatione superioris morbi let aliter irrigari: ita and ij, qui caput
videntur Ecclesiae, morb^ pestifero frateruum vitiant corpus, vt nihil ex
totius corporis compage insanciatum possit euadere, quod negligentium
Sacerdotum vitiositatis mortale infecerit virus, ita vt videas in Ecclesia
passim, quos non merita, sed pecuniae ad Episcopatus Ordinem prouexerunt:
nugacem populum and indoctum, qui talem sibi asciuerunt Sacerdotem: quos si
percontari fideliter velis, quis eos praefecerit Sacerdotes, respondent mex,
and dicunt, ab Archiepiscope sum nuper Episcopus ordinatus: He says not, Mill
libras, or Duo vel tria librarum millia.
centumque ei solidos dedi, vt Episcopa^em gratiam consequi meruissem: quos si
minime dedissem, hodie Episcopus non essem. Vnde mihi melius est aurum de
saccello inuehere, quam tantum Sacerdotium perdere. Aurum dedi, and Episcopatum
comparaui. Quos tamen solidos, si vino, recepturum me illico non diffido.
Ordino Presbyteros, consecro Diaconos, and accipio aurum. Nam and de alijs
nihilominus Ordinibus pecuniae quaestum profligare confido. Ecce and aurum,
quod dedi in meo saccello recepi and Episcopatum gratis accepi. Et nescij
homines and indocti in Ordinationibus eorum clamant and dicunt, Dignus es, and
iustus es: and conscientia misera, Indignus es, and iniustus es, dicit.
Pronunciat enim Episcopus huiusmodi ad p^pulum, dic^^s: Pax vobis* Oculis
quidem carnalibus videtur quasi Episcopus magnus, and diuin^s obt^tibus,
inspicitur lepresus magnus. Per pecuniam acquisiuit indebitum Ordinem, and,
Deum perdidit in interiore homine. Caro suscepit dignitatem, and anima perdidit
honestatem. Caro ancilla Domina facta est animae; and anima, quae erat Domina,
facta est famula carni. Caro dominatur populis, and anima seruit Daemoni. Carni
Sacerdotium comparauit, and animae detrimentum parauit. Quod dedit, cum
ordinaretur, aurum fuit: and quod perdidit, anima fuit. Cum alium Ordinaret,
quod accepit, pecunia fuit, and quod dedit, lepra fuit. Haec sunt mercimonia
iniquorum, in pernitiem little. And the same holy Father, in his sixth Chapter of
the same Book, prosecutes this argument thus: Ecce ad quae mala voluitur
Deificus Ordo! Ecce ad quae probra sunt prolapsi Sacerdotes, qui audire
meruerunt a Iudice Mundi, Vos estis sal terrae. Ergo si lux est Ecclesiae
Episcopus a Domino Ordinatus, ita vt imperitiae tenebras praedicationis suae
eloquio rutilante, conscientiarum latebras illuminet: cur ipse palpabilibus
tenebris tenetur obstrictus? Et non solum, quiae ipse, dum male agit, digne
perit, in super and alios secum indigne perdit. Si enim meruisti salis
possidere saporem, vt insipientium possis arua condire: cur infatuatus tali
vitio, immundis te porcorum conculcandum pedibus praebuisti, ita vt nec alios,
nec teipsum possis condire? Oculorum etiam in corpore officium, id est, in
Ecelesia, voluntarius appetisti, vt reliquum per te corpus ducatum lucis
haberet: and nunc quadam lippitudine, and caligine vitiorum obtenebratu^, nec
teipsum luci idoneum praebes, and alijs adimis lumen. De quibus oculis in
Euangelio dicitur: fi oculus tuus simplex fuerit, totum corpus tuum lucidum
erit: id est, si Episcopus, qui lumen promeruit praeesse in corpore,
simplicitate est Sancta, and innocentia decoratus, omnis Ecclesia splendore
luminis radiatur. Si autem oculus tuus nequam est, totum corpus tuum tenebrosum
est, id est, si Episcopus, qui videbatur corpori subdito lucem praebere,
obnubiletur nequitiae c^citate, quid caetera facient membra, quibus lux adempta
est oculorum? Id est, quid secularis factura est multitudo, cum voluptatibus
illicitis, and actionibus vetitis, ad similem facinorum voraginem Episcopus
multitudinem populi prouocauerit, vt nulli iam iamque illicitum esse videatur,
quod ab Episcopo quasi licitum perpetratur. Sed ipsum magis credunt homines
esse laudabile, quicquid Episcopus habuerit delectabile. Nec quisquam, quod
agere Pontifex non dubitat, se indubitanter agere dicat. Episcopus enim a
cunctis indubitanter vocaris, presertim cum ipso nomine censeris, si tamen
actio concordet nomini, and nomen se societ actioni. Nam quid aliud
interpretatur Episcopus, nisi superinspector? Maxim cum solio in Ecclesia
editiore resideat, and ita cunctos respiciat, vt and cunctorum oculi in ipsum
respiciant. Ergo quia ita est, cur te velut tetrum speculum vniuersorum oculis
demonstras, ita vt non possint obscuritate tua se comptius exornare? So this
holy Bishop. Quid referam plura? Si Rex Jeroboam, veris exclusis Leuitis, ex
intima plebe vnumquemque iuuenculam suam, and septem arietes secum afferentem,
sibi in Sacerdotem consecret: quid mirum si solus vniuersam gentem Israeliticam
fecerit peccatricem? Ecqu^ aut^m isti infimi plebei, ex faece populi in sacrum
Ordinem cooptat^? Nempe quos David viles appellat, quippe timore Domini
destitutos. Psalm. 15.
In tali igitur Sacerdotio Israelitico, si nemo inueniatur Sanctus ac probus,
si inter tot Reges ne vnus quidem faedissimae idololatriae, adeoque omnium
vitiorum lab^ non fuerit notatus: Ioh. 10.
quis iure miretur? Vt enim Totus componitur orbis Regis ad exemplum: sic
qualis Pastor, talis grex. In Sacerdotio Simoniae corruptela vitiato, frustra
quaeris pium probumque populum. Et si Simoniacus Sanctus esse possit, etiam
furi competet nomen sanctitatis. Qui enim non per ostium intrat, sed alia in
ouile scandit, fur est ac latro, inquit Pastor ille Magnus. Vnde Lyra: Atque
hoc faciunt omnes infideles, and etiam mali fideles (hoc est, qui fidem
profitentur) statum Praelatione indebite assequentes. Lyra. in Ioh. 10.
But (says he) he that enters in by the door, that is, by the faith and
humility of Christ, and by his other virtues, to him the Porter opens, that
is, the Holy Ghost reuealeth his truth, that he may feed his sheep: but the
thief comes not, but to kill. So Lyra. P. Damian l. 1. Epist ad Summ^s
Pontifices. Epist 9. ad Nicol. 2. To. Pontificem.
Damianus tells of a certain Simoniacall Bishop, who by no means could name
the holy Ghost; although he could name the Father, and the Son; but when he
came to name the holy Ghost, his tongue did stammer, and became stiff. Merito
enim, Spiritum Sanctum, dum emit, amisit: Vt qui exclusus erat ab anima, procul
etiam esset consequenter a lingua. Hac igitur difficultate conuictus,
Episcopale decarc^raeuit Officium, qui per Simoniacam haeresin ad Episcopatus
culmen irrepserat. For buying the Holy Ghost, he deservedly lost it; that it
being shut out of his soul, should be also far off from his tongue. So that
being by this impediment convicted, he abando^ed his Episcopal Function,
having cropped to that top of his Episcopalitie by Simoniacall heresy. So he.

Gratian also relates a saying of Greg. Epist. 114. Theodorico and Theoberto
Regibus Francorum.
Gregory to this purpose: Vulnerato Pastore, qui^ curandis ouibus adhibet
medicinam? Aut quomodo populum orationis clypeo tucatur, qui iaculis hostium
sese feriendum exponit? aut qualem fructum de se producturus est, cui graui
peste radix infecta est? Mayor ergo metuenda est locis illis calamitas, vbi
tales intercessores ad locum regimines adducuntur, qui Dei magis in se
iracundiam pr^uocant, quam per semetips^s placare debuerant. To this purpose
Bernard Ser. ad Pastores in Synodo.
Bernard says to such, Soli non potesti^ perire, qui praire debetis docendo
and operando. Mul^i sunt Catholici praedicando, qui Haeretici sunt operando.
Quod Haeretici faciunt per praua dogmata, hoc faciunt plures hodie per mala
exempla: Et tanto grauiores sunt Haereticis, quanto praeualent opera verbis. So
Bernard. Simoniaci autem haeretici sunt, in quibus quid impedit, quo minus omne
genus peccat^ dominetur. Cic. de Senect.
For as Senectus est omnis Morbus; So Simonia est omne malum. It is the Mare
Mortuum, wherein are buried, yea bred more then all the sins of Sodom, and
her confederate Cities. From whence come all those sins of Bribery in the
Commonwealth, but from this stinking lake? from whence, all that Sir ^. C.
Lay-Simonie in buying and selling all sort of Offices, great and small, of
public Justice, and private service, but from the authenticke precedent, yea
the spawne and sperme of Simonie? Thus the Virgin Dinah, the Virgin Church
being ravished, what follows, but that these two, Simeon and Leui, the
Simoniacall Patron and Parson, brethren in evil, will be the Instruments of
cruelty to destroy the whole City, or Parish where they dwell; and so make
the whole profession of true religion to stink in the nostrills even of the
enemies of the truth. These two being like the two maine pillars, whereon the
Judge. 16.26.
whole house leaned: if Simonie like Sampson shake these down, tell me how
the whole Parish cannot but perish with them? We have a memorable and deplored
example hereof in Herod and Caiphas, the one, the Patron selling, the other,
the Priest purchasing. For it is well observed by Ferus, Ferus in pass p. 2
that Annas and Caiphas did purchase to themselves the yearly vicissitude of
succession in the Office of the High Priest, which is noted by the Evangelist,
saying, That Caiphas was the High Priest for that year. So that Annas and
Caiphas, the father and son in law, had their yearly turns in the
Highpriests Office, yielding to Herod a yearly return for the same, to keep
his fingers in use and ure. Vnde facile conijci potest quam nihil pietatis
habuerint, multum autem arrogantiae and vanae gloriae: Whence it may easily be
coniectured, how little or no piety they had, and how much pride and
vainglory; says Ferus. And who so fit as these grand Simoniackes, to be the
betrayers and murderers of the Lord Jesus Christ? whereupon insued the fatal
ruin of that most ancient and renowned Church and Nation of the Jews. So when
the Lord had denounced that fat^ll and final destruction to Jerusalem, and
that Church; does he not immediately thereupon go into the Temple and purge it
from those profane Merchants? Intimating, that such like profanation of the
Church by buyers and sellers, should be one principal cause of the ruin
thereof, Luke 19.44.45. Gratian pars. 2. causa 1. Sicut Eunuchu^.
Saint Augustine reported, that the holy fire of the Sacrifice, which during
the seventy years captivity in Babylon lived under water, was extinguished,
when Antiochus sold the Priesthood to Jason. And what marvel then, if the fire
of godly zeal, and the very life and light of religion be in danger to be
wholly extinguished in that Church, where Simonie is predominant^? In Pope
Gregory the ninths time, a Grecian Archbishop elect, coming to Rome to be
confirmed, and not speeding without a large sum, thereupon returned, re
infecta, which gave the first occasion to the Greek Church to revolt and rent
it self from the Latin, as Matthew Paris says. But this by the way, to show
how odious, and how pernicious Simonie is.

Cyprian de Lapsis, says. Non in Sacerdotibus religio deuota, non in Ministris
fides integra, non in operibus misericordia, non in moribus disciplina.
Episcopi plurimi, quos and hortamento esse oportet cateris and exemplo, diuina
procuratione contempta. Procuratores rerum saecularium fieri, derelicta
Cathedra, plebe deserta, negotiationis quastuosa nundinas ancupari;
esurientibus in Ecclesia fratribus non subuenire, habere argentum largiter
velle, etc. Quid non perpeti tales pro peccatis eiusmodi mereremur? Adeo
traditam nobis diuinitus Disciplinam pax longa corrupit etc. And de ieiunio and
tent. 6. Simon Apostolorum temporibus vaenalem putans Spiritum Sanctum, Petrum
donis aggreditur, and tentat emere potestatem, per quam plura lucretur. Haec
sacrilegij forma per omnia Officia, gradusque discurrit, and nihil intentatum
ambitio praetermittit. Nec dubitet quisquam Diaboli esse negotia, and
nundinatores eius, quicunque haec exercent commercia nec quicquam hu^usmodi
abeo, nisi praemissa Apostasia, donari. So that Simonie and Apostacy go
together.

What should I speak here of the infinite and insupportable discouragements,
which both learning and honesty jointly suffer by reason of Simonie? when as
an honest Scholar sees before his eyes, an impossibility of coming to any
place in the Church, his honesty being in this respect so lame, as it cannot
stir either hand or foot to climb, or clamber to any such place by bypath.

That reverend and learned Bishop Jewel, in one of his Sermons before the late
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory: Sermon. in Psalm. 69.9. The zeal of thy house
has eaten me up.
among many other excellent observations to the like purpose, says thus: Loath
I am to speak, quoth he, yet the case so requires. Maintenance of Learning,
whereby an able and sufficient Ministry may grow and be established in all the
Churches of this Realm, is to be wished for. The good estate of this noble
Kingdom, the comfort of posterity, the stay of religion, the continuing of
the Gospel, the removing of darkness, hangs upon it. One asked sometimes
how it was, that in Athens, so goodly and great a City, there were no
Physicians. To whom this answer was made, because there are no rewards
appointed for them that practice physic. The same answer may be made for our
times; the cause why the Church of God is so forsaken, is the want of zeal to
them, that should either for their courtesy, or for their ability, be
fosterers of learning, and increase the livings, where occasion is, and give
hope and comfort to learned men. What said I? Increase? Nay the livings and
provision, which heretofore were given to this use, are taken away. Have
patience, if any such be here (as I well know there are) whom these things
touch. Suffer me to speak the truth, it is Gods cause. The livings of such, as
are in the Ministry, are not in their hands, to whom they are due. All other
Laborers and Artificers have their hyer increased double as much, as it was
wont to be: only the poor man that labors and sweateth in the Vineyard of
the Lord of hosts, has his hire abridged and abated. I speak not of the
Curates, but of the Parsonages and Vicarages, that is of the places, which are
the Castles and Towers of fence for the Lords Temple. They seldom pass now
adays from the Patron, if he be no better then a Gentleman, but either for
the Lease, or for present money. Such Merchants are broken into the Church of
God, a great deal more intolerable, then were they, whom Christ whipped and
chased out of the Temple. Thus they that should be careful for Gods Church,
that should be Patrons to provide for the consciences of the people, and to
place among them a learned Minister, who might be able to preach the Word unto
them out of season, and in season, and to fulfill his Ministry, seek their
own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's. They serve not Jesus Christ, but
their belly. And this is done not in one place, or in one Country, but
throughout England. A Gentleman cannot keep his house, unless he have a
Parsonage or two in farm for his provision.

O merciful God, whereto will this grow at last? If the misery, which this
plague works, would reach but to one age, it were the more tolerable. But it
will be a plague to the posterity, it will be the decay and desolation of Gods
Church. Young men, which are toward, and learned, se^ this. They see, that he
which feeds the flock, has least part of the milk: he which goes a
warfare, has not half his wages. Therefore they are weary and discouraged,
they change their studies, some become Prentises, some turn to Physic, some
to Law: all shun and flee the Ministry. And besides the hinderance that thus
grows by wicked dealing of Patrons, by reason of the Impropriations, the
Vicarages in many places, and in the properest Market towns, are so simple,
that no man can live upon them, and therefore no man will take them. They were
wont to say, Beneficia sine Cura, Benefices without charge: but now may be
said, Cura sine Beneficio, Charge or Cure without Benefice. Thus and much more
to this purpose said that peerlesse Jewel. And he concludes with a grave
Exhortation to her Majesty, as follows: O that your Grace did behold the
miserable disorder of Gods Church, or that you might foresee the calamities,
which will follow. It is a part of your Kingdom and such a part, as is the
principal prop and stay of the rest. I will say to your Majesty, as Cyrillus
sometimes said to the godly Emperors, Theodosius, and Valentinian, Ab ea, quae
erga Deum est, Epist. ad Theod.
pietate, reipub. vestrae status pendet: The good estate and welfare of your
Commonweal hangs upon true godliness. You are our Governor, you are the
Nurse of Gods Church. We must open this grief before you. God knows if it
may be redressed, it is run so far. But if it may be redressed, there is
no other besides your Highness, that can redress it. I hope I speak truly,
that which I speak without flattery, that God has endued your Grace with
such measure of learning and knowledge, as no other Christian Prince. He has
given you peace, happiness, the love, and the hearts of your Subjects. Oh,
turn and employ these to the glory of God: that God may confirm in your
Grace the thing, which he has begun. To this end has God placed Kings and
Princes in their state, as David says, that they serve the Lord, that they may
see, and cause others to see to the furniture of the Church. The good Emperor
Justinian cared for this as much, as for his life. Constantine, Theodosius, and
Valentinian, and other godly Princes, called themselves Vassallos, the Subjects
and Bond-seruants of God. They remembered that God furnished them in their
houses, and were not unmindful to furnish his House.

To this purpose also a grave and learned now Prelate of this Church in his
sermon at Paul's Cross, thus said: We that are bred up in learning, Ioh.
Howson. 4. Nouemb. 1597. Related by Democritus ^unior in his books of the
causes of Melancholy p. 177.
and destinated by our Parents to this end. We suffer our childhood in the
Grammar School, which Augustine calls, Magnam tyrannidem, and grave malum, and
compares it to the torments of Martyrdom; when we come to the University, if
we live of the College allowance* as Phalaris objected to the Leontines,
(...), needy of all things, but hunger and fear; or if we be maintained but
partly by our Parents cost, do expend in University maintenance, books and
degrees, before we come to any perfection, five hundred pounds, or a thousand
marks; if by this price of the expense of our time, our bodies and spirits,
our substance and patrimonies, we cannot purchase those small rewards, which
are ours by Law, and the right of inheritance, a poor Parsonage or a Vicarage
of fifty pounds, per annum, but we must pay to the Patron for the lease of a
life (a spent and out-worne life) either in annual pension, or above the rate
of a Copyhold, and that with the hazard and loss of our souls, by Simonie
and Perjury, and the forfeiture of all our spiritual preferment in esse and
posse, both present and to come: What father after awhile will be so
improuident, to bring up his son, to his great charge, to this necessary
beggerie? What Christian will be so irreligious, to bring up his son in that
course of life, which by all probability and necessity, Cogit ad turpia,
enforcing to sin, will entangle him in Simonie and Perjury? whereas the Poet
says, Inuitatus ad haec aliquis de ponte negabit; A beggars brat taken from
the bridge, where he fits a begging, if he knew the inconvenience, had cause
to refuse it. So he. Let me conclude it with the words of our Democritus: This
being thus, says he, have we not fished fair all this while, that are
initiated Divines to find no better fruits of our labor? Hoc est cur palles?
Pers. Sat. 3.
cur quis non prandeat, hoc est? Do we macerate our selves for this? If this
be all the respect, reward, and honor we shall have, Martial.
Frange leaves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos; Let us give over our books,
and betake our selves to some other course of life. To what end shall we
study? Quid me literulas stulti docuere parents? What did our parents mean,
to make us Scholars? to be as far to seek for preferment, after twenty
years study, as we were at first? Why do we take such pains? Quid tantum
insanis iuvat impallescere chartis? So he. Honos alit Arts, Honor and reward
is the maintayner of Arts. But the Ministry is the Art of Arts. And that
which God and Man has appointed for the maintenance of the Ministry, shall
we call it the reward of a Minister? Alas: God help us, if this were our
reward, which at the most has no correspondency to the work of a Minister.
For if we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter ^f we
reap your carnal things? yea, Non magnum, sed minimum, says Anselme, A very
small matter. But shall the work of our Ministry so infinitely exceed that,
which in no proportion can be reputed a reward: and yet can we not have this
poor recompense of our labor, though not of our function, to sustain our
poor bodies and studies, but we must pay as dear for it, as he that never saw
School may pay for this, or any temporal commodity? If so, then frange leaves
calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos. Away with learning, and consequently away
with the Ministry, yea farewell all good Ministers. For every Minister should
be an honest man, and no honest man will be a corrupt Minister: and
consequently, no honest Minister will be a Simonist: and does not Simonie tend
then to the utter abolition of the Ministry? And what other Ministry can be
expected in a Church, where Simonie reigns, then such as was under Jeroboam?
to whom Abiah King of Judah said, Have ye not driven away the Priests of the
Lord, 2. Chron. 13.9.
the sons of Aaron and the Levites, and have made you Priests like the people
of other Countries? whosoever comes to consecrate with a young Bullock and
seven Rams, the same may be a Priest. So Simonie drives away all good men,
and admits into the Church those that be corrupt, of the basest of the
people. Master Perkins that Reverend man of God alleges this, as one of the
maine reasons of the rareness and scarsitie of good Ministers, namely, want of
maintenance and preferment for men that labor in this Calling. And what
difference is there (I pray you) between want of maintenance or preferment,
and the buying and purchasing of them? For so, preferment becomes a recompense
of my money, not of my Ministry. I will relate the words of that good man.
Men (says he) are flesh and blood, and in that respect must he allured and
won to embrace this Vocation, Perkins.
by some Arguments which may persuade flesh and blood. The world has in all
ages been negligent therein, and therefore God in his Law, took such strict
order for the maintenance of the Levites: but especially now under the Gospel,
this Calling is unprovided for, when it deserves best of all to be rewarded;
certainly (if Gods Law did not bind us) it were a worthy Christian policy to
propound good preferments to this Calling, that thereby men of the worthiest
gifts might be won unto it, and the want thereof is the cause, why so many
young men, of special parts, and greatest hope, turn to other Vocations, and
especially to the Laws, wherein at this day the greatest part of the finest
wits of our Kingdom are employed; And why? But because they have all the
means to rise, wherea^ the Ministry for the most part yields nothing, but
a plain way to beggerie. This is a great blemish in our Church; and surely I
wish, the Papists, those children of this world were not wiser in their kind
(in this point) then the Church of God: the reformation hereof is a work
worthy the labor of a Prince and people; and special care is to be had in it,
else it will not be reformed. For doubtless had not God himself in the Old
Testament taken such strickt Orders for the livings of the Levites, they had
been put to no less extremities, then is the Ministry of this age. And this
reason added to the other makes them perfect, and all put together makes a
reason infallible: For who will undergo so v^le contempt, and so great a
charge for no reward? And where there is so great contempt, and so mean a
reward, what marvel if a good Minister be one of a thousand? So this holy man.
By all which we may both see the misery of the Ministry of a Church, where
not only the one moitie of Church-maintenance is impropriate. But the other
for the most part is in Hucksters handling, the property of it, as of a
pr^ferment and reward of a faithful Minister, being altered by Simonie, and as
it were made impropriate too: and consequently, we cannot but feel, and more
yet fear the ruefull effects thereof, both in Church and Commonwealth.

Again, for as much as Simonists are the most doughtie Non-residents, making
use of their Benefices, as Fishers do of their lesser fishes, as baits to
catch the greater fish, and so leave the sweet fresh Rivers at home, to go
fish abroad in the main Sea (because, No fishing to the Sea, nor service to a
King) whereas they might wisely with the Vine and Fig Tree, and Oliue-tree,
Proverb.
enjoy their sweet private life in Gods Vineyard, feeding their harmless
flock, and not with the Bramble Abimelech, aspire to become, as Saint Peter
says, (...): not examples to the flock. Doing so, what else can come of it,
but ruthful ruin, as to themselves, so to the flock of God? For Simonie does
necessarily imply Non-residency. For first, a Simonist, after the payment of
his first purchase, is commonly enforced to live privately, to let out his
Parsonage to farm, defrauding the poor of their hospital relief, and go
sculke in some corner of the City or other, and there thrust himself into
some Lecture: there he gathers up his crumbs again. And after some miserable
difficulty recovering himself, does he then retire home to feed his flock?
Nothing less: But as Genesis 49.14. Adeo execrabilis est quorundam religiosorum
ambitio, qua semper p^us ambiens, eo magis fit insatiabilis, quo sibi amplius
indulge^* extra^. Ioh. 22. tit. 3. Execrabilis.
Issachar, he is like a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens, he
sees that rest is good, and the land pleasant, and now begins he tooth and
nail to gather another stock, to purchase another preferment: and that done,
after awhile another, and so the tide at last comes in so fast upon him, as it
bears up his Bark now ready rigged for any Port of preferment or Prelacy,
like some travailing heads, who for gain will hazard their life in some far
and dangerous voyage: but herein unlike: Those, go with a mind and hope to
return home: These, seldom or never so much as once look back toward their
more homely home on the Plain, fearing belike the punishment of Lots wife, So
eager they be with the wing^ of Ambition to fly to the highest Mount of
preferment, a^ if there were no safety but there: Those again, lay out one to
receive three or four at their return: These, will give Tria Beneficia pro
vno Episcopatu.
three for one, if they never return. Whence, what mischief to the Church?
What decay of Religion? What coldness of devotion? What contempt of the sacred
Calling? What scandal to the Gospel? What ignorance, the mother of Popish
devotion, indeed of all impiety and profaneness, of all heresy and
superstition? All threatening imminent and inevitable danger (if it be not the
sooner prevented by a happy reformation) both to Church and Commonwealth. It
were endless to muster up all the mischiefs, which follow this one General,
Simonie. A worthy Minister once of this Church, M. Marb.
said: A Simonist is a perpetual eare-boared bond-slaue to his Patron. He
has no warrant to teach the people, and commonly less success. Whereas if a
man be sent of God to govern a people never so ignorant and fierce, God will
put his hand between, and tame them. According to that of the Prophet, Ierem.
23.32. I sent not those Prophets, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not
profit this people at all, says the Lord.

I will conclude therefore with two or three zealous and pithy Admonitions of
Gregory to this purpose, in his 64. Epistle to Queen Bruni^hilda; he
instantly exhorts her to root out of her Kingdom this heresy of Simonie,
saying, Prouidete animae vestrae, etc. Have a care of your soul, have a care
of your posterity, to whom you wish a happy reign, have a care of your
Provinces, and before our Creator put forth his hand to smite, bethink you
most carefully of the correction of this sin. And in his 51. Epistle to
Virgilius Bishop of A^les, Constat etc. It is reported that in the provinces of
France and Germany, Note, that in those days, none were admitted into the
Ministry, but withal they were instituted and admitted into a benefice, or
some spiritual preferment.
none is admitted to holy Orders, without giving a bribe; if it be so, I speak
it with tears, I denounce it with grief, that the Priestly order being
decayed inwardly* the outward state of it cannot stand. And Epist. 54. He
exhorts Theodorick the French King, to assemble a Synod, V^ (...) etc. That
all evil conversation of the Priests, and S^m^niacall heresy, which first
arose in the Church by impious ambition* may by the definitive Sentence of the
Council, ^acked with the censure of your authority, be taken away; and rent
up by the ro^^es: Lest if gold be more set by, the^ God, He whose gentleness
is now despised in his precepts, may afterward cause ^ee wrath to be felt in
revenge. And Epist. 57. to Queen Brunichilda. Synodum etc. Call a Synod, and
amongst other things, carefully cause the heresy of Simonie to be abandoned
out of your Kingdom. For believe me, as we have learned by manifold
experience, That is to be reckoned among our losses, whatsoever is gained by
sin. If therefore you would be defrauded of nothing unjustly, be careful
to possess nothing unjustly. For in earthly things always the cause of damage
is originally from sin. If therefore you would outstrip your adverse
Nations, if by Gods assistance you desire the conquest of them, intertaine with
reverence the Commandments of the same Almighty Lord, that he may vouchsafe
to fight for you against your foes, who ^ath in his holy Oracle promised,
saying, The Lord shall fight for you, and you shall hold your peace. So this
last good Bishop of Rome. Now the Almighty Lord God, give grace to this Church
and Commonwealth, that for the still flourishing of his glorious Gospel
amongst us, the good of our souls, the welfare of our estates, the settling of
our peace, the securing of our posterity, and the subduing of all our enemies,
there may be stirred up in us all a godly care and conscience, to join hearts
and hands together, to the utter extirpation (if possible) of this mother sin
of Simonie.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the cutting off, or curing of Simonie.

ALthough, when the Article of Simonie (among other enormities) came to be
considered of in the Council of Trent, for reformation, it was cautelously
proposed, Hist. Council* Trid. l. 6.
that the abuse occurring in the collation of Benefices should not be
mentioned, as being an infirmity, not to be cured with any remedy, but death:
Yet since this M^rbus Roman^-Catholicu^, is not yet grown so epidemicall, or
inueterate in the maine branches of the true Catholic Church, but that there
is some hope left of staying the further spreading, and of allaying the fury of
it: My conclusion shall be an humble supplication to the Almighty (to whom
nothing is impossible) through the mediation of the great Shepherd, to
persuade and move his Vicegerent, our gracious King, and the most honorable
and high Court of Parliament now assembled: That for as much as Simonie is the
very Mass of all mischief and misdemeanure both in Church and Commonwealth:
It would therefore please his Royal Majesty, and this Noble Assembly, to add
some more cords to the whip of former Laws, and to make, and take order, that
it be more surely and severely inflicted upon the transgressors in this kind.

True it is, that we Ministers, for our parts, need not desire any other Laws,
for the restraint of Simonie, then the Oath it self; which alone is
sufficient, if there were no other reason, to make us decline all the ways of
Simonie. For how many thousands does this Oath alone prevail with? Loath we are
in the most opposite sense, to become a spectacle to the world, and to Angels,
and to men. We will choose rather with the Apostles of Christ, 1. Cor* 4.9.
to become spectacles for our poverty, and contempt, which our very Calling
suffers of the ungrateful world. Ezra 8.22.
Therefore, as Ezra the Priest was ashamed to require of the King a Guard for
his safe conduct, having professed to the King, and promised to himself, that
God would guard and defend them that seek him in goodness: So I confess (and
that in the name of all my reverend Brethren.) I cannot, but be ashamed to
request of my Sovereign any other stronger guard to keep off this dangerous
way-laying enemy, from assaulting Gods Ezraes, his Priests and Ministers* as
they are going toward Jerusalem, to the repairing of the Temple, to the
reedifying of the ruins of Gods Church, in these last loosest times, seeing
we, of all other, profess our selves precedents of Virtue, patters and patrons
of the practice of Piety, of faith toward God, of pure conscience amongst
men, and whom not direful Oaths, invented by man's wit should constrain, but
the lively Oracles of Gods Word should sweetly and graciously move, to come
with pure hearts, and clean hands to bear, yea to be the holy vessels of the
Lord in his Sanctuary. But forasmuch as many do take their first degree of
Simonie, before their commencement in the University, and perhaps before they
have taken Orders in the Church, as some pretty pregnant Pedant, that has
learned to distinguish, per se, aut per alium, to contract by precontract, but
ignorant of the nature of such bargains, falls unwittingly into the snare: and
seeing also, that if there were no sellers, there would be no buyers at all:
therefore for the prevention of much Simonie, either between the Patron and
his Schoolmasters, or between the Patron and his neighbor, too provident for
his sons preferment: it were to be wished that the Oath of Simonie might be
ministered to the Patron presenting, that so the wicket being stopped up, the path
in time would be so ouergrowne, as men would be diuerted from ever seeking to
enter at the bro^d gates. Though if some wily Chapman can with his Logic, or
rather selfe-deceiuing sophistry find out euasions, even beyond Hercules
pillars, Directly and Indirectly, beyond which there cannot be plus vltrae:
will not the Merchant* trow we, by some trick or quillet in Law, as easily
waft himself out of that narrow mouthed strait? Notwithstanding (I say) it
were to be wished, that as well the Presenter; as the Presente^, might take
the Oath. Howsoever I would to God that a severe penalty might be
indifferently imposed upon both the Simoniacall parties, and that the Patron
peccant might not only be dispossessed of all present title of presentation,
but for ^uer after deprived, and disabled of being capable of any presentatiue
power. And this stands with good reason and equity, seeing the sin of the
Seller (except the condition of his person may somewhat extenuate it, in
comparison of the buyer, if he be sacred) is not inferior to that of the
buyer. Can. 1. p* 2. q. 1. Quos.
For as Gelasiu^ says, Dantem parit^r and accipientem damnatio Simoni^
i^u^lui^: The giver, together with the receiver is in^olued in the same
damnation of Simon. And the buyer (we know) the Relative peccant, is by ancient
Canons deprived and dispossessed of all spiritual promotion, and Ministerial
function, both for the present and the future. And if either shall be found
perjured, let them undergo the penalty of Perjury. Paulus Ven^tus p. 2. to
restrain the sin of Simonie says: Cum detestabile Scelu^ Simoniac^
prauitatis tam Diuinorum, quam Sacrorum Canonum authoritas abhorreat atque
damnet: nos considerantes, quod plures poenarum grauitas, quam Dei Timor arc^re
solet a voluntate peccandi, ac sum^is defid^rijs affectantes, vt horum
p^steferum vitium non ex vsusolum, sed etiam mentibus hominum, saltem propter
poenarum metum pe^itus euellatur, etc. Seeing the authority, as well of
divine, as sacred Canons, does abhor and condemn the detestable sin of
Simoniacall prauitie: we considering that the greatness of punishments, is
commonly of more force to restrain most men from pr^nenesse unto sin, then
the fear of God; and earnestly desiring, that the pestiferous vice of these
men, at least for the fear of penalties, may be altogether rooted out, not
only from the use, but also from the minds of men, etc. He includes and
inuolues all, of what degree or ^ignitie soever, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, giue^s or receivers, principalls or accessaries, in the same
penalty of Simonie, and that is, suspension from the execution of their pla^^
and function, and excommunication, not to be absolved, but by the Noting the
heinousness of this sin, which none but the Pope can absolve; as also what a
dear excommunication that must needs prove, the absolution whereof cannot be
redeemed, but at the Popes own Holiness hands. For all reserved cases, are his
Holiness proper fees; as Bishops Palles, and Saints canonizations, etc.
Pope himself, except in the very point of death. Extrau. qo^. li. 3. de Sim.
ca. 2.

And here let me crave leave to relate a passage in the Council of Trent
concerning this purpose: which whether it may be thought a good rule and law
to us, for the better pre^ention of Simonie, I refer to grauer judgments.
The Church of Rome being desperately and deadly sick with infinite enormious
diseases, especially of her Clergy, in whom that of Simony might challenge the
precedencie: This Council pretending, but never in^ending (as the sequel
proves) a reformation; after much ado, and long debatemen^ about the Care of
such an inueterate and epidemicall disease; at length the Romish Doctors,
having beaten their brains about it, set down their Recipe, as an Antidote
against Simonie: at length I say, after sore travel, posting to Rome, and
again, this Catholic Mother, brings for^h a fair and well featured Child to
see to, which if it had not proved abortiue in the birth, might have lived to
have wrought wonders in the coniuring down of the spirit of Simonie, which
Simon the Sorcerer first coniured up. Wherefore finding this Infant lying all
along dead, and exposed in the eighteenth Chapter, of the twenty four Session
of that Council: Let me, not with Gehezies staff, but with Elizeus his
spirit, prove if any life may be fetched again out of it. Thus it lies:
Expedit maxim animaerum saluti a dignis atque idoneis Parochis gubernari: id
vt diligentius, ac rectius perficiatur, statuit Sancta Synodu^, etc. (Lo, what
a fair and well-fauoured face is here:) It is most behoouefull, for the
salvation of souls, to be governed by worthy and fit Pastors: which that it
may the more diligently and duly be effected, the holy Synod does decree, that
upon the vacuation of any Benefice, the Bishop should presently, upon the
notice of it, take order for a fit Incumbent Rector; for which purpose, the
Bishop and the Patron within ten days, or such a time limited by the Bishop,
shall nominate some fit Clerks to govern the Church, before the Examiners
that are to be deputed and appointed. Yea, let it also be free for others, who
shall k^ow any to be fit for that function, to bring their names, that a
diligent inquiry may thereupon be^ made of every ones age, manners, and
sufficiency. And if it seem good to the Bishop, or Provincial Synod, let
them also be called by public Edict, as many as are willing to be examined.
And to the end, a fit choice may be made, let there be appointed at every
years Diocesan Synod of the Bishop, or his Deputy, at the Visitation, six
Examiners approved of the whole Synod: that at the Vacancy of any Church in the
Diocese, the Bishop may choose three of those Examiners, which he will, to
join with him in the Examination of a fit succeeding Incumbent. And these
examiners, being men of quality, shall swear by the holy Evangelist; that
setting aside all humane affection, they shall faithfully execute their Office.
And let them take heed, that upon the occasion of their Examination, neither
before, nor after, they finger any fee: least otherwise, as well they the
receivers, as their giuers, incur the sin of Simonie, from which they
cannot be absolved; unless they forgo all their Benefices, upon what
condition soever formerly obtained, and become incapable of any afterward. And
at every Provincial Synod, they may be called to account, and if they be
found faulty, to be punished, as the Synod shall appoint. N^w upon every such
foresaid Examination, those whom the Examiners approve of most for their
sufficiency, shall be commended to the Bishop; and of those, let the Bishop
choose him, whom he shall judge most fit, and upon him, and none else, shall
the Patron confer the Benefice. All other forms of institution, let them be
holden for surreptitious, notwithstanding any exemption or privilege
heretofore to the cantrary whatsoever, or to whomsoever.

Thus this Council. And although, I confess, this Chapter (as also the whole
Council, containing the whole Mystery of iniquity) is very perplexedly
compiled, as if the Council meant no such matter, though so speciously
pretended (as the judicious Reader may easily discern, when he reads the
Chapter it self, being full of reseruations and equivocations) yet the reading
of this Riddle may open a way to stop and stay this fretting Gangrene: the
Pearls gathered out of this mud, may serve to hold our Simoniacall Merchant
from dealing in other merchandise; A sword framed out of this Forge, may cut
off the head of Simonie; and a line drawn from the windings of this Circle,
may regulate and confine all irregular and Simoniacall persons.

Yet after all these ways, which happily may prove either irksome to him, that
has not gone them before, as for the Patron to be put to the; Oathor
wearisome, to make them passable; there is a shorter cut (I confess) to a more
speedy reformation, but that it is very hard to hit upon. It cannot better be
described, then by setting down an example or two of those that have gone this
way. And here we have a noble Precedent in the Emperor, Henry the Fourth. It
is recorded by the late reverend Bishop of Winchester, in his Book of
Christian subjection, and Antichristian rebellion, the third part, and taken
out of Lambertus Scafn. in Anno 1075. that this Henry the Fourth, in the
vacancie of the Abbey of Fuld, being solicited very ambitiously by sundry
Monks and Friars, competitors for the place, on the sudden, as led by a divine
spirit, chose one Ruzelin, a good honest poor Monk, that dreamt of no such
matter. The like also this Emperor did upon the vacancie of the Abbey of
Loressan.

For conclusion, it were to be wished, that, for the more careful cure of
this cursed cankered sin, all, not only professed Recusants, but
Church-Papists, such as will come to the Church but once a month at most, may
be by Act actually and potentially deprived and dispossessed of all
presentatiue power whatsoever, in disposing of any Church-liuing: And that for
the better discovery, every Patron presenting, shall presently take oath, not
only of Allegiance, but of Supremacy, this being the Lidius Lapis, or
touchstone to discern a true Christian, from a counterfeit Catholic, and a
good Patron, from a crafty Romish Latron. For can the flock be in safety,
when the dog is of the wolfes providing? And will not such a wolf, be sure to
provide such a dog, as the Holy Ghost speaks of by his Prophet ( Esa. 56.10,
11.) either some dumb dog, or lazy and sleepy mungrell, or ranging spaniell,
or ravenous hound? Such as are muzzled, either ignorant, and cannot; or can,
and will not; or would, but dare not bark at sin and sinners? Or whose
mangie manners are enough to infect his whole flock? or whose rangeing
Non-residence, gives the wolf leave to prey the more securely? or whose
rapatious and ravenous avarice deuoureth no less, then does the wolf? or in
one word, all of these, of necessity some grand Simoniacke, so deeply
drenched and bemudded with Simonie, that he is for ever after (so vnspongiable
is this pitchy sin) both a laughing stock to the wolf, and a stumbling
block to his own flock. For a Simonist he must needs be, and that some
unlettered Capito, whom Popish Patrons amongst us prefer to their Benefices,
accounting such money well got, which they bestow in tam pios vsus, upon such
pious uses, as the maintenance of their Mass Priests. So that by this means
the wolf must be maintained by the Simoniacall Pastor.

The Corollary: directed especially to all Lay-Patrons, and Lay-Purchasers of
the Sacred Portion.
NOw before I shut up my little Treatise, I entreat all Lay-persons,
especially Patrons of Benefices, and also all such Fathers, as make no
difference between the purchase of a Benefice, and of a Farm, to leave as a
portion for their children: that they would patiently peruse, and wisely weigh
these few lines; which, as they proceed from a heart inflamed with the zeal of
Gods glory, of the propagation of his Church, and of the Soule-saluation of all
those whom it especially concerns: So I desire they may be affectuously
embraced, and effectually followed of all. For, since I speak unto wise men,
let me speak the more freely in few words; but they are the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ: What shall it profit a man, Mar. ^.36.
if he win the whole world, and lose his own soul? Hereby the Lord implies,
that a man's soul is infinitely of more value, then the whole world. Now if it
be so in the whole, what is it in every little part? What shall it profit a
man, if he win a little piece of the world, and lose his own soul? What
gained Esau, for selling his birthright, and typically his soul, for a mess
of broth? or Achan, for a wedge of gold? or Judas, for selling both his soul
and his Savior for thirty pence? or Gihezi, for selling his Masters gift for
two talents? or Ananias and Saphira, for detaining what was vowed and
consecrate? Now God is the same jealous God still, that he was from the
beginning. And the Apostle says concerning sacrilegious persons; Gal. 6.7.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, the same
shall he also reap. But wherefore all this? First, this concerns all
Patrons to look unto it; such as account it no less lawful to sell a
Benefice, or to usurp by strong hand, or cunning, either the whole, or a part,
to his own proper improper use, then to sell his horse, or house.

Now to all Patrons is my speech chiefly addressed. The Benefices in your
Patronage, are but a gage committed to you of trust. And it is no small trust.
The souls of Gods people are engaged in it. Your first and chief care should
be to make choice of a worthy Minister; next, to collate it on him freely,
without either exacting, or expecting of him less or more. Much less should
you set a rate upon it, or make portsale of it to him that will give most; or
to reserve your own Tithes, or the glebe, or such a portion to m^intaine your
house with bread-corne, or drinke-corne, or some other commodities. The Eagle
snatching the sacrifice from the Altar, carried withal a coal that claue unto
it, which proved enough to set her nest, and self on fire. O look unto it, if
ever you look for Gods blessing upon you, and your posterity. Gihezies curse
was fearful, it claue also to his posterity. How many such Merchants have
been outed of all, if we did but observe the examples? Nor is it sufficient
that you shake your own hands from Simonie, but see that your family, your
wife, your son, or daughter, or servant, be free from it. In vain did
Pilate w^sh his hands, from the guilt of that innocent blood of the Lamb of
God, while he suffered himself to be overcome with the malicious importunities
of those murtherous Jews, himself passing the sentence, though it were
perhaps as much against his will, as against his conscience. When you bestow a
Benefice at the earnest suit of any of yours, when you cannot be ignorant of
some base corruption, you give your consent to the betraying of the lambs of
Christ into the wolfes power. And where does Simonie begin, but at this source?
At this gate is let in some Alphabeticall homebred Pedant, the very fry of
Simonie. Such a one will be content to change his Ferula, for a broken
shortened Sheep-hook, and to accept, not what the Church may challenge, but what
the Patron will leave, and perhaps will cite authority out of the Grammar
School for it, if he have so much Greek, (...). Dimidium plus toto. Half a
loaf is better then no bread, nay then a whole loaf which he cannot come by.
For it cannot be, that an ingenuous Scholar, of liberal education, will ever
seek to enter into Christ's fold, upon any base and unworthy terms. If there
be any Simoniacall Ministers in the Church (as I charitably hope there may be
none) that go about to pur^hase dignities, it is most probable they learned
first to chafer in this market. O shut your gates against such pedling
Merchants. The way to keep the coasts clear, is for you to be no less
careful in providing a worthy Incumbent beforehand, then the illiterate
Pedant is watchful to catch the preferment before it fall. But your giving way
to such, opens a wide gate to every Farmer, teaching him by this means to
provide a sufficient maintenance, perhaps for the most untowardly, and most
deformed of all his sons, by laying out his money for the next vacancie,
which lay in your power to prevent. Happily you will say, You bought the
perpetual Presentation or Patronage at a great rate; or, if not your self,
your father or predecessors. If your predecessors bought, and left it freely to
you, you may the more freely bestow it. If you bought it for your money, and not
with a purpose to bestow it freely for the glory of God, and good of his
Church; but to make a ga^ne of it, your sin is so much the greater, and not to
be pardoned, without speedy and hearty repentance, nor that repentance ever
true, or pleasing to God, unless you bestow even that you deerly bought, both
freely, and worthily. You sinned in the buying of it, with respect to gain:
but your sin is doubled, and sealed up in a bag, if you sell it again.
Therefore in the fear of God take heed to your selves. The Living is Gods, not
yours. You keep it but in trust. Discharge your trust faithfully. So, God will
reward it. Otherwise, he will require it.

And you Fathers, let me use a word of advice to you. You desire to leave your
children portions for this life. I commend i^. For he that does not provide
for his family, has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. But let
your provision (as I say) be honest. Provide honest things aforehand, says the
Apostle, and that honestly. First, let your moneys be lawfully gotten. Next,
if you will disburse a piece of money for the settling of your sons
Patrimony, bestow it, where you may lawfully. Take heed of purchasing that,
which is Gods own Patrimony, Gods Tithes, or a Benefice. Much less, for one
of your most unlikely sons, for him, that you know not, or rather may suspect
whether he will prove Scholar, or no; or if Scholar sufficient, whether an
honest man: or if both, whether he may be fit for that holy calling, apt to
teach, wise and faithful to go in and out before Gods people, family, and
flock. Matt. 24 45.
Who is a faithful steward and wise, whom his Master may set over his family,
to give them their portion in due season? For, who is sufficient for these
things, says the Apostle? Take heed, least while you seek to purchase your
son a fathers blessing, you procure unto him an inevitable, an inheritable
curse. Besides, though you are the principal Simonist in the purchase, yet he
is the accessarie, in one degree, or other; either he knows, or suspects at
least, and that strongly, that he comes in by purchase, and so by an implicit
faith he becomes a perjured Simonist. But if you will needs make your son a
Minister, let him be one of the best and towardliest; and if you will needs
purchase for him, let it be of such things as are common merchandise, not Gods
inheritance. Tithes are Sacred, not to be bought and sold, no more then the
Cure of Souls, or the Calling of the Ministry, upon which Tithes attend, as
their ordinary maintenance. Meddle not you with that, for fear of Christ's
whip. He cannot endure bu^ers and sellers in his Temple. And does it not stand
with good reason, why Lai-men should not meddle with purchasing of B^nefices,
since you have by a strict Law provided, that Minis^ers shall not meddle in
purchasing your Farms? And shall not Gods Law be as powerful to restrain you
from laying profane hands upon that which is sanctified: as man's Laws are to
inhibit^ Ministers to purchase a poor Lease of a Farm or Tenement? Nay,
rather let Gods Law stand for ever inviolable, and consider with your selves,
how reasonable your own Law is, that upon any terms, without any express
limitation, prohibits to a Minister the laying out of a little money (if
perhaps he have it) upon a poor Lease, that may be at least some stay for
his poor wife and children, when he is gone. H^ply the first hint of this
Law, was some abuse. If so, as Saint Hierome said upon the like purpose, I am
not so sorry for the Law, as for the occasion of it. Yet if some men abuse wine,
you do not presently make a law to forbid all men to drink any wine at all.
But the way is to make a law against drunkenness: If we could as readily
define what drunkenness is, as we are sharp sighted to condemn a Minister
for base covetousness, in case he had a Farm in possession. Indeed, if a
Minister should turn Farmer, and Negotiator, relinquishing, or neglecting his
calling, let the Law forbid that in any case. For as Saint Hierome says,
Negotiatorem Clericum, ex inopi diuitem, ex ignobili gloriosum, quasi quandam
pestem fuge. This were for Ministers to turn Impropriators (the worst of all
other) to impropriate their Sacred Calling, by bemudding t^eir hands, but more,
their minds, by leaving to be the Lord^s husbandmen, to become the worlds
drudges. But howsoever, remove the abuse by law, and that even of the Medes and
Persians, that alters not. In the mean while be pleased to take into your
consideration, what equality there is (and consequently, what equity) between
your restraining Ministers from the lawful purchase of your Farms, and your
unlimited purchasing of our proper Free-holds, the purchase whereof howsoever
Humane Law makes it current, yet Divine Law has proclaimed the contrary.
Besides, if Gods Law were silent, or of no force, yet herein humane and carnal
reason might sway you. For consider, I pray you, and consult but with flesh and
blood; in restraining Ministers from that liberty, what do you, but bring an
old house upon your own heads? For do not Ministers come out of your loins?
Do you not make interchangeable and reciprocal marriages with them? (except
where any of the Lay-tribe (as too many there be) do disdain to match with a
Priest, as they term us) Are not their children your grandchildren, do not
their sons match with your daughters, and their daughters with your sons? We
are not, as once the Levites, a Tribe so select, and so separate from the rest
of our brethren, but that in all natural respects we communicate with you. We
that are now Ministers, were once (if you remember) your sons. And your
sons may be (if you consider) Ministers as we. To whom then do you deny
this liberty? Is it not to your own sons and daughters, and grand children?
Even to your own flesh and blood? Say, a Minister, your sonne-in-law dies
poor, leaving a poor widow, and so many small helpless orphans behind him;
is she not now your daughter still, and are not her babes your grandchildren,
flesh of your flesh, and bone of your bone? Well; you that cannot be content
to give Ministers liberty so much as to purchase a Farm, if they be able in
their life time (and happily they were able; had money; but for want of such
occasion to lay it out, spent it, now it is gone; and no sign of ^t, but
perhaps a few books, which now at the Booke-binders rate will not purchase the
fourth part of a Farm) yet no doubt (such are the bowels of natural love,
yea and compassion in you, that you will not deny your daughter and
grandchildren, harbor and maintenance, in this their distressed calamity. But
now if you find a yearning in your bowels, upon better reason to repeal this
law, then happily whereon it was first grounded: yet for all that, you must not
think to claim the like liberty in purchasing Gods own patrimony, which is
holy. Your doing Gods Ministers right and reason, gives you no warrant or
privilege to wrong God. Do God right, and deny his Ministers, your own
bowels, no reason. But this by the way, to show that in no case sacred Tithes
are to be bought and sold.

No? In no case? Yes, in some case. There is a way of purchasing the sacred
Tithes, which would be both acceptable to God, profitable to his Church, and
comfortable to the soul and conscience of the purchaser himself. How is that?
But alas! where shall we find one Purchaser? Yet we are not altogether
hopeless. There be very many charitable and well disposed Christian men and
women in this our Church, whom God has enabled as well with a large hand, as a
gracious heart, to leave goodly Legacies to charitable uses, as Hospitalls, and
the like: and no doubt more would be, if they could find Executors or Feffees
in trust, who could but live to see the will of the bequeather duly executed.
Now to all such well disposed Christians, that desire to make them friends of
the unrighteous mammon, and to lay up in store for themselves a good foundation
for the time to come, that they may inherit eternal life: to such let me
address my speech. How many have money to lay out upon land, or so, and cannot
light of a fit purchase? I will be your intelligencer to discover unto you a
fair purchase; so fair, as I cannot but marvel, that never yet any has
traded in it. Shall I tell you? The purchase of Tithes. Why, that is no news.
They are bought and sold every where. But I mean here the purchase of Tithes
impropriate. These also are commonly bought and sold. But I mean, the
purchasing of them, and redeeming of them, to restore them to God again, for
the maintenance of his Ministry. O noble purchase! so rare as unheard of. A
worthy object, indeed, for every rich good man to pitch the eye of his
charity upon, a worthy subject to deal in. Would ye erect a new Hospital?
Sa^^ your labor. You have all re^die at your hand in an impropriate Parsonage;
both house, and d^maines. Plant your hospital there. A hospital not only for
poor bodies, but for poor souls too; poor st^rued souls. For a Parsonage
being rightily used, is a very hospital for the poor, in both these kinds,
O, lay out your money here. Christ made one invaluable and incomparable
purchase, redeeming our souls with his most precious blood. That is indeed
without parallel. All the merits of Saint Francis, or Saint Dominicke,
wherewith the golden Legend is stuffed, or the virtue of our Lad^^s Milk, as
they call it, are not to be compared unto That. But if any purchase may be
named after That, in any relation, surely this purchase, of all other is
nearest a kin unto it; not by way of merit, in no sort that; for it cost more
to redeem their souls, but by way of means to save men's souls. To purchase
an Impropriation, and to restore it to the Church, whose it is, and where it
ought to be, is to purchase the means of saving so many souls, which for
lack of that means do perish. For where the maintenance fails, the
Ministry fails (for Ministers are men, and cannot live by the air) and
consequently the people perishes, for whom Christ dyed. O then, you Christian
hearted ones, whom the Lord has blessed with abundance, make your purchase
here. O, how happy you, that thus may be the Instruments of saving so many
poor souls, by pulling them out of the fire, as Inde speaks! But you will
say, How shall this be done? I will tell you, do but entertain such a
purpose in your heart, and God tha^ put it in your heart to will, will also
direct and enable you to do it, of his good pleasure. The ready way is, as
one says, Sapere aude, Incipe, etc. Resolve to be wise betime; begin. He
that dela^es the time of doing good, is as he that observes the River, while
it run all out. Men use to put off their doing of good until their death. A
dangerous adventure. For either they may be prevented by untimely death
unexpected: or after death, their Will may either be neglected by, or between
the Executors, or made frustrate by some little flaw in the conueyance, if it
be no bigger, then happily some nimble Attorney may put in his little finger, or
but look through the narrow crany of it, be it no wider then the space of one
word, or one small letter. But this commonly happens unto such Legacies, as
extend no farther then to temporal ends, as to bodily relief. Although I
could wish men would see it done in their life time. But this, which concerns
men's souls, would be done now while we live. We need not distrust Gods
providence, as fearing to lack it our selves, ere we die: no, we may rather
expect a greater blessing of God even in this life. For as our Savior says,
He that forsakes house or land, for my sake, and for the Gospels, shall
receive an hundred fold now in this life. Now the money we part wi^hall for
such a purchase, is for Christ's sake, and for the Gospels. But if you cannot
come to see it performed in your life time; then consider upon what assurance
you may best trust it to be done after your death. If I were either able or
worthy to give advice in this matter, I should think, that the Legacy, so to
be bestowed, were best to be put into the hands of some College in
Cambridge, or Oxford, and they, both to lay out the money upon the purchase,
and so to have the perpetual Patronage, for the placing of some worthy member
of their house in the Pastoral charge so redeemed. But they that are so well
disposed and inclined to so worthy a work, cannot want the best advice, for
the wise and well managing of such a business. The Lord God strengthen the
hands, and stir up the hearts of all true Christians, to put their helping
hands to this great work. No doubt, but many Impropriators themselves well
considering and weighing the nature of such a business, will be content to
meet the Purchaser half way, or at least be content to stoop and condescend
to some reasonable composition.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT. now assembled.
The humble Supplication of the Author, in behalf of many poor Souls, that
perish for want of food.
HVmbly showing, to the wisdom of you, the most Noble Senate of this State,
that whereas in many places of this Land, where Jmpropriations be, the
allowance for the Vicar and Curate is so pitifully small, and the Charge or
Cure it self so exceeding great (as commonly Impropriate livings be, being
great Parishes) as no Minister of any parts, can easily be invited to take it
upon him, but is necessarily deuolued upon some poor ten-pound-man at the
most, nay in many places lower value, and that by more then half in mine own
knowledge; to the inevitable peril of so many poor souls, whose mouths
should be fed with the bread of life: yea, my self knowing by mine own woeful
experience, that in a poor Town in Yorkshire, where first I took breath,
and was bred up, that long before I was borne, and ever since now above this
forty years, there has not been a Preacher, but only a poor Reader, one of
the cheapest rate, yea one that dwells two long miles off, at another Town,
where he has also another Cure, posting between, (albeit now a poor Emeritous
Octogenarie Leuite) to serve both hired at so small a rate, as I think
himself, as poor as he is, would blush to name it, although the Parsonage it
self be worth two hundred and forty pounds at the least by the year, there
being also a poor Vicaridge house, which is also made by long-custome
impropriate, being let out for a Lay-mans tenement; so that there is neither
Minister, nor Schoolmaster to instruct old or young: which one Precedent,
without any further knowledge, may justly breed a fear, that many other places
impropriate in this Kingdom may suffer the like calamity.

May it please your wisdoms therefore, out of a tender compassion to the many
dispersed Flocks of Jesus Christ in this Kingdom, who are as Sheep without a
Shepherd, suffering Egyptian darkness, even in the midst of Goshen, to
appoint and allot by Act a certain proportion (according to your grave
judgments) of all Impropriations within this Kingdom, to the better
maintenance of a worthy Minister, especially where there are no Vicaridges at
all endowed, or those that be, are very poor and incompetent to maintain
liberally the Lords laborers. So shall you bring a blessing upon you and
yours, yea upon this whole Land and Church, extending even to Posterity, whose
race shall (we trust) sing the memorable Acts of this every way (as we pray)
most prosperous and happy Parliament: and your humble Suppliant shall daily
pray to God so to bless this your happy Assembly, as hereby Gods glory may be
advanced, Religion propagated, the Commonwealth established, Antichristian
Heresy extirpated, and your selves blessed in your deed, Amen.

The Authors Conclusion, containing his ingenuous protestation, and zealous
gratulation.
AS it is in the natural body: so in the politic. The fairest and best
constituted body may have some bad inbred Humors, or Impostumes, or Ulcers,
which as they be grown to greater height, require the bitterer Pills and
Potions, the sharper Lancers, the hotter Cearers, and more eating Corr^siues.
Now although the remedy be applied only to the ill-affected part, or member:
yet, such is the mutual sympathy of all the parts, that they all jointly
suffer, as one; all complain alike of the bitterness, sharpness, and
smartnesse of the physic, impatient of it, as if each part were the Patient.
Which waighing with my self, I might justly suspect, least this Censure of
Simonie (consisting of so many Ingredients, composed as it were into one
plaster or pill, according to the judgment and prescript of so many Doctors,
proportionated to the quality and quantity of the disease) being found to be
so bitter and sharp as it is, although it be applied only unto some ill
affected members in this goodly and beautiful body politic, yet the most
entire, vnco^rupt, and most noble parts, out of some tender sympathy, might
complain, as if without discretion I applied it to the whole: but that I know,
there is no one member of the body natural, can better put a difference
between its own integrity, and its fellows infirmity, then those of the
politic can. So that for me, as it were but the simple Apothecarie of so many
Doctors, to go about to protest, that this Censure is not general, as applied
to the whole: what were it else, but to argue, as if any impotency of sinister
conceit (where there is no just cause given) could take impression in such
noble generous breasts, the entire members of this beautiful body, or as if I
could be guilty of mine own innocence. But herein must my protestation break
forth: nay, rather let it be turned into a joyful gratulation: How many are
there, how many (I say) not a few, both of the truly generous Nobility, and of
the truly noble Gentry, even all the truly virtuous of both, whose Patronages
are not tainted with the least touch of Simoniacall corruption? Yea how many,
and some of mine own knowledge (whom I should not stick for their honor sake
to name, but that the raritie of them in regard of mine own knowledge, might
seem to breed envy, and therefore I will reserve their names, till I can get
a greater number, and shall happily have occasion to touch upon this argument
again) many, I say, who in the vacancie of the Benefices within their
Presentation are not Patients, looking to be sought to, and solicited (a thing
which commonly has no good savor) but themselves are Agents and Sollicitors,
sending to the Universities, and inquiring after the worthiest men for such a
place and charge of Souls, on whom, thus carefully sought, and iudiciously
found, they freely collate the Benefice, sending the worthy Scholar (happily now
pooring on his books in his private Cell, and dreaming on no such matter) the
Presentation sealed up in a Box: so far are they from expecting, that any
Scholars modesty should be made so much as to blush, by being a Suitor, much
less his honesty be blamed, for presenting his suite sealed up in a Bag.
Wherein, me thinks, I see a noble emulation between the Laity, and the
Clergy of England, and (let me speak it in the Apostles sense) between the
children and the fathers. You are the gracious Sons, the sacred persons
Patrons, are your spiritual Fathers, who have begot you by the Word of Truth.
O blessed emulation, free from the least envy, saving that it may well be the
envy of other Nations. Emulate still ye sacred Fathers of the Church, and you
noble heauen-bred Sons of such Fathers, of such a Mother. Contend on Gods
Name, who shall be able to lift up whitest and purest hands, freest from
Simoniacall briberie, when you shall all stand together at the great Bar:
that as you were careful to call worthy persons to the Pastoral Cures within
your Patronage, bidding them, Come, not abiding till they should come without a
Calling: so it may be said to you at that day, being of the number of Gods
Elect, and called to the great assembly of the Great Shepherd, collected by his
Angels from the four winds, Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
before the foundation of the world. O blessed recompense! As you freely called
the blessed Ministers of Christ, inuiting them to come to their Ecclesiastical
or Leuiticall inheritance here in the Kingdom of Gods grace, prepared for them
by Gods special appointment, and under God by your special care, as Gods
Feoffees in trust: Matthew. 25.21.
so then at that day, You that have been faithful in a little, shall be made
Rulers over much, and enter into your Masters joy. What shall I say more? Your
virtues have almost rapt me with you into that third Heaven, where also I see
other of your works following you, and giving full testimony to what I have
said. And here I have a new occasion to break forth into a second Gratulation;
where I must begin with you the worthy Knights and Gentlemen of the Lower House
of Commons. For I hear that now of late you have by one unanimous Vote, for
your parts, passed a Bill in your House, that Patrons also shall take the Oath
of Simonie, in as large and ample manner as the Presentee does. Here let me
also congratulate my own happiness, that my maine Petition and Desire is
granted, before I could come to make it known unto you. And blessed be God,
who has put into your hearts this godly care. You have begun it, and it is
already more then half done, nay, as good as altogether done. For you have
commended it to the Honorable Lords both Spiritual and Temporal of the Upper
House. And is it not then as good as done? For coming to the Temporal Lords,
their pure vn-simoned hands will easily subscribe: and doubt not then of the
sacred hands of the Lords Spiritual; whom, if the matter labored of some
difficulty, you should find as the Triarij, to redintegrate all. And what is
wanting then, but (which is never wanting unto you, and to the Church of God)
the Kings Royal assent, which shall crown this noble Act. From the influence
of whose Spirit (no doubt, next under God) as from a most careful
Nursing-Father of Gods Church, this motion came first to be inspired into you,
as the will and affections receive their prime direction from the Sovereign
Dictate of the intellectual Power. And to make this good, me thinks, I see
the very footsteps of his Majesty's Spirit and ingenie leading you along upon
the ground of reason, and equity. For, with what reason and equity, shall he
that purchases, both be punished in purse, and pinched in conscience, by
taking the Oath; and he that sells, shall enjoy his Chapmans pecuniarie
mulct, as a reward of his own equal, if not superior, sin, and his
conscience called to no account for it. As if a Law were made to punish him
that is robbed, and not the Thief; or to punish him that is oppressed by
usury, and not the Oppressor. If any Recusant, though he profess to be the
Kings Liege Subject, yet refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance, who will swear
for him, that he is, and will be a loyal Subject? so that Patron, that shall
be unwilling, either that a Law shall be made for him to take the Oath of
Simonie, or being made, will be loath to take it, who will swear for him, that
he neither is, nor means to be a Simonist?

From my House in Friday-street. May 24. 1624. Soli Deo Trin-Vni Gloria.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 23. read understand. p. 3. l. 8. for, gi, r. given. p. 5. l. 10.
for, it, r. is. p. 9. l. 2. r. appropriate. p. 16. l. 6. r. quenquam. p. 17. l.
29. for is, r. it. p. 26. l. 22. r. Simonie, p. 29. l. 9. blot out the former,
him. p. 32. l. 1. r. the right. and l. 7. r. Damasus. p. 38. l. 37. r.
sectantur. p. 49. l. 27. r. supitis. p. 41. l. 21. r. sugere. p. 42. l. 15. r.
such sacred. p. 42. l. 20. r. Gloss. p. 45. l. 8. blot out the latter not. and,
l. 22. r. evasion. p. 65. l. 23. r. gains. p. 83. l. 18. r. potentia. p. 88.
l. 17. r. fearfully. p. 96. l. 13. r. infima. p. 105. l. 17. (...). p. 113. l.
3. r. oath. Other smaller faults, as some mispointings, or so; I must refer
to the judicious Reader to correct.


