THE EXCELLENCY OF A Gracious Spirit.

DELIVERED IN A TREATISE upon the 14. of Numbers, Verse 24.

By IER. BURROUGHES Minister of Gods Word.

PROVE. 17. 27. A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman, and L. Fawn, at the Brazen Serpent
in Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD, Viscount MANDEVILLE.
Right Honorable,
THere is a common slander that has been raised, and vile aspertion that has
been, and still is cast upon the ways of godliness; That they dis-ennoble
men's spirits, (which Salvian complained of eleven hundred Sal. l. 4 de Gab. 1.
Dei.
years ago, Si quis ex nobilitate converti ad Deum coeperit, statim honorem
nobilitatis amittit; o quantus in Christiano populo honor Christi est, ubi
Religio ignobilem facit!) That they make men rigid, melancholy, sour,
uncivil; That they dull their parts; That they take them off from the delights
of the things in the world; That if men take up the power and strictness of
them, they must resolve never, to keep any correspondence with their friends
who are of rank and quality in the world; and therefore although those who have
little of the world, and little to do in the world, may live strict lives; yet
it is not for such who are borne to great things, whose fortunes are raised
higher than other men's, who have references to many of quality and place; it
cannot be expected that they should be so strict; this must needs hinder them
in their outward accomplishments; if they begin to take such a course, it is
impossible they should be complete every way, as beseemes such as they are:
and thus many are compelled to be evil, lest they should be esteemed vile, as
Salvian complains of his time; Mali coguntur esse ne viles habea^tur: a
notable speech of his, fully suitable to our times. The first observance (that I
remember) I had of this place in Salvian, was from your Lordships ownhands,
showing it to me in him, as an expression that your Lordship was much affected
with. But these men do not consider how much they speak against themselves;
were this true, it were a snare, a judgment to be raised in outward
excellencies above others. No; it is not honor, they are not riches, parts,
dignities that hinder godliness; it is the baseness and corruption of men's
spirits, in the enjoyment of these that hinders; godliness raises the
excellencies of them, it draws out the chief good in them, and puts a higher
beauty and glory upon them. God has raised up your Honor, to convince the
world of the falsenesse, malice, impiety there is in this evil report that is
brought up, upon the good and blessed ways of godliness. Malice it self
cannot but acknowledge, that godliness in the strictness of it, and natural
excellencies in the eminency of them, have a blessed conjunction in your
Honor; Godliness as the enameling of Pearls in those golden natural
endowments with which God has mercifully and plentifully enriched you: and
were it but for this service only to God and his Church, in convincing the
world of the vileness of this slander; I may speak without suspicion of
flattery, happy that ever you were borne; and I know, that those who know your
Lordship, will justify me in that I say. In this God has honored your
Lordshipe exceedingly; were there no other end for which you still live in such
a generation, as you do, but only this; yet in this you have great cause to
bless your self in God, and in this great honor he has put upon you, to
make you so public and worthy an instrument of his. Who is it that looks upon
you, and sees your ways, but must needs confess, Now I see that strictness
and power of Religion, may stand with a most noble, generous, sweet, amiable,
courteous demeanor; I see it raises and ennobleth parts; and though it
banisheth base and sordid pleasures, which are beneath the dignity of a man,
much more of ture Nobility and generousnesse; yet it knows how to make use of
the delights that God affords in this world, and orders and guides them so, as
by it they are enjoyed with a double sweetness, far above that which others
find.

And yet further, there are two more blessed conjuctures which add much honor
to you; the one is a facile yeeldablenes of spirit to any (though much
inferior) in anything, where good may be done; and yet a strong, unmovable,
sledfast, resolute spirit against that which is evil. It was the high
commendation that Nazianzen gave of Athanasius, that he was Magnes, and
Nazian. in Encom. Athanas.
Adamas, A Loadstone in his sweet, gentle, drawing nature; and yet an Adamant
in his resolute slout carriage against those who were evil.

The other is this (which makes all beautiful and lovely indeed) though God
has raised you high in birth, in abilities, in the esteem of men both good
and bad; yet the luster of the humility of your spirit shines beautifully
through all, manifesting it self in much gentleness and meekness; and this is
the height of all true excellency. A man of understanding is of an excellent
spirit, says Solomon, Prove. 17. 27. the word in the Original, is, A cool
spirit. In also posito non altum sapere difficile est, and omnino inusitatum;
sed quanto inusitatius, tanto gloriosius, says Bernard, ep. 42. The Lord carry
on your truly noble and generous spirit, that you may long hold forth the
power, beauty and excellency of his grace. Let the height of all your designs
be, to list up the Name of the great God. 2 Cor. 5. 9. We labor, says the
Apostle, whether present orabsent to be accepted of him: the word translated,
Labor, loses the elegancy of it, it is (...); we love the honor of it; it is
such a labor as we account it our honor and glory: We are ambitious; to have
high designs for God is a holy and a blessed ambition; whereas the ambition of
other men is low, and base: Infoelix prorsus ambitio, quae ambire magna non
novit, says Bernard. Account your self blessed Bern. page 1010.
when your God is blessed. It was the blessing of Shem, Genesis 9. 26. Blessed be
the Lord God of Shem; the chief of Shems blessing was, that his Lord God was
blessed. That which I seek, is to engage your Lordship for God, and to stir
you up to answer fully the esteem, the expectations that men have of you,
whose eyes are upon you as a public blessing, and an ornament to the
prosession of the truth. And yet this I desire your Lordship would consider,
(as I know you do) that Religion is a greater honor, and ornament to you,
than you are to it; it does and will more honor you, than you ever did, or can
honor its Your birth made you honorable, but oh how honorable have you been,
since you have been precious in Gods eyes! Esaias 43. 4. Your parts were always
hopeful, but how apparently have they been raised since grace has sanctified
them? Although God takes it well at the hands of those whom he has raised in
the things of the world higher than others, when he sees them forward in
setting out his praise; yet he would not have them think that he is beholding
to them, as if the honor of God depended so upon them, as it would fail, did
not they put to their help. No, God can raise his honor by other means, he
can glorify himself, and get himself a great name, by low, mean, and
contemptible things: It is not because God has need of honor from you, but
because he delights to honor you, that he is pleased to use you in his
service; It is an advancement to whatsoever greatness you have in the world,
to be employed for God, were it but in the meanest service he has to do.
Where the heart is right, even in that, it gloryeth more than in all the
dignity that earth can put upon it; But yet the greater Instruments the Lord
raises up for his glory, the greater services he calls them unto, the greater
things may we hope he intends for his Church.

When S. John saw the Elders casting down their crowns before the Throne,
saying; Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, Apoc.
4. 10. soon after S. John heard every creature in heaven, and on earth, and
sea, saying, Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore, cha. 5. 13. And soon after that,
he saw Christ with his Crown upon him, going forth conquering, and to conquer
Chap. 6. 2. What great mercies might we expect, did we see God raising up
truly noble and generous spirits, more generally in the great ones of the
earth? did we see the Elders and Nobles, casting down their Crowns before the
Throne of the Lamb, willing to deny all their glory, and excellencies, and
estates, for the raising up the glory of Jesus Christ?

Certainly, God has great things to do in this latter age of the world, and
he is a God with whom there is as great abundance of spirit as ever, when his
time comes, how soon will such a thing be, as the raising men's spirits to
higher and more noble designs, than now we can imagine?

The observing the frame and work of your most precious noble spirit (Right
Honorable) put me upon the thought of this Argument; The chiefest book that I
made use of, for the enlarging (...) Meditations in it (next the Scripture was
that which I joyfully beheld in you(...) self, and your Noble and much
honorred Lady; highly honored and lov(...) and that deservedly, in the
esteem, and hearts of all who know her and the truth, John Ep. 2. ver. 1.

Such gracious principles appeared in your spirits, such divine rules by which
ye were guided, those high and noble employments in which ye delighted, those
blessed qualifications, which as so many Diamonds in their luster, and beauty,
sparkled that light, that freeness, that strength, that publikenesse, that
holiness, etc. Those comsorts of a higher nature than the common drossie
comforts of the world, that ye chose to your selves, to satisfy your spirits
in, and found contentment in the enjoyment of; that caused the dilating of my
thoughts about these things, and now making known themselves publicly, they
crave patronage from your Lordship, who have been the original from whence
they came.

And here I humbly present them to your Honor, and to your virtuous and noble
Lady, as a glass wherein your selves and others may see the frame and workings
of your spirits; I dare say, that all who know you, and know that I had the
happiness to be so near unto you, and to have

(...) excited to look about thee, if false. Art thou endued with such a spirit
as here thou may find? nothing in the world, in hell, or in thy flesh, shall
be able to conquer thee; as Christ himself, thou shall endure such crosses and
contradiction of sinners, as these times are big with; thou shall despise the
shame, and be able to resist to blood, if God should call thee to that honor.
What excellency of spirit was in S. Paul, when Act. 21. 13
he took it ill that they diswaded him from going up to Jerusalem, where he was
to meet with sharp afflictions; What mean you to weep and break my heart,
says he, for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the Name of the Lord Jesus. Moses refuses to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter; though himself, or some of his posterity might happily have come to
the Kingdom by it, and chooses afflictions rather with the people of God, etc.
He would not become an Egyptian, though of Heb. 11.
the Royal Stem; but abide an Hebrew, who were abomination to the Egyptians:
He knew, that the reproach of the Members did redound to the Head, and would
be well recompensed by him; and therefore he will suffer afflictions, and
esteem the reproaches of Christ above all the treasures of Egypt, a greater
patrimony, says Ambrose. So base are many spirits in this age, that they had
rather censure than trace his practice. Scaliger tells of a Tree, to which when
^xer^it. 18^. 27, 28.
a man comes, Ramos constringit; but when he departs, ramos p^dit: Too many
are like this tree; when any Ministers or Christians, that have the reproach of
Christ upon them, come near them, and have to deal with them; let relations,
promises, ingageme^ts be what they will, they shrink up themselves, are
troubled, sadded, and perplexed, thinking it disgrace unto the^ to have to do
with such; but when they are gone, then their hearts dilate again, and their
faces grow pleasant: such an adulterous generation there is, that are ashamed,
of Christ in any of his poor, reproached, despised Members; and not only
ashamed, but like that Plant called the Tartarean Lamb, which in shape and
proportion answers the Lamb, but grazeth and eats up the grass round about
it, suffering no green thing to be near: and these men are Lambs in shape,
but eating up every green thing that is near unto them. Psa. 14. 4. They eat
up my people as bread; they are the food their malice feeds upon.

It is observed, the Pope was so busy and hot against Luther, that he
neglected to look to all Christendom against the Turk; such baseness was in a
Popes breast, that he could easier have digested Mahumetisme; than Lutherdnisme;
and may we not think the Alcoran would be welcome to those Confessors, who have
enjoined their burdened in conscience to burn their Bibles for Penance;
this, some living know to be a truth. There is much baseness in the spirits of
men, and upon little occasion it vents it self: 1 Samuel 12.
Doeg haead (...) malicious murderous spirit in him, and spared not those that
ware the Linen Ephod. The rich man, Luke 12. 19. was all for earth, and
nothing for heaven. A great man finding his sickness increasing, caused his
bed to be made between, or upon his Coffers, where he had much gold; a Lord
came to him, and wished him to go to his Chamber, and not lie there; his answer
was, I am well where I am, so long as I can tarry, for I am near unto my
friends, meaning his Coffers and his gold. What drossie corporal souls have
such men? The Gadarens drove Christ out of their Country; they esteemed their
Swine above a Savior: Demas embraces the present world; Ananias and Saphyra
reserve a portion for themselves: such spirits ever have been, and will be in
the world. Spirits they are as much beneath common reason, as those mentioned
in this work are above it. It is choice, not common spirits, that will honor
God in stormy times. Had not a choice and excellent spirit been in Nehemiah,
the plots and practices of enemies would have daunted ^eh. 6. 11.
him; but take a view of his spirit; Should such a man as I am flee? and who is
there, that being as I am, would go into the Temple to save his life? I will
not go in. He had a good cause, a good conscience, Ve. s 13. 17
a good God, which advanced his spirit to such resolvednesse, that he would
not take Sanctuary, and disparage either of them by his fear or
faint-heartednesse; when he saw the Sabbath profaned, he hid not his eyes from
it, but contended with the Nobles about it. What Divine spirits were in the
three Children? Could Nebuchanezars greatness, mandates, threats of Dan. 3. 18.
the fiery Furnace, force their spirits to false worship? Be it known unto
thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods. Here they did obediently
disobey, As Groasthead Bishop of Lincoln once answered the Pope.
knowing that nothing pleases God, but what he has commanded in his Word:
they would not deliberate in this case, We are not careful to answer thee,
say they. When any enticements come to draw us from the pure worship of God,
we should stop our ears, charm the Charmers never so wisely.

Charles the Emperor, and two great persons in this Kingdom, soliciting King
Edward the sixth to allow his sister the Lady Mary to have ^^asse, would not
listen, but bade them be conce^^t, for he would spend his life, and all he had,
rather than agree, and grant to that he See Act. and Mon. 2 Vol. p. 553.
knew certainly to be against the truth; the suit being yet pressed, he brust
out into bitter weeping, and sobbing, desiring them to desist. The motioners
seeing his zeal, and constancy, wept as fast as he, and told one, he had more
Divinity in his little finger, than they had in all their bodies. What a choice
spirit was in that young Lord Harrington, who was a man of prayer: he prayed
twice a day in secret; twice with his servants in his chamber, and joined at
appointed times with the family in prayer: he would never be idle, but always
well, if not religiously employed; he meditated on 4. or 5. Sermons every day,
retaining five or six in his memory always; he kept an exact account of his
life every day, very conscientious of honoring God to purpose, in public and
private; on the Lords day he would repeat both the Sermons with his servants
before supper, and write them down in his night book before he slept, and on
the morning of that day, he would as he made him ready, repeat those Sermons
he had heard the Lords day before; and for the Sacrament, he received it very
frequently, and always fasted the Saturday before, spending the whole day in
Stock See in his funeral Sermons.
examination; prayer and humbling himself, that so he might be fitted to feast
with Christ: he gave away the tenth of his estate unto the poor, and pious
uses, besides his occasional charity when he was abroad: Here was a choice
spirit, beautified with variety of graces, not unfit for great and mean to
propound for their pattern.

Daniel in Babylon would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings
meat, nor with the wine which he drank; he had rather eat pulse than defile
his conscience. When the writing was signed, the Lions den threatened, did he
mussle up his Religion, and shrink up his spirit? he would not shut up his
window, nor diminish his prayers, but thrice a day prayed, and gave thanks
unto his God, as he did before time; here was a spirit for God and his ways,
and not for the times.

Happily some temporizing politician will charge Daniel of indiscretion: no, it
was the excellency of his spirit, that in case of danger, and that of life, he
would not separate external profession from inward faith, when God should lose
by it: And what, do thou charge him with indiscretion, whom the Scripture
commends for his wisdom? It was a proverbiall speech, Wiser than Daniel, Ezekiel.
32. 3. and his heart did not accuse him for that indiscretion, when he was in
the Lions den; for he says, Innocence was found in him; he was not ashamed of
his godliness; that had raised him and he would maintain the honor of it.
Such spirits have true excellency in them, and are not shie of the ways or
servants of God, when the floods of iniquity overflow, and threaten to bear
down all. Fearfulness to appear in Gods cause is a part of the old man, and
when God puts into his, another, a new spirit, that wastes thy fearefulnes; the
more thou have of Gods Spirit, the more thy old timorous cowardly spirit is
abated. Mat. 9. 16. That is put in to fill up, takes from the garment; and when
grace fills up a man, it takes away from the old man, the old baseness, fear,
and dastardlinesse in the cause of God, and a holy undaunted resolution is
begotten in thee to justify wisdom, although thou da^nifie thy self. Dan. 6.
10.


According to the fullness of men's spirits are their carriages, with more or
less confidence in their undertakings; If Satan have filled the heart, men
will boldly serve him, Acts 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie unto
the Holy Ghost? Satan had filled his heart, and therefore he feared not to lie
unto God himself. Dieu says upon the place, Implere cor alterius est audacem
eum reddere, and he cites that place, Hest. 7. 5. Quis hic est, qui implevit
cor suum ad faciendum sic? Who is he that has filled his heart; in our
Translations, That durst presume in his heart to do so? Hamans heart was
filled with malice, and that made him bold to attempt the destruction of all
the Jews: And where godliness fills the heart, there will be as venturous and
bold attempts for God. Paul being filled with the Holy Ghost set his eyes on
Elymas, and so Acts 13. 9. 10.
thundered and lightened against him, that presently his proud malicious spirit
was blasted.

When the heart of a man is filled with divine truths, it is not the presence
of men in highest place can daunt it. Elisha had a double portion of the spirit
of Elijah; and did the greatness, or wickedness of Iehoram daunt him? There
appeared a Deity in his very speech and spirit, 2 Kings 3. 14. As the Lord of
Hosts lives before whom I stand, surely were it not that I regard the presence
of Iehosaphat, the King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.
He had a fullness of Gods Spirit in him, that could speak thus to one of the
gods on earth. When a man's heart is filled with divine influence, he fears not
the enemies of goodness, neither is ashamed of ought accompanies godliness, 2 Timothy 1. 7, 8. God has given us the spirit of power, of love, and of a sound
mind; be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony, etc. When the power of
God is in a man's spirit, he will not be ashamed of the Cross, nor refuse to
share in the afflictions of the Gospel. It is the honor of Religion, to have
such Disciples as will own her, and stand for her at all times, and that with
an undaunted courage, Acts 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Peter was filled with the Holy
Ghost, and said; Be it known unto you all, and all the people of Israel, that
by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised
from the dead, even by him does this man here stand before you whole; this is
the stone which was set at naught of you builders, etc. And after when he and
John were commanded silence; what said they? Whether it be right in the sight
of God, to hearken unto you more than God, judge ye; for we cannot but speak
the things we have seen and heard. It is a brand upon Nicodemus that he came
to Christ by night; and so of the chief Rulers that believed on him, but
because of the Pharisees did not confess him, lest they should be put out of
the Synagogues: but it was Nicodemus praise, for that he had got boldness to
speak for Christ, when vilified, though himself suffered reproach for it: this
showed some excellency and growth in his spirit, that he could both speak and
suffer for Christ. So Joseph of Arimathea was timorous at Ioh. 19. 38. but
being filled with grace, He went in boldly to Pilate and craved the body of
Jesus, Mark. 15. 43. With what holy boldness did those men march through
reproaches, afflictions, and persecutions for the truths sake.

Reader, swallow thou this Book (as Ezekiel did his roll) and thou shall be
enabled to do as much. Principle and fill thy spirit with the precious truths
contained in this little Treatise, and thou shall find thy drooping spirit to
receive, a heavenly warmth to come upon thee, and a holy boldness thrusting
thee forward for God and godliness. Wickedness is too bold, and godliness
too shamefast; it has lost and suffered much through men's cowardlinesse.
Read, meditate, and feast thy spirit with what thou herein find, and thou
may walk bold as a Lion through the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation; thou shall daunt wickedness it self, and make Religion truly
beautiful, and honorable.

If thou should say, This book might have been kept in, there are too many
already; I answer thee, There be many, but few to purpose. The Sea is full of
water, yet God adds daily to it by rivers, and showers. Many would read
little, if new books were not set forth daily Books do quicken up a drowsy
age to the best purpose. New books are like new fashions, taken up at first
with affection. Notwithstanding all the Munition of the Kingdom, there is new
made daily. Books are more needful than Arms, the one defends the body, the
other the soul. If thy spirit be choice and right, thou will acknowledge this
work, solid, spiritual, and such as hitherto thou have not met with many like
it. If trees be known by their fruit; what other sentence may be passed upon
the Composer of it, but that he has profited in the School of Christ above
thousands; has had a large operation of Gods Spirit in his own soul, attained
to a choicenesse and excellency of spirit himself, and that he has clearly
differenced between precious and base spirits. I shall appeal to thy self,
Christian Reader, when thou have perused this Book, whether thou would have
had it buried in the dark. If he deserves a curse that withholds corn, Prove.
11. 26. thou will bless God for this corn the Author has sent to market.
God made him a fountain not to be sealed up, but to slow for common good.
Veritatem celare est aurum sepelire. In a fountain sealed, and treasures hid,
Aug conf. l. 11.
the Author knew was little profit. He has let out himself to advantage
thee, taken this off from his own spirit, to put upon thine. Do thine
endeavor to better thy self by it, and if thou gettest any good, give unto
God glory; if none, suspect thy spirit, and spare thy censures: The Authors
spirit is above them, and counts it a very small thing to be judged of man's
judgment. My prayers are, that thou may profit much, attain true
excellency of spirit, and follow God fully all thy days, that so thy end may
be comfortable, and glorious.

Thy Christian friend, W. Gr.

A GRACIOUS Cap. 1.
SPIRIT, A CHOICE and a precious SPIRIT.
Numb. 14. 24. But my servant Caleb, because he had an other spirit with him,
and has followed me fully, him will I bring into the land, wherein he went;
and his seed shall possess it.
CAP. I.
What that other spirit is, which a godly man has differing from the world.

IN these words we have Gods approbation of Caleb, accepting his faithful
service in the testimony he gave of the good Land; encouraging the hearts of
his people to go into it: As for the other that were sent, God determines
against them, they shall never see that good Land; But my servant Caleb, etc.

First, Gods commendation of Caleb. Secondly, his blessing upon him. Obs.

For the first he says three things of him.

1 He is my servant. 2 He has another spirit. 3 He has followed me fully.
He is my servant:] It is a great honor to be the servant of the blessed God,
and to be acknowledged so by God himself: We should not look at our services
to God only as duties enjoined, but as high privileges, as dignities put upon
us; we should glory in his service. It was a great part of that glorious
reward of those who came out of great tribulation, who washed their Robes, and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb, that they should be before the
Lord, and serve him night and day. Apoc. 7. 14, 15. [My servant] He has showed
himself to be my servant indeed; I will for ever own him; what ever others
did, he continued faithful with me. To be a servant unto the Lord, is an
honor; but to be acknowledged faithful, that higher: I have obtained mercy
to be faithful, says Saint Paul. To be faithful in service, is, not only a
means of obtaining 1 Cor. 7. 25
mercy, but it is a great obtained mercy.

[My servant Caleb:] Caleb is only mentioned here, and so in the former Chap.
verse 31.

Why is not Joshua mentioned likewise, Quest.
for surely he followed the Lord fully, as well as Caleb?

1 Some think that Ioshuah at the first Answ. Abulensis (...). 54, 55.
did conceal himself, although after he did declare himself fully; but
certainly this had been a very great sin of his, to conceal himself in such
a Cause of God, to have stood as Neuter, for the saving himself; he would not
have passed without some signification of Gods displeasure against him for
this: But Verse 30. God promises Joshua, that he shall enter into the Land
together with Caleb. Others therefore think, that at the first Caleb was the
more forward of the two in speaking, because he was of the more honorable
Tribe, one of the chief of the Tribe of Judah; and Joshua was of Ephraim: And
besides; Joshua being Moses Minister to attend on him, it might be the more
suspected that he might speak to gratify Moses, against whom the people now
murmured, because of the straits they were brought into by him. And besides,
others think, that Moses here Scrarius l. 1 Ios. c. 8. q. 6
relates this by Joshua, That Joshua was used in the penning of this relation,
and therefore the less is said concerning Joshua.

Another spirit: The spirits of the rest were base and cowardly, poor, dead,
unworthy spirits; but he had another spirit, went not that way. There is a
strange conceit some of the Jewish Interpreters have of this other spirit; that
is, say they, Caleb and Joshua, Lorinus in Numb. 14. 24.
when they were in the Land, and in their journey; they said as the rest of the
Spies did, and concealed their purpose of declaring any other opinion they had
of the Land, than the others had, and this they did for fear of their lives;
but when they came before Moses, and the children of Israel, then they had
another spirit, and spoke plainly what they thought. Many such chaffy
interpretations of Scriptute we find amongst them, God having given them over
to the spirit of blindness. He sollowed me fully.

The words are, He fufilled to follow Implevit sequi.
me: Nothing could take him off from me, what ever therefore becomes of the
rest, he shall possess the Land, and his seed with him. I intend only to
handle the two latter commendations of Caleb.

First, that he was a man of another 1
spirit. Secondly, that he followed God fully. 1
And herein, first, severally; secondly, in the reference of the one to the
other.
For the first, the Point is; It is the excellency of godly men to be men of
other spirits, of choice spirits, differing from the common spirits of the
world, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have not received the spirit of the world, says the
Apostle, but the spirit which is of God: There is a great deal of difference
between our spirits and the common spirits of the world. There is a vile
spirit ruling in the world; As, Ephesians. 2. 2. A spirit that works strongly and
actively in the children of (...)
disohedience. But of the godly it may be said, as it was of Daniel, Chap. 6.
3. An excellent spirit was found in him; so surely an excellent spirit is found
in them.

Herein, first, what this other spirit is.

Secondly, wherein the excellency of it lies.

Thirdly, apply it.

For the first; it is, first, a spirit that has other principles, a better
principled 1
spirit than the spirit of the world. The spirits of worldly men have base
corrupt principles, by which they judge of things, by which they are led,
according to which they favor and relish whatsoever is propounded to them.
The vileness and power of these, appears in the ways of the world; but the
spirits of the godly are acted by Divine, heavenly, holy principles, that carry
them to God, to divine and heavenly things; they carry them by a kind of
natural instinct; the frame of their spirits is so principled, that by as it
were a natural instinct, (natural, I mean the new nature) they savor of
spiritual and heavenly things; their hearts work after them, cloze with them,
unite themselves to them, find much sweet and contentment in them, are fastened
and settled unto them. What is the reason the same truths propounded, set before
diverse spirits, whose natural parts are equal; one sees much excellency in
them, receives them, rellishes them; the other looks on them as mean and
foolish things, wonders what men see and find in them, they are unsavory to
them, their hearts turn away from them? This is from their diverse principles.
Where the spirit is well principled, it is carried on sweetly and strongly in
Gods ways; though the natural parts be weak, though objections against them
many, pretenses for evil ways fair; yet these divine principles are as a
pondus, a weight upon these spirits, that carries on the soul still toward
God: when all is said that can be against Gods ways, and for sinful ways,
it will, it cannot but, hold the conclusion, Surely Gods ways are good. As
that blessed Martyr said, I cannot dispute for the truth, but I can dye for the
truth. These principles cause, if Sapida ^^i^^tia.
not a disputative knowledge, yet a savory knowledge.

Persuade a man by most subtle arguments, eloquent orations, that what he
tastes sweet, is bitter, perhaps he cannot answer all you say; but yet he
knows the thing is sweet: So the Spirit principled right with grace, having
the savor of the knowledge, as the Apostle speaks: though many subtle wiles
of Satan, and cloquent persuasions from the wisdom of the flesh be brought to
persuade to the contrary, yet still it says, It is good to walk in the ways
of godliness.

Every life has principles according to the nature of it, receiving to it
self things suitable, or turning from things disagreeable to it; the vegetative
life according to the nature of it, so the sensitive, and the rational life,
and the life of grace according to it. Most men's spirits are led by the
principles of a sensitive life, few live so high as rational principles reach
to. There is a death of the soul in this respect; only God puts in by a
common work of his Spirit, some common notions, which appear in some, which
give but a glimmering light, and are very weak; but where the life of grace is
in any soul, there are principles of an higher nature, full of light and
beauty, carrying the soul to high, spiritual, supernatural things, for the
attaining to, and enjoyment of the highest good. Other creatures under the
rational, are made for the enjoyment of no higher good, than is within the
compass of their own natures; and therefore their principles are only to
receive in such good things as are suitable to those natures, and in them they
rest satisfied; for they are capable of enjoyment of no higher; I say, they
cannot enjoy any higher: indeed they are of use to, and were made for that end,
that they might be serviceable to some higher good than themselves; but this
they enjoy not. The destruction of their natures, is the highest use that
creatures which are above them, have of them. But the rational creature was
made for a higher good than is within the compass of its own nature, and was
to enjoy this; and the fuller it does enjoy it, the more perfected it is. Now
then, there are required principles of life accordingly to carry these
creatures higher than their own natures, to have the fruitio^ of that good
they were made for, and to be blessed in the enjoyment of it. Now these are
the principles of Grace, with which this other spirit is endued, higher above
the principles of reason, than the principles of reason are above the
principles of sense; and thus it is another spirit.

Secondly, it works by another rule: every thing is guided to its end by some
rule, which is a beam of Gods wisdom; no creature under the reasonable,
knows either its end or rule, but is acted by God to that it was made for: but
the reasonable creature is of such a nature, as is capable of the knowledge of
both, and therefore cannot be happy without the knowledge of both, and working
accordingly. Now it is a great mercy not to mistake in the rule that leads to
eternal life, to see it, and act by it; most of the world mistake here, their
spirits are led by false rules, they go according to sense, according to their
own carnal apprehe^sion of things, accordings to their own wills, would have
the rule of their actions from their own spirits, or else according to the
common course of the world, as Ephesians. 2. 2. That which men bless themselves in,
that they go according to the common course, is one of the most apparent
arguments that is, that yet they are strangers from the way of life; but the
godly they make the Word their rule, they look up to the mind of God, to see
the beam of Divine wisdom let down from heaven, to guide them in their way;
they look to it for direction, give up themselves to it, dare venture their
comforts, estates, safeties, souls upon it: Thou shall guide me by thy
counsel, says David, and so bring me Philo Iudaeus in his book entitled Om
nis probus liber, t^ls of the Py^^ agereans, that inter Sacrata praecepta, this
was a principal Per viam publicam ne ingredere. Argument^ tur^issimis (...)
turba, says Seneca. (...).
to thy glory, Psalm. 73. 24. A godly man thinks it a most dishonorable thing
to make the examples of men his rules; it is for beasts to follow the Herd:
Examples of men cannot satisfy his conscience. A godly man works for
eternity: and therefore is careful to work by rule; as a man when he works
in a work that concerns his life, erects a frame that must be for
continuance; he makes sure of his rule, lays often his rule to his work. When
God erected the frame of the world, which was to last but for a sew years, he
made all by weight and measure: The frame of man's actions here, must be for
eternity; and therefore a godly man dares venture upon no other rule but that
which is divine; he looks at the Word, not only at the notions of it, and
that excellency and beauty he sees in it, shining a great way off; but as a
light to his feet, a Lantern to his steps; holds it close to his feet, to
guide him in his going; knowing, that every step he goes, is either to hell or
to heaven; and this doing, he may look up with comfort for that blessing of God
upon his servants: 1 Samuel 2. 9. He keeps the feet of his Saints: His way is
like the way of the Mariner, guided by the heavens. Eadem ratione hanc vita
viam quaeri oportet, qua in altoiter navibus quaeritur; nisi aliquid cali lumen
observent incertis cursibus vagantur; quisquis rectum iter vitae tenere
nititur, non terr'd debet aspicere sed coelu^^; and ut a^ertius loquar, on
hominem debet sequi, sed Deum. Lactant. l. 6. c. 8.


3. Thirdly, another spirit. that is, employed about other things; it is not
for mean, base services; but set on work about high and honorable
employments. As men of place and dignity have, or ought to have other spirits
differing from ordinary spirits; they cannot endure to be employed in mean and
dishonorable works: no, those fit for mean, base spirits. While other men's
spirits are busied about low, poor things, and are content in these, minding
nothing higher; they are busied about great affairs of State, the high things
of the Kingdom, consultations about, and transactions of the great businesses
of the Commonwealth. It was the baseness, and dishonor of Domitians spirit,
who though a great Emperor, yet busied himself and spent great part of his
time in catching of flies; and so of Artaxerxes his spirit, who spent a great
deal of time in making hafts of knives of Box.

Thus godly men account it too mean a thing, for their spirits to be busied
about low base employments; while the spirits of other men are busied about
meat, drink, clothes, play, money, lust, and are taken up in these poor
things; the spirits of the godly are taken up in contemplation of the glory of
the blessed God, the beauty and high excellency of Jesus Christ, the great
Counsels of God, in the greatest work that ever he did, the work of man's
Redemption, the great mysteries of the Gospel, the glorious things of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the great things of eternity, the interest they have
in all the good in God, Christ, Heaven, about the setting out the glory of the
blessed God in the World, lifting up his Name, working together with God in
glorifying himself, observing Gods ways in his glorious works of Creation,
and Providence, preparing and fitting themselves for the glorious appearing of
the great God; joining with those blessed creatures, the Angels and Saints in
heaven, magnifying, praising, worshipping, and adoring the Lord of all; these
are things fit for the spirits of the godly, they are not suitable to the
spirits of the world, as Psalm. 92. 6. A brutish man knows not, neither does a
fool understand this.

A godly man sometimes may be busied in mean low things, but his spirit not
contented, not taken up, not satisfied in those things, as adequate objects for
him, as the spirits of the world are, they are objects adequate to any
principles they have: A man sometimes that is understanding, may condescend to
sport with children in low things, but these take not up his spirit, as
adequate objects to what he has in him; if indeed he should take content and
satisfaction in such things, it would argue a childish spirit in him; So here.

Fourthly, this spirit is carried to other 4
ends; the spirit of the world looks at ease, pleasure, honor, gain, and
Self in all; it is a low spirit in an ill sense, subjecteth not only ordinary
actions, but the best things it does, even the duties of Gods worship to base,
low, unworthy ends: At the highest, the most excellent of the Heathen, who had
the most brave spirits the World had in their time, aimed no higher than to
work according to reason, to satisfy the dictates of rational principles, and
a natural conscience; knew not what it was to honor God; to aim at God in
all they did: but the spirit of the godly is a raised spirit, looks at God and
eternity in all it does, carries things up to the highest good, restless till
it gets through all creatures, and closes with God; it accounts the excellency
of what it is, and what it has, to be in order to God, and directs what it
does to him, and in this comes as near the working of God himself, works as
like him, as may be; it is the glory of God to be the first cause, and last
end; and to work from himself, and for himself; No creature can work from
it self, but as it has his principle from God, so it works for him, giving
him the glory, as the first cause, and last end: and this is the great worship
that God has from his creature, both in this world and eternally in heaven.

We speak much of honoring God, and serving God, and worshipping of him; we
do nothing except we do this; God made the world that he might have some
creatures to work thus, to make him the highest and last end of all; many who
have excellent natural parts, are often busied about deeper things then other
men, but their spirits being corrupt, not carried to God in that they do, they
dive deep, but all comes to nothing; are like children diving deep in the
water, and bring up nothing but shells and gravel.

Now where the spirit is carried to 1
God as the last end, there first, the beauty, excellency, glory of what ever
it has or does, is judged according to the reference it has to God; Its true,
I have these mercies, I do such and such things; but is God honored by all? al
things are as dead to this spirit, where it sees not Gods Name lifted up: and
so the excellency and beauty of what others have or do, if God is not honored
by them, it looks on them as dead things. Secondly, all it has, is, or does,
lies in an absolute subjection under God, to be at his dispose; all things are
absolutely subject to the last end. Thirdly, where God is aimed at, as the
highest end, there Gods glory is willed infinitely; no limits, no bounds set to
the desires, or endeavors of the soul after it.

Fifthly, thjs spirit has other qualifications; the spirits of the godly are 5
glorious within: As, 1. it is an enlightened 1
spirit; the light of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, has
shined into it, and transformed it into the same image. Dan. 5. 11. They 2 Cor.
4. ^.
said he was a man in whom the spirit of the holy Gods was, because light, and
understanding, and wisdom was found in him; surely, the spirit of the living
God is here; for light, understanding, wisdom is found here; this is the true
light, the light of life, that has a quickening power, and influence of life in
it. There is a great difference between the light of the Sun shining in a
garden, and the light of torches; there is the influence of an inlivening power
in the one, not in the other; such difference there is between the light in the
spirits of wicked men, and the light in the spirits of the godly: it is the
knowledge of the holy, that is true understanding, Prove. 9. 10. And a man of
such understanding, is of an excellent spirit indeed, Prove. 17. 27. This is
that which the Holy Ghost calls Spiritual understanding, Col. 1. 9. to
distinguish it from that understanding there is in natural men; they see into
Spiritual things after another manner than other men; they see the reality,
beauty, excellency, glory of them, which are hidden from drossie vile spirits:
the Gospel is said to be a mystery, revealed to the Saints, Col. 1. 26. The
Law and Testimonies are sealed and bound up amongst the disciples, Esaias 2. 16.
The Lord delights to reveal himself, to men of excellent spirits, who are
only fit to close with divine and spiritual truths. As none can teach so as
God teaches, Job 30. 22. so none knows the things of God so as the godly do;
they behold them as with open face, they walk on in the light of the face of
God, Psalm. 89. 15. their spirits elevated by such a light as is suitable to that
light there is in God himself, and that luster of his Image, that shines in
the face of Jesus Christ: but the spirit of the world, is a spirit of
darkness; even that light which is in them is darkness.

Secondly, it is a free spirit, Psa. 51. 12. Establish me with thy free Spirit,
and this freedom makes it indeed, a true, royal princely spirit; for so the
word signifies that is translated in that place, a free spirit. The words are,
Establish me with thy royal princely spirit.

1. A free disingaged spirit, not entangled, nor ensnared with base, earthly
engagements like the spirits of the world; but a spirit that is at liberty,
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. How do the
engagements of worldly spirits miserably enthrall them, that notwithstanding
convictions of conscience, notwithstanding much unquietness of their hearts in
their way, many checks, secret wounds of spirit, sinking damps, and fears, yet
they cannot get off their hearts from those engagements they are so miserably,
so dangerously entangled in; this is a woeful bondage. Those who are godly can
remember a time, since their hearts were thus ensnared; but it was the blessed
work of the Lord to set them at liberty, and now they have ease, now sweer
quiet, and rest to their spirits.

2. Free from the bondage of sin, not under the power and command of it; it
has command over it self, over its own passions; not in a base slavery to
Satan, not in servile subjection to men, not brought under the power of any
creature. It was a notable free expression of two blessed Martyrs, Surgius and
Bacchus, who were two great Courtiers, being accused for Christians, and
commanded to offer unto the Idols, they refused to go to the Temple, and gave
this answer unto the Emperor; We, o Emperor, are bound Nos, Imperator, so a
terrena militia tibi obstricti sumus; in animas nullum tibi jus est; illarum
Deminus est solus Deus Coutzen. aul^ speculum page 47.
unto you, only in an earthly warfare; you have no right over our souls; God
only is the Lord of them. It will not be forced to any thing that is base; God
leaves the body and estates of his servants to the power of men often times but
their spirits are free: It is to base a disposition of a servant of GOD, to
plead necessity of sinning; no creature can compel another to sin.
Tertullia^ has an excellent expression to this purpose; Non admittit status
sidei allegati onem neces sitatis deliuouendi, quibus una est necessitas non
delinquendi Tertul. de Cor militis. cap. 11. (...). Romans 8. 15 (...) 2 T(...).
1. 7.
The state of faith does not admit, the alleging a necessity of sinning in
those, to whom the only necessity is not to offend.

3. It Is free in regard of slavish fear it is able to look upon the face of
God with joy, Job 22. 6. Thou shall have delight in the Almighty, and shall
li(...) up thy face to God. The Scripture speaks of a spirit of fear, and a
spirit of bondage from both which, this spirit is set a liberty; it can look
upon the power sovereignty, justice, holiness of God, and rejoice in them;
glad that God is so holy and just, and that it has to deal with such a God;
It has access to his presence with boldness and liberty of speech, Ephesians. 3.
12. as the word signifies there. It has sweet and blessed (...).
freedom in the performance of holy duties, is not forced and haled to them,
does not take them up as tiresome burdens; Gods Commandments are not grievous,
they are not as fetters of iron, but as chains of gold, for beauty and
ornament; there is a readiness of spirit to what ever is good; they are
vessels of honor, ready prepared to every good work, 2. Tim. 2. 21. It is
written in the volume of thy book, I should do thy will, and ^o I come,
psalm. 40. 7, 8. There is a sutablenesse between the law and the spirit; the
law is written in it; never so in it is element, as when it is in the ways of
obedience; there is not that straitness of spirit as in others; but here the
heart sweetly enlarges it self, as the flower that opens it self to the
shining of the Sun.

Thirdly, a sublime spirit, raised high, by spiritual, heavenly influences,
not 3
swelling by pride; a spirit that has all earthly things under feet, as the
Holy Ghost sets out the Church, Revel. 12. 1. Things received with admiration
by other spirits, it looks on with contempt, as things infinitely inferior to
it; a godly man's feet are where other men's heads; their heads, that is, the
pitch and height of all their aims, is upon things that are on the earth; but
the Saints have these things under their feet. When Valence sent to offer Basil
great preferments, to tell him what a great man he might be; Basil answers,
Offer these things to children, not to Christians. When some bade, stop
Luthers mouth with preferment, one of his adversaries answered, It is in vain,
Hem Germ ma illa bestia non (...) auru^. Melchior ^d^m in (...).
he cares not for gold; his spirit was too noble and high, to be tempted with
gold; base, low spirits would have been taken with such things; such a spirit
as Demas, who forsook Paul to embrace this present world, but a spirit raised
by God is above them.

How was S. Paul's spirit above money? when he speaks of lucre, he calls it,
silthy lucre, 1 Timothy 3. 3. A godly man's spirit is suitable to the high dignities
put upon it, and privileges it has. Saul when made a King, had another spirit
put upon him, contemning former things, highly esteemed of: a man raised on
high, looks on things below, and they appear small things to him; so here,
Reason may raise Nemo est dignus namine hominis qui unum diem v^lit esse in vo
luptate lib. 2 de sinibus.
the spirits of men above the common sort: a rational man looks at many
sins as too mean and base for him, scorns to stain his excellency with
them, as the sins of sensuality, and Platonis Phoedo p. 81. (...). (...)or
sum et ad majora naturquam vt mancipium sim corporis mei. Sen. (...). 66.
filthy lusts. Tully thinks him not worthy the name of a man, that spends a
whole day in the pleasures of the flesh; and Socrates had such a vile esteem
of sin, as he thinks, it shall be one of the greatest torments of men in
another life, to be tied and bound to the sins they most delighted in here.
Seneca has a notable expression to this purpose; I am too great, and borne to
greater things, the^ that I should be a slave to my body: But if Reason raises
the spirit so high, how high then does Grace raise it? This spirit cannot be
satisfied with small low things; as it is reported of Luther, when great gifts
were sent to him, he refused them, with this most brave and excellent speech;
I did earnestly protest, that God should not put me off Valde protesta tus
sum, me nolle sic sa^iari ab co. Melchier Adam in vita Iuth.
with these things; meaning that he would not be satisfied with anything that
was here below. All the things in the world are far from being able to
satisfy this spirit; it accounts all, yea, if they were a thousand times more
than they are, but a poor pittance for the portion of an immortal soul; If
God should make more worlds for it, yet if he give not himself to it, it would
not be satisfied; nothing but a God, an infinite, universal, eternal Good,
can fill up the desires of this spirit. Thou have Feci^^i nos Domine prote, and
^^qu etum est ^or n(...) do(...) veniat adte.
made us, O Lord, for thy self, says Saint Austin, and our hearts are unquiet
till they come unto thee. It is the work of a base drossy spirit, to think,
If I had but so much, or so much yearly, I should have enough: how base the
spirit of that rich man, blessing himself in his goods! Soul Luke 12. 19.
take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years; what were all those
to his soul, to the happiness of his soul? These are spirits that have
higher designs the^ so, their designs no less than a Kingdom, yea, than God
himself, Romans 2. 7. They seek for glory, honor, immortality, eternal life:
Though they can be content with little of the world for their use. yet they
cannot be content without that Good and Happiness that is infinitely higher,
and better than all the world, for their portion. As Abraham said concerning
his child, when God promised him a great reward, Genesis 15. 2. Lord what will
thou give me, so long as I go childlesse? Lord what is all the reward I can
have, except I have this mercy, except I have a child? because the Messiah was
to come out of his Ioines; So the soul here, if God should promise it never
such great things, yet Lord what are all these things to me, if I have not thy
self? All the gifts that God can give to this spirit, will not satisfy it,
except he gives himself to it. As God is not pleased with what we tender to
him, except we give our selves to him: So a godly heart is not contented with
all that God gives to it, except he gives himself to it. Thus Bernard
exceeding sweetly, As what Hern. de amore (...). Sicut mea ^on tibi placent
oblata nisi mecum; sic bon rum tuorum contemp(...)io resi^^t nos s(...)non sat:
at, nis^^e cum.
I have, if offered to thee, pleases not thee, O Lord, without my self; so
thy good things we have from thee, though they may refresh us, yet they
satisfy us not without thy self.

Yea further, the enjoyment of God is not enough, except they may have a full
enjoyment of him; they are not satisfied, except they be filled with the
fullness, yea, with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 19. See a notable
example of this in Moses, Exodus 33. 12. and so on: The Lord had done great
things for Moses many ways; but besides all he had done for him, he told him
that he knew him by name, and that he had sound favor in his sight; one would
have thought this might have satisfied him: No, Moses must have more, Verse 13.
I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, show me thy way, that (...)
know thee, and that I may find grace in thy sight. God grants him this, and
rels him, Verse 14. that his presence shall go with him, and he will give him
rest; surely, this will satisfy him: No, Verse 16, Moses must have yet more,
he must have such a presence; as the world may know, that God does go with
him, and that he and his people are a separated people, from all the people
that are upon the face of the earth: and Verse 17. The Lord says to him, I
will give thee this thing also that thou have spoken. Surely this will satisfy
him: No, Moses is not satisfied yet: Verse 18. I beseech thee show me thy
glory. He must have more of God yet; God grants him this also, Verse 19. I
will make all my goodness pass before thee: And so the Lord passes by him, and
proclaims his great and glorious Name before him: He shows him so much of
his glory, as he was able to behold. Surely Moses has enough now: No, not yet,
Chap. 34. 9. God must pardon the sin of his people too, and take him and them
for his inheritance: He must have this fruit of Gods favor, as a higher than
all the rest. See how, as we may so say with holy reverence, he incroaches as
it were, upon God, as one that could never have enough; and yet this, God liked
exceeding well. Here Is a spirit indeed, that is not satisfied with mean, and
ordinary things. In a spiritual sense the godly do seek great things for
themselves, and it is their glory so to do. God delights to have the spirits
of his children thus raised; he would not have them to be of such sordid
spirits, as to mind no higher things than the base drudges of the world (...).
de amore Dei c. 8. Habet enim sa(...) a et sai generis superbiam.
do; as a Prince or Nobleman delights to see the spirit of his child raised
to higher designs, than the ordinary sort of men.

Fourthly, a firm strong spirit: 4
Esaias 11. 2. The spirit of Christ is a spirit of might.

First, strong to resist strong temptations. Secondly, strong to overcome
strong corruptions. Thirdly, strong to bear strong afflictions.
For the first, it is not every temptation that can prevail with these; little
things will draw weak childish spirits; but such temptations as others know not
how to resist, these can stand before them, and go on in their way, without any
alteration of spirit by them; though they live in the midst of temptations,
yet they are able to keep themselves unspotted; like the three Children, who
walked in the fire, and yet the smell of the fire came not upon them, nor their
garments; or like the children of Israel, walking on the dry land safely, and
the seas on each side of them: they are ashamed to complain of temptations to
excuse themselves by their temptations; for wherefore has the work of God
been so mighty upon their spirits, but to strengthen them against temptations?
many temptations which others think to be strong, they scarce take notice of;
so far are their spirts above them.

Luther was so far above the sin of covetousness, as he says of himself, he
found no temptations to that sin, though his spirit was much pestred with
temptations in other kinds. The Devil will not set upon such with ordinary
temptations, he knows it is in vain; when he comes upon them, it is with
temptations of a higher nature, of stronger efficacy; as some men's bodies are
of such strong constitutions, as that which will work mightily upon others,
will not stir them: So it is with men's spirits, the devil need not trouble
himself much about many; the poorest, sleightest temptations are enough to draw
them to what he would have: yea, and such who account themselves to be of
brave, of more than ordinary spirits too, who can stand out strongly against
GOD, and his truth, against the strongest arguments; the drawing motives, the
powerful persuasions of the Word, they move them not at all; but every poor
temptation of the Devil draws them any way; they have no power to resist, but
are led as the Ox to the slaughter, and as the fool to the stocks. The godly
man is strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10. Other
men are strong in their lusts, and in the power of them against the Lord and
his truth.

Secondly, they can overcome strong corruptions: temptations from without have
not such power, as corruptions that are within; yet when these rise up like a
flood, This spirit of the Lord in them, sets up a standard against them, Esaias
59. 19. Yea, by a contrary stream opposes and overcomes them. The more
suitable any corruption is to the natural disposition, the more powerfully it
has heretofore prevailed, the more strongly it would now put forth it self,
the more does this spirit keep it under above all others. Every ordinary
spirit can oppose, and be able to resist some mean, contemptible sin, which
brings little pleasure, or profit with it: when sin is, as it were, weakened and
benummned by afflictions; then they can cast it off: when the strength of it is
abated for want of fuel, for want of opportunities of acting, for want of
bodily strength to put it forth; then they can leave their sin: as Simeon and
Levi came upon the Sichemites when they were sore, and overcame them; so they
can come upon their sin, in times of affliction, and overcome it; and this
they think to be repentance, which is a mistake. But this spirit can oppose
sin, when it is in the vigor and strength, and activity of it, and overcome
it then. Let God put this Spirit into one who is young and strong, whose bones
are full of marrow who has the world smile on him, and may have opportunities
to the full to enjoy his lust; yet now he shall be able to overcome his
corruption, and prevail against the strongest lust. As it is said of Moses,
Hebr. 11. 25. When he was of full years, he then could deny himself, and refnse
the pleasures of the flesh. The word in the Original, When he was great, when
(...).
he was grown up to ripeness, when he might have enjoyed his pleasure to the
full; yet now he was able to overcome himself, and the world; and this requires
strength of spirit indeed.

Thirdly, it is strong to bear strong afflictions, as a strong bodyed man 3
can endure cold and hard weather, which others dare scarce put out their heads
into; such difference is there in the spirits of men, in regard of their
bearings of afflictions; some are always complaining, murmuring, Invalidum om
ni natura (...) rulum
whyning at every little affliction; their hearts fret, vex and rage under it;
like some men's flesh, if their skin be but razed with a pin, it presently
festers and rankles: Job 23. 2. He says, that his stroke was heavier than his
groaning, but these men's groanings are heavier then their strokes: like rotten
boughs of trees, if a little weight be hung on them, they presently break. A
little thing will break the spirits of these men, a little thing will cause
them to sink and pine away, and in a desperate sullenness to make away
themselves. If thou faintest in adversity, thy strength is small, says
Solomon, Prove. 24. 10. What poor things are they, that many men's spirits are
not able to bear? Not a frown from a great man, not a conceit of the least
disparagement that they suffer in any thing, that is but a toy and trifle,
which a man of an excellent spirit would scorn to bestow a thought about; the
loss of a little money: as I have read of one who hung himself, only upon a
dream that he had, that he had lost his money. Others, if they meet but with
a little disturbance in their family, from husbands or wives; if their parents
do but cross them, if their hopes be frustrated in things of no great
moment, they cannot bear it, but they sink down in such desperate
discouragements, as their lives are bitter unto them, they are weary of them,
and they seek to ease themselves by putting an end to them. Impatient sinking
desperatnesse, ever proceeds from base weakness of spirit. Despair is a sin
exceeding vile and contemptible. Gulielmus Parisiensis O verbum sempiterni
opprobrii and confusionis, atque ^gnomini^ ind^lebilis, scili et despero;
victorem enim esse Diabolum praedicat: and utinam videres Diabolum coronari
victorem, cui tam turpiter succ^b(...).
speaking of despair, has this expression; I despair! Oh word of eternal
reproach and confusion, of dishonor never to be blotted out! it publishes the
Devil to be the Conqueror: and would thou did see the devil crowned as a
Conqueror, to whom thou do so shamefully lie under. These sinking
sullen-spirited people may please themselves in the froward, sullen distempers
of their hearts, and conceit as if they were fruits of humility: but let them
know that the devil is the most sullen spirit that is, and yet the most proud.
Though in thy frowardness thou flyest from God, and let thy spirit sink
down, even as low as the bottom of the Sea, yet even there the wrath of God
will follow thee. As, Amos 9. 3. Though they hide themselves in the bottom of
the sea, I will command the Serpent to bite them.

Thus those, whose spirits are sunk into the bottom of the sea of desperation,
they shall have no ease there, even there the Lord will command the Serpent to
bite them; the devil shall vex and torment them there. Many while in their
prosperity, while the world smiles on them, they seem to be of brave and
stout spirits; to be sure, they are scornful, proud, and high enough; they
are all for mirth and jollity, they are so afraid of sadness, as they banish
all seriousness: But when affliction comes upon these, when God touches them
with sickness, what poor spirited men are they then? how do their hearts sink
like lead? how disconsolate? how dejected are they then? none more.

Manasseh was of a bold presumptuous spirit, and exceeding scornful in time of
his prosperity; he went on with a high hand against God, as if he meant to
contest with heaven it self: but mark in the 2 Chronicles. 33. 11. when he was
brought into trouble, what a poor, base spirit he had: he runs amongst the
thorns, he hides himself in the bushes, and from thence he is taken, and
bound in Fetters. As it was said of Alexander, it was nothing for him to carry
himself bravely, because he always conquered; but for Caesar to behave
himself wisely, and to uphold his spirit when he was conquered, and others
fainted; this was an high praise unto him. You talk of merry hearts and
joyful spirits, but can you be joyful in affliction? will your spirits hold
out in tribulation? Can you rejoice in the greatest troubles? Will your
comforts hold out in sore and grievous distresses? this were a sign of
strength of spirit indeed. The spirit of a man can sustain his infirmity,
says Solomon. This is the strength of a man's spirit, to be able to carry it
self bravely, undauntedly in the midst of greatest afflictions; your spirits
can bear nothing, they are childish, poor weak spirits, not to be accounted
the spirits of men. Lactantius boasts of the bravenesse Nostri (ut de viris
taccam) pueri and mulierculie tortores suos taciti vincunt, and expromere illis
gemitum nec ignis potest, Lib. 5. cap. 13.
of the spirits of the Martyrs in his time, in this respect; Our children and
women (not to speak of men) do in silence overcome their tormentors and the
fire cannot fetch so much as a sigh from them.

Fifthly, they are generous spirits: as, 5


1 They are not mercenary, they 1
will not indent with God for what they do; so much as they may get by their
service, so much service, and no more: No, they go on in their work, and
leave themselves to God: let the benefit of that they do, be what it will,
they lose not their end if they be employed for God; men do very ill for
themselves, in indenting with God for any service; for their strait spirits
cannot imagine, or desire that latitude of good, that the infinite bounty of
God would give, if they left themselves wholly to it.

Seneca reproves the opinion of such, who said a man should choose a friend
that he might have one, who might relieve him in his want, who might visit him
in his sickness, etc. No, says he, this is mercenary; but I will choose a
friend, that I may have one, to show love unto, to visit if he be sick, to
help if he be in want: So for men to choose a God unto themselves, that they
may be helped out of troubles, that they may have their estates blessed, that
they may get such and such things by, to make this the highest end is
mercenary, and too low for a true, gracious, generous spirit; but to choose a
God, to be my God, that I may honor, love, fear, worship him for ever, this is
true Christian generousnesse.

2 A true generous spirit, cannot endure basely to subject it self to any;
that is, to flatter, and fawn, and to be serviceable to men's lusts, and base
humors for advantage sake. It knows how to lie under the feet of any to do
them good, where God may have honor: but to be serviceable to any man's lusts
whatsoever, it cannot endure: As we read of Dionysius his flatterers, who were
so gross in their flatteries, that when he did spit, they licked up his
spittle, and said, it was sweeter than Nectar and Ambrosia. It is reported
likewise of Cambyses, who falling in Purcas Pilg. page 354.
love with his sister, he asked the Judges whether it were lawful for him to
marry her? they answered, That they had no such law, but they had another, that
the King might do whatsoever liked him; whereupon he married her. Such
base-spiritednesse, cannot stand with Christian generousnesse.

3 A true generous spirit is not ready to take advantages against those that
are under it; Men of these spirits, love to pity and relieve those whom they
have at advantage, as Elisha, 2 King. 6. 22. when he had the Syrians in the
midst of Samaria, and the king of Israel asked him, Shall Quo quisque est major,
magis est placabilis ^rae, Et saciles molus men's generosa capit. Corpora
magnanimo satis est prostrasse ^^oni, Pugna suum finem, cum jacet hostis,
habet: At lupus et tristes instant morientibus ur si, ^t quaecunqu^ minor
nobilitate f^r(...)
I smite them? shall I smite them? He answered, Thou shall not smite them; set
bread and water before them that they may eat, and drink, and go to their
Master: and he prepared great provision for them, and when they had eaten and
drunk, he sent them away. As is reported of the Lion, it spares those things
that fall down and submit to it; but the Wolf, Bear, Dog, rend and tear what
they get hold of. To be able to do one hurt and not to do it, that is truly
noble. It is the glory of a King, yea of God himself to pass by an offense.
To show mercy, says S. Chrysostom, is a more Posse et nolle nobile. Chrysostom.
hom. ad pop. 36. and 51.
glorious thing than to raise from the dead, and a greater work than to build
most magnificent Temples. Many base-spirited men, who will crouch low enough to
those who are above them, yet they are imperious, cruel, hard-hearted, rugged,
fierce toward those that are under them, and they think it the bravenesse and
greatness of their spirits that they can insult over them, and revenge
themselves upon them, but there is Nec judicandum est aliquid iram ad
magnitudinem animi confer. Non est illa magnitudo, tumor est. Senec. de ira.
lib. 1. cap. 16.
nothing great in these men but pride, and self love: this is the greatest
baseness of spirit that can be, and the more these men formerly did discover
their baseness, in their sordid crouchings unto others that were above them,
the more do they now discover the vileness of their spirits, in their cruel
insultings over those that are under them; And this they think a goodly and
brave thing that they can trample upon others, whereas the kindness of a man
is the goodlinesse, and beauty, and excellency of a man's spirit. That word in
Esaias. 40. 6. that is translated, The (...)
goodlinesse of the flower, is the same word which signifies Kindness. We
read Revel. 9. The Locusts that came out of the smoking pit, They had faces
as the faces of men, and they had hair, as the hair of women; They had fair
countenances, they could look smiling, and flattering upon men, for their own
ends, but their teeth were the teeth of Lions, and they had tails like
Scorpions, to tear and sting those that they had at an advantage. An insulting
spirit over those that we have at advantage, is far from true generousnesse,
howsoever men may bless themselves in it.

Rehoboam was a man of an exceeding imperious, insulting disposition; My little
finger, says he, shall be thicker than my fathers loins; My father put a
heavy yoke upon you, but I will put more to your yoke; my father chastised you
with whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions: O, what a spirit was here!
Surely he, and those who put him on, rejoiced in this as a brave commanding
spirit indeed; But the holy Ghost says of Rehoboam, that he was a poor, weak,
childish-spirited man; yea, he calls him a child, though he was above forty
years old, 2 Chronicles. 13. 7. he was young, the word is a child, and
tenderhearted, that is, of a poor, soft, effeminate spirit. True
generousnesse and cruelty are exceeding opposite, one destroys the other. When
David's spirit was distempered, when he had lost much of his generousnesse, by
that sin of uncleanness, as appears in the 51. Psalm, where he prays to
God for his free spirit, which word signifies, a royal Princely spirit, as you
heard before, much of the royal princelinesse of his spirit, was lost by that
sin, and David was never so rigid as he was at this time, which appears out
of the 2 Samuel 12. 30, 31. where he commanded the people whom he had overcome,
to be brought forth, and put them under sawes; and under harrowes of iron, and
made them pass through the brick-kilne, and thus did he unto all the Cities of
the children of Ammon. This was exceeding harsh and rigid; we never read of
him, that ever he dealt thus with any before; now this is observable, that this
act of his, was at that time, wherein he lay in his sin: for Ioab had
besieged that City before David saw Bathsheba, and it was at that siege, that
Vriah was slain: And although this fact be related after Nathans coming to
him, and after Solomon's birth, yet it is probable it was before, even while he
lay in his sin, for two reasons;

1. Because it is not probable that the siege continued; not only till the
child conceived in adultery was borne, but after the birth of Solomon too, as
it here stands in the story.

2. Neither is it like, that David newly receiving such mercy from God, as he
did in the pardon of his sin, and when his heart was so broken as it was,
that he should then show such rigid severity, only for the abuse of his
Messengers. The reason why this is set after, is, because in the time of the
siege David committed the adultery; and so the whole story concerning David and
Bathsheba is first related, and then he comes to the story of the war again.

4. A generous spirit is studious, and diligent to return good, as well as
desirous to receive good, as David, Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render unto the
Lord? says he: he speaks, as a man pressed in his spirit, troubled until he
did return something; he accounts favors received, as great obligations, as
any debts in the world. It is infinite baseness in spirit to be so for ones
self, as if ones own turn be served, then neither God nor man is regarded.
How many men will crouch, and yield to any thing, till they have got their own
turns served; but then they grow proud, and regardlesse of those, yea,
oftentimes spightfull against those, to whom (when time was) they crouched for
favors, and from whom they received many, by which they are come to that which
now they are. A notable example of this, we have in Benhaded, 1 King. 20. 32.
compared with Chap. 22. 31. In the former place, he caused his servants to gird
themselves with sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their heads, and to
come to the King of Israel and say, Thy servant* Benhadad says, I pray thee
let me live, and he was content to yield to any terms, when the King of
Israel had him at advantage, as verse 34. The Cities which my father took from
thy father, I will restore, and thou shall make streets for thee in Damascus:
but after that he was got out of his hands; Ahab was feign to go to war with
him to get those Cities, Cap. 22. 3. And observe the baseness of the spirit of
Benhadad, he, who before had so crouched to Ahab for his life, he now
commands his Captains, to fight neither with small nor great, save only with
the King of Israel: see with what malice he seeks the life of him, who before
had saved his.

5 A generous spirit loves to be 5
abundant in service; it is not satisfied in doing mean and ordinary things, as
before they were sublime in that receiving of ordinary things from God would
not satisfy them, but they must have great things from him; so now it is their
generousnesse, that they will not be quieted in doing ordinary things for God,
but they must do great things for him: they prize their service as well as
their wages, as Ioh. 17. 4. Christ says He has finished the work that his
Father gave him to do; he accounts his work a gift. Thus those who have the
Spirit of Christ, account their services to be gifts from God: to live
unserviceable they would account to be the greatest burden in the world to
them; they had rather have less comforts and more service, than Quid prodest
esse, quod esse non predest? Tertul. de ^^di(...).
more comforts and less service; they had rather be straightened in comforts than
in duties. To what purpose do we live, if we be of no use? It is the baseness
of men's spirits (which a truly godly man abhorres) who desire to receive great
things, but are content in doing little; they put off God with ordinary, flight
services; but the spirits of the Saints are more generous than so, if it were
possible they would be infinite in service to God, they never think they have
done enough for him: I will yet praise thee more and more, says David, Psalm.
71. 14. I will add to thy praise, so the words are in the Original; as if he
should say, God has had some praise in the world already, I would feign add
something for my part, I would come in withmy share, that he might have some
more praise for me, and this not an ordinary praise, but endeavoures to have
the high praises of God in heart and mouth, Psalm. 149. 6. desires to make the
praise of God glorious, Psalm. 66. 2. he would feign be eminent in good works,
Tit. 3. 14. Let ours also learn to maintain good (...).
works, the words are, let them learn to be eminent in good works above
others; there is a holy ambition in them; to get above others in godliness; this
is, indeed, to walk circumspectly, that the Apostle exhorts to in the 5. Ephesians.
15. the word there translated (...).
Circu^spectly, signifies To get up to the top of godliness, to perfect
holiness in the fear of God, and therefore he sets the highest pitch of the
rule before him, would not have the rule come down to him, but endeavors to
get up to the rule, sets before him the highest examples he can; he is not
willing to offer that to God which cost him nothing, but if any thing more
choice, more excellent, better then others, it shall be for God; he loves to
be abundant in duty, he would not scant God, to give only that which he must
of necessity, but loves to be fruitful in all good works. The reasonings of
many men's spirits, shows much baseness in them; Why are we bound to do
this? is it absolutely necessary? cannot a man be saved except he do thus?
may not such a thing be lawfully done? If thou had a raised, generous spirit
for God, it were enough to thee, that such a thing is good, is commendable, it
may be, serviceable; Vestrum est, (...) solum attend^re quid praecipiat Deus,
sed quid velit, quae sit vulu(...) Dei bona, been placens, and pers^cta.
B(...). de vita solitaria ad fratres de mont^ Dei, p. 1020.
God may have glory by it, I may do good by it; and such a thing has no
excellency in it, God shall have no glory by it: This were enough to cause the
soul greedily and delightfully to embrace the one, and freely and strongly to
reject the other.

A generous spirit strives to be abundant in doing good, and leaves it self
with God, let God do with him what seems good in his eyes; it does not
maintain jealous, suspicious thoughts of God, as if it were best to provide for
it self, and not dare to venture upon God: Base unworthy spirits discover
themselves much in this; they will part with nothing, but first will see what
they shall have; they must have present pay, be sure of it in the hand; they
are jealous and suspicious of every one, they are conscious to themselves of
baseness this way, and therefore look upon all others, as if there were only
for themselves too: but a generous spirit finds in it self a disposition
ready to do good to others, though they can do little for him; yet if they
need, and he able, he finds he can freely, and readily do it; and this makes
him to venture upon others, that they will likewise out of freedom and
generousnesse, be helpful to him, if occasion, if need serve, though they
should not receive recompense from him: and therefore he is not ready to
entertain jealous and suspicious thoughts, as other baser spirits do. Thus in
respect of God, he knows God is infinitely good, and blessed in himself; and
that he out of his own infinite goodness is ready to do good, and help those
in want, who are able to do little again in way of requital; but that he for
his Names sake, shows mercy and loving-kindnesse to his poor creatures,
because Mercy pleases him; and therefore he can venture himself upon God.

Base spirits, as they are very jealous in regard of trust, so they are very
suspicious of love; and think, because themselves are conscious to themselves
of unworthiness, and that they themselves love only for their own ends,
therefore they think they cannot be truly beloved of others, but so far as
they are useful to them. But one of a generous spirit knows in himself, that
he can love others, not only because he receives good from them, but that he
may do good to them; and therefore sees this to be infinitely more in God, and
therefore can rely upon Gods love in sense of his own unworthiness. Though
the Lord can receive no good from me, yet he can do good unto me; and this I
believe is the glorious excellency of the Lord, and therefore my spirit shall
not give way to suspicious thoughts of his love: As David, 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Although (says he) my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he makes not to grow. And this is
observable, that it is said of him in Verse. 1. that when he spoke this, he was
a man who was raised up on high. It is true even in this sense, that that
expression of his in Verse 5. was an argument of a man whose spirit was truly
raised on high; and the rather does a generous spirit abandon base, jealous,
suspicious thoughts of Gods faithfulness and his love, because it knows in it
self that it has not such a vile disposition, as to abuse this gracious and
blessed nature that it apprehends of God, so as to be the more secure and
loose; to give liberty to it self in any evil, because of this: Oh no, God
forbid; this, far from a true generous spirit; this, the spirit of baseness;
this, a sordid disposition indeed, that it loathes, it abhorres the thought of
it; it finds in it self, that the sight of this grace of God, this blessed
nature of God draws it most sweetly to him, to close with him, to delight in
him: it is the strongest Motive to draw it up to holiness; yea, To perfect
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And therefore it casts out jealous
and suspicious thoughts of the goodness, and love of the blessed God, as
fruits of baseness of spirit.

Sixthly, though sublime and raised 6 As Nazianzen said of Athanasius, he was,
(...) He was high in worth, and humble in heart.
as before, yet withal it is an humble, broken, and contrite spirit, one who is
poor in spirit; this, a blessed co^junction indeed; though it thinks it self
too good for any lust, yet not too good to be subject to the least
Commandment; though will not be under the power of any creature, yet will lie
flat and trembling under the least word of the Lord, Esa. 66. 2. Though not
satisfied with mean things, yet accounts it self less than the least of all
Gods Mercies. How sublime was Paul's spirit, when he accounted all things dung,
yet himself could be contented to be accounted an offscouring for Christ?
the sublimity of his spirit was not a greater glory to him in the one, than the
humility of it was in the other. Though a godly man minds high things above
others, yet can be well contented to be used in the meanest services for the
good of others; though he be raised above the world, yet judges himself less
than the least of the Saints: Though he aims at the highest pitch of
godliness, yet bless God for, and makes much of the least breathings of his
Spirit; and such a heart is precious indeed in Gods eyes: this, O Lord, thou
can not despise, Psa. 51. 17. so the words are. God can despise Kings and
Emperors, God can despise the glory and luster of the world; but a humble
broken spirit, the Lord cannot despise. There is no object that God accounts
worth the looking at in the world, but such a one: Esa. 66. 2. To him will I
look, says God. The highest heavens, and the lowest heart, are the two places
of Gods most glorious residence.

Seventhly, it is a public spirit, enlarged for public good; not a narrow, 7
base, straightned spirit. Godliness does mightily enlarge the heart of a man:
The Lord persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Shem; the words signify, The
Lord enlarge the heart of Iaphet. When a man is converted, his heart is
enlarged; and it must needs be so, for now the spirit makes after the
enjoyment of God, an infinite universal good: now it opens it self to receive
and embrace a God, in whom it expects all good; before it followed after some
poor drops of good in the creature; but now finds all is to be enjoyed in
God himself; and being thus enlarged to receive an universal good, it desires
to enlarge it self, as much as it can, to be an universal good, but that is
proper to God: yet a public good it may be, and therefore spreads it self as
far as it can. Now it loves good as good, not upon particular private
grounds; and therefore the more good, the more beloved. It minds good, as in
reference to God; and therefore where God may be most honored, there the
heart most sollicitous, most industrious: it is willing therefore to empty it
self of it is private good, that the public may be furthered. If Nature will
venture it is own particular good, for the general, (as heavy things will
ascend contrary to their natures, to keep out vacuity, and so to preserve the
Universe) much more then will Grace. Every godly man, one way or other,
according to the abilities he has, is a public blessing to the place where
he lives. The Saints of God are compared to a cloud, Heb. 12. 1. the
comparision is true in this respect; a Cloud waters the earth as a common
blessing, so are they; not as water-pots, that water but a few spots of ground
in a garden. And this publikenesse of spirit is then right, and truly gracious;

First, when it is content to do public good, where it self shall be taken
little notice of; as, many times the Engine that does all in great works, is
(inward, hidden) not taken notice of.

Secondly, when he can be glad, that any public good work goes on, and
prospers, though others be used in it, and not himself, to the eclipsing of
his light.

Thirdly, when he is willing to be used in any service, though but to prepare
work for others, which they, not he, shall have the glory of after he is
gone. As Luther, writing to Melancthon, encouraging him against the strong
opposition that they met with in the cause of God; Potens est Deus causam suam
labentem servare, lapsam erigere; si nos digni non erimus, fiat per alios.
Melchior Adam. in vit. Luth. 8
God (says he) is able to preserve his own cause falling, and to raise it
fallen; if we be not worthy, let it be done by others. Such a public spirit as
this is, is an excellent spirit indeed.

Eighthly, it is a sanctified spirit: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8, He has made us partakers
of his holy spirit: Chap. 5, 23. I pray God sanctisie you throughout, your
whole spirit and soul. Sanctified, that is,

1 Not such a mixed spirit, as the 1
common spirit of the world, has not that mixture of filth and dross in it,
but is pure; purity consists in freedom from mixture with that which is of a
baser nature, if mixed with that which is of a superior nature, that does not
make the thing impure; as when silver is mixed with gold, but when it is mixed
with lead or dross. The spirits of the godly are mixed with grace, but that
makes them more excellent and pure; such mixture of spiritual excellency that
is above the excellency of the soul, their spirits close with: but if there
come any mixture with that which is base, beneath the excellency of the spirit,
this defiles, and this their spirits cannot close with, but are sensible of the
evil of it, and never leave working till they have purged it out from them.

2 Sanctified, that is, God has 2
set them apart for himself; as Psalm. 4. 3. Know that the Lord has set apart
him that is godly for himself, and they have devoted, dedicated, and
consecrated themselves, to and for God; they are spirits resigned, given up to
the Lord.

3 All the parts, abilities, common gifts of this Spirit are sanctified, 3
a higher excellency is put upon the^ than they have in the spirits of other
men; weak, natural parts in these, are more excellent than the strongest not
sanctisied: As the consecration of Wood, and Leather, and mean things, put
greater excellency upon them, than Gold and Silver had, that were not so
consecrated; yet the larger the natural parts are of a sanctified spirit, the
more excellent it is.

4 It is able to make a sanctified use of what it meddles withal, of 4
what it has to deal in; of all the works and ways of God, it makes all to
be holy to the Lord.

Ninthly, It is a true heroical spirit; none have such brave heroical spirits
as Gods servants have; it is not discouraged by difficulties, it will set upon
things a sluggish spirit thinks impossible; it will go through that which such a
one thinks can never be; it breaks through armies of difficulties, that it
might go on in its way, and accomplish its work, not discouraged as the
sluggish spirit, who cries out, there is a Lion in the way. Non quia dura, sed
quia molles patimur.
It is not the difficulty of the work, but the baseness of our spirits, that
ordinarily hinders us in our way; some difficulties that others count great
hindrances, it slights and contemns; Nil magnum in rebus human is nisi animus
magna despiciens: s^ magnanimus sueris nunquam juditabis tibi contumel am
sieri. Sen de quatuor virtue.
as reproach and scorn in the ways of God; it can contemn contemners, and
vilify those who account the ways of God as vile; this, the true spirit of
Jesus Christ, of whom it is said, Hebr. 12. 2. He endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, the shame whereby others despised him, was despised of him,
not accounting it a thing worthy for his spirit to be troubled at; no more is a
true godly spirit hindered in his way by this, than one riding on with strength
in his journey, hindered by the barking of whappets at his horse heels, he
rides on and minds them not; and as for railings, and revilings at the ways of
God, by which many are discouraged, the spirit of a godly man can shake them
off, as St. Paul the Viper that hung upon his hand, and feel no hurt; it
bears off many hardships, that are like to be very grievous to flesh and
blood, that it is like to meet with, which discourages the hearts of many, both
from beginning to enter upon Gods ways, and from continuance in them after some
entrance made; as the other Spies that were sent with Caleb and Joshua, their
hearts fainted, they tell of great difficulties are like to be met with; The
land indeed is good, but there are children of Anak there, and walls that reach
up to Heaven; but this was the brave heroical spirit of Caleb and Joshua,
their spirits were undaunted, they would go up and possess the Land, let what
ever could be stand in their way. Thus many have convictio^s of conscience
that the ways of God indeed are good, but the great hardships that they are
like to suffer in those ways, keep them off; But a true godly spirit, is
willing to embrace Religion, with all the hard terms annexed unto it; it is a
poor, mean spirit that must indent with God a forehand: If I were sure to
hold out, to have at last that which I desire, then I would venture upon the
ways of godliness; but I am afraid it will never be: and so sinks, and has no
mind to set upon the work. But this spirit will set upon the work with all the
hazards, as Ester, If I perish, I perish; this was a brave spirit indeed. If
she had had such a base cowardly spirit as many, to think, Alas what good shall
I do? I may hazard my self, and bring my self into trouble, but no likelihood
of any good will come of it: she is content to venture all, upon a mere
possibility of good; To break through armies of difficulties, as David's
Worthies showed the excellency of their spirits, in breaking through an Host to
gratify their Lord. If the Worthies of God in former times, had stood upon
every difficulty, what had been done in Gods cause? No, this spirit sets upon
that which God calls it to, does what it can, and leaves it self, and the issue
of its work to God, as Ioab 2 Samuel 10. 12. Let us play the men for our people,
and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good: It
was a brave speech of him, that showed an excellent brave spirit in him.

A poor low spirit, thinks every difficulty an impossibility; but this spirit
will not easily entertain thoughts of impossibility in services that are noble
and worthy of choice spirits; it will rather think with it self; Was there
never any such thing done before? or was there never any thing that had as much
difficulty as this in it? that was as unlikely as this, to come to a good issue
and yet was at last accomplished? why may not this then be done? and so sets
about it, without any more objectings against it, with this resolution; Quic
quid sieri potuit, potest; That which has been done, may be done. Such a
spirit as this is ashamed to see and hear, and read what great things have
been done by others, and what poor things it has all this while been employed
in. Suetonius reports of Julius Caesar, that seeing Alexanders Statue, he
fetched a deep sigh, because he at that age had done so little. Yea, so far
is a true heroical spirit from being discouraged by difficulties, as its
raised by difficulties; thus its said of a true godly man, that he stirs up
himself against the hypocrite, that he holds on his way, and grows stronger
and stronger, Job 17. 8, 9. When a difficulty, when any opposition, or danger
comes in Gods ways, now it sees an opportunity offered of showing so much the
more love to Jesus Christ, so much the more sincerity, and power of grace, to
bring so much the more honor to God and his cause, and in this it rejoices;
this was the reason why the Apostles and Martyrs, rejoiced so much in their
sufferings for Christ.

When Ignatius felt his flesh and bones begin to be ground betwixt the teeth
of wild beasts, now says he, I begin to be a Christian. When Alexander saw an
apparent great danger near him, his spirit works I am periculum par animo
Alexandri.
on this manner; Now says he, here is a danger fit for the mind of Alexander
to encounter withal. When David at first heard of being the Kings son in
law, he was troubled at it. 1 Samuel 18. 22. But when he knew, what a difficult
and hazardable service he was to undertake for it, then says the Text in the
26, Verse It pleased David well to be the Kings son in law: that which would
have discouraged others, who would gladly have had the preferment, that raised
the spirit of David, and made him like the offer the better; and surely this
was not an ordinary, common spirit; it was the true magnanimity of the spirit
of David.

Tenthly, A solid, serious spirit; 10
other spirits are slight, empty, vain, frothy, rash spirits, which are
exceeding great evils in the spirits of men; sleightnesse of spirit, makes men
almost incapable of any good; what ever judge meant the Lord lays upon me in
this world, yet the Lord deliver me from a vain, slight, frothy spirit: how
do the blessed glorious truths of God, which are of infinite consequence,
pass by such, and are never minded; nothing sticks by them, nothing abides
with them that may be useful for their everlasting good: but this spirit is
put into a serious, solid frame; it examines the ground of actions, compares
one thing with another, looks much at the issue of things; and this must needs
be, because the fear of the great God, and the fear of eternity is fallen
upon it, Esaias 11. 2. These are joined together, the spirit of knowledge,
wisdom, the spirit of counsel and the fear of the Lord; it converses so much
with serious things of high and infinite consequence, that it must needs be put
in a serious frame.

Eleventhy, It is an active, lively 11
spirit, serious but not sullen, not heavy, dull; solid but not stupid, 1 Pet.
2. 5. The godly are called lively stones; stones, because of their solidnesse;
lively, because of their activenesse; God is himself a pure act, and these
spirits have some likeness to him, and nearenesse with him; the higher things
are, the more active; water more than earth, air more than water, fire more
than all; these spirits are raised to the highest excellencies of any creature
in this world. They are of quick understanding, as Esaias 11. 3. And ready
prepared to every good work, as 2 Timothy 2. 21. The most noble, excellent
activenesse is from life, and the more noble and excellent the life, the more
noble and excellent activenesse; as sense more than the plants, and the
rational life more than the sense, and grace more than that, and glory more
than all; the more spiritual, the more active; the more power the form has
over the matter, the more active the thing is; and the more the form is sunk,
as it were into the matter, there the less activenesse, as in the earth, and
all heavy bodies; now where life is, there the form has most power, and the
higher the life, the greater the power; Godly spirits therefore are not
melancholy, for melancholy makes dull, but they are active and lively, though
they may be heavy and sad, if put to some employment not suitable to their
spirits; but put them upon spiritual employments, and then you shall find them
lively and active; when they have to deal with God, when drawing near unto
him in spiritual exercises, then they are full of life, they are fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord, as Romans 12. 11. Boiling in spirit, (so the word
signifies) when serving the Lord. The effectual fervent prayer of the
righteous availes much, says S. James 5. Chapter 16. verse; The working
prayer, so the word signifies, and such a working, (...)(...).
that notes the most liveliest activity that can be. Birds, whose motion is on
high, fly swiftly when they are got up, but slutter when they are below; so the
spirits of the godly, when they are got up on high to God, in spiritual
exercises, then they move lively: but when they are busied in inferior things,
they are oft-times dull and heavy.

Twelfthly, the spirits of the godly 12
are faithful spirits, faithful to God and men, such as will certainly stick
to, and will be true to their principles; you may know where to find them, if
you know their principles, which are sound and good, as before. The righteous
is as an everlasting foundation, Prove. 10. 25. you may build upon him; there is
an evennesse in all his ways, a constancy, an universality of truth and
faithfulness; for it proceeds from the holiness of their spirits; as the
faithfulness of God proceeds from his holiness: and therefore those mercies
that are called the sure mercies of David, Esaias 55. 3. they are called the
(...).
holy sure things of David, Acts 13. 34. Gods holiness makes them sure, being
once promised.

There may be a particular faithfulness in some things, between man and man,
where but some common gifts, and the spirit not this choice spirit, but that
faithfulness comes not from a holy frame; and therefore there is not an
universality in it.

These are the special qualifications of this other spirit, these are the
bright glistering Pearls, with which a godly soul, the Kings daughter, the
Spouse of Jesus Christ, is beautiful within, and enlightened, free, royal,
sublime, humble, sanctified, public, heroical, serious, active, faithful
spirit; this is another spirit indeed, not the common ordinary spirit.

Sixthly, another spirit, it feeds upon 6
other comforts, differing from those that common spirits feed upon: Every life
draws to it things suitable to the nature of it, and finds some kind of
content and comfort in the enjoyment of such things. We account life no life,
except it has the fillings of it, with things suitable, from whence it may have
comfort, according to the variety of several principles, whereby every
creature that has life, lives; such is the variety of comforts in the world:
So the life of this spirit must have comforts suitable to it, and because it
differs from the life of other spirits, therefore the comforts of it are
different, it lives upon other comforts. The life of a Dog is maintained by
carrion, of a Swine by swill, of a Toade by poison; but what does a man care
for these? though Carrion lie in the ditch, though Swill be in the kennell,
though poison cast upon the dunghill, he cares not for them; for his life is
maintained by, and he feeds upon other comforts. Thus though the men of the
world living by sense and lust, have no other comforts to feed upon, but such
as are suitable to them; but the godly having a life that has higher and more
noble principles, they feed upon higher and more noble comforts.

While Nebuchadnezzar lived the life of a beast, he fed on grass; but after,
when he was restored to his Kingdom, and began to live the life of a King, he
had other comforts to feed upon, and delight himself in. The joy of the
spirits of the godly are like the light of the Sun, fed by heavenly
influence; but the joys of other men, are as the light of a Candle, fed by
base and stinking matter: for so Solomon, makes the comparison, Prove. 4. 18.
The righteous is as the Sun, that shines more and more unto the perfect day;
and the joys of the wicked he compares to a Candle, Prove. 24. 20. The Candle
of the wicked shall be put out. The men of the world have seduced spirits, they
seed upon ashes, Esa. 44. 20. The curse of the Serpent is upon them, upon their
bellies they go, dust they eat, while they feed upon their Swill and Husks:
the spirits of the Saints find bread in their fathers house; their comforts
are inward: A good man is satisfied from himself, Prove. 13. 14. he has a
spring within in his own breast, he need not shark abroad: Godliness with
contentment is great gain, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 6. (...)
Godliness with selfe-sufficiency, so the word signifies.

When Oecolampadius lay sick, his friends asked him, whether the light
Oecolampadius.
did not offend him? he clapped his hand on his breast, and said, Hic sat lucis,
Here is light enough; this is soirituall comfort, that which arises from a
right frame of spirit. Hence the word in Saint James chap. 5. 13, translated
merry, is (...), the rectitude of the mind; noting that all true mirth must
come from the right frame of the mind. As for other mirth, I have said of
laughter, it is mad, and of mirth, What do thou? As when the humors of the
body are all in a right temper, there is a sweet sensitive delight in the body;
much more in the spirit, when the faculties and the frame of it are in a right
temper. Spiritual comforts are such as are above the soul, and therefore put
an excellency upon it; the comforts that are in things beneath the faculty,
cannot but be mean, and do debase it. How much beneath the excellency of the
spirit of a man, is the flesh of beasts, the juice of the Grape, or any vain
sports, or whatsoever may give content to the sensitive part? but there are
comforts that are above the soul, spiritual, heavenly, divine things, and
these this spirit feeds upon; they are comforts that the spirit rejoices in
before the Lord: That a sweet and blessed joy indeed, that is enjoyed before
the Lord; and when the Lord most present, most enjoyed. Other vain sensual
spirits have joy, but not before the Lord; the apprehension of the presence of
the Lord damps all: and therefore they desire not to have mention made of the
Name of the Lord, Amos 6. 10. So to rejoice, as to be able to bless God for
our joy; so to rejoice, as to make the presence of God the chief matter of
(...) joy indeed, this, (...), for the spirit to feed upon such comforts, is a
choice blessing indeed. They are spiritual comforts, for they are administered
to the soul by a special work of the Holy Ghost: it is the office that the
Holy Ghost is designed to, by the Father and the Son, to be the Comforter,
to bring in suitable comforts to the spirits of his setvants; and surely the
holy Ghost will not be failing in this work of his, as the Father and the
Son have been full and glorious in all their works, so is the Holy Ghost in
his; and therefore such must be the comforts of the spirits of Gods servants,
as must manifest a glorious work of the Holy Ghost, in the discharge of that
he is sent to do by the Father and the Son. No marvel then though the
Apostle called this joy, unspeakeable and glorious. Consider what a difference
must there needs be between the comfort that a little meat and drink, and
vain sports afford, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost, which he conveyes
into the souls of the godly, by the appointment of the Father and the Son?
Surely these must needs be soule-satisfying, soule-ravishing consolations: God
is the God of all consolation, and therefore here are all consolations. There
is surely infinite good and sweetness, treasures of all excellency in God, and
what are they all for, but to be comforts for the spirits of his servants to
rejoice in? these are not for common ordinary spirits, they have meat the
world knows not of; a stranger shall not intermeddle in these joys: men of
rank and quality, as they are in higher condition than others, so their
comforts and delights are much different from the delights of ordinary people.
As God has raised the condition of his people higher than other men, so he
has raised their comforts; Childrens bread from the Lords own table, is
provided for them, while husks and swill serves worldly spirits. Their comforts
such, as are the delights of God himself, and of Jesus Christ; they partake
with them in their joys: and surely, such joys as they come and join with
them in, must needs be sweet and glorious indeed. I and my Father (says
Christ) will come and sup with them, and they shall sup with me. They have
dainties which their spirits feed upon, that are savoury even to the Father and
the Lord Jesus Christ. Surely, the world mistakes, who thinks the life of
godliness not to be a comfortable life; as if the most excellent and highest
life should have the worst and lowest condition: surely, it is a gross
mistake, to think that the spirits of the Saints should be the most sad and
melancholy spirits: Gods Spirit witnesses of them, that they are the children
Spiritus Calvimanus est spiritus (...)cus.
of the Light, yea, that they are light. If they be sad, it is because they
meddle too much with things below; it is when their spirits are down; when they
get up their spirits to heavenly things, then they can rejoice and sweetly
delight themselves; their hearts are enlarged, their souls are filled with
joy. The Birds do not use to sing when they are on the ground, but when got up
into the air, when on the top of trees, then they sing sweetly. If they be sad
and melancholy, it is because they differ no more from the world than they do,
because they retain so much likeness to your spirits, still in them; were they
freed altogether from the likeness there remains in them to your spirits,
they would never be sad more, but their spirits would be filled with
everlasting joy: For the present they joy in things suitable to them, and
sutablenes is the thing that causes comfort in any creature. If the Swine could
express it self, it would tell you, that no such comfort as in Swill and Dung,
and wonders that any other creature can take comfort in any other thing like to
this, because this is the most suitable to their natures: Thus worldly brutish
spirits, because these low vile things are so suitable to them, they think
there can be no such comfort in any other thing; these things they rejoice in,
for they know no better: but if their natures were changed, their greatest
comfort would be in the despising and vilifying such comforts. S. Augustine
before his conversion, Quam suave istis suavitatibas carere.
could not tell how he should want those delights he found so much
contentment in; but after, when his nature was changed, when he had another
spirit put into him, then he says, O how sweet is it to be without those
former sweet delights! You think we have no comforts, or at least not like
yours; know, we can taste natural comforts as well as you, if the poison of
sin be not mixed with them; and God gives us leave to rejoice in them: God
has made these outward comforts for his setvants. Surely God has not made the
flowers for Spiders and Frogs, but rather for the Be to suck honey out of
them: we can taste another manner of sweetness in them, than you can; for we
can taste the love of God through them; we can taste them as the comforts that
flow from that God, in whom all comfort is; we can taste them as forerunners
of eternal comforts. A Be can suck her honey out of a flower, that a Fly
cannot do.

But besides these, there are other conveyances of comforts, through which our
spirits find comforts to feed on; namely, the Ordinances, where the Lord lets
out himself in a blessed sweet manner, to the souls of his servants; and yet
besides, God communicates many comforts immediately, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Now our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and GOD even our Father, which has loved us, and
has given us everlasting consolation. Do you think we have no comforts?
What, did Jesus Christ come into the world, suffer so many sorrows and
miseries, die such a painful death, and all to bring us to a more sorrowful
estate than we had before? Let us alone with our comforts, we envy not yours.
As Tertullian says, in his Apology against the Gentiles, Wherein do we
offend you? If we believe there are other pleasures, Cap. 2. Quo vos
ossendimus* si alias praesumimus voluptates, si oblectari nolumus nostra
injuria e(...) reprobamus quae placent vobis, nec vosnestra a delectant.
if we will not delight in our selves, it is our own wrong; we reject those
things that please you, and you are not delighted with ours.

CAP. 11.
Wherein the excellency of this gracious spirit appears.

THus they are men of another spirit, and this is their excellency: A spirit
thus differenced from the world, where all this is found, is an excellent
spirit indeed. Here is true worth, all the bravery and glory of the world not
worthy to be mentioned with this. The soul is the excellency of a man, and
this is the excellency of the soul: a man's self is his soul. Hence, whereas
in Matthew. 16. 26. it is said, What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world, and lose his soul? it is said in another Evangelist, Luke 9. 25. What
shall it prosit a man if he gain the world, and lose himself? Surely,
spiritual excellencies are the highest excellencies; as,

First, these spiritual excellencies have this propriety in them, they 1
make a man a better man, wheresoever they are, which bodily excellencies do
not, nor all the riches nor honors in the world: A man is not the better man
because he has money, clothes, honors, better diet than others; these are but
outward things added to him, no intrinsecall excellencies.

Secondly, these spiritual excellencies are the beginnings of eternal 2
lise, the same life we shall have in heaven: and hence the work of Gods Spirit
in the soul, is called, The Earnest of the Spirit; not a pawn, but an
Earnest: for a pawn is to be returned again, but an Earnest is part of the
whole sum that is to follow. That which we have of Gods Spirit, is part of
the same glory we shall have fully in heaven; it is not only an evidence unto
us that there is glory coming, but it is a beginning of the glory, the
fullness whereof is to come afterward. Such a spirit as has this life, lives a
life far above the common life of the world, even the life of heaven, the
same life that Angels and Saints do live in heaven, the life of those blessed
spirirs there. We mistake if we think eternal life is only in heaven;
eternal life is in this world, in the excellent frame of the spirits of Gods
servants, 1 John 3. 15. Life is the chief excellency communicated to the
Creature, and the highest life, the highest excellency. There is more distance
between the excellency of the meanest, weakest godly man in the world, and the
most eminent man for parts and common gifts only, than between the meanest
and weakest godly soul, and the most eminent glorified Saint in the highest
heavens; the weakest godly man excels him that is most eminent in common gifts,
more than the most eminent Saint in heaven excells him: for the glorified Saint
is only higher in some degrees in the same excellency, which in the
principles, yea, and in some luster, the meanest Saint on earth has; he has
that which will at last grow up to heavens glory: but the distance between
him, and the man who only has the excellencies of parts, learning, common
gifts, it is essential: All parts and common gifts in the world can never grow
up to this.

Thirdly, yea, this is not only the life of Angels, the life of heaven, but 3
the life of God himself; for so it is called by God himself, Ephesians. 4. 11.
Ratio nihil aliudest, quam in corpits huma* (...) pars divim (...) meisa (...)
Epist ^7.
Seneca says of Reason, that it is part of the Divine Spirit in man's body, it
is much more true of Grace, it enables the soul in some resemblance to come the
nearest that can be, to live as God lives, to work as God works; it represents
God in his highest glory, and therefore it is called, The lynage of God: This
shows more to the world what God is, than all the frame of Gods creation
besides. It is not as an Image, which has only the dead lineaments drawn,
though there be some beauty in this; but as the Image in a glass, which
presents the motion as well as the lineaments: yea, and not only so, but as the
son that bears the Image of the father; and this represents the life: or as
if a glass had life in it, and so could enjoy the sweetness, the good of that
Image it represents unto it self. This Spirit is such a living glass of the
blessed God, that it enjoys the good and sweetness of that Image of God it
has in it: Yea, one degree higher, it is called the very Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1. 4. as if it were nothing else but a sparkle of the Deity it self. Seneca
has a strong speech concerning man's soul, What can we call the soul Quid
aliud voces animum, quam Deum in corepore humano ^o (...) (...)tem. Sencea.
(says he) but God abiding in an humane body? If a soul that has only
natural excellencies, comes so near God, how near then comes it to him, when
raised by those spiritual and supernatural excellencies we have spoke of.
Yea, yet there is an higher degree than this; It is called the glory of the
Lord, Romans (...). 3. yea, a higher degree than all the former; the excellency
of this spirit is such, as it is one spirit with God himself, 2 Cor. 6. 17. He
that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit. It was the excellency of Joshua,
that he had the spirit of Moses upon him; of Elisha, that he had the spirit
of Eliah; what is it then to have the Spirit of God himself? yea to be one
spirit with him. Put all these then together, godliness by which this other
spirit is raised higher than common spirits, it is the life of God, the Image
of God, the divine Nature, the glory of God, yea one spirit with God; and is
not here an high and glorious excellency?

Fourthly, this makes him, wheresoever 4
it is, fit to glorify God in the world, and so the soul thus endued, is not
only a glass to represent, a living glass to enjoy the comfort of what it
does represent; but as a glass to reflect upon the face of God himself, the
glory of his own Image, and that by a principle within it self. Other glasses
can reflect upon the thing whose image it has, if acted by a hand externally;
but this by an inward living principle, and so gives God his glory actively,
which no other creature can do, but Angels, and men's souls, who have these
spiritual excellencies in them. Were it not for a few of these spirits, what
glory would God have in the world? how little would he be minded, or regarded?
But these are they who have high thoughts of God, who have trembling frames
before him, who do reverence, fear, adore, love, cleave to, trust in, magnify
the Name of the great God in the world; these sanctify his Name in his
worship, they worship him as a God, they worship him in spirit and truth, and
such worshippers God seeks, Ioh. 4. 23. as these he highly esteems of, and
much rejoices in; these take notice of him in all his creatures, in the ways
of his providence, and use the creatures for him, from whom they are; the glory
of God is dear and precious to these; this is the excellency of their
spirits, they are not sunk in the dregs of the world, but being kept in some
measure in their purity, they work up to God, do as it were naturally flow to
God, as to their Center.

Fifthly, these are such as are fit to stand before the Lord, to have converse, 5
and enjoy communion with him. Dan. 1. 4. we read, that those that were judged
fit to stand in the Kings palace, before King Nebuchadaezzar, they must have
no blemish, they must be well-favoured, and skillful in all wisdom, and
cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and taught the learning, and
the tongue of the Caldeans.

Every spirit is not fit to stand before the King of heaven, to have converse
with him; none but the reasonable creature is capable of any such thing as
communion with God, and it must be the reasonable creature thus raised, they
must be men of other spirits. A man of an excellent spirit, cannot endure
converse with base sordid spirits; much less can God, who is that blessed holy
Spirit. No creature can have communion with another, but such as live the same
life; hence the beast cannot have communion, with man, because man's proper life
is rational; these are the spirits who being partakers of the life of God, are
fitted for converse and communion with him: Likeness is the ground of all
liking in communion, it is the likeness they have to God, that makes God to
delight in communion with them; God loves to dwell with these, and that in a
special manner. 2 Corin. 6. 16. As God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, I will be their God, and they shall be my people; the words are
very significant in the Original; I will in-dwell in them, so the words (...).
are. There are two ins in the Original, as if God could never have near
enough communion with them, Psalm. 4 1. 12. He sets them before his face for
ever, as loving to look upon them. Now how great, how inconceiveable a dignity
is this, for the poor creature to have this near communion with God? Cursed
be that man, says that noble Marquess, Marcus Galeaceus, that prizes all the
gold and silver in the world, worth one days enjoyment of communion with Jesus
Christ; he was a man of another spirit, who spoke from his own experience, of
that sweet he had found of communion with Christ, who had parted with much
honor and riches for him. Enoch and Noah, who were men of other spirits in
their generations, are said to walk with God: God took them up even in this
world to walk with him; many a sweet turn have these spirits with their God;
God delights to have them near him, that he might reveal and communicate
himself to them; these know much of Gods mind; the secrets of the Lord are
with these, and to them he reveals his Covenant, God does not love to hide his
face from these. That hidden wisdom which the Princes of the World knew not,
which eye has not seen, ear heard, neither has entered into the hearts of
men to conceive, yet has the Lord revealed them to us by his Spirit, says the
Apostle, 1 Corin. 2. 10. even by that Spirit, that searches the deep things of
God, and by virtue of this communion, these can prevail much with God; As it
is said of Jacob, Genesis 32. 28. as a Prince he had power with God and
prevailed. Hence S. Bernard in his meditatios, giving diverse rules of
strictness, of purging the heart, of being humble and Et cum talis fueris,
inemento mei. Bern. meditat. devoti^^. cap 5.
holy, and when thou art thus, says he, then remember me; as knowing the
prayers of such a one would much prevail with God for blessing.

Sixthly, this spirit is fit for any service, any employment God calls it 6
to; it is a vessel of mercy, sitted for the Masters use; Many honorable
services God has to be done in the world; men of ordinary common spirits, are
not sit for them; if they should be set about them, they would spoil the work,
and dishonor God in it. If a man have a choice piece of work, he will not
employ one that has not ability to reach to it; he knows the work would
fail, and it would be his disgrace. When God would employ some about building
his Tabernacle, he fills them first with his Spirit, so he says of Bezaliel,
and Aholiab. If a man be employed in government, he had need be a man in whom
the Spirit of God is, as Pharaoh said concerning Joseph, Genesis 4 1. 3 8. When
God chose Saul for government, he gave him another spirit, so that he was
another man: When God had a piece of work to do of high esteem, beyond Saul's
reach, he looks out for another, who had a more excellent spirit than Saul,
and says, I have found a man according to mine own heart, who shall fulfill
all my will. The excellency of a thing is in the use of it: What can it do? The
excellency of the Angels is, in that they are ministering spirits; and the
excellency of man is to be serviceable; his excellency is not, that he can eat,
and drink, and sport, and go fine, but that he is of use, fitted for what
service God has to do in the world, that he can further Gods ends in his
works, that God may say of him, I have found a man according to mine own
heart, that is prepared to fulfill all my will. When Esaias Chap. 6. had his
spirit purged, signified by that sign of one of the Cherubims, touching his
tongue with a coal from the Altar, he presently shows the excellency of his
spirit in this, that when God had a choice piece of work to do, and asks
whom he shall send, The Prophet readily and cheerfully answers, Lord here am I,
send me: do but set the truth of God before these, it is enough; their spirits
being gracious close with it, yield to it, obey it, set about the work it
shows they should do; but when men's spirits are corrupt and unsavory, there
is such a stir to convince them of Gods mind, in that which is not agreeable
to them; so much a do to prevail with them to the practice, though convinced,
that it would grieve a man to have to deal with them.

The excellency of the spirits of Gods people, is set out to us very sweetly in
that expression of the Psalmist, Psalm. 18. 44, As soon as they hear, they
shall obey me. There is a wilingnesse of spirit to their work, what God would
have, what ever it be; if they apprehend it above their reach, they cast not
off their work but seek to God for supply of ability, knowing that there is
spirit enough in God, that God has ways enough to enable the spirits of his
servants unto, and carry them on in any work he sets them about; they know
that God will never put any man, upon any services, but by one means or other,
he will fit his spirit for them: for it is the great delight of God, to have
men in service, to be of spirits fitted for service. When the Devil himself
has any work to do, he chooses men who have spirits fitted for his work,
and in them he delights; If the work requires boldness and impudence, he has
men of daring spirits, who will set upon it, and go through with it; If it
requires subtilty, he chooses men of more moderate spirits, who can keep in
their passions, and secretly, and insensibly work their own ends. We read,
Revel. 12. the Devil there opposes Gods Saints in fiery and open violence, as
a Dragon; but afterward, Chap. 13. he gives his power to the Beast who had
seven heads, who would work with more subtilty, to draw the world after him;
and as we read, Hos. 7. 4, 6, 7, verses, those who labored to set up the
Calves in Dan, and Bethel, were as hot as an Oven in their purposes,
intentions, and desires; but because they saw the best way to have the work
succeed, was not to carry it on at first by open violence, therefore they were
content to stay; As the Baker cease from Cornel. a Lapide in locum.
raising after he has kneaded the dough until it be leavened, and when it is
once leavened, then he puts it into the Oven; so they were content to forbear
a while, until they had sent fit instruments abroad amongst the people to
leaven them, to prepare them, by persuading them, that if such a thing were
done, it were no great matter; they should still worship the true God; the
difference was but the circumstance of the place; and thus when they were
leavened, then they were fit for the Oven; that is, for the purposes and
intentions, of those who desired to set up the Calves, which were as hot as an
Oven. According to any service the Devil has for men, he has devices to
raise their spirits to that height of wickedness, as shall fit them for it. We
have a notable relation of Hospinian concerning this. When the Jesuits have
made choice of an Instrument, for that King-killing service, that they intend
to set Hospinian hist. Jesuit. p. 225.
him about, they do not put him upon it until they have first raised, and
sitted his spirit for the service by these means.

1. They bring him to a very private place, in a Chapel or Oratory, where the
knife lies wrapped up in a cloth, with an Ivory sheath, with diverse characters,
and Agnus Dei upon it; they draw the knife, and bedew it with holy water, and
hang on the haft of it some Beads consecrated with this Indulgence, That so
many blows, as he gives in the killing the King, so many souls he shall save
out of Purgatory: then they give the knife to him, commending it to him in
these words; O thou chosen son of God, take to thee the sword of Iephte,
Sampson, David, Gideon, Judith, of Machaheus, of julius the second, who
defended himself from the Princes by his sword: go and be wisely courageous,
and GOD strengthen thy hand; then they all fall upon their knees with this
prayer; Be present, O ye Cherubins and Seraphins; be present ye Thrones,
Powers, holy Angels, fill this holy vessel with glory, give him the crown of
all the holy Martyrs; he is no longer ours but your companion; and thou, O God,
strengthen his arm, that he may do thy will; give him thyhelmet and wings, to
fly from his enemies; give him thy comforting beams, which may joy him in the
midst of all his sorrows; Then they bring him to the Altar, where the picture
of Iacobus Clemens is, who killed Henry the third of France, the Angels
protecting of him, and then they show him a crown of glory, and say, Lord
respect this thy arm, and executioner of thy justice; then four Jesuits are
appointed privately to speak with him; they tell him that they see a divine
luster in his face, which moves them to fall down and kiss his feet, and now
he is no more a mortal man; they envy his happiness, every one sighing and
saying, Would to God I were in your room, that I might escape Purgatory, and
go immediately into Paradise; but if they perceive him to shrink and be troubled
after all this, they will sometimes affright him with terrible apparitions in
the night, and sometimes have the Virgin Mary, and the Angels appear before
him, etc. Thus you see, how the Devil will have men's spirits fit for their
work, and when they are fit, then he uses them, and not before; much more will
God look to have the spirits of his servants fit for their employments, and
then only he delights to use them, and those are the spirits who are higly
accounted of, who are exceedingly honorable in the sight of God, who are
fitted for his own service.

Seventhly, this puts a luster of Majesty and beautic upon a man. Wisdom 7
(much more all the excellencies of this Spirit) makes a man's face to shine; as
the light of a Lantern puts a luster upon the Lantern, so the brightness of
these spirits puts a luster upon the men in whom they are. Men of such spirits
as these are, have a daunting presence in the eyes of those who behold them. It
is reported of Basil, that such was the Majesty and luster of hisspirit,
appearing Gregor. crat. de landibus Basil^i.
in his very countenance, that when the Emperor Valens came unto him, while he
was in holy exercises, that it struck such a terror into him, that he reeled,
and had sallen, had he not been upheld by those that were with him. When the
Officers came to take Christ, he did but say, I am he, and let out a beam of
the Majesty of his Deity, it struck such a fear in them, as made them all
fall backward: This Spirit has a beam of this Majesty, and somewhat of the
daunting power of it: how unable are wicked men to converse with men of such
spirits? They often go from their company convinced, self-condemned; their
consciencestroubled, and their hearts daunted in them.

Eighthly, this spirit makes men fit for any condition that God shall put 8
them into; they know how to yield to God, to sinde out Gods meaning, to carry
themselves in every condition, so as to work out that which God would have by
it; which men of ordinary spirits cannot do. S. Paul was a man of a most
admirable sweet spirit, and he shows it much in this; I know (says he) how to
want and how to abound; how to be full, and how to be empty. He could go
through good report and evil report, and keep his way still, and carry his
work before him. It is the weakness and vanity of our spirits that makes us
think, that if we were in such and such a condition, then we could do thus
or thus; this is a temptation to hinder us from the duties of the present
condition, by putting our thoughts upon another. It is the excellency of ones
spirit, if the present condition be not suitable to the mind, to make the
mind suitable to the condition, that the present which God calls to, may go on.

When a joint in the body is set right, it enables not only to move one way
without pain, but to move any way according to the use of the member; so where
ones spirit is set right, it does not only enable to go on with some comfort
in one condition, but in any condition that God calls unto, to carry on the
work of that condition with joy: and hence the recovering of the spirit from a
distempered condition to a right frame, is compared to the setting of a member
in joint: As, Gal. 6. 1. If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness: the word signifies,
Put him into joint again. And here you have had the discovery, as of (...).
what this other spirit is, so wherein the excellency of this other spirit
lies; now then let us make Applicaon of all.

CAP. III. Cap. 3.

A discovery to the men of the world, whereby they may see that their spirits
are not like the spirits of godly men.

HEnce let the men of the world see, there is a great difference between their
spirits, and the spirits of the godly. There are men indeed of excellent
spirits, God has such in the world, in whom he delights, with whom he
converses, whom he employes in high and excellent services: but you are of
base, sordid, unclean spirits; the spirit of whoredom, of lying,
stubbornness, vanity, folly is in you; your spirits drossie, sensual,
froward, malicious, profane, slight, empty, unsavory, unfaithful, perverse:
What delight can the Lord, who is an infinite, holy, glorious Spirit, take in
such? How far are these from any communion with God? No marvel though
nothing of God, or any spiritual thing be savory to them. Oh the corrupt
principles that men's spirits are possessed with, the corrupt rules they go by,
and corrupt ends they have in what they do! the base employments they put
their spirits to, the noisome distempers of them, and base comforts they feed
upon! The heart of the wicked is little worth, says the Scripture, Pro. 10.
20. Perhaps your Lands, your houses may be something worth, but what are your
hearts worth? they are worth nothing, full of chafe and dross; like childrens
pockets, full of stones and dirt, while the spirits of the godly are
Storehouses of most choice and precious treasures.

When Grace is gone from the soul, the excellency is departed from it; as it
was said of Ruben, his excellency was departed, in respect of that sin of
his. How many a man or woman, who have fair comely bodies, good complexion,
beautifully dressed up; but within, spirits most ugly and horrid; spirits full
of filth, full of venom and loathsome distempers; spirits full of wounds and
putrified sores, breeding filthiness continually; nothing else but filth and
corruption issuing out from them: Men of corrupt minds, as the Apostle
speaks? How unsavory to any who have the least of God in them? If the Lord
should give men but a view of the horrid deformednesse, and filthiness of
their spirits, it would amaze them, and sink their hearts in woeful horror;
they could not but abhor themselves, as loathsome creatures, fit to be cast
out from the Lord, as an everlasting curse: especially, if together with the
filth of their own spirits, they had a sight of the infinite brightness, and
glory of the holiness of God, who is an infinite, pure, glorious Spirit. God
abhorrs not any other filthiness, but the filth of spirits. The Devils are
abhorred of God, because they are unclean spirits. There is no other object of
Gods hatred, but the corruption of spirits. God made man's soul at first, a
most excellent creature, the very glass of his own infinite wisdom and
holiness; but now, what an ugly, base, loathsome creature is it, where it is
not renewed? If men's bodies were deformed, and ran with loathsome issues, and
putrified sores, how dejected would they be in their own thoughts? But
certainly this spirit-defilement is incomparably worse. If men's bodies were so
putrisied, that they bred vermin continually (as it is reported of Maximinus)
how grievous would it be to them? Their spirits have these loathsome diseases
upon them, by which they are infinitely more miserable. If they had such a
distemper of body, as their excrements came from them, when they knew not of
it; this would be accounted a grievous evil: but their spirits so corrupt,
that much filth comes from them, and they know not of it. Many are so deeply
putrified in their spirits, that they usually swear and speak filthily, and
know not of it; and think this a sufficient excuse, that they did not think of
it.

It is a rule in nature, that the corruption of the best thing, is always the
worst; as a stain in fine Cambrick worse than in a courser cloth: So by how
much the spirit of a man is more excellent naturally, than the body which is
the brutish part; by so much the corruption of the spirit is a greater evil
than any the body is capable of. The reason why the Devils are so vile and
miserable now, is because sin seized upon natures which by Creation were most
excellent. When diseases seize on the natural spirits in the body, they are
the most dangerous and deadly. Souldiseases, of al diseases are the greatest
evils, and usually prove deadly; yea, the least spirit-corruption would most
certainly prove deadly, were it not for the application of that blood that is
more precious than ten thousand worlds. Spirit-defilement is such a defilement
as defiles every thing you meddle with; as, Tit. 1. 15. To the impure all
things are impure. Of what use are men whose spirits are so vile? many make no
other use of their spirits, but to be, as the Philosopher said of the sensitive
soul of the Swine, it served for no other use, but to be as salt to keep the
flesh from stinking. How are many men's spirits employed about nothing else but
to make provision for the flesh, and the filthy lusts of it? O that an
immortal spirit capable of eternal communion with the blessed God, and to be
employed in such high and heavenly exercises, as for which it was made, should
now come to be so far degenerated and debased! Especially, how vile is this,
that men who in regard of estates and place, are raised above others, and be
trusted with large and blessed opportunities of worthy services for God and the
Church; but they mind nothing but satisfying their lusts, to have their
sports; let the cause of God, Church, or Commonwealth lie bleeding, they
regard not. What a lamentable thing is it, to have the weight of great
businesses of consequence, to depend upon such weak-spirited men, who mind
nothing but vanity and baseness? they have no worthy enterprise in their
thoughts, their spirits so effeminated, that they will do or suffer any thing
for the satisfying of their lusts? Others there are, who have remaining in them
many excellent parts, precious natural endowments; but of what use are they,
but to enlarge their spirits to be capable of more wickedness than the spirits
of other men are, wise to do evil, the fittest instruments for Satan's
depths? Who such enemies to Christ; as the Scribes and Pharisees, men of the
strongest parts? Who such enemies to S. Paul when he came to Athens, as the
Philosophers there? and no Church was founded at Athens, which was the place of
the greatest learning in the world. And thus it has been in other succeeding
Ages.

CAP. IV. Cap. 4.

The Reason why the men of the world, and the Godly can never agree.

HEnce we see the Reason why the men of the world, and the godly can never
agree; they are men of another spirit. Where there is difference of spirits,
there can be no agreement. Water and oil cannot mingle; no agreement between
light and darkness: they look at them, as men, whose lives are after another
fashion. That Apocryphal Author in that book of Wisdom, has an excellent
expression to this purpose, Chap. 2. 12. he brings in wicked men saying of the
godly, He is clean contrary to our doings, he is grievous unto us to behold;
his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion; we are
esteemed of him, as counterfeits; he abstaineth from our ways, as from
filthiness; he commends greatly the latter end of the just, Verse 19. Let us
examine him with rebukes and torments, etc. Let the relation, and the
engagements be what they will, yet so long as of different spirits, they cannot
close. What a different spirit was there between Jacob and Esau, who lay in
the same womb at the same time (...) There may be outward peace fo(...) while
between Gods people, and some wicked men; but inward closing of spirit there
can never be: The spirit that is in you, the world cannot receive, says our
Savior, John 14. 17. Antipathies are irreconcilable; no arguments, no means
ever used can cause an accord, except there be a change in nature. Nothing in
the world puts men's spirits in such a distance, as Grace when that comes; and
therefore where the most eminent grace, there the greatest disagreement
between them and wicked men. How many wicked men cannot but be convinced of
some godly who live with them, that they are better than themselves, that they
are conscientious men, whose Principles Cap. 5.
are truly godly, and that they walk close to them? they are not able to
charge them with any ill carriage toward them; they seek to do them all the
good they can, and yet their spirits cannot close: but as they were wont to say
in former times, Caius Seius was a good man, but he was a Christian; so now,
such are Caius Seius ho^us vir, sed Christianus.
good men, but they are too strict, and this enough to keep a perpetual
breach between them.

CAP. V.
Learn to have a right esteem of such precious spirited men.

IF the godly be of such excellent spirits, learn we then hence to have a
right esteem of them; they surely are worthy of precious account, of most
honorable esteem, who are men of such excellent spirits: Let them be what they
will, in regard of their outward condition, though never so mean and poor. No
matter what the Ring be, if the Pearl in it be precious. Many most precious
spirits have very mean outsides. The Tabernacle was beaten Gold within, but the
out side covered with Badgers skines. If the treasure be rich, what though the
vessel be earthen? Surely, these are the excellency of the earth, the very
light and beauty of the world, the glory of Gods Creation; they give a luster
to the places where they live, to the families in which they are; especially if
they walk close and faithfully with God indeed, manifesting the excellency of
their spirits in their ways; so that when they are taken away, the very places
where they lived, are darkened. This other spirit of the godly makes a Job
scraping his soars on the dunghill, and a Jeremy sticking in the myrie
dungeon, more glorious than Kings and Princes sitting crowned upon their
Thrones: these are glorious within. God is a Spirit, and he looks on men, to
see what they are in their spirits; and he esteems accordingly of them; and so
should we. What does brave clothing, what does money, what do titles of
honor raise the dignity? what? are these to the excellency of man's nature? No
certainly; the excellency of man must be that which mustmake the most
excellent and noble part truly excellent, which is the spirit of a man. If a
man would know the excellency of any thing, as of a sword, or of any other
instrument, he judges it not by the Hilt, or the inferour part; but by what
excellency the principle part has. There is a spirit in man, and the
inspiration is from the Almighty; a spirit inspired by the Almighty, and
beautified with his heavenly graces; this innobles a man indeed; it is the
ornament of the hidden man of the heart, the glorious clothing of that which
makes truly beautiful and glorious. How did many of the Heathen highly prize
those, in whom they saw any natural excellency of spirit, differing from other
men? Those amongst the Romans, who were called the Curii, and ^abritii, they
lived very poorly and meanly, yet being perceived to have more excellent
spirits than other men, they were taken from their dinner of Turnips and
Watercresses, to lead the Roman Army: How much more should we honor men in
whom we may see Divine spirits, the luster of heavenly graces shining in them?
But to show more particularly that godly men are to be highly prized in regard
of this other spirit; as they have received a spirit differing from other men,
so they are to have esteem and honor differing from other men; not to be
looked at as common men for,

First, this difference of their spirits from other men, is a certain 1
sign of the eternal love of God unto them; it comes from the treasure of
Gods everlasting love, of that choice special love of God, from the bowels of
Gods deepest mercies: it is a most infallible argument, that God has set his
heart upon them for good; as for other favors, a man may have them more than
other men, yet they are no such but may stand with Gods hatred, and with his
eternal wrath: and this is a great difference between spiritual mercies and
outward mercies, which sets an exceeding high prize upon spiritual mercies
above all others: these are the distinguishing mercies, which others are not.
But,

Secondly, the spirit receiving 2
these spiritual excellencies from Gods choice everlasting love, receives
likewise all other mercies from the same fountain; though in their own nature
they be common mercies, yet where this other spirit is, there they are
received from another Fountain than other men receive them, which adds much
sweetness and excellency to the mercies we have; they come as fruits of the
common bounty and general goodness of God to ordinary men; but to men thus
differenced from others, they come out the spring of the rich treasures of Gods
grace, tending to the furtherance of eternal mercies.

Thirdly, The Lord has an especial eye upon and delight to dwell 3
with these, who are of choice and excellent spirits; He will dwell with the
contrite heart, to revive the spirit of the humble, Esaias 57-15. He has a
special care of these spirits, that they do not fail before him; he puts
under his hand, to support, comfort, revive them. When we beat ordinary
spices, we heed not so much every dust, but some flies out and falls on the
ground; But if Bezarstone, or some special choice costly spice be beaten,
then there is care had of every dust, that the least be not lost; So though
God may afflict the choicest spirits of his servants, yet he is very careful
that their spirits fail not before him; as for other common ordinary spirits,
he cares not much to let them fail, and sink in their affliction, but this
is the merciful care of God over those spirits, whom he highly esteems of.

Fourthly, The excellencies of this spirit, are eternal excellencies, 4
they shall abide for ever, not vanish, not be taken away as common gifts and
other mercies shall, as, Ezech. 46. 17. If a Prince give of his inheritance to
one of his servants, it is to be his but for a time, and to return unto the
Prince again; but his inheritance shall be to his sons, for them for ever:
So when God gives any thing to common men, who are but his servants at best, it
must return again; GOD will call for all his mercies from them again; but
these soule-mercies of his children, shall be their inheritance for ever. Hence
God calls his Church, an eternal Excellency, Esaias 60. 15.

But fifthly, and principally, these other spirits are most honorable 5
creatures indeed, because they are reserved for other mercies; GOD gives
common mercies to common spirits, but he reserves his choice mercies for
choice spirits. With the pure, thou will show thy self pure, says David, in
the 2 Samuel 22. 27. The words are, with the choice thou Electis.
wilt show thy self choice. Abraham gave Ishmael and Hagar a bottle of water
and a few raisins, and sent them away; but the inheritance was reserved for
Isaac. So God gives to other men a few ordinary mercies, but his glorious
mercies he reserves for these peculiar ones: and, as it is said of Iehosaphat,
2 Chronicles. 21. 3. he gave his other sons great gifts of silver, gold, precious
things, fenced Cities, but the Kingdom he gave to Iehoram, because he was the
first borne: So God gives these outward mercies to other men, but the mercies
of his Kingdom, are reserved for these men of choice spirits, who are the
first borne, the chief and most excellent of all Gods creatures in this world.
Now we are the sons of God, says S. John, but it appears not what we shall
be; there is more to come hereafter, they have not spirits that will be
satisfied with the things of this world, and therefore are not as ordinary men,
who have their portion in the things of this world. God delights to fill the
capacities of all his creatures with suitable good; now these other spirits, by
that choice excellency of them, are made capable of far higher mercies than
the world can afford; they must be the good things of another world that can
fill them, and those are reserved for them. The bodies of the Saints, because
they are joined to such precious souls, shall be like the glory of the Sun,
yea, excel in glory. How glorious then shall their souls be, for whose sake
their bodies shall be thus glorious? We look upon great heirs, who have
great inheritances to come, with high esteem, though they have little for the
present: These are the great heirs of heaven, Coheires with Jesus Christ
himself; these they are, who are delivered from the wrath to come and to be
made partakers of the glory that is to be revealed. The Lord gives them no
great matters in comparison now, because he has reserved so much for them
afterward. As nature is not very exquisite in her work in inferior things,
where she intends some higher excellency; So the God of Nature, intending such
high and glorious things hereafter for his Saints, does no so much regard to
give them these inferior things for the present.

But what are those reserved mercies you speak of, that God has for these?

Not entending a Treatise of that glory, that God has for his choice ones,
only take these five generals.

First, These mercies are prepared mercies, prepared before the foundations 1
of the world were laid, and again prepared by Jesus Christ, who is gone
before to heaven to that end, as he tells us himself, To prepare Mansions for
us, John 14. 1. Now this is spoken after the manner of men, who do not use to
make long and great preparations but for some great work in hand: Surely,
these mercies must needs be great, which the wisdom, power, and mercy of God,
has been from all eternity preparing.

Secondly, They are other mercies, than Adam, than Mankind 2
should have had, than they could have attained unto, if he had stood in his
innocence. Man indeed should then have been for ever happy, but not according
to that height of happiness, and glory that now is provided for those, who are
the beloved of the Lord.

Thirdly, These reserved mercies, are such as must set out Gods Magnanimity, 3
that God may show to Angels, and all his creatures what his infinite wisdom,
power, and goodness can do for poor creatures, to raise their conditions to a
height of glory; surely that glory must needs be high, that is raised for that
end. If a King should do any thing of purpose to show his magnificence, it
must needs be some great thing; it is not a common ordinary thing, that can set
forth the Magnificence of a King; much less that can set forth the
Magnificence of the great God. When Ahasbuerus would make a feast, and
Nebuchadnezzar would build a Palace, to show to their people their greatness,
they were great things; so surely here, that which must show the greatness of
the great God, must needs be great indeed.

Fourthly, These mercies must be such, as may show to Angels and all 4
the world, how infinitely well pleased God the Father is with the obedience of
his Son, in giving himself up to death, for the purchase of, mercy: Surely
that mercy thus purchased must needs be great. If there had been no higher
good for man, but to eat and drink, and to have pleasure to the flesh,
certainly Christ would never have died, to have purchased this; but there were
higher things then these which Christ looked at, these are but poor things for
God to show by them how infinitely he is well pleased with the obedience of his
son to the death; that which must demonstrate this, cannot but be very great
what ever it be, and that, yea the fullness of that, is the mercy reserved for
these choice ones.

Fifthly, Other mercies (in some respect higher) than the very blessed 5
Angels themselves have;

For, 1 Man's nature is more highly advanced than theirs, being hypostatically
united to the Divine Nature.

2 The righteousness whereby the Saints come to glory, is a higher
righteousness, a more excellent righteousness than that of the Angels; though
theirs be perfect in its kind, theirs is the righteousness but of mere
creatures, but the righteousness of the Saints, is the righteousness of that
Person, which is both God and man.

3 The sonneship of the Saints, is founded in a higher right, then that of the
Angels, namely in the Sonneship of the second Person in Trinity.

4 They are the members of Jesus Christ, and so in a nearer union with him then
any other creature.

5 They are the Spouse of the Lamb, whereas the Angels are but ministering
spirits, as the servants of the Bridegroom, but the Saints are the Bride.

Surely then, the mercies reserved for these choice spirits, are choice and
glorious, not only other mercies then others have, or they themselves have
now, but other mercies then they are able to imagine; these therefore we are
to look upon, as most blessed and honorable creatures.

CAP. VI. Cap. 6.

A Rebuke to this vile world, who have vile conceits of this spirit, and
abusemen of such excellent spirits.

IF the spirits of godly men be thus precious, how vile then is this base
world, which has such irrational absurd conceits of this spirit? and which so
scorns and abuses men of such excellent spirits? There are two branches of
this use: In the first, the vile conceits that men of this world have of this
spirit, are rebuked;

For, 1 they think godliness befooles men.

2 They think it makes them cowards, to be men of no metal and valor, poor
spirited men.

3 They think this spirit to be a turbulent spirit, as Ahab said of Elijah,
Art thou he that troubles Irael? Luther was called the trumpet Tu(...)
rebellioni^.
of rebellion.

4 And lastly, They think them to be factious spirits.

For the first of these; What more ordinary, than to cast this aspersion upon
Godliness, that it makes men to be dull, heavy, stupid fools, not sit for
the great and high things of the world, and therefore they labor to stifle any
beginnings of godliness in their children, or in any near to them, for fear
it should ^inder their parts, and take away the quickness of their wits, and
bravenesse of their spirits; Except you think that to be the only bravenesse of
spirit, to venture upon any thing that may further your own ends, not to fear
sin, nor the displeasure of an infinite God, to let out your hearts to the
utmost, to the satisfying your own desires, to examine nothing by rule, but to
do whatsoever is good in your own eyes, to rejoice in the ways of sin, and
to bless your self in the proud swellings of your own heart, to be able to
scorn at conscience, humiliation for sin, strictness in Gods ways, as too
mean a thing for men of such quality, of such birth as you are, of such
estates, hopes, preferments, and designs as you have, things fitter for poor
snakes, meaner people, contemptible silly souls to look after; If this be the
excellency of your spirits, then, godliness debases them indeed, yea, it
debases them as low as hell it self; it casts shame in the faces of, and
breaks in pieces such haughty, swollen spirits as these are, it brings them down
to lie at Gods feet, as poor contemptible creatures in their own eyes,
loathing and abhorring themselves, as there is infinite cause they should, and
judging themselves worthy to be destroyed; but as for any true natural
excellency of spirit, godliness does not quench it, but raises it, and
beautifies it, and perfects it; It is either gross ignorance, or desperate
malice, that causes these conceits of the work of godliness in the spirits of
men, yea, there is much blasphemy in them. What? shall the work of Gods grace,
wherein the glory of God consists, which is the life of God, the Image of God,
the Divine Nature, as has been shown; shall it be the debasing, the
besotting, the befooling of men's spirits? What? does holiness, that makes God
glorious, make man contemptible and vile? does that which makes God so
honorable in the eyes of the blessed Angels and Saints, make man a sott, and a
fool in the eyes of men? Oh! that ever there should be such malice in the
hearts of men, against the grace of God, ever to have such vile conceits of it;
pray, if it be possible, that this thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.
Did not malice blind men, they might see that the Lord has had, and still
has, some of his Saints as emine^t in any outward true excellency, as any in
the world; as great Scholars, as brave Courtiers as any living; as deep in
policy, as profound in learning, as complete every way as any whosoever. Who
more eminent in learning than Moses, who was learned in all the learning of the
Egyptians? who ever had a higher strain of eloquence than Esaias? who ever more
profound than S. Paul? And in later times, yea, even in our days, the Church
has not wanted worthy and glorious lights, who have been exceedingly eminent
in all, that natural excellency could make them, even their enemies being
Judges. What braver Courtiers ever lived, than Joseph, Nehemiah, and Daniel?
Could godliness in the power and life of it, in the strictness of it, stand
with bravenesse of spirit, and natural excellencies, then? and can it not do
so now? Though God choseth oft-times the poor in the world, to be rich in
faith; the foolish things in the world, to confound the wise; and weak things
of the world to confound the strong; and base things, and things despised, etc.
1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. Yet when men are godly, their parts are not by their godliness
debased, but raised; many poor weak men, who before were of mean natural
abilities, yet put them now upon spiritual things, and what strength of parts
do they show, in prayer, in conference about the mysteries of God, in
discerning the subtilities and wiles of Satan, in finding out the corruptions
of their own hearts, in wisely ordering their affairs for God, and the
furtherance of their own eternal good? Wise in the right choice of the
highest end, and prudent in the right disposing of the best means tending
thereunto; These things are not the works of fools, of poor silly, simple
men; they require quickness of understanding, depth of judgment. There are
five reasons why godliness must needs raise a man's parts:

1 Because it purges from many lusts, that darken and besot men in their parts.

2 It imployes men in conversing with high, spiritual, and heavenly things.

3 It makes men serious, and so strengthens their judgments, in the
apprehension of things.

4 It makes men make conscience to improve their time, in the use of all means
and helps they can, to enable and fit themselves for service.

Fifthly, it causes to employ their parts faithfully, and so they come to have
the blessing of God upon them, for the increase of them, according to his
promise, To him that has, it shall be given. Again, Godliness (...)*
does not make men cowards, surely, it hinders not spiritual valor; who ever
were greater soldiers, more eminent in true valor and fortitude, then Joshua,
David, Gideon, Barak, and others, who through faith subdued Kingdoms? Hebr.
11. 32, 33. That is baseness of spirit, and want of valor that makes a man a
slave to sin, and the Devil; so a slave, as he has no heart to any worthy
service, to free himself from it; but lies down under it, and carries the
fetters and yoke of his bondage about with him, withersoever he goes. That is
cowardly baseness that brings conscience into a servile subjection, that
cowardly baseness that will suffer the cause of God to be betrayed, rather
than venture any thing for it; what greater argument that men want true spirit,
than this? Godliness puts a spirit of fortitude into men, that will not suffer
them to be thus debased: and where appears the like courage in any, as in
these, when they are called to stand for the truth? Though all the Tiles of the
houses in the City of Worms, were Devils, yet thither would I go to testify
to the truth, says Luther.

Again, it is not a turbulent spirit; 3.
for turbulency of spirit makes men cruel and malicious; this spirit causes
men to love their enemies, to do all the good they can to them: turbulent
spirits seek only their own ends, they care not what becomes of others; so it
be that they may but warm themselves, they care not what house be on fire:
They are boisterous in things that concern themselves. But the Saints of God,
in whom this other spirit rules, they are meek and gentle, and yeeldable in
their own cause, ready to put up wrong in all quietness: take them in things
that only concern themselves, and you shall find none so readily, so freely,
so cheerfully denying themselves, as they. And again, turbulent spirits do
not love to examine things by rule, to call things to account, but follow their
own fiery humor, and set upon their own will with violence: but godliness
takes off men from this ruggedness and turbulency of spirit, and makes them
gentle and peaceable: let them be never so active, never so forward, never so
zealous in any thing, yet if you will call them to examine things by rule, they
will meekly and patiently hear you; yea, a child shall lead them, Esaias 11.
6. And yet further; turbule^t they are not, for none more obedient to
authority than they; none see that Majesty of God in Authority, as they do;
none obey Authority out of conscience so as they do. If the will of men in
authority, rather than authority, shall require any thing that the authority of
Heaven forbids, that they do not; because they cannot obey, for conscience
sake: And so sacred do they account Authority, that they would have no
obedience performed to it, but obedience for conscience sake. Blind obedience
the Church of God has long ago exploded, as too servile for Christian
spirits: this were more servile than selling men's bodies in the Market for
slaves, which Christianity abhors. It were too uncharitable a conceit of
Christian Magistrates, to think that they should require of, or expect from
any, other obedience, than in, and for the Lord; and in this obedience, those
who are godly, are so forward, as they are judged turbulent, for being
over-forward to maintain the honor of Authority, as some think; when according
to their places they promote the execution of laws made by authority, and that
of those laws which are of the highest consequence for the furtherance of
Piety and Peace.

Again, factious spirits they are not, because they seek above all 4
things to keep to the maintenance of, and obedience to the Primitive truth;
that is faction that sides against that. Tertullian has a notable expression
in his Apology for the Christians against the Gentiles, to clear Gods people
from being men of factious spirits: it seems that aspersion was cast upon them
then, which was about Cum boni, cum probicocun^ cum ^ii, cum casti
congregantur, ^^n est factia dicenda, sed (...); et econtrario, illis nomen
facticnisa^ (...) da^dum est, qui in (...) ^onor^m et proborum conspirant.
Tertull. Apol. advers. Gentes, cap. 39, number. 520.
1400 years ago, his expression was this, When good men, when honest men meet
together, when godly men are gathered together, it is not to be called a
faction, but a Court; and on the contrary, the name of faction, says he, is
to be applied to them, who conspire to the hatred of good and honest men.

And thus much of the first branch of the Use, which was the reprehension of
the vile co^ceits that men had of this other spirit; Now the second follows,
which is the rebuking of the men of the world, for the ill use they give to men
who are of such excellent spirits. The excellencies of the spirits of the
godly, do challenge all the good use that can be, but it is little they meet
withal; they are for the most part abused by the men of this vile world, as if
they were the vilest scurfe and filth of the earth: yea, so indeed they account
them; so says S. Paul. 1. Cor. 4. 13. We are (...)
made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto
this day. Why? what was S. Paul, and what were those that were with him, who
was so accounted of, were they not men of most excellent and admirable spirits?
S. Paul was one of the most excellent spirited men that ever lived upon the
earth, and did as much service for God, as ever any mere man did since the
beginning of the world; and yet how vilie was he thought of? how contemptibly
was he used? put into stocks, and whipped; wanted clothes and victuals? And
for the others that were with S. Paul, they were men of whom the Holy Ghost
gives this witness, that they were the very glory of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8.
23. Oh unworthy world, that ever they should have such men live amongst them!
Those who are the delight of Angels, yea, of God himself, how are they abused
in this wicked world, as if they were dogs, or the basest scumme and filth of
the earth? What scorn and contempt is cast upon them? the most abject of men
think themselves good enough to reproach and abuse them. Were it not a grievous
sight to see some base drudge to have power over the body of some noble Prince,
to abuse it by stripes, or any other contumelious sordid manner? but a more
grievous thing it is to see the vile and base spirits of the world, who are
nothing but sinks of filth themselves, to abuse men of such noble and excellent
spirits, as if they were more vile than dirt? It was the bitter complaint of
Jeremy Lament. 4. 2. that the precious sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold,
were esteemed as earthen pitchers. Such as blessed spirits would honor, if
they had them with them, yet here they are cast out as filth. What grief
sufficent to lament the seeing of such filthy swine to trample under their feet
such precious pearls? in all ages thus it has been. Those who were indeed
the true honorable upon the earth, such precious and excellent spirited men,
as of whom the world was not worthy; and yet they have been most vilely
abused, and are so still by this wretched world, who know not wherein true
worth and excellency consists. Matthew. 5. 12. Christ telling his Disciples how
ill the world would use them, he tells them, they have as good use from it, as
the Prophets had before them. How was Micaiah (a man of a very sweet and
excellent spirit) contumeliously used? he was struck on the mouth, shut up in
prison to be fed with water and bread; yea, with the water and bread of
affliction, while 430 false Prophets, most base spirited men, were fed
delicately at Iesabels table. How was Jeremiah used? he was thrown into the
dungeon, stuck up almost to the ears in the mire; the Word of the Lord was
made a reproach unto him daily. David before them, (a man in whom Gods soul
delighted, yet he) complains of himself, that he was a reproach of men, and
despised of the people: all that saw him, laughed him to scorn; they shot out
the lip, and shook their head at him, Psalm. 22. 6, 7. and Job before him, he
was made a byword of the people, and as a Tabret unto them; as he says of
himself, Chap. 17. 6. The same use had the blessed Apostles, who were filled
with the Spirit of God; none more scorned, persecuted, contemned, than they.
The most worthy and famous men in the Primitive times, found no better use than
these. It were infinite to instance in particulars. Ignatius, Polycarpus,
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Salvian complains, tha in his time, which was in the
fifth Century, Homines coguntur esle mali, ne viles habeantur.
Basil, and the rest, reproached, banished from their people; persecuted, and
exceedingly contumeliously used. In later times, the more excellent the spirits
of men were, the worse use did they ever find from the world: We might
instance in Wickliffe, Hus, Luther, Zwinglius, Musculus, etc. I cannot pass by
that sad example of Musculus, who was a Melc^^lor Adamus in vita Musculi.
man of as brave a spirit, as any lived in his time, and a very learned and
godly man; yet after he had much labored in the work of the Lord, in his
public Ministry, was so ill used of the world, that he was feign to get into
a Weavers house, and learn to weave, that by it he might get himself and his
family bread, and within a while he was accounted unworthy of that preferment,
and was thrust out of the house by his Master the Weaver, and then was forced
to go to the common ditch of the Town, and work with his spade; to get his
living. Whose heart bleeds not to hear of these former examples, and diverse
others, men of most precious spirits thus ill used by this unworthy world, even
such in whom Christ rejoices that ever he shed his blood for them? Esaias 53. 11.
such as he will glory in, before his Father, and the blessed Angels; yet thus
are they abused by this wicked world: The more eminently the spirit of Christ
appears in any, the more is the rage of evil men against them. As it is
reported of Tigers, that they rage when they smell the fragrancy of Spices; the
fragrancy of the Graces of Gods spirit in his people, which are delightful to
God and his Saints, puts wicked men into a rage; when as base spirited men have
the world smile on them according to their hearts desire. Oh the providence of
God, who suffers such indignities to be offered to his most precious and
choice servants! but by this means the excellency of their spirits appears in
greater brightness, their graces shine in the more clear luster. All Gods
servants have his spirit in them, but when any of them suffer reproach and ill
use of the world, then the Spirit of God, and glory rests on them, then the
glorious Spirit of God is upon the^, according to the promise of God unto them,
1 Pet. 4. 14. and they may in part perceive, even while they are using them
ill, that they are men not of common, not of ordinary spirits, who are thus ill
used by them: they may see in that meekness, that patience, that humility,
selfe-denyall, faith, holy carriage, requiting good for evil, praying for,
doing all the good they can to those who use them worst; that constancy,
spiritual cheerfulness, sweet contentedness; that holy boldness, humble
courage, heavenly magnanimity, that it is a wonder their conscience should not
misgive them, even while they are abusing of them; that their conscience does
not tell them, Surely these men we do mistake in, they are led by other
principles than we know of; they have something within that does support them,
we understand not. It is a wonder men are not afraid to abuse them as they
do. As Number. 1. 2. 8. The Lord said to Miriam and Aaron, concerning Moses, when
they spoke against him, Were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?
The words are very emphaticall in the Hebrew, they are thus, Were ye not
afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses? Were he only my servant,
though he were not Moses, were you not afraid? but when my servant, and Moses,
that is such an eminent servant of mine, in whom so much of my Spirit appeared,
were you not afraid to speak against him? Certainly, the Lord will not always
suffer precious choice-spirited men to be trampled under feet; he looks upon
them in their lowest estate as his Jewels, even while they are in the dirt; but
time will come when he will make up his Jewels; as, Malac. 3. 17. and then there
shall be seen a difference between the righteous and the wicked; between him
that serves God, and him that serves him not, verse 18. God will own the
excellency of the spirits of his servants, to be the Image of himself; and
what confusion will this be to the ungodly of the world, when the Lord before
men and Angels shall own that, for the luster and beauty of his own
excellency, which they, when time was, made matter of their scorn, objects of
their hatred? when God shall come to them, as Gideon to Zeba and Zalmana,
Judges 8. 18. What manner of men were they, says Gideon to them, whom ye slew
at Tabor? They answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the
Children of a King. Then he said, They were my brethren, the sons of my
mother: as the Lord lives, if you had saved them alive, I would not have
slain you; but now he says to Iether his first borne, Up and slay them. So
shall God hereafter say to the men of the world, What were those men, and what
did they, whom ye so hated and abused? what? were they some vile-spirited men?
how did they carry themselves? Your consciences shall be forced then to answer;
O Lord, we must confess, They were those who kept themselves from the common
pollutions of the world, they lived strictly in their ways, they walked
unblameable in their course; they were very forward in the duties of the
worship and service of God. The Lord shall then answer; What? these men they
were my Saints, this was my holiness, my image, my glory; these were not
common ordinary men, these were my choice ones; men precious in my eyes,
separated from the common sort of the world for my praise: If you had loved
them, prized them, and honored them as the choice of the earth; if if you had
followed their example, I had not slain you; but now you shall perish
everlastingly.

CAP: VII. Cap. 7.

No dishonor to be singular Seven notes to discover that godly men's differing
from other men proceeds not from proud humourous singularity, but from the
choicenesse and excellency of their spirits.

IF godly men be men of another spirit, and this be their commendation; why
then should any account it to be a dishonor to be singular from the world?
Singularity is cast upon Gods servants as their disgrace, but certainly it is
their glory; they are singular, and their ways are singular, it is true, and
they avouch it, they rejoice in it, and bless God for it; it is impossible but
that it should be so, for they are of another spirit, a peculiar people,
separated from the world, set apart for God, their separation is a wonderful
separation, Exodus 33. 16. So shall we be separated, says Moses, I and thy
people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth; the word is in
the Original, We shall be wonderfully separated; No marvel then, though their
singularity be such, as the world, who knows not their principles, wonder at
it. Their ways are different from other men; I, that is true indeed, who can
think otherwise? Their principles, their estates, their dignites, their hopes
are raised higher then other men's. Would Saul have been offended, if his former
acquaintance had complained; Oh, now, Saul, he minds other things, goes on in
other ways, lives after another fashion then we do; I, that is true indeed,
for his condition is altered, his estate is raised higher then yours, he has
an other spirit: To complain of Gods servants, that they are singular from
others, is all one, as if you should complain of Pearls, that they are more
glistering than dirt and gravel. Their way, their lives are singular; Why? how
would you have them live? would you have them live according to the common
course of the world? they cannot, for they have not received the spirit of the
world, but another spirit.

When the Spirit of God would set out, the greatest misery of men, when they
are the children of wrath, without God in the world, without hope, it is, that
they lived according to the common course of the world, Ephesians. 2. 2. And those
two are joined together, living according to the common couse of the world, and
according to that spirit, that rules in the children of disobedience: So long
as they were acted by that spirit they did live so, but now there is another
spirit, that they are acted by, and would you have them live so still as they
did before? Certainly it cannot be; You cry out of dissimulation, and that
justly; But what is dissimulation, if this be not? where there is not a
sutablenesse between the inward principles, the inward frame, and disposition
of the spirit, and the outward actions: Now if Gods people should not live
singular lives, certainly their outward actions would not be agreeable to the
inward principles, frames, and dispositions of their spirits, for they are
singular, differing from other men's. As there may be dissembling, for a man to
seem better than he is; so there may be dissembling, to seem worse than we
are; Is there not as much evil in a life differing from the spirit, as in a
spirit differing from the life? If a man seems to be godly, and is not, it is
an argument the man is vile, who will thus play the hypocrite; but it is a
commendation to godliness, that men will account the very seeming of it to be
honorable; but if a man has godliness in his heart, and yet his life be no
other than other men's, this would argue that a man were ashamed of godliness
it self; here godliness it self would suffer; as if it were such a
dishonorable thing, as would bring shame to a man, if it did appear; as if
though indeed it must be reserved in the heart, for necessity sake, yet it must
be kept down, not suffered to appear in the life, for fear it be a disgrace
to men. Is not here then as great an evil, in this way of dissimulation as in
the other? Better all the men of the world had shame cast upon them, than that
godliness should have the least stain. Surely then, where the spirits of men
be other spirits, singular choice spirits, their lives ought, and must needs be
other lives, singular from other men. Their conscience witness to them, that
their spirits are changed, that they are other from that they were; yea, and
witnesses for them, that their lives are other lives, singular from other men;
and in this witness their souls rejoice.

But is there not a proud fantastical singularity? may not pride,
sullenness, and fancy, carry men on in singular ways, differing from other
men, conceiting themselves to be wiser than others, loving to satisfy some
odd humors of their own? If it were any choicenesse, or excellency of their
spirits, it were another matter, we would not speak against them; but it is
this proud, hypocritical, humorous singularity, we speak against.

To this I answer; If you indeed should do as they do, if you should live
after a different manner from the common course of the world, having no other
principles than those you have, it would certainly be singularity, pride,
hypocrisy, and humor in you; and thus your consciences would tell you, and
that because you had not principles to carry you out in this way, you have not
spirits suitable to it; and you judging of others, by that you seele in your
selves, this makes you to think, the different ways of Gods servants, is
only from pride, and humourous singularity; yea, and they themselves know,
that there was a time indeed, where in if they should have done, as now they
do, it would have been no other in them, then that you now accuse them of
namely, when their spirits were, as other men's spirits are; but now they know,
they have other principles, other qualifications of spirit then formerly they
had. But surely, you do not think indeed, that their different lives do come
from proud, and humourous singularity; for if you did, why do your
consciences so well approve of them, when you lie on your sick beds? when you
apprehend your selves going before the great God, then you could wish it were
with you as it is with them.

But what say you? if you thought it were not from this pride, and
conceitednesse you speak of, then you would think it were well; then you
would join in justifying of them, if you were sure it were from a choice,
excellent spirit in them.

Well then, let Gods servants rejoice in this, that they know it is not from
pride, that it is not from humor, that they run not into excess of riot as
others do, but from the work of God upon their spirits, and this witness
they have for themselves, this they have to encourage themselves in, that if
the men of the world did but know their principles from whence they work, as
they know them themselves, even they would justify both them and their ways.
But further, we must know there is a way of God that is real, that tends to
life; what ever way it be, this is certain, it must be different from the
common course of the world; and if this be not it, in which Gods people do
walk, tell us what is that way, and we will walk in it. The Scripture tells
us, the way to life is narrow, and that few walk in it; and the other way is
broad that tends to death; we cannot therefore but fear, when we see the mark
of a way that leads to death. Christ's flock is but a little flock, Luke 12.
32. Fear not little flock: there are two diminutives in the Original, the
word translated, flock, signifies a little flock; but (...)
that the exceeding littleness of it might appear, Christ adds another word,
so the words are, Fear not little flock. And S. John 1 Epist. 5. 19. says,
the whole world lies in wickedness, but we know that we are of God. What a
singularity was this in S. John? how does he difference a few odd contemptible
people from the whole world? We are of God, and yet the whole world lies in
wickedness, and the world surely is not grown better since. But that you may
see, that the way of the godly is not from singularity, or humor, take these
Evidences, and judge according as conscience shall tell you is truth.

First, Where humor and conceited 1
singularity prevails with men, there is no evennesse, no constancy in their
ways, no porportion of one thing with another in their course; they are
singular and humourous in some odd foolish things; but in other things where
they have as much reason to be singular, they do as others do; But in Gods
people you shall see an evennesse, constancy, and proportion in the course of
their lives; that which makes them singular in one thing, makes them so in all
other of the same nature; They are not as humourous people who have their fits,
and take them out of their fits, they are other men, they are as different from
themselves, as they are from other men; But where the Spirit of God guides,
though there be more difference from other men, yet there is less difference
from themselves.

Secondly, Those who do things 2
out of singularity, they care less for such things they do out of that
principle, when they come to be common, then they did before; But it is not so
here in the ways of godliness; the more common they grow, the better they
are, the more does Gods people rejoice and bless themselves in them, they are
the more lovely, and amiable in their eyes.

Thirdly, Humourous singular men differ exceedingly one from 3
another, one will be singular in one thing, and another in another; but Gods
people go all the same way, they have the same course with such as they never
saw; Observe the spirits and ways of godly men in all places of the world,
though their education, their constitution, their employments, their former
principles be exceeding different, yet now for the maine, they are the same,
they favor and relish the same things, they delight in the same way of
holiness, which evidently shows, they are led, acted, by one and the same
spirit; though they may differ in some things of lesser moment one from
another, yet they differ very little amongst themselves, in things wherein
their difference from the world principally lies; in those things for which the
world dislikes them and their ways, there is a general agreement in the
spirits of all godly men in such things; As in searing of the least sin, as a
greater evil then any outward misery; in loving the strictest ways of
holiness; in laboring to keep themselves pure, as much as they can, from the
sins of the times, and places where they live. etc. In these and such like
things, which are most proper to godliness, and for which they are judged
singular, there is a general agreement of all the spirits of the godly
throughout the world.

Fourthly, proud, conceited singularity acts it self especially in things 4
that are taken notice of by others; if others look not after them, and will
not vouchsafe to take notice of them, they quikly grow weary of that they do,
and this is the best way to deal with such people, to neglect them; Let them
perceive no body thinks them worthy of regarding, of once minding them, and
this makes them sooner weary then all the opposing of them that can be: The
end of singularity is, that it might be observed; this is the humor of these
people, they would feign be taken notice of for something, let it be what it
will be; observance is the thing that feeds this humor; where this is not, it
soon grows weary of it self; and hence when these people are alone, when
none can observe them, they do but as other men do. But now the special
work of godliness, wherein Gods people differ from other men, in which their
souls most delight, and are most fully exercised in, it is in secret things,
not subject to the view of the world, The Kings daughter is all glorious
within; If there be a little godliness outwardly, there is much more inward,
as where there is a little wickedness without, there is abundance in the
heart; Godly men are most eminently godly in inward things; The countenance and
voice of the Church, is most sweet and comely in secret places, Cant. 2. 14. My
Dove that art in the holes of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs,
show me thy sight, let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is sweet, and thy
sight is comely: Godly men dare not indeed, but be godly before men, for so
Christ commands them, Let your light shine before men, that others may see your
good works; but it is one thing to do that which may be seen, and another, to
do it to that end that it may be seen, and to make that the highest end. If
they make their end, that the light may be seen, and not that themselves may
be seen; and that their Father in heaven may be glorified, and not themselves
glorified, it is no other than Christ would have. But between God and their
own souls, there is the chief work of godliness; there the souls of Gods
servants do most expatiate themselves, there they are most themselves, there
is their most proper Element; wherefore surely it is not a humor of
singularity.

Fifthly, If it were humourous singularity, it would not bring them so 5
much sweet peace, and heavenly joy when they are upon their sick beds, and
deathbeds, and when they have to deal with God in a special manner; when
they are to appear before the great God, to receive the sentence of their
eternal doom, when they are to enter upon eternity; how many then bless God
that ever he put it into their hearts to go another way, not according to the
common course of the world? Though humor and conceitednesse may please, and
give content for a while, yet it can never bring such peace, and joy in
sickness, and death, and when the soul sees it has to deal with such an
infinite, holy God, such a dreadful Majesty; none apprehend the glory and
Majesty of God, so as the godly do; none understand what eternity means so as
they do; the sight of these things would shake men out of an humor: it is not
humor that can stand before God, and the eternal misery, or happiness of the
creature rightly apprehended; it is time now to lay aside humors, and
conceits; and yet then when these things are most clearly, most powerfully
apprehended by Gods servants, even then they are most for the ways of God, in
which they differed from the world, than ever they were before; it is now their
greatest grief, that they have no more differed from them than they have, and
if they were to begin again, they would differ far more than ever they did.

Sixthly, Surely it is not humourous conceited singularity, because most men who
have enlightened consciences, when they are most serious in their best moods,
are of this mind. If you will needs go by multitudes, we dare venture upon
this, yea we dare challenge upon this argument, only with these two Cautions;

1 That the men you bring in, be men of enlightened consciences, for what have
we to do with others, Nihil ad nos at(...) quid judic^^t stulti, quid
^omu^cul^ s(...). L^stan. (...). instit. (...).
who are blind and ignorant? though there were never so many thousands of them,
they can add nothing at all to the cause.

2 Let the judgments of men be taken when they are most serious, when they are
best able to judge, do not take them when they are in passion, when their
lusts are up, but when their spirits are calmed, and in the best temper, when
conscience has the most liberty to speak indeed what it thinks; and of such
men, in such times, we shall have the most on our side; and therefore surely it
is not a humor of singularity, that acts the in the way of godliness.

Seventhly, It is not singularity, for we have the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Saints of God before us, clouds of witnesses, thousand thousands of them, and
every one of them worth ten thousands of others, as S. Chrysostom has an
expression in one Chrysostom. hom. 26. ad pop. Antioch.
of his Sermons, to the people of Antioch, It is better to have one precious
stone, than to have many halfpenies; so one godly man is better than multitudes
of others. And S. Cyprian has the like expression in one of his Epistles; Do
not attend to the number of them, says he; for one that fears God, is better
than a Cypr. l. 1. ^p. 3. Non attendas numerum illorum, melior est enim unus
timens quam mill^ filii impii.
thousand wicked. It is safe to follow the way of good men, according to that
in the Proverbs, 2. 20. Walk thou in the ways of good men, and keep the ways
of the righteous.

Now then, let neither the ways of godliness, or godly men ever be blamed for
their singularity; other spirits must needs lead into other ways. It was laid
to Luthers charge, that he was an Apostate; he confesses Confitetur se esse
apostatam, sed beatum and sanctum, qui fidem diabolo datam nonservavit.
himself to be one, but a blessed and a holy Apostate, one that had fallen off
from the devil. So we confess, this is singularity, but a blessed, and a
holy singularity, which differences Gods servants from this vile wicked world
in which they live, whereby they live as men of another world, as indeed they
are.

CAP. VIII. Cap. 8.

Bless God for making this difference between your spirit, and the vile
spirits of the men of the world.

SEeing this other spirit is so excellent and blessed, then do you, to whom
God has given other spirits, learn to bless GOD for them; the mercies of GOD
to men's spirits are the greatest mercies; though your conditions be meaner than
others, in other respects, yet if your spirits be raised to an higher
excellency than others, you have infinite cause to bless the Lord, as S. Paul,
Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the Lord, which has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things, in Christ. What though God has not abounded to
you in outward honors, estates, delights, yet if he has abounded to you in
wisdom, holiness, faith, humility, etc. you have no cause to complain: Where
God gives his Spirit, in the gifts and graces of it, there he gives all good
things; hence whereas S. Matthew says, Chap. 7. 11. How much more shall your
Father in heaven, give good things to them that ask him? S. Luke 11. 13.
bringing in Christ speaking upon the same occasion, says, How much more shall
your heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to them that ask him? as if all one
to give his Spirit, and to give all good things: Spiritual blessings make all
outward crosses light and easy, as Prove. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will
sustain his infirmities. Spiritual blessings have this excellency in them,
they cause a man to feel no need of many outward things, which others know not
how to want; and it is as good to be in such an estate, to have no need of a
thing, as to enjoy it when we want it. And further, it is the excellency of
spiritual blessings, to keep down the body, and to carry the spirit above the
body. It was the excellency and glory of the Martyrs, that their spirits were
so satisfied with mercies they had, that they so little regarded their bodies,
when they suffered grievous torments, as if they had not been their own; Thus
Zozomen reports of them. Spiritual blessings are such, as enable men to
improve all other blessings they enjoy: without these, the greatest of other
blessings would prove to be the greatest curses to us; and yet further: These
blessings upon our spirits, cost God infinitely more, than other blessings do.
Other blessings God can give at a lower rate, but these cost the dearest heart
blood of his own Son, and therefore above all let God have the praise of
these. Outward bodily mercies we are unworthy of, but when we consider of
these, let us say as David, Psalm. 66. 14. Come and hearken all ye that fear
God, I will tell you what he has done to my soul: There God has magnified
his mercies toward me indeed. You may remember how base your spirits once were,
how blind, foolish, drossie, sensual, and it may be, malicious. This S. Paul
calls to mind, to stir up himself and others, to praise God for that blessed
change he had wrought in his, and in their spirits: Tit. 3. 3. For we our
selves also were in times past (says he) unwise, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts, living in maliciousness and envy; hateful, and hating
one another: but when the bountifulness and love of God our Savior appeared,
etc. But if your spirits have not been so vile as some others, if they have
been fair and ingenuous, if you have been of sweet natures, and tractable
dispositions, you have cause to bless God in some respects so much the more,
for the change he has wrought in them, for his mercy toward you, that you
did not rest in those natural excellencies, and mistake them for saving
graces, as many do with much danger to their souls: and when you see the base
corrupt spirits of other men, as those who have any thing to do in the world,
shall meet with exceeding vile corrupt spirits; Cap. 9.
not only in the worst sort of men, but in those who seem to be fair, in
whom a man would never have thought to have met with such base workings of
spirit, that would make a man wonder. Oh Lord, what are the spirits of men?
Then, I say, when you see this, bless the Lord, let your spirits, and all that
is within them, bless his name, who has put such difference between your
spirits and theirs; as you cannot but acknowledge, except you should be
exceedingly injurious to the grace of God in you.

Cap. IX.
Communion and converse with men of such excellent spirits, is a most blessed
thing.

IF the godly be of such excellent spirits, then converse and communion with
them is a most blessed thing; no greater heaven upon earth than this; for here
you may see the beauty and luster of Gods graces shining, the brightness of
which darkens all the beauty and glory of the world to a spiritual eye. Seneca
saw so much excellency, that Morality put upon a man, that he says, that the
very look of a good man Ipse aspectus boni viri delectat.
delights one: The very sight of such servants of God, who walk close with
God, who are careful to keep their spirits clear and shining; truly, it is
very delightful, it has much quickening in it; the uprightness, holiness,
spiritual enlightnings, that their souls have, will guide them to advise for
God in safe and good ways. The advice of godly men, in things concerning God,
is much to be prized. It was a good speech of Shechaniah to Ezra, Chap. 10. 3.
Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God, etc. according to the
counsel of the Lord, and of those that fear the Commandment of our GOD. It
was good to follow their counsel. The spirits of these are favory in their
discourse, in their duties, in all their carriage; their example exceeding
powerful and profitable. The blessing of Abigail upon David, was, The Lord
bind up his soul in the bundle of life. Enjoyment of communion with Gods
people, is the binding up of our souls in the bundle of life, for every one of
them has life in him. Doctor Tailor the Martyr, rejoiced that ever he came
into prison, because he came there to have acquaintance with that Angel of God
John Bradford, as he calls him. If the society of one sweet heavenly spirited
man, be enough to make a prison cheerful, what a blessing then is the
enjoyment of communion with many? All my delight (says David) is in the
Saints, in them that excel in the earth. It is the blessing of the Gospel, to
come to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. when we are amongst
them, we may in the beholding the work of their spirits, come to see many
failings in our own, that we saw not before; and so be humbled for them, and be
put on to seek help: We may see the same graces shining in them, that we
feel in our own hearts, and so be strengthened and encouraged in them, and
stirred up to bless God for them; and the sutablenesse between their spirits
and ours, if ours be right, will cause such a closing and mingling, as from
thence there will arise an unspeakable delight, and incomparable sweetness: No
society under heaven has that pleasantness and sweetness in it, as the
society of the Saints; no men's spirits close so fully one with another, as
theirs; no men's spirits bound so firmly by such indissoluble bonds together, as
theirs; they know the excellency of one another spirits, so as they can freely
open themselves, Gregory Nazianzen says of himself, and Basil, that one soul
in (...)rner was in two bodies. In Orat. Fun. Basi^^i. The same is said of
Minutius Fa^ix, and Octautus.
unbosome their hearts one to another, and venture their lives one upon
another: and it is the most honorable society in the world; for it is the
association of the most excellent and glorious creatures; God himself delights
to join himself with them, to be amongst them: as; 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will dwell
among them (says the Lord) and walk there, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. But the words are more significant in the Original, they
express (...).
Gods delight, not only to dwell among them, and walk with them, but to dwell
in them, and walk in them. And hence that expression of Tertullian, that we
made use of before in another case is very pertinent for our purpose here
likewise; When good men meet, (says he) when godly men are gathered together,
this is not to be called a faction, but a Court. What place is accounted so
honorable, and excels in more delights than the Courts of Princes? The society
of Gods Saints, communion with Gods people, has more honor, is filled with
more delights than any Court in the world, where this is wanting: the society
of the wicked, that is unsavory and tedious, because their spirits are so vile
and corrupt, like the slime and filth there is congealed, when many Toades and
venomous filthy creatures do join together; How abominable is their
breathings together to a gracious spirit? how loathsome is the mixture of their
spirits? Zach. 13. 2. we have a promise, that God will in his due time take
away the unclean spirit out of the Land, and oh what a blessed time will that
be! How happy would Gods servants think themselves, if they might be
delivered from the noysomnes of corrupt unclean spirits? Let us keep our selves
what we can now, from mingling with them; we shall within a while be for ever
delivered from them.

CAP. X. Cap. 10.

That all those whose spirits God has thus differenced, should improve this
Mercy, by walking not as other men.

IF God has been merciful to you, in giving you another spirit, improve this
mercy; show in all your ways that you are acted by another spirit: let the
renewed spirit guide you, let the beauty and excellency of it appear: If we
live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit, says the Apostle, Gal. 5. 25.
The works of the flesh are manifest, Gal. 5. 19. Why should not the works of
the spirit be so too? God has beautified your spirits with his own Image, in
this he has honored you, that you might honor him, in holding forth the
beauty and excellency of his Image; he has made you a peculiar people, to that
end that you might show forth the virtues of him, who has called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. It is a dishonor to a parent,
or any special friend, to hang his picture in some dark hole, in some obscure
contemptible place; it is expected we should make it conspicuous, that we
should hang it in some eminent place, so as to manifest that we rejoice in it,
as an ornament to us. It is a great evil to obscure the Graces of Gods Spirit,
to keep in the work of God upon our spirits, in which he has set out the
glory of his own Image, to that end, that he might be glorified in us before
men and Angels. Every man delights in the expression of that, wherein he esteems
his excellency to consist, be it Eloquence, Wisdom, or any Art, wherein he has
attained any eminency; yea, if he accounts his excellency to consist in his
riches, in his honor, in his beauty, he loves to make them appear before
others; as the Prophet in another case, Esa. 60. 1. Arise and shine, for the
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. If God has shined
upon your spirits by his grace, let your lights shine before men, that the
world may see, there are men of other spirits, who can do such things as they
cannot. Oh what beautiful, convincing co^versations would men live, if they
were only acted by this renewed spirit! As it was said of Steven, they could
not resist the Spirit by which he spoke; so it would be true here, men could
not resist that spirit by which you live. What do you more than other men?
says Christ to his Disciples, Matt. 5. 47. Men of other spirits must manifest
in their lives, that they can do more than other men. Let me in the name of the
Lord plead with you for more honor and service for the Lord, than he has from
others.

First, your birth is from him, you are borne of God in another manner 1
than others are, and therefore it must not be with you as it is with others.
Men of high birth will not live as other men do. Hence we read of a custom
amongst the Heathen, they were wont to derive the pedigree of their valiant men
from their gods; to this end, though the thing were not true, yet they
believing themselves to be a Divine offspring, they might upon confidence
there of, undertake higher attempts than others, with the more boldness: Much
higher things should those endeavor after, who are indeed borne of God.

Secondly, God has put forth an other manner of power out upon 2
your spirits, than upon other men; other men have but a general common
influence of Gods power let into their spirits: but he has manifested the
exceeding greatness of his power in you; as, Ephesians. 1. 19. observe the gradation
there; the Apostle speaking of the power of God, put forth upon those that do
believe, expresses it in a sixfold gradation.

1 It is his power; only the power of a God could do it.

2 It is the greatness of his power.

3 It is the exceeding greatness of his power.

4 It is the working of his power.

5 It is the working of his mighty power.

6 It is the same power by which he raised Christ from the dead, and set him at
his right hand in the Heavens, far above all Principality, and Power, and
might. Now God does not use to put forth great power, but for great purposes;
he uses not his extraordinary power, for ordinary things: when supernatural
power is put forth, it is, that it might raise to supernatural operations.

3 Again, God does put other abilities 3
into you, that others have not: that grace with which he has endued your
spirits, is a spark of his own divine nature; as you have heard, it has a
divine power with it, and a divine activity in it; that is expected from you,
that none can do by an inferior power, as by the strength of parts,
education, moral principles: if your lives be not beyond the highest of those
who have none other principles than Vniuscu jusque casus, tanto majoris est
crimin^s, quanto priusquam caderet majoris crat virtutis. Be^n. de inter. domo.
c. 50.
such to raise them; you dishonor God, and his grace, and your holy profession.

Fourthly, your spirits have been made acquainted with more truths; God has
revealed to you the secrets of his Counsels, of his Kingdom; 4
he has shown you himself, his Glory, his Majesty, Soveraingty, Holiness;
he has shown you the reality, beauty, excellency, equity of his blessed
ways: He has made known to you the certainty, the infinite consequence of
the things of eternity; the vileness, pollution, poison, danger of sin: he
has given you experiences of the things of heaven, the sweetness of his
ways, the distress of conscience for sin.

Fifthly, he has separated you for himself, he has taken you into a near 5
communion unto himself; though God is to be feared by all, yet more
especially in a higher degree, he is to be feared in the assembly of his
Saints, and to be had in reverence of them that are about him, Psa. 89. 7.

Sixthly, God has put other dignities 6
upon you, that he has not put upon other men; he has made you Citizens of
the new Jerusalem, favorites of heaven, heirs, co-heires with the Lord Jesus
Christ. God has raised you above the condition of men; and therefore you must
not walk as men. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 3. blamed the Corinthians that they did
walk as men: He has redeemed you from the earth, Revel^ 4. 3. Therefore you
must not walk as the men of the earth: God has not dealt thus with other
people, they know not what these things mean. Therefore well may the Lord
expect from you other manner of service and honor, than he has from other men.

Seventhly, more depe^ds upon you, 7
than upon others; the weight of many services depends all upon you, which are
no ways expected to be performed by others: What shall become of Gods Name,
his Glory, the fulfilling his will in the world, if men whose spirits are
fitted for his service, should not live in a higher way of holiness, and do
more for him, than others? God expects great things from you, Esaias 63. 8. I
said, surely they will not lie: When others are base, unfaithful and vile in
their ways, yet God rejoices in this, that he has a generation in the
world; a choice company of other spirits, precious and excellent spirits, and
he shall have other dealings from them.

Eighthly, your sins go nearer to the heart of God than others: Other 8
men may provoke God to anger, but you grieve his Holy Spirit. God took it
very ill at Salomons hand, that he dealt ill with him after he had appeared
twice to him, 1 King. 11. 9. How often has God appeared to your souls? What
gracious visitatio^s have your spirits had from him? It is a shameful thing
indeed for you to fall as other men do: It was an aggravation of the fall of
Saul, 2 Samuel 1, 21. That the shield of the mighty was cast down, the shield of
Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil; for you to fall, as though
you had not been anointed, as others which have no such ointment powered upon
them; this is a great and sore evil.

Ninthly, the eyes of many are 9
upon you; the Name of God, the cause of God is engaged in you.

Tenthly, you are appointed by God to be the Judges of other men; 10
1 Cor. 6. 2. Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the world? yea,
Verse 3. Know you not that we shall judge the Angels? God will bring your
lives and ways before all the world to judge the world by, and therefore they
had need to be very exact, and to have something in them more than ordinary.
It is a shameful way of reasoning, for any man to reason for sin, by
examples; as it like a these, he would feign escape in the crowd; but much more
shameful is it, that any godly man should be found to argue for sin this
way, for this is an aggravation of sin, not a lessening of it, as if I should
say, God has dishonor by such and such, and therefore why may he not have
some more by me? Sin is a striking at God, and every sinner strikes at him,
and thou come running for thy stroke too. What? will thou have thy blow
also at him? and, what thou? for whom the Lord has done such great things? as
Caesar said to Brutus, when (...).
in the Senate House, tho Senators had wounded him, with many sore wounds, and
Brutus he comes also for his stroke, whereupon Caesar looks on him, and
says to him; What? and thou my son Brutus too? Conceive as if thou saw
the Lord looking on thee, and saying thus to thee, when thou ventrest upon any
sinful way upon the example of others.

But in what particulars should we manifest this choicenes of our spirits, in
ways differing from others?

Answ. In these especially:

1 In self denial: show that you can deny your opinions, your desires, your
wills, though you have a strong mind to a thing, though you have fit
opportunities to enjoy your desires, yet if you see God may have more honor any
other way, you can freely and readily without disturbance, without vexing
yield; and do not deceive your selves in this, be easily convinced in
particulars, which are for God against your selves; the excellency of a man's
spirit is much seen in this. Many conceit an excellency of spirit to be in
selfe-willednesse, in being passionate, froward, and boisterous; Certainly this
comes from weakness of spirit, no excellency is required for this, every fool
can be thus; but that is excellency, to be able to ove^rcome, to rule ones
spirit, to have command of ones spirit, to subdue and bring in order passions,
and violent stirrings of spirits; this is precious and honorable in the eyes
of God and man: this is a well tempered spirit indeed, that can be strong,
zealous, full of courage, unyeeldable in the cause of God and the Church; but
meek, quiet, yeeldable, selfedeniable in its own cause: those who usually are
the most boisterous, and passionate for themselves, are the poorest spirited
men, and the most basely yielding, when it comes to the cause of God.

2 Show the excellency of your spirits enabling you to do that which others
cannot do, by loving your enemies, praying for them; doing them all the good
you can; this is the special thing our Savior commands to his Disciples in
that 5. Mat. when he would have them do more than others do.

3 Fear the least sin, more than the greatest suffering; Morality raises the
spirit highest next to Grace, and yet a mere moral man, accounts it
foolishnes, to be so nice as not to yield in little things, for the avoiding of
great sufferings; but a gracious spirit thinks the least truth of God worthy to
be witnessed to, by the loss of his dearest comforts, It was a brave spirit
of Zwinglius expressing it self thus, in his 3. Epist. Q^as non oportet mortes
praeetigere, quod non supplicium putius far, into inquam prosundim inferni
ab^stum non incrare, quam contra conscientiam attestari?
and suffering the greatest evils; yea, he accounts suffering for small things
the most honorable sufferings of all, as testifying the greatest love; as
David's Worthies showed their dearest love to him, in ventring their lives to
get him a little water.

4 Prize opportunities of service more than al outward contentments in the
world; a gracious heart thinks it honor enough, that Gods imploies it; he is
not only willing to go on in his work, though outward contentments come not
in, but increase of service for God, he esteems so great a good, as he
accounts the want of outward things made up in it; Though I get not so much by
that I do as others, yet I bless God, I can go on in my work as chearefully
as others, for contentment is made up to me in this, that God will employ me
in his service more than others.

5 Make conscience of time; this felv do; few regard the fillings up of their
time, their spirits having no excellency in them, they cannot make use of
their time in any worthy employments for God, to themselves, or others; but a
man of an excellent spirit knows how to employ himself in things that are
excellent, and therefore prizes the time he has to work in, and is
conscientious in the spending of it.

6 Make conscience of thoughts, and secret workings of heart, of secret sins
to avoid them, and secret duties to perform them; a man that has a precious
spirit, does not like to have it run wast in extravagant thoughts, and
affections; the thoughts of his mind are precious, the affections of his heart
are precious, as his spirit is precious: We let water run wast, because we
put no price upon it; we think it little worth, and therefore we let it run to
no use; but if it were some precious liquor, some precious oil, compounded of
dear ingredients, we would not do so, but would be careful to save every
drop; this is a precious spirited man indeed, who knows how to lay out his
thoughts, and his affections at the best advantage, and will not lavish them
our to no purpose.

7 Make conscience of the manner 7
of performing holy duties, as well as of the doing of them, and look after
them, what becomes of them when they are done; this is not according to the
common spirits of the world, who think to put off God with flat, poor, and
dead services; A gracious spirit has much of the excellency of his spirit
acting in holy duties, and therefore he does much mind them, and looks much
after them; but others have little of their spirits acting in them, and
therefore they are little regarded, little looked after by them.

8 Rejoice in the good of others, 8
though it eclipses thy light, though it makes thy parts, thy abilities, thy
excellencies dimmer in the eyes of others; were it not for the eminency of some
above thee, thy parts perhaps would shine bright, and be of high esteem; yet
to rejoice in this from the heart, from the soul to bless God, for his gifts
and graces in others, that his Name may be glorified more by others, than I can
glorify it my self, to be able truly to say, Though I can do little, yet
blessed be God, there are some who can do more for God than I, and in this I
do, and will rejoice; this is indeed to be able to do much more than others,
this shows a great eminency of spirit: All the parts, gifts, abilities, that
any man in the world has, where this is not, come far short of this
excellency; to be able to do this, is more than to be able to ^xcell others
in any excellency whatsoever, if this be wanting: If God has given thee
this, he has given thee that which is a thousand times more worth than strong
parts, and abilities, in which thou might have been far more eminent, than
thou now art, or than others are.

9 If thou will show the excellency 9
of this spirit in some choice thing, then labor to keep the heart low in
prosperity, and man heavenly cheerfulness in adversity; not only contented,
but joyful, in a quiet, sweet, delightful frame: In the greatest difficulties
and straits, when you are put upon hard things, go on in your way with what
strength you can, without vexing, distracting thoughts, let your spirits be
stayed on God quietly, and meekly committing your selves and cause to him, as
the people of God in the 26. Esaias 8. They profess their willingness in all
quietness to wait upon God, in the ways of his judgments; and they give the
reason, because the desire of their soul is to his Name, and to the
remembrance of him. If in the times of our troubles, the desires of our souls
were to Gods Name, and to the remembrance of him, and not unto our own names,
and to the remembrance of our selves, we should not have such sinking,
discouraged, disquiet, vexing spirits as we have. The spirits of most men, if
any difficult thing befall them, they are presently in a hurry, so disquiet and
tumultuous, that all the peace and sweetness of them is lost, and they hinder
themselves exceedingly, both in the business they are about, adding much to
the difficulty of it, and in all other businesses that concern them. This
notes much distemper of spirit, like distempered flesh of a man's body, if it be
but touched with the finger, or the least air come to it, it presently festers
and ranekies.

10 Be more careful to know the 10
fountain from whence all your mercies come, and to have a sanctified use of
them when you enjoy them, than to have the possession of them, or delight in
them: An ordinary spirit looks at nothing, but only to have the thing it
desires, is not solicitous about the fountain from whence they spring, nor
careful to attain any sanctified end, to which they tend, looks not at them
as from God, neither uses them for GOD; but where all these are, here is the
work of a choice precious spirit indeed, the peculiar work of it; this is to do
more than others, and thus Gods servants must do, or else they can never live
convincing lives. While Pharaoh and his Magicians saw, that Moses did no more
than they could do, they were not convinced; but when Moses did that which
they could not do; then they acknowledged the finger of God: So it is here,
while wicked men see those that are religious, do only such things as they
could do if they would, as going to Sermons, speaking of good things, they are
never convinced by them; but when they fee them do some thing, which their
consciences tell them they cannot do, then they are forced to acknowledge, that
there is a real excellency in godliness which they have not, as Christ said
once, If I had not done those things that no man did, they had not had sin,
Ioh. 15. 24. It aggravated the sin of the Jews, that they did not believe in
Christ, notwithstanding he did those works amongst them that no man ever did.
So, if godly men did manifest the choicenesse of their spirits amongst the men
of the world, in doing such as none other can do, this if it did not convert
them, and bring them in love with Gods ways, it would certainly much aggravate
their sin, and increase their condemnation. It is therefore a most shameful
thing, that those who make a great show and profession of godliness, should in
their lives be no more than equal unto, yea be lower than others, who are
merely Moral; lower than a Socrates, than a Fabritius, than others of the
Heathen. How many civil moral men go^ beyond them who would be taken for
godly? they are more meek, and patient, more courteous, more faithful and
trusty, more liberal and helpful, more ingenuous and candid. Many servants
who would seem godly, are not so obedient, so diligent, so humble, and
submissive, so conscionable in their work, as others, whom they judge merely
carnal: So, many wives, not behaving themselves with that quietness,
respectivenesse, love, and obedience to their husbands, as others, whom they
themselves judge to be only civil: In like manner, many husbands, and masters
of families, who profess godliness, yet in their houses are more froward,
more dogged, more churlish, cruel, and bitter to wife and servants, than
others, whom they esteem only carnal: So, many children more stout to their
parents, and parents more negligent in the care they ought to have of their
children, than others.

What a shame is it, says S. Hierom, that faith should not be able to do Vt
non prastet sides, quod prastitit infide(...) as.
that, that infidelity has done? What? not better fruit in the garden, in the
vineyard of the Lord, then in the wilderness? What? not better fruit grow upon
the tree of life, than upon the root of nature? Cap. 11.
Where lies the power of godliness? If it carries, not men beyond these, what
is it to live godly in Christ Jesus? in the virtue, in the power, and life of
Christ Jesus, if it does not enable to go beyond others? There needs no such
virtue, power, life of Christ Jesus, to enable one to dof that, which others
can do. What? is godliness but a notion, but a conceit, that it will not
carry men beyond the light of nature?

CAP. XI.
An Exhortation to labor to get this excellent spirit.

IT is an use of Exhortation; let us labor to get this other spirit; Every one
desires to be eminent, to be above others in estate, in esteem, in natural
excellencies; if we would feign be eminent, let us labor to be eminent in
spiritual blessings, in getting our souls endued with higher spiritual
excellencies than others have. It is commendable to strive to be as eminent
here as we can, especially you whom God has raised higher than your brethren
in other things; in the Nobility of your births, the eminency of your places,
the greatness of your estates: Do you labor to be as high above others in
the excellencies of your spirits; that as your birth is other, your places
other, your estate other than common men's, so your spirits may be other
spirits? What an excellent thing is it, to have a spirit suitable to ones
condition? A great Alagnus an^ mu^ mag^am fortu(...)am decet.
mind becomes a great fortune, says Seneca. He means greatness of mind in the
exercise of virtue, which only gives a true greatness to the mind. I know this
is a powerful argument with you, to make grace lovely and desirable in your
eyes, to tell you that it will raise your spirits, that it will put beauty and
glory upon them, that it will add greatness and excellency to them. The world
is much for brave and Noble spirits; we desire your spirits may be so: only
mistake not the true Nobleness, the true excellency of spirit; certainly it
is inthat which may bring you nearest to God, the highest excellency: You can
no way be so honorable, as by the raising of your spirits by grace: Wisdom
with an inheritance is good, wisdom with birth and eminency of place is a
great blessing indeed; to be rich in goods, and rich in goodness, is a happy
connection. You would account it a great disgrace not to have education somewhat
suitable to your birth and quality; what can be said more dishonorable of a
man than this, He has left him indeed a great estate, and is of a great house,
but he has no breeding? What? is a competent measure of knowledge, in tongues,
and Divitiae non faciunt insignes, nisiquos possunt bonis operibus facere
clariores. Lactant. lib. 5. cap. 16.
Arts, and other things suitable to your births and estates, accounted a beauty
and ornament to them, and is not grace and godliness much more? Do these add
an excellency to your quality, and put an honor upon your dignities, and will
not godliness much more? Shall Sea and Land be traveled over with much
hazard, soule-hazard, and bodilyhazard, with great expense of estate, to get
knowledge of fashions, and a Gentile behavior, because you think they will be
Ornaments to your great estates you are borne to; and shall no labor be
undertaken to get godliness, to get your spirits raised by grace, as an
ornament to the greatness of your birth, and eminency of your estate? How is
this, to slight the very glory of God himself, and to contemn the highest
dignity men or Angels are capable of? Are any places so fit for wisdom, as
the high places of the City? Prove. 9. 1, 3. Wisdom has builded her house,
she has hewn out her seven Pillars, she cries upon the highest places of
the City. How honorable does godliness make those, whose birth, whose place
is honorable in the eyes of God, his Saints, blessed Angels, and in the
consciences of all? How well does grace suite with the highest dignity, as a
bright shining Diamond in a golden Ring? as the world is drawn more conspicuous
and full in a large Map, than in a small; so the beauty and excellency of
grace and godliness, appears more conspicuous and glorious in great men and
honorable, than in those who are of a meaner rank.

First, you had need of other spirits; more need than others for the
improvement of those great mercies that you have above others. As some foul
that have great wings, yet can fly but little; so many men have great estates,
but not having spirits to improve them, they are of little use. Know, that your
estates are either mercies or miseries, blessings or cursings to you, according
as you have hearts to improve them: if they be improved for God, as advantages
to honor God by, to do good withal; they are then great blessings indeed:
and that is as great an argument of the truth of grace, as any, to be as
earnest with God for an heart to improve an estate, or a place of dignity for
God, as to rejoice that Divites sunt, non qui divitias habent, sed qui utuntur
illis ad opera justitiae. Lactant. lib. 5. cap. 16.
you have such an estate for your selves, or that you are in such an eminent
place, whereby you may get honor to your selves. Where God gives not a more
excellent spirit than others, as well as an higher condition than others; there
an eminent estate is made but as fuel for a nourisher and maintainer of all
manner of evil, to afford opportunities for acting of sin; and is not this
the excellency that many account to be in their estates, in that it is higher
than others, in that they can have their wills, and satisfy their lusts more
than others?

Secondly, you had need of other spirits, for the improving of the large 2
opportunities of service for God and his Church, that you have more than
others; these are as great blessings, as your estates, or any dignities you
have above others. God betrusts you with much, in giving you such large
opportunities of service, for the honor of his great Name. If your birth be
high, your estates high, and your spirits endued with excellency from on high,
how fit then are you to be used by God in high and honorable services? Hence
the conversion of a great man is of exceeding great consequence; whereupon
Saint Paul was so loath to lose the Conversion of the Deputy Sergius Paulus,
who began to listen to his preaching; of whom we read Acts 13. verse 7. and so
on: Therefore when Elymas withstood him in this work, seeking to turn away the
Deputy from the Faith, the spirit of S. Paul rose against him with much
indignation; and being filled with the Holy Ghost, he set his eyes on him, and
said, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil thou
enemy of righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the
Lord? And now behold the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be
blind. As if S. Paul should have said, What? will you hinder me in such a great
work as this, wherein God may have so much honor in the conversion of this
Nobleman, this man of public and eminent place? this indeed is to be full of
all mischief, to be an enemy of all righteousness. Thus you see how his
spirit was stirred when he was put in fear of being hindered in such a notable
prize as this: As a man when likely to have a great draught, there comes in one
and disturbs him, and is like to hinder him of it. Surely, S. Paul saw that it
was a wonderful great blessing to the Church, to have great men to be brought
in, to the obedience of the faith, and to be added to it.

And further it is observed, that God going along with S. Paul, and finishing
the work of the conversion of this great man; that upon this Saint Paul had his
name Paul given him, being changed from Saul, and called Paulus, from that
notable work of the conversion of this Paulus Sergius. As many great Captains
amongst the Heathen were wont to have their names changed upon their success
in some noble enterprise, and great victories; as Scipio Africanus, he was
called Africanus from his Conquest of Africa.

3 You who are in high and eminent 3
dignities, you are the earnest prayers of Gods servants in all places, that
God would raise you up with truly noble, excellent, and gracious spirits, that
you may be instruments of his glory: How blessed you, if God fulfils the
prayers of his servants upon you! What great pity is it, that such blessed
opportunities of service, of honoring God, themselves, and families, as you
have, should be lost for want of spirits? Were it not more honorable to you,
and your houses, to be employed as public blessings to Church and
Commonwealth, to have thousands of souls bless you, and bless God for you,
than for you to go siner than others, to have your tables better furnished than
others, to sport and game more than others, to spend more than others?

4 Again, you had need of other 4 Tutum est peccare aut^ribu^ istis.
spirits, for your example is looked at more than others, either in good or
evil; as Christ said of himself in another case, If I be lifted up, I will
draw all men after me: so I may say, If godliness be lifted up in the examples
of great ones, it will draw all men after it. What ever evil is seen in you,
is not only followed by others, but used as a plea to maintain and encourage
that which is evil in many others. Charles the fifth was wont to say, that as
the Eclipse of the Sun is a foretoken of great commotions; so the errors and
oversights of great men, bring with them great perturbations to the places
where they live.

5 Their sin is worse than others, 5
for it does more hurt, and therefore their punishment will be greater than
others; as their actions are exemplary, so will their punishments. Hence that
place, Mich. 6. 5. O my people, remember from Shittim unto ^ilgal; at Shittim
the Lord destroyed the Heads of the people, Number. 25. 4. The destruction of
great ones is to be for ever remembered.

6 And yet further, you have need of other spirits, because you have
temptations greater and stronger than others; therefore if you have not the
more excellent spirits, you are in greater danger than others. The high estate
of great outward dignity, is a very dangerous estate, if God gives not an
extraordinary spirit. There is a notable story of Pius Quintus, that Pope, who
excommunicated Queen Elizabeth; my Author of the story is a Jesuit, Cornelius
a Lapide; one highly esteemed amongst the Papists, and therefore the truth of
it is to be the less suspected: the story is this; he says, that this Pope
Pius Quintus was wont to say of himself, that When I was first in religious
Orders (that is, without any further Ecclesiastical dignity) I had a very good
hope of the salvation of my soul; Cornelius (...) Lapide in his Comment upon
Numb. 11. verse 11. Cum essem Religiosus, sperabam been de salute animae meae,
Cardinalis factus, extimui; Ponti ex creatus, pene despero.
but being made a Cardinal, I began to be much afraid; but now bein Pope, I do
even despair. So, says Cornelius, did Clement the eight, that followed after
him, think of himself. Thus by this example we see what a dangerous thing it
is, to be raised in outward honor, and yet still the spirit to continue base
and vile.

7 Above all, you who are honorable and great in the world, you had need
labor to be gracious, because sin is more unsuitable to your condition, than
to others. It was the complaint of the Church, Lam. 4. 5. that those who were
brought up in Scarlet, did embrace the dung: How unsuitable was this, to have
the highest places, and the lowest spirits? Bernard writing to a noble Virgin,
who was godly, he says, that others were clothed with purple and silk, but
their consciences were poor and beggarly; they glistered with their Jewels,
but were base in their manners; but you (says he) without, are meanly clad,
but within shine exceeding beautiful, not to Seeds prima vitaima. Bern. Indu
untur purpura and Bys^^, and subin de conscientia pannosa jacet; fulgent
monilibus, moribus sordent, e contra tu foris pann^sa, intus spectosa
resplendes divinis aspectibus, non humanis. Bern. ep. 113. ad Sophiam virginem
nobilem. Plutarch.
humane, but to Divine eyes. How unsuitable was the one, but how comely and
suitable the other? It is reported of Scipio Asricanus, that when he took new
Carthage, he took a young Gentlewoman prisoner who was so fair that she
ravished all men's eyes; this Scipio then said, If I were but a common soldier,
I would enjoy this Damsel, but being Commander of an Army, I will not meddle
with her: and so preserving her entire, restored her to her friends. Thus he,
though a Heathen, thought wickedness too mean for, and unsuitable to
greatness. Sin is uncomely any where, much more uncomely amongst great ones;
and grace is comely where ever it is, much more to the great ones of the earth.
As Aeneas Sylvius was wont to say concerning learning, I may say the same
concerning godliness; Popular men should esteem learning as silver, Noble men
should account it like Gold, and Princes should prize it like Pearls. Thus if
godliness be as silver to ordinary men, it is to be accounted as gold and
pearls to you. The Scripture compares beauty in a woman without wisdom, to a
Pearl-in a Swines snour, Pro. 11. 22. as a thing unsuitable: Thus are all
outward excellencies where there is not grace.

8 And would it not be a grievous thing to you, to see poor, inferior, mean
men and women to be lifted up to glory, and your selves cast out, an eternal
curse? have not many of them most excellent precious spirits? do they not do
God far more service than you? do they not bring more honor to his Name,
than ever you did? Think then with your selves, Why should God put those who
are of such choice precious spirits, into such a low condition, and raise me to
such an high? Is it not because he intends to give me my portion in this life,
but reserves better mercies for them afterward? It would be very grievous
indeed if it should prove so.

9 The hopes we have of the continuance of our peace in the happy enjoyment of
those precious liberties of the Gospel, that in so great mercy have been
continued unto us, depends much upon the work of Gods grace upon your souls:
If God takes off your spirits from common vanities, the pleasures of the flesh,
from the poor low things of the world, from your own private ends, and causes
the fear of his great Name to fall upon them, and raises them to the love of,
and delight in the great things of godliness, to be given up wholly to him, to
lift up his great Name; we shall then look upon you as the joyful hopes of our
souls, that God still does and will delight in the blessing, peace and
prosperity of his people: But if we see darkness upon your spirits, then a
dismal night of darkness is upon us. As when we see it wax dark in the valleys,
we say, it is toward night; if it begins to be dark upon the hills, it is nigh
night; but if it be dark in the sky, it is night indeed: So where we see the
works of darkness amongst the people, it is a sign that a night is coming;
but where we see them in those of a higher rank, in the Gentry, it makes us
fear that the night is nearer; but if in the Nobility, and the great men, then
it is a dismal night indeed.

Wherefore be you exhorted in the Name of the Lord, to labor much that you may
have more gracious and holy spirits than others, together with your dignities,
whereby you are lifted up above others. We envy not your honors, we desire
that they may be raised higher by grace. Grace may well stand with the
enjoyment of all your dignities, yea, grace is the only thing that blesses
them, and advances them.

And you whose spirits God has raised above others, in the excellencies of
your parts, and many excellent endowments of learning you have, who are men of
larger understandings, of higher apprehensions than others, and can look upon
ordinary men as low and mean in respect of the difference between your parts
and theirs: Do you labor yet to raise your spirits higher by grace and
godliness, that as you differ from them in natural excellencies, so you may
differ from them much more in spiritual and divine? How eminent would you be
in grace, if those parts and abilities of learning you have, were sanctified
for God? What blessed instruments might you be of glory to God, of comfort and
encouragement to his people? but otherwise your parts and gifts are poisoned; a
sinful wicked heart will poison all. It may be said of many, as it was of Pope
Eugenius the second, he was a man of great Learning, and great Eloquence, with
a mixture of great hypocrisy: If it may be thus said of any, He is a man
indeed of excellent parts, very learned, of strong abilities, but he has a
corrupt spirit; he is a man of a corrupt mind; surely these parts are all
poisoned; no marvel then, though such men swell so much by reason of them.
Parts unsanctified do exceedingly enlarge men's spirits, to be so much the more
capable of spiritual wickedness, more than others of meaner and lower parts
can be; your parts will aggravate all your sins, and increase your damnation:
It is a lamentable thing that such excellent parts and abilities as many have,
which might be of so great use, for God and his Church, yet that they should
vanish into froth.

It was the great complaint of one Robertus Gallus, a famous man, an opposer of
the corruptions of those times in which he lived, which was in the 13. Century:
He compared the Schoole-Doctors to one having bread and good wine hanging on
both his sides; yet notwithstanding, he was gnawing hungerly on a flintstone.
Thus they, leaving the wholesome food in the Scriptures, busied themselves with
subtle questions, wherein there was no edification, or comfort to the soul;
thus their excellent parts did all vanish into nothing. Now if it be so
grievous a thing, for parts and learning to be employed about mean and
unworthy things, how much more grievous is it, when they are employed against
God? Oh, what great cause have we then to pray for these men, whose spirits are
raised by natural parts? and how great cause have they themselves to seek
God, and to use all means, that their spirits might be likewise raised by
grace, that, that great blessing of parts, and learning might be blessed to
them, by Gods bestowing upon them this other spirit? Oh consider, what an
opprobrious thing it is to you, that God should have more fear, honor,
service, from men of lower, far meaner, weaker abilities; That their hearts
should close more with the ways of godliness; That their hearts should be
more enlarged toward God than yours; That they should enjoy more heavenly,
spiritual communion with God than you, Quam innumerabilis ex^stant and semper
extiterint, qui sint aut suerint sine ulla doctrna boni, ex philosophis autem
perraro fuerit qui aliquid in vit^ laud dignum secerit. Lact. li. 3. cap. 15.
E^ lib. 5. cap. 1. Nutant plurimi, and maxim qui literarum aliquid attigerint.
yea, such communion with God, as you are altogether unacquainted withal; And
that at length their souls should be saved, and for ever blessed, when yours
shall be cast out as filth, and an everlasting abhorring from the presence of
the Lord: What a grievous thing will it be to you, when it shall appear, that
your parts shall serve for no other and than to enlarge your souls to be more
capable of the wrath of God, than other men? for be you assured, that none are
so filled with Gods wrath as knowing men.

It was the grievous complaint of S. Austin in his time; The unlearned, Surgunt
indocti, and rapiunt coelum, and nos cum doctrinis nostri^ de rudimur in ge^en
^am.
says he, rise up, and take heaven by force, and we with all our learning, are
thrust down into hell. It is a speech well known to Scholars; of how great use
might it be, if God did settle it upon their hearts? And S. Bernard has a
speech somewhat to the like purpose; Let the wise of the world, says he, who
mind high things, and yet feeding upon the earth, let them Smite sapientes
hujus saeculi alta sapientes and terram lingentes, sapienter desc^ndera in
In(...)rnum. Bern. de vita solitaria ad frat^^ de Monte Dei.
with their wisdom go down into hell. And Luther has a notable story, which
may be very useful for this purpose. It is in his writings upon the fourth
Commandment, which he makes the third; It is to show, how the holiness of the
spirits of mean and unlearned men, shall confound great understanding learned
men, where there is not the like godliness.

In the time of the Council of Constance, he tells us, There were two
Cardinals riding to the Council, and in their journey they saw a shepherd in
the field weeping; one of them pitying him, says, that he could not pass by,
but he must needs go to yonder man and comfort him; and coming near to him,
he asked him, why he wept? he was loath to tell him at first; but being urged,
he told him, saying; I looking upon this Toad, considered that I had never
praised God as I ought, for making me such an excellent creature as a man,
comely and reasonable; I have not blessed him, that he made not me such a
deformed Toad as this. When the Cardinal heard this, he was struck with it,
considering that he had received greater mercies than this poor man; and he
was so struck, as he fell down presently dead from his Mule; his servants
lifting him up, and bringing him to the City, he came to life again, and
then cried out; Oh Saint Austine, how truly did thou say; The unlearned
rise, and they take heaven, and we with all our learning, wallow in flesh and
blood!

You therefore, whom God has honored with excellent parts, that you may not
be thus confounded another day, before the Lord and his blessed Angels, and
Saints, be you restless in your spirits, till you find God has added a
further beauty to them, even the beauty of holiness, the sanctifying graces
of his Holy Spirit, that may make you lovely in his eyes, truly honorable
before him, and for ever blessed of him. Take heed you rest not either in gifts
of learning, or in gifts of morality; the gifts of morality are yet a further
ornament to men's spirits, but yet they come short of those divine excellencies
of spirit, that will make it blessed for ever.

We read of many, who were very eminent in moral excellencies, and yet
altogether strangers from the life of grace. As for example, Josephus lib. 15.
c. 8. reports of Herod the King, that which would make one think, he was
raised to very high moral excellencies: once making a speech to his Army,
amongst other passages he has this; Perhaps some men will say, that right and
equity is on our side, but that the greater number of men, and means are with
the other; but this their speech is unworthy of my followers: for with those
with whom justice is, with those also God is, and where God is, there neither
wants multitude, nor fortitude. And Cap. 12. he reports of him, that in the
time of a famine, he caused all his vessels of gold and silver to be melted,
to buy corn withal for the relief of the poor. That Herod likewise which S.
Luke speaks of in the 12. Acts 23. who was smote by the Angel, and eaten of
worms, yet even this man had many excellent moral gifts: Josephus reports of
him, That he was a man of a most mild Joseph. lib. 19. cap. 7.
disposition, ready to help those which were in adversity, free from outward
gross defilements, and that there was no day past him, in which he did not
offer Sacrifice; and for a testimony of his mild and gentle temper, he tells a
notable story of him, that when one Simon a Lawyer, in his absence, had
scandalized him with many grievous accusations before the people; As that he
was a profane man, and that upon just cause he was forbidden to enter the
Temple: when Herod was certified of these things, and came to the Theater, he
commanded that this Simon should be brought to him, and would have him sit
down next to him, and in peaceable and kind manner he spoke thus to him,
Tell me, I prithee, what thing thou see fault-worthy, or contrary to the Law
in me? This Simon not having any thing to answer, besought him to pardon him;
the King grew friends with him, and dismissed him, bestowing gifts on him. What
a shame is this example to many Christians? and yet we would all be loath to
be in this man's condition. It is reported likewise of Titus, whom God made a
grievous scourge to the Jews, yet he was so meek, so liberal, so merciful,
of so mild and sweet a nature, that he was usually called, The love and
delights of Am^r and deliciae humam generis.
mankind: If he had done no good in any day, he would use to say, I have lost
this day. Suetonius tells of him, that he was wont to use this speech, That
none should go away sad from speaking with a Prince. Excellent things are
likewise reported of Trajan, he was accounted a pattern of upright dealing, in
as much as when a new Emperor was afterward elected, the people were wont to
wish him The good success of Augustus, and the uprightness of Trajanus: and
yet the persecution of Christians under him was very grievous. It is likewise
said of Antoninus Philosophus, that he was of such a sweet temper, that he was
never much puffed up in prosperity, nor cast down in adversity.

Thus we see, men may have excellent gifts of morality, and yet all these but
as the flowers that grow on brambles, far different from those graces of this
other spirit that we speak of, which only grows upon the tree of life: As
many a fair flower may grow out of a stinking root, so many sweet
dispositions, and fair actions may be, where there is only the corrupt root
of nature. It is true, learning and morality are lovely, they are pearls
highly to be esteemed, they are great blessings of God; but there is a pearl
of price that is beyond them all, which the true wise Merchant will labor to
get, and will be content to sell all to obtain, as Matthew. 13. 45, 46. And this
pearl of price is that, by which this other spirit comes to be so excellent
above all that learning and morality, or any common gifts can make it. It is
said in that place of S. Matthew, That the wise merchant sought other goodly
pearls: common gifts are to be sought after, as things that have much
excellency in their kind; but it was that one pearl of great price that he
sold all for: It is that grace of God in Christ, that raises the spirit above
all other excellencies, and is to be prized and sought after above all things
whatsoever. And that you may know, that there is a great deal of difference
between natural endowments, moral virtues, and true spiritual excellencies;
that this other spirit is far beyond the excellencies of these, take these
notes of difference.

1 This other spirit is a renew^d spirit; A new spirit will I give ya, 1
says the Lord, in 11. Ezekiel: 19. It does not arise out of principles bid up
with us; the Lord makes the spirit sensible of its natural corruption and
weakness, and of the Almighty work of his grace upon it. It (...) made
another spirit, by a high and supernatural work of God upon the soul,
working a mighty change in it, creating new principles, new habits. Examine
what change have you found in your spirits; if they be no other then ever have
been, yea; if the change be only graduall, not essential, if it be only the
raising of some natural principles, so as to enable you to live in somewhat a
fairer way then you did; if it be not the work of God breaking your spirits
in pieces, and making of them anew, if it be not a new creation in you; surely
then, yet, your spirits are void of that true blessed excellency, that this
other spirit has.

2 This other spirit works from 2
God, and for God; it is sensible of the need it has of continual influence
from heaven, and it draws virtue and efficacy from God, conveying his grace to
the soul, through that blessed covenant that he has made with the children
of men in Jesus Christ; and receiving thus grace from on high, it is acted up
to God himself, it looks at God in what it does, it is carried out of love to
him, with unfeigned desires to lift up his great Name. Moral virtues are
wrought by that reasonableness the soul sees in such virtuous actions, and
the highest pitch they reach to is, the love to that equity which appears in
them to a man's reason; and therefore the spirit of a man, that is raised no
higher then these, blesses it self rather then God in the exercise of them;
It is far from drawing any virtue from God, in a way of covenant of grace, or
from denying it self, and returning all the praise, and honor to God.

Seneca was a man of as brave a spirit for Morality, almost as ever lived, and
yet see how far he was from working from God, and for God; observe a strange
expression of his in one of his Epistles: The cause Beata vitaecausa et
firmamentum est sibi fidere; turpe est Deo; satigare* Quidvotis opus est: f^^
te soelicem: bonam mentem stultum est opta re, cum possis a te impetr^re: ^^tio
recta et con summata falicitatem ^o^^nis implevit.
and foundation of a blessed life, is to trust ones self, to be confident in
ones self; it is a shameful thing to weary God, says he, in prayer for it.
What needs prayer? Make thy self happy. Its a foolish thing to desire a good
mind, when thou may have it from thy self: right reason is enough to fill up
the happiness of a man.

3 Where true spiritual excellency is, there is a connection of all spiritual 3
excellencies, of all graces, Ephesians. 5. 9. The fruit of the spirit is in all
goodness, and righteousness, and truth, and the reason is, because all are
united in one root, namely in love to God, and holiness: The beauty and
comeliness, that God puts upon the spirit in the work of grace, is a perfect
beauty and comeliness, Ezech. 16. 14. There is no grace wanting, there is all
true spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be God, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings; so the words are in your books, but in the
Original, blessings is in the singular number, with all spiritual blessing;
there is all, and yet but one blessing; to note, that spiritual blessings are
so knit together, that they all make up but one blessing: and therefore where
there is one truly, there none can be wanting; there is such grace as in the
growth of it, it springs up to eternal life: There is such a perfection as
wants only the ripening, and it would be the same with the life in heaven;
but where there wants any essential part, though it be ripened never so much,
let it grow up never so fast, it will never come to be perfect. Thus if there
be any work of grace wanting, if there be any defect in the principle, though
that, that be there, grow up never so fast, yet it would never attain unto
eternal life; Therefore in the work of sanctification, where it is true,
though it be never so weak, yet there is this perfection, that there are all
graces in it; but where there is only a sweet nature, where there is only
some moral work upon the spirit, there are only some particular
excellencies; The most Moral man that ever lived, has had some way of evil,
that his spirit has run out unto.

4 Where there are true spiritual 4
excellencies, there is an impulse of heart, a strong bent of spirit, in
following after the Lord; there is such a powerful impression of divine truths
upon the soul, as presses it on with strength in Gods ways, so that it cannot
easily be hindered, as the Propher says, Esaias 8 11. That the Lord spoke to
him with a strong hand, that he should not walk in the way of the people; such
a spirit has not only some desires, and some wishes, to that which is good;
but goes on bound in the spirit, as S. Paul says of himself; The love of
Christ constraines him; there is a power of godliness where it is true. When
Eliah had cast his Mantle upon Elisha, the spirit of Elisha was pressed to follow
him, 1 King. 19. 19, 20. so that when Elisha desired leave of him to go to his
father and mother to take his leave of them, and said, that then he would
follow him, Eliah answershim, What have I done to thee? Eliah indeed did
nothing in outward appearance, to draw him after him; for what was the casting
of his Mantle upon him, to work such an effect in him? but together with the
casting of his Mantle, there went a spirit into Eliah, that he could not but
follow him: Such a powerful work is there in the sanctifying graces of Gods
Spirit, as with strength to cause the soul to follow him; there is a law of
the mind that has power and command in it, as before there was a law of sin.

But where there are only sweet natures, there men are easily drawn one way,
and as easily drawn the other way; they join with those that are good in good
actions, but their hearts are not so set on that they do, but that they may
be easily taken off, and carried another way.

Fifthly, where there are only 5
moral principles, there the soul sees not into, is not sensible of, turns
not from the evil of sin, as the greatest evil; it sees not such evil in
it, as to make it subscribe to the righteousness of God in all those dreadful
things that are threatened against it, but thinks they are too hard; Surely,
God is not so severe a God; God forbid things should be so as those we read
of in the Gospel. When Christ spoke that Parable concerning those who smote
the servants of the Lord of the Vineyard, Luke 20. 16. and told them, that the
Lord should come and destroy those Husbandmen, and give his Vineyard to others:
It is said, When they heard that, they said, God forbid: So many when they
hear the dreadful wrath of God denounced against sin, they say, God forbid;
they think indeed, that sin ought not to be committed; but they do not
think it so great an evil, as to procure so great miseries; but if their
spirits were right, they would apprehend sin, as opposite to an infinite
good, and so having a kind of infiniteness of evil in it; they would not
only yield to the Justice of God revealed, but acknowledge, that there are
greater and more fearful miseries due to it than can be conceived: yea, they
would see cause, that if God should bring those evils upon them for their
sin, that there is infinite equity that they should lay their hands upon
their mouths, and take shame to themselves, and acknowledge the Lord to be
righteous for ever.

Sixthly, where there are only natural and moral excellencies, they 6
do not raise the soul to a love of the strictest ways of God; they think of
accuratenesse and exactness in Gods ways to be but niceness and too much
preciseness; luke-warmenesse is the only temper suitable to them; they think
wisdom consists in the remission of godliness, not in the improvement of it;
and what is beyond their temper, they judge as weakness and folly; and it must
needs be that moral men must have such thoughts of the strictness of the
ways of God, because that good they have is such as arises from the principles
of natural reason, and makes a natural good its end; and therefore all their
virtue and goodness must be such as must not stretch nature, but must be
subserviet to that natural good they frame to themselves. Now the observing of
some Rules and Duties of Religion, will suite well with this; and so far they
approve and like well of Religion: and here they stick, and think any thing
that is further than this, is folly, and more than needs. The work of
godliness in the power of it, must needs be distastefull to them, because it
seeks to empty a man of himself, to cause him to deny himself; to fetch all
from principles beyond himself, and to be for a higher good than himself is,
which is an infinite good: and therefore, if it were possible, it would work
infinitely toward it, but howsoever, it will set no limits to it self.

Seventhly, where there is only nature or morality, there is no sense 7
of the breathings of Gods Spirit in his Ordinances; the Ordinances are dead
and flat things to them: a mere moral man can like well enough of presenting
himself in the Ordinances, but he feels no virtue in them, no impression that
they work upon him, that abides on his spirit after the Ordinances are done;
he knows not what it is to enjoy God in them, he knows not what it is to
stir up himself to take hold on God in the exercise of them; those
excellencies that he has, are not drawn out, maintained or increased by
spiritual objects and duties; but it is otherwise where true spiritual
excellencies are; such a one goes to Ordinances and holy duties with
expectation to meet with the Lord there: He can discern and feel the
gracious presence of the Lord; he finds the Spirit of the Lord breathing
graciously upon his spirit, and rofreshing his soul with much quickening, and
life and sweetness; he finds his spirit drawn out by them, his heart much
enlarged, his graces much increased in the use of them; or if at some times he
wants this, then he is sensible of the want of it, of that difference that now
he feels between that which sometimes he has had, and that which now he
wants; but the other is sensible of no such want, all times are alike with him.

Thus you see how you may examine your spirits, whether the excellencies of
them be natural, whether they be only moral, or truly spiritual. By these
Notes you may see, that to be true of your selves, that our Savior said to
his Disciples in another case; You know not of what spirit you are. Though God
has given you many excellent blessings, beautified your spirits with many
excellents endowments, which are in themselves lovely and desirable; yet he
has not raised your spirits to that true spiritual excellency that he uses
to raise the spirits of his people unto, even in this world. There are yet
other higher excellencies to be attained to, to be sought after, without which
all the other you have will vanish, and never bring up your souls to the
enjoyment of God as yours in Christ.

But what should be done that we Quest.
may get another spirit?

Work what you can upon your Ans.
hearts what ever truth may further 1
convince you, of the difference of spirits; that you may be thoroughly
convinced, that there is indeed a vast essential difference, and that you may
see into the evil of your spirits, and be sensible of the want of this true
spiritual excellency, and lie down before God dejected, and humbled in the
sight thereof.

Secondly, be much in the company 2
of the godly. When Saul was among the Prophets, the Spirit of God came upon
him, and he began to prophecy too. Elijah told Elisha, that if he were with
him when he was taken up, then he should have his spirit come upon him;
wherefore Elisha kept close to him, and would by no means leave his company.
By being much in the company of the godly, you will come to see some beams of
the excellency of their spirits shine out to you, whereby you will see that
your spirits are not like theirs; that they are in a happier condition than
you; that they are men in a nearer reference to God than you; you will soon
discern, that surely the world is mistaken in these men.

Thirdly, frequent the Ordinances 3
of God, where the Spirit uses to breath; set your souls before the work of
Gods Spirit: The Spirit breaths where it lists, therefore it must be
attended upon in those ways which it self chooses. Though your spirits be
never so dead, and polluted, who knows but that at length in the attending
upon God in his way, the Spirit of God may breath upon you, may breath in you
the breath of life? it has breathed upon as dead, polluted spirits as yours,
and it has cleansed them, sanctified them, it has filled them full of
spiritual and glorious excellencies.

Fourthly, nourish and make good use of those common works of 4
Gods Spirit you have already; they have much excellency in them; and if they
be not rested in, but improved, they may be very serviceable for the work of
Gods grace; but as Christ says of the riches of the world, If you be not
faithful in them, who will trust you with the true riches; so if you be not
careful to make use of the common works of Gods Spirit, how can it be expected
that the Lord should bless you with further mercy this way? Be sure you do
not wilfully go against the rules of right reason you are convinced of; do not
darken that light of reason that God has set up in you; do not extinguish
those sparks in natural conscience that God has kindled there; do not dead
those principles you have received in your education; use that strength of
reason, resolution, and natural conscience you have, to keep in your spirits,
that they be not let out to feed upon sinful delights. With what face can you
complain of weakness, and yet feed your distempers? There is little hope of
such as have extinguished the light of their common principles, which once they
had in an eminent manner; their light of reason once was at least as a fair
Candlelight, but now it is like the snuff in a socket, almost drowned and
quenched with their filthy lusts. How just with God were it, that these men
should be left to die and perish for ever in their filth?

Fifthly, seek earnestly from God to renew, to sanctify your spirits; it is 5
he that is the Father of spirits, and the spirit of man is under no other
power, but the power of God himself; and he has the command of all, and with
him there is abundance of spirit, and he is willing; yea, he has promised to
give his Spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11. 13.

But you will say, how can I pray Quest.
without the Spirit?

I answer, put thy self upon prayer, and who knows but assistance and Ans.
blessing may come? present thy self before the Lord, tell him what thou
apprehendest of the vileness, of the filthiness of thy spirit; what
convictions thou have of the necessity of the renewing of it, of the
excellency thou see in the spirits of his servants; tell him of those
desires thou have to be blessed with such a spirit: O Lord, thou have given me
many bodily blessings, great blessings of my estate more than others, many
excellent gifts; but Lord there are other mercies my soul wants; Oh that thou
would give me another spirit! As this Caleb, Joshua 15. 19. gave his
daughter Aohsah a blessing, namely, the upper springs, and the neither spring,
so do thou seek of God, that as he has given thee the blessing of the nether
springs, so he may give thee the blessing of the upper; namely, that he may
bless thy soul with true spiritual blessings.

Sixthly, be sure thou look up to 6
God in Christ, to seek this mercy in him; look on him as anointed by the
Father with the fullness of the Spirit; look to him in whom all the fullness of
the Godhead dwells bodily, that out of this fullness, spiritual blessings may
be conveyed to thee; for otherwise whatsoever thou seek for of God, and not
in this way, thou seek but in a natural way.

Seventhly, be careful to observe 7
the beginnings of those special stirrings of Gods Spirit in thee, those gales
that sometimes thou may feel, and then put on what possibly thou can;
then sollow the work of Gods grace, make much of such beginnings, give up thy
self to the power of them; turn the motions of Gods Spirit into purposes, and
those purposes into endeavors, and those endeavors into performances, and seek
that those performances may be established. We do not know what we lose,
when at any time we lose the stirrings of Gods Spirit in our hearts. Who knows
but that thy eternal estate may depend upon those sparks that he is now
kindling in thee? It is a great wickedness to stifle the child in the womb,
when it is new conceived; and is it not a great wickedness to stifle those
blessed motions that are conceived by the work of the Holy Ghost? And for a
conclusion of this point, let thy spirit be for ever restless until thou
feel God graciously coming in unto thee; let no mercy satisfy thee, till
God gives thee soule-mercies, and blesses thee with his choice spiritual
blessings, such as are peculiar to those who are good in his eyes.

A GRACIOUS Cap. 1.
SPIRIT FOLLOWS GOD FVLLY. The second Part.
Numb. 14. 24. And has followed me fully, him will I bring into the land,
wherein he went; and his seed shall possess it.
CAP. 1.
(...)t is for a man to follow God fully.

THe second Doctrine follows, which is this; It Doct. 2.
is the high praise of servants that they follow God fully: This is their
commendation, that they have their hearts come fully off in the ways of
obedience, to fulfill the good will of the Lord; this is that perfect heart
which God so often calls for in Scripture, and for which so many of Gods
servants are commended in the Word; as, Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, says God
to Abraham, and be thou perfect. Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Thou shall be perfect with the
Lord thy God. This Noah is commended for, Genesis 6. 9. He was a just man, and
perfect in his generations: so Job, Chap. 1. 1. He was perfect and upright. The
want of this was the stain and blot upon Solomon, 1 King. 11. 6. the Text
there says, he went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father: This
likewise was the stain of the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. 2. I have not found
thy ways perfect; the wo^ds are, I have not found thy ways (...) thou have
not filled up thy (...) (...).
following me; something ind(...)ou have done, but thou have not followed me
fully. To have a heart full of goodness, as S. Paul testifies of the Romans,
Chap. 15. verse. 14. and to have a life full of good works, as, Acts 9. 33. is
witnessed of Tabitha. This is the excellency of a godly man, this is the true
declaration of the excellency of that spirit, wherein this glory does consist.

In this Argument we shall first show, what it is to follow God fully, 1
or what the frame of the spirit is in the following the Lord fully.

Secondly, wherein the true excellency 2
of this lies.

Thirdly, apply it.

For the first, take this Caution premised; 3
When we speak of a fullness in following the Lord, we do not mean a legal
fullness, such a fullness wherein there is no want or imperfection: not to
sin, is here only our law, in heaven it shall be our reward. Bu^ ^here is a
true following of the (...), that is even in this life to b^ ^^^a^ned unto, an
Evangelicall fullness, and that is the fullness that we are to speak of. The
Gospel requires perfection as well as the Law, though in a different manner:
and this is,

First, a fullness of all graces; though not the degree of all graces, yet the
truth of every grace: There is no grace wanting, where this Evangelicall
fullness is.

Secondly, there is no want, no not of any degree, wherein the soul rests;
there is such a perfection as the soul takes no liberty to it self to fail
in any thing.

Thirdly, there are sincere aims, as in the sight of God, to attain to the
highest perfection, the full measure of holiness; and,

Fourthly, there is that uprightness of the soul, as it does not only desire
and endeavoure to attain, but does indeed attain to the truth of that I shall
deliver.

First, the heart is fully set and resolved for God, there is fuln(...) of 1
resolution; so the Septuag(...)slates that place in Ioshuah 14. verse. 8 where
Caleb speaks of his following of God fully; they turn it thus, I decreed, I
determined to follow him: The heart is fully taken off from shiftings, from
hankerings after other (...).
things, from the engagements that before it had; from disputings reasonings
for the ways of the flesh: it does not hang between two, as unsettled,
irresolved, wavering; but is truly and fully taken off, and the resolutions are
fully set upon, and for the ways of God. Many have some co^victions, some
stirrings, some makings toward the ways of God, some approbation of them;
thinking with themselves, it were well, if we could do thus: Surely, they are
the best men who can do thus; but still some engagement holds them fast; they
have thoughts flitting up and down; they would and they would not; they could
like well, were it not for this thing and that thing; this inco(...)ience and
the other trouble w(...) follow; and so they delay and put off, and think, it
may be they may hereafter do better; their good desires and inclinations they
hope, may serve turn for the present. And thus they stand baffling with God
and their own souls: they are, as Seneca speaks of some, always about
Semper victuri.
to live: But this soul who fully follows God, is fully broken off from
former ways, the thoughts of it are come to a determinate issue; it is
resolved against them whatsoever becomes of it; resolved to listen no more
after the reasonings of flesh and blood, as S. Paul says of himself, Gal. 1.
15, 16. that after it pleased God to call him by his grace, and to reveal his
Son in him, immediately he conferred not with flesh and blood. Many are a great
while before they be thus fully taken off; they are as Agrippa, Acts 26. 28.
almost persuaded to become Christians; the truths of God do move them, They
do suadere, but not persuadere.
but not thoroughly persuade them; they strive with them, but d^ not thoroughly
vanquish them. The spirit of God leaves some in the very birth, that there is
never strength to bring forth; but it is a most blessed thing, when the heart
comes off kindly and fully; now it is not so ready to raise objections against
the ways of God, nor to hearken to objections raised by others, as it was
before: When the fire is fully kindled; there is little smoke, at the first the
smoke rises thick, that we can see no fire: The reason of so many arguings,
and objections of the flesh, is because the heart is not fully taken off.
Tertullian has a notable expression to this purpose: How wise an Quam sapiens
Argum^ntatrix ^^bi videtur arroga(...) h(...) na* (...) praesertim cum aliquid
de gaud^is saec(...) me^uit am^^tere! Tertul. de spect^c. cap. 2.
Arguer, says he, does the pride of man seem to it self, when it is afraid
to lose some of worldly joys! It is the engagement of man's heart to his lust,
that makes him think there is any strength in those objections and reasonings,
that he has in his heart against Gods ways; when the heart is taken off, they
vanish of themsel(...)*

2 There is a fullness of all the faculties of the soul working after 2
God; full apprehensions, full affections; the soul is filled with the will of
God, as Col. 4. 12. That ye may stand perfect, and full in all the will of
God, as the sails silled with the wind; My soul and all that is within me
praise the Lord, says David. As it is in giving men full possession of a
house; they give up the keys of every room; so here the soul gives up every
faculty to God; the whole soul opens it self, to receive the Lord and his
truth. There is a loving the Lord with all the mind, with all the heart, and
with all the soul; there is a spiritual life, quickening every faculty; there
is a sanctification throughout every faculty, though no faculty be thoroughly
sanctified.

3 The soul follows God fully, in regard of the true endeavors of 3
it, to put forth what strength it has in following the Lord; all the
faculties work, and it is not satisfied, that they should work remissely,
(...)it would have them work ferv(...)y, and powerfully, as David, Psalm. 63. 8
My soul follows hard after thee: there is a panting of the heart, a gasping
of the spirit after the Lord; As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so
pants my soul after thee, O God, says David, Ps. 42. 1. My heart breaks
for the longing it has unto thy judgments, Psalm. 119. 20. The spirit boils in
fervor while it is serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. Fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord. Esaias 26. 9. With my soul, says the Prophet, I have desired thee,
and with my spirit within me will I seek thee. This soul does not only love
God, with all the mind, and with all the heart, but with all the strength too;
there is no strength reserved for any thing else, but the Lord.

4 The soul that fully follows 4
the Lord, follows him without delay, in the use of all means, and in all the
ways of his Commandments; the delaying and putting off, is an argument of
remissness. David's* soul followed hard after the Lord, as you heard before
in the 63. Psalm: and this made him seek the Lord early, Verse 1. O God, thou
art my God, early will I seek thee, says lie; the present time is the
sulnesse of time with such a soul. We read of Haman, Ester 3. 5. that he was
full of wrath, and hence he procures, that the Posts should be hastened about
his work in destroying the Jews, Verse 15. And it sets upon all means, what
way soever it may be brought near to God, either by ordinary means, or else
by extraordinary; uses all ordinances conscionably in their season, will
abstain from all occasions of evil, avoids all hindrances, in that which is
good; if he knows any thing may further him in the bringing of his heart
nearer to God, he readily and thankfully embraces it, and makes use of it; he
uses all means, and yet rests not in any means.

5 Again, a soul that follows 5
God fully, follows him in all the ways of his Commandments is the Lord says
of David, Act. 13. 22. That he had found a man (...) would sul^ll (...) has
will; in the Original, the word is in the plural number; That would fulfill
all his wills. There are many reasons that many give, (...)
why David was called, A man after Gods own heart: Some think, because he
was so broken a hearted man: Others, because he had such a thankful heart; but
this Scripture resolves us, for God says, That he had found a man after his
own heart, and gives that reason of it, because he would fulfill all his
wills. This soul desires to fulfill all righteousness, as Christ says of
himself, It became him to fulfill all righteousness. It desires to yield
obedience to God, and to be holy in all manner of conversation, as the Apostle
speaks, in 1 Pet. 1. 15. Then shall not I be ashamed, says David, when I have
respect unto all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. We have a notable place for
this universalitie of obedience in the 1. Coloss. 9, 10, 11. We pray, says the
Apostle, that ye might be fulfilled in all knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom, that ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things, being fruitful in all good works, strengthened with all might, through
his glorious power, to all patience: there are six alls together in this
Scripture. A heart that is fully for God, is for all Gods ways, in all things;
it is not willing to baulke any way of God. Zachariah and Elizabeth were two
choice spirits indeed, and this was their honor, that they walked with God in
all the Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1. verse. 6.

1 It is willing to follow the Lord 1
in difficult duties, when it must put the flesh to it, in duties that require
pains, much labor, that cannot be done without some hard things attending on
them. God has some hard pieces of services to put his people upon, to try the
uprightness of their hearts, the sincerity and power of their loves to him
in; and God takes it exceeding well when they will follow him in such duties;
As that hard piece of service he put Abraham upon, in offering his son, when
Abraham was willing to follow him in that, Now, says he, I know thou love
me: It is nothing to follow God in such duties, as will so suit with us,
wherein we need put our selves to no trouble; many are well content with such
duties, and seem to yield to God in them; but go beyond those, and put them
upon further, and they stir not; but as the rustie hand of a Dial, if you
come at that time of the day, wherein the hour falls out the same, at which
the hand stands, it seems to go right, but if you pass that time, the hand
stands yet still, it goes no further than it did, and so shows the Dial not
to be good: So here, when it falls out so, that a duty is enjoined, which is
suitable to a man's mind, and ends, he will readily yield to it, and seem as if
he made conscience of obedience to God in it; but if you put him on further,
in duties that are not so suitable to him, there he stirs not, because of the
difficulty which he sees in them, and in this he shows the falsenesse of his
heart, that he does not follow God fully.

2 Again, one that follows God 2
fully, will follow him in discountenanced duties. Some duties are liked well
enough of in the world, for reason tells every man, God must have some service;
and some general way of serving of God, all rational men approve of; and if
God would require a man to follow him, in no other duties but these, it were
fine; but there are some others that will make him to be observed; some, in
which if he follows the Lord, he shall be reckoned amongst such kind of men,
of whose number he does not like to be accounted one; he knows they are
discountenanced, and despised, and this he cannot bear, and therefore those
are duties he has no mind unto, and then thinks with himself, Why may not
my obedience in other things serve the turn?

3 And yet further, one that is willing 3
to follow God fully in all duties, he will follow him in those where he sees
no reason, but the ^are command of God; it is enough to him, that they are
commanded of God; it is not for the Lord to give account of his ways, to his
creatures; Audaciam existimo de bono divini praecepti disputare, n^^ quia bonum
est auscultare d(...)mus, sed quia Deus praec^pit Tertul. de poenit.
it is enough for us, that he bids us follow him; absolute obedience is that
which is our duty; there is always reason enough in Gods will; but whether we
see it, or see it not, if we can but see the Commandment, it is enough for us;
we take too much upon us, to dispute about the reason of things with God, we
must not be Judges of the Law, but doers of it. Saul could see no reason, why
he might not spare the best of the cattle, especially when he did it to keep
them for sacrifice, but it cost him his Kingdom; God rejected him for it, and
told him, Obedience was better than sacrifice. Luther Mallem obedire quam
miracula sacere.
says, He had rather obey than work miracles. And Cassianus reports of one
Johannes Abbas, who when he was young, was willing for a whole Cassianus l. 4.
cap. 24.
year together, to fetch water every day near two miles, to water a dry
stick, because he was commanded so to do; he thought it reason enough to
do things unreasonable, to show his obedience unto man, whose will is many
times unreasonable; how much more reason is there then that we should show our
obedience to God, in duties, where through our weakness we cannot see the
reason, when we may be sure that there is always reason enough, if we were
able to see it?

Fourthly, and yet further, the soul that is willing to follow God 4
in all duties, will follow him in Commandments that are accounted little
Commandments: God expects faithfulness in little things; God prizes every
tittle of his Law more worth than heaven and earth, howsoever we may slight
many things in it, and think them too small to put any great bond upon us.
Christ says, that, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot or
tittle of his Word. As if he should say, If Heaven and earth were in one
balance, and any jot or tittle of my Word in another, and if one of them must
needs perish, I had rather that Heaven and earth should perish, than that one
jot or tittle of my Word should fail: The Authority of Heaven puts weight on
things, that are never so little in themselves. If man's authority do this, how
much more Divine? Man cannot bear disobedience in little things; though the
things be very small in themselves, yet if commanded by Authority, it is justly
expected that they should be much regarded. Shall man's authority make small
things to be accounted great, and shall Gods Authority do nothing? Obedience
in small things is due to Magistrates, much more to God: Give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, Matthew, 22. 21. It
is observable in that place, the Article is twice repeated in the Greek Text,
when he speaks of God, more than when he speaks of Caesar: showing, that our
especial (...).
care should be to give God his due.

Fifthly and lastly, not to instance in more particulars, the soul that
follows God fully in all duties, is willing 5
to follow him in duties wherein it must go alone; it is willing to follow God
in folitary paths. Many men, were it that they might have company in the way,
in following the Lord, they would be content; but to go all alone in such
solitary ways, wherein they can see none go before them, wherein they can
have none along with them, few or none are like to follow after them; this is
tedious. But a child of God thinks he has enough, in that he has God with
him, that he walks along with God; this is company enough, let the way be what
it will be: As David, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, yet thou art with me. God promises that he will go before his
people; that is enough, though there be none else. It is true, company in Gods
ways is delightful, and it is a sad thing, that there is so little a tract in
Gods paths. It was the complaint of Gods people, Lam. 1. 4. that the ways of
Sion did mourn, because none came in them. But if company cannot be had, it is
enough we have the Lord. 2 Timothy 4. 16. At my first answer, says S. Paul, no
man stood with me, but all men forsook me, notwithstanding the Lord stood with
me. Elijah thought he was left alone, he could see no man go that way he did;
yet he continues in his fervor and zeal, following the Lord. Indeed we should
the rather follow the Lord, because we see so few follow him: What? shall he
have none to follow him? as Christ said to his Disciples, when many forsook
him, Will you also forsake me?

Thus you see by these several instances in difficult duties, in
discountenanced duties, in duties wherein we can see no reason, but a bare
command, in duties that seem to be small and little, and in duties, wherein if
we follow God we must follow him alone; that the soul that follows God fully,
will follow him in these, and so by the same reason in all other duties that
God shall require, to follow him in: And this is that precious choice spirit we
spoke of before, which shows it in this, that it is thus willing to follow God
fully. You know it is required of us to be perfect, as God himself is perfect,
to be holy as God is holy; yea, this the Gospel requires of us; but how can
that be? Yes, thus; Gods perfection and holiness is made known to us in his
will, in his Commandments; now look how large they are set forth to us in
these, so large must our obedience be: though we cannot attain to the degree,
yet our hearts must enlarge themselves to the things, to what ever part of Gods
will, God makes known his perfection and holiness by. Thy Commandment is
very broad, says David, yet godliness inlargeth the heart to every duty it
calls for: there is a grace within the soul suitable to every duty the law
requires.

It may be this is indeed, may some think, in those who are eminent in grace,
upon whom God has bestowed a great measure of his Spirit; but is this in every
one that has any truth? Wherefore for answer let us know, there is this
perfection, or else there is no truth at all; only remember, I do not speak
now of the perfection of degrees; in this co^sists the right straightnes of a
man's heart. A straight line will touch with another straight line in every
point, but a crooked line will not, it touches but only here and there in some:
so straight hearts will join with Gods law in every part, but crooked and
perverse hearts, only in some, only so far as may serve their own turns.
In this consists the true plainness of a man's spirit: you know, plain things
will join likewise in every point one with another, but round and rugged
things will not: so proud, sowlne hearts, and rugged spirits will not close
fully with Gods truths; but where there is plainness of spirit, there is a
full closing, a through union. There is a great dangerous mistake about this
point, which yet is a general mistake; multitudes of people miscarry
everlastingly upon this mistake; they think because we cannot in this life
attain to the perfection of holiness in the degrees, therefore there is no
perfection at all necessary, but that they may be saved without it: they think
therefore that if they do some good things, if they obey some Commandments, it
is sufficient, though they take liberty to themselves in other things; they
find they can yield in something; yet other things of Gods will are
exceedingly unsuitable unto the^. Be convinced of your mistake herein: a godly
man indeed is weak, and cannot attain to the performance of every part of Gods
will, but the frame of his heart is to every part; every part is suitable to his
spirit: He esteems all the Precepts of God concerning all things to be right,
and he hates every false way. He finds the Law of God in the latitude of it,
Psalm. 119. 128.
written in his heart; there is no command of God that is not dearer to him
than all the world. Mark that place in Job, Chap. 8. verse 20. God will not
cast away the perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers: The perfect
man is opposed to the evil doers, who shall be cast away. If you be not
perfect in this sense that has been spoken of, then you are an evil doer, who
must be cast away, how glorious soever many of your actions may seem to be.
That place in Ezechiel, Chap. 18. verse 21. that is usually taken for the place
of the greatest mercy in all the Scripture, and by many is exceedingly abused;
yet see what that requires of men in their repentance: the words are usually
taken up thus, At what time soever a sinner repents him of his sin, I will blot
out all his iniquities, says the Lord. There are not those very words in any
place of Scripture, but there are to the like effect, which are in this place
of Ezechiel: And in no other place is Gods mercy to a sinner, more fully
revealed: There is no Text in Scripture comes nearer to that which men
ordinarily take up, than that verse and the 27. 28. verses in the same Chapter:
and see what of Gods mind we have made known there; the words of the
Scripture are thus, If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has
committed, and keep all mystatutes, and do that which is lawful and right,
he shall surely live: and again, Verse 28. Because he considers, and turns
from all his transgressions. Thus you see, that God in the largest promises of
his mercy to those who have the least measure of grace, he requires the turning
from all sins, and the keeping of all his Statutes: and this God brings to
show the infinite equity of his ways toward sinners. As if he should say,
Except this be, no man's conscience in the world but must acknowledge it to be
infinitely just and equal, that he should perish everlastingly; if there be
any way of wickedness reserved, if any statute of mine be neglected, if he
thinks to have mercy without an universal turning from his sin, without an
universal obedience; his conscience will tell him, that it is an unequal and
unreasonable thing, that he should ever expect it. And yet further, because
you think that this universalitie of obedience should be expected only from
some who are eminent in grace, who have attained to a great measure of
godliness; consider what is required of poor widows, 1 Timothy 5. 10. They
must diligently follow every good work.

First, they must not only have good desires, but good works. Secondly, they
must follow good works. Thirdly, they must diligently follow them. Fourthly,
they must diligently follow every good work.
And fifthly, they must so follow, as they must be well reported of for it.

Yea, sixthly, they must do all this, or else they must not be received into
the Church. Surely, then it is a shame for any man, especially of parts and
abilities, to plead weakness, when so much is required of poor women;
certainly it is not weakness, but falsenesse of heart, that is contrary to
universalitie of obedience, to the following of the Lord fully in this respect.
The Vessel of honor is distinguished from the vessel of dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.
21. by this Character, that it is one that is sanctified and prepared for every
good work. You know what S. James says, Chap. 1. verse 26. If any man seem
to be religious, and bridle not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this
man's religion is in vain. It is an heavy censure, that all a man's religion is
in vain for one fault, and that but for a fault in the tongue; and yet this is
the censure of the Holy Ghost. No question, such men who were guilty herein,
would reason thus with themselves, We cannot be perfect in this life, we do
perform many duties of religion; and therefore we hope though we fail in this
one thing, that yet we shall do well enough, God will accept of us. No, says
S. James, he deceives his own heart; such a one shall never be accepted. To
the like effect is that of our Savior, John 5. 44. How can you believe on me,
which receive honor one of another? This was enough to keep the^ off for ever
from Christ; and yet this was but an inward sin, no outward gross crying sin
in the esteem of the world. Let a man be never so glorious in never so many
duties of Religion, yet certainly the giving liberty to himself in any one
lust, is enough to keep him off for ever from God, from partaking of good in
him. As if a wife be never so officious to her husband, yielding to him in
never so many things, seeking to give him content in his desires never so many
ways, yet if she entertaines any other lover besides himself, it is enough to
alienate his spirit from her for ever.

That which God says to Solomon, 1 King. 9. 4. is very observable to our
purpose: After Solomon had finished that glorious Temple, for the honor of the
Lord, after he had assembled all the Elders of Israel, all the heads of the
Tribes, the chief of the Fathers of the children of Israel, to bring up the
Ark of the Lord with all solemnity, to that Temple he had made for it, after
he had made such an excellent prayer before all the people; and when that was
done, that he might show his further respect unto the Lord, he offered to the
Lord two and twenty thousand Oxen, and one hundred and twenty thousand sheep,
and in his rejoicing in this great work, he made a great feast to the people
seven days, and to them he added seven days more, and sent away the people
with joyful and glad hearts: Here were great things done in honor to God, yet
all this would not serve Salomons turn, but Chap. 9. 4. After all this, God
says to him, If thou will walk before me, as David thy father walked, in
integrity of heart and uprightness, to do according to all that I have
commanded thee, then I will establish the Throne of thy Kingdom: As if he
should have said, Do not think to put me off with any thing thou have done;
though the things be great things, yet I expect walking according to all that I
have commanded thee, or else all is nothing; And therefore, as before you
heard, he was charged by God, Chap. 11. 6. that he did not go fully after the
Lord: One would have thought those glorious actions that he did, had been
enough to have got him the commendation of going fully after God; but we see it
would not be: there must be besides these, a walking according to all that God
commands, a keeping his Statutes, and his judgments, yea, and that is
observable that we have in the 6. verse of this 9. Chapter, where God says
after all this, That if you shall at all turn from following me, you, or your
children, etc. then will I cut off Israel. We must take heed of the least
failing in our following the Lord. God threatens Solomon, after he had done so
much, that if he did at all turn from following him, he would cut him off.
It is not our forwardness in some good things, it is not our serviceablenes in
some public and worthy employments, that will serve our turns, if we make not
conscience of every duty, of secret duties, and that constantly. God has so
connexed the duties of his Law one to another, that if so be there be not a
conscionable care to walk according to all, it is accounted as the breach of
all, according to that of S. James, Chap. 2. 10. Whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all; The bond of all is
broken, the authority of all is slighted; and that evil disposition that
causes a man to venture upon the breach of one, might the breach of others
serve for his own ends as well as that, it would make him venture upon the
breach of any.

To draw to a conclusion of this Argument, let us know, that if the heart be
right, it is willing to be cast into the mould of the Word, to receive
whatsoever print the Word will put upon it, to be in whatsoever form the Word
will have it: as Metals that are cast into a mould, they receive the print of
the mould, print for print in every part; and this is the heart that does
indeed follow God fully. This is S. Paul's expression, Romans 6. 17. You have
obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine unto which you were delivered; so
the words are in the Original: The (...).
form of doctrine is compared to the Mould, and the sincere obeyers from the
heart, are compared to the Metal delivered into this Mould, which takes
impression from it, in one part as well as in another. No sincere obedience
from the heart, no true following of God fully without this. I have been the
larger in this particular, because the mistake is so general and dangerous.

5 Then does the heart fully follow 5
after the Lord, when it is indeed willing to search fully into every truth,
that yet it does not fully know, with a readiness to lie under the power of
it: Such a man is not afraid of any truth of God, lest it should put him upon
that he has no mind to, as Ahab was afraid to enquire of Michaiah what the
mind of God was, because he was never wont to prophecy good unto him; but
that man who follows the Lord fully, does always account the word of the Lord
to be good to him, as Mic. 2. 7. Do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly? He says to the Lord as Elihu, Job 34. 32. That which I see not,
teach thou me: if I have done iniquitiy, I will do no more. Lord, that which
I know not, do thou teach me; and wherein I have failed, I shall conscionably
endeavor to reform. Oh! let the Word of God be glorified for ever,
whatsoever becomes of me; let it come in the full latitude of it, my soul
shall yield to it; my heart is prepared to submit to whatsoever truth God shall
make known to me.

I remember, I have read in one of the Epistles written to Oecolampadius, of a
notable expression, of one Baldassar a Minister in Germany writing to him; Let
the word of the Lord Veniat, venia^ verbum Domini, et submittemu^ illi,
sexcenta si nobis essent c^l^a.
come, let it come, says he, and we will submit to it, if we had many
hundred necks to put under: This is a degree further then the other; for there
are many who dare not go against known truths, for then conscience would fly
in their faces; but there are some truths which they are afraid to know, which
they are secretly willing to put off, lest they should come to know them, which
is an argument that their hearts are not fully after the Lord: when men are not
convinced of many truths, not because there is not light enough to convince
them, but because they are not willing to be convinced, they strive to keep
out the power of the truth from their hearts; they are not willing, that such
truths that are not for their turns, should come into their judgments; they
seek to shift them off: when the truth stands and pleads for entrance, they
seek one shift or other to put it off withal, Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse
not him that speaks: The words are, See that ye shift not him off that
speaks. In the propriety of that word as it is in the Original, we have thus
much signified to us: Christ in his truths (...).
comes to ask entrance, and we must ^ake heed that we do not put him off.
And if the truth have got into our judgment, we must take heed, we do not
strive to get conscience off from it; and if conscience has closed with it,
take heed we strive nor to get it out of conscience again, and then think it a
sufficient plea, to satisfy our selves and others in the actions we do, that
now our judgments are better informed; whereas the truth indeed is, our lusts
are more satisfied, the corruptions of our hearts are more increased. Oh take
heed for ever of laboring to blind our understandings, of withholding the
truth in unrighteousness, of imprisoning it, to keep it from working with
power upon our hearts. This distemper of heart, is exceedingly opposite to the
following of the Lord fully.

6 To follow God fully, is to follow him so, as to be willing to venture 6
the loss of all for him, willing to decline from and cast off whatsoever
comes in the way, though never so dear unto us; to follow him close whatsoever
comes in competition with him; when we cannot follow him without parting with
much for him, when our following him will cost us the loss of our formerly
most dear comforts and contentments; to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes,
through all afflictions, through all straits, knowing that his way though it be
a way of blood, yet it leads to the throne; To follow Christ to mount Calvery
where he is to suffer, as well as to that Mount that we read of Esaias 25. 6.
where the Lord makes to his people, A feast of fat things, a feast of wines, a
feast of fat things full of marrow. It is nothing to follow him, when our
comforts, peace, ease, honor goes along together with him; it cannot then be
known whether we follow him or no, or whether it be our own ends that we
follow: As when a Serving-man follows two Gentlemen, we know not which of
these two he follows till they part, but then you shall see which was his
Master: So here, when Christ and our own ends part one from another, then is
the trial which was followed before. We must love the truth, not only when
we can live upon it, when we can get advantage by it; but then also, when it
must live upon us, when it must have our estates, our peace, our names, our
liberties, our lives to live upon, and to be maintained by: we must follow
him when we must deny our selves, and take up our cross, when we must
thoroughly deny our selves; for the word in the Original is a compound, noting
more than a single, more than an ordinary (...). Mat 16 24. Abneget omnino
neget.
self denial; when we must take up our Cross, not choose what Cross we are
willing to meet with; to think, if it were such an affliction that such a man
has, I could bear it, but I know not how to bear this: but it must be our
Cross, and willingly took up, and that daily too; We must be willing to
follow him through the wilderness. Cant. 8. 5. Who is this that comes from
the wilderness, leaning on her beloved? The wilderness is the troubles and
afflictions of the Church, she comes through them with her Beloved, resting
Zach. 13 9.
her self upon her Beloved. If the Lord will lead us through the fire, and
through the water, yet we must follow him there; if he will lead us where fiery
Serpents and Scorpions are; yet we must follow him there. Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
Josephus writing of the times of Christ, says, There was one Jesus a wise man
in those Iosoph. lib. 18. cap. 4.
times, if it be lawful to call him a man, for he did diverse admirable
works, yet he was condemned to the cross; but notwithstanding this, those who
followed him from the beginning, did not forbear to love him, because of the
ignominy of his death, but followed him still. To follow a crucified Christ, a
contemned Christ, to sollow him in the bloody paths of his sufferings, this is
to follow him fully indeed. When one came and told Christ that he would follow
him wheresoever he went, Mat. 8. 19 Jesus says unto him, The Foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay
his head. As if he should have said, You must not expect great matter in
following me, but you must be content to suffer hard things. Christ ^els the
young man that came running to him to know what he should do for eternal
life, that if he would be perfect, he must sell all; and then come and follow
him; if he would follow him fully, he must be content to part with all for
Christ; to sell all, as the wise Merchant sold all for the Pearl. If there be
any thing in the world that you are not willing to part withal, if any thing
that you are not willing to suffer, you cannot follow me fully. In this
consists the uprightness of heart, to go in a right line to God; what soever
comes between God and us, yet not to fetch a compass, but to go through it;
for if we fetch a compass, the line is not right: we must therefore strike
through all troubles and hazards we meet withal, still keep our way, not break
the hedge of any Commandment to avoid any piece of foul way. Many think they
desire to follow God, but when they meet with some trouble in their way, then
they would fetch compass to baulke that, and yet hope to come to God well
enough at last; they would be loath not to be accounted followers of God: But
let such know that this fetching compass, which they think to be their
wisdom, it is the declining from uprightness. Many follow God, as the Dog
follows his Master, till he comes by a Carrion, and then he lets his Master
go, and turns aside to it. Thus many seem to be forward in profession of
Religion, till they meet with some opportunity of satisfying their lusts, then
they leave off, and turn aside to the enjoyment of them: But the heart that
fully follows God, is not only willing to part with any lust for Christ, but
it gives up it self to the dispose of God, to become of his estate, credit,
liberty, comforts, life, what God pleases; it is not sollicitous about these
things; the business that it has to do, is to follow the Lord; it knows that
it is the work of the Lord to take care for it about these things, while it is
in following of him.

It is said of Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. That he did that indeed which was right
in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart; he did many good
things, but he had not a heart to follow God fully: and this was one Argument
of it, which we have, Verse 9. that he was so sollicitous about his money; for
when the Man of God came to him, and told him the mind of God, that he must
not have the Army of Israel go with him, because he had hired the Army with an
hundred Talents; he was very sollicitous what he should do for his money; for
so he says, But what shall we do for the hundred Talents which I have given
to the Army of Israel? Whereas if his heart had been right and full in
following God, as it should have been, it had been enough for him to have
known the command of God, let become of the hundred Talents what they will.

Seventhly, to follow God fully, is 7
to follow him only, so as to be willing to dedicate, to devote whatsoever God
lets us still to enjoy, to God alone: If we have any gifts, any estate, any
esteem in the world, all shall be employed for God alone, all shall be laid
out for him. As we must be willing to lose all things for him, when he calls for
them, (of which before) so we must endeavor to use all things for him, while
we do enjoy them. To sollow God fully, is to follow him as the highest good,
as the only good, as the All-sufficient good, as the Fountain of all good, as
the Rule of all good; to follow him so, as to follow nothing else but God; not
only to follow God chiefly, that is more than to follow any thing else, but to
follow him only. But how is that? I mean thus; we must follow God in our
following any thing else, we must follow all for God, in reference to God, in
subordination under God, and then we cannot be said to follow the creature, but
it is God that is followed in it. As when God is followed in reference and
subordination to any good in the creature, it is not then God, but the creature
that we sollow; so when the creature is followed in subordination to God, it
is God, and not the creature that is followed. As thus; when David was in the
dry Wilderness, no question, he desired water; yet, Psalm. 63. 1. I thirst
after thee, O Lord, in a dry and barren Wilderness, where no water is: He
does not say, I thirst after water, but after thee; be cause he sought all in
reference to God; and so it was God alone that he thirsted for. When we desire
nothing, when we seek after nothing, when we let out our hearts to nothing,,
use, enjoy nothing, but in order to God; when all the good, comfort,
sweetness, desireablenesse in any creature is in the reference it has to God,
so far as God is in it, as God is honored, or enjoyed by it; when God alone
is lifted up in the heart, in the use of every creature, this is to follow God
fully. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve;
thou shall follow the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou follow. Christ
charge the Jews, in John 5. 44. that they did not seek the honor that came
from God only; and this was that which kept them off from believing: this is
enough to keep us off from God for ever. If we would have our hearts come up
fully to God, it is not enough to seek the honor that comes from God, but we
must seek the honor that comes from God only: and this is the true singlenes
of heart which the Scripture speaks of, when it singles out this object, and
eyes it alone.

The doubleness of a man's heart consists not so much in that it is otherwise
within, than that it appears outward, but in that it is divided to diverse
objects; it does not fix upon God as the only object: and as double-minded
men have double objects, so they have double motions: as the Planets that are
carried in their motion one way by the Heavens, but have besides a private
motion of their own; so, many are carried to God by some external, yea, it
may be, internal Motives; but yet they have a private motion of their own
another way to other things; God alone is not the Center of their hearts.

Eighthly, the soul then follows 8
God fully, when it carries through the work it undertakes, against all
discouragements and hindrances: As a Ship coming with full sail, bears all
down before it. It does not only work, but works thoroughly, works out that
it does. As Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation; work till you get the work
through: This (...)
soul works after God in his ways, and that with power; though it finds no
good comes in by them for the present, though it has wrought a long time, and
yet sees nothing coming in; yet it murmurs not, it repines not, it repents not
of any thing it has done for God; it complains not with those Hypocrites,
Esaias 58. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not, and wherefore have
we afflicted our souls, and thou regardest not? Nor with those in Malach. 1.
13. who say, What a weariness is this? and, Chap. 3. 14. who say, It is in
vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is there that we have kept his
Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? But
this soul that follows God fully, makes no such complaints, but goes on still
in the way of God; though the flesh be weary and tired, it goes on still. As
Gideon and those three hundred men that were with him, Judges 8. 4. though they
were faint, yet they went on pursuing; so here, though there may be much
faintness and weakness, yet the soul does not think of turning back
again, but goes on still, pursuing in that way it has begun; it is glad it
has done any thing for God, and it resolves still to do more, how ever God
pleases to deal with it. Though he may be weary in his following the Lord, yet
he is is not weary of following the Lord. Many follow the Lord, as a beggar
follows a man, only in expectation of Alms, he follows him a furlong or
two, begging; but if he sees the man goes still from him, he leaves off, and
lets him go: so many will pray, and hear, and seek after God for a while;
but if they feel not that come in, which they did expect, they grow weary, and
leave off. Duties that bring present comfort with them, many can be content to
be exercised in, but if they find nothing coming in by them, then their
hearts sink in discouragement, they have no heart to do anything. As it is
said of Ephraim, Hos. 10. 11. Ephraim is as an Heifer, that loves to tread out
the Corn: Ephraim loved to tread out the Corn, but not to Plow: The Heifer
while it was treading out the Corn, did feed upon the Corn, and so had
present delight in that work it did; but the Heifer that plowed, did labor,
and spend its strength, but had no refreshment till after the work was done:
Thus it is with many; that work, that has present joy, that has present
refreshment in it, while they are about it, they can take content in it; but if
they must work and tire the flesh, and yet have no present refreshing, but
must continue working a great while, and stay till the accomplishment of the
work, before any benefit comes by it, this they like not: But one that
follows the Lord fully, resolves to follow him, though he hides himself; as
David, Psalm. 101. 2. I will behave my self wisely, in a perfect way; oh when
will thou come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. As
if David should have said, I am resolved to walk before thee in a perfect way,
and yet I have not thy gracious presence with me; oh when will thou come unto
me? but still whatsoever becomes of me, I am determined to continue walking
within my house with a perfect heart. The like place we have, Psalm. 119. 8. I
will keep thy statutes, oh forsake me not utterly. As if he should have said,
O Lord, thou have in some degree forsaken me, thou seem as if thou would
forsake me; yet Lord, I am determined that I will keep thy Statutes. Thus the
upright heart resolves, Though I should perish Cypr. upon that voice that came
from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, hear him. Loquere Magister bone,
libenter te audio, and cum adversaris mihi, audio to cum i^asceris.
everlastingly, yet I will perish following the Lord; and if I cannot follow
him, I will cry after him; and if I cannot cry after him, I will look toward
him; yea, though he appears to be angry, yet will I follow him: as ^ob, Though
he kills me, yet will I trust in him. Though there be much guiltiness upon the
spirit, so that the devil, and an unbeleeving sullen heart would much
discourage from following after the Lord; yet still it will not leave off, but
it labors to encourage it self, as Samuel did the people, 1 Samuel 12. 20, 21.
Samuel said unto the people, Fear not; ye have done all this wickedness, yet
turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your
heart, and turn you not aside: for then should you go after vain things,
which cannot prosit nor deliver, for they are vain. Thus the soul that
follows the Lord, reasons with it self; Though it is true I have sinned, mine
iniquities are great, God may justly be provoked, and for ever reject me, yet I
will not turn aside from following him: I know there is no good to be got
els-where: though I be unworthy of mercy, yet God is worthy of honor, and
therefore what ever I can do, I will, that God may have honor, though I
perish; yea this soul though it receives many a repulse, yet still it will
follow. As the woman of Canaan, though Christ called her Dog, yet she leaves
not off; she acknowledges her self to be a Dog, yet still she seeks. Yea,
though God seems to go cross ways, quite contrary to that the soul expected,
yet still this soul will follow him even in those ways. As when the Lord
called Abraham to follow him into a Land that should flow with milk and honey,
Genesis 12. 1. Abraham was content to leave his own country, his fathers house,
his kindred, and all his friends; and notwithstanding as soon as he came into
that Land, he found there was a famine in the land, Verse 10. so that he was
forced to get into Egypt, and that with the peril of his life, or else he must
have starved. Flesh and blood would have murmured much at this, and have said,
What? is this that Land that God said he would show me? is this that fruitful
Land for which I must leave my Country and all my friends? and now as soon as
I come into it, I am ready to starve in it: and yet Abraham followed God still
in all the ways he was pleased to lead him in. Again, when God promised to
multiply his Seed as the Stars of heaven; yet for twenty years after this,
Sarah was barren; God seemed to neglect his promise: and after when he had a
child, in whom all the Nations of the earth were to be blessed; yet this Child
Abraham must kill: And here God seems to go cross to his Promise, yet
Abraham follows God still. One who follows God fully indeed, looks up to the
goodness of God in himself, and in his Promise; not to it as it appears to
sense: he sees more good in the Promise, then in all the things in the world;
though he sees nothing, though he seeles nothing in himself, nor in any
creature for the present; and what work he follows the Lord in, he will not
leave imperfect; he will not give over, till he sees something come of it: if
he follows God for a broken heart, he will pray and meditate, and pray and
meditate again, and again, if it were a thousand times, and a thousand times
over again, till the work comes to some effect: And so for power over a
corruption, and strength in any grace; where there is truth of grace, there
will be working, like fire that never leaves working till it breaks forth,
and gets the victory. Hence that place of our Savior Matthew. 12. 20. where he
says, he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised Reed,
till he send forth Judgment into victory. If we observe the place of the
Prophet from whence this is taken, which is Esaias 42. 3, the words are, He shall
bring forth judgment unto truth: noting that wheresoever there is truth, there
will be victory: Christ will nourish the smoking flax, that is, the least
work of grace, till Judgment, that is, this work of sanctification be
brought into victory, and overcome what opposes it. If he brings any
beginnings of grace to truth, the victory is already gotten. It is reported of
Master Bradford, that he would never leave off when he was in holy duties,
till he found something coming in; as in confession of sin, till he found
his heart melt and break for sin; in seeking pardon, till he found some
quieting of his spirit, in some intimation from God of his love; and so for
grace, till he found his heart warmed and quickened. It is an excellent thing
indeed, to resolve to follow the Lord in duty howsoever, though nothing should
come in by it to our selves: but yet the heart that is right, will never be
satisfied in the performance of a duty, till it find some manifestation of
Gods presence in it; some work of God put forth upon it, by it; it will not
rest in duty performed; it is not satisfied in good inclinations, in good
desires it has, nor in gifts it receives, nor in comforts it finds in the
creature, nor in enlargements and more inward joys, but it must have grace,
and God; it must have some impression of God upon it, to carry with it as a
Seal of that presence of God it did enjoy in the duty: it so strives with the
Lord, as it resolves not to let him go, till it has got a blessing.

It is a very full expression that S. Bernard has to this purpose, in two or
three words; Oh what a mercy were it, continually to enjoy that Nunquam ab^ te,
ab(...) te re^^do, Bern. ep. 116.
which he says! Oh Lord, says he, I never go away from thee without thee: he
means, he never leaves off duty, till he gets the presence of God, and so
carries the Lord along with him. Oh how often do we go from God without God!
we think it enough that we have been before him in holy duties, though indeed
we still abide strangers to him and he to us. How often does God send us empty
away from his presence, which we should account a sore and grievous affliction?
But here is the misery, we are not sensible of this; if we have our desires in
the creature, we are quieted and satisfied: whereas if our hearts were fully
after the Lord as they ought, when we are before him, we should cry to him,
as Moses in another case, Exodus 33. Except thy presence go with me, Lord send
me not hence.

9 One that follows. God fully, is willing to engage and bind himself 9
to God, by the most full, and strong bonds, and engagements that can be; his
spirit is at the greatest liberty, when he is most strongly bound to the Lord.
That place in the 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, is very observable for this; Asa and his
people enter into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all
their heart, and with all their soul; yea so, as whosoever would not seek the
Lord God, should be put to death, whether small or great, man or woman, and
they swear unto the Lord with shoutings, and with trumpets, and with cornets:
But were they not afterward troubled, that they had so tied and bound
themselves? would they not have thought it better to have been at more liberty?
No surely, for Verse 15. the Text says, that all Judah rejoiced at the oath;
and this reason is given, Because they had sworn with all their heart, and
sought him with their whole soul. When any seek God with their whole heart,
with their whole soul, they are not only willing to engage themselves to God,
but they rejoice in their engagements: Thus Nehemiah whose heart was fully set
for God, did himself, and got the Princes, the Priests, Levites, and People to
make a sure covenant, to write it, to seal it, Chap. 9. 38. And as if this
were not engagement enough, they further enter into a curse, and into an oath,
to walk in Gods Law, to observe and do all the Commandments of the Lord, and
his Judgments, and his Statutes. Thus David discovers the fullness of his
spirit in following after the Lord, in that he not only promises, but swears
he will keep the righteous Judgments of the Lord, Psalm. 119. 106. It is a
sign that men's hearts are not fully taken off from their sin, when they do
not fully come off in the Covenant of the Lord.

No, may some say, it is because we often covenant with God, and find we are
overcome again, and do break covenant with him, and therefore we are afraid
to enter into covenant any more. Is it not better not to covenant, than not to
perform?

I answer, It is true, if men covenant and wilfully neglect, they were better
not covenant at all; but if when we enter into covenant, we have the
testimony of our consciences, that we labor as in the sight of God, to fulfill
our covenants we make, and it is the burden of our souls that we sail in
them, then I say, that we are still to go on, and engage our selves further;
our covenants do not aggravate our sin, but in time they will help us
against our sin; this is one way that God has appointed to strengthen us;
and therefore, we must not complain of weakness, and yet neglect any way
appointed by GOD, to get strength by.

10 To follow God fully, is to abide 10
in all these constant to the end of our days; That is, we must be constant in
Gods ways, not think it enough to enter into them by fits and starts, but the
ways of God must be our ordinary track, Prove. 16. 17. The high way of the
upright is to depart from evil; It is his common road, and constant course: and
we must continue faithful before the Lord unto the death. It is the
commendation of Hezechiah 2 King. 8. 6. He clave unto the Lord and departed
not. And David, Psalm. 119. 112. he says, He has inclined his heart to
perform Gods statutes always; but as if that expression were not enough to
signify his continuance, he adds, even unto the end. Job 17. 9. The righteous
holds on his way. A heart that has given up it self fully to God, does never
forsake him. There is no Apostate in the world, but if we could trace him along
in his ways, to his very beginning, we might find, that in the entrance of his
profession, there was not a full giving up himself to God, there was not an
absolute surrender made, of all that he was, and had, unto the Lord. It may be
said of him as it was of Amaziah, That though he did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord, yet he did it not with a perfect heart.

There are three Reasons why it must needs be, that, that man which follows
God fully, must needs follow him constantly and for ever.

First, because where ever the Lord 1
brings any to follow him fully, he causes such a perfect breach between
sin and that soul, as there is no possibility that ever there should be a
reconciliation made, that the breach should be made up again. An unsound
heart so falls out with his sin, as there is a possibility of reconcilement,
and therefore when such a one finds trouble in Gods service, he is willing to
enter into parley again, upon terms of agreement with his sin; but it is not
so with a truly godly heart; there is such a breach made, as there is no hope
of reconciliation. It was Achitophels policy to get Absolon to stick to him,
so as never to leave him. To take away the fear that there might be, lest
Absolon in time might be reconciled to his father, and so leave him, therefore
he sought to make such a breach between him and his father, as there should
never be any hope of reconciliation, and so he might be the surer to keep
constant to him, and the people that joined with him, and therefore he
advised, that Absolon should go in to his fathers Concubines upon the house
top, in the sight of all the people, 2 Samuel 16. 21, 22. It is the wisdom of
God, that he may have followers never to leave him; to make such breaches
between sin and their souls at first, so as there may never be hope of
peace between them again. As the Devil when he would draw one to be his for
ever, he seeks to make great breaches between God and him, that if he
should have ever any thoughts of returning, he may discourage and sink his
spirit with thoughts of despair, telling him there is no hope of good in
returning that way, and therefore it were better for him to continue as he is,
as Ier. 2. 25. Thou said, there is no hope; No, for I have loved strangers,
and after them will I go. When the Devil gets one who has been forward in
the profession of religion to Apostatize, he labors to make such a breach
between him and his former course, as not only to fall off from it, but to
hate it, and to persecure it, and to turn deadly enemy to it, and then both
the devil and wicked men think, they are sure of him for ever: and indeed it
is very seldom that ever such a one returns. Bishop Latimer in a Sermon before
King Edward, tells of one who fell away from the known truth, and after fell
to mocking and scorning it, and yet was after touched in conscience for it;
beware of this sin, says Latimer; for I have known no more but this one man,
that ever fell from the truth, and afterward repented; I have known many fall,
but never any but this repent. Now the breach between sin and the soul in
conversion, is as great as between God and the soul in Apostasy; yea,
greater; for there is a possibility of reconciliation in the one, but never in
the other: and therefore as the one, because of this great breach between God
and his soul, does follow the Devil, and his destruction for ever; so the
other, because of the breach between sin and the soul, does follow the
Lord, and his salvation for ever: as in the one, the gifts of Gods Spirit are
so cast out as usually they never return again; so in the other, the unclean
spirit is so cast out, as it never comes back again.

2 A second Reason, why that man 2
that follows the Lord fully, must needs follow him for ever, is, because at
the first giving up himself to God, he was content to let go all other holds,
and all other hopes in all creature comforts whatsoever, and so to venture
himself upon God, is to be content to be miserable for ever, if he find not
enough in God to make him happy: he has so let all other things go, as if he
should fail here, he has nowhither to retire, he has reserved no way, no
means for to help himself by, if he should miscarry here; he has laid all
the weight of all his comforts, of all his hopes, of all his happiness upon
the Lord; he has no other prop that he does or can expect any support by:
there is a blessed necessity upon him to follow the Lord for ever, and this
necessity the soul is glad of: and this is the reason why God in his first
bringing a soul home to himself, uses so much means to take it off from all
other things; namely, that it might follow him for ever. As it is reported of
William the Conqueror, when he came to invade England, and had landed his
Soldiers, he sent back his ships, that so they might have no hope of
retreating back again, and so they were put upon a necessity of fighting it out
to the utmost. Thus the Lord takes off the soul from all its former hopes and
props, that it may have no lingrings after any thing but himself, but thoroughly
sight the good fight of faith, and with resolution hold on its course to the
end. But it is otherwise with a false, unfound heart; though such a one may
follow God in many glorious performances, yet it secretly reserves something in
case of failing here; when it enters upon Gods ways, it is enlightened so
far, as it thinks some good may be had here: yea, it has a taste, it may
be, of much sweetness in these ways, but dares not venture all upon them; he
would be glad to have some thing to retire to, in case he should fail here;
he reserves a back door, that he might turn another way, if this way should
prove troublesome and dangerous; he enters upon Gods ways, not without some
suspicions and jealousies, that possibly he may meet with such inconveniences
as may make him to wish he had been more wise, and not put himself in too
far; he sees many others, who being deeply engaged, and gone on so far in
those ways, wherein they meet with much trouble, many sore and heavy
afflictions; and he thinks they do, or at least may repent themselves, and
wish they had not ventured themselves so far, as that now they know not how
to go back again; and if they were to begin again, he thinks they would be
wiser, and hearken to grave advise for more moderation.

The King of Navarre told Beza, Pelago se nonita com(...)ssarus esset quin
quando liberet, pedem refer posset.
he would launch no further into the Sea, than he might be sure to return safe
unto the Haven; though he showed some countenance to Religion, yet he would be
sure to save himself. Many think it wisdom not to venture all in one
bottom. It was once the speech of a deep politician, that it was good to
follow the truth, but not to follow it too near at the heels, lest it dashed
out his brains. Ananias and Saphira would be Christians, they would join
with the Apostles, they saw great things were done by them; their possessions
must be sold, and the money laid at the Apostles feet; but something must be
reserved, in case they should want afterward, and then repent them they had
gone so far, when it should be too late; and this is the very root of
Apostasy. But it is otherwise with a sincere heart that follows God fully; in
such a one there is a holy kind of desperatnesse, so to cast it self upon God,
and his ways, as never to expect any comfort, any good, but there; and
therefore this is that it must rest to for ever, and follow after for ever.

3 The soul that follows God fully, will follow him for ever, because 3
in the full following of the Lord, it finds so much ease, peace, joy,
satisfaction, as it is for ever settled and confirmed in this way; there is
never ^ase, sweetness, and full contentment in Gods ways, until the heart
comes off fully; till then it is distracted with jealousies, fears, doubts,
lingrings after some other way, many temprations pestering the spirit
continually: but when it is fully come off, then it goes on with ease; it is
satisfied, and blesses it self in the way wherein it is; temptations
(...)u(...)ores vivimus, si tot^m Deodamus; non autem nos ill ex part and nobis
ex part commi^timus. Aug. de ono per^^verant. c. 6.
vanish, the soul is freed from much distraction and trouble: As the ship that
is part in the mud and part in the water, is battered up and down, and beats
up and down, so as in a little time it beats it self all in pieces; but if
it be taken off from the mud, and be put into the full stream, it goes with
ease and safety. Thus it is with a man's heart, while it sticks partly in the
mud of the World, or filth of any lust, and conviction of conscience strives to
raise it, but it is not fully taken off, there is nothing but vexation and
trouble in that soul: but when it is taken off, and gives up it self fully to
God in his blessed and holy ways; Oh that sweet and blessed ease that now it
finds! When a man halts, the way is tedious to him, he is soon weary, and
gives over; but when he is sound, the way is easy, he holds on his way to the
end: so when there is falsenesse in men's hearts, they do but halt in the ways
of God, they quickly Cap. 2.
find them tedious; but others who are of sound spirits, they find them
delightful, and go on with strength, and hold on to the end. The reason that
Philosophers give why the heavens are incorruptible, is, because the form of
them is so excellent, as it wholly fills up the utmost capacity of the matter;
so the reason of the holding on of the upright heart, is, the full satisfaction
of it, the filling up the full capacity of it, with contentment and delight in
Gods ways. Thus you have heard what it is to follow God fully.

CAP. II.
The excellency of this frame of spirit, in four things.

THe second thing propounded in the point, was, to 2
show wherein the excellency of such a kind of frame of spirit lies, take it in
these four things.

First this is truly to honor God 1
as a God; except God be honored as infinite, he is not honored as God; now
it is the full following him that only honors him as infinite; where God is
followed and not thus, he is followed no otherwise than a creature may be
followed; this is not therefore to honor him as a God, but rather it is a
dishonor to that infinite excellency and blessedness of his, whereby he is
infinitely above all that creatures are, or that they are any way capable of.
The great thing that God aimed at in the creating of the heavens and earth,
was, that he might by Angels, and men, be honored as a GOD, and therefore
that which gives him this, has true and much excellency in it.

Secondly, this full following of God, does much honor the work of 2
Grace, and the profession of godliness; it shows a realitie; power,
excellency and beauty in it; it shows that it proceeds out of the fullness of
Jesus Christ, such as has high and heavenly principles; when there is power,
proportion, and constancy in a man's ways, there must needs be much beauty in
them; there is a forcing of conviction from the consciences of evil men by
them: this takes away all pretenses from men that they know not how to speak
evil of the ways of godliness; they know not how to oppose and persecute
them; when they can see no flaw, when, though they watch what they can, yet
they can see nothing unsuitable to their principles. The principles of
godliness for the most part are acknowledged by the consciences of the worst,
who have any light in them; and therefore when all a man's ways are suitable to
these, it puts wicked me^ to a stand; they know not what to say against such
men, nor against their way; but their own thoughts tell them, that surely
there is something in these men, that has realitie, and power, and divine
excellency in it, that is from none other but from God himself.

Thirdly, this has such excellency in it, as that God himself boasts 3
of such as these are; as they glory in the Lord, and bless themselves in the
Lord; so the Lord seems to glory in them, and to account his name blessed by
them; as you may see how God rejoices in, and makes his boast of Job, Chap. 1.
verse. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in
the earth, a perfect, and an upright man? And so of David, I have found a man
after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will: So of those we read of
in Revel. 14. These are they which were not defiled; and again, These are they
which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; and again in the same verse,
These were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the
Lamb, and in their mouth was found no guile.

Fourthly, this following of the Lord fully, does ever attain its end; 4
it prospers in that it works for: in Cap. 3.
whatsoever thing any soul follows the Lord fully, it shall be sure to
accomplish that it aims at, and to be satisfied in that it would have: As Hos.
6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: Thus David, in
Psalm. 63. where his soul thirsted after God, his flesh longed for him, his
soul followed hard after him; he says himself in the same Psalm, that Gods
right hand did now uphold him, and that his soul should be satisfied, as with
marrow and fatness; and his mouth should praise the Lord with joyful lips;
and the King shall rejoice in God.

CAP. III.
Rebuke to diverse sorts, whose spirits are not full in following after the Lord.

IF thus to follow the Lord fully, be so excellent, if this fullness of spirit
be such an honor unto Gods people, then justly are those rebuked, whose
spirits are not full in following the Lord, who acknowledge the Lord worthy to
be followed, but their spirits are slight and vain, their hearts are straightened
in the ways of the Lord; they do not fill up this blessed work of following
after the Lord; their hearts do most basely fall, and most miserably vanish in
it.

As first, some are convinced, their judgments and consciences are for 1
God, but their lusts carry them violently another way: Oh the miserable
torment of these men's spirits, while their consciences draw one way, and their
lusts another! it is not so great an evil to have wild Horses tied to the
members of ones body, tearing of them by drawing contrary ways.

Secondly, others rest in their good inclinations, their good desires; 2
they say they would feign do better, and they hope God will accept the will
for the deed; they like of Gods ways, and speak well of good men, and
therefore they think their hearts are for God: but these desires and good
motions, are but as little buds and sprigs that come out of the roots of trees,
or from the middle of their body, which come to nothing, they never grow up to
bear any fruit; these are yet far from following the Lord fully and
savingly; for,

1 Their judgments are not yet enlightened, not thoroughly convinced 1
of the poison and infinite evil there is in sin; of that absolute infinite
necessity there is in the holy ways of God; they see not the dreadful
Authority of God in every truth; they think it were well if things were
amended, it were good if more were done than this; God help us, we have all
our infirmities: and though they do not as others do, yet they hope their
hearts are good toward God; were it not for some inconveniences they are like
to meet withal, they could be content to do more than they do. But what is
this, to that mighty work of God upon this spirit, convincing of the infinite
necessity, equity, beauty of his blessed ways? What is this to that sight of
Gods infinite, dreadful authority? Those whose hearts the Lord takes off from
other things, to work fully after himself, he begins thus with them, in the
powerful enlightening, and convincing of their judgments.

2 These never were made sensible 2
of their inabilitie to have holy desires after God, so as to see any need of
any special work of the Holy Ghost, to raise such desires in their hearts.
Those who are not sensible of their inability to holy desires, though they may
have many flashes like unto holy desires, yet they are wholly strangers to
those desires after God, which are truly holy.

3 These prize not the means of grace, they long not after them, they 3
will not labor, they will not be at charge, they will not endure hardship to
attain them, they are not conscionable in the use of them in any power; they
use not all means; if one way will not bring their desires to effect, they try
not other ways; they are not solicitous about the success of means, they
look not much after them, but rest themselves in the bare use of them, not
examining, not searching their hearts, to see what is in them that hinders the
blessing, not bemoaning their unprofitablenesse under means.

4 Their desires are not strong, 4
unsatiable; other contentments quiet their hearts; Time wears away the
strength of their desires, though they be as far from the enjoyment of the
things that were desired, as they were at the first.

5 Their endeavors are not powerful, they are not working constant 5
endeavors; they do not dedicate, devote, give up themselves, whatever they
are, or have, to the seeking after the Lord; their consciences cannot but tell
them, that the strength of their hearts, and endeavors, is after other things:
David in the 119. Psalm. 48. verse. says, That he would lift up his hands unto
Gods Commandments, which he had loved; and he would meditate in his
Statutes: He did not think it enough to have a love to, to have some wishes
and desires, to keep Gods Commandments, but he would lift up his hands to
them, he would set himself on work in laboring to obey them; he would
meditate, set his mind and thoughts, to plot and contrive, how he might best
come to the fulfilling of them, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired, and that
will I seek after. Certainly those slight, vain Grace cannot be had with
doing nothing. Nemo casu sit sapient. Senec. ep. 77.
desires, and wishes that there are in many peoples hearts, are not the
following this blessed God fully; they are but the dallyings, and triflings
with God and their own souls; they are so far from bringing them unto God,
as they prove to be their destruction; The desire of the slothful kills him,
for his hands refuse to labor, Prove. 21. 15.

Thirdly, others have good resolutions 3
now and then in some good moods; the truths of God come darting in with some
power, as they cannot but yield to them, and then they are resolved that they
will do better, that it shall not be with them as it has been; they will set
upon a new course of life, things shall be reformed, and their lives shall be
changed; but yet these vanish too, they follow not God fully; They are as those
in the 5. Deuteronomy. 27. who seemed to have strong resolutions to walk in Gods
ways; Go thou near, say they to Moses, and hear all that the Lord our God
shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto
thee, and we will hear it, and do it: But as the Lord said there, concerning
them, Verse 29. So I may say of these, Oh that there were such a heart in them;
How far are they from having yet a heart to follow God fully?

For, 1 Their resolutions are not fruits of their deep humiliation, for their
former neglect of God, and the former sinfulness of their ways; They are only
to procure peace unto themselves for the present, their hearts being stirred by
the power of the truth darted in.

2 They arise not from changed principles, from a renewed nature, from out of
love to the Lord, and his blessed ways; hence they vanish, and they never
bring them up unto the Lord.

Fourthly, others have strong, sudden affections, they feel sometimes 4
some meltings, in sorrow for sin, in hearing the blessed truths of God
revealed to them; they feel some sweetness in the working of truths upon
their hearts, they are sensible of some joys in good things, they have a taste
of the powers of the world to come: When they hear Christ preached, or see his
body broken, or his blood shed in the Sacrament, they think with themselves; Oh
that Jesus Christ, should come from heaven, to save such poor wretches as we
are, that he should shed his precious blood, that he should die for such vile
sinners! yet these are a great way off from following the Lord fully:

For, 1 these affections are sudden, 1
and flashing; the truths of God pass by them, leaving a little glimmering
behind them, or as water passes through a Conduit, and leaves a dew; but they
soake not into the heart, as the water soakes into the earth to make it
fruitful.

2 These are stirred with the pardoning, 2
comforting, saving mercies of God, but not with the humbling, renewing,
sanctifying mercies: when the word puts them upon any hard thing to flesh and
blood, it is unsavory to them, their hearts turn from it; If the word urges
to strict examination of themselves, if it puts them upon the finding out of
the deceits of their spirits, their secret corruptions, and would strain them
to higher duties than their principles reach unto, then their spirits fly off;
they seek to bless themselves in that they have already, and think that these
things trouble people more than needs and if God should not be merciful to
such who find such affections, such stirrings of heart as we do, then Lord,
what shall become of us?

3 These flashy affections do not arise from spiritual judgment,
apprehe^ding the spiritual excellencies of godliness, after a spiritual
manner; their apprehensions of spiritual and heavenly things, are too too
carnal and sensitive: Hence afterward when they come to find the good things
of the ways of God to be spiritual, and heavenly, not suitable to those
apprehensions they had of them, their hearts are then taken off, as those we
read of in the 6. of John 34. verse; When Christ told them, That the bread of
God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world, Oh
say they, Lord ever give us this bread; their hearts were up and exceedingly
stirred; Well, as if Christ should have said, You shall have it, I am the bread
of life; he that comes to me shall never hunger, he that believes in me
shall never thirst; as if he should have said; This must be done by faith, you
must feed upon my flesh by faith, and drink of my blood by faith. But now they
having apprehended a strange kind of bread from heaven before, and afterward
hearing of no other, but coming to Christ, and believing in Christ, they were
deceived of their expectations, and so were offended, and now their affections
fall; for verse 41. they begin to murmur at him, and verse 60. they said, It
was an hard saying, who could hear it? and ver. 66. From that time many of
them went back, and walked no more with him. The like example we find in the
Galathians, at the first they would have plucked out their eyes for S. Paul,
their affections were so stirred by his Ministry, they apprehended some great
matters in the message of the Gospel that S. Paul brought, but afterward,
finding that those great and excellent things that the Gospel spoke of, were
only spiritual, which their carnal hearts had little skill of, and could not
relish, their affections were soon cooled, and they fell off from S. Paul. Take
heed therefore of resting to these flashy affections, for if you do, when these
are gone, your hearts will be left in darkness. Many examples are known of
such, who have proved to be most vile Apostates; yet time was, wherein they
have had many meltings, much sudden strong joy, so as they have professed that
the joy they have found has been so great, that if it had continued but a
while, they could not have lived, but their spirits would have expired. A solid
work of the soul proceeding from an humble broken heart, casting it self
upon the faithfulness, and freeness of the grace of God in the promise, for
pardoning, and sanctifying mercy, and there resting, so as willing to venture
it self there for ever, though it has no present sense of joy, yet it is
far more to be prized than the strongest of these sudden flashes of
affection. These flashy affections which have not principles to maintain them,
are like to Co^duits in the City, running with wine at the Coronatio^ of
Princes, or some other great triumph, but it will not hold: they are like
Landfloods, which seem to be a great sea, but come to nothing in a day or
two; As there may be flashes of terror, and yet no true fear of God. The
Israelites were terrified when the Law was given, and yet God says, Deuteronomy. 5.
29. Oh that there were a heart that they would fear me: So there may be
flashes of joy, desire, sorrow, and yet no true sanctified joy, desire, or
sorrow at all. There is much deceit in men's affections; Affections not well
principled, not well grounded, soon vanish; time will wear them away. The
people of Israel at the giving of the Law, had their affections much stirred,
so that one would have thought, they had been engaged unto the Lord for ever;
and yet within forty days, their hearts were so taken off from God, and his
Law, as if God had never made himself known unto them; they call to Aaron to
make them gods to go before them, and say to the Molten Calfe, These be thy
gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Another notable
example we have of people whose affections are strong for the present, and yet
worn away in a little time, in the 13. of Hosea 1. When Ephraim spoke,
trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he
died: When Ephraim spoke, that is, when Jeroboam who Sanctius in Hosea 13.
was of the Tribe of Ephraim, declared his purpose to alter the worship of God,
the people at the first were exceedingly affected with it, and they stood all
trembling at such a strange thing as that was; the very thought of it made
their hearts to shake, because they knew how jealous a God the Lord was; But
Jeroboam exalted himself in Israel, he went on resolutely in his way, and
would bring his purpose to effect; then the people in a little time, were
brought to offend in Baal, and then they died, and they became a dead, sottish,
heartlesse people, fit to receive, or do any thing though never so vile.

Fifthly, others follow the Lord, 5
but they follow him in a dull, heavy manner; there is no spirit, no heat, no
life in their following of him, and therefore they do not follow him fully:
They rest themselves in a middle temper, in a lukewarm course; they like well
of Religion, and profession, but what need men go so far, what need they do
so much? As Pharaoh said to the Israelites, Exodus 8. 28. I will let you go,
only you shall not go far away. The judgment of these men is for a middle
way; they are mixed spirited men, like Ephraim, Hosea 7. 8. mixed with the
people, as a cake not turned, half baked and half dough; they go on in an
ordinary track of performing the duties of Religion without any growth, or any
sensiblenesse of the want of growth; they set upon some fair way of Religion,
which they persuade themselves is enough, and that they mean to hold to; they
are content to make use of Christ, and the profession of Religion, so far as
may serve their own turns; but to entertain Christ, and his truth, as an
absolute Lord to rule them, that their spirits cannot bear; in their converse
there is no ribauldry, no filthiness; so there is no warmth, no heat to
refresh and quicken any gracious spirit, that has to deal with them; in all
the Duties of Religion that they perform, they take no pains with their
hearts, to work them to God. Luther calls such kind Cainislae sunt, of serentes
non per ^^nam, sed of us ^e^ sonae. I uther. decl^^at. in D^cal.
of men, Cainists, that is, such as Cain, who offered to God the work done, but
do not offer themselves to God; they content themselves with general hopes of
Gods mercy upon weak, and unexamined grounds; they never trouble themselves in
calling things into question, about their conditions and their eternal
estates; they never lay to heart the miseries of Gods Church; and the public
cause of God is not dear unto them; they have not heat enough to cause a
melting spirit, for the dishonor that God has by themselves; much more is that
heat wanting, that should keep their hearts melting for that dishonor which
God has from others.

Now this temper is so far from following the Lord fully, as it is loathsome
and abominable to the Lord; so loathsome, as he threatens to spue such out of
his mouth. It is Revel. 3. 16,
observable, that of all the seven Churches we read of in the Revelation, there
is some good said, every one is commended for something; only this Church of
Laodicea excepted which was a lukewarm Church; and of this there is no good
at all said; and yet none of the Churches had that high esteem of it self as
this had; none of them conceited themselves 1
to be rich, and increased with goods, and to have need of nothing, as this
did. No people does so bless themselves in their way, as lukewarm people
do; and yet no people more abominable to God than they. What a dishonor is
this lukewarm temper to God, as if God were such a God, as such flat,
slight, dead-hearted formal services, as are performed by them, were
sufficient to honor his holy, great, dreadful and infinite Majesty? God
pronouneeth a curse in Malac. 1. verse 14. against those who do not offer the
best that possibly they can, in sacrifice to him; and gives this Reason of it,
Because my Name is dreadful, and I am a great King, says the Lord: As if he
should say, Therefore only the most high and excellent things that can be
performed by the creature, are fit for to be tendered up to me. This lukewarm
temper wrongs Jesus Christ exceedingly, as if there were no other life and
virtue in Jesus Christ, than to enable a man to do as they do. What? has
Christ laid down his life, and shed his precious blood for the renewing of Gods
Image in man, and is it nothing but this? if Christ had never come into the
world, men might have done as much as this comes to. It is a wrong to the Holy
Spirit likewise, for it is the special office of the Holy Ghost, for to be a
Sanctifier, to frame the heart to God, to quick the soul with the life of
grace, and holiness; and is this all it does? this were a poor work, if
there were no other but this. It dishonours holiness, which is the most
glorious thing in the world; the life of God, the Divine Nature; this makes it
as if it were nothing but a moral, livelesse, dead-hearted, empty thing; this
puts holiness in subjection to humane reason, to carnal wisdom; it must bow
to their discretion, to the opinions and ways of men; and in truth, to their
base lusts, though it be in a more cleanly way, than in others. Be convinced
then, that this is not that following the Lord fully, which is the honor of Gods
people in his eyes.

Sixthly, some go beyond this dull lukewarm temper, they are very 6
forward in some things, but in other things their hearts stick; they come not
off fully in them. Agrippa says of himself, that Paul had almost persuaded
him; the words are, Thou perswadest me a little. The hearts of these men are
divided, as it is said of (...).
those in Hosea 10. 2. they will not let go their profession, but will keep
their corruption too. As Camden reports of Redwald King of the East Saxons, the
first Prince of his Nation that was baptized, yet in the same Church had one
Altar for Christian Religion, and another for Sacrifices unto Devils: Thus
these men join Religion and their lust together. If they let out their hearts
inordinately to any contentment, and take liberty sometimes in satisfying some
lusts, they think to make up all again by some forwardness and earnest
devotion in some other thing; as many who get surfets think they can sweat and
purge them out again.

This division of heart the Lord cannot endure, and therefore it follows in
that place of Hosea, They shall be found faulty; or as the words are read by
some, Now shall they be made desolate: for in the Hebrew, the word signifies
both to be guilty, and to be desolate. It is too much boldness and
presumptuousnesse in men, to venture to take liberty to themselves, to choose
wherein they will yield to God in some things; but in others presume to
satisfy themselves; this is not to cast down our souls before the Lord, as
poor, condemned, vile creatures, to lie at his mercy in an humble, faithful
resignation of our selves up to him, in all we are, or have, which is that
honor that God expects from us, and is infinitely due unto him. While our
hearts are thus divided between God and other things; God does not account
himself obeyed, or honored at all in any thing; all that we seem to do, in
truth, is nothing at all. Hence in Ierem. 32. 23. the Prophet charge the
people with this, that they neither walked in Gods Law, and that they had done
nothing of all that God had commanded them to do; and Ver. 30. he says, they
had only done evil: and in 2 Kings 17. the people are said to fear the Lord,
and serve their own gods, Verse 33. and yet in Verse 34. the Text says, that
they feared not the Lord: showing unto us, that where the heart is divided
between God and other things, there God has not the heart at all, God is not
feared, he is not honored at all. If we join the counsels of the flesh with
the spirit, we frustrate all.

Seventhly, there are others who cannot be so easily convinced in 7
what particulars they forsake God in any of his ways; they seem to have a
general forwardness in that which is good, but the truth is, they follow
themselves, and not God in all; they rise no higher than Self in all they do;
which their own consciences, upon search made, will tell them; the
Commandment of God may be made the pretense, but Selse is the chief Engine,
Selse is the great mover in all. As Physicians putting in many operative
ingredients into their Physic, and they are the things that work; but
besides, they put in something to give a color, or a little taste, which
neither does good nor hurt, that has no operation at all: Thus it is in many
men's Religion; selfe-ends are the operative ingredients in that they do, and
the show of obedience to God, is but that which gives the color, that that
which they do may have the better apperance. It is impossible, that a man
which seeks himself, should come up to this fullness of spirit that is
required in this following of the Lord. Hos. 10. 1. it is said, That Israel is
an empty Vine; Why so? he brings forth fruit unto himself; he brings forth
fruit, but yet is empty, because he brings it forth unto himself. Where
selfe-ends are the chief movers, Fructus adaequatus est ei; so the old Latin.
there is no further latitude or degree of godliness minded, but such as may
be serviceable unto them: Now they cannot but be low, strait, narrow, in
comparison of those who lift up God in all they do; and therefore their
profession must needs be empty and scant; not full and powerful, as it is in
the other. A selfe-seeking heart is always an empty heart, but a gracious
heart is fruitful in all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old: And what is
the reason? I have laid them up for thee, O my beloved Cant. 7. v. last.
Observe the difference, Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit to
himself; but the Church here brings forth all manner of pleasant fruit; for
she lays them up for her Beloved; she brings them not forth for her self,
as Israel did.

Eighthly, others follow the Lord 8
earnestly a while, but afterward they forsake him, they turn Apostates, they
do not fill up their work they have begun, but undo all again; of whom it
may be said, as Lament. 4. 8. They were whiter than Milk, they were as Rubies
and polished Saphires in regard of their glorious profession; but now they are
blacker than a Coal. God may justly complain of them, as he did of his
people, Micah 2. 8. They who were my people yesterday, are now risen up against
me, as an enemy: it was far otherwise with them very lately, than now it is.
Many are very hopeful at the first, yet they prove exceeding vile afterward;
yea, the more forward in good at first, the more vile after: As water that has
once been heat, and grows cold again, is colder than ever it was.

It is reported of Nero, who proved the very Monster of men for wickedness,
yet in the first five years of his reign, he behaved himself exceeding well,
so that it was used as a Proverb to express the good beginnings of men,
Neroes five first Nero^^s Quin. quennium.
years: So Caligula, who proved afterward exceedingly wicked, yet Josephus
reports of him, that when he Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 8, 9.
was young he traveled very diligently in good disciplines, he was of a sweet
conversation, and modest, and he governed the Empire the first two years of
his reign, with most noble directions, behaving himself graciously toward
all men: yea, Julian himself, who proved such a cursed Apostate, yet when he
was young, was very forward and hopeful; he was a public Reader of holy
Scriptures in the Church; he seemed to glory in nothing more than in Religion;
he was of a very temperate dyer, content with mean food, without much
preparation; he used Petri Mart. Morentini praesatione in Iulia. (...)
M^sapogo(...).
to lie hard in mean bedding, to watch much a nights, spend his time in study;
he was very chaste, clear from the least suspicion of lust; those Officers
that were about him, that served for nothing but to maintain (...)linus, lib.
22.
delicacy and luxury, he banished from him; he took no delight in public
shows, when he came to them, he came rather of necessity, than for any
pleasure he took in them: he says of himself, that when he was on the
Theater, he was more like a derester of their Plays, than a spectator of them,
and was present at them with trouble and disdain, and was joyful when he
went from them: he loved learning exceeding much; hearing of a Philosopher
that came to him out of Asia, he leaps out of the door, and goes to meet him,
and kisses him, and entertains him with much honor. In an Epist. of his to one
Eodicius a Governor of Egypt, he has this notable expression; Some (says he)
delight in horses, others in birds, others in beasts, Quidam equis, h(...)
avibus, nonnulli seris de^ect(...)ur, ego vero n^e usq (...) a pueritia l(...)
cupiditate arsi.
but I from my very childhood, have burnt with desire after books. He had an
honorable esteem of man's soul, looking upon the body as vile in comparison of
it. There is this notable expression reported of him, concerning this; It is a
shameful thing for any wise man, seeing he has a soul, ^urpe est saptenti,
cum, ab^at animum captare ^audes ex corpore.
to seek for praises from any thing that belongs to his body. He seemed to
have much uprightness in the course of Justice; he would not condemn upon
accusations without proof; there is this expression of his concerning this
reported of him; when one Delphidius accused one before him, of a crime, of
which he could not bring sufficient proof; the party accused denied the fact;
this Delphidius answers, If it be sufficient to deny that which is laid to ones
charge, who shall be found guilty? Then Julian answers, And if it be sufficient
to be accused, who can be innocent? Etquis innocens esse poterit, si accusasse
sufficient.
Many other notable things are reported of him; but these I have related more
fully, because in this example we may see how far a man may go in much
seeming good; what hopeful beginnings he may have, and yet what a vile cursed
Monster he may prove, if he looks not to it. Let none then rest themselves in
their good beginnings; but as they have made entrance upon this work, in
following the Lord, so let them labor to fill it up: and as for those who
heretofore have seemed to be forward and hopeful, while they lived in good
families, and under the care and watchful eye of able and godly men, and yet
have now forsaken the Lord, and his ways; let such (I say) know, that it is an
evil, and a bitter thing, to forsake the blessed God; to turn from him to
follow after vanities that cannot profit; so great an evil is it, that God
himself calls the heavens to be astonished at this, Ier. 2. 12, 13. Be
astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate,
says the Lord: For my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me
the Fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisternes, broken Cisternes,
that can hold no water. The evil of this forsaking the Lord, were great, if
this were all.

First, that all your labor in Religion, that all that you have done, is 1
lost: In Hosea 8. 2. Israel shall cry to me, My God we know thee; but verse 3.
Israel has cast off the thing that is good; therefore, verse 7. it is said that
They have sown the wind, and shall reap the whirlewind: It is but a sowing to
the wind, to follow God in some things, and not to hold on in our way. In the 2
Epist. of St. John and the 8. verse, Look to your selves, says S. John. that
we lose not those things that we have wrought: It is an evil thing, to lose
all that we have wrought for; but this is not all.

Secondly, if you leave off from following the Lord, all the good that ever you
have done, and made profession of, shall serve only to aggravate your sin,
and increase your torment.

Thirdly, this leaving off from following Blasphemiam iagerit Relig(...) quam
co(...) quod consit^tur non ante omnes impleverit. Cypr. de sing. Cleri(...).
the Lord, is a great dishonor to God and his ways; an upbraiding of them, as
if they were not good enough to draw the heart constantly after them; as if
there were not that in them, that they make show for. Hence the Lord pleads
with his people, Ierem. 2. 5. who had forsaken him, What iniquity have your
Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
vanity? As if he should have said, The world may think my ways are unequal,
men may think that I have not shown my self a God, ready to do good, and to
reward those who follow me. The forsaking of the truth, the profession whereof
we have once taken up, it is to put Christ to open shame, Heb. 6. 6.

Fourthly, such men as these, do much mischief in the world; they are
grievous scandals; they make the good ways of God to be evil spoken of; they
harden men's hearts against them, and the profession of them; many in hell curse
them, as the cause of their ruin: if a man were borne to do mischief, he
could not do greater any way, than this. So much hurt is done by them, they
cause such blemishes, such sports to be upon the profession of godliness, as
we should be glad if we could wash them off with our dearest heartblood, and
account it well bestowed: but woe be to them by whom these offenses come. The
greatest part of all the scorn, contempt of, and opposition against the ways
of God, and godly men, shall be charged upon these men, as the causers of it;
for were it not for such as these, wicked men could not tell what to say for
themselves, in their opposition of those ways of godliness, which in
themselves are so equal, and good, and blessed; woe be to them, by whom such
offenses come.

Fifthly, These men shall have their spirits filled with horror; they did 5
not fill up their work in following the Lord; but God and conscience shall
follow them, with anguish, and horror, and fill up their spirits with them. It
may be, once they had some flashy comforts in the performance of some duties;
but they shall be all taken from them, and dismal horror, and hideous
amazement of spirit shall possess them, Pro. 14. 14. The backslider in heart
shall be filled with his own ways; Much more than, the backslider in heart
and life too, he shall be filled, he shall have enough of them. Conscience
one day will upbraid, fly in the face, and tear the heart. Oh wretched
creature what have thou done? whom have thou forsaken? is it not the God of
life, and peace, and comfort, and all good, that thou have forsaken? are they
not the blessed ways of holiness, the ways of eternal rest and peace that
thou have left? God has likewise forsaken thee, and all good and comfort
begins to withdraw it self from thee; thou art like to be left in horrid
dismal darkness; Just it is that thou should be left as a forsaken,
forlorn, miserable wretch, who have thus wretchedly and vilely forsaken God,
and his truth, for the enjoyment of such poor, base things as thy heart is
turned aside unto. How will thou be able to look upon the faces of those, with
whom thou have formerly joined in holy duties, and have had communion with? But
how can thou look upon the face of the blessed God, when he shall appear
in his glory unto thee? What anguish will it be to thee when thou shall see
others, who have continued in their way following the Lord, to be for ever
blessed in that God, whom their souls have followed, and cleaved constantly
unto? but thy self, because thy base unbeleeving heart dared not venture all
upon him, now thou art cast out for ever, as an eternal curse: Oh what rack of
conscience will it be, when thou shall see in what a fair way once thou were,
but for want of coming off fully, and constantly in such and such particulars,
thou art now for ever lost?

Lastly, these men are hateful both to God and Men; they are 6
hateful to Men, because they go so far; and to God, because they go no
further, as Hebr. 10. 38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure
in him. Oh what a happy thing were it, if God would trouble the ways of these
poor creatures, if he would make them bitter and grievous to them, if he
would magnify his mercy, and his power in turning their hearts again toward
him, if he would deal with them as he did with his people, Hosea 2. 6. 7.
Hedge up their ways with thorns, make a wall that they should not find their
paths, that so they might at length, come to that blessed resolution we find
there; I will go and return to my Husband, for then it was better with me
than now; So I will go and return to my former ways, and follow after the
Lord again, from whom I have wretchedly departed, for then it was better with
me then it is now; then I had more comfort, more peace, more safety, more
blessing than I have now; And let such know, that though it were just with God,
for ever to reject them who have forsaken him; just to say, that vanity should
be their portion, who have turned after lying vanities; and many of the
Ancients have made the case Clemens Alex. quoted by Sympson in his history of
the Church in the second century
of such exceeding doubtful, especially if after conviction they have forsaken
God again and again; as Clemens Alexandrinus thought, that God might give
such the first and second Tert. thought their case desperate, especially who
fell into the sin of uncleanness. Lib. de pudicit. speaking of that place,
Heb. 6. 6. It is impossible that they who were once enlightened, etc. He says,
that this Author knew no second repentance promised to the Adulterer and
Fornicator. Nunquam moecho and fornicatori secundam poenitentiam promissam ab
Apostolis.
repentance, but if they fell oftener, there was no renewing them by repentance.
And Origin seemed likewise to be of the same mind, in his 5. Homily upon
Leviticus, Chap. 25. So Tertullian in his Book of repentance: God grants (says
he) a second repentance, but no further. Thus we see the strictness of these
Ancient times. But though these leave these men exceeding comfortless, yet let
them know, that the Lord calls them to return again unto himself: For though
it be (says the Lord) that if a wife have played the harlot, and she be put
away, and become another man's, her husband will not receive her again; yet
says the Lord, Ier. 3. 1. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, but
yet return to me: and verse 22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will
heal your backslidings: Oh that your hearts would answer, as theirs there
did; Oh that this gracious offer of the Lord, might have the same effect upon
your hearts as it had upon theirs: Behold, say they, we come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord our God; truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the
hills, etc. We see, we see, we have been utterly deceived; the ways that
we have chosen, have not been good; shame has devoured our labor, we have
bestowed our labor in shameful things, we lie down in our shame, and our
confusion covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord our God. As when a
man goes from the Sun, yet the Sunne-beames follow him, shine on him, warm
him; so though thou have departed from the Lord, yet the beams of Gods mercy
this day follow thee, they shine on thee; Oh that they might so warm thy
heart, as to cause thee to return. Cap. 4.


CAP. IV.
Comfort, and encouragement to those who follow the Lord fully.

IF this following of the Lord fully, be the honor of the Saints before the
Lord; then here is comfort, and encouragement to those whose conscience does
witness, that their hearts, and ways are fully after the Lord. What ever
others do, yet there are a generation of men in the world, who do fully follow
the Lord; Blessed are you of the Lord, you are honorable in the eyes of God
and man, you make up in part that hurt that is done to Religion by others; you
bind up the wounds of Jesus Christ, and do in part heal his scarres: If you
be content to give up all to God, to betrust God with all, know that there are
many blessed promises, full of mercy, and encouragement for you, that God will
make good to the full unto you; yea, they shall come to you fuller of
goodness, and blessing than you can imagine. Caleb challenged this promise of
God to him made in this place, upon this ground, Ioshuah 14. 8. five and forty
years after it was made; for he was but forty years old when he went to
spy out the Land, and when he challenged this promise in this place, be
says verse 10. I am this day fourscore and five years old. Though God may
seem to defer a while the fulfilling of his promise; yet be encouraged to
follow him still, for the eye of God is upon you, to make good his word unto
you, and the longer it stays, the more full with good and blessing it will
come. God seemed to defer a long time that promise he made to Abraham, That
he would make his seed as the stars of heaven; for two hundred and fifteen
years after this promise was made, there were but seventy souls that came out
of Abraham's loins, namely, when Jacob went down into Egypt; which if we
compute the time, we shall find to be just two hundred and fifteen years:
for Abraham was seventy and five years old when the promise was made; he was
an hundred years old when Isaac was borne; Isaac was forty years old before
he married, and he continued twenty years without a child; and Jacob was one
hundred and thirty years old when he went into Egypt; so that the time falls to
be just two hundred and fifteen years, which was just half the time, from
the promise till the people of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, which S. Paul
says, Gal. 3. 17. was four hundred and thirty years. Now observe, that
whereas God half this time did but little for Abraham, in the fulfilling of
this his promise, yet because Abraham followed him fully, ventured himself
wholly upon the faithfulness of the Lord, see how fully God came in with his
mercy at the last; for, in the second two hundred and fifteen years, he so
increased his seed, that from seventy souls, they were grown up to be six
hundred thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty, Number. 1. 45,
46. and these only from twenty years old and upward, such men as were able to
go to war; there was thus many of these, besides all children and women,
which it is like were far the greater number; yea, and the Tribe of Levy was
not numbered amongst this number; there were two and twenty thousand and
upwards of them besides. Thus you see, how fully God comes in at the last in
his mercy, and making good his word of promise to such who follow him fully. Be
you as full as you can in following the Lord, the Lord will be as full toward
you, in doing good unto you; Gods mercy shall be every as full, as your
obedience can be, 2 Samuel 22. 26. with the upright thou will show thy self
uprigh: The words are in the Original, With the strong and perfect, thou will
show thy self strong and perfect. God will go on strongly to his perfection
of mercy toward them, who do go on strongly in their perfection of obedience
toward him. Psalm. 11. 7. The Lord loves righteousness, and his countenance
does behold the upright: The words translated word for word are thus, The Lord
loves righteousnesses, and his faces shall behold the upright.
Righteousnesses, that is, when all the duties of righteousness are together.
And his faces shall behold; that is, all the several kinds, and manners of
the blessed comfortable manifestations of his love the upright shall have. The
great difficulties thou meetest with in Gods ways, (if thou be not
discouraged, but go through them) they shall turn to thy greatest comforts:
As Caleb, who was not discouraged by the Anakims those great Giants, and the
strong places they lived in, which so much discouraged the rest; Therefore
Hebron, the place of the Giants, was given unto him for a possession, Iosuah
14. 12, 13, 14, and 15, verses.

God certainly will remember the kindness of those who are willing to follow
him through the wilderness of difficulties and discouragements, Ierem. 2. 2.
You who do thus, shall die without stain, without any blur, which few do;
your memories shall be sweet, and blessed, when you are dead and gone: You
shall have an entrance ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 11. This is promised,
not only to those that are godly, but abound in it, as verse 8. They shall be
as a ship coming gloriously into the Haven with full sail: Thus S. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. with much confidence and full assurance concludes, That seeing
he had fought the good fight, and finished his course, and kept the faith,
henceforth there was laid up for him, a crown of righteousness, which the
righteous Judge should give him at that day: he challenges it upon the
righteousness of God. When the souls of these who have followed God fully,
are to enter into heaven, the everlasting doors shall stand wide open for
them; as when great men come to a house, the great gates are set open for their
entrance; and in Heaven, oh how full a reward shall there be there for them, as
2 Ep. Ioh. 8. verse. There is fullness of joy at Gods right hand, Psalm 16.
ult. So full as Ibi non gustabunt quam suavis sit Deus, sed implebuntus, and
satiabuntur dulcedi^e mirifica. Cypr. de Assent.
shall be more than can enter into them; they must enter into it, because it
cannot enter into them; there they shall not taste of joy and happiness, but
shall be filled up with them. This, Christ encouraged his Disciples withal,
Luke 22. 28, 29. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations,
and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me. With
this, S. Paul encouraged himself, in all his afflictions he met withal,
while he was following the Lord, 2 Cor. 4. ver. 17. For our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding eternal
weight of glory.

First, it is glory, and this word alone implies that there is exceeding 1
much in it; but further, it is a weight of glory, yea, an eternal weight of
glory; and more than that, an exceeding eternal weight of glory; as if yet it
were not expressed fully enough, he adds further, a farte more exceeding
eternal weight of glory; and what expression can be fuller than this? This
was that likewise that encouraged Moses in his full following the Lord,
forsaking the pleasures, the riches, the treasures of Egypt, that he migh
follow the Lord fully; For he had, says the Text, a respect unto the
recompense of reward, Hebrews, 11. 26. And you whose hearts and ways are
fully after the Lord, have the more cause to rejoice in this your blessedness,
because it it is the blessedness but of a few. Iniquity shall abound, says
Christ, and the love of many shall wax cold, but he that endures to the end,
shall be saved: It is but a he, in the singular number, that endures to the
end. Let these encouragements then fill your hearts with joy, and your spirits
with renewed resolutions and vigor, to fill up your course; let them fill your
sails, that you may go on with strength, and prosper, and be for ever blessed
in your way. I conclude this Use with that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Seeing
we have these promises, (these encouragements) let us labor to perfect our
holiness in the fear of God. And thus I pass to the last Use, which is of
Exhortation.

CAP. V. Cap. 5.

An Exhortation to follow the Lord fully.

NOw the Lord carry our hearts fully after himself: As the two blind men,
Matthew. 20. verse. last, as soon as their eyes were opened, they followed
Christ; so were our eyes opened, we would certainly follow after the Lord;
were they fully opened, our hearts would follow fully. Many of you have some
convictions, some inclinations, stirrings of affections, good resolutions; you
begin to have good thoughts of Gods ways, you are almost persuaded: Oh that
the work were thoroughly done! it is pity but that these beginnings should be
improved. When Christ saw the good inclinations of the young man, when he came
unto him, the Text says, He looked upon him, and loved him: those beginnings
are lovely; but how lovely then would the full work be, if these beginnings
were brought to perfection?

In this Use we shall show, first, the Motives which may draw our hearts to the
following of the Lord fully.

2 What it is that hinders the soul in this work, that it may be prevented.

3 What it is that would bring off the heart fully indeed.

For the first; there is infinite reason, 1
that our hearts should be fully after the Lord: for,

1 There is a fullness of all good in God; he is worthy; Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory, honor, and power, Revel. 4. 11. Thou art worthy to
receive the highest honor that any of thy creatures can by any means give
unto thee. The Heathen gods were honored, as those who were only Authors of
some particular good things; and therefore there were such a multiplicity of
them: one was honored as the Author of one good thing, and another as the
author of another; and therefore particular honor was sufficient for them.
There was no reason that that any of them should have the whole soul, working
in the fullness of the operations of it after them; but our God is not so; he
is an universal good, in whom there is all good, and from whom all good
flows, and by whom all good is preserved in the being it has; and therefore it
is a most absolute, universal honor and service that is due to him; if we had
thousands of souls, and if they were all of ten thousand times larger extent
than they are; yet infinite reason there would be, that they should all in the
full latitude, extent, and strength of them, work after this our God, to honor
and magnify, and worship this God for ever. As that blessed Martyr once said,
What, have I but John Ardley.
one life to lay down for Christ? If I had as many lives, as there are hairs
upon my head, they should all go for Jesus Christ: He saw Christ worthy of all
he had, yea, of more than he had. This was Gods own Argument to Abraham, Walk
before me, and be upright; be perfect, for I am God all-sufficient, I have all
perfection in me, and therefore be thou perfect before me.

Secondly, consider God might 2
have had full glory in your destruction; let him not be a loser in his
showing mercy to you. How much better is it for you, that he should have the
fullness of his glory, in his mercy to you, than the fullness of it in his
judgments upon you? This he might have had long ago: yea, and the fullness of
his glory he will have; if you give it not to him, he will force it from you.

Thirdly, Christ has fully gone 3
through the great work of Redemption; he would never leave it till he had fully
accomplished all, and said, It is finished. This was a mighty work, for the
accomplishment whereof, he passed through more difficulties, than ever thou art
like to do, in the fullest measure of following the Lord, that possibly can be.

Fourthly, yea, Gods mercies for 4
the present, are very full toward you; his pardoning mercies, and his
supplying mercies, with all things needful; when he receives thee to mercy,
he fully pardons all thy sins, he leaves nothing upon the score; he remits all
thy punishments. This was David's Argument, Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3 Bless the Lord,
O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name: and bless the
Lord, O my soul, again; as if he should say, O let God be fully blessed by me:
why? what was that, that raised and enlarged David's heart? It follows, Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heales all thy diseases; and verse. 4. He
crowns thee with loving kindnesses; and verse. 5. He satisfies thy mouth with
good things. God gives his servants a fullness in all they do enjoy; his grace
exceedingly abounds toward them in every thing. That place in 2 Corinthians. 9. 8.
is very remarkable for the setting out of the abounding of Gods grace toward
his people; And God is able (says the Text) to make all grace abound toward
you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work. What ever God is able to do for us, by faith we make it as if it
were done. And this power of God is set forth to the Corinthians, as a Motive
to persuade them to full obedience, that they might abound to every good work;
which if they did, they should have this power of God active, fully working for
them, according to these large expressions we have of it in this Scripture.
And observe the several expressions.

1 It is grace.

2 Then all grace.

3 Then all grace abounding.

4 A sufficiency.

5 An all sufficiency.

6 An all sufficiency in all things.

And 7. always an all sufficiency in all things. And is not here an Argument
full enough, to cause them and us, and all Gods people for ever, to abound in
every good work. How often does God fill our cup with mercy, and make it even
run over; as Psalm. 23. 5? If there shall be an All Sufficiency in all things,
then there will be an all sufficiency in our greatest straits, in our greatest
afflictions, in our greatest seares: As it is said of the wicked, Job 20. 22.
in the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits; the contrary is
true concerning Gods people; in the fullness of their straits, they shall be in
all sufficiency. God causes all his Attributes, and all the ways of his
Providence, and all his creatures to work for the good of his people; All that
is in God, all that God does, and all that belongs to God, is for them;
therefore infinite reason there is, that all they are, that all they do, that
all they have, should work for his honor.

First, all there is in God 1 is for 1
them, Ierem. 32, 41. I will rejoice over them, to do them good, and I will
plant them in this land assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my whole
soul: God calls for no more from thee than he is willing to give unto thee; he
would have thy whole heart, and thy whole soul for his honor, and he
promises to give thee his whole heart, and his whole soul, for thy good.
Again, all that God does, is for thee; Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the
Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his Covenant and his testimonies:
The paths of the Lord, are the ways of God, in the passages of his
Providence; not only some particular acts, but the track of God in his ways,
his paths: Now all these paths of God, that is, all the workings of God in
the ways of his Providence, they are mercy unto such, they work mercifully for
their good. And further observe, they are not only mercy, but mercy in truth:
God has engaged his truth, that they should thus work for them; God has tied
this mercy to them by his truth. See here the difference between Gods mercy to
his people, and his mercy to other men.

First, some of Gods paths may be mercy to other men, but not all; or some
particular acts of God, rather than his paths: God does not ordinarily go on
in a track and course of his mercies with them, as he does with his people: As
their obedience is only in some particular acts, and no continued course; so
Gods mercy to them, which comes from his general bounty, is manifested only
in some particular acts of his, and not in any constant course. But it is
otherwise in his dealings toward his people; they go on in a constant course
of obedience; they make Gods Commandments their paths, and therefore God goes
on in a constant course of loving kindness toward them, he makes his mercy
to them the ordinary paths wherein he walks: As, Psalm. 36. 10. O continue
thy loving kindness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the
upright in heart. The word in the Original, is, Draw out thy loving kindness.
Gods mercies to his own, are a continued Series, they are drawn out from a
constant Spring, they come forth from a never-failing Fountain; there is a
connection between one mercy and another; but as for others, God now and then
only casts his favors on them.

And observe a second difference; all Gods paths are mercy to his people, not
some few; there are none of Gods dealings, but aim at good toward them; if
God should cause one favor to follow another toward some wicked man, out of
the fullness of his bounty; yet it cannot be said of any wicked man in the
world, that all the paths of God are mercy toward him. God has his paths of
wrath and judgment, wherein he is coming toward him, though he be little
aware of it: But this blessing of all the paths of God being mercy, is a
peculiar blessing to such as follow the Lord fully, in the uprightness of
their hearts, in all the paths of service and obedience.

And thirdly, observe yet a greater 3
difference than the former: All the paths of God are not only mercy, but
mercy and truth to his people: though God may show mercy to others, yet he has
not tied his mercy to them by his truth; they cannot challenge mercy from him
by virtue of his truth; if they have mercy, it is more than they could have
expected; they cannot be sure of the continuance of it one hour; they have
nothing to show for their mercy; they do not hold their mercy upon that Tenor
of Gods truth which his people do. Nay, when God comes to make good his truth,
to give his truth the glory of it, then there is an end put to their mercy; it
is cut off from them; but there is a blessed connection between Mercy and Truth
in the good which Gods people do enjoy; according to the like expression in
the forenamed 36. Psa. 10. the loving kindness and the righteousness of God
are put both together, as the portion of an upright heart. And hence the
mercies they have, are no other than such as they may expect, as they may build
upon, before they come; such as are made over to them by the truth of God; and
when they are come they may be sure to hold them, because they hold them upon
such a blessed Tenure as GODS own truth. And hence the Scripture calls them
sure mercies. See how confident David was of holding Gods mercies, Psalm. 23.
6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.

And further, all that God has, is for their good; the heavens, and earth, and
all Creatures are theirs, and work continually for them: Hosea 2. 21. 22. I
will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall
hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Iezreel: 1
Cor. 3. 22, 23: The world, life, death, things present, things to come, all are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: Romans 8. 28. And we know that
all things work together for good, to them that love God. This is a mystery
that the world is not acquainted with, but we know it, says the Apostle. The
world may think, that things work against us; yea, all things in the world
seem to work against us; but we know that all things do work for good, and
they work together for good; though some particular things considered apart,
may work for good to other men; yet take all together, and they work their
ruin; but altogether works for good to us; although the good does not seem
yet to come forth, yet it is a working for us; stay but till the work be
done, and it will appear: Good it will be, though it may be not the same
good that we think of, yet a good that will be better for us; a greater good
than we imagined or desired. Now then, if all that is Gods be for thee, and
works thus fully for thee, is there not reason then, that all that is thine
should be for God, and work as fully for him? Thine did I say? the truth is,
there is nothing thine; for all is Gods; God has a greater propriety in, and
right to whatsoever thou art, and have, than thy self; but God is pleased to
let it be called thine, that thou may freely give it to him: and if it be
his own, why should he not have it fully? If he thus inlargeth himself
toward thee, how unequal is it, that thou should be scant in thy service
to him, and in thine honoring of him?

Fifthly, wicked men do fully follow 5
after that which is evil; an infinite shame and confusion then would it be to
us, an infinite dishonor likewise unto God, if we should not as fully follow
the Lord in that which is good? Ecclesiastes 9. 3. The heart of the sons of
men is full of evil: and Chap. 8. 11. The heart of the sons of (...).
men is fully set in them to do evil: The Seventy translate this, The heart
of man has a Plerophorie to evil; it is set upon it without any doubt, or
suspicion; there is a plerophorie of boldness to sin in them; why should
there not be a plerophorie, (that is) a full persuasion of faith in Gods
servants to that which is good? Micah 7. 3. the Scripture says, that wicked
men do evil with both hands, earnestly: Esaias 57. 5. Idolaters there are said
to inflame themselves with their Idols; and Jeremy Chap. 8. 2. they are said,
1. To love their Idols: 2. To serve them: 3. To walk after them: 4 To seek
them: 5. To worship them: all these 5. expressions together in one Verse, to
set forth the earnestness and fullness of the spirit of Idolaters toward
their Idols. Where have we five such expressions together, to set out the
fullness of the work of men's spirits in following after the Lord? It was said
of Ahab, that he sold himself to work wickedness; what a fullness of spirit
was there in him, in doing wickedness? Ier. 23. 10. It is said there of the
people, that their course was evil, and their force was not right. That vis,
that strength, and force that was in their spirits, was not right; it was not
after God, but after the ways of sin. How many difficulties will men pass
through for their lusts? what cost will they be at? how great things will they
suffer? nothing is so dear unto them, but they will be content to part with it
for, and bestow it upon their Idols. How soon did the people, Exodus 32. break
off their golden Earrings from their Ears, to make an Idol withal? and shall
not then our hearts and lives be more fully after the blessed God? We see
wicked men stick close to their wicked principles; they are bold, they will
not be daunted, they will go through with the work they have begun, what ever
come of it; should not we much more stick to our principles, should not we
much more be undaunted in our way, and go through with our work?

I remember I have read a passage in Saint Cyprian, how he brings in the devil
triumphing over Christ in this manner; As for my followers, I never dyed for
them, as Christ did for his; I never promised them so great reward, as Christ
has done to his; and yet I have more followers than he, and they do more for
me, than his does for him. O let the thought of our giving the devil occasion
thus to triumph over Christ in our slacknesse and negligence in following after
him, cause shame and confusion to cover our faces: and yet to put on this
Argument a little more close; It may be you your selves heretofore, have
followed sin fully, your hearts have been strong after evil, and your lives
have been fruitful in it; it may be you have been forward in putting forth
your selves ringleaders in that which was evil; not only stout and perverse
your selves, but maintainers, encouragers of much evil in others; you gave up
yours members, your estates, and what you had, to the service of sin; much time
was spent, much sleep broke, in plotting and contriving wickedness, much
pains taken in the execution of it, and now your hearts and ways seem to be
for God; and is a poor, slight, scant, dead-hearted service sufficient for
him? Oh be ashamed and confounded in thy thoughts, let Conscience judge
between God and his Creature. Do thou thus requite the Lord? is this thy
kindness to him? Is there not infinite reason, that as you have yielded your
members servants to uncleannes, and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so you now
should yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness? Romans 6.
19. Mark the opposition there; there are three to's in the expression of the
service to sin, To uncleanness, To iniquity, Unto iniquity; but in the
service of God there are only two, To righteousness, Unto holiness. It is true,
in this life there will never be that fullness of spirit in following after
God, as there was in following after sin; because there was nothing but sin
in the soul before, no other stream to abate it; but now there is something
else besides grace; a stream of corruption to oppose it: but yet we should
be ashamed, that there should be such a difference; the thought of it should
cause a dejection of heart within us, and we should judge it infinitely equal
and reasonable, that we should endeavor to the utmost we are able, to follow
God as fully now, as ever we followed sin before. Saint Paul, Acts 26. 11.
confesses, that in his former way he was madd in the persecution of Gods
servants; and when God turned the stream, others judged him as mad in the
other way; 2 Corinthians. 5. 13. For whether we be besides our selves, it is to
God; the love of Christ constrains us. And hence we may observe, that the
same word that signifies to persecute, he uses to set out his earnest pressing
toward the Mark; Phil. 3. 14. I press toward the Mark, for the price of
the high calling of God. The word that is there translated, press toward, it
is this same that signifies to persecute, because (...)
the earnestness of his spirit, in pressing toward the mark now, is the same
that it was in his persecution of those that pressed toward the mark before.

Sixthly, the more fully we follow 6
God, the more full shall our present peace, and joy, and soul satisfying
contentment be. Psalm. 119. 130. The entrance of thy words gives light; the
beginning of following God, is sweet and good, but the further we do go on,
the more sweet we shall find, as they who walked toward Sion, Psalm. 84. 7.
They went from strength to strength: so they who walk after the Lord, they go
from peace to peace, from joy to joy, from one degree of comfort unto another;
for if the entrance into our way be so good and sweet, what will it be when
we come into the midst of it? Prove. 8. 20. I lead in the way of
righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment; mark what follows
there, verse 21. That I might cause those that love me, to inherit substance,
and I will fill their treasures. Then does the soul inherit substance indeed,
then are the treasures of it filled, when wisdom leads it, not only in the
way of righteousness, but in the midst of the paths of judgment. The way of
the just is compared to the shining of the light, that shines more and more
unto the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. The further he goes on his way, the more
light he has, the more glorious shine is upon him. Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be
abundantly satisfied, and they shall drink of the River of pleasures. Who are
those that shall be thus abundantly satisfied, and shall have this River of
pleasures? they are verse 10. the upright in heart. That soul that walks on
before the Lord in the uprightness of it, shall not want satisfaction, shall
not want pleasure. Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy law. It
is more to love Gods law the^ to do the thing that is commanded in it. That
soul which does not only submit to the Law, but loves it, will be abundant in
duty, for love is bountiful; and great peace has such a soul, that thus
loves Gods Law. Every good motion in the soul is as the budd of the Lord, and
that is beautiful and glorious; but how excellent and glorious is the fruit of
it then? the good beginnings which are as the budding of the Pomegranate, and
the putting forth of the tender Vine, are delightful to God and to the soul;
but how pleasant then is the fruit when it comes to ripeness?

The more fully we follow on in Gods ways, the more full will the testimony of
the witnesses both in heaven and earth be, in witnessing our blessed estate
unto us: Those three witnesses in heaven, the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, and
those three on earth, the spirit, water, and the blood, of which S. John in his
1 Epistle 5. 7, 8. they will all come with their full testimony, to that soul
which follows God fully. By following the Lord fully, we keep our evidences
clear; sin blots and blurs our evidences, that oftentimes we cannot read
them; but when the heart keeps close to God, and walks fully with him, then all
is kept fair. The Kingdom of God consists in righteousness, peace, and joy;
the more fully we are brought into his Kingdom, the more fully we are under
his government; as there will be the more righteousness, so the more peace,
and joy. Es. 9. 7. Of the increase of his government, and peace, there shall
be no end, says the Text. The more increase there is of Christ's government in
the soul, the more full it is, the more peace will be there.

Seventhly, there is great reason that we should walk fully after the 7
Lord, because the way that God calls us to walk in, is a most blessed and holy
way: In the 21. Revelation, 21. verse; The streets of Jerusalem, (that is, the
ways of Gods people in his Church, wherein they are to walk) they are said to
be of pure gold, and as it were transparent glass; they are golden ways,
they are bright shining ways. Prove. 3. 17. The ways of wisdom are the ways
of pleasantness; and all her paths are peace. There is not any one Command of
God, wherein he would have us to follow him, but it is very lovely, there is
much good in it: God requires nothing of us, but that which is most just and
holy: as God is holy in all his works, so he is holy in all his Commands; they
are no other, but that which if our hearts were as they ought, we would choose
to our selves. A righteous man is a law to himself, he sees that good, that
beauty, that equity in all Gods Laws, as he would choose them to himself
were he left at his own liberty. What one thing is there in Gods Law that
could be spared? What is there that thou could be glad to be exempted
from? It may be in the strength of temptation, when some lust is up working,
the flesh would feign have some liberty, but upon due serious thoughts, looking
into the bottom of things, a gracious soul closes with the Law, and loves
it as gold, yea, fine gold, and breaks for the longing it has, not to the
reward of obedience to Gods Statutes, and Judgments, but to the Statutes and
Judgments of God themselves, as David says his soul did. Howsoever our path
in following the Lord may seem rugged and hard to the flesh, in regard of the
afflictions and troubles it meets withal in it; yet where there is a
spiritual eye, the way of holiness appears to it exceeding lovely and
beautiful. Though David Psa. 23. supposed the worst that might befall him in
his way, as that he might walk through the valley of the shadow of death; yet
he calls his way green pastures, and says, Godwill lead him by the still
waters. It is true, the ways of God are grievous to the wicked, but very good
and delightful to the Saints, because they are the ways of holiness, as Esaias
35. 8. And a highway shall be there, and it shall be called, the way of
holiness; The unclean shall not pass over it.

Eighthly, the consideration of the end of our way, should be a strong 8
motive, to draw our hearts fully after the Lord in it; the entrance into it is
sweet, the midst of it more, as before we have showed; but the end of it most
sweet of all; there is that coming, that will fully recompense all.

Consider of the sweetness of the end of our way;

1 In that period of it that will be at death, and 2, In that glorious reward
we shall have in heaven.

That sweet and blessed comfort, that the full following of the Lord brings at
death, is enough to recompense all the trouble and hardship, that we meet
withal in our way, while we are following of him: This has caused many Saints
of God to lie triumphing, when they have been upon their deathbeds, blessing
the Lord that ever they knew his ways, that ever he drew their hearts to
follow after him in them.

When Hezekiah received the message of death, Esaias 38. 2, 3, he turned his face
to the wall, and said, Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight; and Hezechiah wept sore: O the sweetness that possessed the
heart of Hezekiah, which did flow from the testimony of his conscience, that
he had fully walked after the Lord with a perfect heart! the verb there, I
have walked, It is in Hithpael. Continuoi^de sinenter ambulavi.
is in that Mood in the Original, that adds to the signification of it; It
signifies, I have continually without ceasing walked.

Thus Luther, who was a man Osian hist. Eccle. cent. 16. l. b. 2 cap. 56.
whose spirit was exceeding full in his love unto, and walking after the Lord
Jesus Christ while he lived; and when he came to die, his spirit was as full
of comfort, and joy, as before it was full of zeal, and courage; these
expressions brake from him; O my heavenly Father, O God the Father of the Lord
Jesus Christ, the God of all comfort, I give thee thanks that thou have
revealed thy Son Jesus Christ to me, whom I have believed, whom I have
professed, whom I have loved, whom I have honored, whom the Bishop of Rome,
and the rest of the rout of wicked men have persecuted, and contemned; and now
I beseech thee; O my Lord Jesus Christ, receive my soul, my heavenly Father;
although my body is to be laid down, yet I certainly know that I shall for
ever remain with thee, neither can I by any be pulled out of thy hands. The
grace of Gods Spirit oftentimes appears most in the glory of it, when death
approaches, because grace and glory is then about to meet. That soul that
has followed God fully here, when it comes to depart out of the body, it only
changes the place, nor the company; which was the speech of a late reverend
holy Divine of ours, a little before his death. I shall change my place, says
he, but not my company: meaning, that as he had conversed with God, and
followed after the Lord here in this World, he was now going to converse with
him, and to follow after him more fully in a better World. Death to such a
soul, it is but Gods calling of it, from the lower gallery of this World, to
the upper gallery of Heaven, to walk with him there. Here the converse that
Jesus Christ has with the souls of his people, is compared to that converse,
that friends have one with another, in their walkings together in their
galleries, Cant. 7. 5. The King is held in the galleries: he does not only
walk with his Beloved there, but is as it were bound, he is kept there by the
bands of love, and when death comes, then the soul is called up, to the upper
room, to heaven, there to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes.

We read of a notable speech, that Hilarion had when he was to die; Go out,
go out my soul, why do Egredere, quid times? egredere anima mea, quid
dubitas? septuagintaprope annis servisti Christo, et mortemtimes? Hicronym, in
vit. ejus.
thou fear, why do thou doubt? almost these seventy years have thou served
Christ, and do thou now fear death? And if the end of our way at death, has
so much good in it, how much good will there be in the end of our way, that we
shall enjoy, when we come to heaven?

As the consideration of the full reward in heaven, was made use of before, as
an encouragement to those who do fully follow the Lord; so now we make use of
it, as a strong motive to draw up our hearts to the full following after him.
It was S. Paul's motive to the Corinthians, 1 Epistle 15. 58. persuading them to
he steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; forasmuch
as they knew that their labor was not in vain in the Lord. We do not follow
after shadows, and phancies, in following the Lord, but we seek for glory,
honor, immortality; we follow after an incorruptible crown, a glorious
kingdom, an eternal inheritance, the glory of heaven; the treasures of the
riches of God himself are set before us, to draw up our hearts fully to him.
It was the argument that S. Paul used to work upon his own spirit withal,
Phil. 3. 14. I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus.

How full is the work of many men's spirits, in their working after some poor,
little, scant good in this world? whereas if they had all the world, they had
but an empty husk, in comparison of that glory that is set before us: They pant
after the very dust; what cause is there then, that our hearts should pant in
the strong workings of them, after those high and glorious things, that are
reserved in heaven for us? It was the goodness of the land of Canaan, that was a
strong motive to draw Caleb and Ioshuahs heart fully after the Lord, through
many difficulties. Canaan was but a dark Type of the glory of Heaven, which
God has promised to reward the full followers of himself withal. It was once
a speech of Anselme, If a man should serve God zealously here a thousand
years, yet should he not thereby deservedly merit to be one half day in
heaven. Let us be as forward, let our hearts be as strong and zealous in Gods
ways as possibly they can be; yet I may say as Abigail did to David in that
particular case, it shall not repent my Lord when he comes into his Kingdom;
so it shall never repent you of any thing that ever you have done for the Lord,
when you come into your Kingdom. But if it were possible there could be sorrow
in heaven, you would be sorry that you did no more. It was a speech of one
Gordius a Martyr, that the threats of his enemies were but as seeds, from
which he should reap immortality, and eternal joys; so all the hardship and
troubles that we meet with all in our way here, in following the Lord, are but
increasers of that glory that is to be revealed: why then should any thing
hinder us, or stop us in our way? And thus I pass to the second thing
propounded in this Use, namely, to show what are the Causes that hinder men
from following the Lord fully; and they are five especially; which I shall but
name.

First, low apprehensions that men 1
have of God; they see not God in his glory, in his greatness; surely, they
know not God, and therefore it is that their hearts work so poorly after him:
Ier. 9. 3. They are not valiant for the truth upon the earth: and what is the
reason? For they know not me, says the Lord. As if he should say, Did they
know me, certainly they would be valiant for my trruth: They that know thy
Name, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 9. 10. they will put their trust in thee; so
they that know Gods Name, will love him, will fear him, will be zealous for,
will fully follow after him. The knowledge of all truths, concerning Heaven,
and hell,

ven, and hell, or any other thing that can be known, can never raise, can
never enlarge the hearts of men so after the Lord, as the knowledge of God
himself; and therefore where God is little known, no marvel though he be so
little followed.

Secondly, unsound beginnings in 2
the profession of Religion, are the cause why men do not fully follow after
the Lord; their hearts are not thoroughly broken, not deeply humbled, the
truths of God not deeply rooted at first, their souls not well principled, the
foundation not well laid: If men be not well principled at first, in their
entrance into the ways of God, they are like to prove but shufflers and
bunglers in Religion all their days. If cloth be not wrought well at the
first, though it shows fair in the Loome, yet it will shrink when it comes to
wetting: the cause why many do so shrink in the wetting, when they come to
suffer any thing in the ways of Religion; it is, because their hearts were not
well wrought at first.

A third cause is the strength of engagements; their hearts are so wrapped 3
in them, so glued to them, as it is exceeding painful to get them loosened
from them, they are so near and dear to a corrupt heart: As it is said of
Esau, he looked on the Pottage, and it was so red; so they look upon their
engagements, and they are so full of content; it is so grievous to be taken off
from them, that they rather suffer their hearts to be taken off from God
himself: when engagements have taken possession of the heart, then how hard is
it to work any thing upon the judgments of men? it is hard to get the mind to
view the truths of God, to get it to search into them, to consider of them; it
is ready to close with the least objection against them, to catch hold of the
least advantage to cast them off; and if truths be so clear as a man cannot
but see them, as conscience for the present is over-powred with them, yet if
the heart be not taken off from engagements, it will fetch about again, to
see if something may not be gotten against those truths, to break the
strength of them; but where the heart is taken off from engagements, how easily
do the truths prevail? how soon is the heart brought fully to close with
them? 2 Samuel 22. 33. God, says David, makes my way perfect: the word is, He
frees my way, Solvit, so it is translated by some, He frees it from snares;
and this is a great mercy. Hence, Psalm 18. 32. Where this thanksgiving of
David is again repeated, there the word is translated Dedit, He has given my
way to be perfect; this is a good gift indeed, for God to make a man's ways
free and clear before him, to take off the temptations that did engage and
ensnare his spirit; and then, as Verse 34. of that place in Samuel, He makes
my feet as Hindes feet: O how swiftly and powerfully then may the soul run
in Gods ways, when it is thus freed! Psalm. 119. 44, 45. I shall keep thy Law
continually, for ever and ever, and I will walk at liberty. When the heart is
at liberty, then it goes on continually, for ever and ever, in following after
the Lord: but if there be any secret engagement in it, it will be weary, and
one time or other will leave off: a man that is fettered, can neither go apace,
nor continue long.

A fourth thing that hinders men 4
in following God fully, it is, going out in the strength of their own
resolutions, not in any strength that they receive out of the fullness of Jesus
Christ; they trust more to their own promises, than to Gods. Luther reports of
Staupicius a Germane Divine, that he acknowledged of himself, that before he
came to understand aright the free and powerful grace of Jesus Christ, that he
vowed and resolved an hundred times against some particular sin, and never
could get power over it; at last he saw the reason to be, the trusting to his
own resolutions.

A fifth cause, is the meeting with 5
more difficulties in Gods ways than we made account of: when Christians
think only of the good and sweet that they shall meet with in Gods ways; but
they do not cast in their thoughts, what the troubles are like to be, that
they shall find in them; like Joseph, who dreamed of his preferment and honor
that he should have above his brethren, but dreamt not of his selling into
Egypt, nor of his imprisonment there: Christians should at the first entrance
into Gods ways, expect the utmost difficulties; they should enter upon those
terms, to encounter with great troubles, if they mean to sollow God fully in
them. It is a shame for any Christian to account any trouble that he meets
withal in Gods ways, to be as a strange thing unto him. Because the Lord had
taken S. Paul as a chosen vessel unto himself, and purposed to draw his heart
fully after him; observe how God deals with him in his first entrance into his
way, Acts 19. 16. I will show him how great things he must suffer for my Names
sake.

But what then would take off the heart, and carry it fully after the Lord?

These three things will do it.

First, the real sight and through sense of sin, as the greatest evil. When
God leads his people weeping, and with supplications, then he brings them into
a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble, Ier. 31. 9. and again, Ier.
50. 4, 5. the Lord says, that his people shall go weeping, and seek the Lord
their God, they shall ask the way to Zion, with their faces thither-ward,
saying, Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that
shall not be forgotten. When they are led weeping in the through sense of their
sin, then their faces are set toward Zion, and then they are willing to join
themselves to God, in a perpetual Covenant.

The second thing that will take off the heart fully, is the clear sight of
God in these two considerations.

1. In relation to our selves, to see how there is all good in him for 1
us to enjoy fully, though we have nothing but him alone; what ever we would
have in any creature, in any way so far as is good for us, it is to be had
in him; when the soul is thoroughly convinced of this, it comes off sweetly, and
flows fully after the Lord.

2. Consider God in relation to all other good; thus, that nothing 2
else has any true goodness in it, but in reference and subordination to him.

The third thing that will take off 3
the heart fully, is the fear of God, and the fear of eternity powerfully
falling upon the soul, and deeply taking impression in it: For the fear of
God, take that place, 2 Cor. 2. 1. Perfect your holiness in the fear of God.
The fear of God is a great means to bring your holiness to perfection; and
for the second, that place in Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling. The fear of Cap. 6.
the eternal salvation of the soul, of the infinite consequence of it, will
cause us to labor to work it out.

CAP. VI.
That it is the choicenesse of a man's spirit that causes him to follow GOD
fully.

FRom the reference that this Doct. 3.
following of God fully has to the excellency of Calebs spirit; The Doctrine
that arises is this, That it is the choicenesse and excellency of a man's
spirit, that causes him to follow God fully. As Comets that are called blazing
stars do soon vanish, because of the baseness of the matter out of which they
are; but Stars in the Firmament continue; because they are of an heavenly
substance: so there are many blazing Professors of Religion, who rise high for
a while, but at last they come to nothing, because their spirits are base and
vile; but those who have heavenly and choice spirits, they god on in their way,
and finish their course to the honor of God and his truth, Pro. 11. 5. The
righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the wicked shall fall.
Ezec. 36. 26, 27. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, etc. And after it follows, And cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them. This new spirit will cause a
man to walk in Gods Statutes; a man of such a spirit shall certainly keep his
judgments, and do them even to the end. It is not strength of parts that will
carry a man through, nor strength of Argument, nor strength of conviction, nor
strength of natural conscience, nor strength of resolution, nor strength of
common grace; it is only this choice excellent spirit; that other spirit, of
which we have spoke so much before.

In this point I shall follow these three things.

1 We shall show what there is in this spirit that does carry on a man fully.
2 Why only this can do it. 3 Apply it.
For the first, it is the choicenesse of a man's spirit that causes a man to
go fully after God: for,

1 By this a man comes to have a more full presence of God with him, 1
than any other man can have; such a man is nearer unto God than others, he
has more of the nature of God, than others; is more capable of the presence of
God, than others; and God delights to let out himself more to him than to
others: These are filled with all the fullness of God, according to that
expression of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 19. Now this fullness of God in their
spirits must needs carry them on, because it so satisfies them, as they feel
no need of other things. Empty spirits are always sucking and drawing of
comfort from the creatures that are about them, and hence it is that their
hearts are taken off from God so much. Again, a spirit that is filled with
God, is not so sensible of any evils that are without, so as empty spirits are;
as it is in the body when it is filled with good nourishment, with good blood
and spirits, it is not sensible of cold, and alteration of weather, as the body
is that is empty, and filled only with wind.

Secondly, the choicenesse of a man's spirit raises it to converse with high 2
things, and so carries it above the rubs, the snares and hindrances that are
below; and being above these, it goes on freely and fully in its course, and is
not in that danger of miscarrying, as other poor spirits are, who converse so
much with the things upon the earth: as Birds that fly high, are not catched
by the Fowler, they are not taken by his Lime-twigs, by his Net or Pit fall so
as others are, who are much below upon the ground. Broverb. 15. 24. The way of
Life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath; It is the
keeping in his way above, that delivers him from the dangers and snares that
are laid for him below. Thunders and Lightnings, tempests and storms, make no
alteration in the highest Region; so the threats and oppositions against the
ways of godliness, and all the troubles that the world causes, make no
alterations in heavenly hearts, that keep above. When the tree grows low, it
is subject to be bitten by the Beasts, but when it is grown up on high, it is
out of danger: The lower the heart is, the nearer the earth, the more danger;
but when it is got up on high, the danger is past; and now, what should hinder
it from the growing up to the full measure of it in Christ.

Thirdly, the choicenesse of a man's 3
spirit changes his end, and so carries him on fully after the Lord; for when
the end is changed, all is changed; when there are but particular changes it is
a certain argument, that the highest end is not changed; but when that is
changed, there must of necessity be an universal change upon these two
grounds.

1 Because the last end is always loved for it self, and therefore infinitely
loved.

2 It is the rule of all other things that are under it; the good of all things
under it is measured by it, and is subordinate to it.

Fourthly, this choicenesse of spirit causes a suteablenesse, a sympathy 4
between the frame of the heart, and the ways of holiness: Now sympathies
first, are always between the general natures of things, and not individuals,
not particulars; as thus, where there is a sympathy between one creature and
another, it is always between the whole kind of those creatures; wheresoever
such Natures are found, there will be this agreement. We may see it more
clearly in that which is contrary; that contrariety of nature which we call
Antipathy, it is not between any particulars so much, as between the whole
natures of things; as between the Wolf and the Sheep, there is such a
contrariety: Now the nature of the Wolf is not contrary so much to any
particular sheep, but to the whole nature of sheep, wheresoever the nature of
it is found, and therefore to all sheep; Thus it is in the soul, where there
is such a kind of opposition of it against sin, it is not against any
particular sin so much, as against the whole nature of sin, wheresoever it
is; so where there is such an agreement, which we call a sympathy, it is not
so much with any particular way of holiness, or particular Act, but with the
whole nature of holiness, wheresoever it is found, and therefore such a soul
must needs follow God fully. Again, sympathies do always work without
labor and pain, and therefore where there is such an agreement between the
frame of the heart, and the ways of God, the heart must needs work fully,
because it works delightfully: and yet further, this agreeablenes of sympathy
is deeply rooted in the very principles of the creature, it is founded in the
very being of it, and therefore it must needs work strongly and constantly.
Vain reasonings, carnal objections, subtle arguments, strong oppositions can
never prevail against that soul, where there is this deeprooted
agreeableness between the frame of it, and the ways of holiness. But that
you may see further what a wonderful agreeableness Grace makes between the
spirits of the godly, and the Law of God, which is the rule of those ways
wherein God would have the soul to follow him in: observe the several
expressions by which the Scripture sets it out.

First, it is written in the tables of their hearts. Secondly, it is their
meditation day and night, Psalm. 1. Thirdly, it is the joy of their souls, Psalm.
119. 14, verse. and 47. verse. Fourthly, they love it above gold, above fine
gold. Fifthly, their hearts break for the longing it has after it. Sixthly,
they lift up their hands to it, Psalm. 119. 48. Seventhly, their mouths talk
of it, Psalm. 119. 13. ver. and 46. ver. Eighthly, their feet run in it, Psalm.
119. 32. Ninthly, their soul keeps it. Psalm. 119. 167. Tenthly, they will
never forget it, Psalm. 119. 16. Eleventhly, they give up their members as
instruments of the righteousness of it, Romans 6. 13.
And lastly, to name no more, (though there be many more expressio^s in
Scripture to set this out) they apply their hearts to it, to fulfill it always
even to the end, Psalm. 119. 103.

Fifthly, This choicenesse of spirit 5
causes a man to look to his duty, and not to regard what may follow. The
thing that hinders most in their following the Lord, it is want of this; it is
not want of conviction what should be done, but the reasonings of their heart,
about the hard and troublesome consequences that will follow, if the things be
done: But a true gracious heart says only, Let me know what is my duty, let
the right be done, though heaven and earth meet together.

Sixthly, The choicenesse of a man's Fiat just^tia, etsi mundus ruat. 6
spirit causes a man, that if he does look at any consequences, that may
follow upon his way, he looks only at the last issue of all, what his way
will prove in his last conclusion; how things will go with him when he comes
to the last trial, what will be the ultimate end of all: Will it then be
peace? shall I then be glad of these ways I now walk in?

Seventhly, The choicenesse of a 7
man's spirit strengthens it against the impressions that sensitive objects use
to leave upon soft and weak spirits. Most men have their spirits formed, and
fashioned according to sensitive objects; it is not what they apprehend in
abstract notions, that works upon them, let them be what they will; yet, when
they have to deal with sensitive things, the sweetness, desireablenesse,
glory of them, works the most powerfully; their hearts are altered according to
the impression that they leave upon them, and this is great weakness, and an
effeminate softness of spirit: Hence the word translated Effeminate, 1 Cor. 6.
9. signifies (...).
soft-spirited men. This diste^per in the spirit, is like that in the flesh,
when it is corrupted with the dropsy; the flesh is soft, and if you put your
finger to it, the impression of your finger sticks in it, and pits the flesh;
so the impression of sensitive objects, sticks in distempered, weak, soft
spirits, as it was in the other Spies who were sent with Caleb and Ioshuah; the
terrible things they saw in the land, stuck mightily in their hearts, they
brought with them the impressio^ of them fastened in their spirits: hence Numb.
13. 33. according to the translation of the Greek Translators, it is, They
brought the fear of the land with them: But (...).
this choicenesse of spirit that was in Caleb, and is in those who are truly
godly, keeps from this: and there must be this firmness in the spirit of a
man, or else it will never carry him after the Lord fully, 2 Samuel 22. 26. With
the upright thou will show thy self upright; the word translated upright,
signifies strong and perfect: There is required strength, and that more than
ordinary too, to carry on the soul to perfection.

Thus you see what there is in this choice spirit, that caries it on fully
after the Lord: Now there must of necessity be this, or else this full
following of the Lord will never be, nothing else will do it. And that;

1 Because the ways of God are supernatural, and therefore there must be
something in the spirit of a man which is supernatural, that must reach to
them; this which is supernatural in the spirits of godly men, we see it in
the effects, and we know it is above reason, and all natural principles
whatsoever. But what is, is very hard to express; and therefore men of parts
in the World, are mad to think, that any should imagine, that those who are
of weaker parts than themselves, should have any thing in them, to carry them
on in other ways, than they walk in; which they do not understand, because
they do not know, what that same thing is, which is called supernatural; they
will rather think it a conceit and fancy, than any real excellency: because
they can apprehend other things better than others, they think, why should
they not apprehend this better than others, if there were any real excellency
in it.

2 The ways of God are not only above nature, but contrary to nature, and
therefore there must be needs, some special choycenesse of spirit, to carry a
man on in them; there must be a contrary stream, to overpower the stream of
nature, and this stream must be fed by some living fountain, or else there
will never be a holding out. In following after the Lord, all natural
abilities, and common grace will do no more but stop the stream of corrupt
nature; they cannot so overpower it, as to carry the soul another way; but the
work of grace in this choicenesse of spirit will do it.

3 The stream of times, and examples of men, are exceeding strong, and it is
not a little matter that will carry on the soul against them. The dead fish is
carried down the stream, though the wind serves to blow it up: all natural
abilities of the soul, will no more help a man against the stream of
examples, than the wind can carry the dead fish up the stream; but if there
were life put into the fish, it were able then to move against the wind and
stream too.

4 There are so many strong alluring temptations, where in the wiles,
subtilties, depths of Satan, are very powerful to draw the heart away from
God, that except there be some special work of Gods grace to give wisdom to
discern the deceits of sin, to make the soul spiritually subtle, to find out
the cunning devices of Satan, and to discern the danger of them, the soul
most certainly could never hold on in the way of its following after the Lord.

5 There are so many troubles, oppositions, that it meets withal in this way,
that most certainly would drive it out, were it not for some choice Work of
Gods grace in it; but this choycenesse of spirit, will carry a man through all
them: It is Gods promise, Esaias 59. 19. That when the enemy shall come in like a
flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. We made use
of this Scripture before, for opposition of strong corruptions; but it is true
here now, for the resisting of strong spiritual enemies, of strong
oppositions; when they come in like a flood against the soul, to carry it out
of Gods ways, the Spirit of God in it does lift up a standard against them,
and were it not for this, it could not hold: It is this good and sound
constitution of the soul that makes it endure those oppositions that it meets
withal. An aguish heat may be greater, than that which arises from a good
constitution, but it is not able to resist cold: so there may be a natural
violence in a man's spirit for a while, in the profession of Religion, which may
seem to be zeal, but not arising from the good constitution of the soul,
when troubles come, it vanishes, giving no strength at all.

6 There are so many scandals and reproaches that rise against the ways of God,
so many aspersions that are cast upon them, that if a man has not more than an
ordinary spirit, he most certainly will be offended: Blessed are they that are
not offended in me, says Christ. It is a great blessing when there falls out
scandals, and when we see grievous aspersions cast upon Gods ways, yet not to
be offended; there needs be some more than ordinary light to discover to a man,
the certainty of that good there is in the ways of God; he had need be sure of
his principles, and know in whom he has believed.

7 Yea, God many times hides himself from his servants, while they are
following after him, and this oftentimes proves the sorest temptation of all,
and a greater discouragement then all the rest: for as for oppositions,
scandals, reproaches, these are things they make account of, and can often
lightly pass them over; but when God hides his face, this puts them at a
stand, now they are in the dark, and know not what to do; Christ was not much
troubled at the reproaches of men, at the oppositions he met withal from
them; for the Scripture says, He despised the shame, and endured the Cross;
but when his Father hid his face from him, then he was in an agony, then his
spirit began to be amazed, then his soul was sorrowful to the death, then he
falls grovelling upon the ground, then he sweats drops of water and blood, then
he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These spiritual
desertions in their degree, Gods servants often meet withal in their way, so
as, if they had not choice spirits, some special work of God in their souls,
they would certainly fall and sink in it. Now put all these together, and we
see, it is not every ordinary spirit, that is like to go on fully after the
Lord; it must needs be some thing extraordinary, that preserves a spark in the
midst of waves, that preserves a candle light, in the midst of storms and
tempests.

Never wonder then, or be offended, to see so many to fall off from Use 1.
God; few men have choice spirits; those who are godly expect no other from
most professors, and therefore they are not troubled when they see this fall
out; They went out from us, because they were not of us, says the Apostle.
Wicked men are offended, because they know not what the work of grace means;
and hence, if they see a man make profession of Religion, they make no
difference, as though there were as much to be expected from him, as from
another; as though the cause of God fell when he fell; no such matter; If you
see men's spirits proud, slight, earthly, sensual, or carried with a greater
violence than their principles will bear; I do not mean, though their
affections may sometimes go beyond their knowledge; but by principles I mean,
the rooted graces of God in their hearts, as one may perceive in some, there
are not graces rooted suitable to their expressions, and outward ways; and when
you see not an evennesse in the ways of men, then never expect from them any
full following the Lord: and if they fall off, be not troubled, let it be no
more than you made account of beforehand would be.

Hence the world is mistaken, who Use 2.
judge it stoutnesse, and stubbornness of spirit in Gods servants, that will
go on in the ways of godliness; they are a kind of inflexible people, there is
no persuading of them, there is no dealing with them: No, it is no
stubbornness; it is the choicenesse of their spirits, that makes them to do
as they do; you judge it stubbornness because you do not know the principles
upon which they go. I confess, if I see a man stand constantly in his way,
and will not be moved by the persuasions of others, if I do not understand
the reasons upon which he goes, I cannot but think it stoutnesse, and this is
your case; but if you did but know, what are their reasons, what are their
powerful motives, that draw them on in the ways of God, you would not have
such thoughts of them; Their spirits within them constrain them, as Elihu
says of himself in another case, Job 32. 18.

Take these convincements that it is not stubbornness, but choicenesse of
spirit, that carries them on so unmovable in their way.

1. In other things they are as yeeldable, as tractable, as easy to be
persuaded as any men; it is only in the matter of the Lord their God they are
thus. They can bear burdens upon their shoulders, and cry out, and resist as
little as any; if you will compel them to go a mile, they will be content, if
it may do good, to go two, yea, as far as the shoes of the preparation of the
Gospel of peace will carry them; who can bear wrongs and injuries from men
better than they? stubborne-spirited men cannot do thus.

2 Stubbornness is joined with desire of revenge; but in these dispositions,
there is all pity and compassion; they pray for those who do oppose them; when
they are reviled, they revile not again; If sometimes their corruptions should
be stirred, they are ashamed and confounded, in their own thoughts, for that
they have done, they mourn and lament in the bitterness of their spirits for
it.

Thirdly, stubborn dispositions are not contracted on a sudden; it is by
degrees, and continuance of time that 3
alters nature; but this disposition of being unmovable in Gods ways comes
many times even of a sudden, as soon as ever the heart is turned, which is an
evidence of a new principle put into it.

Fourthly, stubborn hearts do 4
not use to seek God to uphold them, to strengthen them, to bless them in that
way; they do not bless God for being with them, helping of them to persist in
their way, as Gods servants do; they go to God to get strength to enable them
to be immovable; they give God the glory of it, when they have found
themselves enabled to withstand temptations.

Fifthly, those who are of stubborn dispositions, do not use to be most 5
stubborn, when the heart is most broken with afflictions; stout hearts,
though in their prosperity are unyeeldable, there is no dealing with them then;
their hearts are presently up; if you move them to any thing they have no mind
to, their words are stout, their answers are sierce; but let afflictions come,
then, as Es. 29. 4. Their hearts are brought down, and they speak as one out
of the ground, and their speech is low, as one out of the dust; then they are
willing to hear what you say; As the young Gallant that Solomon speaks of in
Proverbs 5. there was no speaking to him in his prosperity; but when his flesh
and body were consumed, then he mournes at the last, and cries out, How have I
hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof! I have not obeyed the voice
of my Teachers, etc. But now, those that are godly, in their greatest
afflictions, when their hearts are most broken, when God humbles them most,
even then they are most settled and unmovable in that way they walked in
before, and it is then the greatest grief of their souls, that they walked no
closer with God in it, than they did. Have other thoughts then of Gods people,
than you have had; do not accuse that of stubbornness, that you do not
understand; think with your selves, that there may be something in their
spirits, more than you know of.

Let those who have this excellent choice spirit, encourage themselves in use 3.
this, that surely it will enable them to follow God fully; let them know,

First, that though they be weak, if 1
their spirits be right, if of the right kind, they shall certainly hold out.
That which Christ said for the comfort of the Church of Philadelphia, Revel. 3.
8, they may apply for theirs; Thou have a little strength, says Christ, and
have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name. A little strength, if it be
right, if it be the strength of a sound spirit, it will carry on the soul to
keep Gods Word, and enable, not to deny his Name.

Secondly, therefore is Christ filled with all fullness of all grace, that out 2
of his sulnesse thou may receive grace for grace; that Spirit by which he is
so plentifully anointed, it is for thee.

But I am afraid my spirit is not this choice spirit, and therefore I shall not
Object.
hold out in following the Lord.

First, is it a broken humble spirit in sense of thy weaknesses and Ans.
wants? 1


Secondly, that which thou do, though but weakly, is it upon divine 2
grounds, and have thou divine ends?

Thirdly, does the sight of thy weakness make thee cling, and cleave unto 3
Jesus Christ?

Fourthly, when thou losest God in following him, art thou sensible of 4
the want of his presence, and do thou never leave crying and seeking till
thou enjoyest him again? Certainly this is a true choice spirit, that will
carry on fully in following the Lord, when thousands of glorious Hypocrites
shall vanish and come to nothing.

If it be this choicenesse of spirit, Use 4.
that is the only thing that will fully carry after the Lord, then let us learn
to look to our spirits: Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it come
the issues of life: Do not so much complain of temptations, oppositions,
troubles you meet withal; but look to your spirits, and all is safe and well. If
there be the spirit of love and of a sound mind, there will be the spirit of
power; for these are joined together by the Apostle; there need not be 2 Timothy
1. 7.
the spirit of fear; for the spirit of a sound mind, and the spirit of fear,
are opposed one to another in the same place. But wherein should we look
Object. Ans.
to our spirits? First, take heed to your judgme^ts, keep your judgeme^ts clear
for God and his truth; as it is said, Es. 33 1
that wisdom and knowledge should Esaias 33. 6.
be the stability of those times; so, true wisdom and knowledge preserving the
judgments of men right and sound, are the stability of men's hearts. Take heed
your judgme^ts come not to be altered, to think otherwise of Gods ways, than
you did before, to have other opinions of the^. Though there may be many
weaknesses, yet if the judgment be kept right, all may do well; but if the
Leprosy be got into the head, then the soul is in a dangerous condition: as
Lev. 13. 44. when the Priest shall look upon a Leprous man, and see the plague
is got into his head, the Text says, he shall pronounce him utterly unclean,
for the Plague is in his head. The Priest was to pronounce none to be utterly
unclean, but such who had the plague in their heads.

Secondly, labor to keep conscience 2
clear, take heed of pollution there, take heed of a breach in thy spirit
there, for that will weaken it much: conscience is the strong Tower of thy
soul, if the Truth of God be got out there, the strength of the soul is gone.

Thirdly, labor to keep thy heart low and humble; when the flesh swells, 3
it cannot bear any hard thing upon it: though a member grows bigger when it
swells, yet it grows weaker; so it is with the soul.

Fourthly, labor to keep the spirit 4
heavenly; mixture of dross will weaken it, convince thy soul, that a little
of the Creature will serve turn, to carry thee through this thy Pilgrimage well
enough. One told a Philosopher; If you will be content to please Dionysius, you
need not feed upon green herbs: The Philosopher answers him, And if you will
be content to feed upon green herbs, you need not please Dionysius. So if men
would be content with a little in the World, to be in a low and mean
condition, they need not flatter; those things that draw others from following
after the Lord, would not move them at all.

Fifthly, labor to keep thy spirit in a 5
continual trembling frame, abiding in the fear of the Lord all the day long;
the fear of the Lord causes men to depart from evil; meditate the fear of
the Lord continually.

Lastly, keep thy spirit continually working; many things have much power in
them while they are in motion, but weak when the motion cease; sin is very
strong while it is in motion, but when affliction stops the motion, the truths
of God have more power over it; so grace, while it is acting, it is strong, but
if it grows dull, it grows weak, and is soon turned aside. Thus we looking
to our spirits, we shall be able to follow the Lord fully, and finish our
course in peace.

FINIS.

