A NEW DISCOVERY OF PERSONAL TITHES: OR The TENTH PART of Men's CLEAR GAINS
Proved due both in CONSCIENCE, and by the LAWS OF THIS KINGDOM BY C. BVRGES.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the entering in of Popes head Alley, out of Lumbard street. 1625

APPROBATIO.
HVnc Librum de DECIMIS PERSONALIBVS, a CORNELIO BVRGES Regiae Majestati a
Sacris editum, perlegit, expendit, and vt Pium, Orthodoxum, Vtilemque,
approbavit

TH: WORRAL, S S. Theologiae Professor, GEORGIO Domino Episcopo LONDIN. a
Sacris Domesticis, Librorumque Censor Deputatus.

READER, Some Aduertisements.
1. Read All, or read nothing.

2. Pardon me that I take not up that Principal Weapon of this Warfare: viz.
Ius Diuinum My Betters have often done that; but, Heu! (such is the hardness
of men's hearts,) with a Satis parum of fruit.

3. To that Tenet J subscribe affirmatively, ex animo: but with Cautions. 1.
Tithes (J say not, ought else) are due by Divine Right to Ministers of the
Gospel. 2. I never was, nor (J think) ever shall be of opinion, that, All
Tithes within such, or such a circuit of Ground, now by Positive Law made but
one Parish, are absolutely, and without al exception, due by Divine Right to
the Person of one single Incu^bent there, but to the Church, in whose name he
receives them.

4. The Reason of forbearing that Argument, he^^, is because Joam to deal with
men, that else would complain of Begging the Question, and that I dispute ex
non concessis. No disputation will yield good fruit, unless some Principles
undeniable on all bands be held, to cut off all Difficulties which all
Disputes will produce.

5. Though the Conclusion undertaken be properly mine, ^et the Premises be as
properly theirs with whom J dispute. Nothing therefore can be left to denial,
unless the Conclusion And who so denies that, denies obedience both to God
and Man. This (being proved) will take off the aspersion of Covetousness,
unjustly cast upon the Minister by the Mammonists; and justly cause it to fall
upon himself for denying payment of what the Laws both of God and Man have
made due to his Pastor; wherein he breaks six of the Ten Commandments at
once: viz. The second Commandment, by Sacrilege: the fourth Commandment, by
denying the means of sanctifying the Sabbath: the fifth Commandment, by
dishonoring his Spiritual Father: the sixth Commandment, by causing (as much
as in him lies) his Minister to perish for want of maintenance: the eighth
Commandment, by robbing the Minister of his just dues: and the ninth
Commandment, by bearing false witness against his neighbor; unjustly
accusing the Minister of Covetousness, which is indeed the proper sin of
himself.

6. Jf J be not so press; and Sylogisticall throughout, as some may expect,
consider that J intended this Work principally to Vulgar Capacities, whom it
chiefly concerns. And in dealing with such, the Palm is better the^ the Fist.

7. Jn stead of Incumbent, J often use the word, Pastor; not as better, simply,
or including therein an Episcopal Authority; but as more distinct, facile, and
plain to some Understandings that J write unto.

8. Jf the Distinction of Personal, and Prediall Tithes, seem heathen Greek,
take notice; That Predial Tithes are such as arise out of the Ground; as Corn,
Hay, increase of all kinds of Cattle, Fowls, Fruit, etc. Personal, are such as
grow out of the lawful gains gotten by any Art, Science, Manual Occupation,
Trade, Merchandise, etc. of any Person or Persons.

9. That J fall to Moo^ing, and exposition of S^^tutes, is not wholly
incongruous. The Subject is mixed. And though the Roof, and Battlements be of
Law, yet the Ground-cell, and Foundation is Divinity. No man can finish this
Pile, without some help from both Professions. The Lawyer cannot do it,
without encroachme^t upon our ground: Nor we, without the like upon His. He
has begun; therefore let him allow the same liberty to us, to build a
Buttresse or two upon his Freehold, the better to support our Building.

Why not? Have not Two Great Masters, one of Civil, the other of C^non Law,
amongst us, taken their pleasure in our Walks, and handled Subjects merely
Theological? Such Precedents will, J hope, make that pardonable to me, which
some think, is matter of Praise to them. Yes: (will you say,) if you come off
well. Go to, then. Consider, and Censure: -- Sed magis acri
Iudicio perpende, and si^b I vera videtur,
Deed manus: aut, si falsa est, accingere contra.


Some letters and points omitted, transplaced, ^t redundant; correct, or pardon.

A NEW DISCOVERY OF PERSONAL TITHES, Proving that EVERY Person within this
Kingdom using any Profession, Art, Science, Handy craft, Trade, Merchandising,
Buying, Selling, Bartering any Goods, Wares, or Commodities by which any
lawful Gains are made, is bound both in Conscience, and by the Laws of this
Realm, to pay the TENTH part of all his clear Gains (as a due debt) to his
Pastor, Unless some, special Custom, Composition, or Privilege of the Place
where he lives allowed by Law, exempt him therefrom.
BEfore I enter upon the proof of this Proposition, I crave leave to profess
3. things.

1. That my Purpose is not here to fall upon that Question, (for I make no
Question of it) Whether Tithes be perpetually due to the Ministers of the
Gospel by Divine Right: nor to fetch any Argument from that Tenet to prove the
point in hand.

2. That I intend not the Justification, in point of equity, of Persons laying
hold on the Customs, or Privileges of the Places where they live, to pay
little, or nothing: but to leave their practices and consciences to be
maintained by such as are better able to plead for them, and are willing to be
entertained in so doubtful a Cause.

3. That my chief aim in this discourse is (if it be possible) to pull sundry
honest Christians out of a damnable sin, whereof perhaps many of them never
dreamed; which knowing and considering of as I do, I hold my self bound in
conscience to make Discovery thereof unto them, least I be guilty of their
sin, and their blood.

The Arguments on which the Proposition undertaken is originally grounded, (as
I intend now to confirm it,) are drawn from these places of Scripture.

1. Corinthians. 9.13, 14. Do ye not know that they which minister about holy
things, live of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar,
are partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained that they which
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, make him that taught him
partaker of all his goods.

From these Scriptures I deduce these four vndenia^le Conclusions: viz.

1. That God has as carefully and firmly taken order for the maintenance of
the Ministers of the Gospel, as ever he did for the Priests and Levites in time
of the Law.

2. That their maintenance must arise from, and out of whatsoever the People
have by the blessing of God upon their labors in their several Callings.

3. That every man instructed must communicate to his Teacher; be the
instructed man's Calling what it will; and that what he communicates in this
kind is not a free Contribution, or voluntary bounty, but a due debt imposed
by God.

4. That God having thus provided for the maintenance of the Minister, Every
Pastor performing his duty, may justly demand a portion of every man's goods
whom he instructs; and that as his proper Portion appointed by God himself.

No intelligent man durst absolutely to deny any of these Conclusions, for
substance yet there are who make some Q^^stions, touching some pa^ticulars in
them, as they are laid for grounds proving a Tenth due from men using Trade,
etc.

The Questions are Two: viz.

1. Whether, if a Minister have a Competencie out of Praediall Tithes: that is,
of the Profits of the Ground; A Man that lines by Trading be bound of due to
give as much to his Minister, as if he had not such a Competencie from other
men? And

2. If every Tradesman must pay; then, whether he be bound to pay a Tenth?

These Questions will be best resolved to every man's capacity and
satisfaction, by propounding and answering the usual Plea's which men make
against my Position.

If a Minister (say some) have a Competent living out of Praediall Tithes in
kind, 1. Question, and Plea.
or by Composition, which he may recover by Law from such as deal in
Husbandry; then, such as live upon Trade, or other Bargaining, or Manu-facture
are not bound to allow him more then the Laws of the Kingdom enjoin; or at
least, not so much as otherwise they ought.

viz.

1. Because I desire to avoid wrangling and tedious disputes, and to convince
these men by their own Rules; I will, for the present, admit, that, if the
Minister have a Competencie arising from Tithes, Tradesmen are not bound to
make a larger allowance then the Laws of the Realm bind them unto.

2. Yet, so much as the Laws require of them they must pay, what ever his
maintenance arising from others amounts unto.

This last appears thus:

1. The Apostle says, Let him that is taught out Gal. 6.6.
of the Word, etc. that is, every He, none excepted; unless him that has
nothing to give. If others give, and I think by that to be excused, how do I
obey the Apostles precept which excludes none but them that have nothing? If a
Minister might not require maintenance of the Tradesman, because he has
enough from others in Praediall Tithes, it would follow, that if he had a
Temporal estate of his own sufficient to maintain him, he could not justly
demand any Tithes at all: which I think no man (well in his wits) would
affirm. For, Who goes a warfare at any time at his own charge? Who planteth
a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? 1. Cor. 9.7. Every man therefore that is
made partaker of the Ministers Spirituals, must render Carnals. verse 11.

2. Admit a Minister may by Law recover a maintenance without the Tenth of the
Tradesmans increase, yet it often happens that a good part of his means (if he
live in a Country Town especially) arises out of the small Tithes and
Oblations of the Poor who stand in daily need of Alms from him. In this
case, will any conscionable Christian think, that so long as such petty dues
may be by Law extorted from the poor, he should rather take this course to be
maintained, then call to rich Tradesmen for such a portion as may fill up that
Competencie which is made up by the Poor? Should not those Tradesmen hold
themselves bound to yield him so much as that he may rather be able to give to
the poor, then enforced to pull the poor man's bread out of his belly, to save
the rich man's purse?

3. Suppose such as use husbandry should think (as our Taske-masters would
persuade them) that in respect of the liberty of conscience and equity, they
are free by Gods word from paying Tithes, and so deny payment, as the Tradesman
does: how then shall the Minister have his Competencie raised?

I know to this it will be answered by a Tradesman: That the Parliament which
has absolute power to set a part what portion it will of all men's goods for
any public good use, has ordained that Hu^bandmen shall yield the Tenth of
their increase to the Minister for his service: and therefore if the Husbandman
deny payment, there is Law to compel him.

True. But of him that would have us plead Law to the Husbandman, I demand;
whether he do think that Law of the Kingdom to be equal, and such as the
Husbandman is bound in Conscience to obey, considering that He sees Tradesmen
(who sometimes with more ease get as much in one year, as he with all his
toil can gather in five,) take themselves not to be strictly bound to pay any
thing, (as Tradesmen,) but two pence at Easter? And if we urge them with
conscience, they retort a captious answer; Why should not the Magistrates
conscience (who has left us at liberty,) be as good as yours? One of these
two therefore, must be yielded and confessed; Either the Law of the Land is
just, and good; or else unjust, and without warrant from the Word of God.

The first part of the Dilemma.
First, If the Law be granted to be just, and good in this case, then it must
be confessed that there is both equity, and strength sufficient to bind the
Husbandman in conscience to submit unto it; and to assure the Minister that he
may with a good conscience press it upon him, if he refuse it. If there be
any equity in this Law (as doubtless there is) it consists in this, that
Spirituals do well deserve Carnals. And if this equity will hold to bind the
Husbandman when God blesses him with any increase, let any man show me a
reason, why he should pay so much of his Carnals for Spirituals; and not the
Tradesman whom God has blessed with Carnals as much, or more.

If it be said, the Husbandman has Tithes; and the Tradesman, none. This
alters not the case in respect of equity of maintaining the Pastor, in the
Tradesmans judgment: for he does not hold Tithes to be the proper constant
and fittest maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, by Divine Right; but
strikes in with some of the Papists, and Brownists and some others of late time
(who, herein, dance all in a ring;) and avouches that they are now due upon
another ground, namely by virtue of the Magistrates Law only. Therefore the
Tradesman cannot plead this as a reason why in equity the Husbandman should
pay so much, and himself so little.

The equity of the Magistrates Law in respect of the Husbandman is this. He
partakes of Gods blessing in Temporals, therefore it is just he should return
unto God a portion thereof for the maintenance of his Ministers who sow unto
him Spirituals. Now, this cannot but reach all sorts of men, so blessed, as
well as any. Unto all men it is commanded, Honor God with thy substance, and
with the first fruits of all thine increase. Prou. 3.9. If any think, this
held only in the time of the Law, or that it was spoken only to Husbandmen, let
him consider whether this agrees not in all points to the Apostles peremptory
command more then once pressed in the Gospel, and that not to Husbandmen, but
to Citizens and Tradesmen in the Cities of Corinth, and Galatia.

But the Tradesman will yet plead, that his Profession is Casual, and he often
loses more then he gets? Will the Minister bear a part in his losses?

I answer that this Plea becomes none but an earthworme who makes Mammon his
God.

For, 1. So does the Husbandman lose too, and yet pays Tithes of what
remains: which if he should not do, the Minister might starve for want of a
maintenance justly due unto him by the Tradesmans Rule. So courteous some of
out hot Professors are to their Pastors whom they admire most.

2. When the Tradesman has no increase, he is not bound to pay increase: yet
is he still (if he be able) bound to help maintain his Minister, if he be in
want. This he is tied unto by the Rule of Charity.

3. The Minister when he calls for his gains, does not call for them in the
way of Partner-ship; but as a due for Spirituals, enjoined by Law according to
the Word. Although the Law has set out no allowance of any thing but of
increase, yet the Minister takes no less pains when the Tradesman loses,
then when he gains. And will the bountiful Tradesma^ think it equity, not
only (in that case) to let the Minister work for nothing; but require him to
pay back part of his just dues formerly received; or else resolve not to pay
him of his gains at all: If the Tradesman sink follow in his estate that he
cannot subsist, the Minister (I deny not) if he be able, is bound to help him;
or otherwise, to stir up others to supply the necessities of their decayed
Brother.

4. The Minister has warrant from the word to partake of his increase: but the
Tradesman has no warrant from God o^ man to indent with his Pastor to bear
part of his losses, if he will receive a part of his gains. The labourer is
worthy of his hire. And Spirituals deserve Carnals whether a man be a gainer or
not. And he that is of a contrary opinion, I know not wherein (unless in
outward profession, which makes the matter worse,) he differs from a Gadarine
who loves a good heard of swine better then Christ. If they loose their swine,
let Christ go seek his maintenance where he can get it.

The second part of the former Dilemma.
Secondly, If the Laws of the Kingdom; enacted by the King and the whole Body
of the Kingdom, be not just and agreeable to the Word in binding the
Husbandman to payment of Tithes, How can a Minister with a good conscience lay
hold on it for his maintenance from the Husb^ndman, so as not to need the
Tradesmans help? How can the Tradesmen stand still and look on their poor
Brother too heavy laden, and they ( Pharisee like) not stoop to ease him with
one of their fingers? How can they advise, and put their Minister to sue
Husbandmen for Tithes, so as to carue out his whole maintenance out of their
estates, and the mean while themselves suppose they are not in justice bound
to do any thing; or not to pay in proportion half so much as the others: and
that which they do, must be proclaimed and accounted, not a due, or just
payment, b^^ a free Contributio^, a gift, a benevolence which they hold
themselves no way bound unto? This is neither agreeable to Religion, nor
conscience, nor Law, nor humanity: and it would better befit an Atheist, then
a Christian.

Thus of the first maine Plea which Tradesmen urge to prove the^selus not bound
to pay any thing (above their 2. d.) for their gains in Trading as a due,
where the Pastor has a maintenance out of other men's Pradiall Tithes.

2. Question and Plea.
But now, suppose the Tradesman co^uinced that he must pay proportionably to
others; yet How can it be proved to him who denies Tithes to be now due by
Divine Right, that he is bound in conscience to pay the Tenth part of all his
clear gains?

He will plead, I give as much and more then the Law enioyneth: as much as I am
well able to spare: more then many, worth five of me, do allow: as much as I
suppose my self bound in conscience to give: and more then my Pastor can in
strictness require, or recover.

a sure Rule. The Rule in this particular, is either the express Word of God;
or else the Established Law of the Kingdom wherein a man lives, to which (if
it contradict not the Divine Law of God himself,) every person is bound to
conform, 1. Pet. 2.13.
as unto the Lord, and that under pain of damnation. Rom 13.2.
He that lives in a well governed State must not walk by the guide of his
own fancy, and conceit, or by the Opinions of some Good men, or by the
practice of such as are behind him in estate, and eminent for profession of
Religion: but he must keep to his Rule, or he damnably sins. A good
conscience, finding such controversy about the Ministers Portion, will sooner
suspect his own heart of covetousness, then his Pastors; especially if the
Pastor be one that performs his duty. Nor will he take liberty to suspend
his payment till the Title be cleared: but knowing something he must do, (yet
ignorant, how much;) he will rather give too much, then too little, for fear
of ensnaring his conscience. And, if there be any Rule, he will follow it to
an hair, what ever it cost him, rather then hazard the peace of his heart.

Suppose a man to be perplexed in conscience about this point. He sees a
Portion of all his goods is due by Gods Command; nor can he have any color of
Reason, to deny, or euade it. Yet, for the definite Quantity he can find no
order, taken in all the New Testament, whether it be there to be found, or
not. This he knows; Tithes were once paid not only to Leui, but by Leui in
the loins of Abraham and Jacob. Heb. 7.9, 10. Genesis ^8.22.
And if God had not commanded this as a duty: yet those holy Patriarchs
thought it their duty to do as much voluntarily, for the blessings of God
received. Those Tithes had nothing to do with Leuies Priesthood, no reference
to it, no dependence on it. Thence a tender conscience may justly thus reason
the case. Though some men hold Tithes to be no longer due then Leuies
Priesthood endured, and peremptorily deny that before Leui any Tithes were paid
by command from God; yet I fi^^e they were paid, and accepted: Since men
cannot agree touching every man's particular duty herein, and that Holy men
(before Leui) though they had (as it seems to me) no express Rule did pay the
Tenth of all; whether shall I fly in this my distress to pacify and settle
my Conscience for time past, and to guide it safely for time to come? If there
were from the beginning no particular diu ne Rule, nor at this present there
were any such, for the Quantity due; yet if I were left to mine own
discretion, can I have better Presidents then two such Patriarcks before the
Leuiticall Law? Or may I safely, (notwithstanding those examples, and the
judgment of the whole Church of Christ for above a thousand years,) govern
my self by the Laws of the State in which I live?

I ask now, in the Name of God, how I, or any Man else should satisfy and
resolve this man's Conscience in such a perplexity? Will you have me to say
unto him, as the bloody Priests to Judas; What is that to us? Look thou to
that? Shall I tell him, You were best keep your money till you see all men
agree herein among themselves; when he is tortured in soul out of fear he
has detained it too long already? Or shall I bid him use his own discretion,
and to give what he thinks in Conscience he is well able to spare, and ought
to give? This is cold comfort: poor relief. He is almost at his wits end for
trusting so much to his own discretion already. This is the ground of his
trouble, that he has followed his own corrupt heart, and not any certain
and infallible Rule. And if a Tenth prove due by any Law sufficient to bind
him, See the Advertisement to the Reader Number. 5.
he shall but encourage him to steal, yea to commit Sacrilege, and many other
sins of a high nature who shall bid him give only that which he is well able
to spare; though less then a Tenth.

The Law of God has made something a debt to the Minister; and, if this Man
has not fully paid that due, it is not what he is well able to do, that shall
always serve his turn before God, when he will take upon him to be the sole
Judge to himself. Debts must be paid, though the Debtor will not confess
himself well able to spare them. And to decide, what he is well able to
spare, will be a work as difficult as the other.

None of all these ways then will prove sufficient to direct a doubtful and
distressed Conscience. Nor do I know any in the World soundly to resolve, and
guide that Conscience, but one of these two: viz. I must bid him either,

1. Look into the Scriptures, and search what has bin paid of old by the
People of God, before the Leuiticall Priesthood; and rather then ensnare thy
self, follow those Examples till it be made clear unto thee by sure Grounds
that those Payments were neither enjoined; nor, in equity, due; nor that any
in Conscience is bound now to do the like. or,

2. Have recourse to the established Laws of the whole State and Kingdom
wherein thou live, (who have absolute power to appoint and set out what
Portion they please of every man's estate for any Public Use, and every one is
bound in Conscience to render the same): And look what the Laws (thus
ratified) enjoin, that thou must do, or be a Rebel.

Some Mammonist, perhaps, suspecting whether he may be drawn by yielding that
to be a Due, which the Law of the Kingdom has settled upon the Minister, would
be ready to say; I promise you, I doubt whether the Magistrate has Power to
enjoin Payment of Tithes, seeing Good Men, and Great Clerks hold Tithes to be
so Jewish, and Leuiticall that they were to be abolished together with the
Ceremonial Law; and that the Magistrate should appoint some other Maintenance.
Now welfare Brownist. What if in the Law, Tithes were Levites Maintenance, may
not that Maintenance be made over to another Order of Ministry, when Leui was
degraded? May not money once offered at the shrine of some Popish Saint, never
be lawfully appointed or employed to any other use? If this were sound
Divinity, many of those ill-willers to Tithes should be much more afraid how
they touch any money, but that which comes new from the Mint, least (forsooth)
it be such as formerly has been offered to some Roman Idol, and so it should
pollute them to use it, or touch it. But concerning any thing coming toward
them, they ask no Question, for Conscience sake: therefore this, in their
opinion (though the same with the other,) shall pass for a Toy.

But touching Tithes which is a sweet morsel that they are loath to part with:
Is there any thing in the substance or nature of Tithes that Legally typified
Christ? If there be, name it, and prove it, and you say somewhat. Otherwise,
All you could infer from that absurd grant of Tithes to be solely and
properly Leuiticall Maintenance, would amount but to this Conclusion; Tithes
given to Leui for serving at the Altar, may not by any Power of the Magistrate
be still continued to Maintain a Leuiticall Priesthood.

Howbeit, God, though he has dismissed Leui, and repealed that Law of Tithes
due to Leui; yet having appointed, that (as they that served at the Altar
should live of the Altar, so) they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel; A Godly State (not taking upon them to be wiser then He himself in
the old Testament: or his Apostle Saint Paul in the New) will thus resolve: We
cannot possibly appoint sitter Maintenance (all inconveniences considered) for
Ministers now, then God did of old for the Levites; therefore we will ordain
the same Quantity shall now be paid out of every man's estate to the
Ministers of the Gospel, whose Ministry being more excellent, their allowance
should not in equity be less then that of Leui.

If it were a good Argument to prove Tithes not lawful or fit to be now paid,
because once employed to maintain Levites; It must be pressed, much rather,
upon the Magistrate, that he is bound in Conscience to pull down all Churches,
once superstitiously prostituted to Popish Idolatry, not suffering them to be
now used for the true worship of God. But he that should urge this, would
manifestly declare to all the World his just Title to Bedlam.

It may be, Some are of opinion that Christians are now at liberty from such
Impositions, so as a man may use his own discretion, and give what he thinks
fit. But to this something has been said before, to which now I add; that
this were the high way to become sons of Belial indeed. We know how it went
with Israel when there was no King among them, and every man did as it seemed
good in his own eyes. This indeed is that many Professors would have:
Liberty, Liberty. Let them be noted for bountiful; but not bound to be just.
What would become of Ministers, (shall I say, nay), of themselves, if this gap
should be opened to the World that Christians may do as themselves see good?
Who would not abuse his liberty as an occasion to the flesh?

What though a few Honest men would pay their Dues justly, although no Law of
man should be made: must their Honesty make the World of opinion that they
ought not to be bound to a Law? Would not every man plead the like; and so all
would come soon to a confusion? Can any of those Honest Men prove that the
Magistrate has no Power to rule them herein? Should not they rather for
examples sake (though they might plead freedom) be first in yielding obedience
to Laws, even for their sakes who would never do justly without Laws to
enforce them?

Has God bounded out all men's estates by wholesome Laws; and has he left
only Ministers to Peoples Discretion and good Pleasure, so as the Magistrate
may not appoint them a certain Portion, as to his Wisdom shall seem most
convenient, and agreeable to the Laws of God himself? Oh Sons of Belial
that thus Prostitute Religion to palliate their covetousness? The Covetous
Earth-worme would laugh in his sleeue to see his elbow vnderlaid with such a
Cushion. The Licentious Gallant would soon bring the Minister to his beck,
and force him, Fidler-like, to play nothing but what He, and his lewd
companions should please to call for; or make Him to beg his bread from Door
to Door. And are these the best Rules our best Zealots would walk by? Then,
Who would not pray; God defend me from the Power, and Courtesy of all such
Professors? Should not Papists (if this were allowed) have just cause to apply
unto us that bitter Taunt, Paternoster set up Churches, and Our Father pulls
them down?

The Law of the Kingdom, then, is the only sure Refuge of all that deny Tithes
to be a Moral Commandment. This is the only Rule they have in all other
Reformed Churches and States (having Power to make Laws) throughout
Christendom.

Admit this for this time to be a sufficient Rule; and it must be granted
that, The Laws of this Kingdom established in Parliament do bind men both
for Quantity and Quality of the Ministers Maintenance: And he that does not
strictly observe it, can never have a good Conscience, because he swerues from
the Rule of his own choosing. Whatsoever is of force as a Rule of Faith to
justify the Conscience walking by it, is also sufficient to bind the
Conscience; and to condemn him of sin that digresseth from it.

Let the Tradesman wrangle and wriggle till he be weary, this Rope will hold
him. Now grant me this, and grant all I undertook to prove: viz. that
Every Person within this Kingdom (not living in Places Privileged) is bound
to pay the Tenth of all his clear Gains to his Minister. For, this is the Law
of this Kingdom enacted in the 2. and 3. years of Edward the sixth, cap. 13.
Entitled, An Act for the true Payment of Tithes. In which Statute is ordained
as follows.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Person
exercising Merchandises, Bargaining and Selling, Clothing, Handy-craft, or
other Art or Faculty, being such kind of Persons, and in such kind of Places as
heretofore within these 40. years have accustomably used to pay, such
Personal Tithes, or of right ought to pay, other then such as be Common day
Laborers, shall yearly at or before the Feast of Easter, pay for his
Personal Tithes the Tenth part of his clear Gains; his charges and expenses
according to his estate, condition or degree to be therein abated, allowed, and
deducted.

To this it will be presently objected, Do you not mark that clause, that men
shall pay Personal Tithes in such kind of places as heretofore within these
40. years they have accustomably used to pay such Personal Tithes?

Answer. I do: This is explicated.
and pray you to observe that which follows: viz. or of Right ought to pay.

Some, perhaps, are in hope this will prove such a Gordian knot, as will never
be untied. But to put them by that vain shift, let them know that this will
easily be expounded (to the satisfaction of such as desire the truth may
appear;) partly by Other Parts of the same Statute; and partly by the Maine
End and Scope of the Whole.

1. 1. By other parts of the Statute.
By other branches of the Statute it will appear who they be that (not having
paid Personal Tithes, yet (of Right out to pay.

In the next Fraction after that branch of the Statute here alleged, it is
said; Provided always and be it enacted that in all such places where
Handycrafts-men have used to pay their Tenthes within these 40. years, the
same custom of payment of Tithes to be observed and to continue. And a little
after: Provided that this Act shall not extend to any Parish which stands upon
and toward the Sea coasts, the Commodities and occupying whereof consists
chiefly in fishing, and have by reason thereof used to satisfy their Tithes by
Fish but that all and every such Parish and Parishes shall hereafter pay their
Tithes according to the laudable customs as they have heretofore of ancient
time within these 40. years used and accustomed, etc.

And again: Provided always and be it enacted that this Act or any thing
therein contained shall not extend in any wise to the Inhabitants of the City
of London, and Canterbury, and the Suburbs of the same: ne to any other Town
or Places that have used to pay their Tithes by their houses, otherwise then
they ought or should have done before the making of this Act. Lastly, there is
an exception of the Tith of Marriage goods in Wales.

Now these Exceptions do abundantly expound that clause who they are, that in
right ought not to pay: namely, All Handy-crafts men that paid less then the
Tenth by the space of 40. years before the Statute: All living upon Fishing:
All in London, Canterbury, and other Places having a custom to pay a rate by
their houses: and Those of Wales in that one Particular.

Therefore it is evident that All others, though they have not paid by 40.
years before that Act, yet in right ought to pay. For, why else should so many
be exempted by Name, if the purpose of the Statute were not to bind all others
not so exempted?

2. By the maine Scope and End of the Statute.
2. This appears yet more clearly by the Maine Scope and End of the Statute,
as is manifest to every man (though no Lawyer) that shall read and observe it
but with one of his Eyes.

The Intent of a Law, (say our Great Masters of the Law) is best discerned by
the P^^^ce^ unto ^ir. The Preface of this Statute has reference to Two other
Statutes, one made in 27. Hen. 8. the other in 32. Hen. 8. to the same purpose:
and it says, that diverse things are needful to be added to those other
Statutes, that Tithes may be truly paid according to the mind of the
Lawmakers, for which purpose this last Act was made. We must then consider:
1. What was enacted: 2. What was defective in those former Statutes: 3. What
here is supplied.

1. 1. What was enacted.
In the former Statute of 27. Hen. 8. it was resolved that as well Personal as
Praediall Tithes were due unto God and Holy Church: and therefore enacted that
every subject should pay them according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and
Ordinances of the Church of England, and after the laudable vsages and customs
of the place where he dwells. The Statute of 32. Hen. 8. was principally
intended both to give life to the former Statute, and also to enable Laymen
enjoying Tithes to recover them by Law, which, before they could not.

2. What was defective.
2. Neither of those Statutes did particularly decree what Praedial Tithes
should be due; from what Ground: and in what Quantity in some Grounds: what
Customs should hold, and what not: What Places and Persons should allow
Personal Tithes, and what not: nor how much should be due, where no Custom,
Composition real, or other sufficient Priuiledge^ ^^kes place.

3. All these Defects are supplied in this Statute of Edw. the 6. For, (passing
over the supplies touching P^aediall Tithes) we may find these supplies for
Personal Tithes.

1. Whereas the former Statutes spoke of them only in Gross; This declares of
what in particular they shall arise.

2. Whereas the former did not express the just Quantity exactly; This says,
the Tenth of clear gains.

3. 3. What is supplied.
Whereas the former did speak of Customs ^im g^^^^ally; This shows where,
and in what Places and to what Quantity Custom sh^l prevail to paying less
then a Tenth, and in what not.

This Statute agrees to the best English Canon Law made and established for
declaring, and paying of Tithes both Praedial and Personal, above 320. years
sithence: Only this Statute of Edw. gives more to Custom, and to some Persons,
then that ancient Law does. Now, it is granted that so much of the Canon Law as
is not against some Statute in force, is still good Law. In the particular of
Tithes, it is ratified by the Laws of the Kingdom. What therefore the Statute
of Edward the sixth has not cut off from that old Constitution, it has
established for Law.

To make this clear to every eye, do but consider these things: viz.

1. That the Statute of Edward 6. in the beginning says thus; Be it ordained
and enacted by the King, etc. that the said Acts made in the 27. and 32. years
of the reign of the late King Henry the 8. concerning true payment of Tithes,
and every article and branch therein contained, shall abide and stand in their
full strength and virtue. Therefore what ever was enjoined in those former
Statutes, is by this Statute established to continue in full force.

2. Consider that the Statute of 27. Hen. 8. does in express terms ordain
payment as well of Personal as Praedial Tithes according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws and Ordinances of the Church of England and after the Laudable vsages and
customs of each Parish. And in that other Statute of 32. Hen. 8. the same was
again enjoined, still having reference for kind and Quantity to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, and lawful Customs. Therefore what ever was then
payable by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Kingdom, (unless in some
Pedulia^s where Customs laudable and lawful had taken root) before that time
in use, was established by those Statutes, and so reestablished by the Statute
of Edward the sixth, to remain in force as the Law of the Realm to every
Place (...) (...) Eccles^^sti^^^ (...) this, (as it is to be seen in
^INDVVOOD: Prouinc: Constitut: tit: de Doc: c. Quon: Prop:) that Statuimus
etiam quod Dec^mae personales soluantur de artisicibus, and Mercatoribus,
sc^licet de ^uc^o negotiationis. Similiter de carpentari^s, fabris, cem^tariis,
textoribus, pandoxatricibus, and omnibus a^ijs stipendariis: vt videlicet dent
Decimas de st^pendi^s s^is, nisi stipendarii i^si aliquid ^ertum velint dare ^d
opus, vel ad lumen Ecclesiae, si Rectori ipsius Ecclesiae placuerit.
Personal Tithes should be paid from Artificers, and Tradesmens gain of
Trading. And so from Carpenters, Smiths, Plaisterers, Weaners, Bruers and all
other Laborers who should all pay the Tenth of their Wages. This Canon was
made at a Convocation Wolden at London in 23. Edward: 1. And is rightly
reaconed, by Mr. Seldom, the ^hiefest of the English Canon Laws. It is the
Principal Rule and Law for sundry Tithes, therein (and no where else)
expressed, which has force to this Day from the Statutes aforesaid, as daily
experience shows.

From the Premises these Conclusions do vndenyably issue.

History of Tithes. cap. 8. page, 232.
1. That in all Places Personal Tithes of right ought to be paid where any Laws
enacted within 40. years before the Statute of Edward the sixth has
commanded their Payment.

2. That all Personal Tithes decreed to be paid in those two Statutes of Hen.
8. are still due of right; both because they were made within 16. years before
that of Edward 6. and because this last Statute does ratify those, and every
branch of them.

3. That all Personal Tithes that of right ought to be paid by the space of
24. years before either of those Statutes of Hen. 8. are still due; because
the Statutes of Hen. 8. were made but 16. years at most before that of Edward
6. and this Statute extends to 40. years backe-ward.

4. That all Personal Tithes due by the old Canon before mentioned, are due by
the Laws of this Realm: forasmuch as the Statutes of Hen. 8. does ratify
that Canon, and the Statute of Edward 6. does ratify those Statutes, except
before excepted.

5. That therefore the Statute of Edward: 6. (giving force to the old Law which
enjoined the payment of Personal Tithes,) does intend and command that the
Tenth part of every man's clear Gains (except such as are expressly excepted
in the said Statute,) should be paid by every man to his Minister.

6. That it is not needful for the Minister to prove (if he will recover or
demand Personal Tithes where they were never paid,) that such Tithes have
been constantly, or at all paid in the Place where he lives, by the space of
40. years before the Statute; since the Statute makes them due, where, of
right they ought to be paid.

Though the Right be clear enough; yet to make all men see it with both eyes
without Spectacles, I will reduce all that has been spoken to prove the right
of Personal Tithes, into form, thus.

There Personal Tithe^ of right ought to be paid by virtue of the Statute of
Edward the sixth, where there was any right to them within 40. years before
that Statute, although they were not actuacty paid. But

There was in all places a right unto Personal Tithes by 40. years before that
Statute, though they were not actually paid. Therefore in all Places (not
expressly excepted in the Statute of Edward the sixth) Personal Tithe^ ought
still to be paid though it cannot be proved that they were actually paid in
all that time. The Minor is proved, thus.

There must needs be a Right to pay Personal Tithes, where any Statutes still
in force, enacted within 40. years before that Statute of Edward, enjoin the
payment of Personal Tithes. But

Both those Statutes of Hen. 2. enjoined the payment of Personal Tithes, and
were enacted within 40. years of that last Statute, and are still in force:
Therefore Personal Tithes, that is, the Tenth of every man's clear gains, are
still due and of right ought to be paid by all Persons, and in all places not
expressly exempted by Statute, though it cannot be proved that they were ever
actually paid.

If any should say; Where the Custom of the Place has been to pay nothing,
nothing is due. This will appear to be a mere Cauil, by that one Maxim
known to Al of any experience or observation. De non Soluendis de cimis non
valet consuetudo. Custom of paying nothing, is worth nothing. The reason given
by Lawyers is, iuri naturae and diuino contraria est. Because it is contrary
both to the Law of nature, and God himself. The Law in such a case is this;
Where men pay no Tithes at all of any thing made Tithable by any Law, there
Tithes (unless some special Privilege allowed by Law be pleaded and proved)
must be paid to the utmost extent that any Law has decreed such Tithes to be
paid in any place. So then, He that confesses he never paid any thing, nor
that it has been the Custom of the Place where he lives so to do, makes
himself liable to pay the full Tenth.

Least any man should suspect me of ignorance, or partiality in this point,
because I seem out of my element: I will produce Mr. Seldom (none of the best
Proctors for us Tithing-men, but One with whom we poor Vicars are daily
nosed,) to brush off this aspersion, if any be cast on me.

He, in his History of Tithes, Cap. 20. showing that Mortuaries first became
due upon the general presumption of every man's negligence in paying his
Personal Tithes in his life time, (for which cause a Mortuary was given in lieu
of such Tithes unpaid at death:) he alleges a Case adjudged in it. Ed^^rd,
3^ wherein the Person of Whitwell being sped for taking away a Horse for a
Mortuary at the death of one of his Parish, according to the ancient Custom of
the Land and Holy Church, was acquitted against the Plaintiff, and his Act
just f^^^ to be agreeable to the Law.

This he urges to prove, that Custom has ever been held as Law, even for
such Personal Tithes. But he explaineth himself thus; Where any Statute has
made a discharge, or Prescription, or Custom has settled a Modus, de cimandi
or certain Quantity payable, though never so little, for the Tith, there, by
the Laws of the Kingdom, the Owner is not bound to pay other Tith then the
Statute, or Custom, or Prescription binds him to. Which yet must be so
understood in the Case of Laymen, that Custom or Prescription founded in
their Possessions as Lay, cannot wholly discharge the Tith, or be De non
decimando, but may well be De modo only. Otherwise is it in the case of
Spiritual Persons, that may by the Common Law be by Prescription wholly
discharged, and prescribe De non decimando. AND THIS IS REGVLARLY CLEAR LAW.
Thus, that Master of the Law.

This considered, does fully pluck up another objection by the roots which
any wrangler might make from those Phrases in the Statutes of Henry the 8.
which say, men shall pay their Tithes according to the laudable and lawful
vsages and customs of the Places wherein they live. Those Customs are neither
laudable, nor lawful which are pleaded for paying of nothing. It is not said
that where any Custom has been to pay nothing, nothing shall be paid: but,
men shall pay their Tithes according to the laudable vsages and customs of
each place where they live. Therefore it must be understood of Customs by
which men do Pay something: All being tied to Pay; and all Customs of paying
noth^ng being utterly void. To say, that Law, which Commands some men to pay,
according to Custom does show the same men to plead Custom for paying
nothing, is a Contradiction very ridiculous.

But yet some may say: If the Law be so firm for Personal Tithes, How is it
that Ministers call not, for them, and that they do not recover them by Law?

To this I may answer with Grief. That Law which has made them due, has
given us power enough to recover them of every man that is Honest, and makes
conscience not to lie, or deceive; but it has not given us strength sufficient
to recover them if they be denied by a Knave: for it debarreth us of the
Principal and indeed the only means of finding out what every dishonest man's
gains are: namely, the Oath of the party that is to pay them.

The Makers of this Law supposing Tradesmen bred in Towns to have more
Giui^^^^ then others, and presuming of their honesty and conscionablenesse to
pay their dues to the Minister, without suites in Law; did purposely provide
that the Tradesman should not be forced to discover his Estate to the World so
often as otherwise (in likelihood) he should be required; which might prove
much to his prejudice. I^ was their Indulgence to enjoin the duty without
binding him to this extremity: but it was their purpose to tie his conscience
the more to do justly herein, as he will answer the contrary at his peril to
God, to whom they leave him for punishment. Else why should they make such a
law to declare what was due, and command the payment at Easter.

He that shall say, I am not bound by Law, where the Law has omitted any one
way to compel me, does most impiously abuse the Lenity of the Magistrate,
and believes the Magistrate does never command till he smite. In Divinity it is
no better then Heresy, (if it be stood unto;) and in Morality, no better then
sowing the seeds of Sedition and cursed Rebellion, to hold, That no Law has
any force to bind, but where it gives power to punish: And that the
Magistrates word shall be void, where his sword does not follow at the heels:
nor ought to be longer obeyed, then he is fighting, or putting weapons into
other men's hands. It is a thousand pitties they should want blows who will do
nothing without them. When the Apostle says, The Law was not made for the
righteous, but for the Lawless, and disobedient; 1 Timothy 1.6.
he meant, (as I think you will grant,) that the curse and punishment of the
Law was not intended to the righteous, because he would observe it so
carefully, that there should be no need of Compulsories to be served upon Him.
But does the Apostle thereby exclude him from the commandment and Rule of the
Law? Who but an Epicure, or Madman would make such a Gloss? When God gave
authority to the Husband to command his Wife in lawful things; but not to
beat her: shall the Wife shake off the yoke of obedience which is imposed by
the Husband; and say, God never meant that Law by which my Husband seeks to
command me, should bind me; because he has denied him power, to compel me
by stripes?

What though the Statute deny us the oath of the Party, yet it commands payment
at Ea^ter, in express terms: and gives power to sue him and to examine him by
all other lawful and reasonable means: so as he shall be compelled to speak
truth, or falsehood. The Ordinary may compel him to say what he has gained,
though he cannot compel him to swear. This indeed makes some difference when
a man is to deal with a false Knave: but none at all when he is to deal with
honest conscientious men. And if the Statute had given us the Oath of the
Party; unless we could get another Statute enacted, not only to enjoin, but
to make all men to be Honest; our case would be but little yea very little
b^tter then it is. I need say no more to Reasonable men: yet one thing more,
which makes (...) yet ^^^e ^^ow, that the Statute does bind all men to ^^^y
Personal ^^thus, thou (...) Oath of the Party. The Statute does not only give
power to the Ordinary to examine a Tradesman, as aforesaid; but also to order
him according to what the party shall confess, or can be otherwise proved, (as
in Predial Tithes,) or else to excommunicate him for his contumacy; and
afterward, to require a Writ out of Chancery De Excommunicato capiendo, if the
Party shall continue his contempt for the space of forty Days.

But, what if it should be granted that Tradesmen are not precisely and
formally bound by that Statute, as Husbandmen are? What would they gain to
justify themselves in point of Equity and Conscience? Let them suppose
themselves free from the Law in the strictness and rigor thereof; yet they
must confess the Husbandman to be absolutely bound to a Tenth. Nor will any
but Brownists and Rebels deny the Power of the Parliament to appoint that
Quantity. Now the Law binding the Husbandman, does as firmly, in equity
bind Tradesmen to the same proportion, if they will not hold themselves
Lawless, but acknowledge themselves bound to that Law which binds the rest
of their Brethren.

There be two things that bind to a duty: Justice, and Equity the ground of
Justice. In Justice (as it is strictly taken) he only is bound on whom the Law
established does absolutely, directly, and expressly take hold, and commands
him formally. But in Equity, which is the ground of Law, every man living in
the same State is truly bound also, to whom the same Equity on which the Law
enacted was built, equally extends.

To shut up all. From all that has been said, I may justly draw four
Conclusions more.

1. Whosoever gains by Trade, bargaining, or other lawful means, being not
exempted as aforesaid, must pay the Tenth of his clear gains, or he sins
against the laws of this Land.

2. Whosoever in this case w^l^^ll^ v^olateth the laws of this Realm, is a
double sinner against the law of God: for he breaks that Commandment, Th^n
shall not Steal: and commits Sacrilege by withholding that which lawful
Authority has lawfully consecrated to God.

3. Although a man employ part of his stock in Husbandry; yet is he bound to
pay the Tith of his Gains by Trading (if he use any) as well as if he paid no
Pradial Tithes at all.

4. They who being informed of this Duty, and con^inced in their judgment
thereof, are bound to Restitution (unless their Pastors remit it) of all they
have hitherto wrongfully detained so near, and as full as they are able.
Otherwise, they wickedly; rob the Minister, and live in a damnable sin
without repentance: nor can they in such a condition expect any thing from God
but wrath and a curse upon them and theirs, let their Profession and
forwardness in other duties of Religion be what it will.

I expect many to cry out upon this, as strange and hard Doctrine: and to say,
If we should pay all Arrerages, we should part, it may be, with half our
estates. But then I must Answer: to the first part, if it be true, (as you
see it is;) the strangeness of it must not make any man bold to kick against
the Pricks. And to the latter, I say.

1. It is unlikely and improbable that the Tenth part of a man's clear gains
should be half his estate both of Stock and Gains.

2. Admit it were so, yet if what thou deteinest be none of thine, it will make
a greater hole in thy conscience, then it can in thine estate by parting with
it. The Usurer and the Thief have as good a Plea as this against Restitution.

3. Zacheus did as much, and our Savior approved it as one sign that proved
him A son of Abraham: Grace will make men just; though it should make them as
poor as Lazarus. Restitution with an ouer-plus, if they be able, shall be unto
them, as any other duty enjoined by God.

4. If God have blown upon thy dishonest gain; and made thee unable to
Restitution; then behold his hand; humble thy self even unto Hell for this
sin; and desire of God, one way or other to repair the wrongs, that cannot
be repaired by thy self. And in this case, he were an hard and most
unconscionable Minister that should require (...).

Let not Restitution then be held an unjust and cruel imposition. And for
payment of Tithes for time to come, stick not at it seeing thou now see it
to be thy duty: do it cheerfully, least God account it as not done at all.

Consider (besides all the former discourse) this one thing: He that willingly
and justly pays the Ministers Portion has a more special promise of God to
thrive in his Calling, then any man has, for performance of any one other
particular duty whatsoever. The Promise I mean is in Malachy 3.10, 11, 12.
and it is this; Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse that there may
be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of H^sts, if
I will not open you the windows of heaven, and power you out a blessing, that
there shall not be room enough to receive it.

And I will rebuke the deuourer for your sake, and he shall not destroy the
fruit of your ground, neither shall your v^ne cast her fruit before the time in
the field, says the Lord of Hosts. And all nations shall call you blessed: for
ye shall be a delight some land, etc.

Now he that does not obey this iniunction, (at least so far as now by Law
he is tied) does, thereby proclaim that he does not believe this promise: He
says in his heart that in this point God is a Liar, and it is in vain to
serve him.

One Scruple yet is behind. Some may s^y; It may be my Minister is unable,
unfaithful, or scandalous: must he have Tenths too?

Though such a person deserve them not, yet being actually possessed of the
Church (and presumed in Law to be such as he ought) he may claim them as
due in the right of the Church, until Authority shall take notice of his
demerit, and discharge the Church of such a burden.

So then; He that sought to wind himself out of the brakes of Tithes due by
Divine Right, supposing it better to stand to the Magistrates Discretion, may
see what a fine Snare he has made for himself.

He, must not hear of Tithes due by the Old Title. The Magistrate must give
him his Rule. Well. A Law is now established. This Law binds every man to give
the Tenth of his clear Gains to his Minister. It makes no exemption of Bad
Ministers. Therefore The Tradesman is bound in Conscience and by Law to pay
Tithes to his Minister be he Good or bad: or his own Rule will cast him for a
Sinner.

If I owe money to a Drunkard, I may not justify the deteining of it, when it
was due, because I know he will abuse it to more drunkenness, riot, and other
sins against God. I may labor his Reformation by the Magistrate, but may not
deny him his dues. His disorder cannot warrant me to be unjust. The Law for
Tithes makes them as due to the Minister, as Law can make them: and supposing
that every Patron and Bishop will be careful to place none in any livings but
such as are worthy: it exempts none from the exhibition of the Place to which
they are inducted. Therefore the Tradesman or any other cannot without Theft
and Sacriledg deny any Minister his dues, so long as he stands possessed of the
Church, and in the relation of a Pastor unto him. If any man have just
exception against his Minister, they know the Law is open, and there be Judges,
let them implead one another.

Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty
of all. Iam. 2.10.

Thou that abhorrest Idols do thou commit Sacrilege. Romans 2.22.

FINIS.

