Look from Adam, And behold THE PROTESTANTS FAITH AND RELIGION, EVIDENTLY
PROVED OVT OF the holy Scriptures against all Atheists, Papists, loose
Libertines, and Carnal Gospellers: and that the Faith which they profess,
has continued from the beginning of the world, and so is the true and ancient
Faith.

HEREIN HAVE THOU ALSO A SHORT SVMME OF THE WHOLE BIBLE, and a plain
manifestation, that all holy men who have pleased God, have been saved through
this Christian Faith alone.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Thomas Pavier, and are to be sold at his
shop in Ivy Lane. 1624.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
HAving diverse times observed with my self (most Christian Reader) that the
doctrine of the Gospel, which has been now freely preached these many years
amongst us, in this our flourishing Commonwealth, is yet daily and ordinarily,
by sundry persons, charged with noveltie, as which being an upstart, were not
of sufficient standing or antiquity: I thought it not amiss in this respect,
either for the confutation of the obstinate adversary, or for the comfort of
the weak and simple professor of religion, to publish and set forth this
little work of Mr. Miles Coverdale, who for his integrity of life, and fame
in learning, and other excellent gifts, was so renowned in the Church of Christ
in his age, that I doubt not, but that his only name will be a sufficient
credit, (with any man, that is not maliciously disposed) for the full
allowance, and well-liking of any such monument of his, as he of pure zeal,
and good affection, has commended to us his posterity. By which travels of
his, as he has generally showed himself a notable member in the Church of
God: so has he thereby especially well deserved of this his native Country.
Wherefore not willing to detain thee from better matter, I wish thee to use
this book to thy profit, and with me to give thanks to our merciful Father,
for this valiant Soldier, as also for other worthy Martyrs of his time, which
after the battle by themselves fought, have (by Gods providence) left
spiritual children, (I mean their good books) to make a supply, that Christ's
Church may be increased, to the utter confusion and overthrow of Antichrist.
Farewell in the Lord.

Miles Coverdale, TO ALL CHRISTIAN Readers, wishes grace, mercy, and peace
from God the Father, through our Lord and only Savior JESUS CHRIST.
LIke as the Almighty eternal God, three in persons, and one in substance, of
his tender mercy and love, not only created man at the beginning after his own
similitude and likeness, but also when he was lost, most graciously redeemed
him, and brought him out of bond age: Even so when man (neither regarding his
wonderful creation, nor his most dear redemption) gropeth in darkness, in
vice and blindness, lies in the Devils prison, The accustomed goodness of
God.
and goes in the way of damnation; God always sets up his light before him,
sends the message of his word unto him, shows him what case he is in,
gives him warning, opens the prison door, calls him out of the Devils
service, tells him what danger it is to be his bondsman, or servant unto
sin. This does God always before he punish and plague the world. This (I say)
has ever been the work of God since the beginning, as the stories and
prophesies of all the holy Bible do testify. And though we had no writing of
Gods acts in times past, yet has he practiced this same his wonderful work
of mercy upon us. So that like as we must needs confess, God has showed no
less kindness to us than he did to the old world.
that we are created of God, and redeemed by his only mercy in his dear Son
Jesus Christ: So can we not deny, but we have heard his holy message, had no
less preachings and warnings of dangers to come, than other have had before our
days. Yea even the same merciful God that sent Noe to preach righteousness
unto the wicked world, and converted the Ninivites by his word in the
ministration of the Prophet Jonas, has done even so with us in every
condition. And some (thanks be unto him therefore) has be brought out of
darkness into his wonderful light, and out of the devils service, into the
kingdom of his dear Son.

But alas and woe to this unthankful world. For like as a great number that be
in prison of Satan, will not come forth when they are called and the door set
open, but go on still stumbling in darkness, They that follow Gods word are
laughed to scorn.
when the lantern of light is offered them: Even so if any play a wise man's
part, and do as he is warned by Gods word, he shall have a sort of apish
people, a number of dizerds and scornful mockers, which (because the man will
not dance in the devils morrys with them, nor keep their company in the
bondage of sin and vice, neither run with them unto like confusion (as S.
Peter calls it) laugh him to scorn, and bleare out their tongues at him,
even like fools and cockscombs of the world. And like as when a poor wretch
comes out of prison, he shall have more to stand gasing and gaping upon him,
than to do him good, or to help him to his fees: Even so now that God of his
mercy has called us out of Satan's prison, and from the school of false
doctrine, my Lords fool with his companions stands staring upon us, and
mocketh us, because we sit not still with other prisoners. There goes a fellow
of the new learning (says one) there is one of these newfangled Gospellers
(says another) that is one of the new brethren (says the third) he follows
the new faith, etc.

The doctrine of Christ his faith is no new thing.
Wherefore, in consideration hereof I have here set forth this book: partly
because it shows the antiquity and ancient age of our holy Christian faith,
and partly to give occasion unto all such as have received it, not to be
ashamed of it, nor to shrink from it, for any opprobrious mockage or scornful
derision in this world. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.18.
that the preaching or word of Christ's cross, is foolishness to them that
perish, and that the thing which appertains to the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 1.14.
is foolishness to a carnal minded man. Whereby like as we may learn that it
is no new thing to be mocked and stared upon for holding with the doctrine that
makes so much of Christ his death, and the true worshipping of God in the
spirit: even so may we see (to the singular comfort of our conscience) that no
man mocketh us for it, None but reprobates deride the truth of Gods Gospel.
but such as perish and are carnally minded: and that for all their derision
and scorning, it is yet the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.18. and belongs to his
holy spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. and is not our own doctrine, To us which are saved,
it is the power of God.
neither of any other man's making. This is now to us a comfort and consolation.

But because the world is angry with us for our faith, and gives us so evil
report for teaching it, it shall be expedient for us to declare what faith is,
and what faith we mean, when we make mention thereof. First, because we may
not describe it after our own judgment, we will rehearse the words of the
Apostle, which writing to the Hebrews, What faith is. Hebr. 11.1.
says after this manner: Faith is a substance of things to be hoped for, an
evidence or certainty of things which do not appear. By the which
definition, it is manifest, that when we set forth or teach this faith, we
mean no vain faith, no false opinion of faith, no fond imagination of faith,
no dead faith, no idle faith; but a substantial thing, even a sure belief of
things that are to be hoped for, and a proof, experience, or knowledge of
things that are not seen. This faith then is the instrument, whereby we feel
and are certain of heavenly things, that our corporal eye cannot see. Now
because none other virtue can so apprehend the mercy of God, nor certify us so
effectually of our salvation, as this living faith does, therefore has the
Scripture imputed our justification before God, only unto faith among all other
virtues: not without other virtues following, but without any other work or
deed justifying. This is the faith of Christ, Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.8.
Phil. 3.9. Iaco. 2.14.
which all the Scripture speaks of. This is the faith that S. Paul preaches
to justify in the sight of God: as S. James teaches, that works justify in
the sight of men, and that it is but a dead faith which has no works. This is
the faith, without the which it is impossible to please God, and of the which
whatsoever proceeds not, is sin. This is the faith whereby God purifieth
our hearts, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23. Act. 15.9. 1 Pet. 1.9. Gala. 5.6. 1 Cor.
10.3. Heb. 11.4.
and whose end is salvation. This is the faith that works by charity or
godly love, and is of value before God. This is the faith whereby the holy
fathers which were before Christ's incarnation did in spirit eat and drink and
enjoy the same mercy of God in Christ, that we are partakers of. To be short,
this is the same faith, whereby God saved those his elect, of who^ S. Paul
makes mention in the foresaid epistle to the Hebrews, and rehearses many
godly fruits of the same in their conversation.

This then is no newfangled faith, no strange faith, no faith invented by man's
brain, but even the same that Gods holy spirit teaches in the infallible
truth of his Scripture, and that Adam, Abel, Enoch, and all the other servants
of God were saved in. Why do men therefore either call it a newfangled faith,
or report evil of us, for setting it forth? Why? I fear me this is one cause:
The old faith that all those servants of God had, whom the Apostle names in
the eleventh to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.4, 5.
had a life and conversation joined unto it, which was rich and full of all
good works. Therefore seeing there be so many bablers and pratlers of faith,
and so few that bring forth the worthy fruits of repentance, it gives the
world occasion to report of us, that our faith is but newfangled. They see us
not fall to labor and taking of pains, as Adam did: They see not the
righteousness and thankfulness in us, that was in Abel: They see us not walk
after the word and will of God, as Enoch did: They see us not take Gods warning
so earnestly as Noe did: They see us not so obedient to the voice of God, nor
so well willing and content to leave our friends, to forsake our own wills, our
own lands and goods at Gods calling, and dwell in a strange country, to do
Gods pleasure, as Abraham did: they see that we choose not rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: They see us not esteem the rebuke of Christ, or trouble for his sake,
to be greater riches than all the treasures of this world, as Moses did: To be
short, they see not in our garden those sweet flowers and fruits of Gods holy
Spirit, which were in them that had the old faith.

Ashamed may we be therefore, as many of us as either write, teach, preach,
speak or talk of the old faith, if we endeavor not our selves to have those
old heavenly virtues that were ever plentiful in all Gods true servants, in
every one (I mean) according to his calling. Not that it is evil, to teach or
talk of the true old faith, but this I say, James 1*21
because that (according to the doctrine of S. James) they are but deceivers of
themselves, that are not doers of Gods word, as well as hearers thereof. And
through such slender receiving of Christ's holy Gospel, it is now come to
pass, that like as we have need of such an Apostle as was holy S. Paul, to
rebuke this vain confidence that men put in their works, and to tell us that
no work of our doing (but faith of Gods working, does justify us in his
sight. Even so have we no less need of such another Apostle (as was holy S.
Would to God we had many such as James the Apostle was.
James) to rebuke this horrible unthankfulness of men, that professing
themselves to be Christians, and to hold of Christ's old faith, are yet dead
unto all good works, receive not the word of God in meekness, cast not away
all uncleanness and malitiousnesse, are swift to speak, to talk, to jangle,
and to take displeasure; are forgetful hearers of the Word, and not livers
thereafter, boasting themselves to be of Gods pure and undefiled Religion, and
yet refrain nor their tongues from evil, visit not the poor, the
friendlesse, and the desolate in their trouble, neither keep themselves
undefiled from this world. Read the first chapter of his Epistle. James 1.


What an occasion might such an Apostle (as holy James was) have, to write
another, yea a sharper Epistle, seeing so many pretending to be of Jesus
Christ's old faith, are yet so partial, have such a carnal respect of persons,
are not rich in faith, despise the poor, practice not the law of godly love,
talk and jangle of faith, not having the works thereof, O unthankefull world.
clothe not the naked, help not the poor to their living, regard not their
necessity, have but a dead faith, declare not by good and godly works, the
true and old faith of Christ, are but vain believers, have not the eflectuous,
the working and living faith, James 2.25.
that Abraham and Rahab had. Read the second chapter of his Epistle.

How would holy James reprove these bringers up of strange doctrines, Saint
James would not spare to rebuke such.
blasphemers, backbiters, belie^s of good men, false teachers against Gods
truth, dissemblers with the same, carry fire (as they say) with the one hand,
and water in the other: pretend to be learned, and yet bring not forth the
works of good conversation in meekness out of Gods wisdom, but in
frowardness, and out of carnal doctrine. How would he take up these, that
delight in malice and strife, belie Gods truth, are given to earthly, fleshly,
and devilish wisdom, are unstable, full of all evil works, are not in the
school of Gods wisdom and learning, are not given to unfainednesse of heart,
are not peaceable, are churlish, uneasy to be entreated, etc. Read the third
chapter of his Epistle. James 3 17.


What would such an holy Apostle say to this wicked world, James 4.1.
wherein a great number (pretending to be Christian men) are given so to
quarelling and fighting, to voluptuousness and inordinate lusts, Against such
gross vices would not Saint James spare to speak.
to envy and indignation, to unlawful spending and consuming of that they may
get, to advoutrie, to the despising of holy wedlock, to shameful
uncleanness, either not willing to marry, or else putting away their wives for
light occasions, and for satisfying of their own trifling lusts, falling in
love with the vain friendship of this world, taking part against God: yea
whereas by their profession, oath, and allegiance (which they owe to their most
high Sovereign the King of heaven) they should in a virtuous conversation
maintain all godliness, are become even enemies, suppressours and
overthrowers thereof, as well through their obstinate and cruel resisting of
Gods word, as by other wicked examples of their vicious and filthy living? What
would holy S. James say to such unthankful bellies, that knowing the truth,
live after such a sort? Would he spare them though they were never so rich and
wealthy? Read the fourth chapter of his Epistle, and the first part of his
fifth chapter, James 4.
and ye will judge the contrary.

Wherefore, most dear Readers, whosoever of you has been slack to follow
the good life and godly conversation that S. James, and all the other Scripture
beside requires to be in them, which profess the old faith, let them take
better hold, turn again to the truth, and follow that loving exhortation,
which holy S. James 5.19.
James makes in the latter end of his Epistle. And if he has at the first not
inclined to Gods word, nor received it unfainedly in meekness, Let every man
take the pains to rebuke his own fault.
nor submitted himself to be ordered thereby, and to cast away all
uncleanness, etc. But has happily suffered it, promoted it, set it forth, or
taken a pretense of favor and love to it, for some other purpose to obtain
any carnal profit, gains or liberty by it; let him not put holy S. James, or
any other true messenger of God, to the pains of rebuking him for so doing:
let him rather enter into himself, reprove his own fault and abuse in that
behalf, abhor it in any wise, be angry, displeased and discontent with
himself, sorry and repentant for it, shame not to ask God mercy, and by good
works from hence forward to labor, that the glory of God, and worship of his
truth, may be preferred and set up, which he by such his unchristian living,
has in times past caused to be hindered.

In conclusion: Though there be never so many that recant and deny Gods holy
word, either in their living and conversation, or in their words, writing or
preaching, yet as many of us as are entered into the school of that wisdom
which is from above, let us be true scholars of the same, and practice it both
in our thought, word and deed: let us even enter into the nature and kind
thereof: which (as S. James 3.17. We must put on the nature of Gods doctrine.
James says, Iam. 3.) is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without judging and dissimulation. Which thing
if we do, then shall we follow no filthy doctrine nor counterfeited wisdom,
then shall we be no breakers of peace, then shall we be as glad to forgive, as
we would be forgiven, glad to be reformed, rich and plentiful in the works of
mercy and good fruits of the old faith: then shall we be no quarrell-pickers
or dissemblers with any man: Then shall we not only be found the maintainers
of peace and all good order, but peaceably also, and in all gentle manner shall
we (both in word and deed) sow, spread abroad, and show the fruit of that
righteousness, which comes only of God through Jesus Christ.

If any of them that are gone (of high or low estate, pretending to be
maintainers, favorers, setters forth, or scholars of Christ's doctrine) has in
any condition dissembled therewith, fallen from God, misbehaved himself in the
affairs of his Prince, misgoverned his household, maintained riot, vice and
sin, or brought the good word of God into any evil report by his ungodly
conversation (as I fear me, it be too true) let us beware by such men's fall.
Let us not receive the grace of God in vain. For like as they that harden
their hearts at Gods word, and spurn wilfully against it, are sure of their
damnation, Let the works of God, which are past, be a warning to us.
except they repent; Even so they that dissemble withal, shall find their
judgment. Wherefore let us that have received the old true faith of Christ,
not only be content to abide any storm or trouble for it (yea to be mocked,
scorned, persecuted, and put to death therefore, if it so please God) but also
unfainedly every man to his power, in his heart by fervent prayer, in his mouth
by good words, and in all his body by virtuous conversation and good Christian
works, help and labor, that the blessed word of God may have the due honor
belonging thereunto, and that the same which it has lost through ungodly
behavior of some, may through the grace and goodness of God be won again
in our good living: That God may have of us better servants, our Prince truer
subjects, and our neighbors more unfeigned lovers, than many have been before
us. Amen.

AN EVIDENT DECLARATION OVT of the Holy Scriptures, that the Christian faith
has endured since the beginning of the world, and that through it only all
virtuous men pleased God and were saved.
CHAP. I.
I SVPPOSE plainly that many simple Christian men will not a little wonder at
this mine enterprise, they are so persuaded, The Christian faith is elder than
1600. years.
and think, the Christian faith did first begin under Tiberius the Emperor:
for as much as out of the Gospel of Luke it is certain, that in the fifteenth
year of Tiberius, John Baptist began to preach the Gospel, and all
histories say with one accord, that in the xviij. year of Tiberius Jesus
Christ did suffer.

Now it is true that all the Prophecies were then first fulfilled, and the true
salvation performed; yea from that time forth were all the glorious treasures
of Christ so richly declared and powered out among all people, as they never
were before. Notwithstanding the same salvation in Christ Jesus was promised
long before, and so opened to the holy old Fathers, that they have no less
sight of Christ Jesus in the spirit than we, and put their trust in him as well
as we: though among us it be clear and open, or performed and fulfilled, that
among them was somewhat darker, and therefore looked for with hearts desire, as
a thing for to come. Moreover it is not I that first bring forth this meaning
concerning the antiquity or oldnesse of our Christian faith: for the holy
Bishop Eusebius Cesariens. which lived above eleven hundred years ago, (and
likewise many other Christian Doctors) has also taught and written the same
more clearly before me. Eusebius.
For Eusebius in the first book De Ecclesiastica historia, says plainly: All
they that in their estate are noted according to their generations, to reckon
backward from Abraham unto the first man, though they had not the name of
Christian men, (for at Antioch certain years after the ascension of Christ,
was that name given to the faithful, Acts 11.26.
Acts 11.) yet as pertaining to the religion and substance, they were all
Christians.

For if this word Christian, be as much to say, as one that puts his trust
in Christ, and through his doctrine fastened unto faith, unto the grace and
righteousness of God, does cleave with all diligence to Gods doctrine, and
exercises himself in every thing that is virtuous; then verily those holy men
whom we spoke of first, were even the same that Christian men boast themselves
now to be. All these are the words of the foresaid old Christian Doctors. But
to the intent that no man shall think that we build upon men, and upon a
strange foundation, therefore we will first declare our minds out of the
Scriptures, and allege somewhat more for the better understanding of the
matter.

CHAP. II. Of the goodness of God, and wickedness of man.
GOd which has ever been sufficient to all perfection, and needs nothing of
the creatures to his perfectness, only of his own kind and nature, which is
good, (that is to say, of his own grace and mercy, yea even because he would
do good) created man for himself: But before he created him, The first
creation of heaven and earth.
he provided first for him wonderfully, and furnished him with unspeakable
riches of his goodness. For when he devised the creation of man, and the time
was now come, which his godly wisdom and providence had ordained, he first of
all appointed a wonderful lodging for man, and garnished the same yet much
more wonderfully. At the beginning (when the goodly and clear light was made)
the Lord prepared the instruments, which he afterward sundred one from another,
and ordained every one to some purpose. Over the deep, that is, over the water
and earth (which yet was in the water) made he a firmament, and spread out the
heaven above as a pavilion. Afterward out of the water he called and brought
forth the earth, (as much as served for the habitation of men) and appointed
the water his bounds and marks, which it may not overpasse. And these three
things, the water, the earth, and the firmament, (that is to say, the air and
clearenesse above us unto the height of heaven) are the essential and
substantial parcels of the world, and serve as an house for the habitation of
men: Nevertheless as yet all this was but rough and unfinished, and nothing
garnished at all: Therefore did the wise and faithful master put forth his
hand wider, The garnishing of heaven and earth.
to perform and pleasantly to garnish that wonderful work; yea not only to
garnish it, but also to make it fruitful and profitable for man, which was the
guest and inhabiter for to come.

And first, in as much as man should inhabit the earth, he garnished it
aforehand, and clothed it with a goodly green garment, that is, with a
substance, which he decked first with flowers and all manner of herbs, which
not only are pleasant to look upon, and wonderfully beautified, of a pleasant
taste and goodly color, but also profitable for food and all manner of
medicine. To the same also did he first add sundry trees and plants. Then
watered he the earth with fair springs, rivers and running waters. And the
ground made he not like on every side, but in many places set it up pleasantly:
And hereof have we the valleys, plains, mountains and hills: which things all
have their due operation, fruit, and pleasantness.

After this also began he to garnish the heaven and firmament, and set therein
the Sun and the Moon, the Planets and Stars: which things all are goodlier
and more wonderful than man's tongue can express. As for their office, The
office of the creatures in t^^ firmament.
and the cause why they are set in the heaven, it is to give us light, and
(with their up and down going, or motion) to declare the times, years,
months, and days, dividing the days and nights asunder.

Thirdly, he laid his hand likewise in the water, Fishes.
in the which he had wrought no less wonders, than in heaven and upon earth.
For in the water (and especially in the sea) do the wonderful works of God
appear in the fishes and marvels of the sea, if a man consider the nature and
disposition of them. Fowls.
And in the air also has he created and ordained great tokens of his
goodness, power, and wisdom, even the fowls that pleasantly (according to
diverse commodities) do sing unto man, and refresh him.

At the last endued he the earth yet more richly, Beasts.
and filled it with all kind of profitable and goodly beasts, and sundred one
from another pleasantly.

When the Lord now had prepared this goodly and rich pleasure, then first after
these he made man, that he might be Lord of all these things. Him also endued
he above all other creatures, The creation of man.
and created him after his own image. He made him of body and soul, which
should have endured for ever, if he had not fallen into sin. Now has he a
frail body, and an immortal everlasting soul. But the first man made he
altogether perfect and without blemish, so that verily he was called the image
of God not without cause. The Lord also was not sufficed in garnishing the
earth goodly, but first also builded upon the earth a special garden of
pleasure, even a Paradise: and therein set he man his dear beloved creature.
The creation of the woman.
And for as much as he being solitary and alone, could not conveniently dwell
without a mate, he appointed him first to plant and keep the Garden of
pleasure, and provided for him a wife, even out of the bones of his own body,
that she might be the man's help. Thus would the goodness of God finish and
make man perfect, to the intent that he should lack nothing which served to a
right, wholesome, and perfect life.

Therefore was it equal, that man, which was endued with reason and high
understanding, should show thankfulness and obedience unto God, for such high
gifts. Yea, God himself (which is not only good, but also righteous)
requires the same of him, and that by the means of the commandment, That he
might eat of all the trees of the Garden of pleasure: Only he should eschew the
fruit of knowing good and evil. The request of the commandment.
And this commandment was not grievous nor unreasonable: Only it required
obedience and love of God the maker, unto whom only the creature (even man)
should have respect, and look for all good at his hand, and not to take the
form of good and evil out of himself, but only to hold that for evil and
forbidden, which God inhibiteth as evil; and to account that as good and
righteous, which God allows or forbids not. For a representation, visible
token, and sacrament, God showed him a right visible and fruitful tree in the
Garden of pleasure, and forbade him with earnest threatening, that in what hour
soever he did eat of the same tree, he should die an everlasting death. The
unthankefulnesse and w^ckednesse of man.
But untruly dealt man with his faithful God, transgressed his commandment,
and gave more credit to the persuasion of the woman and of the serpent, than to
the true word of God: which was nothing else, but even as much as to take the
form of good and evil out of themselves, or elsewhere, rather than of God,
and not to cleave and be obedient only unto him, as to such an one as wishes
good unto every man. For man being deceived through the woman and the Serpent,
did believe that God was not indifferent, and that he had withdrawn from him
some of his godly wisdom. And for as much as the mind now was departed from
God through infidelity* and looked not for all good at his hand, therefore
took the hand the noisome apple, and the mouth did eat the forbidden meat. And
thus thought he to help himself to Gods Majesty, by another means, rather
than by God, and so to repair his necessity which he thought he had. And so
with infidelity, unfaithfulness, disobedience and unthankfulness, he wrought
life, and died the death; that is, he offended against God, and fell into the
punishment of everlasting damnation: Yea he made himself bound unto the
devil, whom he was so diligent, to believe, to follow, and to serve:
Contrariwise he forsook God, and so came he utterly into the bondage of the
devil and darkness. And thus have we now the goodness and faithfulness of
God. Again, the wickedness and great unfaithfulness of man.

CHAP. III. The first and right foundation of our holy Christian faith.
The righteousness and mercy of God.
HEre now had the just God occasion and right to expel man, to destroy him, to
damn him, and to leave him utterly to the devil: And the same also did his
righteousness and truth require. Genesis 2.17.
For he had said, In what day soever thou eatest of the fruit, thou shall die
the death. Contrariwise, the goodness and mercy of God required, not utterly
to suppress man a poor and naked creature. In the mean season was there
found a way, The way of satisfaction before God is Christ.
whereby the righteousness and truth of God should be satisfied, and in the
which the mercy of God should specially be exercised and declare it self: that
is to say, Christ Jesus, which is given us by the manifest grace of God, was
offered for our sins, satisfied and recompensed the righteousness of God,
and so delivered us out of the bonds of the Devil. For he died for us all, in
as much as God said: In what day soever thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death. Therefore died Christ for us all, that through his death we might live,
and be taken out of the kingdom of darkness, and be set in the kingdom of
the dear beloved Son of God.

This device of Gods wisdom (which no doubt was determinate from everlasting)
was also directly opened unto Adam, after the fall, in manner following: When
man had eaten of the fruit of the forbidden tree, immediately his eyes were
opened; in so much that he was ashamed, when he saw that he was naked. Hitherto
had he lived in innocence, therefore began he now to cover himself, but with
simple clothing, which they trusted not much to (like as it is all
unprofitable, that man of himself will cover his sin withal) saving that
they fled from the Lord, and hid themselves from him. Sin.
But the Lord followed upon the fugitive, put him in mind of his decay,
misery, and the life that he was fallen from, and said; Adam, where art thou?
Or know thou what misery thou art fallen into from great felicity? Now
should man have acknowledged his fault, but he showed himself stiff-necked.
And the Lord moves him still, to see if he will acknowledge his sin, and
said: Who told thee that thou art naked? Yea, to help him in the matter, and
to make him confess his sin, he says moreover; Have thou not eaten of the
tree of the which I forbad thee that thou should not eat? But man was loath
to knowledge his sin, and laid it first upon the woman his companion; and the
same did he with so froward and unadvised words, The frowardness of man.
that a man may easily see, that secretly in his heart, he wickedly and
unreasonably laid the fault upon God. For he said not only, The woman gave me
of the tree to eat; but added proudly thereto, The woman which thou gave me,
etc. As though he should say; Thou thy self art in the fault; if thou had
not given me the woman, I had not been deceived. Why God gave the woman unto
man.
And yet the righteous God gave him not the woman to deceive him, but to be an
help to him. Therefore appears it here again, that the sin of man was the
more wilful and grievous. Grace.
Yet for all this did the gracious God proceed further, and would prove whether
he might find any knowledge of the sin with the woman, the beginning and
occasion of the sin. But nothing at all could he find. The one person was as
the other, We all are loath to knowledge our selves guilty.
and they both had no power. Therefore like as Adam put all the fault to the
woman, even so laid the woman all the fault upon the Serpent, that is, upon the
Devil. Which nature does yet, to this day, cleave in man. But what man (which
has well considered this foresaid matter by himself) would now say, or durst
think, that any part of the promise of righteousness and salvation of man
were to be ascribed to his own power and deserving? For as much as it is so
manifest, how unable and lost a creature man is of himself, which does nothing
but heap sin upon sin, and disobedience upon disobedience. Again, who is
so blind, but he sees, that all salvation is to be ascribed to the only
mere grace and mercy of God? For now follows it first how God handled this
matter.

Now when all the complaint was made upon the Serpent, Punishment.
the Lord asks and examineth the Serpent nothing at all, for the deed was
open, neither was the Serpent created of God to speak, and with the Devil was
there no truth. Therefore does the Lord righteously curse the Serpent the
Devil. Unto the bodily serpent also (whom the Devil used as an instrument) he
gives a sore curse, and says; Upon thy belly shall thou go, Genes. 3.14.
and earth shall thou eat all the days of thy life: When this was done, it was
ordained now first for man, that (according to the righteousness and truth of
God) he should be punished also with the curse and with eternal death: but
for the causes expressed in the beginning of this chapter, the curse was
directed unto Christ, who also with clear words was promised, and so was life
in him promised likewise.

Therefore says not the Lord now; And cursed be thou man, because thou have
done against my Commandment; but, And I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, The promise. Genes. 3.15.
between thy seed and her seed: the same shall tread thee on the head, and
thou shall tread him on the heel. Which is thus much to say; Thou have used
the woman to the destruction of men, so that from henceforth they bring death,
and by kind and nature are damned when they are borne. Therefore will I also
use the woman, but to salvation: for of the woman shall a seed or child be
borne, The Serpents head.
which shall break thy head, power and kingdom, sin, damnation and death:
howbeit in his manhood he shall be trodden down and bitten. That is, Man with
his transgression has deserved eternal death, so that (after the rigor of my
justice) he should perish and belong to the Devil for ever: nevertheless I
Will have mercy upon him, and receive him to grace again. But to the intent
that my truth and righteousness may be satisfied, I will cause my Son to
take the very nature of man upon him. Then will I, that he take upon himself
the curse and damnation, and die, and with his innocent death to take away that
noisome death and curse, and so to set the generation of man out of death into
life, out of the dominion of the Devil into his own kingdom, out of
darkness into light. The ^^re foundation of our faith.
Thus the right foundation or ground of our holy faith continues fast and
unmoved: in so much as all the generation of man is whole and cleansed from
sin, and delivered from the curse, from the Devil and everlasting damnation,
only through the mercy and mere grace of God by Jesus Christ.

Romans 8.3.
As touching this, Paul said when he wrote to the Romans in the 8. Chapter; God
sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and through sin, (that is
to say, through the sinne-offering and willing death of Christ) he condemned
sin in the flesh. And in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the first
Chapter, 1 Cor. 1.30.
the same Paul says, Christ Jesus is appointed of God to be our wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that as it is written, who
so glories and rejoices, let him glory and rejoice in the Lord.

But for as much as this is the first promise, and the first sure Evangelion, I
will now speak of every word in especial. First, God calls his Son our
Lord Jesus, the seed of the woman. A seed, because of the very nature of man,
and because that our Lord should not take upon him a fantastical, but a very
true body.

But to these words there is added, The Gospel of Jesus. Genes. 3.15.
Of the woman. For our Lord was not conceived and borne of man's seed, but of
the Holy Ghost out of the Virgin Marie. Therefore cannot this sentence be
understood of Eve, but of the Virgin Marie. Now whereas she is called a woman,
it is done because of the kindred: For even the daughters also and maidens are
reckoned in the women's kindred, and yet continue undefiled virgins. God also
has spoken here distinctly, and said not; I will put enmity between thee and
this woman, but between thee and (haischah) the woman, understanding some
special woman, no doubt even such an one as he afterward set forth clearly by
Esaias, saying; Esaias 7.14.
Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, etc. And this word (seed)
was always afterward in every renewing of this promise concerning Christ Jesus
among all the Patriarks and Prophets, rehearsed, used, and expressed, until
the time of David. Of whom the Lord afterward was called a flower, the root,
sprowting, or blossom of David. The holy Apostle Paul expounds this word
(seed) clearly and plainly, and says it is Christ, Gal. 3. Gal. 3.16.
Moreover, A praise of the virgin Marie.
it serves to the praise of the Lords mother, that God says, I will put
enmity between the woman and thee: for he means the difference of both
their natures. The Devil is proud, subtle, wicked, false, and untrue: but the
mother of Christ is lowly, simple, virtuous, faithful and upright, chaste and
clean. And the same pure virgin and gracious mother has borne unto us him
that trod down the Serpents head. The head of the Serpent is the power and
kingdom of the Devil, even sin, the curse and damnation. All this has that
blessed seed broken for his faithful. All which things the holy Apostle Paul
also has taught with these words: Heb. 2.14.
The Lord is become partaker of our flesh and blood, that he through death
might take away the power from him, which had the Lordship over death, that is
to say, the Devil; and to deliver them which through fear of death, were all
their life time in bondage. For he took not upon him the Angels, but the seed
of Abraham took he upon him, etc. And to the same meaning does this also
serve that follows; Genes. 2.15. Christ's heel.
And thou shall tread him on the heel. The heel is the lowest part in man,
and here it signifies the most inferior thing in Christ, even his flesh. This
has the old Serpent the Devil persecuted and trodden down by his members
Caiphas, Annas, Herod, and Pontius Pilate. For Peter says, Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh: 1 Pet. 4.1.
The Godhead is impassible, and the soul immortal. But by this treading down
of the Lord, has God trodden down the kingdom of the Devil, that is to say,
by his death has he destroyed death, and brought life again to all them that
believe. Hereof comes it that Christ says himself, Ioh. 12. Now is the
judgment of the world, Ioh. 12.31, 32.
now shall the Prince of this world be thrust out. And I when I am lift up
(that is to say, crucified) from the earth, will draw all things to me.

At the last says the Lord, that he will put enmity between the Serpent and
the woman's seed. This may we see in the Devil, and his members and acts, how
they are contrary to Christ and his members and deeds. But how strong soever
the Serpent is, yet shall he be trodden down through Christ and his faithful.
Hereof comes it, that Paul spoke so comfortably to the Romans, Romans 16. Romans
16.20.
The God of peace shall shortly tread down the Devil under your feet. And
herewithall is the duty also of the faithful in Christ shortly comprehended.
For as touching them that say, Object.
Is it enough then, and is all well, when I knowledge that I am a sinner, and
saved through the blessed seed only? To them it is here answered and clearly
given to understand, Answ.
that all they which put their trust in the blessed seed, take upon them the
kind of the seed, and hate the kind of the Serpent, that is to say, sin and
blasphemy, and fight always more and more against the world and the Devil as
long as they live, yea and occupy themselves most faithfully about that which
is Gods will. And hereto now serves it that follows after. For when the Lord
had taken away the everlasting death, he laid upon man a temporal punishment,
correction and discipline, in the which he should be exercised as long as he
lived upon earth. And upon the woman he laid trouble, sorrow, and pain, when
she should bear and bring forth children: Subjection also and service with
fear and obedience, which she owes to the man. To man, he enjoyneth labor,
for the Lord cursed the earth, and said; Genesis 3.17.
With sorrow shall thou get thy living all the days of thy life. Yea, in the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. Moreover, he lays temporal death
upon them both, Genesis 3.19.
and says; Earth thou art, and to earth shall thou return. Of the first does
Paul speak also, 1 Timothy 2.15.
1 Timothy 2. The woman shall be saved by bearing of children, if she continue in
faith, and in love, and in holiness, or cleanness, and nurture. Of the second
speaks the same Paul likewise to the Ephesians and Thessalonians; 1 Thessal.
4.6. Ephesians. 4.25.
Let no man undermine or deceive his brother in occupying: and who so has used
falsehood and deceit, let him do it no more, but let him rather labor with his
hands some honest thing, that he may have to distribute unto such as have need.
Heb. 5.17.
And as touching death, Paul also says to the Hebrews in the ninth Chapter,
How that it is appointed unto men, once to die, and that even so Christ Jesus
was offered up and died once for all.

CHAP. IIII. Of the first faithful Christians, ADAM and EVE.
ANd hitherto I trust we have had in the first promise of God the foundation,
and the whole sum of our holy Christian faith; namely, that the whole
generation of man was but lost through his own fault and wickedness, and
fallen into death and damnation, so that there remains nothing in man but it
is displeasant to God: Hereof comes it that there is nothing to be ascribed
unto the power and deserving of man, save sin and malediction. But God of his
abundant mercy had compassion on us, and of very grace promised he life unto us
again in his Son our Lord Jesus, whom he would to become man, and to suffer
death in his flesh, that thereby he might tread down the devil, death, sin
and hell. Item, he would put enmity between the woman's seed and the serpent,
that is, he would endue us (which are the seed, that is to say, the children of
Adam, if we believe) with another heart and power, that we might become
enemies unto the devils works, resist his suggestion, and hold our selves fast
by the blessed seed, laboring and suffering whatsoever God enjoyneth us to
work and suffer. Who is it now, which sees not herein, all that is written in
the whole Scripture, of belief, of love and innocence, that is to say, of a
Christian life and faith? Who so is disposed, let him look upon the 2.3. and
4. chapters of Paul to the Romans, the first and second to the Ephesians: let
him compare those chapters toward this sum, and he shall find it none
otherwise.

For as much then as Adam and Eve had faith in God, and stood so toward God,
that they knowledged themselves to be sinners, and trusted to be saved only
through the blessed seed, giving themselves over willingly into the discipline
and nurture, travel and trouble of this time. No man can say contrary, but it
follows, that our first elders were Christians. Nevertheless we will declare
the same yet more clearly, by Moses words following: Genesis 3.20. Adams faith.
And Adam called his wife Heva, because she should be the mother of all
living. For as soon as he was now strengthened through the promise of God, and
believed that he and his posterity (which else were children of wrath, of the
devil, and of death) should live through the blessed seed, he turned his wives
name, and called her Heva, for the remembrance of the matter, and practicing of
his faith: for he believed, that she now living in the power of the blessed
seed, should bring forth, not only quick men temporally as pertaining to this
natural life; (like as we call other creatures living) but living, that is to
say, children of salvation. For Adam had lost eternal life from himself, and
from us his posterity: but the same is given unto us again through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Adam for as much as he believed, changed his wives name, like
as we find that for great weighty causes the names of certain places, cities
and men were changed: Thus was Jacob called Israel; Simon, Peter; Luthz,
Bethel. Eve had now a name of life, for Haiah in Hebrew is as much to say, as
Life. Before was she called Ischa, that is to say, Woman, because she was
taken from out of the man, Gen 2.23.
which in the Hebrew is called Isch, Genesis 2. And thus it is manifest, what
faith Adam had, whereby we may well suppose, that Eve had none other faith.

But God used his mercy and loving kindness yet furthermore, Comfort, help
and loving kindness in the mids of correction.
even in the mids of all correction: for when he would now expel man out of
paradise into misery, he does unto him in every condition, even as a faithful
father, which for some misdeed puts his son away from him, notwithstanding
leaves him not utterly comfortless, but provideth him a garment, and
comfort him with friendly words, and then first sends him away from him.
Even thus does God the father of heaven also. For first he cloatheth Adam and
Eve against the frost and tempest of weather, in as much as (by the means of
sin) the weather, the earth, the air, and all creatures, were no more so
subject, tame and obedient unto man, as they were before the fall. Therefore
even now at this present time whatsoever inconvenience and harm is in the good
creatures of God, it comes by the means of our sins. Afterward does the
Lord comfort the miserable wretched man with very loving words after this
manner: Genesis 3.22.
Behold, Adam is become like one of us: or, Lo, Adam shall be as one of us,
and it shall happen unto him, as to one of us, and he shall know good and
evil. This does God speak which is one in substance, and three in persons: he
prophesies here unto Adam, that he shall know or have experience of good and
evil, that is to say, that upon earth he must feel prosperity and
adversity, misery and trouble, sour and sweet, and must suffer necessity,
pain and affliction. Comfort and patience in Christ.
Yet in all this must he be constant and patient, forasmuch as nothing shall
happen unto him, save even the same that shall happen to one of them. And he
means the Son our Lord Jesus Christ the second person in the holy Trinity.
With this his passion, and through the same does he comfort Adam. As though he
would say: let the pain, sorrow and trouble which thou must suffer upon earth,
not vex thee, and consider that one of us also shall take upon him the kind
and nature of man, and that the serpent (as it is said before) shall tread him
on the heel, that is to say, he shall die, he shall be oppressed and have much
affliction and trouble all the days of his life. In the same meaning also did
the holy Apostle Peter say: 1 Pet. 2.21.
Christ suffered for our sakes, and gave us an example, that we should follow
him, and go in his footsteps.

Adams faith.
Out of all this is it easy to understand, what faith and knowledge Adam had of
our Lord Christ: namely, that he knew in him very Godhead and manhood, and that
he saw in faith his Passion and Cross a far off. Moreover, that the passion
of Christ once done for all, breaks the kingdom of the devil, and brings
life again to such as faithfully believe. Secondly, that it is to our living,
an example, at the which we ought to learn patience in adversity, and daily
to die from all evil. And hereto now serve all doctrines of patience, of
bearing the cross, of despising the world, and mortifying or putting off the
old Adam, which thing is contained and with many and goodly words handled
thorowout the Prophets and Apostles. As for Adam and Eve, they lacked none of
these things, though they had not the matter in writing. For God spoke it all
to them himself, and wrote it in their hearts. Moreover, our first Elders had
no Church, rites, nor ceremonies, save only the bodily offering, a
representation of the sacrificing of Christ, and exercises or tokens of
thankfulness. For how should Cain and Abel else have known any thing of
sacrifice, if they had not received the same at the custom of their father?
who with his wife Eva the mother of us all, was saved by none other work or
merit of man, but only through and in the blessed seed our Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. V. That the holy Patriarks also were Christians, and saved by Christ.
SUch faith in Christ Jesus as we now have spoken of, did the holy father Adam
(no doubt) teach his children: that they also might plant in their children the
promise of God, his mercy and device concerning the Messiah or Savior, that
was for to come. And truly Abel had such a notable faith in God, that the holy
Apostle Paul wrote of him after this manner: Heb. 11.4.
Through faith did Abel offer a greater sacrifice than did Cain, and thereby
obtained he witness that he was righteous. For God bare record to his gifts.
In as much then as it cannot be denied, but that all they which are just and
righteous, be made righteous through the blessed seed. And Abel was justified.
Outward sacrifice was a token of thankfulness.
It follows that he was made righteous through faith in Jesus Christ. In that
he did sacrifice, it is a token and fruit of a heart that was thankful, and
feared God. It was no such enterprise, that he would cleanse and make himself
acceptable unto God through that outward sacrifice. For certain it is, that no
outward oblation purifieth man within: But the grace of God granted unto us
through Jesus Christ, purifieth us aright. And the outward sacrifices of the
old fathers, beside that they were tokens of thankfulness, praise, and
magnifying of God, (as it is said before) were figures of the only perpetual
sacrifice of our Savior Christ. And in this behalf they were even as much as
sacraments of things to come. Thus also, and in like understanding have our
first fathers done sacrifice, as hereafter it shall follow more largely.

Now like as in Abel there is set forth unto us an example of Gods seed, and of
a regenerate true faithful Christian man. Cain the father of wickedness.
So is Cain a seed of the Serpent, a child of the Devil, which despised the
inspiration of God, and harkened to the deceitful Serpent. And in these two
brethren we may see what God meaned, when he said: I will put enmity between
the seed of the woman and thy seed. As though he would say: There shall be two
manner of people, the one shall cleave unto Christ, the blessed seed, the other
shall cleave unto the Devil. And these two generations shall in no wise agree,
but be at variance in faith and religion. I will endue my seed, that they shall
cleave only unto me, fear me, honor and worship me, seek all salvation in
me through the blessed seed, live virtuously, honestly, and soberly. Then shall
the Serpent tempt their seed with hypocrisy, not to love me nor serve me
aright, not to hold of me as they should, not to trust in me, but to love the
world, and to follow the lusts and temptations thereof: All this find we here
in these two brethren, in whom begins the first difference of true and false
believers. The first division in religion, when it began.
For Abel was simple, godly, and of a constant faith in God. And in as much as
he took God for his refuge, he brought him gifts of his best substance, no
doubt because he had first given over his soul and all his power unto God, at
whom alone he sought all good without any hypocrisy. He was also innocent,
virtuous and friendly, and followed not his own tentations. And for this
faiths sake did his sacrifice please God: but Cains pleased him not, for his
heart was not right with God: he was a dissembler, greedy and unfaithful
person, which set his heart and mind upon earthly things, always despising Gods
word, and following his own tentation. Which thing was evident in this, that
he having no cause (only of a wilful heart, and through the temptation of the
serpent) murdered his own brother: Whereby he has obtained to be the
Arch-father of all murderers, which persecute and murder the seed of God
(that is to say, the true believers) only for their faiths sake. Thus became
Abel the first martyr and instrument of God and of Christ in the holy Church.
Abel the first Martyr.

The world the city of the Devil.


For these two brethren have set forth before us, the whole battle and strife,
which the world, the city of the devil, the children and citizens of the
cursed city (wherein the Serpent is head and master, and has the dominion)
shall make against the city and citizens in whom Christ is the head, unto the
end of the world. The freemen of the city of God and of Christ, do cleave
only unto God, The difference of true and false faith.
serve him with all their heart, build only upon Christ. The citizens of the
Serpent despise God, and yet they boast of God, to whom also they offer and do
service, but not as they ought to do. Now when they perceive that their faith
is not right, and that their hypocrisy is espied and misliked, then fall they
to murdering, to the which God is an enemy, and forbids it with his word.
For Cain also exhorted he from his purpose, and said, Thou need not to arm
thee because of thy brother, for thou have none occasion to be angry with him.
For if thou do right, thou shall find it, and have joy thereof: but if thou
do not right, then is thy misfortune, sin and trespass open, and thou
shall shame and destroy thy self. Thy brother goes on without fault, he shall
do thee no hurt nor harm: he shall also not be Lord over thee, nor minish thy
right: Yea he shall have respect unto thee, and thou shall have dominion over
him, and so keep thy birthright, and still remain the first borne, although
his sacrifice be acceptable unto me and not thine. Cease therefore from thy
wicked purpose, and offend not against thy brother.

But Cain did as all ungodly do: For he went forth, and slew his innocent
brother. And afterward when the Lord would have brought him into the knowledge
of his great sin, and pardon him, he despised the voice of the Lord with
craking and facing. The first decay of the faith was by cursed Cain.
For the which cause the Lord was wroth with him, and cursed him. Then
despaired he first, and went forth and became yet more wicked, dealt altogether
ungodly, set first his mind upon earthly things, thought to exalt his name
upon earth, and builded the first city, which he called Hanoch: he begat
sons and daughters, but little fear of God was before their eyes, in so much
that the Scripture says, Genes. 4.25.
Adam lay with his wife again, and she bare a son, whom she called Seth.
For God (said she) has given me another seed for Abel, whom Cain slew. Seth
also had a son, and he called him Enos. And then began men to call upon the
name of the Lord. Out of the which words it is easy to understand, that as
touching holy Adam, Adam was not of the faith of Cain.
he held no more of Cain, than as though he never had had child. For Adam
feared God: Cain with his progeny despised God, and became the Serpents
generation. Wherefore when Adam had gotten another son, he was of a good
hope, that in Abels stead God had given him another son, which should do
right, and of whom the root of the blessed seed should spread out afterward.
For the which cause also he called him Seth, which by us is called a plant,
Seth the fir^^ re^^^e^ of the true faith.
meaning, that God had set and planted him as a branch, out of which the
Messiah should be borne. For as for Cain, he doubted of him. And from the same
Seth proceeded the generation of the righteous until Noe, and from him to
Abraham, and so unto David, and from thence forth unto Christ. This Seth
repaired our holy faith, which received great hurt at the death of Abel. The
reparation of our faith.
This did Seth (I say) for as much as he being taught inwardly of God, and by
mouth or outwardly of Adam, learned his children and their seed, to put their
trust in God, and to comfort themselves in the blessed seed, and to cleave unto
the same. Genesis 4.26.
For it is written manifestly: And then began men to call upon the name of the
Lord. Till this time was Adam with Heva his wife only a true friend and server
of God. Adams life.
The generation of Cain was now well spread abroad, and come to two hundred and
fifty years and above, but the more part lived without the fear of God,
unrepentant and ungodly. Wherefore in as much as the generation of Seth now
increased, and the fear of God and right belief was among them, the Scripture
faith well: To call upon the name of God, what it is.
And then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. And by this calling
upon, does the Scripture mean the true right belief and Gods service, that he
most allows. Of the progeny therefore of righteous Seth sprang the servants
of God, and presidents of our Christian faith. As for the cursed generation of
Cain, and of the ungodly, it was destroyed and drowned with the Flood.

To the holy genealogy of the true believers, pertains the Patriarch Enoch,
of whom it is written, that he walked before God, that is, he ordered his life
and conversation altogether after the will of God, being constant and upright
(no doubt) in all that, which God had spoken unto Adam. Therefore became he
also an example of the immortality of the soul, and resurrection of the
body, and that all Gods servants shall be saved after this life. For thus
says the Scripture; And in as much as he applied himself to walk after God,
God took him away, and he was no more seen. Hebr. 11.5.
The holy Apostle Paul also in the eleventh chapter to the Hebrews speaks
very excellently of Enochs faith, so that no man may doubt, but that he had
respect to the blessed seed, and pleased God through Christ.

Moreover, the enmity between the children of God and of man (that is, the
issue of the Serpent) grew ever more and more: so that on the one side the
multitude of God increased, and on the other side the multitude of the devil:
The number of the wicked ever greatest.
Yet at the last the multitude of the wicked was greatest. For when the
children of God withheld not themselves from the children of the world, but
took wives and husbands among them, they begat rough people, which had no
faith at all, and lived only after their own lust and temptation, forgot God
utterly, and regarded not the hundred and twenty years which God gave them to
amend. Therefore was God constrained, so to punish the unfaithful world once,
The wrath of God upon the wicked.
that all posterities unto the end of the world might have a terrible example
of the just wrath of God: whereby they might learn, how ungodliness and
unrighteousness displeases God. Thus the Lord brought the flood upon all the
earth, Noes Flood.
overthrew all that stood up, and destroyed every thing that had life, when the
world had stood now a thousand six hundred and six and fifty years. For so
many years find we in the fifth and seventh of Genesis, where it is written,
that Noe was six hundred years old, when the flood came upon the earth. Now if
we reckon the years of the old Fathers in the fifth chapter until Adam, we
shall find the foresaid sum. And thus the issue of the Serpent had an end,
and all ungodly and unrighteous living was mightily suppressed and destroyed of
God.

And in this horrible destruction of the ungodly, was faithful Noe saved (he
being the eighth) and preserved in the Arc through the grace and mercy of
God. The first triumph of faith in Noe.
Here our holy true Christian faith had the victory, and triumphed. For Noe
was of our faith* even of the seed of God, and put his trust in the blessed
seed our Lord Jesus. Yea, the Arc or ship of Noe was a figure of Christ, as we
may easily understand by the words of S. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Peter, 1 Pet. 3. Seeing then that Noe was preserved through the Arc, it
follows that he was saved by Jesus Christ, therefore is it manifest, that
he first believed in Christ. Noe also was he, with whom God first renewed the
covenant made with Adam. For it is but one covenant only even the foresaid
promise and end made by God unto Adam. Howbeit the same covenant was afterward
at certain times renewed by reason of certain occasions. Here might Noe have
thought that all the world, and all men, should utterly have been undone, for
as much as the Lord said, I am determined to destroy all flesh. Therefore
immediately he adds moreover, and says, Genes. 6.18.
But with thee will I set up my covenant, that is to say, whatsoever pertains
to my covenant, and what I have promised Adam already, the same will I surely
and constantly make good: and though I now destroy the world, yet will I
perform my truth through thee. For I will preserve thee alive, that the
blessed seed promised before, may hereafter be borne of thee in his generation.
To this did Noe trust, The sacrifice of Noe.
and was preserved of God through Christ. Moreover, when he was come out of the
Arc he did sacrifice, and thereby declared the thankfulness of his heart, and
believed, how that he knew that he had all good of God, which should also give
him a seed, that with sacrificing of himself should reconcile and pacific God.
For thus says the Scripture, Genes. 8.20.
Noe builded an Altar unto the Lord, and took of all manner of clean beasts
and fowls, and offered burnt sacrifice unto the Lord: and the Lord smelled the
sweet savor, and said in his heart, I will no more curse the earth for man's
sake, etc. So says Paul in the fifth to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.2.
Walk ye in love, like as Christ has loved us, and gave himself for us an
offering sacrifice of a sweet savor unto God. Whereby every man may learn and
see, that the sweet smell of the outward sacrifice of Noe did not chiefly
pacify God, Outward sacrifice the figure of Christ's oblation.
and was pleasant; but rather that through the bodily sacrifice, was figured
the sacrifice of Christ, and for his sake he was merciful unto the world. For
over Christ he said at Jordan when Christ was baptized: Matthew 3.17.
This is my dear beloved Son in whom I am pacified or reconciled.

The Commandments given unto Noe.
Besides this, the Lord gave unto Noe certain laws, but none other than even
such as he had given to his forefathers, and written in their hearts. The
first pertains to marriage and bringing up of children, in the which is
comprehended all that is written concerning nurture, cleanliness and
temperance, of care and bringing up of children in the fear of God, virtue,
obedience and learning. The second forbids violence and deceit, namely, that
no man shall eat blood. For it is a figurative precept commanding, that no man
get his living by murder, by oppressing the poor, by usurie, by extortion, by
falsehood and deceit. Moreover, all things living were subdued unto him, and all
meats were permitted him. In conclusion, whatsoever concerned the love of God
and their neighbor, the same is here renewed unto Noe and his children, and
required of them.

Through Noe was the world replenished.
Of Noe came afterward all people, yea among his three sons Iaphet, Sem and
Cham, he had both the seed of God and of the froward serpent, that is, such as
had respect unto God, and them also that regarded the devil. Cham the first
Idolater after the Flood.
Of Cham came the Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, by and from whom sprang
idolatry, offering to images, and from whom false religion came up first, and
was brought in among other nations by the help of the old serpent, as among
the Greeks, Romans, and other people.

By this it is good to understand, that our holy Christian faith is elder than
any other. For here may we see clearly, that after a thousand and certain
hundred years (almost in the eight hundredth or nine hundredth year) came up
the first beginning of the Heathens belief and offering to Images, The faith
^f Heathen ^s idolatry (...) Genesis 10.^.
and yet came it of wicked cursed men. For cursed Cham was the beginning of the
Egyptians, and Nimroth the ungodly extortioner and tyrant was the first founder
of the kingdom of Babylon, which kingdom with the building of a mighty tower,
set forth his pride. Nevertheless the hand of God declared it self
immediately, Genesis 11 ^*
as it is read in the eleventh chapter of Genesis. Finally, in the generation
of Cham had the serpent great power: howbeit in the posterity of Iaphet also
(of whom the Almaines come) and in the posterity of Sem, he had his issue
likewise.

Of the progeny of Sem were borne Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Genesis 11. And as
it is said before, Gen* 11.10.27. Faith d^^kned after the flood.
the sincere faith was somewhat darkened in Chaldea: therefore did God call
Abraham out from the idolatry, and renewed with him the old true Christian
faith begun with Adam, and said, Genesis 12. Genesis 12.1.
Get thee out of thy country and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house
unto the land that I will show thee, and I will bless thee, and make a great
nation of thee. And in thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Item
in the 22. chapter speaks God yet more clearly, Genes. 22.18.
and says, In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. This
does Paul declare in the third to the Galathians, and says, In thy seed which
is Christ. Galath. 3.8.
Therefore was the same now another renewing of the promise of Christ the
blessed seed. The promise renewed to Abraham.
For first was he promised unto Adam, afterward was the promise renewed with
Noe, and now with Abraham. And all this now is but one promise, Abraham's faith.
one Savior, and one faith. Abraham also believed in Jesus Christ, and was
saved by faith. For Jesus Christ says himself in the eighth chapter of John,
John 8.56.
Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced. What is now the day of Christ but the
clearness of the holy Gospel? This light had he not bodily, but saw it with
the eyes of faith, and the same made him joyful and saved him. For Christ is
the true joy of troubled consciences. Thus became Abraham the Father of all
faithful believers, Romans 4.16.
Romans 4. And if we believe and do as Abraham did, then are we Abraham's
children, and shall rest with him in his bosom, even in the kingdom of God,
Luke 13.28.16.22.19. Mat. 8.11. Paul also to the Galathians in the third
chapter says, Galath. 3.29.
If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs according to the
promise. Out of this faith in Christ, Abraham's Christian works.
did Abraham Christian works; for with a good will left he his own native
country, all Idols and all Images: all misfortune, hunger and misery took he
patiently: he was not hard against Loath his nephew, but did jeopard his body
and life for the oppressed: he was liberal, merciful, and harborous: he
prayed fervently unto God for the poor sinners: he suffered oppression,
violence and wrong, and for Gods sake also he thought to sacrifice and offer up
his own most dearly beloved son Isaac. Finally, there is no reasonable good
christian work, but thou see it in the life of Abraham. Therefore to us also
for an example of our faith and conversation, he is set forth of the Lord
himself and his Apostles throughout the New Testament.

Here also is it manifest, The f^i^^ of the Iewe^
that our holy faith is elder than the Jewish faith. For the Jews do boast
themselves of the Circumcision, and because they are called Jews and Israel,
and that the Law, the Priesthood and Gods service was given unto them: And yet,
Genesis 15.6. and 17.1. and Romans 4.18. it is evident, that Abraham was Gods friend
and justified or made righteous, or ever he was circumcised. For when he was
circumcised, he was 99. year old, Genesis 17. Genesis 17*24.
Now was the promise made unto him many years before. The Scripture also says
plainly: Abraham believed God, Genesis 15.6.
and the same was counted unto him for righteousness, Genesis 15. So was it many
years after, or ever Israel and Judah was borne, of whom they have taken their
name. The Law also was given 430. years after the promise, as Paul made the
reckoning, Gal. 3. It follows therefore that our Christian faith is 2048.
Gal. 3.17. H^ would the Christian faith i^.
years elder than the Circumcision, and 2449. years elder than the Law, the
Priesthood and ceremonies of the Jews. For from Adam unto the Flood, were
1656. years. And from the Flood until the departing of Abraham out of Caldea
363. years. From that time are reckoned 430. years until the departing of
Israel out of Egypt. And on the 50. day after the departing, was the Law given
unto Israel upon Mount Sin^, Exodus 19.20.
Exodus 19.20. And after certain days was the Priesthood and ceremonies
appointed them. Whereas God then made a covenant with Abraham, when he ordained
the Circumcision, it serves more to the confirmation of our holy Christian
faith, than to the maintenance of the Jewish ceremonies.

Isaac and Jacob were Abraham's children, not only after the flesh, but also
after the spirit. For they had the says of their father and grandfather
Abraham, put their trust only in God through Jesus Christ, and lived a sober
and virtuous life. Of this does the Scripture bear them record thorowout: Yea
Jacob, Genesis 32.28. O^ Israel came the Israe^^^^s.
whom the Lord also called otherwise Israel, (of whom afterward all the people
of God received the name Israel) had many visions of the Lord Christ, Genesis 28.
as with the ladder that stood upon the earth, the top reaching to heaven, on
the which the Angels of God went up and down. Jacob saw that Christ only is
the way to heaven.
For herewith was represented unto him the Lord Jesus, which is the way unto
heaven, the truth and life, without whom no man comes unto the Father. Upon
the vision of Jacob, says he also himself, John 1. Verily I say unto you,
John 1.51.
henceforth shall ye see the heaven open, and the Angels of God going up and
down upon the son of man. And so constant was Jacob in remembering the same,
that afterward at the commandment of the Lord, he set up in the same place an
Altar, no doubt (as it is said before) for a figure of the cross and sacrifice
of Christ, and there honored he and worshipped the Lord: Genesis 35.2.
he commanded all his people also, that they should forsake strange gods, and
give him the Idols that they had brought with them out of Mesopotamia, and he
buried them under an Oak that stood beside Sichem, Genesis 35. And when he would
now die, he prophesied very clearly of the Lord Christ, how he should be borne
out of the kindred of Judah, and that he should be borne the same time that the
kingdom should be taken from Judah. Which thing also came to pass in Herod's
time. For in the 32. year of the reign of Herod, was CHRIST borne at Bethleem
in Iewry. Whereof the words of Jacob are these: Genesis 49.10.
The scepter shall not be taken away from Judah, nor a Ruler from his fe^t, till
Schilo come (that is to say, the Savior, and he in whom all nations shall be
blessed) and the people shall fall unto him. This steadfast faith of Jacob did
Joseph follow also, The faith of Joseph.
which mortified his own flesh, declared patience in adversity and prison,
and exercised great justice and equity in his governance. Joseph a figure of
Jesus.
He was a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ, who also being sold of his own unto
the Heathen, The continuance of faith before the Law.
preserved his brethren alive. So that from the beginning of the world until
the death of Joseph, the right Christian faith endured 2300. years. And thus
all holy Patriarks before the Law, were sawed, not through the Law, nor by
their own strength and deserving, but through the blessed seed our Lord Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. VI. The law of God given by Moses, leads unto Christ, and makes
mention of all his doings.
THe Israelites after the death of Joseph until their departing and
deliverance out of Egypt, were in the land 140. years. And like as before in
the time of Noe the dwelling among the wicked became occasion of falling unto
the righteous: Even so now did the Israelites learn idolatry and all
unhappiness of the Egyptians. For the which cause also they were sore
oppressed a long season, howbeit there remained yet many excellent men which
kept still the old faith, and hated the abominations of the Egyptians. For of
Moses (which was borne 60. years after the death of Joseph) says Paul: Heb
11* 24.
Moses through faith when he grew up and was great, refused to be called the
son of Pharaos daughter: and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and esteemed the
rebuke of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, The faith of
Moses.
for he had respect to the reward, Heb. 11. Now can no man desire to suffer
with Christ, except he have knowledge of Christ's suffering. Therefore Moses in
the midds of all persecution had knowledge of Christ, and the faith in Christ.
So is there no doubt, but more virtuous people had this true faith, which were
all oppressed and vexed in Egypt, like as afterward the right faithful
believers were somewhat more persecuted: as among the heathen in the time of
the Judges and Kings of Judah and Israel: under king Antiochus: under the
Emperors Nero, Tra^^n^s, Domitianus, Maximianus, Iulianus and other. As for the
unbeleevers, they in such miserable times received the reward of their
unthankfulness, disobedience, idolatry, and blasphemy.

But when the appointed time came which God had foreseen and opened unto
Abraham, Genesis 15. Genesis 15.13.
he brought the people of Israel by Moses out of Egypt, with and through great
wonders and tokens. By the which he first declared his power, then his loving
kindness, and mercy toward his own, and his terrible justice and vengeance
against his enemies: whereby all the world might know, that there was none
other just and true God save the God of Israel, in whose hand only consists
all things, which also of his mere mercy preserves his own, and with right
judgment rewards his enemies. Specially this is most wonderful, that in
this great business and work he has so mightily set forth the redemption
performed by our Lord Jesus Christ, yea and expressed it to be a very mighty
redemption. For the same night (when they should depart away and be dispatched
in the morning) the Lord commanded them to kill a lamb, The Easter lamb.
and with the blood thereof to sprinkle the doors and posts of the house: So
when the Angel that in the same night slew the first borne of the Egyptians
saw the blood, he should do no harm, and slay no man therein, Exodus 12.3.
Now testifies Paul, 1 Cor. 5.7. that Christ Jesus is our Easter Lamb and
Passover. So says Saint John, John 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Therefore
were not the Israelites spared, because of the blood of beasts, The del^verance
out of Egypt a figu^^ of our redemption by Christ.
but for the bloods sake of the blessed seed that was promised for to come. And
thus the whole deliverance out of Egypt was a figure of the true redemption,
by the which we are delivered from the power of the devil and from everlasting
death through Jesus Christ, and brought into the land of promise, even to
eternal joy and salvation, which God promised unto our fathers Adam, Noe,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Now when the Lord had carried his people out of Egypt, and brought them through
the red sea dry shod, and had drowned Pharao with all his people, he commanded
his folk to prepare and cleanse themselves at mount Sina. For he would bind
himself unto them, receive them as his own people, and give them his law and
ordinance. The gi^ing of the law.
Which thing he also did, and appointed his law himself, spoke it with his
own mouth, and wrote it with his own fingers in two tables of stone. In the
one and first table he ordained four commandments, concerning the worship
and love of God; The first table.
namely, that we should take him only for the true and right God, and none
else beside or except him: That we should worship and honor him only, and in
no wise to have any other God, comfort, or hope. Item, that we should in no
wise make any image or picture of any things, and neither to worship them nor
serve them. Moreover, that we should not take the name of God in vain, or
lightly. And that we should hallow the Sabbath day. In the other table
ordained he six commandments concerning man. And like as the four first are
comprehended in these words: Matthew. 22.37.39
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. Even so are the six
contained in these words following: The second Table.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. The commandments are these: Thou
shall honor father and mother. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not break
wedlock. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall bear no false witness. Thou shall
not l^st. In all these commandments is comprehended all that serves for a
godly life, and that any where is written of God, of true serving of God, and
of right virtue toward this world.

Who so now does well ponder these ten chapters or commandments, The law
written in stone (...) no n^w thing.
and compares them to the doings and works of the holy Patriarks and old
Fathers which had no law in writing, he shall find, that the Lord now with
this his written law began no new thing, neither ought that was not before in
the world, but rather renewed the old: and the law that he hitherto had written
in the hearts of holy men, now when the people had gotten them stony hearts, he
wrote the same in tables of stone. The first Commandment.
For that we ought to worship and serve God only, and to have none other
Gods, the same did the holy fathers so believe and keep, that all their
conversation and doing bears record 2.
thereof. Concerning images or idols, it is evident, that Jacob buried the Idols
of Mesopotamia 3.
under an Oak beside Sichem, Genesis 35.4. We may perceive also by the oaths of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, how the name of God was had in reverence 4.
among them of old, and not taken in vain. The Sabbath did not the Lord ordain
here first, but on the seventh day of the Creation, Genesis 2.3. The same did the
fathers keep aright no doubt, John 5.
7.22. Whereas Cham had not his father Noe in reverence, 6.
he was cursed for it, Genesis 9.25. Advoutry did the heathen rulers forbid under
pain of death, 7.
as we may see, Genesis 26.10, 11. Whereby it is easy to understand, how the
blessed friends of God kept holy wedlock.

8.
How contrary the holy men were unto theft and deceit, it appears in the
parting of Abraham and Loath, Genesis 13.6, 8, 9. And in Jacobs faithfulness and
handling with Laban his father in law, Gen 29.37, 30, 33, 31.6. Lying and false
dealing was so far from the holy fathers, that for keeping their credit and
truth, they obtained very great commendation. Notwithstanding they were tempted
with evil as all men be, but they resisted the wicked lusts. For manifest is
the chaste act of Joseph, Genesis 39.8.
which would not touch his masters wife, nor desire her. The law written in
stone was fulfilled before.
Wherefore in these commandments is nothing written or required, that was not
also required of the fathers before the law, and performed through true faith in
Christ. The Lord therefore began no new thing with his people, when he
delivered them the tables of the law: Only he would bring into a short sum
and set in writing all the law that the Fathers had (but not together, nor
comprehended in a sum) to the intent that they should the less be forgotten
of the people, which through their dwelling in Egypt among Idolaters and false
believers, were brought into sore offense and slander. This must now be
rectified again after this manner. The Laws given after the ten Commandments
were by-Lawes.
As for all the laws and ordinances which afterward were added unto these two
tables, they were not joined thereunto as principal laws, but as by-lawes,
for the declaration and better understanding of the ten Chapters or
Commandments. For the perfect sum of all laws, the very right rule of
godliness, of Gods service, of righteousness, of good and evil conversation,
is comprehended already in the two tables.

But here might some men make objection and say: Objection.
If all truth be contained in these ten Commandments, how happens it, that
by no token there is mention made of the blessed seed promised unto the
Fathers? Hitherto is it declared and promised unto the holy Fathers, that they
shall be saved through the blessed seed out of the very grace of God, and for
none of their own deservings: but now are written laws which command and
forbid us, as though we through our own works and deserving (as namely if we
keep these Commandments) should be saved and acceptable unto God. Where is
now Christ? Where is the faith of the Patriarchs? Here is nothing heard of
faith, but much, yea only of works?

Answer.
Answer. This objection has deceived many, that they have had no right opinion
and faith of the grace of God and our righteous making. Therefore will we now
give no answer out of our selves, but set forth holy Paul, and let him answer,
that the answer may be the more sure, and the better esteemed. Paul in the
third chapter to the Galathians writes after this manner: Galath 3*15
Dear brethren, I will speak after the manner of men; When a man's Testament
is confirmed, no man does lightly regard or despise it, nor adds ought
thereto.

Now were the promises made unto Abraham and to his seed. He says not, In the
seeds, as in many, but as in one: And in thy seed, which is Christ. All these
are Paul's words, and the meaning of them is; For as much as the Testaments or
works of men are of such reputation in the world, that when they are made,
ordained and confirmed, no man dare add ought to them, or minish any thing
from them, but every man must let them be as they are of themselves: Gods
Testament.
It is much more reason that Gods Testament or bequest remain still, and that
nothing be added to it, or taken from it. Now did God make a Testament or
bequest with Abraham, and promised him therein, that he would give him a seed,
in whom he and his children should be saved. And the same salvation did he
expressly appoint in one, and not in many. Wherefore we must add nothing unto
Gods bequest, seeing he has promised us salvation in Christ only, and not in
many (that is to say, in no creature, not in our own power and works of the
Law) neither must we think, that the Law was afterward added to the intent as
though Christ were not able to save us, or as though we might obtain salvation
by our own works out of the Law. For thus follows it in Paul word to word:
Galath. 3.17.
This Testament (I say) which before was confirmed to Christward, is not
disanulled or made of none effect by the Law (which was given beyond four
hundred years thereafter.) For if the inheritance begotten by the Law, then is
it not given by the promise. But God gave it freely unto Abraham by promise.
These are Paul's words, out of the which every man may understand, that to the
generation of man, Salvation by grace, not by desert or works.
salvation is given only of the grace of God through the promise, and through
no deserving at all: and that the law of the promise (that is to say, the
bequest and Testament of God) is nothing minished, but that the sum remains
without blemish, namely, that salvation is given us freely.

But here might one ask; Objection.
Seeing that the salvation is clearly enough expressed before the Law, and is
ascribed only unto the grace of God, why would God then add the Law? why was
he not content with the Testament alone? Answer.
Therefore follows it now in Paul: Why then serves the Law? Galath. 3.19.
It was added because of transgressions, till the seed came that was promised.
These are Paul's words, which are thus to be understood: The Law was not given
because of the promise, to make it of none effect, and to teach that men are
saved by works, and not through the grace and free liberty of God: Why the Law
was given.
but it was given because of transgression, that is to say, because that the
people of God in Egypt had transgressed the way and truth of their Fathers,
and knew no more what was sin, right or unright, wherein stood salvation or
damnation: for they were corrupt through the long dwelling among the Idolaters
of Egypt. Therefore did God ordain them the Law, out of the which they might
learn the will of God, what sin, right or unright is, and to know
themselves, to go into themselves, and to consider how that the holy works
which God requires, are not in their own power; for the which cause all the
world have great need of a Mediator. The Law was given to further the promise.
And thus the Law was given to further the promise, namely, that we through
the Law might be led only unto Christ. For thus follows it in Paul's words:
Gal. 3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
And it was given of Angels by the hand of a Mediator. A Mediator is not a
Mediator of one only: but God is one. Is the Law then against the promises of
God? God forbid. Howbeit, if there had been given a law, which could have
given life, then no doubt righteousness should come of the Law. But the
Scripture has shut up all under sin, that the promise should come by the
faith on Jesus Christ, given unto them that believe. Before faith came (that is
to say, Jesus Christ in whom we believe) we were kept and shut up under the
Law, unto the faith which should afterward be declared. Thus was the Law our
Schoolmasters unto Christ, that we might be made righteous by faith, etc. By
these words of Paul may every man understand now for what cause the Law was
given, and how it is not contrary to the promise of the foresaid seed, but
rather brings us from our selves, and from all creatures, only unto Jesus
Christ. The Law therefore confirms the first promise concerning the blessed
seed, and teaches that we obtain all salvation in him only. The Law is the
rule to live by.
Howbeit it is also a rule of our life, informing us what we ought to do, and
what we ought to leave undone. Yet on our side is all unfruitful, where faith
is not. But where faith is, it cease not through love to work good according
to the Law: all honor and praise being referred unto God, to men nothing but
unperfectnesse.

God also among his people wrought many things, whereby he set the cause of
Jesus Christ clearly before the eyes of the people, as it is expressed before by
the Lamb of the Passover. Likewise is it where as Moses hanged up a Serpent
in the wilderness, that all they which were stung and poisoned of serpents,
should behold the brazen serpent hanging, and not die, but be saved alive.
Whereas doubtless the outward beholding of the brazen serpent, saved not them
that were poisoned: but it was God, which would so declare, that his Son
should be hanged upon a cross, to the intent that every one which were
poisoned and defiled by the old serpent and sin, should believe in the Son
of God, and live in him. For so is it written, Sap. Wisdom. 16.6, 7. The brazen
Serpent a figure of Christ.
16. They had a token of health according to the commandment. For who so
converted, was not made whole by the outward thing which he saw, but by thee
which art the restorer of health, and Savior of all. And yet says Christ more
clearly, Ioh. 3. John 3.14, 15.
And like as Moses set up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
Son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have eternal life.

And as touching this, the holy Apostle Paul brings in another sentence, 1
Cor. 10.1, 2.
1 Cor. 10. and says: Brethren, I would not have you ignorant of this, that
our Fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, Christ is
the rock.
and were all baptized under Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did all eat
one spiritual meat, and drink of one spiritual drink. But they drank all
of the spiritual rock that followed them, which rock was Christ.

Besides this, if we consider the declaration of the laws of the first Table
(which teaches how we shall behave our selves right toward God, to love,
worship and honor him, to serve him and to cleave only unto him) we shall
find in the same first Table, the whole cause of Christ. For all that
afterward was ordained and appointed concerning the Tabernacle, the Priesthood,
and the Oblations, pertains to the sum of the first Table, for as much as
the Scripture and the mouth of God calls it his law, precept, commandment,
use and statute, ordinance and service.

Question.
And if thou ask, How can God which is a spirit, be served with outward,
visible, and fleshly things, as the foresaid ceremonies of the Jews are?

Answer.
I answer; Such outward rites of the people of God were sacraments and tokens of
heavenly invisible good things, and were not the heavenly riches themselves.
Wherefore they neither served nor pleased God, that used and did such service
without faith and lifting up of the mind. But they that put their trust in
God, cleaving only unto him, and lifting up their hearts higher, and remained
not in the visible thing, those pleased God. Whereas they had but one Altar and
one place appointed where they should do sacrifice; One altar what i^
signified.
it signified the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that he should be
offered up but once, (and that in one place) for the sin of the world.
Therefore whereas the high Priest also every year went into the inward
Tabernacle with blood; it signified, that our Lord Jesus should come into this
world, and shed his blood once for all, to forgive and cleanse our sins, and
so to ascend unto heaven. Yea all oblations and all sheddings of blood in the
sacrifices of the old fathers, signified the death of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Nothing was cleansed among them without blood; which signifies, Note this well.
that all the purging of our uncleanness is done by the blood of Jesus Christ.
And all the Priesthood which was ordained for to teach, to pray, and make
intercession, to offer and do sacrifice, represented the office of our Lord
Christ, which came into this world, to teach us the truth and righteousness:
then to offer himself to the Father for our sins, and after the sacrifice
done, to rise up again from death, to ascend unto heaven, there to sit at the
right hand of God, and even there as a true high Bishop to appear always in the
presence of God, and to pray for us. This is the sum of the rites and
ceremonies of the old fathers, the understanding of the figures, and the spirit
of the letter: whereof holy Paul has written much in the most excellent
epistle to the Hebrews.

Why the ceremonies of the Law were given.
Out of all this is it easy to understand, how that these rites and ceremonies
of the fathers were sacraments, and given to the people of God. Not that they
with the letter and outward visible and corporal thing should sufficiently
serve God which is a spirit, but that they should lift up their minds above
the same to the spiritual things, pondering the mercy of God; out of the which
he being moved, is become gracious unto us. And when he might have damned us
for our sins and misdeeds, he spared us for his Sons sake, whom he gave unto
death, and his innocent death has he accepted for our sins. Such a faithful
consideration (which is the true belief) pleases God, and with such a faith
is God served, and such a faith would the Lord have taught and planted in us,
with the foresaid rites and ceremonies. Therefore all they that pleased God
among the old fathers, pleased him not for the letters sake, but by reason of
the spirit.

When the sacrifice also and ceremony was executed after the ordinance of God
in the congregation, the beloved friends of God had not only respect unto the
outward thing, but much rather beheld they Christ with the eyes of faith, and
thought thus: The godly consideration of the fathers.
Behold the will of God has ordained to do sacrifice for sin: now are we all
sinners and debtors unto God, in so much that he has power and right over us,
that like as the beast which is now slain and offered, dies, and has his
blood shed: Even so might God now also kill us all, and condemn us for ever.
Nevertheless he has taken us to his mercy, and promised us a seed, which
should thus die on the Cross, and cleanse us with his blood, and with his
death restore us unto life: which thing no doubt shall as surely come to pass,
as this beast is slain and offered now before our eyes. And like as the blood
is sprinkled over the people, for the bodily cleansing: so shall the blood of
Christ be sprinkled upon our souls, etc. And out of such a thought and
faithful consideration of the sacrifices, grew repentance and sorrow for their
sins, a gladness, praise, comfort and thanksgiving unto God the merciful
Father. And to this do serve certain Psalms, which were made concerning the
sacrifices. To this also serve all the rebukings of the holy Prophets, and the
refusing of the oblations. For the external pomp and show of the offerings,
without faith in God and the blessed seed, is nothing worth; yea it is rather
abominable unto God, as thou see in the first chapter of Esaias.

Thou will ask: Question.
Might not God have taught and showed his people the cause of Jesus Christ and
of true belief, none other way than through and with such cost, pomp and
glory of sacrifices and other gorgeousness of the Church?

I answer: Answer.
If the people had not fallen to more wickedness in Egypt through their
dwelling among the Idolaters, but had constantly and steadfastly remained, as
did their fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, then might they well have
continued by the old short simple form, as it was among the holy fathers. But
now had they seen in Egypt an outward costly Gods service, with temples,
altars, sacrifices, priesthood, holy days, ornaments, etc. Likewise the
idolatry increased daily in all the world, so that now there was utterly no
people, which had not their own outward ceremonies, wherewith they served God.

To the intent then that God might retain his people within the compass of
faith in one God, and in the blessed seed promised before: to the intent also
that they should show no outward service to any other gods, W^y G^^ (...) among
the (...).
or take upon them to serve God after the manner of the Egyptians or of other
heathen, he appointed an outward Gods service, and commanded to do the same
unto him, and else to none, and in the same pleased it him to set forth all the
cause of the foresaid seed, till he came and performed all things in deed, that
they had figuratively in their sacrifices.

Moreover, God (according to his wisdom) of his special mercy and good heart
that he has unto man's generation, would with these outward tokens tender our
weakness, which of spiritual heavenly things has better understanding, when
they are showed unto it by corporal visible things. God therefore through such
corporal representations, God tendreth our weakness.
labored to show unto that gross and fleshly people, the heavenly cause of
his Son. Nevertheless the corporal visible things were given for no longer,
but until the time of the fulfilling. But now that Christ has appeared, and
fulfilled and performed all that was written and figured of him in the Law and
the Prophets, the figure cease, and the outward sacraments of Moses law are
of no more value to be exercised and used. Thus much be said of the ceremonies.

Whereas beside the ceremonies, Laws judicial.
there is much written also in the Law concerning civil policy, ordinance,
judgment, to live peaceably and well in city and land: of buying and selling,
of war and peace, of inheritance and proprieties, of laws matrimonial, of
punishment of the wicked, of the judgment and counsel, of lending and
borrowing, etc. It is no news at all, and serves altogether for the
declaration of the six commandments of the second Table, and is comprehended
in the words of Paul, Romans 13. Love thy neighbor as thy self: And in the
words of Christ, Romans 13.9. Matthew. 7.12.
That thou would not have done unto thee, do not thou to another, Matthew. 7.
Such laws and rules to live in peace, in a civil order and in virtue, have
also the good holy fathers had from the beginning of the world, written in
their hearts by God himself. Now has God also caused all to be comprehended
in writing by Moses, to the intent that the world might have all more clearly
and perfectly, and that no man might excuse himself of ignorance.

CHAP. VII. The original of the holy Scripture and faith thereof.
The five original b^^kes of holy Scripture written by Moses.
THis matter which I have hitherto treated upon, have I not fained of my self,
but taken it out of the mouth and word of God. For God stirred up Moses to
write, and leave behind him all the matter, for our learning and knowledge.
This did now Moses with great faithfulness, and comprehended all in four
books. The first is called the book of the creation, The first b^oke of Moses.
from the beginning of the world unto his time, of the creation of the world,
beginning of all nations, and of the Patriarks and old righteous servants of
God, of their faith and conversation, of the promises and works of God. The
same wrote he as he was inspired of the Holy Ghost, and as he had received of
old fathers, and somewhat as he found in the books of the Egyptians. Acts
7.22.
For Moses was excellently well learned in all wisdom of the Egyptians, as
Steven does witness of him, Act. 7. The other three books wrote he of his
own time, according as he himself was present, saw, and knew. And specially
the second book, The second book of Moses.
concerning the departing out of Egypt, how the people of God were oppressed
in Egypt, how the Egyptians were punished, how Israel was delivered, received
the Law, and set up a Tabernacle with a gorgeous serving of God. The third
book.
In the third book, which is called Leviticus, are written the spiritual
Laws, namely such as concern the Priests and the Priesthood, their office,
living, knowledge, sacrifices, solemn feast days, rites, ceremonies, and such
like. The fourth book.
In the fourth, which is called Numeri, he writes at length, how they went
through the wilderness, and came to Jordan, with a rehearsal of their order
and number, of their murmuring also and punishment, and of certain victories,
with a remembrance of certain laws and statutes. Beside all this, The fifth
book.
he made yet an Enchiridion and sum of all the acts of his time, and of the
Law of God, which is called Deuteronomium: the same commanded he to be laid
in the Arc at the motion of God, and that it should be read unto all the
people, as it is mentioned, Deuteronomy. 31. And in these five books, The original
Scripture of our faith.
given us of God by Moses, is the whole ground of our holy faith. For all the
Prophets afterward grounded themselves upon the same, and wrote thereout, like
as afterward our Lord Jesus and the Apostles point unto Moses. Neither did ever
any righteous man of understanding, and that feared God, doubt any thing, or
blaspheme such Scriptures. And from such true servants of God, have we
hitherto received our matters in writing.

Thus much have I said concerning the Law, The Law written is no new thing.
how it is no new thing, but even the only will of God, but now comprehended
in writing: Moreover, that all the Law points unto Christ, and that all men
of right understanding which lived under the Law, were Christians. For manifest
is it that Paul said, Romans 10. Christ is the end of the Law, Romans 10.4.
to justify every one that believes. And Galat. 3. Or ever faith (that is to
say, Gal. 3.23.
Christ) came, we were kept and shut up under the Law, unto the faith which
should afterward be declared. Thus was the Law our schoolmasters unto Christ,
that we might be made righteous by faith. All this, I suppose, will be new
and strange in many hearts; nevertheless, I trust that all they which have
understanding, do see and knowledge, that this is the true, old, right, and
godly Divinity and Theology, which ascribes all honor unto God the Father,
through our Lord Jesus Christ in the Holy Ghost. To whom be glory and praise
for ever. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. All virtuous Kings, and the people of Israel, trusted unto Christ,
and not to the Law.
The death of Moses.
AFter that the Law was given, and Gods service set up, Moses the servant of God
died, being an hundred and twenty years old: and at the commandment and
commission of God, he left Gods people to be ruled and guided by the faithful
valiant Iosue, Iosue was a figure of Christ.
which also was a figure of our Lord Jesus. For like as it was not Moses, but
Iosue, that brought the people into the land of promise: Even so are we brought
into the eternal rest, not by the works of the Law, nor through our own
deserving, but by grace through Jesus Christ: like as it is also with many
words expressed of holy Paul, Heb. 4.3. etc. This Iosue, no doubt, did keep,
maintain and defend Gods faith and religion, with the spirit and understanding
thereof, and taught other to keep the same, like as he through Gods
inspiration received it of the fathers by Moses. Which thing, though it be
evident in many points, yet is it manifest specially by this, that he would
not suffer the children of Ruben and Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasse, to
set up and have another altar, beside the only altar that the Lord had
appointed them. For herein (as it is mentioned before) was figured the virtue
and perfectness of the only cross, death, and sacrificing of Jesus Christ.
Therefore would not Iosue that any thing should be set cheeke-mate with the
cross and oblation of Jesus Christ, but that all honor of cleansing and
forgiveness of sins should be ascribed only unto him.

Whereas Iosue now, and other Judges, Rulers, Princes and Kings of Israel after
him, used sore and great war, stroke many horrible battles, Iosue fought at
Gods commandment.
destroyed much land and people, and shed men's blood without measure, he did it
as a chief head, and as an instrument and vessel of God, at the commandment
of God, which would so punish the Idolatry, the great sin and blasphemy of
the ungodly, which he had long suffered, and exhorted them to amendment, but
for all his patient abiding, they would not convert: Those now did he root out
through the sword of his beloved friends: sometime delivered he his people with
the sword of the righteous, and saved them from the hand of their enemies. For
because of the sins of his people, he gave them over sometime into the hand
of their enemies, to nurture and correct them with the rod: then fell the
people of God, and fled before their enemies, and were subdued and oppressed of
the ungodly, till they knowledged their sins, called upon God and amended,
putting their trust in God only, through the blessed seed, worshipping him
only, calling upon him, and honoring him according to his word, casting away
strange worshipping of God, service of Idols, that shameful, blasphemous and
ungodly living. Then sent he them his help, and delivered them in his power,
by the ministration of his appointed Captains. And such warring, delivering
and punishing was no fleshly unfaithful work, whom no man ought to follow, as
some, being wrapped with the unstedfast spirit of the Maniches and Anabaptists,
An heresy of the Anabaptists. Heb. 11.32.
do mean. For Paul expresses clearly; And what shall I say of Gedeon,
Barach, Sampson, and Iephtha, David, and Samuel, and the Prophets? which
through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of
the sword, of weak were made strong, became valiant in battle, turned to
flight the armies of the Aliants, Heb. 11. All which works the holy Apostle
praises and commends as excellent works of faith. Therefore are they no
works of the flesh, neither is it now contrary to the holy faith, if Christian
rulers deliver their innocent people (whom God has subdued unto them) from
wrongful violence, and defend their liberty, righteousness, house and land,
or punish the shameful blasphemers, Idolaters, and persecuters of the holy
faith, and not suffer them to have all their malicious will. Nevertheless,
Rulers must punish.
this must be done by them, to whom God has committed the sword. For thus
says the Lord: Matthew. 26.52.
Who so takes away the sword, shall perish through the sword, Matthew. 26. But
specially in the battles of Gods people and of the unfaithful, it comes to
pass, and is expressly set before our eyes, that God said to the serpent at
the beginning, Genesis 3. Genesis 3.15
I will put enmity between thy seed and the woman's seed. For the righteous
are the seed of Christ, the unrighteous and unfaithful are the seed of the
Devil. Between these now see we great discord; but specially this, that the
faithful do always tread the serpent on the head, though they themselves also
be bitten in the heel. For the right faithful believers before the birth of
Christ in the time of the promise, had no less trouble and persecution, not
only because of sin, but also for righteousness and faiths sake, than the
faithful after Christ's birth in the time of grace and perfectness. An errou^.
Therefore have they small knowledge of the doings of the faithful, which say,
that the people of old were a victorious people, and governed corporally, but
that the people after Christ's coming are borne to suffer, and to no victory
or governance. Nevertheless in these wonderful times (in the which Gods
people had no victory, and anon were subdued and oppressed) the true faith
continued upright and unblemished from Iosue forth throughout all the Judges,
until the time and reign of David.

Of King David.
David also was a man that suffered much through diverse and long trouble,
through miserable distress and vexation, and through sore persecution, without
ceasing, being proved, tried and provoked, before he was King. Whereof the
books of Samuel and the more part of the Psalms bears record. But after
that he was promoted unto the kingdom, by God (which said, Acts 15.22.
I have found a man after mine own heart) he advanced, set forth, and magnified
the true faith right diligently. Here also to the honor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, will I shortly and by the way declare, what knowledge and faith this
noble King and Prophet had of our Lord Jesus. This will I do with the
declaration of the 110. Psalm, whose words are these: Psalm. 110.1.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. In the first verse David knowledgeth the persons in
the holy Trinity, The holy Trinity.
the Godhead also and the eternal kingdom of Christ. Thus likewise did our
Lord Jesus Christ understand and allege this verse in the Gospel, Matthew. 22.
knowledging two of the Persons in the one only Godhead, Matthew. 22.44.
for he says, The Lord said unto my Lord. Now is it certain and undeniable,
that he which speaks, and he to whom ought is spoken, are not one, but two
Persons. Yet is there but one Lord and God, and they both (the Father that
speaks, and the Son to whom is spoken) are the Lord, therefore are they
one, of one substance and being, the very true God. Neither is the Son less
than the Father. There can also none be a father, except he have a son or a
child. Now is the everlasting Father God, therefore is the Son also
everlasting. There is also but one only everlasting without beginning. Both the
Father and the Son are eternal without beginning, therefore are they one
only true God with the holy Ghost. Like as John also says, In the beginning,
(that is to say, from everlasting) was the Word, and the Word was with God,
John 1.1.
and the Word was God. And immediately thereafter, says he, that the Word is
Jesus Christ our Lord. For it follows: The Word became flesh. John 1.14.
Therefore does David also call the Son of God specially his Lord, saying, The
Lord said unto my Lord. Matthew. 22.24. The faith of David in Christ.
And therefore calls he Christ his Lord, because he confesses and
believes, that he is his very natural Lord and God, as Thomas also did
knowledge: John 20.20.
My Lord and my God, Ioh. 20. Afterward calls he him his Lord, because that
after the nature of man, he should be borne out of his loins. For thorowout
all the Scripture is our Lord Jesus called the Son of David: And thus does
David knowledge two natures in Christ, the nature of God, and the nature of man.

That the kingdom of Christ shall last for ever, and that the kind and nature
of man shall be exalted above all heavens (as Paul says, Hebr. 2.) David
testifies with these words: Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Psalm. 110.1.
For Mark says in the sixteenth chapter: Mark 16.19.
The Lord was taken up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God. Of
this also find we 1 Cor. 15.15. Now must he needs be very God indeed, which
reigns for ever, and to whom all enemies must be subdued, yea cast utterly
unto his feet. Now follows the second verse: Psalm. 110.2.
The Lord shall send thy mighty staff out of Sion: thou shall be Lord, even
in the midst among thine enemies. Here speaks he of the preaching of the
holy Gospel, and how the world should be converted unto Christ, and Christ to
reign in the midst of the world. In the first verse is spoken of the
eternal kingdom, that he is very God, living and reigning for ever, The
spiritual kingdom of Christ.
not only in this time, but also after this time eternally. But here speaks
he specially of the kingdom, whereas he reigns here beneath through the
Gospel. For the Staff, the Scepter, the Rod of Christ is the holy Gospel,
even the power of God, which saves all that believe, Romans 1.16. Which makes
Christ's enemies friends, and smites them down that will not convert: so that
Christ has dominion and victory even in the midst among his enemies. It is
he, that with the spirit of his mouth slays the Antichrists. This his word
also and preachings of the Gospel, Acts 1.8.12.
came forth first from Sion or Jerusalem, as Esaias, Psalm. 110.3.
Micheas, and Luke do testify. Now follows the third verse: In the day of
thy battle (or army) shall thy people be well willing: the dew of thy birth
is unto thee in an holy majesty, out of the womb of the clear morning.
Herewith does David describe the glorious and victorious faith of the
Christian. A battle.
For when the Gospel is preached, there arises a conflict between faith and
infidelity, between the seed of Christ and the Serpent, between idolatry and
true godliness. And the unbeleevers persecute the Lord Christ in his members,
that is to say, the faithful: but they are well content utterly to give over
body, honor and goods, their blood and life for Gods truths sake. For the
martyrs and they in the Primitive Church, being gathered together of the
Apostles, and after the Apostles time, have thus kept truth and faith toward
the Lord Christ, and were willing to die for knowledging him. Afterward
describes he also in the foresaid verse, the pure and holy conception and
birth of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this does he with a goodly similitude, and
says: The birth of Christ. Psalm. 110.3.
Thy birth shall be holy and very excellent, not unclean as the birth of other
men: For like as the dew out of the clear heaven, and out of the fair
morning, is borne as it were out of a mothers womb: even so also shall thou be
borne holy and clean, of an undefiled virgin. Whereof thou find more
instruction, Luk 1.31. The Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him:
Psalm. 110.4.
thou-art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. The office of
Christ.
In this fourth verse describes he the office of Jesus Christ, how that he is
ordained of God to be one only Priest for ever, which should offer up himself
for the sin of the world, and always appear in the sight of God the Father,
and to pray for us. All this does holy Paul declare at large to the Hebrews in
the 5.7.8^9. and 10. chapters. And specially in this verse is grounded all that
is read thorowout the Scripture, of the merits of Christ, of the forgiving of
sins, of righteous making, of being Mediator, and that he alone is the only
Salvation, Advocate, Satisfaction and Righteousness of the faithful. Psalm.
110.5.
The Lord is at thy right hand: he in the time of his wrath shall wound even
Kings. Christ's cause shall forth.
This fifth verse teaches, how God will ever more and more stand on his Sons
side, further his cause, and bring down and destroy those Kings, Princes, and
Lords, that will not amend and believe in Christ, but will rather provoke his
wrath, than desire his grace. Which thing Herod, Nero, Domician, Maximine and
Julian have proved. Yet follows the sixth verse declaring the fifth: He shall
judge among the Heathen, and fill all full of dead bodies, Psalm. 110.6.
and smite the head on the wide ground. Christ is also preached unto the
Heathen, and reigns among them: but many withstand Christ, and them does he
judge. And like as a King overcommeth his enemies with a battle, and covers
the whole plain with dead bodies, visits also and smites the head of the
war, and the head city of the enemies: Christ shall destroy his enemies.
Even so does Christ to his enemies, and destroys their power and kingdom.
All which things we have seen in the old unchristian Empire of Rome, and in
many other potentates and powers. But specially he breaks the head of the old
Serpent, according to the promise, Genesis 3.15. And at the last shall he come to
judge the quick and dead, Psalm. 110.7.
and destroy his enemies for ever. Out of the brook in the way shall he
drink, therefore shall he also lift up the head. Finally and in the seventh
verse, he describes the passion of Christ and his glory. In the way (says
he) that is, in his life while he is in this misery, He shall drink out of the
brook, that is, he shall suffer and be overcome. For to drink out of the cup,
is as much as to suffer. But to drink out of the brook, is to be altogether
full of trouble, to be vexed and tormented without victory, and utterly to be
overwhelmed with a brook and strong stream of troubles. Thus was it his mind
to declare the Passion of Christ. After the Passion, follows the glory with
the Resurrection and Ascension. Paul, Philip. 2. speaks of both, and says,
Philip. 2.8.
Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross. Wherefore God has exalted him, and given him a name, which is above
all names, etc. Thus much be spoken of this Psalm, and of David's
understanding, which he had of Christ Jesus and of the Christian faith.

Upon this I marvel, if (after so evident testimonies) there be yet any man,
which perceives not, that David's faith and understanding of Christ, was even
one faith and understanding, with the faith that we knowledge and say: I
believe in one God Father almighty, etc. as it is in the twelve Articles of
the Christian faith. For the holy Trinity in one Godhead does he knowledge,
not only here, but also in the 33. Psalm, saying, Psalm. 133.6. The article of
the holy Trinity.
Through the word of God were the heavens made, and all their power through the
spirit of his mouth. For certain it is, that there is but one only God, maker
of heaven and of earth: but here is the Trinity called Lord or God, Word and
Spirit. Neither is there any thing in the Articles of the Belief concerning
the Godhead and Manhood of Christ, of his conception, birth, passion, cross
and death, of the resurrection, ascension and judgment, but it is clearly
comprehended here in this Psalm. The articles of the holy Church, of forgiving
of sins, resurrection of the flesh, and an everlasting life, are contained in
this Psalm, and are treated upon yet more clearly, and with many mo words
very substantially in other Psalms of David. David was called Christ's father.
Matthew. 9.27.
Therefore had he our holy faith, and knowledged the same, was saved therein,
and of all holy men was called the Father of Christ with high commendation,
because of the promise that was made unto him. Moreover, all the holy Prophets
following, had respect unto David, as to another Moses, and took many things
out of his writings. For there is scarce any other, that so clearly wrote of
the cause of Christ as this Prophet David, and therefore has he honor and
praise above other in Israel: Of whom thou read also, Eccles. 47.2. Such
faith and confidence in God through Jesus Christ, had David out of the holy
Ghost, and out of the doctrine of his Prophets Samuel, Nathan and Gad, and of
other his Priests, which also had the same of God, and of the holy Fathers,
specially of Moses. And no doubt, he desired the honor of God and of his
Son, not to keep it only himself, but also much rather to require it of all
his people. Wherefore no doubt he set up and furthered this his faith and
religion among all his men of war, kinsfolk in all his court, dominion,
before the whole congregation, and all his kingdom: so diligently, earnestly,
and fervently, that afterward certain hundred years, they which believed
right and lived well, were praised for walking in the ways of David their
Father. They also that did evil, and set not forth the true faith, of them is
it written: The ways of David.
they walked not in the ways of David their Father. Of this have thou many
examples in the books of the Kings, and in the Chronicles. Many things also
were forgiven the Kings and all the people of Judah, for David's sake, that is,
for the promise sake made unto David, even for Jesus Christ's sake, whom
Ezechiel calls David. In the first book of the Kings, 1 Kings 15.3, 4, 5.
King Abia.
the fifteenth chapter, it is written thus: The heart of Abia was not right
toward his Lord God, as was the heart of David his father. And for David's sake
did the Lord give him a light at Jerusalem, so that at Jerusalem he set up
his son, and preserved him. For David did that, that was right in the fight
of the Lord, and all the days of his life did not he shrink from any thing
that he commanded him, except in the matter of Vrias the Hethite. Thus read
thou also of Ezechias, 2 Reg. 18. Before Josias was there no King, 2 Kings 18.5,
6.
that was like him, which turned himself so unto the Lord with all his heart,
with all his soul, and with all his power, according to all the law of Moses.
And afterward came there none like him.

But in the second book of the Chronicles, 2 Chro. 34.1, 2, 3.
the 34. chapter, stands the declaration of the foresaid place after this
manner: Josias reigned at Jerusalem one and thirty years, and did that which
pleased the Lord, and walked in the ways of his Father David, and declined
neither to the right hand nor to the left. For in the eighth year of his
reign while he was yet but young (even sixteen years old) he began to seek
the God of his Father David.

Thus much be spoken concerning this, that Israel and all the virtuous Kings of
Judah trusted unto Christ, and not to the Law of Moses. Who so desires the
number of the years, 1 Kings 6.1.
he finds 1 Reg. 6. even 480. years, from the departing out of Egypt until
the fourth year of the reign of Solomon. And from that time until the
captivity of Babylon, are reckoned 419. years, or thereabouts. All together
make 899. years.

CHAP. IX. All holy Prophets do point unto Christ, and preach salvation only
in him.
SOmewhat yet will we now declare further, concerning the times of the Kings of
Judah and Israel, which in a manner were even as the times of the Judges of
Israel. For like as in the first years of Iosue, God gave great victory and
honor, and afterward rest and peace: Even so were the Israelites very
victorious and triumphant under David, and had great rest and peace under
Solomon. The departing of Israel from Judah.
But like as after the death of Iosue the honor of Israel decreased, and the
departing away from God followed with one persecution upon another (though in
the mean time they had peace and deliverers, as Othoniel, Ehud, Barack,
Gedeon, Iephtha, Sampson, etc.) Even so did the worship of Israel decrease
after Salomons time. For the ten Tribes of Israel fell away from the house of
David, only Judah and Bejamin held Salomons son Roboam for their King: the
other made Hieroboam King. And so of one kingdom were made two, the kingdom
of Israel, and the kingdom of Judah. The kingdom of Israel (through the
persuasion of Hieroboam) chose them another manner of serving God. Not that
they utterly denied and refused the God of their Fathers, but they served him
after a strange heathenish manner of their own imagining. But afterward they
fell the longer the more and further into gross idolatry, so long, till the
Lord suffered them to be rooted out, and carried away by the King of the
Assyrians, and scattered abroad among all the Heathen. The kingdom and the
Kings of Judah were somewhat better, howbeit they had some also which excelled
the Kings of Israel and of the Heathen in ungodliness. For they likewise went
forth so long in unrighteousness, till Nabuchodonosor the King rooted them
out, and carried them away unto Babylon. But before, we see that there was a
wonderful combrance in the civil policy, and in the religion. Sometime was
all righteousness and true religion oppressed, and violence and idolatry used.
Sometime gat righteousness up again, and the right true faith had the
victory, all unright and idolatry being put down. This came to pass also in
Israel under Helias and King Iehu. King Iehu.
Yet was the idolatry and wrong rather punished, than any amendment following.
Like as it came also to pass after the birth of Christ, that there were
virtuous Kings and Emperors, which (according to the prophecy of Esaias in the
49. chapter, verse 23.) did all righteousness, set up the faith of Christ, and
put down all idolatry. Again, there came other, that set up all
unrighteousness and idolatry, persecuted the truth, and at the last received
their reward convenient. So weighty a matter is it to have good or evil
Rulers.

God always (...) P^^phets
But in these wonderful alterations, and thorowout all the time of these
governances of both the kingdoms, God always sent his servants the holy
Prophets, to rebuke wrong and idolatry, and to teach all righteousness and
true serving of God. And first after the time of David and Solomon (under whom
there was a great multitude of learned and holy Prophets; for David also and
Solomon were excellently endued with the spirit of wisdom and prophecy above
other men) these were the chief, The oldest Prophets.
most famous, and oldest Prophets, of whom the Bible makes mention with
worship: Semeias, which lived under Roboam King of Judah: Ahias the Silonite
under Hieroboam. Azarias the son of Obed, which lived under Asa King of Judah,
and Iehu the son of Anani, whom Baasa the King of Israel slew: Helias the
great Prophet, and Micheas the son of Iema, lived under Achab and Iosaphat.

Now like as in the time of David there was a great number of learned men; even
so testifies the second book of the Chronicles in the 17. chapter, that in
the time of Iosaphat there were many learned Levites and Prophets. Heliseus was
in the time of King Iehu, and Zacharias the son of Ioiada, was under Ioas,
under whom also he was stoned. Nevertheless we have no books written and set
forth by these: only we have the prophecy of Abdias, which wrote his prophecy
under Achab. Afterward under Vzzia, Iothan, Achas and Ezechias Kings of Judah,
lived the most part of them, whose books are abroad. For under these preached
and wrote Jonas, Oseas, Isaias, Joel, Nahum, Amos and Micheas. Afterward under
King Manasses wrote Abacuck. Under the holy King Josias, wrote Sophonias,
Baruch and Hieremie, in whose days Israel had such misfortune, that Jerusalem
with the Temple was destroyed, and the people that remained over and perished
not, were carried away captive into Babylon. In the same captivity did Ezechiel
and Daniel write their prophecies. And after the captivity when Israel was
delivered again, and came home to Jerusalem, then preached and wrote Esdras,
Haggeus, Zacharias, Malachias and Nehemias. Beside these Prophets no doubt
there were other more, of whom no mention is made. But these are the chief, by
whom it pleased God to open unto us all that appertains to our salvation. And
though we had also the writings of the other, yet should we read no other
thing in them, than we find in our own Prophets, for as much as these whom we
have, agree so together all in one.

Now whether they be our own Prophets, The Prophets preached the old faith.
whose writings we have, or the other whose writings we have not, yet have they
all preached the sum of the doctrine and knowledged the faith that we spoke
of before, and wrote in one sum, which faith Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moses and
David had: And this did they the more evidently, because they applied
themselves to open the Law, and to drive away the misunderstanding, which was
risen up among and in the people: therefore point they every where from the
letter unto the spirit, from the outward sacrifice unto Christ Jesus, from all
idolatry unto the only God, which saves us through his mercy only in the
blessed seed, and through none of our deservings. This did Paul see, Romans 3.20,
21, 22.
and therefore said he, Romans 3. Through the works of the law shall no man be
justified in the sight of God. For through the law comes the knowledge of
sin. But now is the righteousness of God declared without the law, The Law
and the Prophets allow the righteousness of God that comes by faith. Act.
3.24.
for as much as it is allowed by the testimony of the Law and the Prophets.
The righteousness of God comes by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all them that believe. So says Peter also in the third of the Acts: All
the Prophets from Samuel, and thenceforth (as many as have spoken) have told of
these days. And in the 10. Act. 10.2, 3.
chapter: To this Jesus Christ give all the Prophets witness, that whosoever
believes in him, shall through his name receive forgiveness of sins.

Who so now is learned in the writings of the Prophets, knows well, that
there is nothing read concerning the Lord in the New Testament, which the
Prophets have not prophesied of before. He that is then any thing instructed in
the Prophets, has no doubt considered this in the New Testament, that the
Apostles prove all their doctrine of the Lord Jesus, out of the Law and the
Prophets: yea that the Lord himself confirms his own doings with the
Scriptures of the Prophets, and that the Evangelists thorowout the holy
Gospel, set unto the doctrine and miracles of Christ, these words: And this
was done, that it might be fulfilled, Matthew. 21.4.
which was spoken by the Prophets. Nevertheless for their sakes that are not
yet instructed, I will now declare the principal articles of our Lord Jesus
Christ, out of the holy Prophets.

As touching the true Godhead and manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ, The godhead
and manhood of Christ*
and that he should be borne at Bethlehem, in the land of Iewry, of a pure
virgin and maid, out of the kindred of David, the Prophets testify after this
manner. Esaias in the seventh chapter says; Behold, Esaias 7.14.
a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Emanuel
(that is to say, God with us. Mich. 5.2.
) Micheas says in the fifth chapter: Though thou Bethlehem Ephrata art too
small to be reckoned among the principal cities of Judah, yet out of thee shall
there come one unto me, which shall be ruler in Israel, whose forthgoing is
from everlasting. Esaias 9.^*
In the ninth chapter of Esaias it is written: Unto us is a child borne, and to
us is given a son, upon whose shoulders the kingdom shall lie, and he shall
be called after his own name; even the wonderful counsell-giver, the mighty
one of Israel, the eternal father, the prince of peace, his kingdom shall
increase, and of his peace there shall be no end, and he shall reign upon the
seat of David his father. In the 23. of Hieremie it is written thus: Ierem.
23.5, 6. The righteous blossom.
Behold, the time comes (says the Lord) that I will raise up the righteous
blossom of David: he shall be king and reign, and prosper: judgment and
righteousness shall he execute upon earth. In his time shall Judah be saved,
and Israel shall dwell without fear: and this is the name wherewith he shall
be named, even God our righteousness.

Concerning the coming of John the Baptist, which was the forerunner of our
Lord Christ, and prepared the people for him, has Malachy written in the third
chapter after this manner: Mala. 3.1. John Baptist.
Behold, I will send my messenger, which shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye long for, shall shortly come to his temple, and the messenger
of the covenant whom ye would have. Behold, he comes, says the Lord
zabaoth. And afterward: Behold, I will send Helias the Prophet before the
coming of the great and fearful day of the Lord. Mala. 4.5.


Of Christ's preaching, of the grace of God, of the forgiving of sins, of the
wonders also and tokens of the Lord, Esaias 61.1. The office of Christ.
speaks Esaias in the 61. chapter, after this manner: The spirit of the Lord
God is upon me, and therefore has the Lord anointed me, to preach the Gospel
to the meek hearted has he sent me, to heal the broken hearted, to preach
deliverance to the captive, to open the prison to such as are in bonds, to
proclaim the year of Gods gracious will, and to bring consolation to all them
that are in heaviness. In the 34. Ezech. 34. Christ is called David.
chapter of Ezechiel it is written thus: Over my sheep will I raise up one
only shepherd, which shall feed them, even David my servant, which shall feed
them, and he shall be their shepherd. I the Lord also will be their God, and
David shall be their Prince, even I the Lord have spoken it. In the 35. chap.
of Esaias it is written thus: Say unto them that are of a feeble heart: Be strong
and fear not, behold, The miracles of Christ.
our God comes to take vengeance, and to reward: God comes himself, and
will deliver you. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, etc. Then shall
the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall give praise.

Of the kingdom of Christ, in the which he himself alone is king, all the
world being subject unto him, declaring his dominion and royal majesty,
writes Esaias thus in the second chapter: Esaias 2.2.
And it shall come to pass in the last time, that the hill of the house of the
Lord shall be exalted upon the height of mountains above all little hills, and
all nations shall come together unto him, the people shall go to him and say:
Come, let us go up to the mount of the Lord, even to the house of the God of
Jacob, that he may show us his way, and we will walk in his paths. For the Law
shall come forth from Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem. In the 7. of
Daniel it is written thus: Dan. 7.13.
I saw a vision in the night, and behold there came one in the clouds of heaven
like the son of man, which came to the old aged, and they brought him before
his presence. And he gave him power, glory, The kingdom of Christ.
and the kingdom, and all people, nations and tongues must serve him: his
power is an everlasting power, which shall not be taken from him, and his
kingdom shall not perish. Esaias says in the 62. chapter: And the heathen shall
see thy righteousness, and all kings thine honor, Esa. 62.2.
and he shall call thee by a new name (O Sion) and the mouth of God shall give
thee the name. And thou shall be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, ad
a royal crown of the kingdom in the hand of thy God. And soon after it
follows: Esaias 62.10.
Make ready, make ready the way, gather up the stones out of the street, and
hang out the banner unto the people: behold the Lord has caused it to be
proclaimed unto the end of the world. Tell the daughter Sion: behold the
Savior comes, lo, his treasure and his reward brings he with him, and his
deeds go before him. And they that are redeemed of the Lord, shall be called
the holy people. Zach 9.9.
Zachary says in the ninth chapter: Rejoice O daughter Sion, be glad O
daughter Jerusalem: behold thy king comes unto thee, even the righteous and
Savior: meek and simple is he, he rides upon an ass, and upon a young colt
of the she ass. He shall preach peace unto the heathen, his kingdom also
shall reach from the one sea to the other, and from the river unto the
uttermost part of the earth.

The death of Christ. Dan. 9.26.
Of the death and passion of Christ speaks Daniel in the ninth chapter after
this manner: And after two and sixty weeks shall Christ be slain and put to
death, and yet shall they have no true testimony, that he is guilty of death.
Esaias in the 50. chapter says thus: Esaias 50.5, etc.
The Lord God opened mine ear, and I refused it not, neither went I backward:
I gave my body to the smiters, and my cheeks to the nippers, and my face have
I not turned from their shameful entreating and spitting upon me. The Lord God
also shall help me, therefore shall I not be confounded. And therefore have I
hardened my face like a flint stone, and am sure that I shall not be confounded.
Esaias 53.2, etc.
In the 53. chapter there is written of Christ after this manner: He shall have
neither beauty nor fairness, we shall look upon him, but we shall have no
desire unto him. He is despised and contemned of men, a man of trouble, and one
that has had experience of infirmity. He is so despised, that we shall hide
our faces from him, and have him in no estimation. And yet has he borne our
unperfectnesse, and felt our sorrows. We also thought, that he should be
wounded, smitten, and punished of God. But he was wounded for our sins, and
slain for our wickedness sake. And the punishment whereby we have peace, is
laid upon him, and through his wounds are we made whole. All we have gone
astray like sheep, every one of us has had respect unto his own way, and the
Lord has laid all our sins upon him. Violence and wrong was done unto him,
he has been evil entreated, and yet opened he not his mouth. He shall be
lead as a beast to be slain, and as a sheep dumb before the shearers, so
shall he not open his mouth, etc. The whole chapter describes all the cause of
Christ so clearly, that holy Hierom said not in vain: Esaias is not only a
Prophet, but also an Evangelist. Zachary describes the Priesthood and
sacrifice of Christ, and testifies, The sacrifice of Christ.
that with the same only oblation he has obtained grace for all sin; and
therefore seven (that is to say, all) eyes shall have respect unto him, and
shall seek peace and rest of their consciences in him, and shall find it.
Hear now O Iosue thou high Priest, Zacha. 3.8.
thou and thy companions, that sit before thee, seeing ye are men of examples.
For lo, I will bring my servant, even the blossom. For behold the stone which
I have laid before Iosue, will I bring, To the same only stone shall seven eyes
look. Behold, I will dig it up and disclose it, says the Lord Zabaoth, and
the sin of the earth will I take away in one day. And in that day shall every
man call his neighbor under his vine and fig tree.

The burial and resurrection of Christ. Matthew. 12.40.
The burial and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, has the Prophet Jonas
figured very excellently. For thus says our Lord Christ himself: Like as
Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the son
of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

The Ascension.
Of the ascension of Jesus Christ and sending of the Holy Ghost, has Joel also
written in the second chapter, and it is alleged of S. Peter, Act. 2. Of the
calling and gathering together the Heathen, The vocation of the Heathen.
and of every thing pertaining to the holy Church, does Esaias write in the 49.
chapter, and so forth to the end of his prophecy.

1 Pet. 1.9, etc.
Thus have thou, that the Prophets also in their time, did preach Jesus Christ,
and pointed not the people to trust unto the works of the law and their own
deserving, but unto Christ, of whom they prophesied every thing that followed
after. Therefore did Peter speak right, 1 Pet. 1. saying: Ye shall receive the
end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. The Prophets sought
salvation in Christ.
After which salvation have the Prophets inquired and searched, which
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, searching when or what time
the spirit of Christ (which was in them) should signify: which spirit
testified before, the passions that should happen unto Christ, and the glory
that should follow after. Unto the which Prophets it was also declared, that
not unto themselves only, but unto us they should minister the things, which
are now showed unto you, by them which have preached unto you the Gospel
through the Holy Ghost, that was sent unto them from heaven, etc. In the which
testimony the holy Apostle Peter had a special respect to the prophecy of
Daniel; which did not only record the passion and glory of Christ, but also
pointed to the time, in the which Christ should come. For like as God in
greatest perils, dangers and alterations, has always renewed and more clearly
expressed his promise concerning the blessed seed: as in the time of Noe when
the world was destroyed: in the time of Abraham, when God would prepare
himself a new people: in the time of Moses, when God received his people and
carried them out of Egypt, to bring them into the land of Canaan: in the time of
David, when all things stood so well, and it must needs be avoided, lest any
man should think David were the blessed seed: before the captivity of Babylon
also, and in the time of the Prophets, which (as it is said before) preached and
wrote, that no man should doubt in Gods promise, as who say they were given up
and cast away, though the Temple were broken, the City burnt, and though the
people (of whom Christ should be borne) were led into captivity. Even so now
also in the captivity, when the faithful might almost have thought, that the
promise of God concerning the Messiah, were clean gone, even then did God show
his servant Daniel a more clear vision of Christ, after this manner: The
people shall be let go again out of captivity, and shall come home to
Jerusalem, A prophecy told unto Daniel.
build the Temple and City again, but with a sore time. And after that the
City is builded, unto the time of Christ, shall be 62. weeks, that is, 483.
years. And even so was it from the third year of Darius Histaspes or
Artaxerxes, in the which the City was builded, Nehemie 15. until the 42.
year of the Empire of Augustus, under whom Christ was borne, Luke 1. The
Angel also gave Daniel farther information of Christ, how that his own people
should slay him, and find no fault in him, and how that the sacrifice with the
ceremony should cease. And a strange people (says he) shall come from far,
and make the Temple with the City an horrible abomination, yea they shall
destroy and break down all together. All which things were afterward
fulfilled in the last weeks, that is, within 70. years, or thereabout. For
within 30. years did the Lord grow to teach and to suffer. For when he was 30.
year old, John baptized him. Afterward within three years was he put to
death, and within 40. years followed the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus
and Vespasian. The number of the years.
All the time now and years from the captivity of Babylon to Christ's birth
are 616. years. For the captivity of Babylon endured 70. years. In the first
year of Cyrus were they delivered, in the second year began they to build the
Temple, and builded 46. years, even until the 6. year of Darius. In the 32.
year of Darius was the City finished, which makes 143. years: Add now
hereto the 483. years out of Daniel, and thou have the foresaid sum even
626. years.

In the said years had our holy faith sore conflicts, and the seed of the
Serpent pressed sore upon the seed of God, as the Babylonians at Babylon, Faith
assailed and religion suppressed.
and the Persians, when the people of God was come home again. Nevertheless
the truth had ever the victory, and was the more clearly testified by Daniel,
Haggeus, Zachary, Esdras, Nehemias, and Malachy. Afterward were they specially
oppressed by the ungodly king Antiochus in the time of the Machabees. Antiochus.
When as the times were ever the longer, the more full of perils and
adversity, until Aulus Gabinus, Pompeius and Crassus, Captains of Rome
conquered the land, and the true old religion was utterly gone; in so much that
out of the old serpent there arose in Israel all manner of sects and symonie,
whom our Lord Jesus Christ with his coming in the world resisted, and called
them the Serpents generation, as the holy Evangelists testify.
Notwithstanding, God had eve^ some virtuous men.
in the midst of such mischiefs in Israel, there were also godly virtuous
people, which sought God and his anointed (though the error was great) Among
whom no doubt was specially the Priest Zacharias the father of John Baptist,
Elizabeth his wife, and godly Simeon. When Zacharias had knowledge of the Lords
coming, he said with a joyful heart: Praised be the Lord God of Israel,
Zachary. Luke 1.68.
for he has visited and delivered his people, and set up the horn of
salvation in the house of David his servant, according as he had promised before
by the mouth of holy Prophets, etc. For his words are read. Luc. 1. Simeon when
he saw the child Jesus in the Temple, and had taken him in his arms, he said:
Simeon. Luke 1.29.
Now Lord let me dye in peace according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen
thy Savior, whom thou have prepared before the face of all people, that he
might be a light to give light unto the Heathen, and the glory of thy people
Israel, Luke 1. Lo, thus the hearts of all righteous in the old Testament from
Adam unto Christ (even 3974 years) have stood only upon Christ, in him was
their comfort, upon him they trusted, it was he whom they longed for, and in
Christ Jesus were they saved. Therefore has our Christian faith endured since
the beginning of the world, and is, and continues still the only true, old,
undoubted and fast grounded faith.

CHAP. X. Of the time of the grace of Christ, and how that he himself
testifies, that the salvation of all the world stands only in him.
HItherto have I set forth the time of the promises, in the which God (through
the promised seed our Lord Jesus Christ) comforted, cleansed, and preserved all
his servants and dear friends. There have we learned and seen, that the
Christian faith, which has endured since the beginning of the world, is the
eldest, undoubted, right and true faith, which all holy Patriarks had, and in
the which they served God, and pleased him, as Adam Seth, Enoch, and Noe: Item
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: Likewise the excellent and highly endued Prophet,
yea the Father and foregoer of all Prophets, even great Moses his brother
Aaron, the holy Priest Eleazar, and Phinees: The excellent Dukes and Judges,
Iosue, Gedeon, and other more: Even so likewise the Kings, David, Ezechias,
Iosaphat, and Josias: The dearly beloved of God, and excellent Prophets,
Samuel, Helias, Isaias, Daniel, Zacharias, and all the other. This holy faith
also had all righteous, and such as were of godly understanding in all the
congregations of Israel from the beginning: All Gods elect were saved by Christ.
In this were saved all they that from the beginning were preserved and
ordained to salvation: wherefore, whatsoever they can allege against this
faith (whether it be concerning holy men, old age, multitudes, learned men,
general Councels, Convocations of Parliaments, Fathers, Acts, Statutes, tokens
and wonders:) it is all nothing worth, and is not to be reputed in comparison
of our holy faith, as every one that has understanding may see in this
Treatise before. And though my purpose be now finished, even declared out of
the Scripture, that the Christian faith has endured since the beginning of the
world, yet will I add a short instruction concerning the time of grace, and
performing of all promises, and I will declare, that God now also through the
appearing of his Son, would bring into the world and set forth none other
religion, none other faith, neither any other salvation, than even the same
which was showed to the old Fathers: saving that now all things are more
evident, more clearly practiced, accomplished, fulfilled and performed: for
the which cause also all figures, sacrifices and ceremonies do cease. For in
Christ is all perfection. The old Testament is not to be refused.
Yet shall we not therefore cast away the old Testament (as some ignorant,
unlearned and foolish people do) but have it in greater reputation, for as
much as we know now through Christ, what every thing signifies, and wherefore
every thing was thus and thus ordained, used, and spoken: Now shall every man
first have a courage to read the Law and the Prophets, when he sees whereupon
every thing goes. And thus also at the beginning did the holy Apostles preach
Christ unto the Jews, out of the Law and the Prophets, as it is oftentimes
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. And our Lord himself, when he went
with the two Disciples toward Emaus, Luke 24.13.
and preached so unto them, that their hearts burnt within them, he began at
Moses, and went through all the Prophets, and opened unto them the old
Scriptures, and showed them, that so it behoved Christ to suffer, and to enter
into his glory. This is the cause also that the Scriptures of the New Testament
hang altogether, and refer themselves to the Scriptures of the old Testament:
so that these cannot be rightly understood without the other, no more than the
gloss without the text. The text is the Law and the Prophets, The new
Testament declares the old.
the exposition are the Evangelists and the Apostles. Now will we see what the
work of grace of the new Testament is.

The birth of Christ.
In the two and fortieth year of the Empire of Augustus, after the beginning of
the world 3974. years, was Jesus Christ the blessed and promised seed, borne
of the undefiled Virgin and Maid Mary, at Bethleem in the Land of Jewrie. And
though he as a very man was wrapped in clothes, and laid in the crib, yet
appears the Angel of the Lord in great clearenesse unto the Shepherds, and
says, Fear ye not, behold, Luke 2.10.
I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall happen unto all people. For this
day is borne unto you the Savior, even Christ the Lord in the City of David.
Tidings of Christ's birth.
The first news and tidings of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, must the
Angel bring and give, to the intent that it might be the more accepted of all
the world. All the holy men from the beginning of the world, did hitherto long
sore after the promised Seed. Therefore says the Angel now, that he brings
them tidings of great joy: no doubt to them that were gone, dead and past, to
them also that now lived, and to them that were to come afterward. The joy is
this, that Jesus Christ the Savior is borne, even the promised Seed, which
should save all the world from the power of the Devil, cleanse them from
sin, and deliver them from damnation. Therefore says the Angel moreover:
Luke 2.10.
Which shall happen unto all people. For unto Abraham it was said, Genes. 12.3.
In thy seed shall all Nations of the earth be blessed. The same (says the
Angel) is borne in the City of David, even out of David's kindred, out of the
which the Prophets testified that he should be borne; which Prophets also, for
the same cause, called him David, and the blossom of David. The grace of God.
And this is now the grace of God, that whereas we poor sinners belonged unto
death, and were in the Devils bonds, he sent his Son to loose and deliver us
out of captivity. This is the new Testament. For Hieremie also testifies
hereof, and says, This is the Testament that I will make, Ierem. 31.33.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people, I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness and sins, and will think upon them no more, Note well.
Hier. 31. This full and perfect forgiveness is not therefore called the new
Testament, as though there had been no remission of sins among the old
Fathers, but because the promise made long before unto the Fathers, is now
confirmed and renewed: and the old figures that represented the same are
abrogate. Christ the only salva^io^ of all the w^r^d.
Thus the Lord Jesus alone is set forth for the only salvation of all the
world, so that not only we, but all they which before or after his appearance
or incarnation believed on him, were saved. And at the birth of Christ there
comes to the foresaid Angel, the whole heavenly host, which praised God,
and said, Luke 2.
Glory and praise be unto God in the height, and peace upon earth, to men a
good will. And by this they teach us what the duty, thankfulness, and
knowledge of men is or ought to be in this behalf, that God has done so great
good for man: Namely, how that they ought to praise God, The duty of us.
to have a sure trust in him, and to be friendly and loving one to another. 1 Timothy 1.5.
And the fulfilling of the Law, is love from a pure heart, out of a good
conscience, and of an undissembled or unfeigned faith, 1 Timothy 1.

In the fifteenth year of the Empire of Tiberius (from the beginning of the
world 4004. years) came the word of the Lord to John, John Baptist.
the son of the Priest Zachary, in the wilderness, and he went and preached
unto the people of Israel, amendment of life, and forgiveness of sins in
Jesus Christ: To whom he bare record, that he was the fulfilling of the Law and
the Prophets, very God and Man, the only and ever-living Savior, which with
the sacrifice of his own body, should cleanse the world from sin; yea he
pointed unto him with his finger, and said, Behold, John 1.29.
this is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world: And so
perfectly and wholly hangs he all salvation only on Christ Jesus, that he
says plainly, John 1.26.
Out of his fullness have all we received grace, etc. Ioh. 1. Item, 1 John 3.36.
who so believes in the Son of God, has everlasting life: who so believes
not in the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.
Matthew. 11.2.
Therefore did he also send all his Disciples from him, and commanded them to
cleave unto Christ. He makes no mention at all of any ceremonies, figures or
oblations, as necessary points to salvation, but preaches Christ purely and
clearly. This is manifest, Ioh. 1. and 3. Matthew. 3. and Luke 3.

The Lord himself also came unto John, Matthew. 3.13.
and was baptized* And when he had received Baptism, the heaven opened, and
the Holy Ghost appeared in the form of a Dove, and there was a voice heard
from heaven, saying, Matthew. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am pacified: to the intent that all the
world should have witness of Christ the true Savior, not only now by the
Angels, and by John the holiest man of all, but also from heaven, and of God
himself: and that we might be the bolder to commit our selves wholly unto him.
When he had received the testimony, he went into the wilderness: Note this
similitude.
And like as our disease began in Paradise by temptation; even so at the
temptation in the wilderness began the Lord our health: And like as the Father
of us all did eat the forbidden meat; Matthew. 4.1, 2.
so did the Lord not eat the meat that he might have eaten, but fasted forty
days and forty nights. Afterward came he among the people, and began to
preach salvation, saying, The time is fulfilled, Matthew. 4.17.
and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent, and believe the Gospel. Herewith
has he healed all sores, driven out Devils, and raised up the dead, testifying
so by his acts, that he is Lord of all things, and the true Savior: And of
them whom he heals, asks he nothing: he commands them not to build him
a Temple, neither to give him block or stock: he requires no bodily thing,
but only steadfast faith and confidence. And to them whom he has healed, he
says, Go thy way, and sin no more, take heed that a worse thing happen not
unto thee. And herewithall does he teach, The substance of true religion.
in what thing the substance of true Religion lies, even in a right true
faith, and in an innocent life, that in all our conversation we keep our
selves from all filthiness: Yea the thing that some man takes for Gods
service, refuses he, as long babbling prayers, vainglorious fasting, and
like alms giving. He nothing regards men's traditions, diversities of sects,
long garments, outward appearance, their cleansing, nor all their hypocrisy.
He goes into the Temple, overthrows, casts down, powers out every thing
that is to be sold in the Temple: he drives the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple with a whip. For the Temple was ordained for general prayer,
thanksgiving and preaching, and not for chopping and changing, or other such
like things. These three points does he teach us diligently to observe: First,
The special points of Christ's doctrine.
that we obtain remission of sins, true righteousness, and everlasting
life, only through him, and by his Passion and death, and else by none other
mean. For he is the only Mediator, Priest, Intercessour, Comforter, the
only Righteousness, Satisfaction, Ransom, Sanctifying, the only perpetual
Sacrifice, the Surety of grace and salvation. Special testimonies hereof have
thou John 3.6.14. and 16. Secondly, that we cannot serve and please God with
exterior sacrifices or any outward pomp* but with such works as proceed of
love, and mercy. And thirdly, that all the children of God are bound to keep
themselves from the works of darkness, and to apply them to live in
righteousness, and in the light. And herein also is comprehended all
godliness, that is, all right good Christian works.

So when he had taught all righteousness, The patient suffering of Christ.
and disclosed and overthrowen all hypocrisy in religion, he offered up
himself upon the cross for the remission of all our sins. For willingly and
patiently put he himself into the hands of his enemies and of his betrayer,
suffered himself to be taken, to be bound, to be led from one Judge to
another, to be laughed to scorn, cried out upon, to be spitted on, and at the
last to be adjudged unto death, to be scourged, and to be crowned with a crown
of thorn. He himself bare his own cross to the place of execution, where
he was crucified, and hanged up between two murderers. Then lived he in
great pain from the sixth hour until the ninth. John 29 30. Luke 13.46.
At the last he cried; It is finished, Father, into thy hands commend I my
spirit: thus offered he himself for our sins, and died, The fruit of Christ's
death.
that we might live. But soon after followed the things whereby the fruit of
Christ's passion might be perceived. For the veil, which in the Temple
separated the holy from the most holy, did rent from the top to the bottom;
whereby Christ testified, that now with his death, all ceremonies and
figurative things were at an end, and no more of value: that the way to
eternal salvation was opened: that all things significative in the Tabernacle,
in sacrifices, rites, and observances, were now fulfilled and abrogate: that
now the bare and only cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, is altogether unto the
faithful: that the heel of the Virgins seed is well trodden upon, and his
flesh well rent and slain: but that yet also in the mean season he has
trodden the serpent upon the head. Therefore did the dead also arise, and
appeared unto certain at Jerusalem. For the death of Christ is our life. The
earth quaked, the stones burst asunder. For the preaching of the death of the
Son of God has altered the whole world, and many hard stony hearts are
moved to repentance, faith and good works. But when the side of the dead body
of Christ was opened with the spear, and the rock (as Zachary says) was
dug up, there ran out water and blood, Water and blood.
declaring manifestly thereby, that unto us out of the death of Christ,
follows life and purifying. For water cleanses, in the blood is the life of
man. And with the blood of Christ is all blood stanched, and now is Christ's
blood only available, being sprinkled through faith in our hearts. The time of
Christ's Passion.
This oblation and passion of Christ (the ransom for the sin of the whole
world) was done in the 18. year of the Empire of Tiberius, reckoning from the
beginning of the world 4007. years, the 25. day of March.

So the whole body of Jesus was taken down from the cross, and honorably
buried, The burial of Christ.
and on the third day after he rose up again: so that his soul came again
to the body, and his very flesh was raised up from death, howbeit now no more
mortal and passible, but glorified. For he is the first in the resurrection
of the dead. For like as by one man came death, so by one man must come the
resurrect on of the dead. And like as in Adam we all died in body and soul,
so shall we be all together restored again to life in Christ Jesus. This hope
unto life, would the Lord print substantially in us with the resurrection. And
therefore after his resurrection, he continued forty days with his
Disciples, that he might well instruct them of his resurrection, and that they
should have no doubt therein. So when he had showed and declared unto them his
very resurrection diverse ways, and had performed all that the Father commanded
him to finish, he ascended up unto heaven with body and soul from mount
Olivet in the sight of his Disciples, and is set at the right hand of God,
there to remain corporally until the last day, in the which he shall come
again bodily, to judge the quick and dead: And all such as have walked in
faith, shall he take to him with body and soul into heaven, like as he
himself is received into heaven: And shall with body and soul condemn all
them, that have walked in the way of the old serpent, and have no^ converted
from unrighteousness to the righteousness in Christ. And thus shall salvation
be perfectly finished, and Gods children shall live eternally with God,
through Jesus Christ. To whom be praise for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XI. That also the elect Apostles preached this old faith* and declared
that all salvation is only in Christ.
THus through Christ Jesus is all fulfilled, that the Prophets prophesied of
him before, The power of Christ saves all.
thus to become the salvation of all faithful believers, even the Lamb of
God, which has been sacrificed since the beginning of the world; that is,
this is he, whose power and deliverance has cleansed all them that ever put
their trust in God through the blessed seed. Herein now is the right true
salvation, this is the sum of the right and perfect religion. Who so
perverteth this, from him shall God turn himself: who so adds ought unto
this, to him shall God add his wrathful hand: who so takes therefro^, his
life shall God minish. But blessed are they, which walk in this simplicity and
cleanness, and continue so unto the end; even they that hear Gods word, and
do thereafter, whose only hope is Jesus Christ. This only true and ever
during salvation would he to be showed and declared to all nations, which
came to save all nations: but he would it should be declared by the preaching
of the holy Gospel, and through the ministration of the holy Sacraments: And
therefore by his life time he did choose Apostles, whom he received to be
witnesses of all his doctrine and miracles, informing them diligently, and held
nothing back from them. For he says unto them; Ye are my friends, John
15.14, 15.
if ye do all that I command you, I will henceforth call you no more
servants, for a servant woteth not what his Lord does. Christ held nothing
back^ from his Apostles.
But I have called you my friends, for all that I have heard of my Father, have
I opened unto you, Ioh. 15. But for as much as they yet lacked understanding,
and were forgetful, and had ever strange imaginations of the kingdom of
Christ, therefore when he now ascended unto heaven, he charged them not to
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the Holy Ghost: whom he also gave unto
them upon the fiftieth day after his resurrection; that is, upon the tenth day
after his ascension, even the fifteenth day of May: The Holy Ghost b^ough^ no
new doctrine.
by the which Holy Ghost they being illuminate, spoke with all manner of
languages, and were mindful of all that the Lord had commanded them before. For
the Holy Ghost did not endue them with a new doctrine, but it that the Lord had
taught them out of the Law and the Prophets, the same did he bring to their
remembrance, and illucidate all things, and printed them more clearly in their
hearts. For so says the Lord in the Gospel: John 14.26.
The Comforter, even the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, that I
have said unto you. Therefore so long as the Lord was with them, and told them
all the matter of his passion, they were sorry, and could not bear away all
that he said unto them. But after that he was taken up from the earth into
heaven, he sent the Holy Ghost, even him, whom the Prophets also had before,
and that led them into all Christian verity.

So when they were endued with the Holy Ghost, they began (according to the
Lords commandment) to preach in all the world the foresaid matter of salvation
purchased and obtained only by Christ, and gotten by true faith. For he had
said; Go your way into all the world, Mark 16.15.
and preach the Gospel unto all creatures, Whosoever believes and is baptized,
shall be saved, etc. And therewith comprehends he both the points, which the
Apostles used and practiced, even the preaching of the faith in Jesus Christ,
and of the ministration of the Sacraments. And how the Apostles doctrine was,
it is manifest out of the Acts of the Apostles. But shortly and in a sum,
they preached amendment of life, and remission of sins through Jesus Christ:
That is to say, how that the whole generation of man lay in the dominion of the
Devil, and in the bonds of sin, cursed, and damned: but God had mercy on us
all, and sent his Son into this world to die, and with his death to restore
us unto life, and to wash us with his blood, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have eternal life. All this declared they out of the
Law and the Prophets, and proved, that Jesus Christ whom they preached, is the
blessed seed promised unto the fathers. Whosoever is desirous to have a perfect
example of this declaration, he finds two Sermons of the famous Apostles
Peter and Paul, the one in the Acts of the Apostles, the second chapter, verse.
14. the other in the 13. chapter, verse. 16. There does the holy Apostle open
the mystery of our holy faith, very excellently, declaring it from the time
of Abraham unto David, and from him unto John the Baptist. Thereupon shows
he, how Christ suffered, died, was buried, and rose again from death. All this
confirms he with the Scriptures of the Prophets. At the last he concludes
the Sermon after this manner; Be it known unto you therefore, Acts 13.38.
ye men and brethren, that through Jesus is preached unto to you forgiveness
of sins, and that by him all they that believe, are justified from all
things, from the which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. To this
agrees now also the sermon of Peter: Yea, all the Scriptures of the Apostles
do finally accord to the same effect: Hereout also bring they the doctrine of
repentance and amendment of life, the rebuking of sin, consolations,
exhortations, and drawing to all manner of good works, that follow out of faith.

The special Sacraments, which the Lord did chiefly institute, and command the
Apostles to practice in the Church, Baptism.
are holy Baptism and the blessed Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ. Concerning
the first, Matthew. 28.18, 19.
he says thus, To me is given all power in heaven and in earth: therefore
go your way, and teach all people, and baptize them in the name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and teach them to keep all that I have
commanded you. The other did he institute at the last Supper. The Supper of
the Lord. Matthew. 26.26.
For thus is it written in the holy Gospel: When they were eating he took
bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave them saying; Take,
eat, this is my body, which shall be given for you: this do in the
remembr^nce of me. So took he also the cup when ^hey had supt, and said;
Drink ye all out of this, this is my blood of the new Testament, which shall
be shed for the remission of sins. With such Sacraments, through outward
visible forms (for our infirmities sake) pleased it the Lord to show and set
before our eyes, his heavenly and invisible grace: not that we should continue
still hanging in the visible thing, but that we should lift up our minds, and
with a true belief to hold fast, to print sure in our minds, to worship, and
to enjoy the things that faith shows us by the outward Sacraments. With these
outward Sacraments also has it pleased him to open, declare and show unto us
his grace and loving kindness: Namely, how that he gives unto us himself and
all his riches, cleanses us, feeds and moystureth our souls with his flesh
and blood, that he is at one with us, and we with him, so that we use and
practice the Sacraments with a true faith. For the outward enjoying of the
Sacraments of it self alone, does not reconcile us with God: but if they be
used with faith, then (as S. Peter says, Acts 15. Acts 15.9.
) through faith does God purify the hearts. The fru^t of the Sacraments.
With the Sacraments pleased it him, to leave behind him a remembrance of his
gifts and benefits, to the intent that we should never forget them, but praise
and thank him therefore. Moreover, with visible Sacraments was it his will to
gather us together, and to mark us in his Church and people, and to put us in
remembrance of our duty, how we are one body together, and ought to apply our
selves to all righteousn^sse: All which things are found at length in the
Scriptures of the Apostles.

As for the Apostles, they ministered the Sacraments diligently, purely, and
simply; and so (without any addition) distributed them unto the people of God.
Touching Baptism, there are many examples in the Acts of the Apostles. The
Supper of Jesus Christ had the Corinthians somewhat altered. 1 Cor. 11.17.
And when Paul pointed them again to the true ordinance and right use, he
takes the simple words and institution of Jesus Christ without any more
addition, and lays those before them, commands them to follow the same, and
holds him therewith well content, 1 Cor. 11. And thus did the holy* Apostles
gather together all the Heathen people, through the preaching of the Gospel,
and ministration of the Sacraments in the Church, whose head is Christ, Acts 15
28. The Apostles did not overcharge the people with Ceremonies. Acts 2.1.
in whom they are builded and preserved. Moreover, they did not load them sore
with any ceremonies. For in the Acts of the Apostles the second chapter, where
as a perfect shape of a right Christian Congregation is described, we have
first the sending of the Apostles, among whom Peter did first preach the
Gospel, that is to say, repentance and forgiveness of sins in Christ Jesus.
Then baptized he them that were become the people of God. Afterward follows
it, that they which were become Christians, continued in the doctrine of the
Apostles, in prayer, in breaking of the bread, and in the fellowship: Here are
the right substantial points of the Christian Church sufficiently expressed:
the doctrine of amendment of life, and remission of sins, Baptism, the
continuing and increasing in Christ's doctrine, prayer, the holy Supper of the
Lord, and the fellowship, that is, love, kindness, and works of mercy.

Acts 15.20.29.
Now whereas Acts 15. it is ordained that the Heathen should eat no blood nor
strangled, it endured but for a time, The Apostles would not offend the weak.
and their meaning was thereby to avoid offending of the weak. Otherwise have
the Apostles every where (especially Paul) very earnestly exhorted men, to
continue by the doctrine that was showed and delivered them, and to be at a
point in themselves, to avoid such learning as was new and brought up by men,
because they lead men far from the truth, as we find, Col. 2.6. Philip.
3.15. 1 Timothy 4.6. and 6.2. and Tit. 1.9. And thus it is manifest, that the
Apostles taught all nations no new nor strange thing, but even the same that
they had received of the Lord.

CHAP. XII. A conclusion, that this faith is the right true old faith, which
always shall stand sure.
THis holy undefiled faith which the Lord planted and set up in all nations by
the Apostles, immediately after the Apostles decease, was sore attempted by
sundry unclean persons, which brought up false customs and misbeleefes, and
made perilous sects. Beside this also was it sore persecuted with the sword of
tyrants. But in all such dangers the truth overcame and had the victory. For
though the citizens of the devils city (according to the disposition of their
Patriarch Cain) did murder, and although false Prophets brought up evil
counsel, yet the city of God triumphs, and the blood of innocent Abel and
his brethren speaks yet. But after that the persecution was somewhat ceased,
and the persecutors sore and horribly punished for their bloudshedding (the
heresies also being well brought down by faithful shepherds) in the same rest
also was our holy faith not a little hurt. For rest put away fear, brought
idle felicity, voluptuousness, and fleshly seeking of riches and dominion:
and so through covetousness and ambition, Note. The decay of Christ's religion.
there was powered great poison into the Church, whereby religion sore decayed.
For while the Ministers of the word labored more after riches, than to
perform their of^^ce and charge, and to edify the Church, they were pleased
with superstitiousnesse in stead of true religion. Of this then followed it
farther, that the singleness of faith was forgotten, new laws made, the old
rites and customs either perverted, or else utterly overthrown and abused:
whereby men came far from the doctrine and Christian ceremonies, from the way
of truth into error foolishly, and partly into ceremonies of idolatry. What
inconvenience followed.
Hereof comes it, that we have now the abomination of the Popes power, of
Pardons, of Masses for the dead and quick, of merits, power and intercession
of Saints in heaven, of worshipping their bones upon earth, of Idols, and vain
ornaments, pomp and pride of the Church, of hired singing and praying in the
Temple, and of the whole swarm of idle religions. All which things, with other
more like fondness, are nothing but new alterations, pervertings, and contrary
to all old ordinances, having no ground in Gods word, and are clean against
God, though many hardnecked people are yet in a fury and brawle for such
things, and will make all the world believe, that this their foolishness,
alteration, and perverting of Gods ordinance, is the old faith. And yet wot
they, or will not know, that their babbling has very little ground, and that
they (if they considered the matter as it is) are very naked and miserable.

And though this papisticall religion has endured, prevailed, and triumphed
now certain hundred years, yet has God always sent his faithful servants,
and had a little holy flock of his own, like as afore-time in the days of
the judges, of the Kings of Judah and Israel, and in the captivity of Babylon,
though it was almost at the worst before, and at the coming of Christ. Note.
Like as it is also with us, the nigher the second coming of Christ, the worse
it is in the world. Nevertheless (as I said before) God always set forth his
word, and does yet. Contrariwise, the Pope with his multitude, The Pope and
Mahumet strive against Christ.
and Mahumet with his (as it seems and becomes very Antichrists) have
hitherto undertaken to suppress the old religion, and to set up his own
ordinance (unknown to our fathers of old time) to bring it into possession,
and under the name of God and his holy Church, to spread it upon all
Christendom. For out of the acts and statutes of the Pope and his wanton
spiritualty, and out of the laws of Mahumet, it is manifest what the one has
taken in hand and done now more than 600. years, and the other upon a 900.
years. It is evident yet also even now, whereto his general councels and
parlamenrs do extend. But not regarding how he threatens and faceth, and how
he garnisheth his new and wanton religions with false (but dissembling) titles,
boasting of many hundred years, many general Councels, Fathers, holy men,
Doctors, Universities, Cloisters, singing, praying, fasting, almes-giving,
displying, and tells such like: All his bragging set aside, Let us do as our
o^dest fathers have done long before us.
let us cast his religion from us, and take upon us unfainedly the true old
religion, which has endured since the beginning of the world, by the which all
holy men have ever loved, worshipped and served God, and knew nothing utterly
of the Popes religion. And if we must for this cause be hated and persecuted of
the world, well, it happened even so unto all holy Prophets before us likewise,
and specially unto Jesus Christ our Lord: which shall come shortly to
judgment, and utterly destroy the kingdom of Antichrist, whom he now kills
with the spirit of his mouth. Our possession is not here upon earth, the
kingdom of heaven is our native country: From thence look we for the Savior
Jesus Christ our Lord, Philip. 3.20, 21.
which shall raise up our mortal and miserable body, that he may make it like
his excellent and glorified body, according to the power, whereby he may subdue
all things unto himself. To him be honor and praise for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

