The old faith / an evident probacion out of the holy scripture, that the
christen faith (which is the right, true, old and undoubted faith) has
endured sens the beginning of the world.

Herein have thou also a short sum of the whole Bible, and a probacion, that
al virtuous men have pleased God, and were saved through the Christen faith.

1547.

Miles Couerdale,

Miles Couerdale to all Christen readers, wysheth grace, mercy and peace from
God the father through our Lord and only savior Jesus Christ.
LIke as the almighty eternal God, three in persons and one in substance,
of his tender mercy and love, not only created man at the beginning after his
own symilytude and likeness, but also when he was lost, most graciously
redeemed him, and brought him out of bondage: Even so when man neither regardyng
his wonderful creacion, nor his most dear redempcyon gropeth in darkness, in
vice and blyndnes, The accustoma^ goodness of God
lies in the deuyls prison, and goes in the way of damnacion, God always
sets up his light before him, sends the message of his word unto him,
shows him what case he is in, gives him warnyng, opens the prison door,
calls him out of the deuyls service, tells him what danger it is to be his
bo^dman, or servant unto sin. This does God always before he punish and plage
the world. This (I say) has been the property of God sens the beginning, as
the stories and prophecies of all the holy Bible do testifye. And though we had
no writing of Gods acts in times paste, yet has he practiced this same his
wonderful work of mercy upon us. So that like as we must needs confess that
we are created of God, and redeemed by his only mercy in God has showed no
less kindness to us the^ he did to the old world.
his dear son Jesus Christ. So can we not deny, but we have heard his holy
message, had no less preachynges and warnynges of dangers to come, then other
have had before our days. Yet even the same merciful God that sent No^ to
preach righteous unto the wicked world, and converted the Ninevites by his
word in the ministraciou of the prophet Jonas, has done even so with us, in
every condition. And some (thanks be unto him therefore) has he brought out of
darkness into his wonderful light, and out of the deuyls service, into the
kingdom of his dear son.

But alas and woe to this unthankful world. For like as a great nombre that be
in prison of Satan, will not come forth when they are called and the door set
open, but go on still stomblyng in darkness, when the lantern of light is
offered them: Even so if any play a wise man's part, and They that follow gods
word, are laughed to scorn.
do as he is warned by Gods word, he shall have a sort of apyshe people, a
nombre of deserts and scornful mockers, which, because the man will not
dance in the deuyls morys with them, nor keep their company in the bondage of
sin and vice, neither run with the^ unto like confusyon (as S. Peter
calls it) laugh him to scorn, and bleare out their tongues at him, even like
fools and cockescombes of the world. And like as when a poor wretch comes
out of prison, he shall have mo to stand gasyng and gapyng upon him, then to do
him good, or to help him to his fees. Even so now that god of his mercy has
called us out of Satan's prison, and from the scole of false doctrine, my Lords
fool with his companyo^s stands staryng upon us, and mocketh us, because we
sit not still with other prisoners. There goes a fellow of the new learning
(says one) there is one of these new fangled gospellers (says another)
that is one of the new brethren (says the third) he follows the new faith.
etc.

Wherefore in consyderacion hereof I The doctrine of Christ's faith is no new
thing.
have here set forth this book: partly because it shows the antiquity and
ancient age of our holy Christen faith, and partly to give occasion unto all
such as have received it, not to be ashamed of it, nor to shrynke from it for
any opprobrious mockage or scornful derysyon in this 1. Cor. i.
world. The Apostle says, that the preaching or word of Christ's cross, is
folishenes to them that perish, and that the thing which appertains to the
spirit ^. Cor. ii.
of God, is folyshenes to a carnally minded man. Whereby like as we may learn
that it is no new thing to be mocked and stared upon for holdyng with the
doctrine that makes so much of Christ's death, and the true worshippyng of
God in the spirit. Even so may we se (to the syngular comfort of our
conscience) that no man mocketh us for it, but such as perish and are
earnally minded: And that for all their derision and scornyng. It is yet the
power To us which are saved it is the power of God.
of god i. Corinthians. i. And belongs to his holy spirit.i. Corinthians.i.
And is not our own doctrine, neither of any other man's making. This is now
to us a comfort and consolacion.

But because the world is angrye with us for our faith, and gives us so evil
report for teaching it. It shall be expedient for us to declare what faith is,
and what faith we mean, when we make mention thereof. First because we may not
describe it after our own judgment, we will rehearse the words of the
Apostle, which writing to the Hebrews, says What faith is
after this manner: Faith is a substance of things to be hoped for, an evidence
(or certayntie) of things which do not appear. By the which diffinicion, it
is manifest, that when we set forth or teach this faith, we mean no vain
faith, no false opinion of faith, no fond ymaginacion of faith, no dead
faith, ^o idle faith: but a substancial thing, even a sure belefe of things
that are to be hoped for, and a proof, experience or knowledge o^ things that
are not seen. This faith then is the iustrument, whereby we feel and are
certain of heavenly things, that our corporal eye can not se.

Now because none other virtue can so apprehende the mercy of god, nor
certifye us so effectually of our salvation, as this living faith does,
therefore has the scripture imputed our justification before God, only unto
faith among all other virtues: Not without other virtues following, but without
any other work or deed iustifiyng.

This is the faith of Christ, which all Ad Romanos. Gala. Ephe. Jaco. ii
the scripture speaks of. This is the faith that saint Paul preaches to
iustifye in the sight of God, as saint James teaches, that works iustifye in
the sight of men, and that it is but a dead faith which has no works. This
is the faith Hebre. xi. To. xiiii.
without the which it is impossile to please God, and of the which whatsoeur
proceadeth not, is sin. This is the Acts.xv. i. Peter. v Gala. v.
faith whereby God purifieth our hearts, and whose end is salvation. This is
the faith that works by charity or godly love, and is of value before God.
This is the faith whereby the holy fathers which were before Christ's
in^^rnacion, did in ^. Cor. xiiii*
spirit eat and drink and enjoy the same mercy of God in Christ, that we are
partakers of.

To be short, this is the same faith* whereby God saved those his elect, of
whom saint* Paul makes mention, in the foresaid Epistle to the Hebrews, and
Hebre. xi.
^eherseth many godly fruits of the same in their conversation.

This then is no newefangled faith* no strange faith, no faith invented by
man's brain, but even the same that Gods holy spirit teaches in the
infallyble truth of his scripture, and that Adam Abel, Enoch and all the other
servants of God were saved in. Why do men therefore either call it a new
fangled faith, or report evil of us, for setting it forth: Why? I fear me
this is one cause: The old faith that all those servants of God had who^ the
Apostle names in the eleventh chapter to the Hebrews, and a life and
co^uersacion joined unto it, which was rich and full of all good works.
Therefore seeing there be so many bablers and pratlers of faith, and so few that
bring forth y^ worthy fruits of penance, it ge^eth to the world occasion to
report of us, that our faith is but new fangled. They se us not fall to labor
and taking of pains, as Adam did: They se not the righteousness and
thankfulness in us, that was in Abell: They se us not walk after the word
and will of God, as Enoch did: They se us not take Gods warnyng so ernestly as
Noe did: They se us not so obedient to the voice of God, nor so w^^^ willing
and content to leave our friends, to forsake our own wylles our own lands
and gooddes at Gods calling, and dwell in a strange country, to do gods
pleasure as Abraham did. They se that we chose not rather to suffer adversity
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a sea^on:
They se us not esteem the rebuke of Christ (or trouble for his sake) to be
greater riches* then al ye treasures of this world, as Moses did. To be short,
they se not in our garden those sweet flowers and fruits* of Gods holy
spirit, which were in them that had the old faith.

Ashamed may we be therefore as many of us as either write, teach, preach,
speak or talk of the old faith, if we endeavor not our selves to have those
old heavenly virtues that were ever plentyfull in all Gods true servants,
in every one (I mean) according to his calling. Not that it is evil to teach
or talk of the true old says, but this I say, because that (according to the
doctrine of saint James) Jaco. i.
they are but disceyuers of them selves, that are not doers of Gods word
as well as hearers thereof. And through such slender receiuyng of Christ's holy
gospel, it is now come to pass, that like as we have need of such an
Apostle as was holy S. Paul, to rebuke this vain confidence that men put in
their works, and to tell us that no work of our doing (but faith of Gods
workyng) does iustifye us in his sight. Even so have we no less need of such
another Apostle (as was would to god we had many such as James the Apostle was.
holy saint James) to rebuke this horrible unthankfulness of men, that
professyng the^ selves to be christian, and to hold of Christ's old faith, are
yet dead unto all good works, receive not the word of God in mekenes, cast
not away all uncleanness and maliciouenes, are swyt^ to speak, to talk to
iangle, and to take displeasure are forgetful hearers of the word, and not
lyuers thereafter, boastyng them selves to be of gods pure and vndelyled
religion, and yet refrain not their tongues from evil, visit not the poor,
the frendles and the desolate in their trouble, neither keep them selves
undefiled from this world. Read the first Chapter of his Epistle.

What occasion might such an Apostle (as holy saint James was) have to write
another, yea a sharper epistle seeing so many pretending to be of Jesu Christ's
old faith, are yet so parcial, have such a carnal respect of persons, are
not rich in faith, despise the poor, practice not the law of godly love,
talk and iangle O unthankful world.
of faith, not having the works thereof, clothe not the naked, healpe not the
poor to their living, regard not their necessity, have but* dead faith,
declare not by good and g^dly works, the true and old faith of Christ, are
but vain beleuers, have not the effectuous, the workyng and living faith, that
Abraham and Rahab had. Read the second Chapter of his Epistle.

How would holy saint James reprove these bryngers up of strange doctrines,
blasphemers, bacbyters, belyers of S James would not spare to rebuke such.
good men, false teachers against gods truth, dissemblers with the same, carry
fire (as they say) with the one hand, and water in the other: pretend to
belearned, and yet bring not forth the works of good conversation in mekenes
out of gods wisdom, but in fro wardnes, and out of carnal doctrine. How
would he take up these, that delyght in malice and strife, belie gods truth,
are given to yearthy, fleshely and deuelishe wisdom, are unstable, full of al
evil works, are not in the scole of Gods wisdom and lernyng, are not given
to vnfaynednes of heart, are not peaceable, are churlishe, uneasy to be
entreated. etc. Read the third chapter of his Epistle.

What would such an holy Apostle say to this wicked world, wherein a great
nombre (pretending to be Christen men) are given so to quarelyng and fightyng,
to voluptu^usnesse and inordinate lusts, Against such gross vices would not S
James spare to ^^ speak.
to envy and indignacion, to unlawful spendyng and consumyng of that they may
get to aduoutrye, to the disp^syng of holy wedlock, to shameful v^clennes,
either not willing to mary, or else puttyng away their wives for light
occasions, and for satisfiyng of their own triflyng lusts* falling in love
with the vain frendshippe of this world, taking part against God: yea where
as by their profession, oath and allegiaunce (which they owe to their most
high sovereign the king of heaven) they should in a virtuous conversation
maintain al godliness, are become even enemies, suppressours and ouerthrowers
thereof, as well through their obstinate and cruel resistyng of Gods word / as
by other wicked examples of their vycions and filthy living? what would holy
S. James say to such unthankful belyes? that knowing the truth / live of
such a sort?. would he spare them though they were never so rich and welthy.
Read the fourth chapter of his epistle / and the first part of his fifth
chapter / and ye will judge the contrary

Wherefore most dear Readers / who soever of you has been slack to follow
the good life and godly conuersasion / that S. James (and all the other
scriptur beside (requires to be in the^ / which profess the old faith / let
him take better. hold / turn again to the truth / and follow that loving
exhortacio^ / which holy S. James makes in the later end of his Let every man
take the payns to rebuke his own fault.
epistle. And if he have at the first not enclyned to Gods word / nor
received / it unfeignedly in mekeuesse / nor submitted him self to be ordered
thereby (and to cast away all uncleanness. ^c^. But has happily suffered it /
promoted it set it forth / or taken a pretense of favor and love to it for
some other purpose as to opteyne any carnal profit / gaynes or lybertye by it
/ let him not but holy S. James or any other true messaunger of God / to the
pains of rebukynge him for so doing: let him rather enter in to him self /
reprove his own fault and abuse in that behalf abhore it in any wise / be
angrye / displeased and discontent with him self / sorye^ repentaunt for it
shame not to ask God mercy / and by good works from hens forward to labor /
that the glory of god and worship of his truth may be preferred and set up
/ which he by such his unchristian liuying / has in times past caused to be
hyndred.

In conclusion: Though there be never so many that recante and deny gods holy
word / either in there living and conversation / or in their words / writing
or preaching / yet as many of us as are entered in to the scole of that wisdom
which is from above / let us be true scolers of the same / and deed let us eue^
enter in to the nature and kind thereof: which (as S. James We must put on the
nature of gods doctrine.
says. Jaco. 3. (is pure / peaceable / gentle / and easy to be entreated /
full of mercy and good fruits / without iudginge and symmulation Which thing
yfwe do the^ shall we follow no filthy doctrine ner counteerfeyted wisdom /
then shall we be no breakers of peace then shall we be as glad to forgive as we
would beforgeuen glad to be reformed / rich and plentiful in the works of
mercy and good fruits of the old faith: then shall she be no quarellpykerrs or
dissemblers with any man: Then shall we not only befounde the maynteners of
peace and all good order but peaceably also and in all gentle manner shall we
both in word and deed (sow / sprede abroad and show the fruit of that
righteousness which comes only of God through Jesus Christ

If any of them that are gone of hye or low estate, pretending to be
maynteners favorers setters forth or scolers of christ's doctrine (has in any
condition dyssembled therewith fallen from god ^mysbehaued him self in the
effaires of his prince mysgouerned his household main teyned ryole vice and
sin or brought the good word of God in to any evil report by his ungodly
conversation (as I fear me it be to true (let us beware by Let the works of
God, which are past, be a warnyng to us.
such men's fall. Let us not receive the grace of God in vain. For like as
they that harden their hertes at Gods word and spurn wilfully against it are
sure of their damnacion except they repent Even so they that dyssemble withal
shall find their judgment. Wherefore let us that have received the old true
faith of christ not only ^^ content to abide any storm or trouble for it ye
to be mocked scorned persecuted and put to death therefore if it so please God
but also unfeignedly every man to his power in his heart by fervent prayer in his
mouth by good words and in all his body by virtuous conversation and good
Christen works help and labor that the blessed word of god may have the
due honor belonging there unto: and that the same which it has lost through
the ungodly behaueour of some, may through the grace and goodness of God be
won again in our good living: That God may have of us better servants
our Prince truer subjects, and our neighbors more unfeigned lovers, then many
have been before us,

Amen.
Here ends the Prologe,
To the Readers.
For your better instruction (gentle Readers (ye shall understand, that where
as in this book there be many whole sentences of the Bible alleged and
rehearsed, All way for the most part, at the beginnynge of every such
sentence, ye find this cross and such a star at the end thereof: to the
intent that the text of, holy scripture in this book may the better be noted
and known

An evident declaration out of the holy scripture, that the Christen faith
has endured sens the beginning of the world, and that through it only all
wertuous men pleased God, and were saved.
I Suppose plainly The christen faith is elder then. 1500 years
that many simple Christen men will not a little wonder at this mine interpryse,
they are so persuaded, and think, the Christen faith did first begin under
Tyberius the Emperor: for as much as out of the Gospel of Luke it is
certain, that in the fyftenth year of Tiberius, Johan the Baptyst began to
preach the gospel, and all hystories say with one accord, that in
the.xviii. year of Tiberius, Jesus Christ did suffer,

Now it is true, that all the prophecyes were then first fulfyl^ed, and the
true salvation performed: ye from that time forth were all the glorious
treasures of Christ so rychely declared and poured out among all people, as
they never were before. Not wythstandynge the same salvation in Christ Jesu was
promised long before, and so opened to the holy old fathers, that they have
had no less sight of Christ Jesus in the sprete the^ we: and put their trust
in him, as well as we: though among us it be clear and opon, or performed
and fulfilled, that among them was some what darker, and therefore looked for
with hearts desire, as a thing for to come. Moreover it is not I that first
bring forth this meaning concerning the antiquite or oldnesse of our
Christen faith. For the holy bishop Eusebius Cesarien^, which lived above.xi.
hundreth^ year agoo, (and likewise many other Christen, doctors has a so
taught and written the same more clearly before me. For Eusebius in the first
book de ecclesiastica Eusebius
historia, says planely: All they that in their estate ar noted according to
their genera^yons, to reken backwarde from* Abraham unto the first man, though
they had not the name of Christen men. (For at Antioche certain years ofter
the asce^sion of Christ, was that name given to Actuu^. xi.
the faithful. Act* xi. Yet as pertaynyng to relygyon and substance, they
were all Christen.

For if this word Christen be as much to say, as one that puts his trust in
Christ and through his doctrine fastened unto faith, unto the grace and
ryghteous, nesse of God, does cleave with all diligence to gods doctrine, and
exercyseth him self in every thing that is virtuous. Then verily those holy
men whom we speak of first, were even the same that Christen men boaste them
selves now to be. All these are the words of the for said old christen
doctors. But to the intent that no man shall think, how that we build upon
men, and upon a strange foundacyon. Therefore will we first declare our mind
out of the scripture, and allege some what more for the better understanding
of the matter.

Of the goodness of god and wickedness of man.
GOd which has ever been suffycie^t to all perfection, and needs nothing of
the creatures to his perfectness only of his own kind and nature which is
good (that is to say, of his own grace and mercy, ye even because he would
do good) created man for him self. But before he created him, he provided
first for him wonderfully, and fornyshed The first creation of heaven and earth.
him with vnoutspeakeable riches his goodness. For when he devised the
creacyon of man, and the time was now come, which his godly wisdom and
prouydence had ordained, he first of all appointed a wonderful lodging for
man and garnyshed the same yet much more wonderfully. At the beginning (when
the goodly and clear light was made) the Lord prepared the instruments which
he afterward sundred one from another, and ordained every one to some purpose.
Over the deep, that is / over the water^ earth (which yet was in the water)
made he a firmament / and spread out the heaven above as a pauilion. Afterward
out of the water he called and brought forth the earth (asmoch as served for the
habitation of men) and appointed the water his bounds and marks / which it
may not over pass. And these three things / the water / the earth and the
firmament (that is to say / the air and clearness above us unto the heyght
of heaven) are the essensial and substantial parcels of the world / and
se^ueas an house for the habitacion of men: Nevertheless as yet all this was but
rough and vnfynyshed / and nothing garnished at all: Therefore did the wise and
faithful master put forth his hand wyder / to perform and pleasau^rly to
garnyshe that wonderful work: ye not only to garnyshe it / but also to make
it fruitful and profitable for man * which was the gest and in habitour for
to come.

And first in asmoch as man should inhabit The garnyshynge of heaven and earth.
the earth / he garnished it before hand, and clothed it with a goodly grene
garment, that is, with a substance, which he deckte first with flowers and al
mane^ of herbs: which not only are pleasant to look upon, and wonderfully
bewtified of a pleasant taist and goodly color, but also profitable for food
and al manner of medicine. To the same also did he first add sondrye trees and
plants. Then watered he the earth with fair springes, rivers and rennynge
waters. And the ground made he not like on every side, but in many places
set it up pleasauntly. And hereof have we the walleyes, playnes, mountains,
and hills: which things all have their due operacyon, fruit and
pleasantness.

After this also began he to garnyshe the heaven and fyrmament, and set
therein the Son and Moon, the planetes and Stars: which things all are
goodlyer and more wonderful, then men's tongue The office ^^ the (...) in the
firmament.
can express. As for their office, and the cause why they are set in the
heaven. It is to give us light, and (with their up and down going, or mocyon)
to declare the times, years, months, and days, deuydynge the days and
nyghtes asunder.

Thyrdly, he said his hand likewise in Fyshes.
the water, in the which he has wrought no less wonders, then in heaven and
upon earth. For in the water (and specially in the sea) do the wonderful
works of God appear in the fysshes and meruels of the Sea, if a man consider
the nature and disposition of them. And in the air also has Fowls.
he created and ordained great tokens of his goodness, power and wisdom,
even the fowls that pleasauntly (according to diverse commodities) do sing
unto man, and refreshe him.

At the last endewed he the earth yet more Beasts.
rychelye, and filled it with all kind of profitable and Goodly beasts, and
sundred one from another pleasauntly.

When the Lord now had prepared this goodly and rich pleasure, then first
after all these he made man, that he might be Lord of all these things. Him
also endewed The treatio^ of man.
he above all other creatures, and created him after his own image. He made
him of body and soul, which should have endured for ever, if he had not fallen
into sin. Now has he afrayle body, and an immortal everlasting soul.
But the first man made he altogether parfecte and without blemyshe, so that
verelye he was called the image of God not without cause. The Lord also was
not suffysed in garnyshynge the erathe golye, but first also builded upon the
earth, a special garden of pleasure, even a paradyse: and therein he set man his
dear beloved creature. And for as much as he being so The creacio^ of the
woman.
litary and alone, could not conveniently dwell without a make, he appointed
him first to plant and keep the garden of pleasure, and provided for him a
wife, even out of the bones of his own body, that she might be the man's
help. Thus would the goodness of God fynyshe and make man perfect, to the
intent that he should lack nothing, which served to a right wholesome, and
perfect life.

Therefore was it equal, that man which was endewed with reason and hye
understanding, should show thankfulness and obedyence unto God, for such
hye gifts. Ye God him self (which is not only good, but also ryghteous)
requires the same of him, and that by the means of the commandment. That he
might eat of all the trees of the garden of pleasure: Only he should eschew
the fruit of knowinge good and evil. And this commandment The request of
the commandment.
was not grievous nor unreasonable, Only it requires o^edyence and love of God
the maker, unto whom only the treature (even man) should have respect, and
look for all good at his hand, and not to take the form of good and evil
out of him self, but only to hold that for evil and forbidden, which God
inhybyteth as evil: and to compte that as good and ryghteous, which God
aloweth or forbyddeth not. For a representacion, visible token, and Sacrament,
God showed him a right vysible and fruitful tree in the garden of pleasure,
and forbad him with earneste threatenynge, that in what hour so ever he did
eat of the same tree, he should dye an everlasting death. But untruly dealth
man with his faithful The unthankfulness and wickedness of man.
god, transgressed his commandment, and gave more credence to the persuasyon
of the woman and of the serpente, then to the true word of God: which was
nothing else, but even as much as to take the form of good and evil out of
them s^lues or else where rather then of God, and not to cleue and be obedyente
only unto him as to such one as wysheth good unto every man For man being
dysceaued through the woman and the serpente did believe, that God was not
indyfferent and that he had wythdrawen from him some of his godly wisdom. And
for as much as the mind now was departed from God through infydelyte, and
looked not for all good at his hand, therefore took the hand the noisome apple,
and the mouth did eat the forbidden meat. And thus thought he to help him
self to Gods majesty, by another means, rather then by God, and so to
repair his necessyte which he thought he had. And so with infydelyte,
unfaithfulness, disobedye^ce and vnthank fullness, he wroughte life, and dyed
the death: that is, he offended against God, and fell in to the punishment of
everlasting dampnacyon: Ye he made him self bond unto the Devil, whom he
was so dyligent to believe, to follow, and to serve: Contrarywyse he forsook
God, and so came he utterly in to the bondage of the Deuell and darkness. And
thus have we now the goodness and faythfulnesse of God. Again, the
wickedness and great unfaithfulness of man.

The first and right foundation of our holy Christen faith.
HEre now had the just god occasion The righteousness and mercy of god.
and right to expel man, to destroy him to dampne him, and to leave him
utterly to the deuel: And the same also did his ryghteousnes and true the
require. For he had said: In what day so ever thou eatest of the fruit, thou
shall dye the deeth. Contrary wise, the goodness and mercy of God required,
not utterly to suppress man, a poor and naked creature. In the mean ^eason
was there The way of satisfaction before God is Christ.
found away, whereby the righteousness and truth of god should be satysfied,
and in the which the mercy of god should specially be exercysed and declare it
self: that is to say, Christ Jesus, which is given us by the manyfeste grace
of god, was offered for our sins, satysfied and recompensed the
righteousness of God, and so delivered us out of the bonds of the Deuell. For
he dyed for us all, in as much as god said: In what day so ever thou eatest
thereof, thou shalt dye the death. Therefore dyed Christ for us all, that
throw his death we might live, and be taken out of the kingdom of darkness,
and be set in the kingdom of the dear beloved son of God.

This deuyse of gods wisdom (which no doubt was determynate from everlasting)
was also directly opened unto Ada^ after the fall, in manner following: When man
had eaten of the fruit of the forbidden tree, immedyatlye his eyes were opened:
in so much that he was ashamed, wha^ he saw that he was naked* Hitherto had he
lived in innocencye, therefore began he now to cover him self, but with
simple clotynge, which they trusted not much to like as it is a ^
unprofitable, that man of him self will cover his synn wythal) Sin.
saving that they sled from the Lord, and hyd them selves from him. But the
Lord followed upon the fugytiue, put him in mind of his decay, mysery and the
life that he was fallen from, and said: Adam ^here art thou? Or know thou,
what misery thou art fallen into from great felicite? Now should man have
knowleged his fault, but he showed him self styfnecked* And the Lord moves
him still, to se y^ he will knowledge his sin, and said: ^ho told the that
thou art naked? Ye to help him in the matter and to make him confess his
sin, he says moreover* Have thou not eaten of the tree of the which I
^orbade the ^^^ thou should not eat? But man was loathe to knowleg his sin,
and laid it first ^^on the woman his companion* and the same did he with so
froward and unadvised words that a The frowardnes of man.
man may easily see, that secretly in his heart he wyckedly and unreasonably
laid the fault upon God. For he said not only: The woman gave me of the tree
to eat but added proudly thereto: The woman which thou gave me. etc. As
though he should say: Thou thy self art in the fault: If thou had not given
me the woman Why god gave the woman unto man.
I had not ben disceaued. And yet the righteous God gave not him the woman to
discea^e him, but to be an help to him. Wherefore appears it here again,
that the sin of man was the more wylfull and grievous. Yet for all this did the
gracious Grace.
God proceade further, and would prove whether he might find any knowledge
of the sin with the woman, the beginning and occasyon of the sin. But
nothing at all could he find. The one person was as the other, and they hoth
had no power. Therefore like as Adam put all the fault to the woman, even so
^ay^^ ^he woman all the fault upon the serpente, that is, upon the deuell.
Which nature We all are loathe to knowledge our selves gyltye.
does yet, to this day ^leue in man. But what man (which has well co^sydr^d
^his forsayde matter by himself) wold^ no^ say, or durst thy^ke, that any
part of the promise, of ryghteousnes and salvation of man were to be ascribed
to his own power and deseruyng. For as much as it is so manifest, how unable
a^^ ^^st^ man is of him self, which does nothing but he peth sin upon
sin, and dysoh^d^ence upon disobedience. Again, who is so blind, but he
seyeth, that all salvation is to be ascr^bed to the only mer^ grace and mercy
of god. For now follows it first, how god handled in this matter.

Now when all the complynt was made upon the serpent, the Lord asks and
Punyshement.
examineth the Serpente nothyn^e at all, for the deed was open, nether was the
serpent created of God to speak, and with the devil was there no truth.
Therefore does the Lord ryghteously curse ^h^ serpent the deuell. Unto the
bode^y s^rpe^t also whom the deuell used as an instrument) he gives a sore
curse and says* Upon thy belly shall thou go, and earth shall thou eat all
the days of thy life. When this was done, it was ordained now first for man,
that / according to the righteousness and truth of God he should be punished
also with the curse and with eternal death but for the causes expressed in the
beginning of this chapter, the curse was directed unto Christ: who also, with
clear words was promised, and so was life in him promised likewise.

Therefore says not the Lord now: and cursed be thou man, because thou have
done The promise. ^ene. iii.
against my commandment, but: And I will put enemyte between the and the
woman, between thy sede and her sede: the some shall tread the on the head
and thou shall tread him on the ele.

Which is thus much to say: Thou have used the woman to the destruction of
me^ so that from hens forth they bring death* and by kind and nature are damned
when they are borne. Therefore will I also use The serpe^tes head.
the woman, but to salvation: for of the woman shall a sede or child be borne,
which shall break thy beade, power and kingdom, sin damnation and death:
howe^eit in his manhood he shall be trodden down and bytten. That is: When with
his transgression has deserved eternal death, to that after the rigor of my
justice (he should perish and belong to the ^euell for ever: nevertheless I
will have mercy upon him, and receive him to grace again* but to the intent
that my truth and righteousness may be satisfied* I will cause my son to
take the very nature of man upon him. Then will I that he take upon him self
the curse and damnacion / and dye / and with his innocent death to take away
that noisome deathand curse / and so to set the generation of man out of death*
in to life / out of the dominion of the deuell in to his own kingdom / out of
darckneesse into light Thus ^^e right foundation or ground of our holy The sure
foundation of our faith
faith continues fast and unmoved: in somoche as all the generation of man is
whole and cleansed from sin / and delivered from the curse / from the deuell
and everlasting damnation / only through the mercy and mere grace of God by
Jesus Christ

As touching this / Paul said when he To. viii.
wrote to the Romans in the ighte chapter. God ^eet his son in the
simylitude of sinful flesh / and through sin (that is to say / through the
sin offering and willing death of Christ / he condemned sin in the flesh *
And in the first ^ Corin. ^.
Epistle to the Corinthians the first chapter the same P. says: Christ Jesus
is appointed of god to be our wisdom / and righteousness / and sayntifieng
and redemption: that as it written / who so glories and reioyseth / let him
glory and rejoice in the Lord.

But for asmoche as this is the ferst promise The gospel of Jesu Christ.
and the first sure Euangelion* I will now speak of every word in especial.
First, God calls his sone our lord Je, sus, the sede of the woman. A sede,
because of the very nature of man, and because that our Lord sh^lde not take
upon him a fantastical, but a very true body.

But to these words there is added: Of the woman: For our Lord was not
conceived and borne of ma^s s^de, but of the holy ghost out of the virgyn Mary.
Therefore can not this sentence be understand of Eve, but of the virgyn Mary.
Now where as she is called a woman it is done because of the kynred For even
the daughters also and maidens are rekened in the women's kynred, and yet
continue undefiled virgins. God also has spoken here distinctly, and said
not: I will put enemyte between the and this woman, but between the and
(haischah (the woman understand some special woman, no doubt even such one
as he afterward set forth clearly by Esaye: saying Behold, a virgy^ Esaye. vii
shall conceive and bear a son. etc

And this word * sede (was always afterward in every renewynge of this promise
concerning Christ Jesu among all the patriarchs and prophets rehearsed (used
and expressed, until the time of David, Of whom the Lord afterward was
called a flower, the rote spr^w^ing or blossom of David, The holy apostle Paul
expounds this word (sede clearly and planely, and says it is Christ Gal.
iii. More ou^r it serves to the praise of the Lords A praise of the virgin
Mari
mother, that* God says: I will put enemytie between the woman and the. For
he means the difference of both their na ^urs. The deuell is proud sotle
wicked false and untrue: but the mother of Christ is lowlye, simple, virtuous,
faithful and upright, ^haist and clean. And the same pure vyrgin and gracious
mother has borne unto us him, that trod down the serpents head. The head
of the serpent is the power and kingdom of the deuell euensynne, the curse and
damnation. All this has that blessed sede broken for his faithful. All which
things the holy apostle Paul also has taught with these words. The Lord is
become partaker of Hebre. i^*
our flesh and blood, that he through death, might take away the power from
him, which had the lordshippe over death, that is to say, the deuell, and to
deliver them which throw fear e of death, were all their life time in
bondage. For he took not upon him the angels but the sede of Abraham took he
upon him. etc. * And to the same meaning does this also serve that follows.
And thou shall tread him on the hele. The hele is the lowest part Gene. iii.
Christ's h^oe.
in man, and here it singnifieth the most inferior thing in Christ, even
his flesh. This has the old serpent the deuell persecuted and trodden down
by his me^bres Cayphas, Annas, Herod, and Po^te^s P^late. For Peter says,
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh. The godhead i. Pet. iiii.
is impussible and the soul immortal.

But by this treading down of the lord has God trodden dowen the kingdom of
the deuell. That is to say, by his death has he destroyed death, and brought
life again to al them that believe. Her of comes it that Christ says him
self. Joha^ xii* Now is the judgment of the world John. xii^i
now shall the prince of this world be thrust out. And I wha^ I am lift up
(that is to say cru^yfied) from the earth, will draw all things to me.

At the last says the Lord, that he will put enemytie between the serpente and
the woman's sede. This may we se in the deuell and his members and acts, how
they are contrary to Christ and his members and deeds. But how strong so ever
the serpent is, yet shall he be trodden down through Christ and his faithful*
Hereof comes it that Paul spoke so comfortable to the Romans. Roma. xvi. The
God of Romans xvi.
peace shall shortly tread down the deuell under your fete. And here wythall
is the dewty also of the faytfull in Christ shortly comprehended. For as
touching them that say: It is enough then, and is all Objection
well, when I knowledge that I am a sinner, and saved through the blessed sede,
only? Answer.
To them it is here answered and clearly given to understand, that all they
which put their trust in the blessed s^de, take upon them the kind of the
sede, and hate the kind of the serpent, that is to say, sin and blasphemy,
and fight always more and more against the world and the Devil as long as
they live, ye and occupy them selves most faithfully about that which is
gods will. And here to now serves it that follows after. For when the Lord
had taken away the everlasting death, he laid upon man a tempo^all
punyshement, correction and discipline, in the which he should be exercised as
long as he lived upon earth. And upon the woman he laid combre sorrow and
pain, when she should bear and bring forth children. Subjection also and
service with fear and obedie^te, which she owes to the man. To man, he
enioyneth labor for the Lord cursed the earth, and said. With sorrow shall
thou Gene. iii.
get thy living all the days of thy life: Ye in the sweat of thy face
shalt thou eat thy bread. Moreover he laid temporal death upon them both
and says: Earth thou art, and to earth shalt thou Gene. iii.
return. Of the first does Paull speak also.i. Timo. ii. The woman shall be
saved i. Timo. 2
by bearing of children, if she continue in faith and love, and in holiness
or clennesse and nurtoure Of the second speaks the same Paul likewise to the
Ephesians and Tessalonians Let noman undermine or dysceaue h^s brother in
occup^enge: i. Tessa. 4. Ephe. iiii.
and who so has used falshed and dysceate let him do it no more, but let him
rather labor with his hands some honest thing, that he may have to
distribute unto such as have need. And as touching death* Paull also says to
the Hebrews Hebre. ix.
in the.ix. Chapter. How that it is oppoynted unto men, ones to dye, and that
even to Christ Jesus was offered up and dyed ones for all,

Of Adam Of the first faith full Christen, Adam and Eve.
ANd hitherto I trust we have had in the first promise of God, the foundation
The sum of the Christen faith.
and the whole sum of our holy christen faith: Namely, that the whole
generation of man was but lost through his own fault and wickedness, and
fallen into death and damnacion, so that there remains nothing in man but it
is displeasaunt to God: Hereof comes it that there is nothing to be ascrybed
unto the power and deseruyng of man, save sin and malediction. But God of his
abundaunt mercy had compassion on us, and of very grace promised he life unto
us again in his son our lord Jesu, whom he would to become man, and to
suffer death in his flesh, that thereby he might tread down the deuell, death
sin and hell. Item he would put enemyte between the woman's sede and the
serpent, That is, he would endewe us (which are the sede, that is to say, the
children of Adam if we believe) with another heart and power, that we might
become enemies unto the deuels works, resist his suggestion, and hold our
selves fast by the blessed sede, labouryng and suffrynge what so ever God
enioyneth us to work and suffer. Who is it now, which seyth not here in, all
that is written in the hole scripture, of believe, of love and innocencye: that
is to say, of a Christen life and faith?

Who so is disposed / let him look upon the third / fourth / and second
chapter of Paul to the Romans / the first and second to the Ephesians: let
him compare those chapters toward this sum / and he shall find it none
otherwise.

For asmoche then as Adam and Eve had faith in God / and stood so toward God
that they knowledged the^ selves to be sinners / and trusted to be saved only
through the blessed sede / geuyng them selves over willingly in to the
disciplyne and nurtoure / trauayll and trouble of this time / No man can say
contrary / but it follows / that our first elders were Christen. Nevertheless
we will declare the same yet more clerly / by Moses words following And Gene.
iii.
Adam called his wife Heua / because she should be the mother of all living.
For Adams faith.
as soon as he was now stre^gthed through the promise of God / and believed that
he and his posterite (which ^is were children of wrath / of the deuel / and of
death (should live through the blessed sede, he turned his wyfes name, and called
her Heua, for the remembrance of the matter, and practisyng of his faith: for
he believed, that she now lyuyge in the power of the blessed sede should bring
forth, not only quycke men temporally as pertaining to this natural life
(like as we call other creatures living (but living, that, is to say children
of salvation For Adam had lost eternal life from him self, and from us his
posterite: but the same is genen unto us again through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Adam for as much as he believed, changed his wives name, like as we find that
for great weyghty causes the names of certain places, cytyes and men, were
changed: Thus was Jacob called Israel Simon, Peter: Luthz, Be^ell. Eve had
now a name of life, for Ha^ah in Hebrew is as much to say, as life. Before
was she called Ischa, that is to say, Woman, because she was taken fromout of
the man, which in the Hebrew is talled Ischa. Genesis ii. And thus is it manifest,
what faith Ada^ had, whereby we may well suppose, that Eve had none other faith

But god used his mercy and loving Comfort help and loving kindness in the
mids of correction.
kyndnesse yet furthermore, eue^ in the mids of all correction: for when he
would now expel man out of Paradyse in to misery, he does unto him in every
condycion, even as a faithful father, which for some mysdede puts his son
away from him. Notwythsta^dyng leaves him not utterly comfortles, but
provides him a garment, and comfort him with fre^dly words, and then
first sends him away from him Even thus does God the father of heaven also.
For first he clotheth Adam and Eve against the frost and tempest of wether, in
as much as (by the means of sin) the wether, the earth, the air, and all
creatures, were no more so subject, tame and obedient unto man, as they were
before the fall. Therefore even now at this present time what soever
inconvenience and harm is in the good creatures of God, it comes by the
means of our sins. Afterward does the Lord comfort the miserable
wretched man with very loving words after this manner: Behold. Adam is
become like one of us, Gene. iii.
or: lo, Adam shall be as one of us, and it shall happen unto him as to one of
us, and he shall know good and evil. This does God speak, which is one in
substance, and three in persons: he Prophecyt^he here unto Adam, that he
shall know or have experience of good and evil. That is to say, that upon
earth he must feel prosperity and aduersite, misery and trouble, sower and
sweet, and must suffer necessite, pain and afflyction. Yet in all this, must
he be constant and pacient, for as much as nothing shall happen unto him, save
Comfort and patience in Christ.
even the same that shall happen to one of the^. And he means the son our
Lord Jesu Christ the second person in the holy Trinite. With this his
passion and through the same does he comfort Adam. As though he would say: let
the pain sorrow and trouble which thou must suffer upon earth, not vex the, and
considre that one of us also shall take upon him the kind and nature of man,
and that the serpent (as it is said before) shall tread him on the hele that
is to say, he shall dye, he shall be oppressed, and have much asslyction and
trouble, all the days of his life. In the same meaning also did the holy
Apostle Peter say: Christ suffered for our sakes, and gave us an ensample, that
we should follow him, and go in his fotesteppes i. Pet. ii.


Out of all this is it easy to understand, what faith and knowledge Adam had
Adams faith
of our lord Christ. Namely, that he knew in him very godheade and manhede, and
that he saw in faith his passion and cross afar of, Moreover, that the
passion of Christ ones do^e for all, breaks the kingdom of the Deuell, and
brings life again to such as faithfully believe. Secondly, that it is to our
living, an ensample, at the which we ought to learn patience in aduersite, and
daily to dye from all evil. And here to now serve all doctrines of patience,
of bearyng of the cross, of despisyng the world, and mortifienge or putting
of the old Adam, which thing is contained and with many and godly words
handled through out the prophets and apostles. As for Adam, and Eve, they
lacked none of these things, though they had not the matter in wryttyng. For
God spoke it all to them him self, and wrote it in their hearts. Morouer our
first elders had no church, rytes nor ceremonies, save only the bodily
offryng, a representacion of the sacrificyng of Christ, and exercises or
tokens of thankfulness. For how should Cain and Abel else have known any thing
of sacrifice, if they had not received the same at the custom of their father?
Who with his wife Eua the mother of us all, was saved by none other work or
merit of man, but only through and in the blessed sede of our Lord Jesu
Christ.

That the holy Patriarchs also were Christen* and saved by Christ.
Such faith in christ Jesu as we now have spoken of, did the holy father Adam
(no doubt) teach his children: that they also might plant in to their
children the promise of god, his mercy and deuyce concerning the Messiah or
Savior, that was for to come. And truly Abell had such a notable faith in
god, that the holy Apostle Paul wrote of him after this manner. Through faith
Hebre. xi.
did Abell offer a greater sacrifice the^ did Cain and thereby opteyned he
witness that he was ryghteous. For god bare record to his gifts. In as much
then as it can not be denied, but that all they which are just and ryghteous,
he made ryghteous through the blessed sede. And Abell was justified. It follows
that he was made ryghteous through faith in Jesus Christ. In Sacrifice was a
token o^ thankfulness.
that he did sacrifice, it is a token and fruit of a heart that was thankful
and feared God. It was no such interpryse, that he would cleanse and make him
self accept unto God through that outward sacrifice For certain it is, that
no outward oblacion purifieth man within. But the grace of god granted unto us
through Jesus Christ / purifieth us a right. And the out, ward sacrifices of
the old fathers, beside that they were tokens of thankfulness praise and
magnifyenge of God, as it is said before were figures of the only perpetual
sacrifice of our savior Christ And in this behalf they were eue^ asmoche as
sacraments of things to come. Thus also and in like understanding have our
first fathers done sacrifice, as hereafter it shall follow more largely

Now like as in Abel there is set forth unto us an ensample of Gods sede and
of a regenerate true faithful. Christen man, So is Cain a sede of the serpent
a child of the deuell which despised the inspiracion Cain the father of
wickedness.
of God and harkened to the disceatfull serpent, And in these two brethren we
may se what God meaned, wha^ he said:

I will put enemyte between the sede of the woman and thy sede. As though he
would say: There shall be two manner of people the one shall cleue unto Christ
the blessed sede, the other shall cleue unto the deuell. And these two
generacio^s shall in no wise a gree, but be at variavnce in faith and religion.
I will endew my sede that they shall cleue only unto me, fear me honor and
worship me seek all salvation in me through the blessed sede, live vertuous^y,
honestly and soberly. Then shall the serpent tempte their ^ede with ypoc^ysye,
not to love me ner serve me right, not to hold of me as they should, not to
trust in me, but to love the word and to follow the lusts and tentacions
thereof: All this find we here in these two brethren, in whom begins the
first difference of true and false beleuers. For Abel was simple, godly, and
of a constant faith in God And in asmoche as he took God for his refuge, he
brought him gifts of his b^ste substance, no doubt because he had first
given over his soul and all his power unto God, at whom alone he sought all
good without any ypocrisye. He was also innocent* veriuous and friendly, and
followed not his own tentacions. And for this faithes sake did his sacrifice
please God: but Caines pleased him not for his heart was not right with God: he
was a dissembler, gredye and unfaithful person which set his heart and mind
upon erthlye things, allwaye despysinge. Gods word, and following his own
tentacion Which thing was euyde^t in this, that he having no cause (only of
a wilful heart and through the tentacion of the serpent / murthured his own
brother: Whereby he has opteyned to be the ar^hfather of all murthurers /
which persecute and murthur the sede of god (that is to say / the true
beleuers (only for their faithes sake*. Thus became abel the first martyr and
instrumente of god and if Christ in Abel the
the holy church. For these two brethren have set forth before us / the wole
battayl and strife / which the world / the city of the deuel^ / the children
and cytesyns of the curs^d city (wherein the serpent is head and master and
has the dominion) shall make against the city and cytesyns in whom Christ is
the head, unto the end of the world. The fre men of the city of God and of
Christ, do ^leue only unto God, The difference of true and false faith*
serve him with all their heart, build only upon Christ. The cytesyns of the
serpent despise god, and yet make they their boaste of God, to whom also they
offer and do service, but not as they ought to do. Now wha^ they perceive that
their faith is not right, and that their ypocrysie is spyed and myslyked, then
fall they to murthurynge: to the which god is an enemy, and forbyddeth it with
his word. For Cain also exhorted he from his purpose and said Thou nedeste not
to arm the because of thy brother, for thou haste none occasyon to be angry
with him. For if thou doeste right, thou shalt find it, and have joy thereof,
but if thou do not right, then is thy mysfortune, sin and trespace opon
and thou shalt shame and destroy thy self. Thy brother goes on without
fault, he shall do the no hurt nor harm: he shall also not be Lord over the,
nor myny she thy ^yght. Yea he shall have respect unto the, and thou shall
have dominion over him, and so keep thy birth right, and still remayn the
first borne, although his sacrifice be acceptable unto me, and not thine.
Cease therefore from thy wicked purpose and offend not against thy brother.

But Cain did as al ungodly do. For he went forth, and s^ue his innocent
brother And afterward when the Lord would have brought him in to the knowledge
of his great sin, and pardon him, he despised the voice of the Lord with
crakyng and facynge. For the which cause the lord was wroth with him, and
cursed him. Then dispayred he first, and went forth and The first de^a^^ of the
faith*
became yet more wicked, dealt altogether ungodly, set first his mind upon
earthly things, thought to exalte his name upon earth and builded the first
city, which he called Hanoch: he begat sons and daughters, but little fear
of God was before their eyes, in so much that the scripture says: Adam lay^
with his wife aga^^e and she bare a son, whom she called Seth. For God
(said she) has given me another sede for Abel, whom Cain ^lew, Seth also had
a son, and he called him Ends. And than began men to call upon the name of
the Lord, Out of the which words it is easy to understand, that as
touching holy, Adam, he held no more of Cain, then as though he never had
child. For Adam feared God: Cain with his progenye despised God, and became
the serpents generation. Wherefore when Adam had gotten another son, he was
of a good hope, that in Abels stead God had given him another son, which
should do right, and of whom the ro^e of the blessed sede should sprede out
afterward. For the which cause also he called him Seth, which by us is called
a pl^^^^, meaning, that God had set him and planted him as a branch, out of
the which Messiah should be borne. For ^s for Cain, he douted of him. And from
the same Seth* proceadeth the generation of the ryghteous until Noe, and from
him to Abraham and so unto David, and from thence forth unto Christ. This Seth
repaired our holy The reparacion of our faith
faith* which received great hurt at the death of Abell. This did Seth (I say)
for as much as he being taught inwardlye of god and by mouth or outwardly of
Adam learned his children and their sede, to put their trust in God, and
comfort them selves in the blessed sede, and to cleave unto the same. For it
is written manifestly: And than began men to call upon the Gene. iiii*
^ame of the Lord. Till this time was Adam with Heue his wife only a true
friend and seruer to god. The generation of Cain was now well spread abroad, and
come to two hundredth and fyftye years and above, but the more part lived
without the fear of God, unrepentant and ungodly. Wherefore in as much as the
generation of Seth now increased, and the fear of God and right believe was
among the^, the scripture says well: And than began men to call upon the
name of the lord And by this calling upon, does the Inuoca^e nomen domini
quid sit.
Scripture mean the true right believe and Gods service, that he most
aloweth Of the progeny therefore of ryghteous Seth sprange the servants of
god, and presidentes of our Christen faith. As for the cursed generation of
Cain and of the ungodly, it was destroyed and drowned with the floude.

To the holy genealogy of the true beleuers, pertayneth the Patriarch Enoch
The faith of Enoch
of whom it is written, that he walked before god, that is, he ordered his life
and conversation altogyther after the will of God, being constante and
vpryghte (no doubt) in all that, which God had spoken unto Adam. Therefore
became he also an ensample of the immortalite of the soul and resurrection of
the body, and that all gods servants shall be saved after this life. For
thus says the scripture. And in as much as he aplyed him self to Genesi. v.
walk after god, god took him away and he was no more seen. The holy Apostle
Paul also in the, xi, chapter to the Hebrees speakethe very excellently of
Enochs faith, so that no man may doubt, but that he had respect to the blessed
sede, and pleased god through Christ.

Moreover, the enemyte between the children of god and of man (that is the
issue of the serpent) grew ever more and more: so that on the one side the
multitude of god increased, and on the other side the multitude of the devil.
Jet at the last, the multitude of the wicked was greatest*

For when the children of god with held not them selves from the children of
the world* but took wives and husbands among them, they begat roughe people,
which had no faith at all, and lived only after their own lust and tentatio^,
forgot God utterly, and regarded not the hundredth and twentye years which God
gave them to amend. Therefore was God constrained, the wrath of God upon the
wicked.
so to punish the unfaithful world ones, that all posterities unto the end
of the world might have a terrible ensaple of the just wrath of God: whereby
they might learn, how ungodliness and unrighteousness displeases God. Thus
the Lord brought the floude upon all the earth, oaerthrew all that stood up,
and destroyed every thing that had life, when the world had stand now a
thousand, sire hundredth and six and fyftye year, For so many years find we
in the fi^th and seventh of Genesis, where it is written, that Noe was* 600.
year old, when the floude came upon earth. Now if we reken the years of the
old fathers in the fifth chapter until Adam, we shall find the forsayde
sum. And thus the yssne of the serpent had an end, and all ungodly and un
righteous living was myghtely suppressed and destroyed of God,

And in this horrible destruction of the ungodly, was faithful Noe saved (he
being the eight (and preserwed in the Arc through the grace and mercy of God
Here our holy true Christian faith had the victory and triumphed. For Noe was
of our faith, even of the sede of God, and put his trust in the blessed sede
our Lord Jesus. Ye the Arc or ship of Noe was a figure of Christ, as we
may easily understand by the words of saint Peter. i. Petri. iii. Seeing
then that Noe was preserved through the Arc, it follows that he was saved by
Jesus Christ, therefore is it manifest, that he first believed The renewynge
of the promise concerning christ
in Christ. Noe also was he, with whom God first renewed the covenant made
with Adam. For it is but ^one covenant only even the foresaid promise and
end made by God unto Adam. How beit the same couenaunte was afterward at
certain times renewed by reason of certain occasions. Here might Noe have
thought that all the world and all men should vtterley have been undone, for
as much as the Lord said: I am determined to destroy all flesh. Therefore
immediately he adds moreover and says: But with the will I set up my
covenant, that is to say, what soever pertayneth to my covenant, and what I
have promised Ada^ already, the same will I surely and constantly make good:
and though I now destroy the world, yet will I perform my truth through
the. For I will preserve the alive, that the blessed sede promised before, may
here after be borne of the in his generation. To this did Noe trust, and The
sacrifice of Noe.
was preserved of God through Christ. Moreover when he was come out of the Arc,
he did sacryfice, and thereby declared the thankfulness of his heart and believe,
how that he knew that he had all good of hod, which should also give him a sede,
that with sacrificinge of him self should reco^cyle pacify god. For thus says
the scripture

Noe builded an altar unto the Lord, Gene. viii
and took of all manner of clean beasts and fowls, and offered brent sacrifice
unto the Lord: and the Lord smelled the sweet sauou^e, and said in his
heart: I will no more curse the earth for man's sake. etc. So says Paul ^n the
fifth to the Ephesians Walk ye in love, like as Christ has loved Ephesi. v
us, and gave him self for us an of frynge and sacrifice of a sweet savor
unto God. Whereby every man may learn and se, that the sweet smell of the
outward sacrifice of Noe, did not chefely pacifye God, and was pleasant: but
rather that through the bodily sacrifice, was figured the sacrifice of Christ,
and for his sake was he merciful unto the world. For Math. iii.
over Christ he said at Jordan wha^ Christ was baptized: This is my dear
beloved son, in whom I am pacified or reconcyled.

Besides this, the Lord gave unto Noe The commandments given unto Noe.
certain laws, but none other then even soche as he had given to his fore
fathers and written in their hertes. The first pertayneth to marriage and
bringynge up of children, in the which is comprehended all, that is written
concerning nurtour, clenlynesse and temperaunce, of care and bringing up of
children in the fear of God, virtue, obedience and lerninge. The second
forbybddeth violence and diseate, namely, that no man shall eat blood. For it
is a figuratyue precepte, commaundynge, that no man get his living by murthur,
by oppressyng the poor, by usury, by extorcion, by falshode and disceate.
Moreover all things living were subdued unto him, and all meats were
permitted him. In conclusion, what soever concerned to love God and their
neighbor, the same is here renewed unto Noe and his children, and required of
them.

Of Noe came afterward all people, yea among his three sons Japhet Sem
Through Noe was the world replenshed
and Cham he had both the sede of God and of the froward serpent, that is,
soche as had respect unto God, and them also that regarded the deuell. Of Cham
came the Egipcians, Assyrians, Babylonians, by and from whom sprange
ydolatrye, offryng to images, and from whom false religion came up first, and
was brought in among other nations by the help of the old serpent, as among
the Greeks, Romans, and other people.

By this is it good to understand, that our holy Christen faith is elder then
any other. For here may we se clearly, that after a thousand and certain
hundredth years (almoost in the eight hundredth or nine The faith of the heithe^
is ydolatry and worshyppynge of images* Gene. x^*
hundredth year) came up the first beginning of the Heithens believe and
offrynge to images, and yet came it of wicked cursed men. For cursed Cham was
the beginning of the Egipcia^s, and Nimroth the ungodly extorcioner and
tyrau^te was the first founder of the kingdom of Babylon, which kingdom with
the buyldinge of a mighty tower, set forth his pride. Nevertheless the hand
of God declared it self immedyatly, as it is red in the eleuenthe chapter of
Genesis. Summa, in the generation of Cham had the serpent great power: howebeit
in the posterite of Japhet also (of whom the Almaynes come) and in the
posterite of Sem, he had his ys^ue likewise.

Of the progeny of Sem were borne Abraham, Isaat, and Jacob. Gene. xi. And as
it is said before, the sincere faith was somewhat darkyned in Caldea: therefore
did God call Abraham out from the ydolatrie, and renewed with him the old true
Christen faith begone with Adam, and said. Genesis.xii. Get the out of thy
country Gene. xii.
and from thy kynred, in to a land that I will show the, and I will bless
the, and make a great nacyon of the. And in the shall all the nation of the
earth be blessed. Item in the. xxii Chapter speakethe God yet more clearly and
says: In thy sede shall all the nacyons of the earth be blessed. This does
Paull declare in the iii. to the Galathiaus, and says. In thy sede which is
Christ. Therefore was the same now an other renewyng of the promise of Christ
the blessed sede. For first wha^ he promised unto Adam, afterward was the
promise renewed with Noe, and now with Abraham. And al this now is but one
promise, one savior, and one faith. Abraham also believed in Jesus christ
Abraha^s faith.
and was saved by faith. For Jesus christ says him self in the eyghte
Charter of Johan. Abraham saw my day, and reioysed. What is now the day of
Christ but the clearness of ye holy gospel? This light had he not bodily,
but saw it with the eyes of faith, and the same made him joyful and saved
him. For Christ is the true joy of troubled consciences. Thus became Abraham
the father of all faithful beleuers. Roma. iiii. And if we believe and do as
Abraham did, then are we Abraham's children, and shall rest with him in his
bosom, eue^ in the kingdom of God Luke.xiii. xvi. xix. Mat. viii. Paull also
to the Galathians in the.iii. chapter says: If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's sede, and heirs according to the promise Out of this faith in Christ,
did Abraham Christian works, For with a good will left Abraha^s Christen works.
he his own natyue country, all ydols and all images: all mysfortune honger and
miserye took he patiently: he was not hard agagynst Loath his neuye, but
ioparde his body and life for the oppressed: he was liberal, merciful, and
harberous: he prayed ferue^ty unto God for the poor sinners: he suffered
oppresion violence and wrong, and for Gods sake also he thought to sacrifice
and offer up his own most dearly beloved son Isaac. Summa, there is no
reasonable good Christen work, but thou seyst it in ye life of Abraham.
Therefore to us also for an ensample of our faith and conuer^acion, he is set
forth of the Lord him self and his apostles through out the new Testament.

Here also is it manifest, that our holy The faith of the Jews.
faith is elder then the Jewish faith. For the Jews do boaste them selves of
the Circumcision, and because they are called Jews and Israel, and that the
law the presthode and the gods service was given unto them And yet Gene xv.
and.xvii. and Roma. iiii. is it euydent, that Abraham was gods friend and
justified or made righteous, or ever he was circu^cysed. For when he was
circuncysed, he was. 99. year old Gene. xvii. Now was the promise made unto
him many years before. The scripture also says planely: Abraham believed God,
and the same was counted unto him for righteousness. Genesi. xv. So was it
many years after, or ever Israel and Juda was borne, of whom they have taken
their name The law also was given. 430 years after the promise, as Paull made
How old the Christsten faith is.
the reckoning. Gala. iii. It follows therefore that our christen faith is.
2048. years elder then the Circumcision, and. 2449. year elder then the law,
the presthode and ceremonies of the Jews. For from Adam unto the flood, were.
1656. years. And from the floude until the departing of Abraham out of
Caldea. 363. years. From that time are rekened. 430. years until the
departing of Israel out of Egipte. And on the. 50. day after the departinge,
was the law given unto Israel upon mount Sina, Exo. 19. 20. And after certain
days was the presthode and ceremonies appointed them. Where as God then made a
covenant with Abraham, when he ordained the circuncision, It serves more to
the co^firmacion of our holy christen faith, then to the mayntenaunce of the
Jewish ceremonies.

Isaac and Jacob were Abraham children, The faith of Isaac and Jacob.
not only after the flesh, but also after the sprete. For they had the faith
of their father and graundfather Abraham, put their trust only in god through
Jesus Christ, and lived a sober and vertuos life. Of this does the scripture
bear them record through out: Jea Jacob, whom the Lord also called otherwise
Israel (of whom afterward all the people of God received the name Israel) had
many vysions of the Lord Christ as with the ladder Ge. xxviii
that stood upon the earth, the top reachynge to heaven, on the which the
angels of god went up and down. For herewith Jacob saw, that christ only is
the way to heaven.
was represented unto him the Lord Jesus, which is the way unto heaven, the
truth and life, without whom no man comes unto the father. Upon the vision
of Jacob says he also him self. Joh. i. Uerely Isaye unto you: hence forth
shall ye se the heaven open, and the angels of god going up and down upon
the son of man. And so constant was Jacob in remembryng the same, that
afterward at the commandment of the Lord, he set up in the same place an
altar, no dout (as it is said before) for a figure of the cross and sacrifice
of Christ. and there honored he and worshipped the Lord, he commanded all
his people also, that they should forsake strange gods, and give him the
ydols that they had brought with them out of Mesopotamia, and he buried them
under an Oak that stood beside Sichem, Gene. xxxv. And when he would now dye,
he prophesied very clearly of the lord Christ, how he should be borne out of
the kynred of Juda, and that he should be born the same time that the kingdom
should be taken from Juda. Which thing also came to pas in Herodes time. For
in the xxxii. year of the raygne of Herod, was Christ borne at Bethlee^ in
Jewry. Where of the words of Jacob are these: The scepter shall not be taken
away from Juda, ner a ruler from his fete, till Schilo come (that is to say,
the savior, and he in whom all nations shall be blessed) and the people shall
fall unto him. This sted The faith of Joseph
fast faith of Jacob did Joseph follow also which mortified his own flesh,
declared patience in aduersite and preson, and exercysed great justice and
equity in his governance. He was a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ, who also
being fold of his own unto the Heythen, preserved his brethren alive. So
that from the beginning of the world until the death of Joseph, the right
Christen faith endured. 2300. yea res. And thus all holy patriarchs before the
law, were saved, not through the law, ner by their own strength and
deseruynge, but* through the blessed sede our Lord Jesus Christ,

The law of Moses. The law of God given by Moses, leads unto Christ, and
makes mention of all his doings.
THe Israelites after the death of Joseph until their departing and
delyuerannce out of Egipte, were in the land.c. xl. years. And like as before
in the time of Noe the dwelling among the wicked became occasion of falling
un to the righteous, Even so now did the Israelites learn ydolatrye and all
unhappiness of the Egiptians. For the which cause also they were sore oppressed
a long season, howbeit there remained yet many excellent men, which kept
still the old faith and hated the abominations of the Egiptians. For of Moses
(which was born.c. vi. year after the death of Joseph) sa^^th Paul: Moses
through says when he gr^w up and was great, refused to be called the son of
Pharaos daughter: and chose rather to suffer aduersite with the people of God,
then to en^oye the pleasures of sin for a season, and esteemed the rebuke of
Criste The faith of Moses
greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect to the
reward, Hebre xi. Now can no man desire to suffer with Christ, except he have
know lege of Christ's sufferynge. Therefore Moses in the mids of all
persecution had know lege of Christ, and the faith in Christ. So is there no
doubt, but moo virtuous people had this true faith, which were all oppressed
and vexed in Egypt, like as afterward the right faithfwll beleuers were
somewhat more persecuted: as among the Heythen in the tymeof the Judges and
kings of Juda and Israel: under king Antiochus: under the Emperous. Nero:
Traianus / Domitianus / Maximianus / Julianus and other. As for the unbelievers
/ they in such miserable tymeys received the reward of their unthankfulness,
disobedience, ydolatrie, and blasphemye.

But when the appointed time came which god had forsene and opened unto
Abraham. Gene. xv. he brought the people of Israel by Moses out of Egypt, with
and through great wonders and tokens. By the which he first declared his power
then his loving kyndnesse and mercy toward his own, and his terrible justice
and vengeance against his enemies: Whereby all the world might know, that
there was none other just and true god save the God of Israel, in whose hand
only consiste all things, which also of his mere mercy preserves his own,
and with right indgement rewards his enemies. Specially this is most
wonderful, that in this great business and work he has so myghtely set
forth the redemption performed by our Lord Jesus Christ, yea and expressed
it to be a very mighty redemption. For the same night (when they should depart
away and be The Easter lamb
dyspatched in the morning) the Lord commanded them to kill a lamb, and with
the blood thereof to sprinkle the doors and posts of the house. So when the
angel that in the same night slew the first borne of the Egyptians, saw the
blood, he should do no harm, and sley no man therein. Exo, xii. Now te stifyeth
Paul.i. Cor. v that Christ Jesus is our Ester lamb and passover* So says S.
Joha^. Behold, the lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world.
Therefore were not the Israelytes spared because of the blood of beasts, but
for the bloudes sake of the blessed sede that was promised for to come. And
thus the whole delyuerau^ce out of Egypt was a figure of the true redemption,
by the which we are delivered from the power of the deuell and from
everlasting death through Jesus Christ, and brought into the land of promise,
even to eternal joy and salvation, which God promised unto our fathers Ada^,
Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Now when the Lord had carried his people out of Egypt, and brought the^ through
the reed see dry shode, and had drowned Pharao with all his people, he
commanded his folk to prepare and cleanse the^ selves at mount Sina. For he
would bind himself unto them, receive them as his own people, and gave them
his law The genynge of the law.
and ordinance. Which thing he also did and appointed his law himself, spoke
it with his own mouth, and wrote it with his own fyngers in two tables of
stone. In the one and first table he ordained four commandments,
concerning the worcester ship and love of God: Namely, that we The first table.
should take him only for the true and right God, and none else beside or
except him: That we should worship and honor him only, and in no wise to
have any other God, comfort nor hope. Item that we should in no wise make any
image or picture of any things, and nether to worship them nor serve them.
Morouer, that we should not take the name of god in vain, or lightly. And that
we should halow the Sabbath day. In the other table ordained he six
commandments concerning man. And like as the sour first are comprehended
in these words: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. etc. Even
so are the six contained in these wo^des following: Thou shall love thy
neighbor Mat. xxii.
as thy self. The commandments are these: Thou shall honor father and
mother Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not breawedloke. The second table.
Thou shall not ^^eale. Thou shall bear no false witness. Thou shall not lust
In all these commandments is comprehended all that serves for a godly life,
and that any where is written of God of true serving of God, and of right
virtue toward this world.

Who so now does well pondre these ten chapters or commandments, and
compares The law written in stone is no new thing.
them to the doings and works of the holy Patriarchs and old fathers which
had no law in writtynge, He shall find, that the Lord now with this his
written law began no new thing, nether ought that was not before in the
world, but rather renewed the old: and the law that he hitherto had written
in the hearts of holy men, now wha^ the people had gotten them stony hearts, he
wrote the same in tables of stone. For that we ought to worship and serve
God only, and have none other gods, the same did the holy fathers so believe
and keep, that all their co^uersacion and doing bears record thereof.
Co^ternyng images or ydols, it is euyde^t, that Jacob buried the ydols of
Mesopotamia under an Oak beside Sichem Genesis.xxxv. We may perceive also by
the dothes of Abraham, Jsaac and Jacob, how the name of god was had in
reverence among the^ of old, and not taken in vain. The Sabbath did not the
Lord ordeyne here first, but on the seventh day of the creation. Genesis i. The
same did the fathers keep a right no doubt. John^. vii. Where as Cham had not
his father Noe in reverence he was cursed for it. Gene. i^. Aduoutry did the
Heythe^ rulers forbid under pain of death, as we may se. Genesis xxvi. Whereby it
is casye to understand, how the blessed friends of God kept holy wedlock.
How contrary the holy men were unto theft and dysceate, it apeareth in the
parting of Abraham and Loath, Genesis xiii. And in Jacobs faithfulness and
handlyng with Laban his father in law. Gene. xxix. xxx. xxxi Lyenge and false
dealing was so far from the holy Fathers, that for keeping their credence
and truth, they opteyned very great commendacion. Notwithstondynge they were
tempted with evil as all men be, but they resisted the wicked lusts. For
manifest is the chaist act of Joseph, which would not touch his masters The
law written in stone was filled before.
wife, nor desire her. Wherefore in these commandments is nothing written or
required, that was not also required of the fathers before the law, and
performed through true faith in Christ. The Lord therefore began no new
thing with his people, when he delivered them the tables of the law: Only he
would bring in to a short sum and set in writing, all the law that the
feathers had (but not together ner comprehended in a sum) to the intent that
they should the less be forgotten of the people, which through their dwelling
in Egipte among ydolaters and false beleuers, were brought in to sore offense
and slander. This must now be rectified again after this manner. As for all
the laws and ordinances, which afterward were added unto these two tables,
they were not joined there unto as principal laws, but as by laws, for the
declaracion and better understanding of the ten chapters or commandments.
For the perfect sum of all laws, the very right rule of godliness, of god
service, of righteousness, of good and evil conversation, is comprehended
already in the two tables.

But here might some men make obieccion Objection.
and say: If all truth be contained in these ten commandments, how
happens it that by no token there is mencio^ made of the blessed sede
promised un to the fathers? Hitherto is it declared and promised unto the holy
fathers, that they shall be saved through the blessed sede out of the very grace
of God, and for none of their own deseruinges: but now are written laws which
command and forbid us, as though we through our own works and deserving
(as namely if we keep these commandments) should be saved and accept unto
God. Where is now Christ Where is the faith of the Patriarchs? Here is
nothing heard of faith, but much, ye only of works?

Answer. This objection has disceaued Answer,
many, that they have had no right opinion and faith of the grace of God and
our righteous making. Therefore will we now give no answer out of our selves,
but set forth holy Paul, and let him answer, that the answer may be the more
sure, and the better esteemed. Paul in the.iii. chapter to the Galathians
writes after this manner Dear brethren, I will speak after the manner of men,
when a man's testament is confirmed, no man does lightely regard or despise it,
ner adds ought thereto. Now were the promises made unto Abraham and to his
sede, He says not: In the seeds, as in many, but as in one: And in thy sede,
which is Christ. All these are Paul's words, and the meaning of them is: For
asmoche as the testamentes or worcester kes of men, are of such reputacion in the
world, that when they are made, ordained and confyrmed, no man darre add
ought to them, or mynyshe any thing from them, but every man must let them be
as they are of them selves: It is much more reason that gods Testament or
bequest remain Gods Testament.
still, and that nothing be added to it, or taken from it. Now did God make a
testament or bequest with Abraham and promised him therein, that he would give
him a sede, in whom he and his children should be saved. And the same salvation
did he expressly appoynte in one, and not in many. Wherefore we must add
nothing unto gods bequest, seeing he has promised us salvation in Christ only,
and not in many (that is to say, in no creature, not in our own power and
works of the law) nether must we think, that the law was afterward added to
the intent as though Christ were not able to save us, or as though we might
opteyne salvation by our own works out of the law. For thus follows it in
Paull word to word: This testament, I say) which before was confyrmed to
Christward, is not dysanulled or made of none effect by the Law (which was
given beyond four hundredth years there after). For if the enheritaunce be
gotten by the Law, then is it not given by the promise. But God gave it freely
unto Abraham by promise. These are Paul's words, out of the which every man may
understand, that to the generation of man, salvation is given only Salvation
o^ the grace of God through the promise, and through no deseruyng at all. And
that the law of the promise (that is to say, the bequest and Testament of god)
is nothing mynyshed, but that the sum remains without blemishe, namely,
that salvation is given us freely.

But here might one ask: Seeing that Objection.
the salvation is clearly enough expressed before the law, and is ascribed only
unto the grace of God, why would God then add the law? why was he not
content with the Testament alone? Therefore follows Answer,
it now in Paull. Why then serves the law? It was added because of
transgression, till the sede came that was promised. These are Paul's words
which are thus to be understand. The law was not given because of the promise
to make it of none effect, and to teach that men are saved by works, and not
through the grace and free lyberalyte of God: but it was given because of
transgression that is to say, because that the people of God in Egypt had
transgressed the why the law was given.
way and truethe of their Fathers, and knew no more what was sin, right or
vnryghte, wherein stood salvation or dampnation: for they were corrupt through
the long dwelling among the Ydolaters of Egypt. Therefore did God ordeyne
them the Law, out of the which they might learn the will of God, what
Sin, right or vnryghte is, and to know them selves, to go in to them selves,
and to consydre, how that the holy works wyche God requires, are not in their
own power, for the which cause all the world have great need of a
mediatoure. And thus the law was given to furthur the promise, namely that we
through the law might be led only unto Christ. For thus folowethe it in
Paul's words. And it was given of Angels by the hand of the mediatoure. A
mediator is not a Mediator of one only, but god is one. Is the law then
against the promyses of God? God forbid. Howbeit if there had been given a law
which could have given life, then no doubt ryghteousnes should come of the
law. But the scripture has shut up all under sin, that the promise should
come by the faith on Jesus Christ, given unto them that believe. Before faith
came (that is to say, Jesus Christ in whom we beloue) we were kept and shut
up under the law, unto the faith which should afterward be declared. Thus
was the law our scolemaster unto Christ, that we might be made ryghteous by
faith. etc. By these words of Paul may every man understand now for what
cause the law was given, and how it is not contrary to the promise of the
foresaid sede, but rather brings us from our selves and from all creatures
only unto Jesus Christ. The law therefore confyrmeth the first promise
concerning, the blessed sede, and teaches that we opteyne all salvation in him
only. Howbeit it is The law is the rule to live by
also a rule of our life, enfourmynge us what we ought to do, and what we
ought to leave undone. Yet on our side is all unfruitful, where faith is not.
But where faith is, it ceasseth not through love to work good according to
the law: all honor, and praise being referred unto God, to men nothing but
imperfectness.

God also among his people wrought many things, whereby he set the cause of
Jesus Christ clearly a fore the eyes of the people, as it is expressed before
by the land of the Passover. Likewise is it where as Moses hanged up as
serpent in the wilderness, that al they which were stonge and poisoned of
serpents, should behold the brazen serpent hanging, and not dye, but be saved
alive. Where as doutlesse the outward beholdynge of the brazen serpent, saved
not them that were poisoned: but it was God, which would so declare, that his
son should be hanged upon a cross, to the intent that every one which were
poisoned and defiled by the old serpente and sin, should believe in the son
of god, and live in him. For so is it written, Sapien. xvi. They had a token of
health The brazen serpent
according to the commandment. For who so converted, was not made whole by
the outward thing which he saw, but (by the) which art the restorer of
health and Savior of all. And yet says Christ more clearly. Joh. iii. And
like as Moses set up the serpent in the wilderness eue^ so must the son of
man belifte up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
eternal life.

And as touching this, the holy Apostle Paul brings in another sentence.i.
Cor. x. and says: Brethren, I would not have you ignorant of this, that our
fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were all
baptized under Christ is the rock.
Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did all eat one spiritual meat, and
drunk of one spiritual drink. But they drank all of the spiritual rock,
that followed the^ which rock was Christ.

Besides this, if we considre the declaration of the laws of the first table
(which teaches how we shall behave our selves right toward God, to love,
worship and honor him, to serve him and to cleue only unto him) we shall
find in the same first table, the whole cause of Christ. For all that
afterward was ordained and appointed concerning the tabernacle, the presthode
and the oblations, parteyneth to the sum of the first table, for asmoche
Question
as the scripture and the mouth of God calls it his law, precepte,
commandment, use and statute, ordinance and service, And if thou ask: how
can god which is a sprete, be served without, ward* visible, and fleshly
things, as the foresaid ceremonies of the Jews are? I answer: Such
outward rytes of the people Answer.
of God were sacraments and tokens of heavenly invisible good things, andwere
not the heavenly riches them selves. Wherefore, they nether served ner pleased
God, that used and did soche service without faith and lyftinge up of the
mind. But they that put their trust in God cleuynge only unto him, and
lyftinge up their hertes higher, and remained not in the vysible thing, those
pleased god. Where One altar what it signified.
as they had but one altar and one place appointed where they should do
sacrifice It signified the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that he
should be offered up but ones (and that in one place) for the syn ne of the
world. Therefore where as the hye pressed also every year went in to the
inward tabernacle with blood, It signified, that our Lord Jesus should come
in to this world, and shed his blood ones for all, to forgive and cleanse our
sins* and so to ascend unto heaven, Ye all obletions and all sheddinges of
blood in the sacrifices of the old fathers, signified the death of our Lord
Jesus Christ. No Note this well
thing was cleansed among them with out blood, which signifies, that all the
pourgynge of our uncleanness is done by the blood of Jesus Christ. And all
the yresthode which was ordained for to teach, to pray and make
intercession, to offer and do sacrifice, represented the office of our Lord
Christ: Which came in to this world, to teach us the truth and
righteousness: Then to offer himself to the father for our sins, and after
the sacrifice done, to rise up again fro^death, to asce^de unto heaven there to
seyt at the right hand of god, and eue^ there as a true hye bisshoppe, to
appear always in the presence of god and to pray for us. This is the sum of
the rytes and ceremonies of the old fathers, the understanding of the
figures, and the sprete of the lettre: where of holy Paull has written much in
the most excellent epistle to the Hebrews.

Out of all this is it easy to understood, Why the ceremonies of the law were
given.
how that these rytes and ceremonies of the fathers, were sacraments, and
given to the people of god, Not that they with the lettre and outward visyble,
and corporal thing should sufficiently serve God which is a sprete, but that
they should lift up their minds above the same to the spiritual things,
pondrynge the mercy of God: out of the which he being moved, is become
gracious unto us. And when he might have damned us for our sins and
misdeeds, he spared us for his sons sake, whom he gave unto death, and his
innocent death has he accepted for our sins. Soche a faithful consideration
(which is the true believe) pleases god, and with soche a faith is god served,
and soche a faith would the Lord have taught andplanted in, with the ^oresayde
rytes and Ceremonies Therefore all they that pleased god among the old fathers,
pleased him not for the letters sake, but by reason of the sprete.

Wha^ the sacrifice also and ceremonye was executed after the ordinance of god
in the congregation, the beloved friends of God had not only respect unto the
outewarde thing, but much rather beheld they Christ with the eyes of faith
and The godly consideracion of fathers.
thought thus. Behold, the will of God has ordained to do sacrifice for
sin, now are we all sinners and detters unto god, in so much that he has
power and right over us, that like as the beeste which is now slain and
offered, dies, and has his blood shed. Even so might God now also kill us all,
and coudemne us for ever, Nevertheless he has taken us to his mercy and
promised us a sede, which should thus dye on the cross, and cleanse us with
his blood, and with his death restore us unto life. Which thing no doubt shall
as surely come to pass, as this be is slain and offered now a ore our eyes.
And like as the blood is sprenkled over the people for the bodily cle^syng. So
shall the blood of Christ be sprenkled upon our souls, etc. And out of such
thought and faithful consyderacion of the sacrifices, grew repentance and
sorrow for their sins, a gladness, praise, comfort and thanks geuynge unto
God the merciful father. And to this do serve certain Psalms, which were
made concerning the sacrifices. To this also serve all the rebukynges of the
holy Prophets, and the refusinges of the oblations. For the exterior pomp
and show of the offrynges, without faith in God and the blessed sede, is
nothing worth, yea it is rather abhominacion unto god, as thou seyst in the
first Question.
chapter of Esaye. Thou w^^t ask: Might not god have taught and showed his
people the cause of Jesu Christ and of true believe, none other way, then
through and with such cost pomp and glory of sacrifices and other
gorgiousnesse of the church? I answer. If the people had not fallen to
Answer.
more wickedness in Egypt through their dwelling among the ydolaters, but had
constantly and steadfastly remained, as did their fathers Abraham Isaac and
Jacob then might they well have continued by the old short simple form as
it was among the holy fathers. But now had they seen in Egypt an outward
costlye gods service, with temples, altures, sacrifices, pre^^hode, holy daves,
orname^tes. etc. Likewise the ydolatrye increaced daily in all the world, so
that now there was utterly no people, which had not their own outward
ceremonies* wherewyth they served God. To the intent then that God might
re^^^ne his people within the compass of faith in one God, and in the blessed
sede promised before: to the intent also that they should show no outward*
service to any other gods, or take upon them to serve God after the manner Why
god ordained such a long service among the Jews.
of the Egipcia^s or after other Heithe^, he appointed an outward gods
service, and commanded to do the same unto him, and else to none, and in the
same pleased it him to set forth all the cause of the forsayde sede, till he
came and performed all things indede, that they had fygurally in their
sacrifices Morouer, god (according ^^ his wisdom (of his special mercy and
good heart, that he has unto man's generation would with these outward tokens
tender our weakness: which of spiritual heavenly things has better
understanding, when they are showed unto it by corporal vysible things. God
therefore through such corporal God renders our weakness.
representations, labored to show unto that gross and fleshly people, the
heavenly cause of his son. Neuer^theles the corporal visible things were
given for no longer, but until the time of the fulfyllynge. But now that
C^r^st has appeared and fulfilled and performed all that was wryte^ and
figured of him in the law and the prophets, the figure ceasseth* and the
outewarde Sacraments of Moses law* are of no more value, to be exercised and
used. Thus much ^^sayde of the ceremonies.

Where as beside the ceremonies there Laws judicial.
is much written also in the law concerning cyuyle policye, ordinance,
judgment, to live peaceable and well in city and land. Of biyng and sellyng,
of war and peace, of enherytaunce and propertyes, of laws matrimonyall: of
punyshement of the wicked: of the judgment and connsaill: of leadynge and
borowynge. etc. It is no news at all, and serves altogether for the
declaration of the fire ^o^maundementes of the second table and is
comprehended in the words of Paul, Roma xiii. Love thy neighbor as thy
self* And in the words of Christ. That thou would not have done unto the,
do not thou to another. Math. vii. Such laws and rules to live in peace, in
a cyuyle order and virtue, have also the good holy fathers had from the
beginning of the world written in their hearts by God him selse. Now has God
also caused all to be comprehended in wryttynge by Moses to the intent that
the World might have all more clearlye and perfectly, and that no man might
excuse him self of ignorance.

The original of the holy scripture and faith thereof.
This matter which I have hitherto treated upon, have I not feyned of my self,
but taken it out of the mouth and word of God. For god styred up Moses to
write and leave behind him all the matter, for our lernyng and knowledge. This
did now Moses with great faythfulnesse, and comprehended The first book Moses.
all in four books. The first is called the book of the creation, from the be
gynnynge of the world unto his time, of the creacion of the world, beginning
of all nations, and of the Patriarchs and old ryghteous servants of god of
their faith and conversation, of the promises and works ^e god. The same wrote
he as he was inspired of the holy ghost, and as he had received of old
fathers, and somewhat as he found in the books of the Egipcians. For Moses was
excellently well learned in all wisdom of the Egipcians, as Steven does
witness of him, Act. vii. The other three books wrote he of his own time,
according as he him self was present, saw and knew. And specially the
second koke concerning the departing The second book of Moses.
out of Egypt, how the people of god were oppressed in Egipte, how the
Egypcians were punyshed, how Israel was delivered, received the law, and set
up a tabernacle with a gorgious serving of God. In the third book which is
called Leuiticus The third book.
are written the spiritual laws, namely such as concerns the priests and
the presthode, their office, living, knowledge, sacrifices, solemn feast
days, rytes, ceremonies, and such like. In the fourth which is called.
Numeri, he writes at length, how they went through the The fourth oak.
wilderness, and came to Jordane, with a rehearsal of their order and nombre,
of their murmuring also and punishment, and of certain victories, with a
remembrance of certain laws and statutes. Beside all this he made yet an
Enchiridion, The fifth book.
and sum of all the Acts of his time and of the law of God, which is
called Deuteronomium: the same commanded he to be laid in the Arc at the moc
o^ of God, and that it should be red unto all the people, as it is mentioned.
Deuteronomy. xxxi. And in these five books given us of God The origenall scripture of
our faith
by Moses, is the whole ground of our holy faith. For all the Prophets
afterward grounded them selves upon the same, and wrote therout, like as
afterward our Lord Jesus and the Apostles point unto Moses. Nether did ever
any right wise man of understanding and that feared God, doubt any thing or
blaspheme such scriptures. And from such true servants of God, have we
hitherto received our matters in wrytinge.

Thus much have I said concerning The law written is no new thing.
the law, how it is no new thing, but even the only will of god, but now
compre hended in wryrtynge. Moreover that all the law poynteth unto Christ, and
that all men of right understanding which lived under the law, were Christen.
For manifest is it that Paull said. Roma. x. Christ is the end of the law,
to justify every one that believes. And Galathia. iii. Or ever faith (that is
to say, Christ) came we were kept and shut up under the law unto the faith
which should afterward be declared. Thus was the law our scolemaster unto
Christ that we might be made ryghteous by faith. All this I suppose will be new
and starunge in many hertes nevertheless I trust that all they which have
understanding, do se and knowledge that this is the true, old, right and godly
Dyuinite and Theologye, which ascrybeth all honor unto god the father through
our Lord Jesu Christ in the holy ghost. To whom be glory and praise for
ever.

Amen.
All virtuous kings and the people of Israel, trusted unto Christ, and not to
the law.
AFter that the law was given, and the gods service set up, Moses the servant
of God dyed, being an hundredth and twentye year old: and at the
commandment and commission of God, he left gods people to be ruled and gyded
by the faithful val^aunt^ Josue, which also was a figure of our Lord Jesu.
For like as it was not Moses, but Josue that brought the people in Josue was a
figure of Christ.
to the land of promise. Even so are we brought in to the eternal rest, not
by the works of the law, nor through our own deserving, but by the grace
through Jesus Christ: like as it is also with many words expressed of holy Paul
Heb, iiii. This Josue no doubt, did keep, maynteine and defend gods faith and
religion, with the sprete and understanding thereof, and taught other to keye
the same* like as he thoro^e gods inspiration received it of the fathers by
Moses. Which thing though it be euydent in many points, yet is it manyfeste
specially by this, that he would not suffer the children of Rub^n and G^d and
the half tribe of Man^sse to set up and have another auture, beside the only
autare that the lord had appointed them. For here in (as it is mentioned before)
was figured the virtue and perfectness of the only cross, death, and
sacrificyng of Jesu Christ. Therefore would not Josue, that any thing should
be set check mate with the cross and oblacion of Jesu Christ, but that all
honor of cle^synge and forgiveness of sins should be ascribed only unto
him.

Where as Josue now and other judges, rulers, princes and kings of Israel
after him used sore and great war, stroke many horrible battayles, destroyed
much land and people, and shed men's blood without measure, he did it as a
chief head and as an instrument and vessel of God, at the commandment of
God, which would so punyshe the ydolatrye, the great sin and blasphemy of
the ungodly, which he had long suffered, and exhorted them to amendment, but
for all his pacient abiding they would not convert. Those now did he rote
out through the sword of his beloved fr^ndes: sometime delivered he his people
with the sword of the ryghteous, and saved them from the hand of their
enemies. For because of the sins of his people, he gave them over sometime in
to the hand of their enemies, to nurtoure and correct them with the rod: then
fell the people of God, and ^^ede before their enemies, and were subdued and
oppressed of the ungodly, till they knowledged their sins, called upon god and
amended, putting their trust in good only, through the blessed sede,
worshyppynge him only, calling upon him, and honourynge him according to his
word, casting a way strange god service and ydols, that shameful,
blasphemous and un godly living. Then sent he them his help, and delivered
them in his power, by the ministration of his appointed captains. And soche
warrynge, delyuerynge and punyshinge was no fleshly unfaithful work, whom no
man ought to follow, as some being wrapped with the unsteadfast sprete of the
Manichees and Ana baptistes, An heresy of the ana baptistes.
do mean. For Paul expresses clearly: And what shall I say of Gedeon Barach,
Samson, and Jephthae, David and Samuel, and the Prophets? which through faith
subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, opteyned the promyses, stopped the
mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the
sword, of weak were made strong, became valeaunt in battle, turned to
flight the armies of the aleauntes. Hebre. xi.

All which works the holy Apostle prayseth and commends as excellent works
of faith. Therefore are they no works of the flesh, n^ther is it now contrary
to the holy faith, if Christen rulers deliver their innocent people (whom God
has subdued unto them) from wrongful violence, and defend their liberty,
righteousness, house and land, or punyshe the shameful blasphemers,
ydolaters, and persecuters of the holy faith, and not suffer them to have all
their malycious will.

Nevertheless this must be done by them, to whom god has committed the sword
Rulers must punish.
For thus says the Lord: Who so takes the sword, shall perish through the
sword. Matthe.xxvi. But specially in the battayls of gods people and of the
vnfaytfull it comes to pas, and is expressly, set before our eyes, that god
said to the serpent at the beginning: Genesi. iii.

I will put enemyte between thy sede and the woman's sede. For the righteous are
the sede of Christ, the unrighteous and vnfaytfull are the sede of the deuell.
Between these now se we great discord: but specially this, that the faithful
do always tread the serpente on the headde, though they them selves also be
bytten in the hele. For the right faithful beleuers before the birth of christ
in the time of the promise, had no less trouble and persecution, not only
because of sin, but also for righteousness and faythes sake, then the
faithful after Christ's birth in the time of grace and perfectnes. Therefore
have they small knowledge of the doings of the faithful, which say, that the
people of old were a victoryous people, and gouerued corporally, but that the
people after Christ's coming are borne to suffer, and An error.
to no victory or governance. Nevertheless in these wonderful times (in the
which gods people had now victory, and anon were subdued and oppressed) the
true faith continued upright and unblemished from Josue forth through out all
the judges, until the time and reign of David.

David also was a man that suffered Of king David.
much through diverse and long trouble, through miserable distress and vexacion,
and through sore persecution, without ce^ssynge, being proved, tried and
provoked, before he was king: Whereof the books of Samuel and the more part of
the Psalms bears record. But after that he was promoted unto the kingdom,
by God (which said: I have found a man after Act. xiii.
mine own heart) he auaunced, set forth and magnified the true faith right
delygently. Here also to the honor of our Lord Jesu Christ, will I shortly
and by the way declare, what knowledge and faith this noble king and prophet
had of our Lord Jesu. This will I do with the declaracion of the.c. xi. Psalm,
whose words are these:

The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thyn
The holy Trynyte.
enemies thy foot stole. In the first verse David knowlegeth the persons in
the holy Trinite, the godheade also and the eternal kingdom of Christ. Thus
likewise did our Lord Jesus Christ understand and allege this verse in the
Gospel. Mathe.xxii. knowledgynge two of the persons in the one only godhead
For he says: The Lord said unto my Lord. Now is it certain and
undeniable, that he which speaks, and he to whomought is spoken, are not one,
but two persons. Yet is there but one Lord and god, and they both (the father
that speaks, and the son to whom is spoken) are the Lord, therefore are
they one, of one substance and being, they very true god.

Nether is the son less then the father, There can also none be a father,
except he have a son or a child. Now is the ever lastyng father God,
therefore is the son also everlasting. There is also but one only
everlasting without beginning. Both the father and the son are eternal
without beginning, therefore are they one only true God with the holy gooste.
Like as Johan also says: In the beginning (that is to say, from
everlasting) was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was god.
And immediately thereafter says he, that the word is Jesus Christ our Lord.
For it follows. The faith of David in Christ
The word became flesh. Therefore does David also call the son of god
specially his Lord, saying: The Lord said unto my Lord. And therefore
calls he Christ his Lord, because he confesses and believes, that he is
his very natural Lord and god, as Thomas also did knowledge: My lord and my
god. Joh. xx. Afterward calls he him his Lord, because that after the
nature of man, he should be borne out of his loins. For through out all the
scripture is our Lord, Jesus called the son of David. And thus both David
knowledge two natures in Christ, the nature of God and the nature of man.

That the kingdom of Christ shall last for ever, and that the kind and nature
of man shall be exalted above all heavens (a^ Paul says. h^b ii.) David
testifies wit^ these words Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy fo^e stole For Mark says in the.xvi. Chapter The Lord was taken
up in to heaven an^ sytteth at the right hand of God* Of thi^ also find we. i.
Cor. xv. Now he must ^^ des be very God in deed, which rey^nethe for ever, and
to whom all enem^es must be subdued, y^a cast utterly under his fete. Now
follows the second^ verse.

The Lord shall send thy mighty staf out of Syon: thou shall be Lord, eue^
in the mids among thine enemies.

Here speaks he of the preaching of the holy Gospel, and how the world
should be converted unto Christ, and Christ to reygne in the mids of the
world. In the first verse is spoken of the eternal kingdom, that he is very
God, living and reignynge for ever, not only in this time, but also after
this time eternally. Bu here speaks he specially of the kingdom, The
spiritual kingdom of Christ.
where as he reygneth here benethe through the Gospel. For the staf, the
scepter, the rod of Christ is the holy Gospel, even the power of god, which
saves all that believe. Roma i. Which makes Christ's enemies friends, and
smyteth them down that will not co^uerte: so that Christ has dominion and
victory even in the mids among his enemies. It is he, that with the spirit
of his mouth slays the Antichrists. This his word also and preachynges of
the Gospel, came forth first from Syon or Jerusalem as Esaye, Micheas. and
Luke does testifye. Act. i.
Now follows the third verse.

In the day of thy battayll (or army) shall thy people be well willing: the
dew of thy birth is, unto the in an holy majesty, out of the womb of the
clear morning.

Here with does David describe the glorious and victorious faith of the
christian. For when the Gospel is preached, there A battayll
aryseth a conflicte between faith and infidelite, between the sede of Christ
and the serpent, between ydolatrye and true godliness. And the unbelievers
persecute the Lord Christ in his members, that is to say the faithful: but
they are well content utterly to give over body, honor and goods, their blood
and life for gods truths sake. For the martyrs and they in the prymitiue
Church, being gathered together of the Apostles, and after the Apostles time,
have thus kept truth and faith toward the Lord Christ, and were willing to
dye ^or knowlegynge him. Afterward describes he also in the foresaid verse,
the pure and holy Conception and birth of our Lord Jesu Christ. And this The
birth of Christ.
does he with a goodly similitude, and says Thy birth shall be holy and very
excellent not unclean as the birth of other men. For like as the dew out of
the clear heaven and out of the fair morning, is borne as it wereout of a
mothers womb. Eue^ so also shall thou be borne holy and clean of an undefiled
virgin. Whereof thou find more instruction Luke i.

The Lord has swome, and it shall not repent him thou art pressed for ever
after the order of Melchisedech.

In this fourth verse descr^beth he the office of Jesu Christ, how that he is
ordained The office of, Christ*
of God to be one only priest for ever which should offer up him self for the
sin of the world, and always appear in the sight of God the father, and to
pray for us. All this does holy Paull declare at large to the Hebreues in
the.v. vii. viii. ix. and. x, chap. And specially in this verse is grounded all
that is red through out the scripture, of the merits of Christ, of the
forgeuyng of sins, of righteous making of being mediatoure, and that he
alone is the only salvation, advocate, satisfaction and righteousness of the
faithful.

The Lord is at thy right hand: he in the time of his wrath shall wound even
kings.

This fyfth verse teaches, how God will ener more and more stand on his
sons Christ's cause shall forth,
side, further his cause, and bring down and destroy those kings princes
and Lords, that will not amend and believe in Christ, but will rather provoke
his wrath, then ^elyre his grace. Which thing Herodes, Nero, Domicianus,
Maximinus and Julianus have proved. Yet follows the syxte verse declarynge the
fyfth.

He shall judge among the Heythen, and fill all full of deed bodies, and smite
the head on the wide ground.

Christ is also preached unto the Heithe^ and reigns among the^: but many
wythstande Christ, and them does he judge. And like as a king overcomes
his enemies with a battle, and covers the whole plain with deed bodies,
visits also and smyteth the head of the war, and the head cycie of the
enemies. Eue^ so does Christ shall destroy his enemies.
Christ to his enemies, and destroieth their power and kingdom. All which
things we have seen in the old vnchriste^ empire of Rome, and in many other
potentates and powers. But specially he breaks the head of the old serpent,
according to the promise. Gene. iii. And at the last shall he come to judge the
quycke and deed, and destroy his enemies for ever.

Out of the broke in the way shall he drink, therefore shall he also lift up
the head.

Finally and in the seventh verse, he describes the passion of Christ and his
glory. In the way (says he) that is, in his life while he is in this
misery. He shall drink out of the broke, that is, he shall suffer and be
overcome. For to drink out of The passion of Christ.
the cup is as much as to suffer. But to drink out of the broke, is to be
altogether full of trouble, to be vexed and ^orme^ted without victory, and
utterly to be overwhelmed with a broke and strong stream of troubles. Thus was
it his mind to declare the passion of Christ. After the passion follows the
glory with the resurrection and ascensio^. Paul Philip. ii. speaks of both,
and says. Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto death even the
death of the Cross. Wherefore God has exalted him, and given him a name,
which is above all names. etc. Thus much be spoben of this Psalm and of
David's understanding, ^hych he had of Christ Jesu and of the christian faith

Upon this I maruayll, if (after so euidente testimonies) there be yet any man,
which perceaueth not that David's faith and understanding of Christ, was even
one faith and understanding, with the faith that we knowledge and say. I believe
in one God father alymightye etc, As it is in the xii articles of the Christen
faith. For the holy trinite in one godheade does he knowledge, not only here,
but also in The article of the holy Trinite.
the.xxxiii. Psalm saying Through the word of God were the heavens made, and
all their power through the sprete of his mouth. For certain it is, that there
is but one only God, maker of heaven and of earth: but here is the trinite
called Lord or God, word and sprete. Nether is there any thing in the
Articles of the believe concerning the Godhead and manhood of Christ, of his
concepcion, birth, passion, cross and death, of the resurrection, asce^sion
and judgment, but ti is clearly comprehended here in this Psalm. The articles
of the holy church, of forgeuynge of sins the, resurrection of the flesh,
and an everlasting life, are contained in this Psalm, and are treated upon
yet more clearly, and with many moo words very substantially in other Psalms
of David Therefore had he our holy faith, and knowleged David was called
Christ's father.
the same, was saved therein, and of all holy me^ was called the father of
christ with hye commendation, because of the promise that was made unto him.
Moreover all the holy Prophets following, had respect unto David, as to
another Moses, and took many things out of his wryttynges. For there is scace
any other, that so clearly wrote of the cause of christ as this prophet David,
and therefore has he honor and praise above other in Israel, Of whom thou
read also* Eccle. xlvii. Such faith and confidence in God through Jesus
Christ, had David out of the holy ghost, and out of the doctrine of his
Prophets Samuel, Nathan and Gad, and of other his preistes, which also had the
same of God, and of the holy fathers, specially of Moses. And no doubt, he
desired the honor of God and of his son, not to keep it only him self,
but also much rather to require it of all his people Wherefore no doubt he set
up and furthured this his faith and religion among all his men of war,
kynstolke, in all his court, Edominion, before the whole congregation, and in
all his kingdom: so^ diligently, ernestly, and fervently, that afterward
certain hundredth years, they which believed right and lived well, were
praised for walkyug in the ways of David their father. They also that did
evil and set: not forth the true faith, of them is it written. They walked not
in the ways of David their father. Of this have thou The ways of David.
many ensamples in the books of the kings, and in the Cronicles. Many things
also were forgeuen the kings and all the people of Juda, for David's sake, that
is, for the promise sake mode unto Dauyd, even for Jesus Christ's sake, whom
Ezechiel calls David. In the. iii book of the kings the, xv. chapter, it is
written thus: The heart of Abia was not right toward King ^bia.
his Lord God as was the heart of David his father. And for Dauyds sake did the
Lord give him a light at Jerusalem, so that at Jerusalem he set up his
son, and preserved him. For David did it that was right in the sight of the
Lord and all the days of life his did not he shrenke from any thing that he
commanded him, except in the matter of Urias the H^^hite Thus readeste thou
also of Ezechias. iii. Regum. xviii. In the iiii. book of the kings the.xxv.
chapter: says: he Prophet: Before Josias was there no King, that was like
him, which turned him self so unto the Lord with all his heart, with all his
soul, and with all his power, according to all the law of Moses. And
afterward came there none like him. But in the second book of the Chronicles
the xx^iiii. Chapter stondeth the declaracion of the foresaid place after this
manner. Josyas reigned at Jerusalem xxxi. year, and did that which pleased the
Lord and walked in the ways of his Father Dauyd, and declined nether to the
right hand nor to the lift. For in the eyghte year of his reygne while he
was yet but young (even syxtene year old) he begane to seek the god of his
father David.

Thus much be spoken concerning this, that Israel and all the virtuous kings
of Juda, trusted unto Chrste, and not to the law of Moses. Who so desires the
number of the years, he fyndeth.iii. Regum. vi. even. 480, years, from the
departing out of Egipte until the fourth year of the reygne of Solomon. And
from that time until the captivity of Babylon, are rekened. 419. years, or
there aboutes. Altogether make. 899 years.

All holy Prophets do point unto Christ, and preach salvation only in him.
Somewhat yet will we now declare farther co^ernynge the times of the kings of
Juda and Israel, which in a manner were even as the times of the Judges of
Israel. For like as in the first years of Josue, god gave great victory and
honor, and afterward ^est and peace. Even so were the Israelytes very
victorious and tryumphant under David, and had great rest and peace under
Solomon But like as after the death of The departing of Israe* from Juda.
Josue the honor of Israel decreaced and the departing away from God followed
with one persecution upon another (though in the mean time they had peace and
delyuerers, as Othoniel, Ehud, Barack, Gedeo^. Jephthae, Sampson. etc.) Eue^ so
did the worship of Israel decreace after Salomons time. For the ten ^ryb^s
of Israel fell away from the house of David, only Juda and Ben Jamin held
Salomons son Roboam for their king: the other made Hieroboam king. And so
of one kingdom were made two, the kingdom of Israel, and the kingdom of Juda.
The kingdom of Israel (through the persuasio^ of Hieroboam) chose them another
manner of serving God. Not that they utterly deny and refused the God of
their fathers, but they served him after a straung heythenish manner of their
own ymagenyng. But afterward they fell the longer the more and farther in to
gross ydolatrye, so long, till the Lord suffered them to be roted out and
cary^d away by the king of the Assprians, and scatred abroad among all the
Heythen. The kingdom and the kings of Juda were somewhat better, howbeit they
had some also which excelled the kings of Israel and of the Heythen in
ungodliness. For they likewise went forth so long in unrighteousness, till
Nabugodonosor the king roted them out, and carried them away unto Babylon. But
before, we se that there was a wonderful combraunce in the eyuyll police and in
the religion Sometime was all righteousness and true relygion oppressed, and
violence and ydolatrye used. Sometime gat ryghteousnes up again, and the right
true faith had y^ victory all unright and ydolatrye being put down. This came
to pas also in Israel under Helyas and king Jehu. Yet was the ydolatrie King
Jehu.
and wrong rather punysshed* then any amendment following. Like as it came
also to pas after the birth of Christ that there were virtuous kings and
Emperors, which (according to the prophe ^ye of Esaye in the.xlix. Chapter)
did all right ousnesse set up the faith of Christ and put down all yd latrye.
Again, there came other that s^t up all unrighteousness and ydolatrye,
persecuted the truth and at the last received their reward co^ueni^et. So
wayghtie a matter is it to have good or evil rulers.

But in these wonderful alterations, God always sen death his prophets
and through out all the time of these gouernaunces of both the kingdoms, God
always sent his servants the holy prophets, ^o rebuke wrong and ydolatrye,
and to teach all righteousness and true seruyng of God. And first after the
time of David and Solomon (under whom there was a great multitude of learned and
holy prophets. For David also and Solomon were excellently endewed with the
sprete of wisdom and prophe^ie above other me^) these were the chief, most
famous, and oldest prophets, of whom the bible makes mention with worship:
Semeias, which lived under Roboam king of Juda, Ah^as the Si^onyte under
Hieroboam, ^zari^s the son of Obed, which lived under Asa king of Juda, and
Jehu the son of Anany, whom Baasa the king of Israel sl^w. Helias the great
prophet and Miche as the son of J^mla, lived under Achab and Josaphat.

Now like as in the time of ^au^ there was a great nombre of learned men, ^uen
so testifies the second book of the Cronicles in the.xvii. chapter that in
the time of Josaphat there were many learned Levites and Prophets. Helis^us was
in the time of king J^hu, and zacharias the son of Jo^ada was under Joas,
under whom also he was stoned. Neuerth^^s we have no books written an^ set
forth by these, Only we have the prophecy of Abdia^, which wrote his
prophecy under Achab. Afterward under Usia Jotha^ Achas and Ezec^ias kings of
Juda lived the most part of the^, whose books are abroad. For under these
preached and wrote ^onas, Oseas, Isaias, Johel, Nahu^, Amos, and Micheas.
Afterward under king Manasses, wrote Abacuk. Under the holy king Josias, wrote
Sophonias Ba^uch and Hieremye: in whose days Israel had such mystortune,
that Hyerusalem with the temple was destroyed: and the people that remained
over and peryshed not, were carried away captyue in to Babylon. In the same
Captyui^e did Ezech^el and Daniell write their prophecies. And after the
captivity when Israel was delivered again, and came home to Hyerusalem, then
preached and wrote Esdras. Haggeus, zacharias, Malachias and Nehemias. Beside
these Prophrtes no doubt there were other moo, of whom no mencyon is made. But
these are the thief, by woome it pleased God to open unto us, all that
apperteyneth to our salu^^ion. And though we had also the wrytynges of the
other* yet should ^e r^ade no other thing in them, then we find in our own
Prophets, for as much as these whom we have, agree so together all in one.

Now whether they be our own prophets* The prophets preached ^he old ^ayth.
whose writi^ges we have, or the other whose wrytinges we have not. Yet have
they all preached the su^me of the doctrine and knowledge the ^ayth, that we
spoke of before, and wrote in one summ^, which faith Adam, Noe, Abraham, Mos^s,
and David had. And this did they the more evidently, because they apply^d the^
selves to open the law, and to drive away the mysvnderstandynge, which was
risen up among and in the people: therefore point they every where from the
letter unto the sprete, from y^ outward sacrifice unto christ Jesus from all
ydola^rye unto the only God, which saves us through his mercy only in the
blessed sede, and horowe none of our deseruinges. This did Paul se, and
therefore said he. Roma. iii. Through the works of the law shall no man be
justified in the sight of god, For through the law comes The law and the
prophets allow the righteousness of god that comes by faith.
the knowledge of sin. But now is the ryghteous^es of God declared without
the law, for as much as it is allowed by the ^estimo^y of the law and the
Prophets. The ryghteousnes of God comes by the fay^h of Jesus Christ, unto
al, and upon al the^ that believe. So says Peter also in the* ^^* of the
Acts. All the prophets from Samuel. and thence forth (as many as have
spoken) have told of th^se days. And in the. ^* chapter. ^^o^hys Jesus Christ
give all the prophets wi^nes, that whosoever believes in him, shall through
his name recyeue forg^uen^sse of sins.

Who so now is learned in the wrytynges of the Prophets, knows well, that
there is nothing red concerning the Lord in the new Testament, which the
prophets have not prophesied of before. He that is then any thing iustructe in
the Prophets, has no doubt consydred this in the new testament, that the
apostles prove all their doctrine of the Lord Jesu, out of the law and the
Prophets. Yea that the Lord him self confyrmeth his own doings with the
scriptures of the prophets, and that the Eua^gelistes through out the holy
gospel, set unto the doctrine and miracles of Christ, these words. And this
was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken die the prophets.
Nevertheless for their sakes that are not yet instruct, I will now declare the
principal articles of our Lord Jesu Christ, out of the holy prophets.

As touching the true godheade and manhood of our Lord Jesu Christ, and that
The godhead and manhood of Christ.
he should be borne at Bethlee^ in the land of Jewrye, of a pure virgin and
maid out of the kynred of David, the Prophets testify after this manner.
Esaye in the. v^i. Chapter ^ayeth. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a
son, and shall call his name Emanuell, that is to say. God with us. Micheas
says in the.v. chapter Though thou Bethleem Ephrata art to small to be
rekened among the pryncypall cities of Juda, yet out of the shall there come
one unto me, which shall be ruler in Israel, whose forth going is from
everlasting. In the nynth Chapter of Esaye it is written. Unto us is a child
borne, and to us is given a son, upon whose shulders the kingdom shall lie,
and he shall be called after his own name even the wondefull counsel geuer, the
mighty one of Israel, the eternal father, the Prince of peace, his kingdom
shall increace, and of his peace there shall be no end, and he shall reign
upon the seat of David his father. In the. xxiii of Hieremy it is written
thus. Behold, the time The righteous blossom.
comes (says the Lord) that I will tay^e up the ryghteous blossom of David:
he shall be king and reygne, and prospere: judgment and righteousness shall
he e^^cute upon earth. In this time shall Juda be saved, and Israel shall
dwell without fear: and this is the name wherwythe he shall be named, even
God our ryghteousnes.

Concerning the coming of John the baptist w^ych was the fore runner of our
Lord Christ, and prepared the people for him. Has Malachy written in the
third chapter after this manner. Behold John baptiste.
I will send my messaunger, which shall prepare the way before me: and the
Lord whom ye long for, shall shortly come to his temple, and the messaunger
of the covenant whom y^ would have. Behold, he comes says the Lord
zebaoth. And after ward. Behold, I will send Helias the Prophet before the
coming of the great and fearful Day of the Lord.

Of Christ's preaching, of the grace of God, of the forgeuing of sins of the
wonders also and tokens of the Lord, speaks. Esaye in the. l^i. Chapter
after The office of Christ.
this manner. The spirit of the Lord god is upon me, and therefore has the
Lord anointed me, to preach the Gospel to the meke hearted has he sent me,
to heal the broken hearted, to preach delyueraunce to the captyue, to open the
prison to such as are in bonds, to proclaim the year of Gods gracyous will,
and to bring consolation to all them that are in heaviness. In the.xxxiiii.
chapter of Ezechiell it is written thus. Over my sheep will I Christ is called
David.
raise up one only shepherde, which shall feed the^, eve^ David my servant,
which shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherde. I the Lord also will be
their God and David shall be their prince, even I the Lord have spoken it. In
the.xxxv. Cha. of Esaye it is written thus. Say unto them that are of a feeble
heart. Be strong The miracles of Christ.
and fear not, behold, our god comes to take vengeance, and reward. God
comes him self, and will deliver you. Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened. etc.

Then shall the lame man leap as an heart and the tongue of the Domne shall give
praise.

Of the kingdom of Christ, in the which he him self alone is king, all the
world being subject unto him, declarynge his dominion and royal majesty,
wrytteth Esaye thus in the second Chapter. And it shall come to pass in the
last time, that the hill of the house of the Lord shall be exalted upon the
hight of mountains above all lits^ hills, and all nations shall come together
unto him, the people shall go to him, and say: Come let us go up to the mount
of the Lord, even to the house of the God of Jacob, that he may show us his
way, and we will walk in his paths. For the law shall come forth from Sion,
and the word of God from Jerusalem. In the.vii. of Daniel it is written thus:
I saw a / vision in the night, and behold there came one in the clouds of
heaven like the son of man, which came to the old aged, and they brought him
The kingdom of Christ.
before his presence. And he gave him power, glory, and the kingdom, and all
people, nations and tongues must serve him: his power is an everlasting power,
which shall not be taken from his, and his kingdom shall not perish. Esaye
says in the.ixii. capter: And the Heythen shall se thy righteousness, and
all kings thine honor, and he shall call the by a new name (O Syon) and the
mou^h of God shall give the name. And thou shall be a crown of glory in the
hand of the Lord, and a royal crown of the kingdom in the hand of thy God.
And soon after it folowethe: Make ready, make ready the way, gather up the
stones out of the street, and hang out the banner unto the people: behold the
Lord has caused it to be proclaimed unto the end of the world Tell the
daughter Syon: behold the sauyoure comes, lo, his treasure and his reward
brings he with him, and his deeds, go before him. And they that are redeemed
of the Lord, shall be called the holy people. zachary says in the.ix. chap.
Rejoice O daughter Sio^, be glad O daughter Jerusalem: behold, thy king
comes unto the, even the righteous and sauyoure: meke and simple is he, he
rydeth upon an ass, and upon a young colt of the she ass. He shall preach peace
unto the Hevthen, his kingdom also shall reach from the one see to the other,
and from the river unto the uttermost part of the earth.

Of the death and passion of Christ speaks Daniel in the.ix. chapter after
The death of Christ.
this manner. And after two and sixtye wekes shall Christ be slain and put to
death and yet shall they have no true testimonye, that he is giltye of death.
Esaye in the.l. chapter says thus, The Lord God opened mine ear, and I
refused it not, nether went I bacwarde, I gave my body to the smiters, and my
chekes to the nyppers, and my face have I not turned from their shameful
intreatinge and spittynge upon me. The Lord God also shall help me, therefore
shall I not be confounded. And therefore have I hardened my face like a flynt
stone, and am sure, that I shall not be confounded. In the liii. chapter there
is written of Christ after this manner, He shall have nether bewtye ner
fayrnesse, we shall look upon him, but we shall have no desire unto him.

He is despised and conte^ned of me^, a man of trouble, and one that has had
experience of infirmyte. He is so despised, that we shall hyde our faces from
him. and have him in no estimation. And yet has he borne our vnperfectnesses,
and felt our sorrows. We also thought, that he should be wounded, smy^ten and
punished of God. But he was wounded for our sins, and slain for our
wickedness sake. And the punishment whereby we have peace, is laid upon him,
and through his wounds are we made whole. All we have gone astraye like sheep,
every one of us has had respect unto his own way, and the Lord has laid
all our sins upon him. Uiolence and wrong was done unto him, he has been
evil. entreated. and yet opened he not his mouth. He shall be led as a be
to be slayen, and as a sheep domme before the sherers, so shall he not open his
mouth. etc. The whole chapter descrybeth all the cause of Christ so clearly,
that holy Hierome said not in vain, Esaye is not only a Prophet, but also an
Evangelist, zachary descrybeth The sacrifice of Christ.
the presthode and sacrificie of Christ and testifies, that with the same
only oblacion he has opteyned grace for all sins, and therefore seven (that
is to say, all) eyes shall have respect unto him, and shall seek peace and
rest of their consciences in him, and shall find it. Hear now O Josue thou
hye pressed, thou and thy co^panyons, that sit before the, seeing ye are me^ of
ensamples. For lo, I will bring ^acha. iii.
my servant, eue^ the blossom. For behold the stone which I have laid
before Josue, will I bring, To the same only stone shall seven eyes look.
Behold, I will dyg it up and dssclose it, says the Lord zabaoth, and the
sin of the earth will I take away in one day. And in that day shall every
man call his neighbor under his vine and fyg^tre.

The buryall and resurrection of our The buryall and resurrection of Christ.
Lord Jesu Christ, has the prophet Jonas figured very excellently. For thus
says our Lord Christ him self: Like as Jonas was three days and three
nyghtes in the whalles belie, so shall the son of man be three days and three
nights in the heart of the earth.

Of the ascension of Jesu Christ and sendynge of the holy gooste, has Joel
also The asce^sion.
written in the.ii. chapter, and it is alleged of S. Peter. Act. ii. Of the
calling and gathering together the Heythen, and of The vocation of the Heithen.
every thing pertaining, to the holy church, does Esaias write in the.xlix.
chap. and so forth to the end of his prophecye.

Thus have thou, that the prophets also in their time, did preach Jesus
Christ, and poynted not the people to trust unto the works of the law and
their own deserving but unto christ, of whom they prophesied every thing that
followed after. Therefore did Peter speak right.i. Pet. i. saying:

Ye shall receive the end of your faith: even the salvation of your souls.
After which salvation have the prophets inquired The prophets sought
salvation in Christ.
and searched, which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you,
searchinge when or what time the sprete of Christ (which was in them) should
signifye: which sprete testified before the passions that should happen unto
Christ, and the glory that should follow after. Unto the which prophets it was
also declared that not unto them selves only, but unto us they should ministre
the things, which are now showed unto you, by them which have preached unto
you the gospel through the holy ghost, that was sen^e unto them from heaven.
etc. In the which testimony the holy Apostle Peter had a special respect to
the prophecye of Daniel: which did not only record the passion and glory of
Christ, but also poynted to the time, in the which Christ should come. For like
as God in the greatest parels, dangers and alteracions, has always renewed
and more clearly expressed his promise conceruyng the blessed sede: as in the
time of Noe, when the world was destroyed: in the time of Abraham, when God
would prepare him self a new people, in the time of Moses, wha^ God received
his people and carried them out of Egipte, to bring them in to the land of
Canaan, in the time of David, when all things stood so well, and it must needs
be avoided, lest any man should think David were the blessed sede, Before the
captivity of Babylon also, and in the time of the prophets which (as it is
said before) preached and wrote, that no man should doubt in gods promise, as
who say they were given up and cast a way, though the temple were broken, the
city brent, and though the people (of whom Christ should be borne) were led
away in to captivity. Even so now also in the captivity: when the faithful
might all most have thought, that the promise of God concerning Messia, were
clean gone, Even than did God show his servant Daniel a more clear vision
of Christ, after this manner, The people A prophecye told unto Daniell.
shall be let go again out of captivity, and shall come home to Jerusalem,
build the temple and city again, but with a sore time. And after that the
city is builded, unto the time of Christ, shall be.lxix. wekes, that is c.
x^viii. and.iii. years. And even so was it from the. xxx^i. year of Darius
Histaspis or Artaxerres (in the which the city was builded, N^hemie. v.)
until the.xlii. year of the empire of Augustus, under whom Christ was borne.
Luce. ii. The aungel also gave Daniel farther in formacion of Christ, how that
his own people should slaye him, and find no fault in him, and how that the
sacrifice with the ceremonies should cease. And a strau^g people (says he)
shall come from far, and make the temple with the citte an horrible
abhominacion* ye they shall destroy and break down altogether. All which
things were afterward fulfilled in the last wekes, that is, within.c. vii.
years or there about. For within.c. iii. years did Lord grow to teach and
to suffer. For wha^ he was.xxx. year old, I ho^ baptized him Afterward
within.iii. years was he put to death, and so within.xl. years followed the
destruction of Jerusalem by Tytus and U^spasian. All the time now and years
from The nombre of the years.
the captivity of Babilo^ to Christ's birth are. 626. years. For the captivity
of Babilo^ endured.lxx. years. In the first year of Cirus were they
delivered, in the second year began they to build the temple, and builded.
46. years, ^^e^ until the vi. year of Darius. In the. 32. year of Darius
was the city fynished: which makes. 143. year: Add now hereto the. 483
years out of Daniel, and thou have the foresaid sum even. 626. years.

In the said years had our holy faith sore conflictes, and the sede of the
serpent preassed sore upon the sede of God, as the Babilonians at Babylon, and
the Perfians, when the people of God was come home again Nevertheless the
truth had ever the victory, and was the more clearly testified by Daniel,
Haggeus, zachary, Esdras, N^h^mias, and Malachy. Afterward were they specially
oppressed by the ungodly Antiochus.
king Antiochus in the time of the Macha bees: When as the times were ever the
longer the more full of parels and aduersite until Aulus Gabinus, Po^peius and
Crassus captains of Rome conquered the la^d, and the true old religion was
vtterley gone in so much that out of the old serpent there arose in Israel all
manner of sec^es and Symonye, whom our Lord Jesus Christ with his coming in
the world resisted, and called them the serpents generation, as the holy
Evangelists testifye. Not God had ever some virtuous men.
witstandyng in the mids of such mischefe in Israel, there were also godly
virtuous people, which sought God and his anointed (though the error was
great) Among whom no doubt was specially the Pressed zacharias the father of
Jhon Baptyst Elizabeth his wife, and godly Simeon When zacharias had knowledge
of the Lords coming, he said with a joyful heart, Praised be the Lord God
^achay.
of Israel, for he has visited and delivered his people, and set up the horn
of salvation in the house of David his servant according as he had promised
before by the mouth of holy prophets. etc. For his words are red. Lu, i.
Simeon when he saw the child Jesus in the temple, and Symeon
had taken him in his arms, he said.

Now Lord let me dye in peace, according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen
thy sauyoure, whom thou have prepared before the face of all people, that he
might be a light to give light unto the Heythen, and the glory of thy people
Israel. Luc. i lo, thus the hertes of all righteous in the old Tessament from
Adam unto Christ, (even. 3974. years) have stand only upon Christ, in him
was their comfort, upon him they trusted, it was he whom they longed for, and
in Christ Jesu were they saved. Therefore has our Christen faith endured sens
the beginning of the world and is, and continues still the only true old,
undoubted and fast grounded faith.

Of the time of the grease of Christ, and how that he him self testifies,
that the salvation of all the world stondeth only in him.
HIther to have I set for the time of the promyses, in the which God (through
the promised ^de our Lord Jesus Christ) conforted, cleansed, and preserved
all his servants and dear friends. There have we learned and seen that the
Christen faith, which has endured sens the beginning of the world, is the
eldest, undoubted, right and true faith, which all holy Patriarchs had, and in
the which they served God, and pleased him, as Adam, Seth, Enoch and Noe, Item
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Likewise the excellent and highlye endewed propheet
ye the father and foregoer of all prophets, even great Moses his brother
Aaron, the holy Pressed Eleazar and Phinees, The excellent dukes also and Judges,
Josue, Gedeon; and other moo, Even so likewise the kings, David, Ezechias,
Josaphat, and Josias, The dear^i beloved of God and excellent prophets,
Samuel, Helias, Isaias, Daniel, zacharias, and all the other. This holy faith
also had all ryghteous and such as were of godly understanding in all the
congregacions of Israel from the beginning: In this were saved all they that
from the beginning were preserved and ordained to salvation: All gods elect
were saved by Christ.
wherefore what soever they can allege against this faith (whether it be
concerning holyme^, old age. multitudes, learned men, general counsayls
co^uocations or perliame^tes, fathers acts, statutes, tokens and wonders) It
is all nothing worth, and is not to be reputed in comparison of our holy
faith, as every one that has understanding, may se in this treatise before.
And though my purpose be now fynished, even declared out of the scripture, that
the Christen faith has endured sens the beginning of the world. Yet will I
add a short instruction concerning the time of grace, and perfourminge of
all promises, and I will declare, that God now also through the appearinge of
his son, would bring in to the world and set forth, none other religion,
none other faith, nether any other salvation, then even the same which was
showed to the old fathers, Saving that now all things are more euydent, more
clerly practiced accomplished, fulfilled and performed, for the which cause
also all figures, sacrifices and ceremonies do cease. For The old testament
is not to be refused
in Christ is all perfection. Yet shall we not therefore cast away the old
Testament (as some ignorant, unlearned and foolysh people do) but have it in
greater reputacion, for as much as we know now through Christ, what every thing
signifies, and wherefore every thing was thus and thus ordained, used, and
spoken, Now shall every man first have a courage to read the law and the
prophets, wha^ he seyth where upon every thing goes. And thus also at the
beginning did the holy apostles preach Christ unto the Jews out of the law
and the prophets, as it is often times mentioned in the acts of the Apostles.
And our Lord him self, wha^ he went with the two disciples toward Emaus, Luke
xxiiii
and preached so unto the, that their hertes brent within them, he began at
Moses, and went through all the prophets, and opened unto the^ the old
scriptures, and showed them, that so it behooved Christ to fu^^re, and to enter
in to his glory. This is the cause also that the scriptures of the new
Testament, hang all together and refer them selves to the scriptures of the
old Testament, so that these can not be right understood without the other,
no more the^ The new Testament dec are* h the old.
the gloss without the text. The text is the law and the prophets, the
exposition are the Evangelists and Apostles, Now will we se, what the work of
grace of the new Testament is.

In the.xlii. year of the empire of Augustus, after the beginning of the world
3974. years was Jesus christ the blessed and promised sede, borne of the
undefiled virgin and maid Mary, at Bethleem in the land of Jewrye. And though
he as a very man was wrapped to clothes, and laid in the cryb, yet apeareth
the angel of the Lord in great clearness unto the shepherdes, and says,
Fear ye not, behold I bring you tidinges of great joy, which shall happen
unto all people. For this day is borne unto you the sauyoure even Christ the
lord in the city of David The first news and tydinges of the coming
Tidinges of Christ's birth
of our Lord Jesus Christ, must the angel bring and give, to the intent that
it might be the more accept of all the world. All the holy men from the
beginning of the world, did hitherto long sore after the promised sede.
Therefore says the angel now, that he brings them tydinges of great joy,
no doubt to them that were gone, deed, and past, to them also that now lived,
and to them that were to come afterward. The joy is this, that Jesus Christ
the savior is borne, eue^ the promised sede, which should save all the world
from the power of the deuell, cle^se them from sin, and deliver them from
damnacion. Therefore says the angel moreover, Which shall happen unto all
people. For unto Abraham it was said, In thy sede shall all nactons of the earth
be blessed. The same (says the angel) is borne in the city of David, even
out of David's kynred, out of the which the prophets testified that he should
be borne, which prophets also for the same cause called him David and the
blossom of David. The grace of God
And this is now the grace of God, that where as we poor sinners belo^ged unto
death, and were in the deuels bo^des he sent his son to lowse and deliver us
out of captive, This is the new Testament. For Hieremy also testifies he^of,
and says: This is the Testament that I will make I w^ll be their God and they
shall, be my people, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness and sins,
and will think upon them no more, Hiere xxxi.

This full and perfect forgiveness is not therefore called the new
Testamente, as though their had been no remission of sins promise made long
before unto the fathers, is now confirmed and renewed and the old figures that
represented the same are abrogate. Thus the Lord Jesus alone Christ the only
salvation of all the world.
is set for the for the only salvation of all the world, so that not only
we, but all they which before or after his appearau^ce or incarnacio^ believed on
him, were saved And at the birth of Christ there comes to the foresaid
angel, the whole heavenly host which praised God and said: Glory Luce. ii^.
and praise be unto God in the height and peace upon earth, to men a good will.

And by this they teach us what the duty, thankfulness, and knowledge of men
is or ought to be in this behalf, that god has done so great good forman:
Namely The dewry of us.
how that they ought to praise God, to have a sure, trust in him, and to be
fre^dly and loving one to another. And the fulfilllyge of the law is love
from a pure heart, out of a good conscience, and of an undissembled or unfeigned
faith. i, Timoth. ^

In the fyftenth year of the Empire of T^erius (from the beginning of the
John baptist.
world. 4004. years) came the word of the Lord to John the son of the
preyst zachary, in the wilderness, and he went and preached unto the people of
Israel. amendment of life and forgiveness of sins in Jesu Christ. To whom
he bare record, that he was the fulfyllyng of the law and the prophets very
God and man the only and everlasting savior: which with the sacrifice of his
own body, should cleanse the world from sin, yea he poynted unto him with his
finger, and said: Behold this is the lamb of God, that John. i.
takethe away the sin of the world. And so perfectiye and wholly hangs he
all salvation only in Christ Jesus, that John. i.
he says planely. Out of his fullness have all we received grace. etc. Joh.
i. Item who so believes in the son of God, has everlasting life: who so
believes not in the son, shall not se life, but the wrath of God abides
upon him Therefore did, Mat. xi.
he also send all his disciples from him, and commanded them to cleue unto
Christ He makes no men^ion at all of any ceremony^s figures nor oblations, as
necessary points to salvation, but preaches Christ purely and clearly. This
is manifest, Johan. i and.iii. Mat. iii. and Luke iii

The Lord him self also came unto John, and was baptized. And when he had
Math. iii.
received baptime, the heaven opened, and the holy ghost appeared in the form
of a dove, and there was a voice heard* from heaven saying. This is my beloved
son, in whom I am pacified: to the intent that all the worl^e should have
witness of Christ the true savior, not only now by the a^ngels, and by
Johan the holyes^^ man of all, but also from heaven and of God him self: and
that we might be the bolder to commit our selves wholly unto him. Wha^ he had
received the testymony he went in to the wilderness. And like as our disease
began in paradise by te^tation. Even so at the tentatio^ in the wilderness
began the Lord our health: and like as the father of us al did eat the for
bydden meat. So did the Lord not eat the meat that he might have eaten,
but fasted fortye days and fourtye nyghtes. Afterward came ^e among the
people, and began to preach salvation, sayng. The time is fulfilled, and the
kingdom Math. iii*
of God is at hand, repent, and believe the Gospel. Here with has he healed
all sores, dryue^ out deuels, and raised up the deed testifienge so by his
acts, that he is Lord of all things, and the true savior. And of them whom
he healleth, asks he nothing: he commands them not to build him a temple,
nether to give him block or stock: he requires no bodily thing, but only*
steadfast faith and confidence. And to them whom he has healed, he says: go
they way and sin no more, take heed, that a worse thing happen not unto
the* And herewith all does he teach, in what The substance of true religion.
thing the substance of true religion lies, even in a right true faith, and
in an innocent life, that in our conversation we keep our selves from all
filthiness: Ye the thing that some man takes for gods service, refuses he,
as long babbling prayers, vain glorious fasting and like alms geuynge. He
nothing regards men's tradicions, diuersites of sects, long garments,
outward appearaunce, their clensynge, ne^ all their ypocrisie. He goes into
the temple, overthrows, casts down, powers out every thing that is to be
sold in the temple: he dryueth the buyers and sellers out of the temple with a
whippe. For the temple was ordained for general prayer. thankesgeuing and
preaching, and not, for choppinge and chaun gynge, or other such like
things. These The special points of christ's doctrine.
three points does he teach us diligently to observe: First, that we obtain
remission of sins, true righteousness and everlasting life, only thorw him
and by his passion and death, and else by none other mean. For he is the only
mediatoure, pressed, intercessoure, comforter, the only righteousness,
satisfacion, ransom, santifyeng the only perpetual sacrifice the suertye of
grace and salvation. Special testimonies hereof have thou Johan. iii. vi.
xiiii and.xvi. Secondly: that we can not serve and pleace God with exterior
sacrifices or any outward pomp, but with such works as proceade of love and
mercy And thirdly / that all the children of God are bound to keep them selves
from the works of darekenesse and to apply them to live in righteousness and
in the light. And herein also is comprehended all godlynes / that is / all
right good Christen works

So when he had taught all righteousness / and The pacient suffringe of Christ.
discloysed and overthrown all ypocrisye in religion (he offered up him self
upon the cross for the remissyon of all our sins. For wyllingly and
patiently put he him self in to the hands of his enemy^s and of his betrayer
/ suffered him self to be taken / to be bound / to beled from one judge to
another / to be langhed to scorn / cried out upon (to be spytted on / and at
the last to be adjudged unto death / to be scourged / and to be crowned with a
crown of thorn. He himself bare his own cross to the place of execucion /
where he was crucified / and hanged up between the murthurers. Then lived he in
great pain from the sixte hour until the nyenth. At the last he cried: It
is fynished / father in to thy hands commend I my spr^te: thus offered he him
self for our sins and dyed that we might the fruit of Christ's death
live, But soon after followed the things whereby the fruit of Christ's passion
might be perceived. For the veil / which in the temple, se^arated the holy
from the most holy (did rent from the top till the botome: whereby Christ
testified (that now with his death all ceremonies and fig^ ratyue things were
at an end, and no more of value: that the way to eternal salvation was
opened: that all things significatyue in the tabernacle (in sacrifices, rytes
and obseruaunces, were nowfulfilled and abrogate: that now the bare and only
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ is al together unto the faithful that the hele
of the virgins sede is well trodden upon, and his flesh well rent and slain:
but that yet also in the mean reason he has trodden the serpent upon the head,
Therefore did the deed also arise, and appeared unto certain at Jerusalem. For
the death of Christ is our life, The erthquaked, the stones harst asunder For
the preachinge of the death of the son of God, has altered the whole world,
and many hard stonye hertes are moved to repentance faith and good works But
when the side of the deed body of Christ was opened with the spear* and the
rock (as zachary says (was dygged up* there Water and blood.
ran out water and blood, declarynge manifestly thereby, that unto us out of
the death of Christ, follows life and purifyenge. For water cle^seth, in the
blood is the life of man. And with the blood of Christ is all blood stanched,
and now is Christ's blood only avaylable, being sprenkled through faith in
our hertes. This oblacion and passion of Christ (the rawnsome for the sin of
the whole world) was done in the. xviii year of the Empire of Tiberius,
reckoning from the beginning of the world. 4007 years, the.xxv. day of March.

So the whole body of Jesu was taken The burial of Christ.
down from the cross, and honorably buried and on the third day after he
rose up again: so that his soul came again to the body, and his very flesh
was raised up from death, how be it now no more mortal and passible, but
glorified. For he is the first in the resurrection of the deed, For like as by
one man came death so by one man must come the resurrection of the deed. And
like as in Adam we all dyed in body and soul, so shall we be all together
restored again to life in Christ Jesu. This hope unto life, would the Lord
prynte substancially in us with the resurrection. And therefore after his
resurrection, he continued fortye days with his disciples, that he mightwell
instruct them of his resurrection, and that they should have no doulte therein.
So when he had showed and declared unto them his very resurrection diverse
wayse, and had performed all that the father commanded him to find, he
ascended up unto heaven with body and soul fro mount Oliuere in the sight of
his disciples, and is set at the right hand of God, there to remain
corporally until the last day, in the which he shall* come again bodily, to
judge the quycke and deed: And all such as have walked in faith, shall he take
to him with body and soul in to heaven, like as he himself is received in to
heaven: And shall with body and soul condemn all them that have walked in the
way of the old serpente, and have not converted from unrighteousness to the
righteousness in Christ. And thus shall salvation be perfectly fynished, and
gods children shall live eternally with God, through Jesus Christ. To whom be
praise for ever.

Amen
That also the elect Apostles preached this old faith, and declared, that all
salvation is* only in Christ
THus through Christ Jesus is al fulfilled that the prophets prophesied The
power of Christ saves all.
of him a fore, thus is he become y^ salvation of all faithful beleuers, even
the lamp of God, which has been sacrificed sens the beginning of the world
that is, this is he, whose power and delyueraunce has cleansed all them, that
ever put their trust in God through the blessed sede. Herein now is the right
true ^aluacion, this is the sum of the right and perfect religion. Who so
peruerteth this, from him shall God turn him self, who, so adds ought unto
this, to him shall God add his wrothfull hand: who so takes there from, his
life shall God ^^nishe, But blessed are they, which walk in this simplicite
and clennesse, and continue so unto the end even they that hear gods word,
and do thereafter whose only hope is Jesus Christ. This only true and ever
during salvation would he to be showed and declared to all nations, which
came to save all nations: but he would it should be declared by the preachinge
of the holy gospel, and through the ministracion of the hol^ sacraments: And
therefore by his life time he did chose Apostles, whom he received to be
witnesses of all his doctrine and miracles, enfourmyng them diligently, and
held nothing back from them. For he says unto them: Ye are my friends, if
ye do all that I command you, I will hence christ hold nothing back from his
apostles.
forth call you no more servants, for a servant woteth not what his Lord
does But I have called you my friends, for all that I have heard of my father
have I opened unto you. Joh. ^v. But for asmoche as they yet lacked
vnderstondnge and were forgetful and had ever strange ymaginacions of the
kingdom of Christ, therefore when he now ascended unto heaven, he charged them
not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the holy gooste: whom he also
gave unto them upon the fiftieth day after his resurrection, that is upon the
tenth day after his ascension even the fiftenthe day of May: by the The holy
ghost brought no new doctrine.
which holy ghost they being illuminate spoke with all manner of langag^^, and
were myndfull of all that the Lord had commanded them a^o^e, For the holy
ghost did not endew them with a new doctrine, but it that the Lord had taught
them out of the law and the prophets, the same did he bring to their
remembrance and illucidate all things, and prynted them more clearly in there
hertes. For so says the. Lord in the gospel: The conforter even the holy
ghost, whom the Joh. xiiii.
father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring all
things to your remembrance that I haud said unto you, Therefore so long as
the Lord was with them, and told them all the matter of his passion, they
were sorye and could not bear away all that he said unto them But after that
he was taken up from the earth in to heaven, he sent the holy ghost, even him,
whom the prophets also had before, and that led them into all Christen veryte.

So when they were endowed with the holy gooste, they began (accordige to the
Lords commandment to preach in all the world / the foresaid matter of
salvation purged, and obtained only by Christ and gotten by true faith For he
had said: Go your way in to all the world and preach the gospel unto all
creatures Mar. xvi.
Who so believes and is baptized (shall be saved etc. And therewith comprendeth he
both the points which the Apostles used and practiced (even the preaching of
the faith in Jesus Christ, and of the ministracion of the sacraments, And how
the Apostles doctrine was it is manifest out of the Acts of the Apostles: But
shortly and in a sum, they preached amendment of life. and remission of
sins through Jesus Christ: That is to say, how that the whole generation of
man lay in the dominion of the deuel and in ye bonds of sin cursed and
damned: but God had mercy on us all, and sent his soon in to this world, to
dye, and with his death to restore us unto life and to wash us with his blood,
that who so ever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.
All this declared they out of the law and the prophets and proved, that,
Jesus Christ whom they preached, is the blessed sede promised unto the
fathers. Who so is desirous to have a perfect ensample of this declaracion, he
fyndeth two sermons of the famous Apostles Peter and Paul, the one in the Acts
of the Apostles the second chapter, the other in the. xiii, chap. There does
the holy Apostle open the mystery of our holy faith, very excellently
declaringe it from the time of Abraham unto David and from him unto Jhon the
baptist. There upon shows he, how Christ suffered, dyed was buried, and rose
again from death. Act, xiii.
All this confirms he with the scriptures of the prophets. At the last he
concludes the sermon after this manner: Be it kowen unto you therefore ye men
and brethren, that through Jesus is preached unto you forgiveness of sins,
and that by him all they that believe, are justified from all things, from the
which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses. To this now also the
sermon of Peter: Ye all the scryptures of the Apostles do finally accord to
the same effect Hereout also bring they ye doctrine of repentance and
amendment of life, the rebuking of sin conslacions, exhortacions and drawyng
to all manner of good works that follow out of faith.

The special sacraments, which the lord did chefely institute and command
the Apostles to praise in the church, are holy Baptyme and the blessed supper
of ^ ^. xxviii
our Lord Jesus Christ. Concerning y^ first he says. To me is given all
power in heaven and in earth: therefore go your way and teach all people and
baptize them in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost,
and teach them to keep all that. I have commanded you. The other did he
institute at the last supper. For thus is it written in the holy gospel The
supper of the Lord,
Wha^ they were eating, he took bred and when he had given thanks he brake it
and gave them saying Take eat this is my body which shall be given for you
this do, in the remembrance of me. So took he also y^ cup when they had
supte, and said: Drink ye all out of this, This is my blood of y^ new
testament, which shall be shed for the, remission of sins. With such
sacraments through outward visible stourmes / for our infirmities sake (pleased
it the lord to show set before our eyes his heavenly and in visible grace not
that we should continue still hanginge in the visible thing but that we should
lift up our minds and with a true believe to hold fast, to prynte sure in our
minds to worship, and to enjoy the things that faith shows us by the
outward sacraments With these outward sacraments also has it pleased him to
open. declare and show unto us his grace and loving kydnesse Namely how that
he gives unto us him self and all his riches, cleanses us fedeth and
moystureth our souls with his flesh and blood, that he is at one with us, and
we with him so that we use and practice the sacraments with a true faith. For
the outward enioyeng of the sacraments of it self alone. does not reconcyle
us with God: but if they be used with faith, than as Saint Peter says Act.
xv. (through faith does God, purifye the hertes. With the sacraments The fruit
of the sacraments.
pleased it him, to leave behynd him a remembrance of his gifts and benefits,
to the intent, that we should never forget them but praise and thank him
therefore. Morouer with vysible sacraments was it his will to gather us
together, and to mark us in remembrance of our dewty how we are one body to
gether and ought to apply our selves to all righteousness. All which things
are foude at lenthe in the scriptures of the Apostles.

As for the Apostles, they mynistred the. sacraments diligently pu^r^ly and,
symply, and so (without any addicion (distributed them unto the people of God.
Touching baptyme, there are many ensamples in the acts of the Apostles. The
supper of Jesus Christ had the Corinthians somewhat altered. And when Paull
poynted them again to the true ordinance and right use, he takes the simple
words and institucion of Jesu Christ without any more addicion, and lays
those before them, commands them to follow the same, and holds him
therewith well content.i. Corinth. xi. And thus did the holy Apostles gather
together all Heythe^ and people, through the preachinge of the gospel and
mynistracion of the sacraments in the church, whose head is Christ, in whom
they are builded and preserved. Morouer they did not laid them sore The
Apostles did not over charge the people with ceremonies.
with any ceremonies. For in the Acts of the Apostles the.ii. chap where as a
perfect shappe of a right Christen congregation is descrybed, we have first
the ^eudinge of the Apostles, among whom Peter did first preach the gospel:
that is to say, repentance and forgiveness of sins in Christ Jesu. Then
baptized he the^ that were become the people of God. Afterward follows it,
that they which were become Christen, continued in the doctrine of the
Apostles, in prayer, in breakinge of the bred, and in the foloshippe: Here are
the right substanciall points of the Christian church sufficiently expressed:
the doctrine of amendment of life and remission of sins, baptyme, the
contynuynge and increasyng in Christ's doctrine, prayer, the holy supper of the
Lord and the feloshyppe, that is love, kyndnesse and works of mercy.

Now where as Act. xv. it is ordained The Apostles would not offend the weak.
that the Heythen should eat no blood nor strangled, it endured but for a
time, and their meaning was thereby to a void offendynge of the weak.
Otherwise have the Apostles every where (specially Paul) very exnestly exhorted
men, to continue by the doctrine that was showed and delivered the^, and to be
at a point in the^ selves to avoid such learning as was new and brought up
by men, because they lead me^ far from the truth, as we find Collos. ii.
Philip. iii. i. Timoth. iiii. vi. and Titum. i. And thus is it manifest, that
the apostles taught al nations no newer strauge thing, but even the same that
they had received of the Lord.

A conclusion, that this faith is the right true old faith, which always shall
stand sure
THis holy undefiled faith which the Lord ^^anted and set up in all nations by
the Apostles, immediately after the Apostles dysseasse, was ^ore* attempted, by
sondrye vnclea^e persons, which brought up false customs and misbeleuers,
and made per^ous sects Besides this also was it sore persecuted with the
sword of tyrauntes. But in all such dangers the truth over came and had the
victory. For though the cytezins of the deuels city (according to the
disposition of their patriarch Cain) did mur thur, ^ all though falfe prophets
brought up evil counsel, yet the city of God triumphs, and the blood of
innocent Abell and his brethren, speaks yet. But after that the persecucio^
was somwhath ^rassed, and the persecuters sore and horr^bly punished for their
blood sheddinge (the heresies also being well brought down by faithful
shepherdes) In the same rest also was our holy faith not a little hurt. For
rest put a way fear, brought idle felicite, voluptuousnes and fleshly seeking
of riches and dominyon: the decay of christ's religion.
and so through covetousness and ambisio^, there was pou^ed great poison in to
the church, whereby religion sore decayed.

For while the mynisters of the word labored more after riches, then to
perform their office and charge, and to edt ^^e the church, they were pleased
with supersticiousnes in stead of true religion Of ^^u^s then followed it
farther, that the singleness of faith was forgotten, new law^s made, the old
rytes and customs either perverted, or else utterly overthrown and abused:
whereby men came farr^ from the doctrine and Christen ceremonies, from the way
of truth in to er^oure foo What in co^uenie^ce* followed.
^^^ly, and partly in to ceremonies of ydolatrye. Here of comes it, that we
ha^^ now the abomination, of the popes power, of pardons, of masses for the
deed and quycke, of merits, power and intercession of saints in heaven, of
worshyppinge their bones upon e^th, of ydols, and vain ornaments, pomp and
pride of the church, of hired singing and prayenge in the temple, and of the
whole swarm of ydele religious. All which things with other mo^ like
fondness, are nothing but new alteracions, peruertinges, and contrary to all
old ordinances, having no ground in gods wo^de, and are clean against God,
though many hardnecked people are yet in a furye and braule for such hinges,
and will make all the world believe, that this their foolishnes alteracion and
peruer^^nge of Gods ordinance, is the old faith. And yet wo^e they or will
not know, that their ^abling has very little ground, and that they (if they
considred the matter as it is) are very naked and miserable.

And though this papisticall religion has endured, prevailed, and triumphed
now certain hundredth years, yet has God all way sent his ^aythfull
servants, and had a little holy flock of his own, like as before time in the
day^s of the judges, often the kings of Juda and Israel, and in the captivity of
Babylon, though it was all most at the worst before and at the coming of
Christ. Like as it is also with us, the nyer the second coming of Christ, the
worse is it in the world. Nevertheless (as I said before) God all way set forth
his word and does yet. Contrary wise, the, The Pope and Machomet stry^e
against Christ.
pope with his multitude, and* Machomet with his (as it seems and becomes
very Antichrists (have hitherto undertaken (to suppress the old religion
(and to set up his own ordinance (unknown to our fathers of old time (to
bring it in to possession and under y^ name of God and his holy church / to
sprede it upon all christendom. For out of y^ Acts and statutes of the pope
and his wanton spiritualtye and out of the laws of Machomet it is manifest
(what, the one has taken in hand and done now more then 600. years (and the
other upon a 900 years. It is cuident yet also even now / whereto his general
coun sayls and perliamentes do extend, But not* regardinge how he threnteneth
and faceth / and how he garnisheth his new and wanton religions with false (but
dissembling titles / boastinge of many hundredth years / many general
counsayles / fathers holy men / doctors / universities / closters syngyng /
prayeng / fasting alms geuinge Let us do as our ol^est fathers have done long
before us.
de^plynge / and tells such like: All his* bragginge set a side let us cast
his relygion from us and take upon us unfeignedly the true old religion / which
has endured sens the beginning of the world (by the which all holy m^n have
ever loved / worshipped and served God and knew nothing utterly of the Popes
religion. And if we must for this cause be hated and persecuted of the world:
well / it happened even so unto all holy Prophets before us likewise / and
specially unto Jesus Christ our Lord: which shall come shortly to judgment
/ and utterly destroy the kyuge dome of Antichrist / whom he now kylleth with
the sprete of his mouth. Our possession is not here upon earth / the kingdom of
heaven is our native country. From thence Philip. iii.
look we for the sauyoure Jesus Christ our Lord / which shall raise up out
mortal and miserable body / that he may make it like his excellent and
glorified body / ator dinge to the power whereby he. may subdue all things.
unto him self. To him be* honor and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.

