THE CHRISTIANS BVLWARKE, AGAINST SATAN'S BATTERY.

OR, The Doctrine of JUSTIFICATION, So plainly and pithily laid out in the
several maine branches of it, as the fruits thereof may be to the Faithful,
as so many Preservatives against the poisonous Heresies and prevailing
Iniquities of these last times.

By H. B. Pastor of S. MATHEVVS Friday-Street.

ROMANS 5. 1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord
JESUS CHRIST; by whom we have now received the Atonement. Verse. II. Printed at
London, for HENRY TAVNTON, and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint Dunstans
Churchyard. 1632.

To the High and Excellent, who inhabiteth Eternity, JESUS CHRIST, the Lord our
Righteousness, the faithful witness, the first begotten of the dead, the
Prince of the Kings of the earth, who has loved us, and washed us in his own
blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father: Glory,
Dominion, Blessing, Honor, Power, for* evermore. Amen.
MOst High and Holy Lord Jesus, to whom should a sinful wretch, and worthless
abject presume to approach, but to thee his gracious Savior, and merciful
Redeemer? Vouchsafe, then, O Sun of righteousness, to stretch thy healing wings
over my fainting and feeble soul, now prostrate at thy beautiful and blessed
feet, and so bathe and wash me in the fountain of thy precious blood, as that I
may be presented spotless before thy Fathers Throne, clad in the robes of thy
perfect righteousness. Thou art that faithful witness to confirm, yea that
souer^igne King, and supreme Judge, to maintain the cause of thine eternal
truth against all Antichristian adversaries. Vouchsafe therefore to patronize
this poor labor, which the weakest and unworthiest of all thy servants, is
bold here to consecrate to thy Name. It is but that small fruit and rivulet,
which has sprung from thee the living Root, and Fountain of all grace; so as
by just right it is thine. Let thy power protect the work and workman from all
injury of time; and thy grace bless the work, both to the confirming of thy
people in the saving truth, and to the conuincing of the gain-sayer. Thou
see, O Lord, the presumption of Antichrist, and of his seduced seducing
Apostles. Thou beholdest these Apostatizing lukewarm times, how many look
back to Egypt, to Babylon. Thou numbrest and weighest Antichristian Advocates,
and Baals Pleaders, and Babylons Reconcilers, as if they would in despite of
thee and thy blessed Word, re-erect Babels Tower within the borders of thy Sion.

O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? And do not thine eyes run to and
fro throughout the whole earth, to show thy self strong in the behalf of
them, whose heart is perfect toward thee? Art not thou He, that in former
times have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to confusion, that hate
us? But now, Lord, (if we may dispute with thee, and seeing thy servant, who is
but dust and ashes, has begun to speak to my Lord) wherefore have thou cast
thy people off, and go not forth with our Armies? Wherefore do thou make
us to turn our back from the enemy, that they which hate us, spoil our
goods? Wherefore do thou make us a reproach unto our neighbors, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us? Or can we plead for our selves, as
once thy people by the mouth of thy servant David, did, Though all this be come
upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor behaved ourselves falsely in thy
Covenant? Or can we say, Our heart is not turned back, nor our steps declined
from thy way? Or, That we have not forgotten the Name of our God, nor
stretched out our hand to a strange God? Alas, O Lord, our confusion is still
before us, our iniquities are with us, they testify against us; so that how
can we hold up our heads before thee, or stand before our enemies? And yet, O
Lord, all our smart and shame cannot teach us to believe thy Prophets, who have
often told us, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek
him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And
wherein are we convinced of our forsaking of thee, O Lord, but by beholding
with lamentable experience, how thou seem now of long time to have forsaken
us? For else, if thou Lord were with us, how should so many calamities and
disasters fall upon us, and upon thy people round about us? How should England,
formerly a terror to her neighbors, become now their scorn and derision? The
truth is, O Lord, we must needs confess to our great shame, that with the
Church of Ephesus, we have declined from our first love. O teach us to
remember from whence we are fallen, and to repent, and do the first works, lest
thou come against us quickly, and remove our Candlestick out of his place,
except we repent. And have thou not at least a few things against us, that the
woman Iezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, is suffered to teach, and
to seduce thy servants to commit fornication with Idols? For this, thou have
covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through* For
this, thou have made us as the refuse in the midst of the people. For this, all
our enemies have opened their mouth against us; yea, thy fierce winds have
fought against us, wasted and wracked our forces. Yet do not, O Lord, cast us
off for ever. Thy people put their mouth in the dust, if so be there may be
hope. O teach us to search and try our ways, and turn again to thee our God.
O plead for us to thy Father, when in thy name we lift up our heart with our
hands to God in the heavens. And lest our prayers be turned into sin, O
strengthen our hearts and hands from the highest to the lowest, to cast out
from among us our Idol-sins, and sinful Idols, the abominations, and
prouocations of thy jealousy.

O bless thy servant, our gracious Sovereign, King CHARLES, double upon his
royal person the spirit of upright David, and of zealous Josiah, to purge and
repair thy Temple, that upon himself his Crown may long flourish, his
righteous Scepter may cherish and support thy people, his victorious Sword may
suppress and vanquish thine and his enemies. Shower down thy grace into the
heart of his royal Queen, that she coming to partake with him in the only
and blessed means of salvation, thy Word and Sacraments, may become also a
joyful and fruitful nurcing Mother to thine Israel. Multiply the Spirit of
wisdom and counsel upon his Majesty's Honorable Counselors, that taking all
their counsel at thee and thy word, all their consultations and resolutions may
prosper, and procure peace and prosperity to these Kingdoms, and thy Churches
therein and abroad. Double the Spirit of zeal and piety upon all the Ministers
of thy Word and Sacraments, especially, upon the reverend Archbishops and
Bishops, that standing in the place of Pillars in thy Temple, of the salt of
the earth, of the light of the world, they may strongly support thy true
Religion, season and lighten those places, which are dark and unsavory, and all
for want of faithful Ministers: thus shall they highly magnify their office,
and discharge their stewardship, by providing and sending painful laborers
into every corner of thy field. Inspire and inflame them, Lord, with that zeal
of thine own, wherewith thou did purge thy Temple from profane merchandise:
that so they may with the whip-cords of sound Doctrine, and wholesome
Discipline, chase out of thy Church all Heresy and Idolatry. Why should the
world, O Lord, complain and cry, Where is the spirit of those ancient Bishops
and Martyrs, and learned Champions of thy truth, as of Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, Hooper, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Jewel, and other faithful witnesses,
whose either blood has been the seed, or preaching and writing the watering
of this thy noble Vineyard? O keep far from us the spirit of cowardice, and
lukewarmnesse, of ambition, and love of the world, lest these infeebling and
infatuating our souls, we should prove a generation of perverse and foolish
children, pulling down what our religious forefathers with such care and
pains, mature judgment, and sound knowledge in the truth, have built. Stir
up, O Lord, the noble hearts of the two honorable Chancellors of our
Universities, that with the aid of sovereign authority, they may zealously
set themselves to preserve those Fountains and Nurceries from the mudde of
Heresy, and the bitter root of Impiety. Infuse the spirit of courage, zeal,
uprightness, and hatred of covetousness, in abundance upon all the reverend
Judges and Justices of the Land, that they may duly execute the Laws by
freeing the poor innocent from the potent oppressor, by cutting down sin,
and cutting off the traitorous ringleaders to Idolatry. Thus thy Church being
purged, Justice executed, Religion maintained, sin reformed, our Covenant
with thee renewed, our vows of better obedience and thankfulness performed,
and we through thy merits reconciled to thy Father of mercies: thou the great
Captain and Lord of Hosts, may again take thy peoples part, turn the edge
of thy Sword against thine enemies, and fill our mouths with a new song of
praise and thanksgiving to thee, which sit upon the Throne, with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, God blessed for ever.

Amen.
The Preface to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, lo here the two great mysteries laid open; the one of
Godliness, the sum whereof is Christ, believed on in the World: the other of
Iniquity, the head whereof is Antichrist, believed on of the World. Two
Mysteries incompatible, as light and darkness. They are the two bounders,
disterminating Jerusalem from Babylon. This Mystery of iniquity, I mean, the
Romish doctrine of Justification, is the head-doctrine, or source, whence all
their meritorious satisfactions do flow. And Bellarmine, with other
Pontificians, Bellarmin. de Iustif. l. 1. c. 4.
confesses, Justification to be the maine Cardo or hinge, whereon hangs the
whole body of controversies between them and the Pretestants. Nor was it for
nothing, that the Council of Trent so improued all their skill and strength,
to oppose and oppress the true Catholic doctrine of Justification, as
whereby the Papal magnificence and the gain of the Romish Craftsmen for their
Diana, Act. 19.
was endangered. So that this their Abortiue was a hatching for seven months;
so long was this Babylonish Ram, wherewith they would force heaven gates, a
hammering in the Trent-forge: so as the History notes, that the most Hist.
Council. Trid. lib. 2.
expert in the Church affirmed, That if all the Councels, assembled from the
Apostles times to that, were summed up together, they could not make up so many
Articles as the Trent-Fathers had amassed together, in this one sixth Session of
that Synod, the best part whereof also they were beholden to Aristotle for. And
no marvel they were so puzzled, for they were to encounter sundry
difficulties: as first, the evidence of Scriptures: secondly, the concent of
ancient Fathers: thirdly, the powerful preaching and writings of Luther.
fourthly, the dissent of their Schoolmen; and fifthly, the division of the
Council it self, some being Thomists, some Scotists, some Dominicans, some
Franciscans. To satisfy and reconcile all which, was more than an Herculean
labor. But what could be difficult to the Papal Omnipotency; who could send
his holy Ghost post from Rome to Trent in a Cloake-bagge, which loosed all
knots, and decided all doubts? Nor had the Pope wanting in that Council the
most pregnant wits in the Pontifician world, besides a numerous multitude of
new titular Bishops (as titular for learning as living) to lay on load of down
right voices, to conclude and ratify whatsoever the Pope with his Cardinals in
their Conclaue at Rome, and his dextrous instruments in the Council, had with
no less sweat than artifice, contrived. For the first maine obstacle, the
evidence of Scripture, they are feign to collogue, and speak it fair, and
borrow from it certain broad Phylacteries, wouen with Scripture phrases,
wherewith the Babylonish Whore partly decks her shameless forehead, and partly
adornes the cobwebbe Robe of her counterfeit selfe-Iustification: as Coelestis
Pater: Jesus Christ, the Sun Council. Trid. Sess. 6. Proem. cap. 2. 5. 7.
of righteousness, the author and finisher of our faith: The Father of
mercies, and God of all consolation, sent his son to redeem Jews and
Gentiles, and that all might receive adoption of sons: Him has God sent
forth to be a propitiation for our sins in his blood: for this Redemption we
ought to give thanks. And chapter 7. The Meritorious cause of our Justification is
our Lord Jesus Christ etc. O holy Council! Will any suspect the Serpent to
lurk under such flowers of Paradise? Or that they go about to betray Christ
with Hayle Master? But in this their profound hypocrisy lies the whole
Mystery of Iniquity; Si tamen hypocrisis dici debet, quae iam latere prae
abundantia non valet, and prae Bern. Sermon. ad Clerum. Et super Cant. Sermon. 33.
impudentia non quaerit; as Bernard says of Romes Clergy in his time. If that
may be called hypocrisy, which neither for the abundancy of it can, nor for
the impudency of it cares to conceal it self. Thus by egregious hypocrisy
Arrius deluded the Council of Nice, confessing Christ to be God of God, yet
denied his consubstantiality with the Father. Thus the second Council of Nice,
summoned to decree the erection and veneration of Images, makes a goodly
Preface, giving thanks to God that they were delivered from Idols. Thus
Augustine confesses how he was seduced by the Manichaean hypocrisy. Thus
deals the Trent Council. And besides her hypocrisy, her impudency
displayes it self, while in this Council, Rome alters the Rule of Faith,
adds her Traditions, Decretals and Canons, as a party and equal rule with
Scripture, guelds the Scriptures of their masculine authority See Bulla Pii 4
super confirmatione Conc. Trid. and super Forma iuramenti professinis fidei.
and genuine sense, closing up all in the Cabinet of the Popes breast, where
lodges his Infallibility. And thus the sacred Scriptures, which, till that
Idolatrous Council of Trent, were held the sole and entire Catholic Canon
and rule of Faith, must now draw in the Popes yoke with his sophisticate
Traditions. Now, the pure gold and silver of Gods word must go no longer for
current, unless it be stamped in the Popes own Mynt, and subject also to be
abased or inhansed at his pleasure. Now, the waters of life are of no force,
unless distilled through the Popes Limbeck; nor those rivers of Paradise
medicinable, if they flow not from the sacred Minerals of the Romish
Mountains. Thus in effect the Romish Amazon cuts off the right pap of
Scripture, which yields the sincere milk, reserving only the left to suckle
her Paplings withal, as that Lupa did Romes founder Romulus; or, at least, the
right Pap is so patched to that stepmothers breast, as it yields no other
milk, but such as relisheth of the corrupt complexion of the Popes
infallibility. Thus the first Rub is removed, the Scriptures, which are made
cock-sure for the Pope.

2 For Luther, they could easily hiss him out for an arch heretic, and blast
and brand with Anathema those evident truths by him delivered. So that hard it
was to judge, whether fared worse, Luther for the truths sake, or the truth for
Luthers.

3 For the consent of ancient Fathers, the most they stand upon is S.
Augustine, who indeed writ more of this divine mystery, than all the rest put
together. But the Council could easily euade him, saying (as Catarinus about
Predestination) that S. Aug. his opinion therein was nouel, never heard of
before his time: or, that S. Aug. was drawn to speak many things awry, through
heat of disputation against the Pelagians: or (as Vega) Non necesse est etc, It
is not necessary to believe all S. Aug. his arguments to be demonstratiue, or
altogether to stand in force. Thus all the Fathers corn, though growing from
the field of Scriptures, proves but chafe, coming once to be sifted in the
mystical, if not Luke 22. 31.
Satanicall fan of this active Council.

4. and 5. For the dissenting Schoolmen, and those Dominicans and Franciscans
in this Council, whereof Vega and Soto were the two Standard-bearers, and bore
a great sway therein, it behooued the Council to keep good quarter with them,
and to use all their wits, either to reconcile them, or with some pretty
equivocations to please all parties. For this purpose, Marcellus, Priest,
entitled of the holy Cross, President of the Council, Cardinal and
Apostolical Legate a latere, whose wits were as versatilous, as his titles
magnificent and various: after much sweat spent in chopping and changing,
peecing and payring, after an hundred Congregations, wherein these matters were
canuased Pro and Con: at length licked the Decrees and Canons to that form,
that each side was pleased, and Marcellus applauded on all hands; when each
Sect might from the same Delphick Oracle pick out his own meaning. Thus came
these Trent Decrees to be like a curious Picture, which every one in the Room
imagines to look directly upon him. Or like an indented Table-Picture upon a
Wall, wherein the one side of the Room may behold the face of a man, the
other, of a woman, and they in the midst, of an Owl. Thus Soto and Vega, who
in the time of this Session, writ each a Volume of this Subject, though in some
smaller points different in their opinions, which they grounded upon the
Decrees, and dedicated to the Council, were both well pleased; yet no
otherwise reconciled, but, as Herod and Pilate, Brethren in evil, to crucify
Christ. The writing of which two Champions of Trent I have mostly all along
this Treatise, confuted.

Thus, as S. Ambrose says, Fucum faciunt, qui non Amb. de fide l. 1. c. 8.
audent explicare, quod sentiunt censorie, They do but iuggle, that dare not
set down in plain terms, what they captiously conceive. And as Hierome
against the Pelagian Heretics: Sola haec haeresis, quae public erubescit
Hier. ad Ctesiph. de libero arbitr. contra Pelag. Ep. 3.
loqui, quod scripto docere non metuit: This only is heresy, which blusheth to
speak that publicly, that it fears not to teach secretly. But, as there he
says, Ecclesiae victoria est, vos aperte dicere, quod sentitis; sententias
vestras prodidisse, superasse est: It is the Churches victory for you to speak
plainly, as you think; to detect your opinions, is to confute them. But we have
assayed to pull off Romes vizard, and to make the Whore naked. Her
figge-leaue-righteousnesse will not salve her sin, or hide her shame. Only I
cannot but lament, to see many of my brethren, the sons of my mother in show,
to stand up to plead for Baal. Is it the symptom of this our age, wherein
there is so much learning and so little sound knowledge in the Mystery of
Christ, or wherein the Spirit of the world is so predominant, that men are so
transported with an unnatural zeal and love to Babylon? But Wisdom is
justified of her children. And now I begin to conceive the reason, why the
Jesuits pens are of late so silent: surely because they see ours so poynant
in one another sides, while our Mother Church bleeds for it. But those that be
the true Ministers of Christ, will say with S. Paul, We cannot speak any
thing against the truth, but for the truth. Now I could heartily wish, that my
brethren of the Ministry would employ the greater part of their pains in
preaching and pressing this maine Doctrine of Justification: It would be a
maine Bulwark to batter Babels Tower, whereby she would scale heaven with her
merits. And for Antichrist, I wonder to see such a deep silence of him. Does
the Council of Laterans Decree dare us, not to mention Antichrists coming?
Otherwise to press Jesuits with the point of Antichrist, would easily stop
their mouths, while they would put us to show the uninterrupted lineall
pedigree of the Professors of our Religion from the Apostles, all along
downward to Luther. Alas, this is but a poor shift to gain time, and to
cause us to put up our weapons against them. We can easily descry the pearls
of our Religion, strawed all along in the bottom of those muddy streams of
Popery. We can discover the stars, which have given light in all ages of the
Church, notwithstanding all Romes mysts, laboring to eclipse them. And
although injury of time had consumed with fire our particular evidences, yet we
find them registered in the Court-rowles of Scripture, which no fire, nor moth
shall consume.

But not to detain you too long in the Porch of this larger edifice; know
Christian Reader, that this poor Work has lien by me licensed for the Press
a pretty space. It was borrowed from the interrupted succisiue hours of my
Court-attendance. If it displease many, I pass not so much, if it may profit
some; and therein shall I praise God. This is the fruit of all my labor: I
seek no reward, so I may shun reproof. What can be said in opposition to this
truth, or any other by me delivered, in special against the Synagogue of Rome;
I shall be ready to maintain if occasion require, in ampler manner, if I may
have alike liberty with my Antagonists. I say no more for the present, but
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you
up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.

Thine in Christ, H. B.

TRVTHS TRIVMPH Over TRENT.
CHAP. I. Of man's works done before grace, or of preparation in man unto
Justification, commonly called the merit of Congruitie.
The Romish Faith.

THE title of the fifth Chapter of the sixth Session of the Council of Trent, is
Of the necessity Council. Trid. Ses. 6. cap. 5.
of preparation to Justification in men of ripe age; where they say, That by
their free will, stirred up and helped by grace, they are disposed to convert
themselves to their Justification, by free assenting and cooperating with the
same grace. Ibid. cap. 6. Free Will the mother of Romes preparatory works.
The ground of which disposition to Justification, is freewill; which
cooperating with grace, produces fix several works of preparation, laid
down by the Council here, and reckoned up by Vega, one of the Councels chief
champions. Vega lib. 6. de preparatione adultorum ad Iustif. cap. 12.
First, an Historical faith conceived by hearing, believing the truth of Gods
promises to a sinner in general: Secondly, a fear of Gods justice, arising
from the apprehension of their sins; whence they arise (thirdly) to a hope,
by converting themselves to the consideration of Gods mercy, trusting that God,
for Christ's sake, will be favorable unto them; whom they then begin (fourthly)
to love, as the fountain of all righteousness: and therefore are moved by a
hatred and detestation against sin, that is (fifthly) by that Per ^am
paenitentiam, Which I translate Penance, according to the usual and vulgar
language of their Rhemes Testament: nor have they any other repentance but
Penance. Can. 1.
Penance which they are to do before Baptism, while (sixthly) they resolve to
receive Baptism, to begin a new life, and to keep the Commandments of God.
And Can. 1. If any man shall say that a man may be justified before God by his
own works, which are done either by the power of man's nature, or by the
doctrine of the Law, without divine grace by Jesus Christ, let him be accursed.

CHAP. II. Wherein the doctrine of Romish preparation is examined.
IT being the maine drift of this Council, to establish a righteousness
inherent in a man's self; and not finding how to dim the bright sunshine of
truth against this doctrine, but by an artificial shadow of the second beams
of grace, meddled and mingled with blind, or at the best, bleare-eyed nature:
therefore the judicious Reader may observe, how while this Council would seem
in part to ascribe the work of Justification to Gods grace, it does in deed,
and in the maine, attribute it to man's nature; as may appear in laying the
first stone of this Babylonish building, Of the necessity of preparation to
Justification. The whole frame of which preparation, composed according to the
model of their Schoole-diuinitie, as Cabriel Biel, one of their chief
Sententiaries, who lived ^^el ^ist. 14. lib. ^* quaest* 2.
about fifty years before this Council, has laid it down, as, That the Act
of the will, presupposes the Act of the understanding; and the Act of faith
goes foremost to apprehend the abomination of sin, and the wages of it: hence
a fear of Gods wrath, and of hell fire, hence a dislike and detestation of
sin. And this (says he) is a disposition of Congruity, neither immediate nor
sufficient, but very remote. Then faith turns it self to the consideration of
Gods mercy, and resolves that God is ready to remit sin, through the
infusion of charity, to those that are sufficiently prepared and disposed. Upon
that consideration follows the act of hope, whereby a man begins to covet
after God, as the sovereign good; and from this act of hope, he rises to love
God above all things, even out of pure naturals. From this love issues another
dislike and detestation of sin; not for fear of damnation, but for God,
finally, above all things beloved: And all these acts are followed with a
purpose of amendment. And so at length this comes to be a sufficient merit of
Congruity, being the immediate and final disposition to the infusion of grace.
And this is such a preparation, as does necessarily, as by a chain of so many
infolded linkes, draw after it the infusion of grace, whereby a man is
justified. Thus we see, by what perplexed paths they would lead men toward
their justification. But note here, what a power they give to this preparation,
as even to necessitate and enforce the infusion of grace: because, says Biel,
to a man that does as much as lies in him, God has determined infallibly to
give grace. And Aquinas says, it is a merit of Congruity, that when a man Aqu.
12. qu. 114 art. 3. c. and ^. c.
does wellvse his virtue, God, according to his super-excellent virtue, should
work more excellently in him: Videtur Congruum, says he: It seems Congruous,
and agreeable to reason, that a man operating according to his virtue, God
should recompense him according to the excellency of his virtue. Yea, such is
the force of this merit of Congruity, that according to Thomas, Aqu. 12 qu. 1^4
a. 6. c. quian, homo etc.
it will merit not only grace for a man's self, but also for another man: for
because (says he) a man in the state of grace does fulfill the will of God, it
is Congruous, or fitting, that according to the proportion of friendship, God
should fulfill man's will in the salvation of another man. Such is the nature of
their doctrine of Congruitie, of which sort are their works of preparation,
disposing and fitting a man for grace. And this is the sense and sum of the
Trent doctrine, touching preparation.

Now to cut off this Goliahs head, we need no other than his own sword.
First, concerning the title it self, of the necessity of preparation in the
Adulti, or men grown, as we call them; note here the vanity of this doctrine,
how therein they confound themselves. For I would ask them, whom they mean by
their Adulti, or men of years? Those within their The vanity and incongruitie
of Popish preparation.
own Church, such as are baptized? or Heathens and Pagans, without the pale of
the Church, such as are not yet baptized, as Turks, Jews, or Indians? Surely
they mention those Adulti that are not yet baptized. But it must needs be, that
they include Council. Trid. Ses. 6. cap. 6.
their own Adulti: for else what use is there in their Church of this doctrine
of preparation, which they so highly advance and commend, unless it be among
the barbarous Indians? But their Adulti have already (according to their
doctrine) received the grace of Justification in their Baptism, conferring
grace, as they say, ex opere operato: which grace being once by any mortal sin
afterward lost, there can be no more merit of Congruitie, to merit a
reparation of grace, as it is in the preparation unto grace, as Thomas
teaches. Aqu. 12. quaest. ^ 14. art. 7. c.


But leave we the title, and let us come to the thing. Popish preparation unto
grace, hangs upon two special hinges: First, free will; secondly, that this
free will is moved by grace, which their Schoolmen call the first grace,
employed in this This Council speaks of a former and later grace, but names
them not. Ses. 4. cap. 5. Council. Trin. Ses. 6. Can. 5.
Council. A free will they must have, though they confess it to be weak and
feeble. And such a free will we easily grant them; as loath to incur their
Anathema, for saying that free will is altogether lost, and extinguished by
Adams fall. The praise which Vega, their Interpreter, gives to Richardus
learned saying (as he calls it) of free will, we also (with its proper
limitation) admit of. Docte Richardus (de statu inter hom. cap. ^2.) Cum audis
liberum arbitrium esse captiuum, nihil aliud intellige, quam infirmum, and
natiuae potestatis virtute priuatum. Andr. Vega lib. 15. de vera and sicta
iusti^. cap. ^.
When thou hear (says he) that free will is a captive, understand nothing
else, but that it is weak, and deprived of the virtue of its native power.
Being thus weak then, how should it dispose it self to receive grace? No,
says the Council, (as also their Schoolmen) Free Will being weak, it must
be stirred up, moved, and helped by grace, and then it disposes it self
freely to receive the grace of justification. So free will, as the God Baal,
being asleep, must be awakened, and stirred up by Gods grace. Well, but what
grace of God is this, I pray you, that thus moves man's free will, as the
weight, that sets the wheel a going? Surely I can learn no more from the
Councels own mouth, (who knows full well how to temper her words) but that
this moving grace of God is some sound in the ear, whereby Popish faith is
conceived. Or else, when God touches man's heart by the Council. Trin. Ses. 6.
cap. 5.
illumination of the Holy Ghost, according to that of Gabriel Biel, who says,
that the will in the acts of it, does presuppose the acts of the understanding:
and the understanding we know, must be informed by hearing, or by special
illumination. But in general, this grace they call the first grace, or a Prima
gratia, seu gratia gratis data: secunda gratia, seu gratia gratum saciens.
Romes first and second grace.
grace that is freely given, differing from the second grace, which they call a
grace that makes a man gracious and acceptable. They say, this first grace is
freely given, because no merit goes before it: neither is this any saving
grace, because (as they confess) all men are alike capable of it, and many
receive it, that never come to salvation. This is that grace, which Arminius
calls his sufficient grace.

But Aquinas says plainly, that this first grace is not the Aqu. 12. qu. 114
art. 3. 6.
grace of the Holy Ghost; for to the grace of the Holy Ghost, he attributes
the merit of Condignity: but to that grace, whereby the will disposes it
self, the merit only of Congruitie. But this first grace being once received,
and entertained by free will, cooperating with it, a man disposes and prepares
himself to merit the second grace by way of Congruity. And yet Aquinas,
speaking of this grace, says, Deus non dat gratiam Aqu. 12. qu. 114 art. 5. ad
2.
nisi dignis, etc. God gives not grace but to the worthy; yet (says he) not
so, as being first worthy, but because he by grace makes them worthy. O
miserable perplexity! If God give grace to none but to the worthy, then they
were worthy before he gave them grace; but if they were not worthy before he
gave them grace, how does he give grace to none but to the worthy? But
whatsoever this first grace is, whereby the will is first moved, Aquinas tells us
what it is not; namely, that it is not the Aqu. 12. qu. 114 art. 3. c.
grace of the Holy Ghost: for the merit that proceeds of the grace of the
Holy Ghost, is of Condignity; but the merit that proceeds from free will,
moved by the first grace, is only the merit of Congruity, far inferior to
that of Condignitie. But that we may not lose our selves in this Maze, let Vega
and Soto tell us the Counsels mind in this point, as being themselves most
prinie to it. Only the worst is, we find them two of opposite opinions, in
this point of merit by Congruitie. Vega admits merit of Congruity after the
first Vega de meritis ex Congruo iustif. cap. 7.
grace, disposing a man to the grace of justification. But it is pretty to note
the vafrous and subtle elusion and evasion that he finds against the stream
of Fathers, and especially of St. Augustine in this point: For whereas they (as
himself confesses) Ibid. propos. 3.
shut out all kind of merit from justification, teaching that it is freely
given to all: Vega turns the Cat in the pan, and says, Loquuntur de gratia
iustificationis, etc. They speak A notable Pontifician shift.
(says he) of the grace of justification, as it comprehends all the gifts of
God belonging to our justification; whereof, in that proposition a little
before, he makes the first grace to be one. And so take justification as it
comprehends the first grace in it, it excludes all merit; because no merit goes
before the first grace, as the most of them teach: but taking the grace of
justification alone by it self, which is the gratia gratum faciens, the grace
that makes a man accepted, it may be questioned (says he) whether that may
not fall under the merit at least of Congruitie. Whereupon he infers his
fourth proposition, which is, That faith and other good works, whereby we are
disposed Ibid propos. 4. Fides and alia bona opera, quil us disponimur ad
gratiam gratum facientem, qua ^or^ aliter iustificamur, and simus accepti Deo,
meritoria sunt ex Congruo eiusmodi gratiae, and nostra iustificationis.
unto the second grace, by which we are formally justified, and made
acceptable to God, do by Congruitie merit such grace, and our justification.
Yea Vega ibid. says, Alia sunt merita ex congruo, quae in peccatoribus
reperiuntur, quae nullo praemi^ digna sunt, quia fiunt ab hominibus Deo
ingratis and exo^is: sed tamen eiusmodi ex se sunt, vt Congruum sit, and
diuinam bonitatem condeceat, ea ex liberalitate and benignitate sua acceptare,
vt trahat peccatores ad suam gratiam: Of another sort are those merits of
Congruitie found in sinners, which are worthy of no reward, as being done by
men not liked nor beloved of God: but yet of themselves they are such, that it
is Congruous and meet, and beseeming the divine goodness, out of his
liberality and bounty to accept them, that he may draw sinners to his grace.
But Soto on the other side, shuts out all manner of merit of Congruity,
going before justification. Pergimus Soto de not. and great. lib. 2. cap. 4 de
merito ex congruo.
pro ingenio nostro constituere, etc. We proceed (says Soto) according to
our capacity to define, that before justification, which is wrought by that
grace that makes a man accepted, there is in man's works no merit, either of
Condignitie or of Congruitie. But a little after, he makes a full amends for
it, saying, Cum autem quis, etc. When a man begins once to be in the state of
grace, (to wit of justification) then may he merit both for himself by
Condignitie, and for others by Congruitie. Other merit of Congruity, going
before the grace of justification, Soto confesses he finds no foundation of
any, unless that of St. Augustine, alleged by Thomas; Fides meretur
iustificationem; that faith meriteth justification. But Soto would have this
put among St. Augustines retractations: whereas by Merit in that place, is
meant, not either any Congruity or Condignity, (terms unknown to the ancient
Fathers in any such sense) but only the means or instrument to procure or
acquire grace. And as Soto himself a little after, acknowledges St.
Augustines meaning, expressed by himself, by the word Impetrare
iustificationem: That whereas he says, Faith does merit justification, his
meaning is, faith obtains justification, sine aliqua ratione meriti; without
any respect of merit.

Here let me insert by the way, a worthy annotation of What the ancient
Fathers understood by the word Merit.
George Cassander, upon the word Mereri, or Merit, in his second Scholia upon
his Ecclesiasticke hymns, printed at Paris 1616* for in other later
impressions, happily you shall find this Scholia is quite purged out by the
Index Expurgatorius, composed by the commandment of the Catholic King, Philip
the second, and by the advice also of the Duke of Albany; the copy whereof was
printed at Strasburgh. The words of the Index are these: Scholium incipiens,
Vocabulum merendi apud veteres, etc. deleatur totum. The Scholium of George
Cassander, beginning thus, etc. Let it be wholly cancelled* But being
notwithstanding preserved from this Purgatory fire, let us note it. Vocabulum
merendi apud veteres Ecclesiasticos Scriptores, fere idem valet, quod consequi,
seu aptum idoneumque fieri ad consequendum. Id, quodinter caetera, vel ex vno
Cypriani loco apparet. Nam quod Paultu inquit, 1. Tim. 1. (...) quod vulgo
dicitur, Misericordiam consecutus sum: vel vt Erasmus veriit, Misericordiam
adeptus sum: id Cyprianus ad Iubaianum legit, Misericordiam merui. Et multa
loca sunt in Ecclesiasticis officijs, and precibus, vbi hoc vocabulum hoc
intellectu accipi debeat. Quae vocis notio si retineatur, multa quae durius
dici videntur, mitiora and commodiora apparebunt. The word Merit (says
Cassander) among ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, does commonly import as much,
as to attain, or to be made apt and fit to attain, or obtain. That, which
among others, does appear out of one place of Cyprian. For that which Paul
says, 1. Tim. 1. (...), which the vulgar latin renders, But I obtained
mercy: or as Erasmus renders it, I got or received mercy. The same does
Cyprian to Iubaianus read, I merited mercy. And many other places (says he)
there are in the Ecclesiastical offices and prayers, where this word (Merit)
ought to be taken in this sense. Which sense of the word, if it be retained,
many things which seem to be spoken harshly, will appear more gentle and
accommodate. Thus Cassander. But this (among sundry other sayings of Cassander)
being condemned by the Index to be purged out of his works, does plainly show
what opinion the Pontificians have of Merit, advancing it to a sense of a
higher strain, than the ancient Fathers of the Church were ever acquainted
withal. Or let the Pontificians themselves interpret unto us the meaning of
this word Merit, used by St. Augustine, speaking of the sin of our first
Parents, Foelix culpa, quae tale^ August.
meruit Redemptorem. Will they say, that Adams sin merited, either by
Congruity or by Condignity, Christ the Redeemer? And again, where he says,
Nemo de sui peccati dimissione desperet, Aug de tempore ser. 35.
quando illi veniam meruerunt, qui occiderunt Christum: Let none despair of
the pardon of his sin, when as they merited pardon which killed Christ. Will
they therefore say, that they which murdered Christ, merited pardon, either
Congruously or Condignly? Or what meant Gregory, firnamed the Great, Bishop of
Rome, when he used the word Merit to Saul's persecuting the Church of Christ,
saying Greg. in Fuang. hom. 34.
Illi dictum est, Quid me persequeris? Iste vero audire meruit, Dimissum est
tibi peccatum tuum; To him it was said, Why do est thou persecute me? But he
merited to hear, Thy sin is forgiven thee. What merit was this trow we? And
the same Gregory speaking of the thief upon the Cross, says, Latro cruentis
manibus audire meruit, etc. The thief with his bloody hands merited to hear,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. What merit was in his bloody hands?
But thus we see the meaning of the word Merit in these purer and ancient times,
used for to obtain, or such like.

But to return whence we digressed; we see Vega and Soto, two grand Captains
in the Trent Council, one directly opposite to the other in the matter of
merit of Congruity. But the Council, through the dexterity of See Histor.
Council. Trid. lib. 2. Pontificians can with facility reconcile flat
contradictions.
Sancti Crucij, has so composed the decrees, and namely this of preparation,
as that by profound equivocations, even flat contradictions are reconciled. But
the conclusion is, that merit of Congruitie is ratified by the Council, in the
necessity of preparatorie works to justification; but inuolued in such
general terms, that Soto and his side holding the contrary, may not take
offense at it, but be made to believe, that the Council is for them. In so
much as Soto in his three books de Natura and Gratia, which he writes as a
Commentary of this Session of the Council, sets down all the Decrees and
Canons of the same, as the ground and text of his Commentary.

Take one notable instance of their egregious equivocation, in the first Canon
of this Session before alleged. If any Si quis dixerit, hominem suis
operibus, quae vel per humanae naturae vires, vel per legis doctrinam siant,
absque di^ina per Iesum Christum gratia, posse iustificari coram Deo, Anathema
sit. Can. 1.
man shall say, that a man may be justified before God by his own works,
which are done either by the power of man's nature, or by the doctrine of the
law, without divine grace by Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Note here what
variety of senses this Canon is full charged withal. Would Vega and his side
have their merit of Congruity decreed? Here is a Canon leueld against all those
that shall say, that a man by his own works may be justified before God,
without the grace of God; implying, that by, and with the grace of God
assisting a man, he may be justified before God by his own works, done by the
power of nature (as his free will) or by the doctrine of the law. Yea but thus
Soto may fear, that the Anathema, the deadly bullet of this Canon, will hit
himself, for denying all merit of Congruity, done by the power of nature,
assisted by grace, going before justification. Then let Soto but view over the
Canon again, and he shall see it turned and leuelled against the Pelagians,
who taught, that a man by his own works, done by the power of nature, may be
justified before God, without divine grace by Jesus Christ. Or against the
unbelieving Jews, who thought to be justified before God by the observation of
Moses law, saving only that the Council has cautelously and correctedly
expressed this, under the name of the letter of Moses law, Chapt. 1. as here,
under the name of the doctrine of the law, lest (as the History of the
Trent-Councell has well observed) if it had passed (as at the first draught)
in these words, per legem Mosis, by Moses law; then exception might have been
taken in the behalf of Circumcision, to which some ascribing remission of
sins, this Canon or that Decree might have been a prejudice to their opinion.
Thus all parties, even the contrary factions of that Council, were well
satisfied, while one side conceived the Decree made expressly for them; and the
other side, that it made not against them. The Decrees being not unlike an
artificial indented picturetable, which to him that looks full upon it,
presents one kind of form or face; to him that stands on the one side,
another form; and to him on the other side, a third. Or like a plain picture,
which hanging on the wall, although the posture of the face be set one way, yet
it seems to cast equal aspect upon every one in the room. Thus is verified
that of Guido Clemens, Priest and Cardinal of St. Potentiana, who says, that
in the Church of Rome there is quaedam radix duplicitatis, Ioh. Sarisbury* in
Polychron. lib. 6 cap. 4.
simplicitati columbae contraria; a certain root of doubleness, which is
contrary to the doves simpliciti^. To conclude this point of Popish
preparation; it is so far from fitting and disposing a man to receive the
grace of justification (grace of justification being rightly understood) as it
is a maine impediment and stumbling block in the way unto it. For whereas this
preparation of theirs aduanceth man's free will, and other natural powers to
the attainment of grace; what does this else but puff a man up with a conceit
of himself, that he is in a better state than indeed he is, as having
something left in him, which being helped by some motion of common (or I wot
not what) grace, is able to lead him to the full possession of grace, and so
of glory? Gregory says well, He that Greg. Past. Curae pars 3. admon. 33. Qui
morbum suum nescit, quomodo medicum quaerit? mayor enim, quo citius, quia sit
culpa, agnoscitur, co etiam celerius emendatur: minor vero, dum quasi nulla
creditur, co peius and securius in vsu retinetur.
knows not his disease, how does he seek to the Physician? for the greater the
fault is, being the sooner acknowledged, it is the more speedily amended; but
the lesser sin, while it is deemed to be as it were none at all, is so much
the worse, and more securely kept in ure. If Saint Paul, speaking in the person
of a regenerate man, as exercised with the combat between the flesh and the
spirit Romans 7. 18.
, complains, that in him, that is, in his flesh dwells no good thing: then what
good thing can there be in any unregenerate man to dispose him to any grace,
whose Genesis 6.
imaginations of his heart are only evil continually? They are evil, and
only evil; and that continually only evil. If corrupt Nature have yet any
thing left to brag off, if any free will to this grace whereof we speak; where
is that conuicting power of the Law, that makes sin out of measure sinful?
That casts a man down in the sense of his misery, causing him to cry out, Romans
7. 13.
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? How
shall a man come to Christ, weary and laden, that he may be refreshed? How
comes the ungodly to be justified, if he bring any merit to dispose him
thereunto? How shall the Law then be our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,
who came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance? We need none
other testimony to convince this Pontifician puffe-doctrine of preparatory
works, to be at the least Cousin-germaine to that of the Pelagians, than the
Council of Trent it self.

The Pelagians held, that some men using the reason of their own will, have or
do live in this world without any sin. To this agrees that Canon of Trent,
If any shall say, that all Se^. 6. Ca^. 7. Si quis dixerit, opera omnia, quae
ante iustificationem fiunt, quacunque ratione facta sunt, vere esse peccata,
vel odium Dei mereri, etc. Anathema sit.
works done before justification, howsoever they be done, are truly sins,
and deserve the hatred of God; let him be accursed. Compare now the Pelagian
and Pontifician doctrine together, and one egg is not liker another. Pelagians
and Pontificians compared together.
All works done before justification are not truly sins, say the
Trent-Fathers; therefore the works of the Pelagian heretics done before, or
without justification, whatsoever, or howsoever done, are no sins, as they
taught. Shall St. Austine be vmpire in this case? Aug. contra Pelagianos. lib.
3. in fine. tom. 7.
Pelagianorum sententia est, sine vllo peccato, aliquos homines tam ratione
propriae voluntatis vtentes, in hoc saeculo vixisse vel viuere. Optandum est vt
fiat, conandum est vt fiat, supplicandum est vt fiat, non tamen quasi factum
fuerit, confidendum est. Qui seipsum talem putat, ipse se decipit, and veritas
in eo non est; non ob aliud, nisi quia falsum putat. It is the opinion of the
Pelagians, that some men by using the reason of their own will, have, and do
live in this world without sin. It were to be wished so, it were to be
labored for, it is to be prayed for, yet not to be believed, as if it were so.
He that thinks himself such a one, deceives himself, and the truth is not
in him; for no other cause, but because he deemeth falsely. And in another
place he says, Si Gentilis (inquis) nudum operuit, nunquid quia non est ex
Aug. contra Iul. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 3. tom. 7.
fide, peccatum est? Prorsus in quantum non est ex fide, peccatum est; non quia
per scipsum factum, quod est nudum operire, peccatum est: sod in tali opere non
in Domino gloriari, solus impius negat esse peccatum. Nam quamuis bona, male
tamen facit; ideo negare non potes eum peccare, qui male quodlibet facit.
Fructus bonos non facit arbor mala: An dicis hominem infidelem arborem bonam?
If a Heathen (say thou) shall cover the naked, is it therefore a sin, because
it is not of faith? Certainly, in as much as it is not of faith, it is sin;
not in regard of the work it self, which is to clothe the naked, is it a sin:
but in such a work, not to glory in the Lord, only the wicked man denies this
to be a sin: For although he does good, yet he does it ill; therefore thou
can not deny that he sins, that does any thing ill. An evil tree does not
bear good fruit: Do est thou callan unfaithful man a good tree? Note here,
St. Augustine condemns all works for sins, that are not done in the state
of grace, but in the state of nature and infidelity. Therefore St. Augustine is
anathematized of the Church of Rome, for saying that all works done before
justification, are indeed sins.

But whereas the Pontificians may object, that St. Augustine Objection.
condemns only such works, as are done without faith, and not those
Pontifician works of preparation, whereof faith (as they affirm) is the root:

I answer, St. Augustine speaks honestly, without equivocation: Answer.
for having to do with the Pelagians, those enemies of the grace of God, he
opposes the state of grace against the state of nature: showing that
whatsoever a man does in the state of nature before he be in the state of
grace, it is sin: stiling even the best works of these heathen moralists, but
splendida peccata, glittering sins. Now whatsoever is done before
justification, is done in the state of nature, and consequently it is sin, in
St. Augustines sense, because it is the bad fruit of a bad tree. As for that
first grace, whereby the Papists teach a man is stirred up to prepare himself
for justification, it does not set a man, ipso facto, in the state of grace,
he is for all that faith of his, a mere natural man still. And therefore
that faith, which they speak of, going before justification, is not freed from
the imputation of sin, whereas that saving faith, whereof St. Augustine
speaks, is that which does actually not dispose unto, but possess a man of,
the state of grace, which is the very state of justification, as we shall see
in the due place hereafter. Therefore Popish preparation unto justification, is
nothing else but mere Pelagianisme: both Pelagians and Pontificians jointly
holding, that all works done without, or before justification, are no sins.

CHAP. III. The Catholic faith touching preparation to justification.
THe Romish faith concerning such preparatorie works Why Romes doctrine of
preparation is heretical and antichristian.
to justification, the Catholic faith of Christ's Church does renounce and
disclaim, as heretical and antichristian, for these reasons. First, because
the holy Scriptures teach no such thing, but the clean contrary. The
Scriptures teach no merit of Congruitie: they teach not, that free will being
stirred up, and helped by I wot not what first grace, a man is thereby disposed
to receive justification; but the flat contrary: Ioh. 1. 12. As many as receive
Christ, and such are they To receive Christ, is to believe in him.
as believe in him, are made the Sons of God. But does not this grace come by
some disposition in man's nature, as by his free will assisted, and so
cooperating with the grace of God, for the attaining of justification? No such
thing. For verse 13 Christ teaches that those Sons of God are borne not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Where
note a direct opposition between Gods grace, and man's will in the work of
Regeneration, or Justification; man's will being by a negative, utterly excluded
from any copartnership with God: Not of the will of man, but of God. So Titus
3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, etc. Where all humane works going before Justification,
all merits of congruitie, are excluded from disposing a man to receive
justification: for not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy, be saves us. And Romans 4. 5. To him that works not,
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
righteousness. Note, God justifies the ungodly, therefore not the righteous,
not the meritorious by Congruitie; unless ungodliness and sin can merit
justification at Gods hand: as St. Augustine said of Adams sin, Foelix culpa,
quae talem meruit Redemptorem, It was a happy sin, that merited such a
Redeemer. Whereas, besides some places of Scripture, which they pervert to
their purpose, they object the examples of the Eunuch, Acts 8. and of
Cornelius, Acts 10. by which they would prove their works of Congruitie, as
Vega alleges them. Vega may remember what he said in another Vega de meritis
ex congruo justice. q. 7.
place before, where he produces St. Augustines authority, to prove that
these two were true believers, before the Apostles came and preached unto them:
which, also Vega himself Vega de arg^^. pro nece^. bapt. cap. 15.
subscribeth unto, confessing that these two had grace and faith before; saving
only the difference is in the acception of grace and faith: wherein the
Pontifician egregiously equiuocateth, the true nature whereof we shall
hereafter discover. But say, that neither the Eunuch nor Cornelius, before they
were instructed by the Apostles, had the grace of justification: does it
therefore follow, that those works of theirs did by Congruity merit
justification at Gods hands? or that they were thereby prepared to
justification? Why did not then Esau's tears merit the blessing ex congruo? or
why did not Ahab's repentance merit by Congruity, not only a repriuall of
punishment, but an absolute pardon of his sin? for they did quantum in se
fuit, as much as in them lay: Or else, according to Romes doctrine, God must be
unjust, or at least wanting in his native goodness.

For further clearing of this point, come we to the ancient Fathers, to whom
also this doctrine of merit of Congruity and of Condignity was altogether
unknown. This Vega himself Vega lib. 8. cap. 11. de argum. contra iustif.
merit. ex congruo.
is forced to confess, where making this objection; Why did the Fathers (says
he) no where use this distinction of merit of Congruity and Condignity? to
which he answers; If all things, which never were in use among the Fathers,
are to be condemned, we shall be forced to condemn many things which all He
should say, Romane-Catholickes. Pontificians make Philososophy a rule for
Divinity.
Catholics now receive. And the Philosopher should have said in vain,
Scientiaes fieri per additamenta, that Sciences are brought to pass by
addition. But he adds, Neither are we to grant, that this distinction of
merit of Congruity and Condignity was altogether unknown to the Fathers. They
acknowledged the things, although they used not the terms (says Vega) seeing
they diversely used the word of Merit, as either strictly or largely; whereof we
shall speak more largely hereafter. In the mean time, let us see what works
of preparation the ancient Fathers taught or enjoined, as necessary to dispose
a man to justification by way of merit, taken in the largest sense, as Vega at
least would have it.

But before we come to set down the ancient doctrine of A premonition.
the Church concerning this point, I must premonish the Reader, seriously to
note this one thing in the Fathers, That when they speak of grace and faith,
whereby a man is justified, they mean nothing else but saving grace, and
justifying faith, not now preparing a man unto, but actually placing and
possessing him in the state of justification and salvation. They mean nothing
less, than any such first grace, preparatory, and even common to wicked men,
which never come to partake of the second grace, as the Romanists do teach.
The Fathers admit of no such mean between saving grace and faith, and
between saving faith and justification; between any first and second grace,
as differing in kind, but understand one saving effectual grace. Indeed St.
Augustine speaks of a first and second grace; but by the first he means
that of justification, by the second that of sanctification: differing Aug. de
praed. and grat^om. 7.
no more, but as the root and the branch, the tree and the fruit: Or St.
Augustine acknowledges no other first grace, Aug. tract. 3. in Ioh. 1.
but that which is given to the elect in this life, saying, Coronat in nobis
Deus dona misericordiae suae; sed si in ea gratia, quam primam accepimus,
perseueranter ambulemus. God crowns the gifts of his mercy in us; but if in
that first grace, which we have received, we walk with perseverance. Ambrose
says, He that dare preach Ambros. de volat. Gent. lib. 2. cap. 8. and ibid.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
that the grace of God is given according to men's merits, preaches against the
Catholic faith. Therefore this doctrine of merit of congruity was no
Catholic doctrine in Saint Ambrose his days, nor does he mean any other
grace, but that of justification. All the preparation this holy man allows,
is, where he says, Duce Deo, venitur ad Deum; by God leading us, we come unto
God. And St. Chrysostom: So soon as a man believes, he is Chrysostom. in Romans
hom. 5. and 17. Aug. de praedest. sanct. cap. 12.
justified. And St. Augustine: Praedestinatio est praeparatio gratiae;
Predestination is the preparation to grace, to wit, of justification. And
further, he explaines himself thus: Inter gratiam and praedestinationem, etc.
Between grace and predestination this is the only difference, that
predestination is the preparation of grace, and grace is the gift or donation
of predestination: Or as a little after, Grace is the effect of predestination.
But will the Pontifician say, Man's free will is not for all this excluded from
being an ingredient, at least in preparation? Augustine in the same place snuts
free will quite out of doors, yea from setting one foot upon the threshold, or
entry, to justification. Ideo ex fide v^ secundum gratiam firma sit promissio
omni semini: non de nostrae voluntatis potestate, sed de sua praedestinatione
promisit. Promisit enim, quod ipse facturus erat, non quod homines; quia et si
faciant homines bona quae pertinent ad colendum Deum, ipse facit, vt illi
faciant, quae praecipit: non illi faciunt, vt ipse faciat quod promisit.
Alioquin vt Dei promissa compleantur, non in Dei, sed in hominum est potestate,
and quod a Domino promissum est, ab ipsis redditur Abrahae. Non autem sic
credidit Abraham, sed credidit danc gloriam Deo, quoniam quae promisit, potens
etiam and facere; non ait, praedicere; non ait praescire: nam and aliena facta
potest praedicere, atque praescire; sed ait, potens etiam and facere: ac per
hoc, facta non aliena, sed sua. That is: It is therefore of faith, that
according to grace the promise might be sure to all the seed: he promised not
out of any respect to the power of our will, but of his predestination. For he
promised, not that which men, but which himself was about to do; because
though men do those good things, which belong to Gods worship, he causes
them to do those things, which he has commanded: they do not caus^ him to
do that which he promised. Else that the promises of God should be
performed, it is not in the power of God, but of men; and that which the Lord
has promised, is by them performed to Abraham. But Abraham did not so believe
God, but he believed giving glory to God, because what he had promised, he was
able also to do; he says not, to foretell; he says not, to foreknow: for
he is able to foretell, and foreknow other men's works; but he says, he
is able to do: meaning hereby, not others works, but his own. So this holy
man. For otherwise, says he, a little after: Per hoc, vt promissa sua Deus
possit implere, non etiam in Dei, sed in hominis potestate: hereby it should
come to pass, that it rested not in Gods power to be able to fulfill his
promises, but in man's power. St. Augustine therefore admits of no mixture of
man's free will concurring with Gods grace, in preparing him to receive the
promise of God touching justification, as being built upon the eternal decre^
of Gods predestation, as an effect springing from the cause. And ( Epist. 107.
Vital.) The will is prepared of the Lord, says he. How? Quia praeuenit hominis
voluntatem bonam, nec came cuiusquam inuenit in cord, sed facit: For God
preuents the good will of man, nor does he find thie good will in any man's
heart, but makes it se. And the same Father in his exposition of the Epistle to
the Aug. in expos. Epist. ad Galat
Galathians upon these words, Induerunt Christum, They have put on Christ:
says thus, Filii fiunt participatione sapientiae, id praeparante atque
praestante Mediatoris fide; quam fidei gratiam nunc indumentum vocat* Vt
Christum induti sint, qui in eum crediderunt: They are made sons by the
participation of wisdom, which is prepared and performed by faith in the
Mediator; which grace of faith, he now calls a putting on. So that they have
Christ put on them, which have believed in him. Faith then so prepares, as it
also performs the work of justification: whereas Popish faith may, as they
say, prepare, and yet fail to perform. And writing to Simplicianus, he comes
directly to the point: Aug. ad Simplicianum, l. 1. q. 2. tom. 4.
Quaeritur, vtrum vel fides mereatur hominis iustificationem, an vero nec fidei
merita praecedant misericordiam Dei, sed and sides ipsa inter dona gratiae
numeretur: Misericors Deus vocat, nullis hoc vel fidei meritis largiens, quia
merita fidei sequuntur vocationem potius, quam praecedunt, It is demanded,
whether faith do merit man's justification, or else neither the merits of faith
do go before the mercy of God, but even faith it self is reckoned among the
gifts of grace: The merciful God calls, bestowing this grace, no not upon
any merits of faith, because the merits of faith rather follow vocation, than
go before it. And again in another place, Ante fidem Aug in Psalm. 118 Concio
7.
non debentur homini nisi mala pro malis; retribuit autem Deus indebitam
gratiam, bona pro malis: Before faith nothing is due to a man but evil for
evil; but God does reward a man with undeserved grace, to wit, good for evil.
Where he speaks of saving faith justifying, not of common faith preparing.
And in his one hundred and fifth Epistle to Sixtus his fellow Priest, Restat
Aug. Epist. 105. ad Sixtum Com. praesbyt.
vt gratuitum Dei donum esse fateamur, si gratiam veram, idest, sine meritis,
cogitamus: We are to confess that to be a free gift of God, if we consider
the true grace, that is, without merits. Now the true grace, is that whereby a
man is justified and saved: but this grace is a free gift without merits:
therefore no merits go before the grace of justification. And Bernard
sweetly, Bern. in Cant. ser. 17.
Non est, quo gratia intret, vbi iam meritum occupauit. Et, deest gratia,
quicquid meritis deputas: Grace has not where to enter, where merit has
already taken up the room. And, you detract from grace, whatso^uer you
attribute to merits. And again, Ergo Ibid.
iam plena confessio gratiae ipsius gratiae plenitudinem signat in anima
confitentis: Now then a plenary acknowledgement of grace, is a sign of the
fullness of grace it self in the soul of him that thus confesses it. And
thus consequently out of the Fathers we conclude, as the Catholic doctrine
of the Church in those primitive times, That there is in man no work of
preparation, whereby to merit by congruitie the grace of justification, which
is the freegift of God, without our merits. And St. August.
Augustine plainly discouers unto us the puddle whence this doctrine of merit
of congruitie first issued: namely from Pelagius, Qui cos remunerandos dicit,
qui been vtuntur libero arbitrio, and ideo mereri Domini grattam, debitum cius
reddi fatetur: who says, they are to be rewarded, which use well their free
will, and thereby merit the grace of God, which he confesses to be renared as
due to their free will. This accords with Romish School divinity, teaching,
That homini operanti secundum suam virtutem, Aqu 12. q. 114.
videtur congruum, vt Deus recompenset secundum excellentiam suae virtutis: To
a man working according to his natural power and virtue, it seems meet, that
God render a recompense according to the excellency of his virtue. Therefore
the Catholic Church of Christ, where of the Church of England is a member,
rejects this Pontifician preparation to justification, Note the practice and
common opinion of the Church of Rome in the point of merit of works: which is
nothing else but the fruit of this their doctrine, which snake like lurketh
under the green leaves of subtle hypocrisy. Bern. de gratia and libero arbit.
as a doctrine repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and to the Writings of the
Catholic Doctors and Fathers in the Primitive Church. This doctrine of Rome
tending also (howsoever they would dissemblingly disclaim it in words) to a
flat derogation from the glory of Gods grace, while it would make man an
equal sharer with God in the atchieuement of so great a work: for though they
seem to ascribe the glory to God because (say they) he stirs up the will,
whereby it begins to prepare and dispose it self to grace; yet this is
nothing else but a mocking of God. As devout Bernard speaking of this divine
stirring up of free will, says, Nefas est Deo quod minus, nobis quod
excellentius sit, attribuere, It is iniquity to attribute to God that which is
less, and to our selves that which is the more excellent. Now to stir up,
what is it else, but as it were to awaken one from sleep? The will is asleep,
and God must awaken it, before it can do any thing that is good: and being thus
awakened, it sets itself a working. As Sampson awakened by Dalilah, showed his
great strength; the glory of which action, is it to be ascribed to Dalilah for
awakening and stirring him up, or to Sampson, who being asleep, wanted nothing
but stirring up, to give him occasion to exercise his strength? Man's will
therefore being but stirred up of God, and Sampson-like doing works of
wonder, even above humane strength, and natural force, as to prepare and
dispose it self for that great work of justification, how shall it not be
honored much above God, by how much man's work herein is greater than Gods
work? The Church of Rome is very nice and strait laced, in setting out the
manner of Gods moving of man's will in the first grace, as they call it: as
fearing Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 5. and 6. What free will is left in us in
the state of corruption* Bern.
lest more glory might be given to God, than to man; for they ascribe no more
to God, but a certain stirring up, and helping of the will, whereby it should
freely dispose it self to justification. Whereas Bernard speaks home, and
like a downright honest man in this point, Facit Deus voluntarios, quatenus
dum de mala, mutat voluntatem in bonam: God makes men willing, while of evil
he changes the will into good. So it is one thing to stir up, and help;
another, to change the nature of a thing from evil to good. St. Ambrose:
Voluntas Ambros. de vocat Gentium l. 1. cap. 2.
nihil habet in suis viribus, nisi periculi facilitatem: The will has no power
at all, but a propension to peril. And St. Chrysostom, Omnes homines antequam
peccemus, liberum quidem habemus arbitrium, Chrysin Matthew. ^1. hom. 37. ^om. 2.
si volumus sequi voluntatem Diaboli, an non. Quod si semel peccantes
obligauerimus nos operibus eius, iam nostra virtute euadere non possumus. Sed
ficut Nauis, fracto gubernaculo, illuc ducitur, vbi tempestas voluerit: sic and
homo diuinae gratiae auxilio perdito per peccatum, agit, quod non vult ipse,
sed quod Diabolus vult; and nisi Deus valida manu misericordi^ soluerit eum,
vsque ad mortem in peccatorum suorum vinculis perman^bit: All men (says he)
before sin, have free will, to follow the Devils will, or not. When once by
sin we have capituated our selves to his works, we cannot now by our own
power free our selves. But as a Ship, the Rudder being broken, is carried
whither the tempest will: so man having by sin lost the help of divine
grace, does not that which himself wills, but which the Devil wills; and
unless God with a strong hand of mercy loose him, he shall abide in the
bonds of his sins even unto death. So then this strong hand is more than a
bare stirring up. St. Augustine here seems to allude to that in the Gospel:
where our Savior resembles the state of sinful man to a house, kept and
possessed by a strong man, when the will is wholly captiuated by Satan, and
cannot be freed, but by the power of Christ, a stronger than that strong man.
But the Council of Trent wants the ingenuitie to acknowledge the mighty power
of God in freeing man's captiue-wil from the tyranny of the strong Devil. Also
St. Chrysostom in the prosecution of that his former Treatise, compares man's
will before sin, to wit, in the state of innocence, to a free-people or
state, in whose power and election it is to choose what King they will; but
having once elected such a one for their King, it is not now in their power,
upon any dislike to depose him again, although he tyrannize over them never so
much: none can free them from this grievous bondage, but only God. So, it being
once in the power of man's will, in the free state of innocence, to choose a
King, God or the Devil; having once by the consent of sin made choice of the
Prince of darkness, who tyrant-like rules in the children of disobedience,
taking them captive at his will; it appertains only to the mighty power, and
infinite goodness of God to set free these miserable Captives out of that
Tyrants more than Egyptian bondage. A work no less, if not infinitely more,
miraculous, than the deliverance of those Israelites through the midst of
that Red Sea: Howsoever the Trent Fathers mince the matter, and obscure the
power of Gods mighty work in man's conversion, parting the glory of it
between man's nature, and Gods grace, as we have heard: Like the Whore that
would have the child divided, 1 Kings, 3. 26
between her self, and the true Mother. But that the glory of Gods powerful
grace in man's conversion may not lie thus smoothered under the dampe of earthy
and deep hypocrisy, let us see a little what this free will of man is in the
state of Free Will in corrupt nature
corruption. Vega highly commends that saying of Richardus, as we noted before;
Docte Richardus (inquit) Cum audis liberum arbitrium esse captiuum, nihil aliud
intellige, quam infirmum, and natiua virtutis potestate priuatum: Learnedly
said Richardus, says he: When thou hear that free will is a captive,
understand it no otherwise, than that it is weak, and deprived of the virtue of
its native power. I wot well these Pontifician spirits would gladly bring man's
free will into credit, by filing and smoothing that rougher language, which the
Fathers have left upon it. And I dare be bold herein to gratify the
Trent-Councell: Let free will in man's corrupt heart be, not captive, but only
weak, not dead, but deprived only of its primitive and native virtue; nay let
it be advanced to as high a pitch of perfection, as possible a sinful man
can reach unto; I envy it not. But at the best, when all is done, is it ever
the nearer to grace or justification? If nature have any faculty at all this
way, surely it is to be found in those men that most excel in the gifts of
nature, as in the Philosophers, the learned, the disputers of the world.
Wherefore then do not these receive the Gospel with all readiness and
freedom of will? Nay, are they not rather the further off from Christ, by how
much nature seems more excellent and perfect in them? Saint Paul makes a
challenge (1. Cor. 1. 20.) Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the
disputer of this world? Has not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishness? and verse. 21. he concludes flatly, that seeing the world by
wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. And verse. 26. Not many
wise men after the flesh are called, etc. And our Savior (Mat. 11. 25.) I
thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise, and men of understanding, and have revealed them unto babes. And
therefore hence we may conclude, That the more our nature presumes of its own
perfection, any way in disposing it self to grace, the more blind it is, and
further off from grace; though the Council of Trent accurseth those that shall
condemn natures disposing of it self to grace, Can. 7. Nay, bring me an
Angel in his pure naturals, innocent as Adam in his first creation, his will
most free, untainted, vncaptiued; yet what relation is there between him and
the word incarnate? This is a high and hidden mystery, which neither Adam in
his purest naturals, no nor Angel, but by special revelation ( Ephesians. 3. 10.)
could by their natural knowledge attain unto. As the Lord said to Peter,
Flesh and blood has not revealed Matthew. 16. 17.
this unto thee. What free will then can there be in us by nature toward that
thing, which our natural understanding is altogether ignorant of? The natural
man receives not the things 1. Cor. 2. 14.
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. Now that which the understanding
apprehends not, the will desires not: Ignoti nulla cupido. Thomas Aquinas says
well and truly: Hoc est ex institutione diuinae prouidentiae, vt nihil agat
vltra suam Aqu. 12. qu. 114 cap. 2.
virtutem. Vita autem aeterna est quoddam bonum excedens proportionem naturae
creatae, quia etiam excedit cognitionem and desiderium eius. secundum illud. 1.
Cor. 2. 9. Oculus non vidit, etc. This is of the appointment of Gods
providence, that nothing should work beyond its proper virtue. But eternal
life is a certain good, exceeding the proportion of created nature, because it
also exceeds the knowledge and desire of it. according to that, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him; for God has
revealed them unto us by his spirit, etc. And so Thomas concludes, that not
even Adam in his perfection could merit eternal life, without a supernatural
grace. And the same Aquinas; Aqu. Sum. q. 22. art. 6. cap. 1.
Ea quae sunt fidei, excedunt rationem humanam: those things which are of
faith, exceed humane reason. And a little after: Homo assentiendo his, quae
sunt fidei, eleuatur supra naturam suam, etc. A man by assenting to those
things which are of faith, is elevated above his nature: and therefore it is
necessary that faith be infused into him by a supernatural gift of God. Yea,
say the Pontificians, We ascribe the first motion of free will to the work of
a preventing grace. But by their own confession, this work of grace is no
other, but to move and stir up, and as it were, to awaken the will. Indeed,
if the Trent-Fathers would not hypocritically halt in this point, but speak
ingenuously and plainly, and say, That God by his spirit, through the preaching
of the word, does illuminate the blind understanding of the natural man (as
he did the heart of Lydia) to see the mystery of Christ, and so Acts 16. 14.
the will is inflamed to desire, and long after salvation: then we, and all
Catholic believers, would in this point give them the right hand of
fellowship. This is indeed the right and true preparation unto the grace of
justification, if not rather the true grace it self already begun in our
hearts. For this is life eternal, that they know thee, to be the only true
God, John 17. 3.
and whom thou have sent, Christ Jesus. And as the Prophet Esaias speaks. By
his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify ma^ie; Esa. ^3. 11.
for he shall bear their iniquities: which implies, that holy knowledge and
illumination is the first work of grace and justification, knowledge there
being taken for saving faith; faith being that to the soul, which the eye is
to the body: as the Lord applies it, John 3. 14. 15. Or if these
Romane-Catholicke Doctors would but use the same language, that the ancient
Fathers of the Church have used concerning free will, they should herein show
themselves honest men. Saint Augustine confesses plainly, that man by abusing
his free will, Aug Enchir. ad Laurent. tom. 3. Libero arbitrio male vtens ho^^,
and se perdidit, and ipsum. I^ech. 11. 19.
has lost both himself and it. And by this reckoning, more is required than a
bare moving, helping, or stirring up of the will, as if it were only lame,
when it is quite lost. That therefore in the Prophet must here take place: I
will take from them their stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh. The
heart in man's conversion must be new made and molded again.

But they will object, that free will by man's fall is not altogether Objection.
lost, according to that of St. Augustine: Peccate Ad^ liberum arbitrium de
hominum natura perisse non dicimus; We do Aug. contra duas epist. Pelag. ad
Bonif. ^^^. 2.
not say, says he, that by the sin of Adam man's nature is deprived of
free will, or that free will is perished. But note what St. Augustine there
adds; Sed ad peccandum valere in hominibus, subditis Diabolo: ad been autem
pieque viuendum non valere; nisi ipsa voluntas hominis Dei gratia fuerit
liberata, and ad omne bonum actionis, sermonis, cogitationis adiuta: But we
say (says he) that free will in men subject to Satan, prevails to the
committing of sin: but to good and godly living it is of no force, unless
man's will be freed by Gods grace, and assisted unto every good work, and word,
and thought. And in his book de gratia and libero arbitrio, ca. 17. he says:
He works first that we may will, who when we do will does perfect us by
cooperating: that therefore we may will, he works without us; but when we are
willing, and servile, that we may perform, he cooperates with us. And c. 16.
upon Phil. 2. Deus est qui operatur in vobis, etc. Certum est nos facere, cum
facimus, sed ille facit vt faciamus, praebendo vires efficacissimas voluntati.
And Epist. 107 to Vitalis Carthaginen. upon that of the Apostle, Phil. 2. God
works in us, even to will: he says; Vera Dei gratia praevenit hominis
voluntatem bonam, nec eam cuiusquaminuenit in cord, sed facit: The true grace
of God preuenteth man's good will, neither finds he it in any man's heart, but
makes it good. Whereupon, in his second book against Julian the Pelagian, he
calls it, Seruum arbitrium; saying: Hic vultis hominem perfici, atque vtiuam
Dei dono, and non libero, vel potius seruo propriae voluntatis arbitrio; You
would have a man perfected, and I would it were by the gift of God, and not by
the free, or rather servile arbitrament of his own will. Thus according to St.
Augustine, man's liberum arbitrium is by Adams fall, turned into seruum
arbitrium, serving only to sin; and to turn it to good, it must not only
be moved, stirred, or helped, but freed by Gods grace: which is a work of
power, in disarming the strong man. And what this grace is, has been showed
before, to wit, Gods saving grace; The true grace of God, says Augustine, not a
common grace. Devout Bernard understands by free will, a mere Bern. de gratia
and libero arbitrio.
will in man without respect to the object, good or evil, Velle inest nobis ex
libero arbitrio, non etiam posse quod volumus. Non dico, velle bonum, aut velle
malum: sed tantum velle; To will is in us proceeding from free will, but not to
perform what we will. I say not, to will good, or to will evil, but only to
will. And again; Corruit homo de posse non peccare, in non posse non peccare,
amissa ex toto complaciti liberate: Man fell from a possibility not to sin,
to an impossibility of not sinning, having altogether lost the liberty of
delight* Per propriam quippe voluntatem ser^^^ peccati factus, merito perdidit
libertatem confilij: for by his own proper will being made the servant of
sin, he has deservedly lost the liberty of his election or counsel. Now
how shall all this be repaired again? The same Bernard resolves it: Velle
homini vt esset, creans gratia fecit; vt proficiat, saluans gratia facit: vt
deficiat, ipsum se deijcit: That man should have a will, is from creating
grace; that this will should profit, is from saving grace: that it should
decay, i^ of its own voluntary defection. It is therefore a work, not of
common grace, as they understand by the first grace, whereby they say the will
is moved: but of effectual saving grace, to restore the will of man, and fit
it for Christ. Habet igitur homo necessariam Dei virtutem, and Dei sapientiam
Christum, qui ex eo quod sapientia est, verum ei sapere re-infundat, in
restaurationem liberi consilij: and ex eo quod virtus est, plenum posse
restituat in reparationem liberi complaciti; Man therefore has the necessary
virtue of God, and wisdom of God, which is Christ, who as he is wisdom,
does re-infuse wisdom to know the truth, to the restoration of the freedom
of election; and as he is virtue, does restore a full power to the reparation
of the freedom of delight and happiness: which (says he) is begun here in
grace, and consummate hereafter in glory. And again concerning free will, he
says; Nemo putet ideo dictum liberum arbitrium, quod aequa inter bonum aut
malum potestate aus facultate versetur, cum cadere per se quidem potuerit, non
autem resurgere, nisi per Domini spiritum. Ergo si a Domini What Free Will is.
spiritu, iam non a libero arbitrio. Let no man think, that free will is
therefore so called, as having an equal and indifferent power or faculty
between good and evil, seeing it could fall by it self, but not ^ise again
but by the spirit of the Lord. And if it be by the spirit of the Lord, it is
not now of free will. And St. Augustine tells us plainly what that grace is,
whereby the will is freed; to wit: Gratia Dei per Iesum Christum Domin^m
nostrum, in qua nos su^, Aug. de peccat. orig. contra Pelag. and Celest. lib.
2. tom. 7.
non nostra iustitia instos facit, etc. That grace, whereby the will is freed,
is the grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord, wherein he makes us just by his
own, not by our righteousness, etc.

But, says the carnal mind, If man have not free will to Object.
accept grace offered, what cause has God to complain, or to condemn man for
that, which is not in his power to perform? I might answer with the Apostle; O
vain man, who art thou that reply against God? But I answer again, Though
man have no will of himself to receive grace offered; yet he has a will to
reject grace offered, for which he is justly condemned. So that man's corrupt
will is sufficient to convict him, though no way able to convert him, after
that manner which Pontificians teach. And thus God needs not man's carnal
wit, to plead for the equity of his justice; since God does not simply condemn
men for that, which by nature they are inuincibly unable to perform, as by the
virtue of free will to receive grace offered; but for that, which is in their
power and will to do: namely, when they not only not willingly receive, but
wilfully and contemptuously reject and put from them, the grace of God offered
them in the Gospel. And justly do all such obiecters come within the compass
of Jobs censure, Job 13. 7. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? etc. As Saint Hierome; Concede Deo Hier. ad Ctesiphon.
epist. 13. part. 1. tract. 2.
potentiam sui, nequaquam te indiget defensore: Let God be Master of himself,
he needs not thee to plead for him.

Now by the former testimonies, as by a cloud of witnesses, the Church of Rome
is sufficiently convicted of gross absurdity, and of grievous impiety in her
doctrine of preparation to justification: wherein her Gordian knot of manifold
errors (while the Romish Harlot would have the living child divided between
her and the true Mother, Gods grace) is cut asunder, and dissolved by the
sharp sword of Salomons wisdom. First, because the work of preparation,
Reasons overthrowing Popish preparation.
is rather the work of justification it self, and that so soon as the
understanding is enlightened, and the will inflamed to apprehend Christ by
faith. Secondly, because that grace of God, whereby the will of man is prepared
to justification (as they say) is no common grace, received as well by the
reprobate, as the elect: but the saving and justifying grace of God, which
whosoever receives, is more truly said to be already actually justified, than
disposed and prepared thereunto. Thirdly, because the work of Gods grace in
moving the understanding, and the will to embrace Christ, is no weak and
common work, but a work of power, in loosing the works of the Devil, that
strong Ioh. 3. 8. Luke 11. 20. 21
man. Fourthly, because man's will does not cooperate with Gods grace, as a
co-agent and fellow-worker, in the first act of man's conversion; but Gods grace
is the Agent, and man's will is the Patient; that effectually calls, and we
effectuously come; that strongly draws us, and we, by the virtue thereof,
sweetly, not compulsarily, freely, not frowardly, and not now passiuely, but
actiuely, do run after Christ: as St. Cant. 1. 4. Aug de spiritu and litera
ad Marcellinum. tom. 3. Ipsum velle credere, Deus operatur in homine, and in
omnibus misericordia eius praeuenit nos. And Tract. 26. in Ioh. 5. tom. 9. Si
trahimur ad Christum, ergo inuiti credimus. At credere nemo potest, nisi
vol^ns. And, Ille quippe trahitur ad Christum, cui datur, vt credat in
Christum. Aug. contra duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonif. l. 1. Ier. 31. 18. 19.
Augustine says, The will to believe, God works in man, and in all his
mercy preuenteth us. And again, If we be drawn to Christ, then we believe
unwillingly. But none can believe, unless he be wiiling: for he is drawn to
Christ, to whom it is given to believe in Christ. He is the mighty Agent in
converting us: and we thereby become meek Patients in being converted. Turn
thou me, says chastised Ephraim, and I shall be turned: Thou art the Lord my
God. Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh, etc. And it is a thing not unworthy the
observation, that even in their vulgar Latin Translation (which they prefer
before all others, yea before the originals themselves) wheresoever any is
exhorted to conversion to God, the Verb is always put in the passive
signification, as Conuertere, or Conuertimini, Be thou Converted, or be ye
Converted: and never in the active, Convert te, or Conuertite vos, Convert
thou, or Convert you your selves: which might sufficiently convince all
Pontificians, that the work of our conversion, is not a matter of cooperation,
shared between man's will and Gods grace, but passive in us, and active in God.
He conuerteth by his grace, and we are thereby willingly converted. Contrary
to the Trent Doctrine, saying, That a man is disposed by grace to convert
himself. Fifthly, because the whole glory of our conversion to Christ, is to
be ascribed to Gods grace alone, not as the Trent Fathers profess in a few
Hypocritical words, while they deny it in the maine dint of their doctrine:
but in sincerity and truth, without equivocation of any merit of congruitie in
us, preparing and disposing us to be capable of justification. Finally, because
they rank faith among those other works of preparation, as if it had no other
hand in the work of justification, but only as a disposing cause. So as a man
may have faith before he come to be justified, yea and such a faith also, as a
man may have it, and yet never attain to justification. Contrary to St.
Augustine, Iustificatio ex fide incipit, Justification begins at faith: as
hereafter more fully. For these causes the Catholic faith abhors the
Romane-Catholicke-doctrine, touching their preparation to justification.

But say some (who may claim kindred either with Pelagians Object.
or Pontificians) although the merit of congruitie be not admitted as an
inducement to justification, yet there are some works required of us, as
matter of preparation to faith in Christ, which though it be not meritorious,
yet it is acceptable to God. For example, Repentance is a work necessarily
proceeding, and so preparing a man to faith in Christ: which Repentance being
in us, before faith in Christ, it is notwithstanding acceptable to God.

Indeed I deny not but the Pontifician forge can afford Ans.
us such scoria enough. But what Repentance is this? A true Repentance, say
they. It had need, if it be acceptable to God. Wherein consists it? It is
(say they) a sorrow for sin past, and a purpose of amendment for the time to
come. But is this sufficient to true Repentance? Yes (say they) Ahab, and the
Nineuites repented: and was not their Repentance true, since God accepted it,
and thereupon revoked, or at least reiourned the sentence denounced? Indeed
Ahabs Repentance was a true hypocritical Repentance: so the Nineuites
Repentance was a true carnal Repentance, as the faith of devils is said to be
a true faith, which the Pontificians challenge for their only true faith. Is
this true faith therefore acceptable to God? But was the Repentance of Ahab and
of the Nineuites acceptable to God, because God for the present forbore to
punish them? It follows not, because God forbear them, that therefore their
Repentance was acceptable to him. For how can the action be acceptable, when
the person is not? But their persons were not acceptable to God. For Ahab was a
damned Idolater, and a most wretched wicked person, who had sold himself to
the devil: and the Nineuites were heathenish infidels, out of Christ. But till
we be in Christ, our persons are not accepted of God: for in him only God is
well pleased. And before faith in Christ, we are not in Christ; therefore
before faith in Christ, no action of ours is acceptable to God, yea no way
acceptable: not only as these would have it, not acceptable to salvation (as
such obiecters themselves confess) but not acceptable toward it, as these
affirm. For while we are out of Christ, all our actions are abominable before
God, much less acceptable to him. And so much the more abominable they be,
and so much the less acceptable, by how much the more we esteem them
acceptable, or endeavor to please God by them. As God himself says, Matthew.
3, 17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. With whom is God
well pleased in his Beloved? The Apostle applies it, Ephesians. 1. 6: To the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved. Therefore no acceptance with God, but of those that are actually in
the Beloved, to wit, in his son Jesus Christ. Nor do we fear ^rents Canon
here, thundering out her Anathema Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 7.
to any that shall say, that all works done before grace are sins; or, that
the more a man endeavors to please God, before faith in Christ, the more
deeply he endangereth himself to Gods high displeasure: for we affirm this
again and again, That all works done before faith in Christ, the more we
think therein to please God, the more damnable they be, because herein we set
up an Idol of our handiwork, in stead of Christ, whereby to please God.

Much less (as some have dared to vent, that before saving faith in Christ,
there may be, and before begun in a man's heart (by the means of preparatory
graces, as repentance, and the like) the work of sanctification, of
regeneration, of cleansing of the heart, etc. Than which doctrine, what can be
more derogatory to Christ? And what more contrary to the Scriptures; which say,
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature? therefore out of Christ, no new
creature; no not inchoatiue in the least degree. For if regeneration, or
sanctification, or newness of life, or cleansing of the heart, may be begun
without Christ, what hinders, that it may not be also perfected without
Christ? Nay, if regeneration be but begun, then there is a child of God at
least newly conceived, if not newly borne and brought forth. Such conception,
is a false conception of wind; not of Gods spirit, but of man's spirit: so that
if such prove all abortiues and dead borne, it is no marvel. But the sons of
God we cannot be, till we be in Christ; which is, till we believe in Christ: as
Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ; therefore
before this faith in Jesus Christ, we are not the children of God, no not so
much as the Embrio in the first conception. But the new creature must be in
Christ Jesus, as the Apostle says, Gal. 6. 15. So when Christ himself speaks
of regeneration to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. instructing him therein how it is begun
in a man, he tells him in the continuation of his speech, that this appertains
to those that believe in the son of man, verse. 15. and verse. 16. For a man to
be regenerate, or made the son of God by adoption, he must be in the son of God
by believing in him. Where Christ also opposing faith to unbelief, says;
those are condemned already, that believe not, having no part in the
regeneration: therefore before faith in Christ, no regeneration at all, no
cleansing, no sanctification, but all condemnation. Again, Christ is made unto
us sanctification, 1. Cor. 1. 30. unto us, in him. Of him are ye in Christ
Jesus: therefore while out of Christ, no sanctification. So the adoption of
children is by Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1. 5. therefore no sons, no regeneration, but
in Jesus Christ. Likewise, Ioh. 15. 2. Every branch in me that bears not
fruit, he takes away. So verse. 4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it
self, except it abide in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me: ^or
without me ye can do nothing. Therefore while a man is out of Christ, until
by faith he be ingrafted into Christ, the true Vine, from whom he receives
the lively sap of a new life, he can do nothing; nothing that is good,
nothing that is acceptable to God; no work of new obedience or sanctification.

But some may say, Regeneration is wrought by the Spirit Objection.
of God in us; and so may be before faith in Christ: and consequently, before
we come to be actually in Christ. To which I answer: True it is, that the Holy
Ghost is the immediate efficient cause of our regeneration. But how does he
work regeneration in us? namely, by working in us faith in Christ, which faith
is the very immediate instrument, whereby the Holy Ghost does regenerate,
sanctify, and cleanse us: since the Holy Ghost by this faith ingrafteth and
unites us into Christ, in whom we are regenerate, and made the sons of God.
Now that faith is the instrument of our regeneration and sanctification, it is
evident, Acts 15. 9. and 26. 18. So that the very first and prime act of Gods
sanctifying spirit in us, is to work faith in us; by which faith in Christ, as
by a noble instrument, the Holy Ghost uniting vsto Christ, as members to the
head, does regenerate us, and so makes us the adopted sons of God. And before
faith in Christ, we cannot say, we have Gods sanctifying spirit in us; I say,
in regard of prioritie of time: For this sanctifying spirit, in the same moment
that he sanctifies us, he works faith in Christ in us, by which he regenerates
and sanctifies us.

But they re-ioyne by a distinction; and say, that this repentance Objection.
which prepares the way to faith, and lays the foundation of regeneration, is
not acceptable to salvation: but only to fit and prepare us thereunto, and to
make us the more capable of it. In this distinction they do much please
themselves; Answ.
but they confound themselves in their distinction: For they affirm again,
that this precedent repentance of theirs, is regeneration, and sanctification,
and newness of life inchoatiue, begun at least in part. A bold assertion. Is
it regeneration begun and in part? and being acceptable, is it not acceptable
to salvation? Is not regeneration a work of our salvation? And though
regeneration should be begun in this repentance, in never so small a degree, a
work it is of our salvation, if it be true regeneration. Logicians know, that
Magis and minus non variant speciem. A man in the first conception is a man,
though imperfect, and inchoatiue.

But they reply again, That they do not say, this preuious repentance Object.
is acceptable to salvation of it self; but as it has relation to faith
coming after, whereby it becomes acceptable. A pretty shift. And yet they say
again, That repentance goes before faith, not in the precedence of time, but
in nature only, and in the order of causes. Now if this repentance go before
faith in the order of causes, then repentance must cause says; and so this
absurdity will follow, That the effect must give a form and being, at least a
well being, unto the cause; if so be faith, the effect and consequent of
repentance, as they say, make the same acceptable.

But how do they prove, that this their repentance goes before faith in Christ
in nature, and in the order of causes? They prove it out of Matthew. 21. 32.
where Christ taxing the infidelity of the Pharisees, wherein they came behind
the very Publicans, faith; John came to you in the way of righteousness, and
ye believed him not: but the Publicans and the Harlots believed him; and ye
when ye had seen it; repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. Hence
they conclude, That repentance must go before faith, as the cause of it;
alleging Christ's words thus: Ye repented not, that ye might believe; But
leaving out him; That ye might believe Him, to wit, John Baptist, as it is in
the text; which implies what kind of faith Christ there means, to wit, an
assent to the truth of John's doctrine: The place thereby comes to be
preuerted. For, Credere (...) ei, is the faith of assent: but Credere in cum,
that is, in Christum, is the justifying faith. So that by that place alleged,
if repentance goes before faith in the order of causes, then certainly that
repentance is the cause of no other faith, but the faith of assent, there
spoken of; which is not all one faith with the justifying faith. But they which
affirm thus, yet confess, that repentance does not go before the faith of
assent, which they term also the Euangelical faith; but that its an effect and
consequent thereof. And here by the way I might take just occasion, to show the
absurdity of those, that distinguish between Evangelical faith, and the faith
of Christ; as if Evangelical faith were only a general assent to the truth
of the Gospel; whereas a general assent, and Evangelical faith, are as
different as this and the faith of Christ are all one: for Evangelical faith
looks upon the Gospel, not only as a true history, but as the mystery of
God in Christ; it embraces it as the Gospel, preaching Christ the Savior,
yea preaching Christ to every believer of this Gospel in particular. As Luke
2. 10. 11. The Angels said to the Shepherds, ^eare not, for behold, I bring
You good tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people; For unto You is
born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Note,
here is the Gospel preached; to who? I bring You good tidings. And what is the
tidings? To you is borne this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Here we
have an exact sum of the Gospel, which is Christ the Savior borne to us.
Now to believe this Gospel, is an Evangelical faith: but such, as cannot
divide between the Gospel and Christ, and such also, as must needs apprehend
and apply Christ, by believing in him. For, To You is borne this day a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. To You: this is a necessary relative, part
of the Gospel; for Euangelium, or good tidings, imply not only the party
sending, but also the party or parties to whom it is sent.

So that the faith of the Gospel, must so believe the truth of the Gospel, as
that it leave out no part of it. But one part of it is, that this Gospel is
sent to You; that is, to all believers. For as much as the Gospel contains
the covenant of grace between God and us: God and man being the parties
interessed in this Covenant, mutually in Christ the Mediator. Therefore the
Evangelical faith, is not a bare general assent to the truth of the Gospel,
but a particular affiance in Christ, the sum of the Gospel: and so it
apprehends and applies this good tidings, which is to believe the Gospel
indeed. For that general faith which they call an assent, when it goes no
further, it makes no difference between the Gospel and the Law, and other
parts of the word of God: but believes them all indifferently, as a true
history, when it is called an historical faith. But when faith comes to put a
difference, pitching upon the special object, the Gospel; and (...) this
faith becomes an Euangelical faith: then it is so the faith of the Gospel, as
it is also necessarily the special faith of Christ, whom it apprehends and
lays hold upon: unless a man can so divide between Christ and the Gospel, as
the Gospel may be Gospel without Christ; or so divide the Gospel from it self,
as that we may believe it to be good tidings, and not to us in particular:
Whereas the belief of the Gospel consists, in the apprehending, and certain
applying of the good tidings thereof unto us; To You is born this day a Savior:
to You is this word of salvation sent. This is the Gospel; and this is to
believe the Gospel, by applying it to us, to whom it is sent. If we do not
believe it sent to us, we do not believe the Gospel; for it is so far a
Gospel or good tidings to us, as we believe it to be sent to us in particular.
Nor is this faith of the Gospel, a certain or rather uncertain swimming in
the brain, that perhaps, or probably, or possibly, God may be merciful unto us
in Christ: A doctrine bred of the spawne of Trent. This is a wandering
imagination, hatched in man's brain, having no ground of truth, or agreement
with the faith of the Gospel. Thus we see, if Evangelical faith be none other
but the faith of Christ, and in Christ, as we have sufficiently proved: then it
follows that the distinction between Evangelical faith, and faith in
Christ, being unsound and groundless, the whole doctrine of the precedence of
repentance before faith in Christ, as a necessary and acceptable preparatiue
thereunto, does even mole sua, of it self fall to the ground. For the authors
of such a doctrine must needs confess, if they will be guided by reason, that
there is no repentance but faith must go before it, for to cause it; as either
Legal faith must go before it to cause Legal repentance, or Euangelical faith
must go before to cause Evangelical repentance* Now if there be no
Evangelical faith to go before, and cause Evangelical repentance, but the
faith of Christ; then in vain is any repentance devised, to go before and
cause faith in Christ. This Eagle-eyed faith of Christ has no sooner glanced
upon the Sun of Righteousness, but instantly by the force thereof, a dreery
cloud being raised, causes a gracious, but sad shower of repentance, to
descend from those windows and floud-gates of the now heavenly Soul, to
refresh the poor sinner, now hungring and thirsting after the living waters.
They say also, that the faith, to wit, Evangelical faith, which is the cause
of their Repentance, going before, and causing the faith of Christ, is a
general assent, or a general faith of the truth of the Gospel. But how can
this general assent beget in me a particular Repentance, unless with this
assent I have also a particular affiance in the promise of the Gospel of
Christ, applying it to my self? The Gospel says, To you is borne a Savior,
Christ the Lord. I believe this to be true. But how shall this belief move me
to Repentance, unless I believe that this Savior is borne to me in
particular? Ahab had not so easily repented, if Gods judgments being laid
never so close to him, he had not believed the truth of them in particular
toward himself. So the Nineuites. For particular Repentance in every man must
arise from a particular apprehension and application of the Word of God toward
himself. As for their reasons forcing Repentance to go before Faith in
Christ, they are very poor and beggarly; as that otherwise, it leads me to
presumption. A very frivolous and false surmise. For saving Faith does no
sooner lay hold on Christ with the one hand, but withal it lays the other
hand upon the sinner, the subject wherein it is arraigning him at Gods
Tribunal, judging, condemning him for that sinner, whom Christ came to save.
Faith does no sooner look on Christ with the right eye, but it presently
reflects on the sinner with the left eye. The reason is, because it is
impossible I should believe Christ, to be my Savior, but withal I must
believe and acknowledge my self to be the sinner; which I cannot truly do,
but it will necessarily breed in me that Repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of. For, a Savior and a wretched sinner are relatiues, which not even
the thought of man can divide, or sunder one from another. And so here their
reason, why such Repentance must needs go before faith, is found faulty;
which is (say they) because if Repentance went not before faith in Christ, then
faith in Christ would prove to be presumption. Therefore we have showed, that
in true faith in Chrst there is always true Repentance, as the prime and
immediate fruit of Faith. So that rather the novel doctrine of such men is a
high pride and presumption, carrying others also to the top of the same
pinnacle, by persuading them, that they have true Repentance before faith in
Christ, by which they are (at least) in part regenerate, sanctified and
cleansed,

Object. But is there no preparation unto the receiving of grace and
justification? Is not (at the least) the hearing of the Word a work of
preparation to grace?

Answ. True it is, that faith, saving and justifying faith, comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10. 17. So that the hearing of the Word of
God is the ordinary means to beget saving Faith and Grace in us.

Object. But hearing of the Word is in our own power, and hearing of the Word
is a preparation unto Grace; therefore it is in our own power to prepare our
selves unto grace.

Answ. To hear is in our own power: but hearing of the Word is not simply a
preparatiue unto grace, but rather an external means thereunto. For unless
God do give aspeciall blessing to the outward means of hearing the Word, in
opening our hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, we hear the word but as a
sound, or as a strange history, or parable, and as a deep mystery hidden
from us. The Jews did hear Christ's Oracles, and see his Miracles, yet for all
that were they no better than deaf and blind men. God must open the heart to
understand, and to apprehend by Faith the mystery of Christ preached, else
Paul may plant, and Apollos water in vain.

Object. To what purpose then is it for any to come to hear the Word of God,
if thereby he be not the better fitted and disposed to receive grace?

Answ. Although God be the only author and actor of working grace in us, yet
for as much as he does this by the Ministry of his Word, which he has
appointed as the ordinary means to beget faith and all other saving graces in
us, therefore it is our part and duty to attend upon, and use the means,
waiting for Gods blessing upon it. So that all the work of preparation to
grace on our part is without us, not within us, namely, the hearing of the Word
preached, and Gods special blessing upon it.

Object. But it is in our free will and choice to hear the Word of God, or not
to hear it: and therefore something is to be ascribed to free will, in setting
us (at least) in the way to justification.

Answ. It is no otherwise in our free will and choice before our conversion, to
hear Gods Word, than to hear any humane history propounded unto us. For
before our understanding be by faith illuminated to apprehend and apply Christ
unto our selves, and to know him to be our Savior in particular, we have no
will to hear the Word as the Word of God, which is able to save our souls,
but rather as the word of man.

Object. But does not a man understand the Word preached, unless first his
understanding be illuminated by Faith?

Answ. A natural man may by hearing come to have a general understanding of
the Word of God, as a true history; but before he be endued with saving faith
from God, his understanding is not illuminated to know God in Christ to be his
Father, and Christ to be his Redeemer; which is the sum of the Gospel and
the seal which we set upon the truth of God therein. John 3 33.

Object. But John Baptist was sent to prepare the way of the Lord.

Answ. The Ministry of John was to teach men to believe in Christ, pointing
at him that was to come. So that by his Ministry, men believing and being
baptized into Christ, they might thereby be said to be prepared to a more
plentiful measure of receiving Christ, and his Spirit, as afterward they did,
having the first seeds of Faith already sown in their hearts.

Object. But another objects: before true conversion a man must renounce the
first covenant, become humble, confess his unworthiness, his hardness of
heart, his natural disabilitie toward his own salvation; he must fear God,
love God, and the like, or else a man is incapable of, and indisposed to
receive the grace of conversion.

Answ. Indeed a fellow-minister of the Gospel was very earnest on a time in
defending of this. He desired me to resolve him in it by writing, as being a
matter of maine consequence, and a maine ground wherewith many other opinions,
on foot in these days, would stand or fall. Now I could have wished to have
heard his reasons of that his objection, but time at least permitted not.
Therefore my answer shall be short, as also in respect of all that before said.
First then, for a man to renounce the first covenant, to become humble, etc. I
say, no man can do it, till he be in Christ. My reason is, because till a man
be in Christ, he is dead, blind, proud, hardhearted, without the fear of God,
without the love of God. Every man is actually either the child of wrath, in
the state of sin, and death; or the child of God, in the state of grace and
life. There is no term between these two. There is no term or medium
between a man living and dead, but the very instant of his souls departing
from the body, which is in the twinkling of an eye. No more term or medium
is there between a man dead in sin, and living by grace, but the very
instant of his conversion. For every man (I say) is either a dead man in the
state of sin, or a living man in the state of grace: a third term cannot
come between. Now while a man is in the state of sin, he is dead. If dead,
he understands nothing that savors of grace, nor has he any disposition or
affection in him thereunto. While he is under the dominion of sin, he is
nothing but mere enmity and rebellion against God and his Grace; as the
Apostle says, (...) etc.
Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh, or, To be carnally minded, is enmity
against God. This is the state of a man unregenerate, unconverted. Being thus,
he is proud, senseless of his hardness of heart, senseless of any natural
disabilitie toward his own salvation, without love, without fear of God, as
Romans 3. He is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.
He is so far from renouncing the first covenant of works, that before his
conversion, the more moral virtues (which Saint Augustine calls but splendida
peccata) either the frame of his natural and corporal constitution, or of his
more liberal education has adorned him with; the more is he apt to rely
upon the first covenant, trusting to be saved by his good works. But I say
again, that when I see in a man these things, that he renounceth the first
covenant, that he is humble, that he confesses his unworthiness, that he
complains of the hardness of his heart, that he renounceth himself, and his
own abilities toward his own salvation, and the like: these are the signs
and fruits of a true Convert, say I. No, say you. The matter now standing
between your No, and my Yea: who shall be the vmpire? Nay, let us decide it
between us by the rule of Gods word. Either make the tree good, and the fruit
good, or else the tree evil, and the fruit evil: says Christ. An evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit, and contra. Now a man before his effectual
conversion, before he be in Christ, is an evil tree; and therefore cannot
bring forth any fruit of true grace or virtue. But if a man begin once to bring
forth such fruits, show me, if you can, any reason, why such a man is not
already a true Convert? For ought you know, having these signs and symptoms
of true conversion, he is a true Convert. Nay, that he is without question a
true Convert, I prove by two reasons. First, because till a man be a true
Convert, he cannot be truly humble; he cannot truly renounce himself, his
sins, confess his unworthiness, feel the hardness of his heart, to
complain of it, and the like. Secondly, because all these things are common
and proper to the regenerate man. Both these together I prove thus. 1. No dead
man can perform the works of a living man; but these forementioned be the
works of a living man: therefore no dead man, therefore no man, before his
conversion, can perform such works.

But you will say, these things are not so the works of a Object.
man converted, but that also, as moral works, they may be performed of a
moral or natural man before his conversion.

To which I answer, that all these things are not of a moral, Ans.
but of a spiritual nature, and are the proper gifts of the spirit of grace,
which no natural man has, till he become spiritual; which is by conversion,
when he receives spiritual life. God gives grace to the humble, but first he
gives grace to be humble. God gives more grace, says St. James: and what
follows? He gives grace to the humble; that is, more grace James 4. 6.
to him, whom first he has made humble by grace. This humility comes only from
Christ, to those that are in Christ. True humility, St. Augustines compares to
the water of life and of grace, which flows from the inward fountain of the
pure vein of truth. This is the water of confession of sins, this the water
of humiliation of the heart, this the water of saving life, of him that casts
down himself, that presumes nothing of himself, that proudly attributes
nothing to his own power. This water is in no Forreiners books; not in the
Epicures, not in the Stoickes, not in the Manichees, not in the Platonicks.
Wheresoever other precepts of manners and discipline are found, yet this
humility is not found. The way of this humility flows from no where else, it
comes from Christ, etc. So Augustine. This Humility is the Herbe-grace, and
grows no where but in the garden of grace, even the heart of the true Convert.
It grows not in the whole field of nature, though never so well tilled with
the doctrine of Philosophy. And for hardness of heart, it is in every
impenitent man: but when once it comes to be felt, and to be mourned for, this
is the proper effect of a man renewed by grace, whose not only understanding is
enlightened to see, but his will and affections touched with a godly sense and
feeling of his spiritual miseries, which a dead man cannot do. Now till a man
be in Christ by faith, he is a dead man. Except ye eat the flesh of the son
of man, and drink his blood; that is, Except ye believe in the son of man, ye
have no life in you. Ioh. 6. 53. And, says the Apostle; Now I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me; and in that I now live, I live by the faith of the
son of God, etc. Gal. 2. 20. Now a dead man knows not that he is dead: but
when he is restored to life, he then knows that he was dead. So a man till he
be in Christ, that is, truly converted, he is dead, and knows it not, much
less can bewail, or so much as see and feel his spiritual death; but being
in Christ, and so made alive, he knows then that he was a dead man, and
feeling some relics of spiritual mortality in him, as corruption of sin,
hardness of heart, and the like; he is truly humbled for it, he heartily
bewailes and confesses it, and prays against it: which humility, which
bewayling and confessing of his spiritual misery, is no less an infallible
sign of a man restored from spiritual death to spiritual life by Christ,
than the seven times neezing of the widows son, was a true token of his
restitution ^. Kin. 4. 35.
from death to life again.

But as the clause comes in but obiter, so let it suffice, to have touched it
by the way. And this I have said, I am sure will stand good, till any shall be
able to prove, That a man does spiritually live, before he be in Christ, before
he be a true Convert.

CHAP. IV. The Romish Doctrine of the Justification of a sinner, what it is,
and wherein it consists.
NOw after all this ado about preparation to justification, which the more
they magnify, the further off they are from attaining unto it: what is that
justification which the Romish Church stands upon? Let us see if it be worth
all that labor and merit, whereby they must come by it. The foolish Virgins,
while they went to bestow their pains and cost Matthew. 25.
to prepare oil for their empty Lamps, to meet the Bridegroom, lost all
their pains and expense: for when they Oleum and opera perdiderunt.
came, Heaven gate was shut against them. The Romish Virgins (for such they
would be accounted) wanting oil in their Lamps; to wit, the pure oyle-oliffe
of grace, distilling from the true Oliffe Tree, Jesus Christ, while they go
about to Romans 11. 24.
prepare artificial oil made by humane invention, they may justly fear, to
find the gate of righteousness and mercy barred up against them. If they
prove not rather like the men of Sodom, who pressing upon righteous Lot, to
surprise even his Genesis 19. 11. Reu. 11. 8.
Angel-guests, were struck with blindness, that they could not find the
right door, where they would have entered. So these, seeking to enter the gate
of the righteous, as if they would surprise Heaven, the lodging of Angels, by a
strange and new invented violence; it will prove a matter of high admiration,
if ever by their new way of preparation, choked with so many mists of foggie
errors, and blind inventions, they hit upon the gate of justification, and so
come promiscuously to join themselves to the sacred society of righteous
Angels. But now let their justification speak, and justify it self.

The Council of Trent in the seventh Chapter says thus: Hanc dispositionem
seu praeparationem, iustificatio ipsa consequitur; Council. Trid. Ses. 6. cap. 7.
quae non est sola peccatorum remissio, sed and sanctificatio, and renouatio
interioris hominis, per voluntariam susceptionem gratiae and donorum: Vnde homo
ex iniusto, fit iustus, and ex inimico, amicus; ve sit haeres, secundum spem
vitae aeternae: After this disposition or preparation, does follow
justification it self; which is not only the remission of sins, but also
sanctification, and renouation of the inner man, by a voluntary receiving of
grace and of gifts: Whence a man of unjust, is made just, and of an enemy, a
friend; that he may be an heir, according to the hope of eternal life. To
which also agrees the eleventh Canon of this Session. Si quis dixerit, homines
iustificari vel sola imputatione iustitiae Christi, vel sola peccatorum
remissione, exclusa gratia and charitate, quae in cordibus eorum per Spiritum
sanctum diffundatur, atque illis inhaereat; aut etiam gratiam, qua
iustificamur, esse tantum fauorem Dei: anathema sit: If any man shall say, that
men are justified either by the only imputation of Christ's righteousness, or
by the only remission of sins, excluding grace and charity, which is shed
abroad in their hearts by the holy Ghost, and is inherent in them; or else,
that the grace whereby we are justified, is only the favor of God: Let him be
Anathema.

In these words of the Council, is infolded the very mystery of iniquity; For
their justification is composed partly of remission of sins, and partly, yea
principally, of What they mean by sanctification and renouation, may be seen
chap. 13. to wit, pilgrimage, vigils, alms (specially to the Friars) Pater
nosters, Auemaries, oblations, fastings, vows of chastity, etc. also
sacramental confession, and satisfactions. chap. 14.
sanctification (as they call it) and renouation of the inner man; and to this
is added man's free will. And thus their unjust man is made just. Note also how
in the Canon, they name the imputation of Christ's righteousness, as one of the
ingredients, in this composition of justification. But the plain truth is,
this imputation they quite shut out from having any thing to do with their
justification; as this very term of imputation had no good entertainment in
the Hist. Council. Trid. Soto de not. and great. lib. 2. c. 20.
Council. And note again, how they deny the grace of justification to be the
only favor of God, reserving a room for man's merit: contrary to that of the
Apostle, Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

Now by the way, let us see what the Pontificians mean by Imputation. For this
purpose I will insert here a saying of Pighius (though otherwise a Pontifician
writer) which Soto answers, and labors to clear from suspicion of
heresy. Pighius having considered sundry places of Scripture, as in the
Psalms, and Job, etc. that the Saints of God dare not bring their own inherent
righteousness, to the strict trial of Gods judgment: Ex his confecit
Pighius, etc. (says Soto) Pighius thence concludes, That our inherent
righteousness, if it be strictly examined by the divine rule, is not perfect;
but we are justified rather by that righteousness of Christ imputed unto us.
Which he exemplifieth: that as Jacob, hid under the habit of his elder brother,
the true firstborne, received his fathers blessing; so we receive glory under
another person, to wit, Christ. Now how does Soto, with all his subtilty,
acquit his Pighius from being an heretic in so saying? Haes omnia (says he)
all these things, by one word of equivocation, are detorted to a finister
sense. Who can ever doubt, but that we, the sons of Adam, which by our own
nature and ability can bring no merits or worthiness into Gods presence, can
pretend or cover our faults with the only righteousness of Christ, in whose
right we are sons and heirs of the Kingdom? But when we say, Christ's, the
genetiue case, we do not mean the subject of inherency; that the sense
should be, The righteousness which is in Christ (as the heretics grossly
err) but it is a note of the efficient cause; that the sense should be, The
righteousness, which is that of Christ, being accepted of God, nos influit, does
pour into us: so Soto. Thus we see, by what a pretty neat distinction he
would assoile his brother Pighius from being an herericke, although he speak
the same thing with us. Only I pity Soto his sottishness, that while he
would have Pighius to mean by our righteousness, our natural righteousness,
which may not abide Gods strict trial; he remembers not upon what instances
Pighius inferred this his true Catholic conclusion. For his instances, by
Soto his own allegation, were holy Job, and holy David, who disclaimed their
own righteousness. But I hope, Soto will not say, these were now natural
men, and unregenerate.

Now for the clearer unfolding of this mystery, let us hear their great
champions, what they, in their voluminous commentaries upon this Session, mean
by Justification. Soto makes a threefold justification: Prima genuinaque notio
huius nominis Soto de not. and great. lib. 2. c. 6. quo termini controuersiae
exponuntur.
(inquit) est acquisitio iustitiae; nempe ex iniusto iustum fieri. The prime
and proper notion of this word Justification (says he) is an acquisition of
righteousness; namely, of unjust to be made just. As calefaction or heating,
of cold to be made hot; according to the Text of the Council, which says:
Thus the unjust man is made just. So they take Iustificare, to be as much as
iustum facere, to make just. Secunda, etc. the second notion, and next to this,
is (says he) that it signifies an augmentation of righteousness. The first
of these, he compares to that original righteousness that Adam once had;
which imports a rectitude, or right ordering of the whole man: which he
proves divinely out of Aristotle, in the fifth of his Ethics. And the second
he proves, Apoc. 22. 11. Qui iustus est, iustificetur adhuc: He that is just,
let him be justified still. But in this, as in many more, their Latin
Translation will not abide the touch of the original: which says, He that is
righteous, (...)
let him be righteous still, or, let him do righteousness still. The like
place he brings out of Ecclesiasticus, but with the like felicity, and
success. And he alleges that of St. James, You see, that a man is justified
by works, and not by faith only. By James 2.
which words, says he, he had contradicted Paul, where he says, Arbitramur
hominem iustificari per fidem, and non ex operibus: We judge, that a man is
justified by faith, and not of works: unless Paul had spoken of the former
justification, and James of the latter. Although (says he) we will declare in
his proper place, how our works also do concur in justification. Nisi quod
Paulus loquitur de praecedentibus: Unless that Paul speaks of precedent
works: (I suppose he means works going before justification) So he. Where
you see he speaks very perplexedly, yet so, as he cannot dissemble his
meaning. For the judicious Reader may well perceive, that he would feign force
that speech of the Apostle, Romans 3. 28. Therefore we conclude, that Romans 3. 28.
a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law: to be meant of that
faith going before justification, which they rank among their preparatory
works, for that is their fides informis, their faith without charity, as yet
unformed, as they say; saving that herein he forgets himself: for the Apostle
speaks of iustitification by faith, not of faith disposing or preparing a man
to justification. But of this more hereafter.

In the third place (says he) the name of justification is further used, to
signify the absoluing of a guilty person in judgment, and pronouncing of him
to be quit. For which he alleges, Prou. 17. 15. and Deuteronomy. 25. 1. But this
(says he) is not much different from the first acception of the word, but
rather altogether of near affinity to it Yet this third signification (says
Soto) is no where in Paul, nor in the Scripture, where any mention is made of
our justification by Christ. See this crafty shuffler, how he can pack this
close to the first kind of acception of this word justification, as if it were
all one with it, or near a-kinne unto it: and yet he can say of this last,
that it is not to be found in Paul, although he could find the first to be in
Paul, at least in his own strained sense. But is not the word Justify (as it
is taken in the last sense, to wit, to absolve, or acquit as it were in
judgment) used by Paul? yea, and that also where mention is made of our
justification by Christ? What means then that which the Apostle says, Romans
8. 33. 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed: or rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. Note, the Apostle uses here the terms of a judicial
trial: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? who shall accuse
them? who shall bring in evidence against them? It is God that justifies. And
if God the Judge do justify, who shall condemn? Yea, but how shall God
justify a sinner? It is Christ that dyed: He dyed for our sins, Rom 4. 25.
or rather which is risen again: And, He rose again for our justification,
Romans 4. 25. etc. So you see here is justifying taken for absoluing in
judgment: and it is in Paul; and that where mention is made of our
justification by Christ. Therefore Soto bewrayes either gross ignorance in
denying, or egregious malice in dissembling such a clear truth. And no
marvel, if he cannot, or will not find justification used for absolution
judicial, in Paul, or in the Scripture, where mention is made of our
justification by Christ. For indeed justification in this sense is the
condemnation and confusion of Popish justification: as we shall see in the due
place.

Vega also, another Champion in this Council, he speaks Vega de descript.
iustif. l. 5. in c. 4. decret^ de iustificatione. cap. 11.
the same language of Babylon, and says, there is a twofold justification, as
Doctors (meaning the Schoolmen) say: The first, and second. The first
justification, when a man of unjust is made just. The second, when of just a
man becomes more just. The first he defines thus: The first justification is a
certain supernatural change, whereby a man of unjust is made just. The second
thus: It is a supernatural change, whereby a man of just is made more just.
And these also are either active or passive: active in regard of God, working
this justification, first, and second, in us: and passive in regard of man
himself, who is changed from bad to good, and from good to better. But for the
active justification, as it is wrought by God, and so proves derogatory from
man's excellency, Vega sleights it, as rather obscuring, than clearing his
definitions. But as for the third kind of justification, which is judicial,
to be pronounced and accounted just, before the Tribunal seat of justice,
Vega gives it no better entertainment, than his brother Soto, saying, That the
Doctors intermit, and let pass this kind of justification, as impertinent to
the purpose. And so it is indeed, very impertinent to their Pontifician
purpose, and very incommodious; as the wicked complain, that the righteous man
is not for their profit, since contrary to their ways, Wisd. 2. 12. But for
other distinctions of justification, Vega is very liberal in summing them up
together: as, Iustitia Christiana, and Mosaica: politica, and oeconomica:
legalis, moralis, particularis: actualis, habitualis: acquisita and insusa:
inharens and imputata: externa and interna: fidei and operum: practica and
theologica: pharisaica, sincera: philosophica, supernaturalis; and so in
infinitum. But enough of such blundring distinctions. So then the justification
of the Church of Rome is properly to make one just, that was unjust, and to
make one of just, more just. Yet here it will be worth our noting, to observe
the legierdemaine of the Council of Trent, and the Pontificians, in their
distinction of first and second righteousness or justification. For the
Scriptures speaking of a twofold justification, one by faith, another by
works; upon which ground the ancient Fathers also do distinguish a twofold
righteousness, one in the sight of God, the other in the sight of men: the
Pontificians also, that they may seem to speak the same language, they have
their distinction too of a first and second righteousness; yet so, as
destroying the nature of the first justification by faith, whereby we stand
just in Gods sight, they so qualify the matter, as either they make nothing at
all of their first righteousness, or they do altogether confound it with
their second righteousness inherent; and so by their distinguishing, they make
justification and sanctification all one. But the learned Cardinal Contarenus,
writing a little before the Council of Trent, and was afterward one of the
Council; in his tract of justification, speaking of these two iustifications,
says, That by the one, to wit, the imputation of Christ's righteousness by
faith, we are justified before God: by the other, which is inherent, we are
justified before men. But Babylon confounds all together, justification and
sanctification.

In the next place let us consider, how they understand this making just. This
justification (says the Council) consists partly of remission of sins,
partly of the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and partly of
sanctification and renouation of the inner man, and so of inherent
righteousness. Now here lies the knot of the mystery to be resolved; first,
it were well, if the Chuch of Rome did mean truly and sincerely, in naming
remission of sins, and imputation of Christ's righteousness, in the point of
justification. Secondly, if at the best, they did understand them aright, yet
to join unto them inherent righteousness of our own, will be found no just
dealing. But to allow of no justification at all, save that which is inherent
in us, bewrayes deep deceit, and double hypocrisy, in once naming remission
of sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness, which they utterly shut
out, from having any society with inherent righteousness, in the work of
justification, as a little before we premonished.

Now concerning the imputation of Christ's righteousness, what do they
understand by it? The Council it self tells us, chap 7. where speaking of the
formal cause of justification, they call it the righteousness of God; but how
the righteousness of God imputed to us? nothing less: but that which is
infused into us. The words of the Council are these: Vnica formalis causa (put
a iustificationis) est iustitia Dei; non qua ipse iustus est, sed qua nos
iustos facit: qua videlicet ab eo donati, renouamur spiritu mentis nostrae, and
non modo reputamur, sed vere iusti nominamur, and sumus, iustitiam in nobis
recipientes, vnusquisque suam secundum mensuram, quam Spiritus sanctus partitur
singulis, prout vult, and secundum propriam cuiusque dispositionem and
cooperationem: Quanquam enim nemo posset esse iustus, nisi oui merita passionis
Domini nostri Jesus Christi communicantur; id tamen in hac impi^ iustificatione
fit, dum eiusdem sanctissimae passionis merito, per Spiritum sanctum charitas
Dei diffunditur in cordibus eorum qui iustificantur, atque ipsis inhaeret, etc.
The only formal cause (to wit, of justification) is the righteousness of
God; not that whereby himself is just, but that whereby he makes us just:
namely, wherewith he having endowed us, we are renewed in the spirit of our
mind, and are not only reputed, but nominated, and are really just, receiving
righteousness in our selves, each according to his measure, which the holy
Ghost divides to every one, even as he will, and according to every man's
disposition and cooperation: For although no man can be just, but he to whom
the merits of the passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ are
communicated; yet that is wrought in this justification of a sinner, while by
the merit of the same holy passion, the love of God is by the holy Ghost shed
abroad in the hearts of those who are justified, and is inherent in them, etc.

Thus a man may see, by the Councels express words, that though they name
imputation, which they call the communication of Christ's righteousness, as the
formal cause of our justification: yet they mean nothing else, but that
Christ has merited, that charity should be infused into our hearts, whereby we
should be justified: which in sum, is as much to say, as Christ became a
Savior, by whose merit every man might be made his own Savior; and that by
another kind of righteousness, than that of Christ imputed. That this is the
sense of the Council, witness her chief Interpreters. For if they had not
finely found out this witty sense of the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
it is much to be feared they had Anathemarized the very name of it, and thrown
it into the fire of their Index expurgatorius, wheresoever they had found it.
But this, and other clear truths in Scripture, they can so dexterously handle,
as they can easily euacuate them, by turning them to a most sinister sense; and
so are the less afraid to name them, and to seem to avouch them. Otherwise,
as the history of this Council tells us, the very name of imputation found very
harsh intertainment among the most of their Schoole-doctors; and Soto himself
confesses: Quod verbum mihi semper suspectum, in suspicionem Soto de not. and
great. lib. 2. c. 20.
detuli coram sancta Synodo; which word (says he, to wit, Imputation) I
always having suspected, brought it into suspicion before the holy Synod. And
a little after, although he commend the Canons of Colen, accounting them as the
buckler and bulwark of faith; yet (says he) they, as happily more secure of
the adversaries, than safe, have used that word of Imputation: where they say,
That the chief head of justification, is the remission and ablution of sins,
by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ. But yet the Council of
Trent and Church of Rome, are not so barren of invention, as not to be able
easily to reconcile this Catholic word Imputation, to the Church of Rome, and
to make it a Roman-Catholicke: For by the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
they have learned to understand, that Christ has merited an infusion of grace
into us, whereby we are justified. For, confessing the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, to be the formal cause of our justification; they would teach
us out of Philosophy, that Formalis causa est res illa vel qualitas, quae in
est subiecto: that the formal cause, as Soto says, is that thing or quality,
which is inherent in the subject: for the form, says he, is said in relation
to the matter, to which it gives a being by inherency. Pari ergo modo, etc. As
therefore the air is not luminous or lightsome formally by the light that is
in the Sun, but by the light it receives in it self from the Sun;
Constantissimum est, etc. it is a most constant truth, That neither are we
formally just, and accepted by the righteousness which is in Christ, but by
that which himself has conveyed into us. We are (says he) made just by
Christ's righteousness, as by the efficient cause; but not as by the formal
cause. But Vega peremptorily in his 7. book, and 22. chapt. entitled Of the
impossibility of Christ's righteousness, to be the formal cause of our
justification, concludes thus in his first argument: Superfluum est, and ab
omni philosophia alienum, ad hoc ipsum, ponere aliam aliquam iustitiam,
videlicet, iustitiam imputatiuam Christi; It is superfluous, and abhorring from
all philosophy, to put any other righteousness, for a formal cause of our
righteousness, as the imputative righteousness of Christ. Therefore according
to Romane-Catholicke divinity, which is most humane philosophy, the formal
cause of a man's righteousness must be inherent in him, and his own, and not
the righteousness of Christ imputed to us. But yet the same author, afterward
seems to shake imputation by the hand, and to be good friends with it, where
he says: Non est adeo inuisum nobis Vega de vera and sicta justice. lib. 15.
cap. 2.
hoc vocabulum, vt credam nunquam nos posse hoc in proposito been illo vti;
This word (Imputation) is not so odious unto us; as that I think, we may
never use it well to this purpose: Vere namque and sane, ac latin possumus
dicere, ad satisfactionem and meritum, imputatam esse generi humano iustitiam
Christi in passione sua, and iugiter imputari omnibus qui iustificantur, and
satisfaciunt pro peccatis suis, and vitam aeternam suis bonis operibus
merentur: For we may truly, and soothly, and in Latin dicere.
plain terms say, that unto satisfaction and merit, the righteousness of
Christ in his passion is imputed to mankind, and is continually imputed to all
men that are justified, and do satisfy for their sins, and by their good
works do merit eternal life. And much more to this purpose: And a little after
he says; Non transit iustitia Christi realiter ab illo in iustificatos:
Christ's righteousness does not really pass from him into those that are
justified; nor by it are we formally justified. But imputation is of God, which
ioynes the merits of Christ unto us, and makes them ours after a sort; in as
much as for his merits sake, he gives us righteousness, whereby we are
righteous. Cum enim per iustitiam Christi, etc. For seeing by the
righteousness Ibid.
of Christ, mankind has satisfied for their sins, and by it is reconciled
to God; and the gates of Paradise are thereby unlocked, and all that are
justified, or satisfy, or merit at Gods hand, seeing by his merits they are
justified, and reconciled to God, and satisfy for themselves, and merit
increase of grace and blessedness: surely it cannot be denied, but that to
mankind, and all so justified, Christ's righteousness is, or may be imputed to
satisfaction and merit. So Vega. I need pass no other censure upon this
Romane-Catholicke doctrine, than that of Gregory: Deo maledicunt, cum se and ab
illo Greg. moral. lib. 1. cap. 37.
accepisse vires intelligunt, sed tamen de eius muneribus propriam laudem
quaerunt; They blaspheme God, when they acknowledge they have received strength
from him, and yet from his gifts seek their own praise. And St. Augustine in
his Aug. Soliloq lib. cap. 15. tom. 9.
Soliloquies, says sweetly: Vnde gloriabitur omnis caro? Nunquid de malo? Haec
non est gloria, sed miseria: sed nunquid gloriabitur de bono? nunquid de
alieno? Tuum, Domine, est bonum, tua est gloria. Qui enim de bono tuo gloriam
sibi quaerit, and non tibi quaerit; hic fur est and latro, and similis est
diabolo, qui voluit furari gloriam tuam. Qui enim laudari vult de tuo dono, and
non quaerit in illo gloriam tuam, sed suam: hic licet propter tuum donum
laudatur ab hominibus, ^ te tamen vituperatur, quia de dono tuo non tuam, sed
suam gloriam quaesiuit. Qui autem ab hominibus laudatur vituperante te, non
defendetur ab hominibus iudicante te, ne^ liberabitur condemnante te: Whereof
shall all flesh rejoice? Of evil? This is not glory, but misery. But shall he
glory of good? What, of another good? Thine, O Lord, is the good: thine is the
glory. For he, who of thy good, seeks glory to himself, and not to thee; he
is a thief and a robber, and like the devil, who would have robbed thee of
thy glory. For he that would be praised for thy gift, and does not therein
seek thy glory, but his own: this man, though for thy gift he be praised of
men, yet he is dispraised of thee; because of thy gift he sought not thine,
but his own glory. But he that is praised of men, being disallowed of thee,
shall not be defended of men, when he shall be judged of thee; nor absolved,
when condemned of thee.

I have been the more copious in citing these two authors, Vega and Soto,
because both they were grand-Sticklers in the Council, and undertook to write
these things as Commentaries upon this sixth Session of Justification, as we
have sufficiently noted before. So that what the Council has couched in the
Text in fewer words, these have amplified and expressed more at large, to the
end that no man might mistake the Councels mind and meaning, no not in the
midst of her mistie and cloudy equivocations. Thus they have learned to do
with imputation (the very name whereof had so startled the Council for the
time) as men do with the Serpent. The Serpent with her very aspect, at first
affrights the beholder, but being taken, and her teeth pulled out, men are then
not affraide to carry her in their bosoms: So the imputation of Christ's
righteousness was at the first sight terrible to the Church of Rome, assembled
in the Council of Trent, no less than the ghastly Owl was to the Pope and his
Cardinals in the Council of Lateran (which appeared to them in steed of
their holy Ghost) but finding means to take Christ, the Antitype of that
health-giuing brazen Serpent, and to pull out his teeth (to wit the truth of
the imputation of Christ's righteousness, whereby sin and death are bitten
and stung to death) lest it should bite and sting all their merits to death:
they dare now freely and familiarly carry the Serpent in the bosom of their
books, handling imputation at their pleasure, without any peril at all to
Papal satisfaction. Bellarmine has also learned to play with the word
imputation: Bellar. de iustif. l. 2. c. 8.
Homo iustificatus non egit imputatione alienae iustitiae, qua iniustitia
propria and inhaerens tegatur: A man justified needs not the imputation of
another righteousness, whereby his own inherent unrighteousness may be
covered. And in the tenth Chapter of the same book, Christus nostra iustitia,
non quod iusti simus ea iustitia, quae est in Christo nobis imputata: Christ is
our righteousness, not that we are just by the righteousness which is in
Christ imputed unto us; Sic igitur and nobis imputatur iustitia eius, quoad
satisfactionem, quam pro nobis praestitit; sed non propterea nos iusti, id est,
mundi and immaculati haberi possumus, si vere in nobis peccatorum macula and
sordes inhaereant: So therefore is Christ's righteousness imputed to us in
regard of satisfaction, which he performed for us; but for all that we cannot
be holden for just, to wit, clean and immaculate, if the spots and stains of
sin by yet truly inherent in us. So this is the general voice of the
Council of Trent, and the Church of Rome, to allow of no other imputation of
Christ's righteousness, but such, as by his merits we have an infusion of
grace, whereby we merit and satisfy God in our justification: And so they
admit of no other formal cause of justification, but an inherent
righteousness in themselves, and out of Christ. Thus we have seen what the
Romane-Catholike faith is touching Justification, and the formal cause of it.

CHAP. V. The Catholic Faith concerning justification; and of the term and
form of Justification.
NOw to know the true nature of Justification, it much imports us to consider
in what sense this word Justification is to be used and taken, in the
justification of a sinner. The Pontificians or Papists would restrain the
sense of it to the etymology of the Latin word Iustificare, as much, say
they, as Iustum facere, from whence they would conclude their inherencie of
selfe-iustification: wherein they do as some Lawyers, that by the mistaking or
misapplying of a word, can overthrow the whole right of a man's cause. Indeed
St. Augustine says, Quid est aliud iustificati, quam iusti Aug. de spiritu and
litera ad Marcellinum tom. 3. This place makes amends for that other, De praed.
sanct. l. 1. c. 7.
facti? ab illo scilicet, qui iustificat impium, vt ex impio fiat iustus. Aut
certe it a dictum est, iustificabuntur, ac si diceretur, Iusti habebuntur,
iusti deputabuntur: What else is it to be justified, but to be made just?
namely of him who justifies the ungodly, that of impious he may be made
righteous. Or surely it is so said, They shall be justified, as if it were
said, They shall be accounted just, they shall be reputed just. So he. Thus we
see, though St. Augustine, following the etymology of the word, take
iustificare, to justify or make just: yet he means nothing else, but the
accounting or reputing just, and not the infusing Bern. de annunciat. Maria.
Ser. 1.
of grace, whereby to be made just. And Bernard also says, Add huc, vt
credas, quod per ipsum tibi peccata donantur. Hoc est testimonium, quod
perhibet in cord nostro Spiritus sanctus, dicens, Dimissa sunt tibi peccata.
Sic enim arbitratur Apostolus, Gratis iustificari hominem per fidem: Add to
this, that thou believe, that by him thy sins are forgiven thee. This is the
testimony, which the holy Ghost bears in our heart, saying, Thy sins are
forgiven thee. For so the Apostle concludes, That a man is justified freely by
faith. But let us hear from the holy Ghosts own mouth in the Scriptures, he
will lead us into all truth. To justify, in Scripture, is usually taken in a
judicial sense, as being properly a judicial word, justification being
opposed to condemnation. The Hebrews have one word, which signifies to
justify, (...). and it is still applied to such a justification, as a man
stands upon in a judicial trial: As Genesis 44. 16. Mah nits tadhac? how
shall we justify our selves? said Judah to his brother Joseph, in regard of
the cup found in Beniamins sack: which seemed now to be brought to aiudiciall
Trial. So 2. Sam. 15. 4. Absolon wishes he were Judge of the Land, that he
might do every man justice or justify him. Read also for this purpose, Deuteronomy.
25. 1. Psalm. 51. 4. 1 Kings 8. 32. Pro. 17. 15. Esaias 5. 23. and 43. 26. Matthew.
12. 37. 1. Cor. 4. 4. and many other places in Scripture to this purpose, do
plainly show how this word Justify is properly taken; namely to acquit or
clear, to pronounce or declare one just, by the sentence of the Judge. This
sense of justification the Church of Rome cannot endure, they smother, or at
least smooth it over by slight of hand, as a matter of no moment. Whereas
indeed there is nothing that will more directly lead us to the true
understanding of the nature of justification, than the consideration of this
word, taken in a judicial sense, wherein the holy Ghost does use it, namely to
acquit and absolve a man, and pronounce him just by sentence of judgment. This
shows that the point of justification of a sinner, is not so light a matter,
as Papists and profane persons would make it. No: it is a Case to be tried at
the bar of Gods iudgement-seate: in whose sight shall no man living be
justified. Holy Job, while he pleaded with his opposite friends, he wanted
not matter for his justification: but when once the Lord God summons him out of
the whirle-winde before his throne, and bids him girde up his loins like a
man; Job stands not now upon his uprightness, but confesses, I am vile, what
shall I answer Job. 38. and 40.
thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth, etc. Job 40. 4. and 42. 5. I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Yea, he had said
before, Chap. 9. 15. Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but
I would make supplication to my Judge: for God is a righteous and severe judge;
and who may stand in his sight, when he is angry, when he sits to judge? For
the heavens are not clean in his sight: how much more abominable and filthy
is man, which drinks iniquity like water, Job 15. 16. If therefore our
justification be such, as must proceed from Gods judgment seat, and must be
sentenced by Gods own mouth, it nearly concerns every Mothers Son to be
well advised upon what ground we stand, what evidence we can bring to clear
ourselves, to satisfy our impartial Consciences, to stop the mouth of the
accusing Devil, and to abide the fierietriall of that Judge, who is even a
consuming fire, and will condemn even the least sin to the pit of hell. But
that we may not mistake the true acception of justification, we are to
consider justification in a twofold relation or respect: either as it has
relation to God, or to man, before whom also we are said to be justified, but
in a different, yea, opposite respect: whereof we shall have occasion to speak
hereafter. Here we speak of Justification in the first relation.

Now this justification of a sinner, in the sight of God, whereof we speak,
proceeds from a judicial trial. In this sense it is used by the holy Ghost,
Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather
that is risen again, etc. This justification the Lord Jesus does oppose to
condemnation, John 5. 24. where speaking of judgment, verse. 22. he infers:
Verily, Verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but
is passed from death unto life. And like as Jesus Christ was condemned by a
Condemnation by way of opposition, implies justification.
judicial proceeding, Pilate giving sentence, though according to such
evidence as was most untrue in it self: so all those, for whom Christ was thus
iudicially condemned, shall be iudicially justified and acquitted. But this will
appear more clearly in setting down the formal cause of our justification.

To speak to the capacity of the simple, By formal cause, is meant that,
which gives a being to justification; as forma dat esse: the form of a thing
gives being unto it. That therefore which makes a man perfectly just, is called
the formal cause of his justification. Now the Pontificians would hence
conclude, That inherent qualities must be the formal cause of justification;
alleging the authority of Philosophers, who say, That the formal cause is the
thing or quality which is in the subject, as the soul of man is in the body.
And therefore they exclude the righteousness of Christ, whereby he is formally
just, from being the formal cause of our justification, because (say they)
Christ's righteousness is in himself, not in us. But no marvel, if these
Pontificians do wrest the Maxims of Philosophers from their native sense,
when they dare so familiarly force the Scriptures themselves. The Philosophers
speak of a physical formality; but the holy Scriptures speak of the
justification of a sinner in the sight of God, the form whereof is relative,
and not physically inherent in us. But be it so, that the formal cause must
always be in the subject, to which it gives a being; the formal cause then of
justification must be inherent. Wherein must it be inherent? In us? No, but in
justification, which is the subject of this inherent formal cause. For if
inherent grace be the formal cause of justification, then by way of relation,
justification is the subject of inherent grace: For we speak here of the
formal cause of justification, not of the formal cause of man, as if he were
the subject, wherein justification is a quality inherent.

But to answer their mis-applyed philosophical divinity: The form of a thing
is not always a quality inherent, as in the subject where it is; but sometimes
it is only adherent and extrinsicall, by way of relation. As, that I am the
son of such a man, the formal cause hereof is not inherent in me; but it is
originally and relatiuely from my father that begat me, giving a being to my
sonship, respectively to him. So a man set at liberty by the favor and means
of another, the very form of his freedom was the others act in freeing of
him, not inhering in him that is freed, but rather adhering unto him. Yea the
Pontificians themselves confess, and Vega for one, that the formal cause of
man's redemption, is a thing extrinsicall, to wit, the oblation of Christ on the
Cross; and that the free favor of God, for the merit of Christ, is the
formal cause of remission of sins. If therefore the form of our redemption
and remission of sins, is not within us, but without us; why not as well the
form of our justification, the cause whereof is Christ's redemption, and the
effect of it remission of sins? In a word, it is not with a form, as with an
accident: the being of an accident, is the in-being of it. Not so of a form,
where being, or modus essendi, consists not necessarily in the inhering in the
subject, Templer. Metaph. lib. ^. cap. ^* probl. 9.
whose formal cause it is: but it may as well be extrinsicall, by conferring a
virtue and power, whereby the Causatum receives the formality of its being.

But to leave Philosophy, and return to Divinity; it is yet in question;
whether the matter of this justification be within us, or rather without us.
The Romane-Catholicke faith teaches that it is within us; but the Catholic
faith concludes, that the formal cause of our justification is without us,
not within us. This is that Catholic doctrine which the Scriptures teach,
when they ascribe our justification to faith, apprehending that which is
without us: where, by apprehending, is not meant a bare understanding or
knowing, as Soto in the name of his Romane-Catholickes would Soto de not. and
great. lib. 2. cap. 5. in fine.
have it; but it is also a laying hold upon, and applying of the thing
believed. We have showed before, how the Pontificians take the word Imputation;
namely, for a participation of Christ's righteousness, so far forth, as
thereby some other righteousness being merited, is infused into us, and
inherent in us. But the true Catholics hold otherwise, that imputation is of
a thing without us, being apprehended and applied by faith. So that the thing
imputed, is that, which is by faith apprehended: As it is said of Abraham, that
he believed God, and his faith was imputed to him for righteousness, Romans 4.
3. Now the object of Abraham's faith was God; yea God promising: in regard of
which object, Abraham's faith is imputed to him for righteousness. Not the act
of Abraham's faith, being but an instrument; but the object of it is imputed: As
we may say, we are justified by the act of faith, relatiuely to the object,
Christ, not for the act of it. Abraham believed God, and his faith was imputed
to him for righteousness. But how? is this sufficient to justify a man, to
believe God, or the promise of God, that it should be said to be imputed to man
for righteousness? I answer, To believe Gods promise, is to have an eye of
faith upon Christ, who is the substance of all Gods promises, and in whom all
the promises of God are Yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. So that God in Christ is
the object of faith, imputed to the believer for righteousness.

But here an objection crosses my way, cast in by the adversary Object.
of the truth, Vega; who says: Dixi, etc. I said that Vega de iustif. quaest.
1.
this faith of the Mediator is that, to which for the most part, and chiefly
the Scriptures, do attribute our justification: yet we believe also (says he)
that faith taken generally, as it relieth upon divine truth, may also justify
a man. Nor are we in that error, wherein some are, to think, that the only
faith of justification promised, or of salvation in Christ, does justify us,
or is imputed unto us for righteousness: For (says he) Noah's faith of the
future deluge, as Paul witnesses, was imputed to him for righteousness: and
he was appointed the heir of righteousness, which is by faith, in that he
believed Heb. 11.
God foretelling the flood, and, a hundred years before it came, began to
build the Arc for the safety of his house. And to Abraham also, as the history
of Gen^sis plainly teaches, it was imputed for righteousness, because he
believed that his posterity should be multiplied as the stars of heaven. So
that hence he concludes, that not only to faith in Gods promises in Christ,
is righteousness imputed; but to faith in general believing Gods truth, such
as is not in the compass of Gods promises in Christ: but either speculatiue
precepts, or moral doctrines, or other Prophetical predictions, or
historical relations. So that by the Pontifician doctrine, other faith besides
that in Gods promises in Christ, may be imputed to a man for righteousness: As
Noah's faith in building the Arc against the flood, and Abraham's faith in
believing Gods promise concerning the multiplication of his seed.

I answer; that no faith is, or can be imputed to a man for righteousness,
but that which has respect unto Christ, and the promises of God in him. But
Noah's faith in preparing the Arc, to save himself and his family from the
flood, was imputed to him for righteousness. True, this confirms the
Catholic doctrine of the imputation of faith, as it looks upon Christ: for
what was the Arc but a Sacramental type of Christ? as Augustine says;
Christus figuratus est in Noe, and Aug. expos. in Job. 11. tract. 9.
in illa Arca orbis terrarum: Quare enim in Arca inclusa sunt omnia animaliae,
nisi vt significarentur omnes gentes? Christ is figured in Noe, and in that
Arc of the whole world: for why in that Arc were included all creatures, but
that all Nations should be signified by them? And there he applies that
promise to Abraham, Genesis 22. 18. In thy seed, shall all the Nations of the
earth be blessed. And for Abraham's faith in Gods promise, what seed of Abraham
was this, in whom all the Nations of the earth should be blessed? Was it not
Christ? Yes Christ; so says Augustine in the forenamed place: Christus in ea
prophetia occultus erat, in quo benedicuntur omnes gentes: Christ (says he)
was hid in that prophecy, in whom all the Nations are blessed. But the
Apostle, or rather the holy Ghost by the Apostle, is the best interpreter of
that prophecy, Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made.
He says not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one: And to thy seed, which
is Christ. And this was that promise of God, which Abraham believing, his faith
was counted to him for righteousness: as it is there in the sixth verse, even
as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.
Therefore Vega's divinity has very much failed him in propounding these two
examples of Noah, and Abraham, to prove the justification of his general
Faith: whereas we plainly see, both these Patriarchs faith had special and
principal reference and respect to Christ Jesus: And therefore their faith was
reckoned to them for righteousness. For the other examples, which Vega there
adds in general out of the eleventh to the Hebrews, they are all of the
same nature, and all confirm this infallible and undeniable truth, That the
promises of God in Christ, and Christ alone, with all his righteousness, is
the object of that Faith, which is reckoned to Abraham, to Noah, and to every
believer for righteousness.

Here then comes in the true formal cause of our justification, namely Christ
himself, with all his righteousness; which being apprehended by faith, it is
imputed unto us for righteousness. This is it that gives a true being to
justification. Justification therefore consists in the imputation of Christ and
his righteousness, comprehending also all the promises of God in him,
apprehended by faith. Now concerning this Catholic doctrine of imputation of
Christ's righteousness by faith, the Scriptures are very pregnant in the proof
of it. This Gospel has testimony before the Law, in the Law, and in the
Prophets, and is confirmed by Christ and his Apostles. Before the Law, to omit
other examples, we have two famous ones; that of Noah, and Abraham, of whom
we spoke even now, who are laid down for exemplary patterns, yea, and lively
types to all believers: Noah before the flood, and Abraham after the flood, and
before the Law: which St. Paul does especially note, to put a difference
between faith and the works of the Law in the point of justification. In the
Law also we have two principal types, lively shadowing this doctrine of
imputation. The first we find in Leuiticus 1. 4. And he shall put his hand
upon the head of his burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him to make
atonement for him. The burnt offering was a figure of Christ, sacrificed for
us upon the cross: the man that brings this burnt-offering is a type of every
true believer, and the hand which he puts on the head of the sacrifice, is
faith, laying hold on Christ, and as it were owning him for our proper
sacrifice, which God accepts to be an atonement for us, a sacrifice of a
sweet savor unto the Lord. The Apostle applies this sacrifice, with the fruits
of it, to Christ, Romans 5. 11. We rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom we have received the atonement. Also Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling savor. Christ is then this
burnt-offering, our atonement with God, and an offering of a sweet savor
unto the Lord. Now the instrument or hand, whereby Christ is apprehended, and
applied to every true Believer, is Faith. It was the hand of Faith, which the
diseased woman in the Gospel, touched Christ her Savior with, Luke 8. 46.
and fetched virtue out of him; To whom the Lord said, Daughter, be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace. This the Apostle does
also lively set out, Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth (to wit Jesus Christ)
to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the Remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, to
declare at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and a
iustifier of him that believes in Jesus. How fully does the Apostle parallel
and compare this truth with that type!

A second type of our righteousness or justification, by imputation of Christ
unto the believer in the time of the Law, is set down, Number. 21. 8. 9. The Lord
said unto Moses, make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole, and it
shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it,
shall live: and Moses did so, and the serpent-bitten-man looked, and lived. The
brazen Serpent was a type of Christ; the serpent-bitten-man is every sinner,
whom that old serpent has already stung with sin, as he did our first
Parents. The looking on the brazen serpent, so lifted up upon a pole, is the
faith of the believer, beholding Christ lifted up upon his Cross. This Christ
Jesus himself applies, Ioh. 3. 14. 15. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the son of man be lifted up; that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. A most sweet
collation of the truth with the type: showing, that as faith is the hand of the
soul, laying hold upon the bloody sacrifice of Christ, for our atonement with
God; so faith is also the eye of the soul, so to look upon Christ crucified,
as to be thereby cured of all the deadly wounds of sin, and so to live
eternally.

The Prophets also are full of testimonies to confirm this doctrine of
justification, by imputation, Esa 53. 4. Surely he has borne our griefs, and
carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted (as if he had been a malefactor:) But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed. All we like sheep
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way: and the Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all. And verse. 8. he was cut off out of the land
of the living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken. Though he
had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth: yet it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul
an offering for sins, he shall see his seed, etc. Here we see most lively
set down a mutual imputation of our iniquities unto Christ, and of his merits
unto us. And then the Prophet, verse. 11. shows by what mean, or instrument
this righteousness of Christ's obedience, is imputed to us: By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.
Cognitione ^ui.
By his knowledge, or by the knowledge of himself, that is, by faith in him,
knowing and acknowledging, seeing and beholding him with the eye of faith, to
be that Lamb of God before the shearer, taking away our sins; for he has
borne our iniquities. The Prophet Jeremy also does set this down most sweetly,
by a reciprocal or mutual relation between Christ and his Church, calling
Christ and his Church by one and the same name; and such a name, as implies
the imputation of his righteousness unto us: For Ier. 23. 6. Christ the
righteous branch, and the just King, by whom Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dwell safely (to wit, the whole Israel of God, as Romans 11. 26. elect
Jews and Gentiles) this is his name, whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
righteousness. And, ^er. 33. 16. speaking of the salvation of the same Judah
and Jerusalem, he says: And this is the name wherewith she shall be called,
The Lord our righteousness. O what a glorious name is this for us to be
called, The LORD Our Righteousness! What tongues of men or Angels, can with
greater eloquence express that sweet communion, that is between Christ and
his Church, wherein the Church and every believer is so invested in the
righteousness of Christ, as to be called the Lord our righteousness? Indeed
the vulgar latin has much dimmed and diminished the life of those places in
Jeremy, translating in stead of Dominus iustitia nostra; Dominus iustus noster:
as much to say, as our righteous Lord: yet the interlineary Gloss upon it,
says; Qui factus est nobis sapientia a Deo, and iustitia: who is made unto us
of God, wisdom and righteousness: the same in effect, that Christ is the
Lord our righteousness. Thus are we, Judah, saved by the Lord our
righteousness; and by grace are we saved through faith, Ephesians. 2. 30.

The new Testament makes up the testimony of the Law and Prophets fully, 1.
Cor. 1. 30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Thus Christ
is wholly ours by imputation. This the same Apostle does excellently
demonstrate and conclude, 2. Cor. 5. 21. where having spoken of our 2. Cor. 5.
21.
reconciliation with God by Jesus Christ, which reconciliation stands in the
not imputing of our sins unto us, verse. 19. he adds the reason, verse. 21.
For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. Now how are we made the righteousness of God
in Christ? by any inherent righteousness in us, although derived from the
merit of Christ's righteousness imputed, in the Popish sense? Surely we are no
otherwise made the righteousness of God in Christ, than as Christ was made
sin for us. How is that? Was Christ made sin for us, by having our sins
inherent in him, or infused into him? God forbid: for he knew no sin. But if
sin had been inherent in him, or infused into him, he had known sin; yet
he was made sin for us: that is, by the imputation of our sin. Note here
also, Christ is not said here simply to be sin for us, but to be Made sin
for us; and that we simply are not, but are made the righteousness of God in
him: implying a passiuenesse in both, both of Christ made sin, and of us made
righteousness; made, that is, not of or in our selves, but extrinsically, from
without, from another. As therefore our sin being imputed to Christ, made him
become sin for us; even so are we made the righteousness of God in him: that
is, by the imputation of his righteousness; which righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, is no more inherent in us to our justification, than our sin
imputed to Christ was inherent in him to his condemnation. Whereupon St.
Augustine says, Ipse peccatum, vt nos iustitia: Aug. Enchirid. cap. 41.
nec nostra, sed Dei sumus: nec in nobis, sed in ipso: sicut ipse peccatum, non
suum sed nostrum: nec in se, sed in nobis constitutum: He was made sin, that we
might be made righteousness* not our own righteousness, but the
righteousness of God: nor in us, but in him: even as he wa made sin, not his
own, but ours; not in himself, but in us. And Bernard excellently to this
Bern. epist. 190. ad Innocent.
purpose: Homo qui debuit, homo qui soluit. Nam si vnus pro omnibus mortuus
est, ergo omnes mortui sunt, vt videlicet satisfactio vnius omnibus imputetur,
sicut omnium peccata vnus ille portauit: It was man that owed the debt, and man
that paid it: For if one dyed for all, therefore are all dead, that the
satisfaction of one might be imputed to all, as he alone bore the sine of all.
We are then made the righteousness of God in Christ, as Christ was made sin
for us. But Christ was made sin for us, by the imputation of our sins unto
him, not by infusion of them into him. Therefore we are justified, or made the
righteousness of God in Christ, by the imputation of Christ's righteousness
unto us; not by inherency, or infusion of righteousness into us. This is such
an immovable Rock of truth, as the gates of Hell can never prevail against
it. Here all Popish arguments are put to silence: no Romish sophistry, or
schoole-subtilty can invent any probability, or seeming-reason, to oppose this
clear and invincible truth. But perhaps they will find some gloss upon this
scripture, that shall make another sense of it. Indeed they want not their
glosses. But mala glossa, quae corrumpit Textum: It is an ill gloss that
corrupts the Text. Indeed the ordinary gloss upon these words, He was made
sin for us, understands by sin either the sacrifice of sin, according to
the Hebrew phrase in the old Testament, as Hos. 4. 8. or else the similitude of
sinful flesh, as Romans 8. 3. So the gloss is uncertain, it pitcheth upon no
one sense. But the Scripture has one prime and proper sense. Now that the
Apostle should not simply mean by sin, the sacrifice of sin, as being an
obscure Hebrew phrase; is more than probable, because he writes this Epistle
not to the Hebrews, to whom writing, his Epistle is full of Legal types, and
terms, a language which they well understood; but to the Romans, who were not
acquainted with the Law-terms. But the maine reason why the Apostle cannot
mean here by sin barely the sacrifice of sin, is in regard of the
Antithesis or relative opposition here between sin and righteousness. For
sin and righteousness stand here as terms opposite one to the other: look
therefore how righteousness is here understood, namely properly, as opposite
to sin: So sin is to be understood properly, as opposite to
righteousness. Christ then was so made sin for us, as we are made the
righteousness of God in him: and we are so made the righteousness of God in
him, as he was made sin for us. Again, Christ who knew no sin, was made
sin for us: So are we made the righteousness of God in him, even we, who
knew no righteousness, that is, who had no righteousness of our own; but, as
the Apostle elegantly says, were, Rom 6. 20
while in the state of sin, free from righteousness. Christ therefore was so
made sin for us, as that he was reputed, yea and judged as a sinner: as Esaias
says, He was numbered with the Esaias 53*
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many. Now that Christ is said to be
made sin in the abstract, and we to be made righteousness in the abstract, not
righteous in the concrete, as Logicians Lyra upon this place.
speak: Lyra says, Ideo in abstracto dicitur iustitia Dei, vt efficeremur
perfect iusti: we are said to be made the righteousenesse of God in him in the
abstract, that is perfectly just. And that is, we are made just, but
relatiuely in respect to Christ; as he was made sin, but relatiuely in
respect of us, we are made the righteousness of God in him: as he was made
sin for us, and in us, to wit in ourperson, as we have said. So he is
called, The Lord our righteousness.

Yet true it is, that Christ might be said to be made sin, to wit, the
sacrifice for sin, though not so properly in this place. But if Papists will
wrangle and wring out this sense from this place, because the Gloss says so,
let them remember, that as Lyra's Gloss says, As we are made perfectly just
by Christ: so was he made a perfect sacrifice for us, to free us both a culpa
and poena, from the fault and the penalty: and not a lame sacrifice, or
imperfect, to free us only a culpa, but not a poena, as Papists say, reserving
the punishment for their purgatory. But of this hereafter. Howsoever, if they
will needs take sin there, for the sacrifice for sin: yet Christ was so
the sacrifice for sin, as must necessarily imply the imputation of our sins
upon his person. But enough of this place: which one place is enough to prove
the formal cause of our justification to be the righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us.

It follows therefore that the formal cause of our justification, that which
makes us truly just in the sight of God, yea before Gods judgment seat, is
the righteousness of Christ imputed to us; and that no otherwise, than our
sins were imputed to him, whereby he was made a malefactor, not by having
our sins in him, but upon him: He bore our sins upon him, says Peter. So
Esaias; He bare the sins of 1 Pet. 2. 24.
many, and was numbered with the transgressors. He is the Esaias 53. 12.
truth of the type of those two goats, Leuit. 16. the one slain, the other
let go: figuring the humanity the slain Goat, and the divinity of Christ,
the escape Goat: or the slain Goat, the death of Christ; and the escape Goat
his resurrection: For he dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
justification; which his rising again from the dead, is lively shadowed in the
escape Goat, on which Aaron put both his hands, and confessed over him all the
iniquities of the children of Israel, putting them upon the head of the Goat,
and sending him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness, where those
sins should never be seen more, verse. 21. He was that Joshua, the high
Priest, our Jesus, or Iehoshua and high Zach. 3. 3.
Priest; who offering himself upon the Cross, was clothed in filthy garments,
even with the menstruous cloth of our sins imputed unto him, or imposed upon
him: As Chrysostom Chrysostom. ex varii^ in Mat. locis. hom. 6. Esa. 61. 10. Glos.
ordin.
applies that place to Christ; that we might be clad in the glorious robes of
his righteousness put upon us: As the ordinary Gloss upon this place says
excellently: Jesus est indutus sordidis vestibus; quia qui peccatum non fecit,
pro nobis peccatum factus est. Sed haec sordida vestis est ei ab^ata, cum
nostrae deleuit peccata: vt quia ille sordidis indutus est vestibus, nos
resurgentes in eo, semper candida habeamus vestimenta; Jesus has filthy
raiment put upon him, because he that did no sin was made sin for us. But
this filthy raiment was taken from him, when he had cancelled our sins: that
because he was attired in filthy raiment, we rising again in him, may always
have white garments upon us. That we, as Jacob, being cladde in the sweet
smelling robes of our elder brother Christ, might be accounted as a field,
which the Lord has blessed; and so receive the blessing of the birthright in
our elder brothers name. As the type is very pregnant to this purpose:
whereupon Ambrose says thus; Jacob primogeniturae Ambros. lib. 2. de Jacob and
vita beata.
benedictionem obtinuit, vest fratris maioris natu indutus: fic vestis Christi
optimum odorem spirat, etc. Jacob clothed in the garment of his elder brother,
obtained the blessing of the birthright: so the garment of Christ does yield a
fragrant smell, etc. And again; Quod Isaac odorem vestium olfecit, fortasse
illud est, quia non operibus iustificamur, sed fide; quoniam carnalis
infirmitas operibus impedimento est: sed fidei claritas factorum obumbrat
errorem, quae meretur veniam delictorum: That Isaac smelled the odor of the
garments, happily it is to signify, that we are not justified by works, but by
faith: because carnal infirmity is an impediment to works; but the glory of
faith does shadow the error of our works, and procures pardon of our sins.
The convert Prodigal had the fat Calfe slain for him, and the best robe put
upon him. Every sinner is this Prodigal; yea, that believing repenting thief
hanging upon the Cross, as Saint Augustine compares them together. Jesus
Christ is the fat Calfe killed for us; his righteousness is that best robe
put upon us. So St. Augustine applies it: Proferat hic pater stolam illam
primam, induat filium Aug. de temp. ^^rb. sermon. c. 7.
immortalitate, quem secum videt in cruce pendentem: mactet vitulum saginatum,
hominem illum susceptum, etiam pro latronibus crucifixum: Let the father bring
forth that best robe, let him clothe his son with immortality, whom he sees
crucified with Christ: let him kill the fat Calfe, that man, taken and
crucified even for thieves. And the ordinary Gloss says: Adducite vitulam, id
est, praedicate Christum, and mortem eius insinuate: Bring forth the fat Calfe,
that is, preach Christ, and put men in mind of his death. Nor is that an
obscure type of Christ clothing us with his righteousness, which we find,
Genesis 3. 21. where the Lord God does make coats of skins, and therewith
clotheth the man and the woman. No doubt of skins of beasts sacrificed; types
of Christ. The Scripture it self leads us to this construction, so often
mentioning the putting on of Christ: as Gal. 3. 26. 27. Being by faith in Jesus
Christ made the children of God; and such, (says the Apostle) have put on
Christ. Now what is it to put on Christ, but to make him wholly ours? As the
king of Babel is said to put on Egypt, as a garment, in token that it was
become wholly his, Ier. 43. 12. Christ standing before Pilate to be judged, as
he took the purity of our nature in his conception; so now he put on the
impurity of our guilty persons in his condemnation.

And by the way, behold here a great mystery: The son of God, not only in our
innocent nature by assumption; but in our guilty persons by imputation, stands
before Pilate the Judge, to be sentenced by him. Why? what if Christ had been
killed by any of the sundry attempts of the malicious Jews, made upon his
person; as by casting him headlong down the steep Rock, as once they made
sure account of Luke 4. 29.
him, when they had him in the midst of them: yea and had laid hands on him,
leading him to the brow of the hill? No; it was not possible, in regard of the
purpose of Gods wisdom O admirable concourse of Gods wisdom and justice.
and justice, destinating his son to such a death, as he must dye, as Luke
24. 26. that Christ could be so put to death, by all the power and malice of
hell it self. For Gods wisdom so disposed, that the death of his son should
be such, as might be most effectual to satisfy and appease his fathers
wrath, and give a believer sure confidence in the day of judgment, as St. John
speaks, 1. Ioh. 2. 28. Otherwise, if it had been so, that Christ had been
killed in any such tumultuous manner, or in hugger mugger, and not by a legal
and judicial proceeding against him, how had his death secured us from the
terror of Gods Tribunal? Christ must dye; but he must first be sentenced and
judged to dye by a lawful Judge: And such was Pilate. For howsoever Pilate was
a man, and so subject to be led away with passion and affection, which as a
bribe does blind the eyes even of the wise, and peruerteth the ways of
judgment; yet a lawful Judge he was, deputed and appointed for that Province
by Caesar: yea, by a greater than Caesar, even by God himself; for every
earthly Judge sustains the person of God himself, who is the Judge of all the
world: Therefore Iehoshaphat, in his charge to the Judges 2. Chron* 19. 6.
whom he sent, said; Take heed what you do: for ye judge not for man, but for
the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. And such is the judgment and
sentence, which proceeds from the mouth of an earthly Judge, as that it is to
be taken and received as the judgment and sentence of God himself. As the wise
man speaks from the mouth of the holy Ghost; Many seek the Rulers favor: but
every man's judgment comes Prou. 28. 27.
from the Lord. Every man's judgment? Yes, every man's judgment. Nay more
(which is also there employed) every judgment whatsoever it be, true or false,
right or wrong, it proceeds (shall I say, from the Lord? Yes:) from the Lord.
Every man's judgment comes from the Lord: And yet many men co^plain that their
cause is unjustly censured and sentenced by the judge. But God is just, and
shall not he, the Judge of all the world, do right? doubtless he is most just,
and even that judgment which seems to us most unjust, coming from an earthly
judge: yet the same judgment coming from God, is most just. We will use no
other instance, but that judgment of Pilate, passed upon the Lord Jesus
Christ. Jesus Christ the innocent Lamb of God, stands arraigned at the bar
of Pilates iudgementseate: many accusations are brought against him, but
without any proof at all. And the Judge must go secundum allegata and
probata, according to the allegations and proofs, or else aequum licet
statuerit, haud aequus fuit: though he gives a just Sen^c. in Medea
sentence, yet himself is unjust. Well, the Jews with much vehemency of
mortal malice, accusing Christ before Pilate, Matthew. 27. 18.
but all without proof: Pilate knowing that of envy the Jews had delivered
him to him to be condemned, acquits Matthew. 27. 24.
Christ as an innocent person, and that solemnly before them all. But the
Jews at length prevailing with their wicked importunities, Pilate
contraprobata, passes and pronounces the sentence of condemnation upon
Christ, that he should dye. A most unjust and wicked sentence, if we consider
the person of the Judge, Pilate, a man swayed by humane affections (and
especially fear of men, the bane of many a good cause) who against his own
conscience, pronounced Christ guilty, and worthy of death, whom he knew for no
other, but a most innocent person. But now, take me this judgment as
proceeding from the tribunal of God, and we shall see it to be most just; for
in, or with Pilate, God sits upon the Tribunal to judge his own Son. But
God and Pilate pass the same sentence with a most different respect upon
Christ. For Christ here sustaines a twofold person: his own, which only
Pilate looked upon, not knowing any other; and so Pilates sentence of death was
most unjust: but Christ bore another person upon him, to wit, our sinful
person, which God looking upon, and finding him now in our stead, a guilty
person by the imputation of our sins, being our surety; he passes the same
sentence of death upon him, that Pilate did, and yet Gods sentence is most
just. Yea, but God the judge must go also, Secundum allegata and probata,
according to due allegations and true proofs: for, shall not the Judge of all
the world do right? But all the allegations and accusations brought against
Christ, wanted proof, yea they were most false. True. But consider Christ now
as he stood in our person: so all the allegations and accusations brought
against him were most true. In which respect, Christ at the hearing of them was
silent, as guilty persons who have nothing to answer for themselves; as he
that wanted his wedding garment, was speechless: because Christ knew that he
stood there in our person. Against whom, what accusation of sin can be
produced, but may easily be proved? Christ was accused of two maine impieties,
against God, and against the King, and the People; as a peruerter, and traitor.
All this wastrue; for sustaining our person, standing as our surety, and
undertaking to discharge all our debts, what debt was so great, what sin so
grievous, that he now stood not charged withal, and was not as culpable of?
This made him to be numbered among transgressors, not common offenders, but
transgressors, among criminal, yea capital malefactors; and for this very
reason, even Barabbas, a seditious murderer is preferred before him. If Christ
had not thus stood in our stead, been judged and condemned in our persons, he
had never saved the Thief upon the Cross. And therefore as St. Ambrose says,
Nemo est qui possit excludi, Ambros. in Psalm* 39. tom. 4.
quando receptus est Latro: There is none that can be shut out, when the
Thief is let in. And standing in our stead, if he had not been formally and
legally judged, and so condemned, we should never have been able to have
stood before Gods iudgement-seate. But now Christ being cast and condemned by a
lawful Judge, ordained and appointed of God; so that this judgment was not
man's judgment, but Gods; this gives a supersedeas, and a quietus est, to all
true believers, and penitent sinners, that they shall most assuredly stand
innocent and righteous before Gods iudgement-seat, seeing their sins are
already absolutely judged and condemned. For, as Christ was legally condemned
in our person: so shall we be before Gods Tribunal acquitted and absolved, as
just and righteous in his person. For, Who shall now lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is
Christ that is dead. O singular unspeakable comfort to all true believers! The
debt is discharged, and we are free. Christ is judged, and we acquitted; he is
condemned, and we absolved; his chastisement is our peace; his stripes our
healing. Esaias 53. 9.
So that now being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. Now we may which comfort Romans 5. 9.
and confidence, wait for the Son of God from heaven, whom God raised from
the dead, even Jesus, which has delivered us from the 1 These. 1. 10.
wrath to come, as says the Apostle. And all this, for that Christ in his own
person innocent, but in ours guilty, was judged and condemned, even by Gods
own judgment, though by the mouth of a mortal man, yea an unjust, though a
lawful judge. It is not therefore for nothing, that in our Creed we say, He
suffered under Pontius Pilate. O happy suffering under Pontius Pilate! But why
under Pontius Pilate? How comes Pontius Pilate in our Christian Creed? Surely
not for any honor due to his name, or to his person: but in memory of his
office and calling, as he was a Judge, who passed sentence on the Lord Jesus
Christ. This very article, wherein Pontius Pilate is mentioned, is a strong
argument to persuade me, that those who compiled this Creed, called the
Apostles Creed, did it by the special instinct of the holy Ghost, And in this
very Article does this Creed exceed all other Creedes, since it, of all the
rest, expresses the manner of Christ's condemnation; which being done by
Pontius Pilate the Judge, is the very life and soul of our justification. I
have dwelt the longer upon this point, as being a mystery of rare and singular
use to the Church of God. I confess I have looked into sundry Catechists and
Expositors upon the Creed, but I have not had the hap to meet with any to
lead me thus to consider of this point of Christ's suffering under Pontius
Pilate as a lawful Judge: which seems to my poor judgment, to be as a
secure road and safe harbor, for all heavenly Merchants to anchor in:
Although it be easy at the first sight, to take it rather as a history, than
as a mystery.

Much less may we wonder at Popish writers, who in their deuoutest meditations
set forth upon the passion of Christ (as Guiuara's mysteries of mount Caluary,
and such like) do express more womanish passions and affections in condoling
Christ's sufferings (like those daughters of Jerusalem, whose natural tears
Christ reproved in weeping for him, and would have them turned into spiritual
tears, in weeping for themselves) than any masculine discretion in discerning
the true cause and end of Christ's sufferings, as that he was thus iudicially
condemned in our persons, that so we might stand guiltless before Gods
judgment seat. A mystery altogether unknown to Pontifician spirits: as the
Gospel is hid to them that are lost; in whom the god of this world has
blinded the eyes of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them, 2. Cor. 4.
4. Of this sort also is that viperous brood of the Socinians, who oppugning the
doctrine of Christ's satisfaction in our persons, are easily confuted and
confounded by this very article of the Creed: whose madness is sufficiently
discovered by Lubbertus, Ludouicus Lucius, and others; so that they need none
other confutation: their arguments being but mere argutiae, no less futile,
than seemingly subtle; which as the hissings of the serpent, are to be hissed
and whipped out of Christ's school.

Now the imputation of Christ's obedience unto us to our Imputation negative and
affirmative.
justification, is partly negative, and partly affirmative. Negative in the not
imputing of sin unto us; whereof the Psalmist, and from him the Apostle,
speaks: Blessed are they Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Romans 4. 7. 8.
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: blessed is the
man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. The reason of this not imputing our
sins to us, is because they were imputed to Christ, he being judged and
condemned for them: As Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, being made a curse for us. In this respect the Apostle makes a
challenge in the behalf of all Gods chosen: Who shall condemn them? who shall
lay any thing to their charge? For if our sins be imputed to Christ, and he
bore them upon him, and discharged our debt; then it cannot possibly be, that
they should be imputed to us also, who believe in him. Also this' not imputing
our sins, includes in it an affirmative imputation, to wit, of the passive
obedience of Christ unto us: he suffering for us, whatsoever we should have
suffered; yea, even eternal death it self, for as much as the Eternal
suffered the nature of that death, though he only tasted of it, as the
Apostle says, Heb. 2. 9. yet he so tasted it, as that at once, as it were at
one morsel, he wholly devoured it, and swallowed it up in victory: as 1. Cor.
17. 54.

Secondly, Imputation affirmative, is the imputing of Christ's active obedience
and righteousness unto us; wherein, as in most rich robes, we stand most
gloriously arrayed in the presence of God. For as the Prophet says; To us a
child is borne, Esa. 9. 6. Christ's both active and passive obedience imputed
to us. Esa. 26. 12. Phil. 2. 7.
to us a son is given, etc. so that Christ is ours, as well in his birth and
life, as in his death. And Esaias says again, O Lord, thou will ordain peace
for us: for thou also have wrought all our works for us, or in us. This the
Apostle also declares; Christ made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death. Note, the Apostle speaks there
of the whole and entire humiliation and obedience of Christ, continued
throughout his whole life, even unto the death, the death of the Cross. Yea
Christ's obedience to the death was an active obedience; for, Passus est, quia
voluit: the Apostle applies that of the 40. Psalm, Heb. 10 9. for Christ
suffered willingly; to show, that in his very suffering, his obedience was
active. Now for whom did Christ become a servant, become obedient, but for us,
men, who by disobedience had made our selves servants, who were by creation
Lords of the world? So the Lord himself says: For even the Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but Mar. 10. 45.
to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. And again, I am among
you as one that serves. Now for whom was Christ, Luke 17. 19.
in the condition of his life, a servant? For himself? Not for himself, but
for us; as himself says: For their sakes I sanctify Ioh. 17. 19.
my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth, Ioh. 17. 19.
So that the active obedience of Christ in his life, his holiness, as of a
servant, is also imputed to us: For how Ioh. 17. 19.
was he a servant in our person, but that he might free us from the condition
of servants? That as the passive obedience of Christ in his death removed away
from us the rags of our sins, the badge and band of our servitude: So Christ's
active obedience in his life has put upon us the most glorious liberty of our
infranchisement and freedom; his death has cleansed us, and his life has
clothed us. These two therefore are in no sort to be divided; unless we would
be content to have our deliverance from hell, separated from our inheritance in
heaven, and still to be subject to the punishment of loss, though free from
the punishment of sense; like those infants, who dying unbaptized, the
Pontificians have devised to put them in a certain Limbus, or Hell, wherein
they must suffer, though not the punishment of sense, yet the punishment of
loss, as they say. But as this is a mere fiction and fable; so is that other:
it being as impossible for a man, ^uer to come to possess the Kingdom of
Heaven, without the imputation of Christ's active obedience and righteousness,
as without his passion imputed, ever to escape hell fire So that Christ cannot
be divided; we must have him whole, or none. For it was necessary, that the
active righteousness of Christ, should both go before, and accompany his
passive obedience; seeing, without the active, the passive should have been
altogether unprofitable: therefore they are joined together, Phil. 2. 7 8. that
so his passive, might seal unto us his active, and his active, sanctify unto
us his passive* Nay, was not his passive obedience also active, by a voluntary
offering up of himself? Was he not obedient unto the death? Says not Christ
himself, Ioh. 10. 15. I lay down my life for my sheep, and verse. 17.
Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might
take it again: and verse. 18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of
my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.
Christ's passive obedience therefore being it self also active, how can these
two possibly be separated and divorced one from the other? That as the passive
obedience of Christ has freed us from sin, hell, death, and condemnation; so
the active obedience of his life, might restore us unto, and possess us in the
perfect state of righteousness, life, salvation, and the Kingdom of heaven.
Yea, these two are so inseperable, as that the confluence of all the sweet
streams of Christ's active obedience in his life, have a most sweet and
comfortable influence, into the bitter sea of his passive obedience in his
death; making it to be a most perfect and entire sacrifice, the holiness of
Christ's life sanctifying his death, and showing him to be that Lamb of God,
without spot or blemish. So that we cannot be partakers of Christ's passive
obedience, without his active; lest he prove unto us a lame and imperfect
sacrifice. And therefore, the Apostle does infold the affirmative imputation in
the negative: saying, Even as David also described the blessedness of the Rom*
4. 6.
man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works: saying, Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Here is imputation of
righteousness without works, concurring with the not imputing of sins. For
even the passive obedience of Christ, whereby our sins come not to be
imputed, had in it the holiness and virtue of his active The righteousness of
his life, was as a perfume to to make his passion a sweet smelling sacrifice.
Stella in Luc. cap. 4. ini^.
obedience throughout his whole life, having been obedient unto his death,
that so the righteousness of his life also might be imputed unto us. Stella,
upon Luke, says; Omnes passiones Christi potius actionis nomine appellandae
sunt, quam passiones. Christi martyrium, and crucis eius tormentum, nihil
redemptioni nostrae prodessent, nisi actionem habuissent, quod est, velle
flage^^ari, and velle crucifigi: All the passions or sufferings of Christ, are
rather to be called actions than passions. The martyrdom of Christ, and the
torment of his Cross, had auailed nothing to our redemption, if they had not
had action; which is, to be willing to be scourged, and willing to be crucified.

He therefore that separates the active obedience of Christ in his life, from
his passive in his death, is like the man in the Gospel, whom when the
unclean spirit had clean left, returned, Luke 11. 24.
and finding him as an house swept, with whited walls, but void of the garnish
of grace, he takes seven other spirits worse than himself, makes with them his
re-entry, and dwells there: so the last state of that man, is worse than the
first. Such is he that seems to be cleansed from his sins, and all his
uncleanness (like a new swept house) by acknowledging the righteousness of
Christ's passive obedience in his death, imputed to him; but neglecting, yea
rejecting the righteousness of Christ's active obedience in his life, as
nothing pertaining to him in the point of justification: but as though he must
have a selfe-garnish, as of a whited wall, inherent in him, whereby to claim
the kingdom of heaven, he becomes seven times more unclean than he was
before, O never let Christ's life and death be divided, his active obedience and
his passive let ever go together; lest if we let go the one, we lose both.
Therefore give me whole Christ, or none: both his death, that I may not dye for
ever from him; and his life, that I may live for ever with him. The learned and
godly Cardinal Contarenus, who lived in Luthers time, and writ soundly of
justification, says well to this purpose: Omnis Christi iustitia attribuitur
nobis, quicunque Christum induimus: The whole righteousness of Christ is
attributed or imputed to us, as many as have put on Christ. For (to conclude
this in a word) the redemption by Christ procures two things unto us;
deliverance from death, and the purchase of life. By his passive obedience he
wrought the first, by his active the second: For properly the death of Christ
was to free us from death; but the life of Christ to infeoffe us in life. The
condition of the first Adams life was, Do this, and live: the second Adam has
done it, that we might live eternally; eternally, not as Adam had the promise,
here on earth: but in heaven. Hence it is, that as Jesus Christ descended into
the state of death, to redeem us thence by his death: So he came down from
heaven, that in the humility and obedience of his life on earth, he might exalt
us thither: whither (else) not even Adams best obedience could ever have
brought him; much less ours. Which may answer to a question, that here may be
fitly moved.

Quest. Whether the obedience of the whole Law of God, wrought by Christ for
us, is available as to redeem us from the punishment of sin, so to purchase
unto us eternal life in heaven? The reason of the question, is, because not
the Law, if it had been for ever perfectly fulfilled by Adam, had any promise
of that eternal life, and immediate vision in heaven, but only of this life.
Heaven is not within the Covenant of works.

Answ. True it is, that the fulfilling of the Law in it self simply
considered, has no proportion with that endless life above. For the first
Adam was of the earth earthly; and all his happiness promised upon the
condition of keeping the Law, for ought is revealed or can be demonstrated, was
terrestrial. But now forasmuch as the Law is fulfilled by Christ, this
obedience reaches to a higher reward (because there is a higher promise made)
than that of the first Adam; Because Christ the second Adam is the Lord from
heaven, the Eternal, whose Kingdom is not of this world, but of a better, a
heavenly, whose house is not made with hands. So that his obedience to the Law
in regard of his person, becomes a rich and inestimable purchase of that better
Kingdom for us. For as is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly, to
wit, the generation of God in and by Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 48. 49. 50. vide
and John 3. 13. No man ascends up to heaven, but he etc.

Thus have we proved out of the holy Scriptures, how the formal cause of
justification, or that which gives a perfect being to our justification, making
us perfectly just in the sight of God, is the imputation of Christ's
righteousness unto us, and that even of his whole righteousness, active in
his life, and passive in his death.

And that the formal cause of our justification is not within us, but without
us, not inherent, but by imputation, may easily appear from the maine
difference between the first Covenant and the second. The first Covenant was
that which was made with Adam in Paradise: Do this, and live: the second that
made with man after his fall, Believe, and live. So the first Covenant was of
works, the second of faith, the first, of an inherent righteousness of our
own: the second, of a righteousness without us; not our own simply, but by
relation, namely made ours, to wit, Christ's righteousness, who of God is made
unto us righteousness, called in Scriptures 1 Cor 1. ^0. Romans 10. 6.
the righteousness which is of faith. Not to observe and know this difference
well, is the ready way to lead men into all error of this mystery of God.
The Apostle does notably set down this difference between the first and second
Covenant, as terms infinitely opposite, and admitting of no reconciliation,
Romans 10. 3. when he says, that the Jews being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves to the unrighteousness of God. For Christ is the end
of the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes. For Moses
describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does
those things, shall live by them. But the righteousness which is of Faith, is
to confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and to believe in thy heart, that
God raised him from the dead, and thou shall be saved. Also Romans 11. 6. If it
be by grace, it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace: but if
it be of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more work.
Also Romans 4. the Apostle setting down this same opposition between the
Covenant of works and of faith, says on this wise, v. 2. etc. If Abraham were
justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God. For, what
says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace,
but of debt: but to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Even as David also
describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works: saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord will not impute
sin. What clearer Testimonies? Yea, this did God himself teach us not
obscurely by his own act, Genesis 3. For when Adam had forfeited the first
Covenant, which was of works, made with him in Paradise before his fall, and
after his fall had made with him another Covenant, to wit, of faith in Christ,
the promised seed of the woman: What does God thereupon? He shuts man out of
Paradise, and from the Tree of life, lest putting forth his hand, he should
take of it, and live for ever. What is meant hereby? Paradise was not only the
place, but also did signify the happy condition of Adams blessedness, which
he was to enjoy in his innocence: the Tree of life was a sacrament and symbol
of life, appointed as a special means to preserve man from dying, or decaying
in his natural strength, so long as he continued in his obedience. But by
disobedience he forfeited the Covenant, brake the condition, lost his former
happiness, and was deprived of the means of that life, wherein he should
have lived for ever upon earth. Now God shutting him out from the earthly
Paradise, the place of earthly bliss, and from the Tree of life, the sacrament
and symbol of immortality, and having showed unto him another Tree of life in
the midst of the Paradise of God, to wit, Jesus Christ, who is very God and
eternal life; which whosoever by reaching out the hand of Faith, eats of,
shall live for ever God (I say) does hereby plainly teach us, that in
attaining to the heavenly Paradise by the Tree of life Jesus Christ, we must
not have any more to do with the things pertaining to the first Covenant, now
altogether forfeited; and from which Adam and his posterity is for ever
banished, never to return or intermeddle there any more, Genesis 3, 22. 23. 24.
Therefore to teach, and believe, the doctrine of an inherent righteousness,
whereby to attain eternal life, is even as it were in despite of God, and of
his holy Angels the Cherubims, keeping the way of the Tree of life, to revive
the old Covenant of works again, and with the hand of the body, to wit, good
works, reach out to take of the tree of life. This is a Babylonish confounding
of the two Covenants, which stand upon such irreconcilable terms of
difference. Is there no more difference between, Do this, and live: and,
Believe, and live? between man's own righteousness, and Gods righteousness,
the establishing of the one, being the abolishing of the other? Nor is it to
purpose, that these Babylonians allege, that they ascribe their inherent
righteousness to God, as the author of it, and by whom it is infused into
them. Adam in his purest naturals could say no less, but that all his inherent
righteousness was the gift of God: for what had he, that he had not received?
Therefore the maine point of difference between the righteousness of the
first Covenant, and of the second, is in this, That the one was inherent, and
within a man, the other imputed, and without a man. Otherwise, what real
difference can be imagined to be between them? the difference chiefly
consisting in a direct opposition. Nor will they difference these two Covenants
of righteousness in regard of nature and grace, lest they should offend their
Thomas Aquinas, who allows to the first Adam original righteousness,
consisting (as he says) in a supernatural grace, or that which they call
Gratia gratum faciens, the chief grace of all. Aqu. 1. q. 95. 1. and q. 100
ibid. Although Aquinas in so saying, plainly shows his ignorance in the
difference between the first and second Adam. For that grace which he says
was given to Adam, was never given, till Jesus Christ was revealed, who was the
only fountain of this grace, John 1. 17.

Now let us see what judgment the ancient Fathers of the Church are of in this
point. Wherein when we come to Fathers, the Pontificians cast up their caps in
triumph, as if the field were theirs. Hence it is that the Trent Fathers had
such a hard conceit of the very word Imputation, that they Hist. Council. Trid.
l. 2. p. 157. Latina editio.
desired it should be quite cashiered and cancelled, as a word never used of
the ancient Fathers: although as the History there says, that the terms of
communication, participation, diffusion, deriuation, application, computation,
and conjunction, are familiar enough with them. Others were of opinion, that
seeing the thing it self was evident enough, there needed no quarrel about
the word, especially, seeing by this word the same is precisely meant, that is
expressed in other words. And though Imputation be not found used of all the
Fathers, nor so frequently, yet of some it is, namely, of Bernard in his 109.
Epistle. Vega also did affirm, That that word, though it be not found in the
Scriptures, yet that it is a very proper Latin word; and that the righteousness
of Christ may most truly be said, to be imputed to mankind for merit and
satisfaction, and always to be imputed to all that are justified, satisfying
for their own sins: but to be imputed to them, as if it were their own, he
approved not. Whereunto, when it was objected what St. Thomas was wont to say,
That the passion of Christ for the remission of sins, was so communicated to
him that is baptized, as if himself had undergone it, or had suffered death:
there was sharp and long contention about his words. The Master of the
Eremites was of opinion, that in the Sacrament of Baptism Christ's
righteousness was imputed, because in all, and every respect, it is
communicated: but not in Penance, wherein our satisfaction also is required.
Soto confessed, that the term of Imputation was very popular and plausible, as
which seems at the first blush, to ascribe all to Christ; yet in regard of
those consequences which the Lutherans draw thence, he always had it in
suspicion, as we touched before. Of which sort are, That the only imputation
of Christ's righteousness is sufficient, and no inherent required; that
Sacraments confer no grace; that, together with the sin, the whole
punishment was so abolished, that there was no place left for satisfaction;
that all the faithful were equals in grace, righteousness, and glory; whence
was collected that execrable blasphemy, that all were equally just with the
blessed Virgin. Which words (says the History) made that word so edious to the
minds of the hearers, that they were most propense, and bent to damn it for
heretical, notwithstanding strong reasons were alleged to the contrary. These
altercations and bickerings amongst the Divines, flowed chiefly from the
immoderate affection of each to that Sect, to which he had addicted himself.
Thus the History.

But come we to the Fathers: among whom, though we find not the word
Imputation precisely, yet the thing it imports, we find expressly; according
to the opinion of some in the Council, mentioned but now, saying: That seeing
the thing it self was clear enough, there needed no quarrel about the words;
especially seeing by this word, the same is precisely meant, that is expressed
in other words. And by the way, Andreas Vega triumphs greatly, that among all
the Vega de ver^ and fi^ia ius^if lib. 15. cap. 2,
Fathers, he cannot find the word Imputation; as neither in the Scriptures,
that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us unto righteousness: although he
confess the word Imputation to be there used, as, faith imputed for
righteousness, and sin not imputed. And (says he) the ancient Doctors of
the Church, before Bernard, were contented for this purpose to use the words of
communication, of participation, application, copulation, conjunction: but
never the word Imputation, as that Christ's righteousness were so imputed to
us, as if it were made ours. But those Authors, and authorities which he
alleges, do speak very significantly to the purpose, to confirm this
doctrine of imputation. As first St. Augustine: Communicatio passionum Christi,
virtus tua erit; The communication of the sufferings of Christ, is thy virtue.
And to pass by others, Thomas Aquinas says: Omni baptizato communicatur
passio Christi in remissionem, ac si ipse passus and mortuus esset: The passion
of Christ is communicated to every one baptized for remission of sins, as if he
himself had suffered and dyed. And again, as the same Vega alleges him:
Poena passionis Christi communicatur baptizato, in quantum fit membrum Christi,
ac si ipse poenam illam sustinuisset: The punishment of the passion of Christ
is communicated to him that is baptized, in as much as he is made a member of
Christ, as if he himself had sustained the same punishment. And yet (says
Vega) neither there, nor elsewhere, to my remembrance, does he say, that the
punishments of the passion of Christ are imputed to us, as if they were our
own. And perhaps (says he) it came to pass by the instinct and providence
of the holy Ghost, that the Ancients never in this case used the word
Imputation, lest the Heretics might seem to have taken from them the hint
and occasion of their errors. So Vega. Or rather, do not Pontificians even
wilfully make it an occasion, of confirming themselves in this their heresy,
while they will rather believe, what they find men have precisely said, than
cleave to that, which God himself in his Word has so expressly defined; as
neither Rome is named in Scripture for the Whore of Babylon, nor the Pope for
the man of sin. But in the mean time, let any indifferent man judge, what
more could have been expressed by the word Imputation, than they have done by
the word Communication (whom Vega has quoted) to show how thereby the
righteousness of Christ is made wholly ours, his sufferings our sufferings, as
if we our selves had suffered. But yet let us see a little further into the
language of the Fathers, concerning this point. Only by the way, seeing Vega
cannot find the word Imputation once mentioned among the ancient Fathers, let
him look but St. Augustines Epist. 106. to Bonifacius, or as some copies have
it, to Paulinus, and there he shall find these words: Cur meritis praeueniri
gratia perhibetur, quae gratia non esset, si secundum meritum imputaretur: Why
is grace said to be prevented by merits, which should not be grace, if it were
imputed according to merit. Yea, how often does Augustine mention the Apostles
words, where he says; Fides imputaretur ad iustitiam: Faith is imputed unto
righteousness? But let us contend not so much for the word; as for the thing
it self, which we shall find the Fathers to abound in. St. Ambrose writing
upon the 39. Psalm, says; Totus ex persona Christi iste Psalmus est:
Iustitiam meam dicit, Anbrosan Psalm. 39.
licet non arroganter and homo dicere possit Iustitiam suam, qui Deo credit,
and fidem suam sibi reputar^ ad iustitiam confitetur: This whole Psalm is of
the person of Christ; therefore he says, My righteousness; though also a man
that believes in God, and confesses that his faith is reputed to him for
righteousness, may without arrogance say, his righteousness. Now although
Ambrose say (speaking of Christ) Iustitiam meam, in stead of Iustitiam tuam (as
it is in the original, and also in the vulgar Latin, he following some other
copy) yet hereby we may see his understanding in the mystery of Christ;
namely, how Christ's righteousness comes to be our righteousness, our faith
being imputed to us for righteousness, as the Scripture says. Saving that
Ambrose uses the word Reputing, for Imputing; differing very little in the
sound, but nothing at all in the sense. The same Ambr. in epist. ad Gal. cap. 3.
Ambrose writing upon the Epistle to the Galatians, where he opposes the
righteousness of the Law, and that of Christ one against the other, upon these
words: for if there had been a Law given, which could have given life, verily,
righteousness had been by the Law: says, Iustitiam hanc dicit, quae apud
Deum imputatur iustitia, id est, fidei; quia and lex habuit iustitiam, sed ad
praesens, quia non iustificaret apud Deum: remittere enim peccata non potuit,
vt de peccatoribus faceret iustos; he says, that righteousness, which of God
is imputed; to wit, the righteousness of faith: since the Law also had a kind
of righteousness, but temporary, that could not justify with God: for it
could not forgive sins, and so of sinners make men to be just. So that here
is another ancient Father, using the very word Imputation. And a little after,
upon these words; As many as have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have put on
Christ: says, Hoc dicit, quia credentes, dum immutantur, Christum induunt,
quando hoc appellantur, quod credunt: This he says, because believers, while
they are changed, do put on Christ, when they are called that, which they
believe. So that by St. Ambrose his doctrine, our justification is by
imputation of grace by faith, in the putting on of Christ. And St. Austine,
besides the former alleged place, where he defines justification to be a
making of one just, by accounting him so, or by deputing and reckoning him
just: says, in Psa. 32. Nolo vos interrogare Aug de spir. and liter. ad
Marceltom. 3. Aug. in Psalm. 32. enar.
de iustitia vestra; sortassis autem nemo vestrum audeat mihi respondere,
iustus sum: sed interrogo vos de fide vestra. Sicut nemo vestrum audet dicere,
Iustus sum; sic nemo non audet dicere, Fidelis sum. Nondum quaero, quid viuas:
sed quaero, quid credas? responsuruses, credere te in Christum. Non audisti
Apostolum, Iustus ex fide viuit? fides tua, iustitia tua: I will not ask you
of your righteousness; for happily none of you dare answer me, I am righteous:
but I ask you of your faith. As none of you dare say, I am just; so you dare
not but say, I am a believer. I demand not yet, how thou live: but how thou
beleeuest? thou will answer me, thou beleeuest in Christ. Have thou not heard
the Apostle, The just shall live by faith? Thy faith is thy righteousness. And
upon the 30. Psalm, the same Father does further clear his mind touching
imputative righteousness, upon these words of the Psalm; Rid me, and deliver
me in thy righteousness: Nam si attendas ad iustitiam meam, damnas me. In tua
iustitia ^rue me: est enim iustitia Dei, quae and nostra fit, cum donatur
nobis. Ideo autem Dei iustitia dicitur, ne homo se putet a seipso habere
iustitiam: For if thou look upon my righteousness, thou condemnest me. In
thy righteousness deliver me; for it is the righteousness of God, which is
made also ours, when it is given unto us. And therefore is it called Gods
righteousness, lest man should think that he has righteousness of himself.
Now what righteousness does this holy man mean here? The righteousness of
God made ours by infusion of grace into us? So, I know, the Pontificians would
be ready to interpret this place. But let St. Augustine be his own
interpreter, who adds in the very next words: Sic enim dicit Apostolus
Paulus; Credenti in eum, qui iustificat impium: So says the Apostle Paul; To
him that believes in him, that justifies the ungodly. Quid est, Qui
iustificat impium? Qui ex impio facit iustum: deputatur sides eius ad
iustitiam: What is that, Which justifies the ungodly? Who of ungodly and
wicked makes just: his faith is deputed for righteousness. Yea, this holy man,
is so far from ascribing the least part of justification to any inherent
righteousness in us, as that he excludes even faith it self, as it is a
work, from being any meritorious cause of our justification. For elsewhere
speaking of Gods election and vocation, of grace, and not of Aug. ad Simplic*
lib. 1. qu^^.
works, alleging the examples of lacob and Esau; the one loved, the other
hated, even in the womb, before either of them had done good or evil, etc.
that the election of God might stand, not of works, etc. Si autem verum est,
quod non ex operibus; and inde hoc probat, quia de nondum natis, nondumque
aliquid operatis dictum est: vnde nec ex side, quae in nondum natis similiter
nondum erat: And if it be true, that it is not of works; and from thence he
proves it, because it was said of them before they were borne, and before they
had done any thing: whereupon, neither was it in respect of faith, which
likewise (as a work) was not as yet in them, being yet unborn. And again;
Iustificati gratis per gratiam ipsius, ne fides ipsa superba sit. Aug. epist.
106. Bonifacio out Paulino.
Nec dicat sibi quis, si ex fide, quomodo gratis? quod enim fides meretur, cur
non potius redditur, quam donatur? Non dicat ista homo fidelis; quia cum
dixerit, vt merear iustificationem, habeo fidem: respondetur ei, Quid enim
habes, quod non accepisti? Being justified freely by his grace, lest faith it
self should be proud. Nor let any man say to himself, if it be of faith, how
is it freely? for that which faith meriteth, why is it not rather rendered as
due, than freely given? Let no believer speak thus: for when he shall say, I
have faith, that I may merit justification; it is answered him, For what have
thou, that thou have not received? Thus this holy man disclaimes all merit of
works in us; yea even of faith it self, though it be the instrument to apply
the righteousness of God in Christ unto us, whereby we are truly justified.
And it stands with good reason: For faith justifies not by virtue of the act
of believing, but as the instrument, in applying the object, which is Christ.
As the hand is said to heal, only by applying the medicine; or to enrich, by
receiving a treasure; or to feed, by putting meat into the mouth: as we say, a
child is fed with a spoone, when the milk only feeds. So faith, by
applying Christ, the true balm, heals: by receiving Christ, the true
treasure, inricheth: by conuaying Christ, the true bread and water of life,
feeds the soul. St. Augustine also in his first Sermon upon the 70. Psalm,
says: In eum credo, qui iustificat impium, vt deputetur sides mea ad
iustitiam: I believe in him that justifies the ungodly, that my faith may be
deputed (he comes very near Imputed) for righteousness.

It would fill a large volume, to set down the Tracts and sayings of this holy
Father, to this purpose, seeing all his works are every where perfumed with
this most sweet and Catholic doctrine of justification, through the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us; not for any grace inherent in us,
though it be the gift of God, bestowed on us for Christ's sake. I will only
add one or two sayings more of this holy man. Per fidem induendo Christum
omnes fiunt filij; non natura, Aug. expos. epist. ad Galat. lib.
sicut vnicus Filius: sed filij fiunt participatione sapientiae, id praeparante
atque praestante Mediatoris fide; quam fidei gratiam nunc indumentum vocat, vt
Christum induti sint, qui in eum crediderunt: and ideo filij Dei, fratresque
eius Mediatoris effecti sunt: In putting on Christ by faith, all are made
sons; not sons by nature, as is the only begotten Son, but they are made
sons, by the participation of wisdom, being prepared and performed by the
faith of the Mediator; which grace of faith he now calls a clothing or
putting on; so that they have put on Christ, that have believed in him: and
therefore they are made the sons of God, and brethren of the Mediator. What
plainer words could this holy Father have used to express the nature of
justification, in the imputative righteousness of Christ, than by calling
imputation a participation of Christ, by the means of faith? in which respect,
he calls faith a putting on, because thereby Christ, with all his
righteousness, is put upon us, and so we are made the sons of God. Justin
Martyr says: Quid aliud peccata nostra potuisset Just. Mart. in epist. ad Diog.
tegere, quam Christi iustitia? O beneficia expectationem omnem exuperantia! vt
iniquitas quidem multorum, in vno iusto abscondatur; iustitia autem vnius
faciat, vt multi iniusti pro justice habeantur: What else could have covered our
sins, but Christ's righteousness? O blessings exceeding all expectation! that
the iniquity of many should be covered in one righteous person: and that the
righteousness of one should cause, that many unjust, should be accounted just.
And of later times, devout ^ern. sermon. ad ^ni^^c. temp. c. 11
Bernard: More in Christi morte fugatur, and Christi nobis iustitia imputatur:
Death is vanquished in Christ's death, and Christ's righteousness is imputed to
us. And again: Qui nostram Ibid.
and induit carnem, and subijt mortem, putas, suam nobis negabit iustitiam?
voluntary incarnatus, voluntary passus, voluntary crucifixus, solam a nobis
retinebit iustitiam? Christus peccati meritum tulit, suam nobis donando
iustitiam: He that both took upon him our flesh, and undertook death, will
he, trow you, deny us his righteousness? voluntarily incarnate, voluntarily
suffering, voluntarily crucified, will he keep from us his only
righteousness? And writing to Innocentius, he says: Bern. epist. 190. ad
Innocent.
Homo qui debuit, homo qui soluit. Nam si vnus pro omnibus mortuus est, ergo
omnes mortui sunt: vt videlicet satisfactio vnius omnibus imputetur, sicut
omnium peccata vnus ille portauit: It was man that was indebted, and man that
paid it. For if one died for all, then were all dead: to the end, that the
satisfaction of one should be imputed to all, even as he alone bore the sins
of all. Ambrose also upon these words of the Apostle; Christ A nbros. erat. ad
Auxent. post epist. 32. Cyrit in Esai. lib. 5. cap. 59. in fine. Cord creditur
ad iustitiam, ore autem ^it confessio ad salutem. Accepimus itaque a Deo verbum
fidei, and confessionem. Quod quidem salutare est, and iustitiam conciliat.
Iustificat enim sic impium Christus, quod and palam clamitat: Ecce, deleui vt
nubem iniquitates tuas, and vt caliginem peccata tua Hec enim verbum fidei in
nobis erit perpetuo, and de ore nostro non cessa^it, sed il'ud ad posteritatem
vsque transmittemus: sic enim iustificabuntur and pesteri. Si enim semper
Christus ^it and Deus and Dominus, nunquam definet fidei eius confessio apud
eos, qui illius apparitionem agnouerunt.
was made a curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on
tree; says: Non ille maledictus, sed in te maledictus: Christ was not
accursed, but in thee was he accursed. lust so are we in him blessed. Saint
Cyril also upon these words of Esaias; The Deliverer shall come forth of Sion,
and shall turn away iniquities from Jacob, etc. concludes thus, from Romans 10 10.
For with the heart, etc. With the heart, says he, man believes to
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation. We have
therefore received of God the word of faith, and confession. Which word
brings salvation, and procures righteousness: For Christ does so justify
the ungodly, that he proclaims; Behold, I have removed thine iniquities as a
cloud, and thy sins as a mist. For this word of faith shall be for ever in
us, and shall never cease from our mouth; but we shall transmit and convey it,
even unto posterity. For thus also shall posterity be justified: For if Christ
be for ever both God and Lord, the confession of this his faith, shall never
fail with those, who have acknowledged his appearing. So Cyril. This therefore
was among the ancient Fathers of the Church, and they have sent it down to us
their posterity, as the Catholic faith to be confessed of all Gods children,
until the appearing of Jesus Christ, that our justification stands in the
merits of Christ, and the mercies of God, in the remission of our sins, and
the not imputing them unto us. But the Trent-Fathers, and the Church of Rome,
as being not the legitimate posterity, but the bastard brood, (falsely
pretending from those holy Fathers) disclaim this Catholic faith, concerning
justification in the remission of sins (which God in the forenamed place of
Esaias, calls his new Covenant, or Testament) and does anathematize and curse to
the pit of hell, all those, that have, or shall place our justification in the
only imputation of Council. Trid. Ses. 6. cap. 7. and Can. 11.
Christ's righteousness, or in the remission of sins, without our inherent
righteousness; as appears in the former Chapter.

What needs more testimony in such a cloud of witnesses? Among all which, not
a word of any inherent righteousness, not a word of infusion of grace, not a
word of hope and charity joined with faith, as equally concurring, much less
precurring and out-stripping faith, in the work of justification: not a word
of imputation so to be understood, as if Christ did therefore merit, that we
might have grace inherent, or of our own, whereby to be justified in Gods
sight. Although true it is, that the same ancient Fathers do often call our
inherent righteousness, which is our sanctification, by the name of
justification; but they never say, that hereby we are justified in the sight of
God.

In a word, the consideration of the true difference, between the first
covenant and the second, does easily conclude the truth of this doctrine. The
first covenant made with Adam in Paradise, was the covenant of works; Do this
and live: but the second covenant opposite to that, is of grace; Believe and
live: as the Apostle does notably oppose faith against works in our
justification. Therefore unless we would bring man again into the estate of
Adam, in his earthly Paradise, before his fall, and so shut out Christ the
second Adam: to plead justification by works is a monstrous drea^^e.
Therefore it was not for nothing, that our first Parents were banished out of
that earthly Paradise; typically to teach them, that now they had no more to do
with that first condition of their creation, the happiness whereof, depended
upon the covenant of works: but now they must seek a new Paradise that is, a
heavenly, and that by a new and living way; to wit, by faith in Christ: which
is that covenant of grace, opposite to the covenant of works. So opposite,
that, as the Apostle says, If it be of grace, then it is no more of works;
otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more
grace; otherwise work is no more work, Romans 11. 6.

CHAP. VI. Of the isntrumental cause of justification; and first of the Roman
Catholic doctrine herein.
THE Council of Trentputs no other isntrumental cause Council. Tri^. Ses. 6.
cap. 7.
of justification, but the Sacrament of Baptism; which (says she) is the
instrument of faith, without which faith, no man could ever obtain
justification. Where notwithstanding, she would seem not altogether to
exclude faith, as a party-instrument. But because Baptism is so understood as
an isntrumental cause, as will require rather a particular discourse by it
self; we will show here what allowance they give to faith in justification.
That which the Pontificians ascribe to faith in the work of justification, is
either, that it is a work of grace, preparing and disposing a man to receive
the grace of justification (as being the beginning of other graces, and going
before justification, as appears out of the Trent Council, Ses. 6. cap. 8.)
or else that it is a grace, concurring with other graces infused and inherent;
as hope, and charity, and such like, by which jointly a man comes to be
justified: otherwise, they allow faith no hand at all in justification; As may
appear in the Council of Trent, the sixth Council. Trid. Ses. 5. cap. 8. Can.
9. and 11.
Session, the ninth and eleventh Canons: Si quis dixerit, sola fide impium
iustificari, etc. If any man shall say, that a sinner is justified by faith
alone, etc. And if any man shall say, that men are justified either by the
only imputation of Christ's righteousness, or by the only remission of
sins, excluding grace and charity, which is shed abroad in their hearts by
the holy Ghost, and is inherent in them; or also, that the grace whereby we are
justified, is only the favor of God, let him be Anathema, or accursed.
Whereupon, Vega in his gloss upon this place, sets this down for his prime
conclusion: Certissima Vega de justice. great. fide* etc. qu. 2. Prima conclusio.
fide est tenendum, fidem solam absque operibus alijs, neque satis esse ad
iustificationem acquirendam, neque ad tenendam acquifitam: We are to hold by a
most certain belief, that faith alone, without other works, is neither
sufficient to procure justification, nor being procured, to preserve it. And
what those other works be, he tells us, to wit; first, Baptism; secondly,
the Eucharist or the Mass; thirdly, Penance; fourthly, Confession and
Absolution; fifthly, the keeping of the Commandments, etc. And again:
Multipliciter posse hominem iustificari, Vega de praecipua causa iustific. qu.
3.
and prima quidem, ac communior magisque protrita via est per poenitentiam:
secunda dilectio Dei super omnia, etc. We say, that a man may be justified
many ways. The first, and more common beaten way, is by penance: the second,
by the love of God above all: the third, by martyrdom: the fourth, by prayer
(no doubt so many Pater-nosters, and Aue-maries upon beads, and observing
Cann^nicall hours) the fifth, by the Sacraments of the Church; and especially,
by Baptism, Penance, and the Eucharist. Penance, you must note, is in great
request in the work of justification, being here again repeated and rancked
in the midst, between Baptism and the Eucharist, because in Penance there
is not only Confession, to know what is in the conscience, but satisfaction,
to tell what is in a man's purse, if he will deal by commutation. And in the
last place, Probabilis est etiam sexta, vt videtur, via, nempe per fidem: It
seems also probable, that there is a fixed way, namely by Faith. But this way
of faith comes lag in the rear, and it is but probable neither, nay it does
but seem probable. The other ways therefore are their common highways of
justification: this of Faith is only a way of sufferance, and that in some
case of Necessity; yet with special restriction too, as justifying a man
only from original sin, as Vega there adds: Videtur enim probabile, etc.
For it seems probable, that if a man be infected only with original sin,
and so soon as he should come to the use of reason, having heard the preaching
of faith, and seen miracles to confirm it, should be willing to receive it
for the saving of his soul: by this only, that he gives credit unto it, he
should be justified, and have his original sin pardoned. But here, me
thinks, Vega forgets himself in two things: first, that he puts faith in the
last place, which elsewhere he puts in the first. Secondly, that he attributes
that to faith, to wit, the taking away of original sin, which either was
taken away before in the baptized, or if the party were not yet baptized, Faith
is not sufficient to justify him from original sin without Baptism, either
in facto, or in voto, in deed, or in desire: Yea, in the conclusion he says
peremptorily, Non fides, sed poenitentia primas parts tenet in reconciliatione
peccatoris: Not faith, but penance has the chief place in the reconciliation
of a sinner. For (says he) Penance is the immediate cause, or immediate
disposition: and as it seems, sufficient with Gods grace, to our
justification; yea, it perfecteth and consummateth our justification. But Faith
is not such a near disposition to justification, and it remains in sinners,
and our justification is but as it were initiated by it. It is evident
therefore, that the most potent cause of our justification, is penance, and
therefore that we are justified, it is to be imputed to it, and not to faith.
So he. Nay such is the Pontifician hatred against Faith, that Vega, Trents
Interpreter, denies even Faith, that is formed by grace and charity (as they
say) to be sufficient to justification. As he says, Quamuis eo ipso, quod
aliquis per fidem Vega de justice. great. etc. qu. 1. propos. 2.
iustificetur, fiat fides illius formata, tamen non sequitur, quod per eam, vt
formatam, acquiratur iustitia. Et ideo neque debent loca, quae tribuunt
iustitiam fidei, restringi ad fidem formaetam: Although a man's justification by
Faith implies that his Faith is formed (to wit a true Faith) yet it follows
not, that by it, as it is formed, righteousness is obtained. And therefore
neither those places, which attribute righteousness to Faith, ought to be
restrained to true Faith, or Faith that is formed. Such a hard conceit have the
Pontificians of Faith, formed or unformed.

But now forasmuch as the Scriptures do every where ascribe so much to faith
in the point of justification: how Vega de praecipua causa iustif. quaest. 3.
Vega's five reasons, why justification is by the Apostle oftener attributed to
faith, than to other virtues* Aug. ibid. c. 7.
do they answer the Scriptures in this point? Surely Vega, according to his
rare dexteritite, undertakes that task too, and produces five reasons, why
the Apostle has done most prudently, oftener to attribute justification to
faith, than to any other virtue. The first is, Because faith is the foundation,
and fountain, the prime cause, and root of our salvation: which (says he)
St. Augustine has showed in his Book of the Predestination of Saints;
alleging Cornelius for an example, whose Prayer and Ames-deeds were done in
faith, that by them (says Vega) he might be brought to the Faith of Christ.
Now note here, I pray you, a notable trick of legier-demain in this Tridentine
Champion, who was of one spirit with that Council. For, does he give these
titles to faith, calling it with the Council, the fountain, and foundation,
the root, and original of our salvation, for any good will he bears faith,
or that herein he preferres it before other graces? Nothing less. For a little
before, he had given faith such a blow, and that with Aristotle's
philosophical fist, as that he has made this very foundation to stagger
again. Plus enim quam omnia etc. For (says he) this is of more weight, than
all that are brought for the commendation of faith toward God: that we are
more straightly united to him by our loving of him, and by sorrow for offending
of him, and a purpose to our Popish union.
utmost endeavor to please him for the time to come; then we are united by
faith. Which being the foremost in our justification, it comes hindmost, and
furthest off from perfection: according to that axiom in Philosophy, Priora
generatione, posteriora perfectione: The first in generation, the last in
perfection. But pass we to his second reason, which is much like the former,
Because (says he) all our works which concur to justification, have their
meritorious force from faith, and faith from none else besides. Thirdly,
Therefore is our salvation fitly attributed to faith, because there is no
stronger cause to move a sinner to those things, which on his part are
requisite to his justification. Fourthly, It was convenient that the Apostles
in their Epistles and Sermons should commonly impute and attribute our
justification unto faith. Indeed Vega's copy has sanctification happily
mis-printed; saving that they confound justification and sanctification
together. But why so commonly impute justification to Faith? namely, because
(forsooth) the Apostles had to do with sundry sects, and therefore were so to
attemper their exhortations, as to draw them from their sect, to the Christian
Faith. Nor is it lawful (says Vega) hence to infer, that there are no other
things better, than those, which are more often commended. So by this reason we
are to understand, that the doctrine of justification by Faith, so often
commended, and preached by the Apostles in their Epistles, was not therefore so
much and so often pressed and preached, as if it were the best doctrine, but
that other doctrines, according to Vega's estimate, might be better: but as if
the Apostles only temporized with those times, and persons with whom they had
to do. As if it appertained not to all Abraham's seed by promise, to whose
Faith righteousness was imputed: nor was it written (says the Apostle) for
him only, that it was imputed to him; but Romans 4. 24.
for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him, that raised up
Jesus our Lord from the dead. Therefore it is Verse. 16*
by Faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to
all the seed, both Jews and Gentiles, Verse. 12.
which walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham. O Vega, be not
so impiously injurious, yea sacrilegious, to rob us of the inheritance of our
Faith, under a color, as if justification by Faith had been a temporary
purchase, and merchandise for those Apostolical times; and as if now the
intaile were quite cut off from Abraham's race. Or if ye Pontificians will be
such malignant enemies to justifying Faith, whereby Abraham and all his seed
are, and shall be justified to the worlds end; then confess your selves to
be quite cut off from being Abraham's seed.

His fifth reason why justification is most commonly ascribed to faith, is,
because Faith is that only disposition, to which among all our works, it might
principally be attributed, without peril of our pride, and the injury and
derogation of Gods grace. For, seeing faith is the gift of God, and a kind of
testimony of Gods grace toward us, in as much as it is attributed to our
faith, it is attributed to the grace and mercy of God, and not to our strength,
that no flesh shall glory in his presence. But why then, Vega, do you teach the
doctrine of justification another way, and the only way to puff men up with
pride, and so to empty them of all grace? As Bernard says, Non est qu^ gratia
intret, vbi iam meritum occupauit: ^ern. in Cant. ser. 17.
Grace finds no way to enter, where merit has already taken up the room. And
again, Deest gratiae, quicquid meritis deputas: That is detracted from grace,
whatsoever is imputed to merits. Do thou commend the admirable wisdom of
God, in teaching man to ascribe the justification of Faith to the mercy and
glory of God? and yet do thou add justification of thine own works, to
rob God of his glory, and thy self of all grace, puffing up thy self with
pride in stead thereof? But leave we these puddles of error, and come we to
the Crystal fountains of Christ's truth.

CHAP. VII. The Catholic Faith, of the Doctrine of Faith, as the sole
immediate Instrument to apprehend and apply the righteousness of Christ
imputed to us to our Justification, as being the effectual mean of our union
with him.
Having seen what credit Faith carries among the Pontificians, in the work of
Justification, which at the best, is allowed no more but either to dispose and
make a man the more apt (and that also with the help of other disposing
graces) to receive Justification; which notwithstanding for all his Faith, he
may fail, and come short of: or else, to come in for a share, (but must be
content with the least share, or none at all) among other graces, as Charity,
Penance, Martyrdom, and such like; all which take place of Faith in
Justification: Let us now come to take an estimate of Faith according to the
standard of Catholic Doctrine, weighing it in the most impartial balance of
the Sanctuary. Nor do we purpose in this place to speak particularly, and
punctually of the property and kind of Faith, whereby a man is said to be
justified; as referring that to the more proper place: but we will content our
selves so to speak of faith here in general, as the only immediate
isntrumental cause in us, whereby we come to be made righteous in the sight
of God. For, as our Justification is by the Imputation of Christ, and his
righteousness unto us: so the only isntrumental mean coming between, to
apply, and effectually to work this imputation of Christ to us, is the act of
believing; which is the property Aug. de verbis Apost. ser. 14. tom. 10.
of Faith. As Augustine says, Fidelis est a fide, fides a credendo: A believer
has his name of Faith, and Faith of believing. As the Apostle says, With the
heart man believes to righteousness. Faith is the hand of the soul, which
applies the sacrifice of Christ for sin. It is the hand that puts on the Robe
of the righteousness of Christ our elder brother upon us, by the sweet smell
whereof God being well pleased, bestows the blessing of heaven and earth upon
us, of grace, and glory, and all. Yea, faith has another singular property,
that it is as it were the ligament, or sinew, which fasteneth and unites every
faithful member to the head Christ Jesus, from the influence of whose
fullness, we receive and grace for grace. And the Council of Trent seems to
profess as much, though with limitation, and restriction to her own reserved
sense: saying, Nam ^ides, nisi adeam spes accedat, Council. Trid. Ses. 6. cap. 7.
and charitas, neque unit perfect eum Christo, neque corporis eius vi^um
membrum efficit: For Faith (say they) unless hope and charity be added unto
it, does neither perfectly unite with Christ, nor make a living member of his
body. The Council need not here equivocate for the matter, as if she did
admit of our spiritual union with Christ by Faith indeed, but such a Faith, as
has hope and charity joined with it: whereas in truth her meaning is, that
not Faith, so much as Hope and Charity, do unite us to Christ, since Hope and
Charity make the union perfect, which faith does not. Yea, Charity and Penance
(as her intimous Vega says) do more closely unite us to Christ, than Faith
does. But we shall discuss and discover this myst^rie more clearly, when we
come to speak of the kind of Faith, required in Justification. In the mean
time suffice it us, that we have the Councels confession, That Faith (at least)
with the help of Hope and Charity does unite us to Christ. And though Vega
prefer Charity and Penance before Faith, in this work of uniting with
Christ: yet thereby he does not altogether exclude Faith. Faith therefore
(according to the Pontificians con^ession) has at least a share (though the
least according to their allowance) in working our union with Christ. But the
Catholic belief ascribes this work of union with Christ primarily, yea,
and solely to Faith, namely, as the immediate and only instrument of Gods
spirit in us.

Now our justification by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, stands in
our union with Christ. This is confe^led of all, That whatsoever we receive
from Christ, it is by virtue of our mystical union with him. And says it is
that works this union: not (Faith as Pontificians teach) before it be formed
by Charity. To which Faith only Vega ascribes Vega de iustit. and great. qu. 1.
a certain union with Christ: Comparamus enim nobis Spiritum sanctum and
iustitiam, facimusque vt Christus inhabitet in nobis per Eidem informem, aut
saltem per ^idem, vt prius est natura, quam formetur: For (says he) we get
unto our selves the holy Ghost and righteousness, and do cause Christ to
dwell in us by Faith unformed, or at least by Faith, as it is by nature before
it be formed. So that by this doctrine a dead Faith, or that which differs
not from the Faith of Devils, does cause our union with Christ, or Christ to
dwell in us. But let us see how Vega cleereth this doctrine from this
imputation. Ibid. q. ^.
A little after in his second question of faith and works, taking upon him (as
he is very venterous) to answer an argument brought to prove, that Paul
excludes no believer from salvation, where he says, The righteousness of God
by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe. To this place
(says Vega) many commonly say, that Paul said not, Unto all, and upon all that
believe him, but in him; which is only proper to those that have charity, and
by love tend unto him: Aliud enim (inquiunt) est credere Deo, quod est, Aug. in
Johan. Tract. 29.
ei ^idem adhibere: aliud, credere Deum, quod est, credere Deum, esse: aliud,
credere in Deum, quod est, credendo amare, credendo diligere, credendo in eum
ire, and eius membris incorporari: For it is one thing (say they) to believe
God, that is, to give credit unto him: another thing, to believe God, that is,
to believe that God is: and another, to believe in God, that is, by believing
to love him, by believing to affect him, by believing to go into him, and to
be incorporate into his members. They are the words of St. Augustine, used by
him very frequently throughout his works; and by name in his nine and
twentieth Tract upon John, which Vega quoteth. Well, how does Vega avoid this
Argument concerning Faith in Christ, bringing salvation upon all that believe?
Nihil valet hoc refugium commune. Non enim habetur graece ^i, neque in eum, sed
absolute dicitur, In omnes, and super omnes qui credunt: This common refuge,
says he, is nothing worth. For it is said absolutely, Unto all, and upon all,
thatbeleeue; the Greek has not, him, or in him. Note here, good Reader, that
these Pontificians, howsoever they would magnify and prefer their vulgar
Latin translation, before the original Hebrew and Greek, yet where it makes
not for them, they can appeal to the original: as Vega does here. For indeed
the Latin vulgar adds in the foresaid place of the Apostle, Romans 3. 22. In
eum: saying, Iustitia antem Dei per fidem Jesus Christi, in omnes, and super
omnes, qui credunt in eum: The righteousness of God by Faith in Jesus Christ,
unto all, and upon all, that believe in him. But note, the spirit of the Trent
Council cannot endure to say, or hear Credere in Christum, to believe in
Christ. Vega here disclaimes it, as not found in the Greek, though the Apostle
does use this Phrase in the very same Epistle to the Romans, at the least five
times (...), to believe in him. And in the one Gospel of S. John, this phrase,
to believe in eum, in him, is used above thirty times: yet the Council of
Trent in her whole sixth session of justification, does not so much as once name
credere in eum, to believe in him: which may make a man suspect there is
something in this phrase, which will not agree with the Councels stomach. But
for as much as we touched a little before, how that Vega attributes our union
with Christ to Faith unformed, and that the Council says, that not faith
alone, without hope and charity, does either perfectly unite to Christ, or make
one a living member of his body: to reconcile these two, we may easily see,
how that neither the Council does altogether exclude Faith alone from uniting
with Christ, saving that alone it does not perfectly unite, nor make a living
member, but yet a dead member of Christ, as they say: nor Vega so admit of
faith unformed, to incorporate us into Christ, save that it does it
imperfectly, and makes men only not living members. So that in this work of
union, Vega makes this difference between Faith formed and unformed: that the
unformed procures the holy Ghost and righteousness, and causes Christ to
dwell in us: and faith formed with charity causes both Christ and the holy
Ghost to dwell in our hearts, and the Kingdom of heaven to be within us.

But extricating our selves out of these Roman perplexities, and serpentine
windings, we may easily see how the Scriptures ascribe our union with Christ
unto faith, even by that usual phrase of Scripture, (...): Credere in eum, to
believe in him, or rather, as the phrase imports, to believe into him. A
phrase which the Pontificians do so much abhor: but such, as Augustine does
set forth our union with Christ by; as we see in that very place alleged out
of him by Vega; Credere in Christum, est credendo in eum ire, and eiu4 membris
incorporari: to believe in Christ, is by believing to go into him, and to be
incorporated into his members. And again; Hoc est credere in Deum, credendo ei
adhaerere: This is to believe Aug. in Psa. 77.
in God, by believing to adhere or cleave unto him. As that reuolting
generation of Ephraim, credidit Deo, sed non credidit in Deum, non ex fide
adhaesit Deo: Ephraim believed God, but did not believe in God, did not by
faith cleave unto God. And De verbis Domini, he says: Qui in Christum credit,
credendo in Aug de verbit Dom. in ^uang. secund. Ioh. ser. 61.
Christum, veniet in eum Christus, and quoquo modo vnitur in eum, and membrum
in corpore eius efficitur: He that believes in Christ, by believing in
Christ, Christ will come into him, and he is altogether united unto him, or
rather, in eum, into him, and is made a member in his body. But note here a
maine difference between St. Augustines sincerity, and the Council of Trents
double dealing equivocation. For Augustine in the same place before mentioned,
says, that this faith which unites us to Christ, and Christ to us, has ever
hope and love inseparably joined with it, else it is not that faith, Quae
credit in Christum, which believes in Christ, or into Christ: His words are;
Ille credit in Christum, qui and sperat in Christum, and diligit Christum. Nam
si fidem habet sine spe, a^ sine dilectione, Christum esse credit, non in
Christum credit: He believes in Christ, who also hops in Christ, and loves
Christ: For if be have faith without hope, and without love, he believes
that Christ is, but believes not in Christ. Yet we see that this holy man
ascribes our union with Christ to the act of believing, which is the prime
property of faith; and not to the acts of hoping and loving, which are the
secondary qualities of it. Even as the act of burning is attributed to the
heat of the fire, the prime quality of it; and not to the light, nor to the
dryness of it, which are secondary qualities of the fire. So that as the fire
has heat, has light, has dries, all of them joint qualities in the fire;
yet it unites the combustible matter unto it self, or incorporateth it self
into it, not by reason either of the light, or of the dries of it, but only
by the heat, the prime property of the fire: So faith has believing, has
hope, has love, all of them inseparably joined unto faith, yet faith unites
the object, Christ, unto it, or unto the soul; not by the virtue of hope and
love, but by its most proper act of believing. As the same Augustine says:
Medicina animae omnium vulnerum, and vna propitiatio pro delictis hominum, Aug.
secund. Ioh. ser. 60. de verbis Dom.
est in Christum credere. Nec omnino quisquam mundari potest, sieve ab originali
peccato, sieve ab actuali, nisi per fidem coad^nentur, and compaginentur corpori
eius, qui sine vlla illaecebra carnali conceptus est, and peccatum non fecit,
nec inuentus est dolus in ore eius, etc. The medicine of all the wounds of the
soul, and the only propitiation for men's sins, is to believe in Christ.
Neither can any man be cleansed, either from original, or from actual sin,
unless they be by faith united, and ioynted into the body of him, who without
any carnal lust was conceived, and did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth. But the Trent Council, with her Pontificians, will have hope and love
so joined with faith, in working our union with Christ, as indeed they
attribute a greater part of this work to hope and love, than to faith: which
is all one, as to say, the fire does more burn by virtue of his light and
dries, than of his heat* which is most absurd.

Further, the Apostle shows this union by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith. Now this dwelling is reciprocal and
mutual; for as Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, so we dwell in him by
faith, and so by faith are made one with Christ. Again, Romans 11. 19. 20. Thou will say then, the branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in: Well,
because of their unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith.
And again, ver. 23. If the Jews abide not still in unbelief, they shall be
graffed into the true Oliffe tree, that is, into Christ again. If they abide
not still in unbelief: implying, if they believe, they shall be re-ingraffed:
so that faith is the isntrumental mean of our ingraffing into Christ, of our
uniting with him. Whereupon Augustine says; Quam insertionem Oleastri
(amputatis propter Aug. epist. 12^* ad Hon^rat. cap. 20.
infidelitatis superbiam naturalibus ramis) etiam ipse Dominus in Euangelio
praedixit, occasion illius Centurionis, qui in eum ex Gentibus credidit;
significans inseri Oleastrumpropter humilit atem fidei: Which ingraffing of the
wild Oliffe (the natural branches for their proud infidelity being cut off)
the Lord himself foretold in the Gospel, by occasion of that Centurion, who
of the Gentiles believed in him; signifying the implanting of the wild Oliffe
for his humblefaith. Thus we see upon what ample proofs and testimonies this
truth stands, that by faith we are united unto Christ. Now because our union
with Christ is a doctrine of singular use, setting forth the nature and
excellency of our Justification by Christ, and wherein we put on and possess
Christ our righteousness; therefore we esteem it fit to be treated of in an
entire Chapter by it self.

CHAP. VIII. Of the nature and kind of the union between Christ and the
faithful, and of the fruits and effects arising from the same.
Union is a making of many into one. Now there are sundry kinds of union:
there is a consubstantiall union (as Bernard calls it) in the divinity; but this
so transcendent, as it may be called rather unity than union, and rather one
than unity. The Father, the Word, and the Spirit, these three are one, 1. Ioh.
5. 7. and Christ says, I and the Father are one; not united, but one, Ioh. 10.
30. So that this union in the divinity, this unity, this one, has no parallel.
As Bernard says, speaking of some other unions: Haec omnia, quid ad illud
summum, atque Bern. de consid. lib. 5. cap. 8.
(vt ita dicam) vnice vnum, vbi vnitatem consubstantialitas facit? All other
unions, what are they to that one supreme, and (as I may so say) that only
one, where consubstantiasity makes the unity? And, super Cantica, sermon. 71.
Singularis ac summa illa est vnitas, quae non vnitione constat, sed extat
aeternitate: That is the most singular and excellent unity, which consists not
by unition, but existeth by eternity. There is also a personal union, and that
is of the two natures in Christ; which Bernard calls dignatiua vnitas, qua limus
noster a Dei verbo in vnam assumptus est personam: a vouchsafing or gracious
unity, whereby the word of God vouchsafed to assume our slimie nature into the
unity of his person. There is a Sacramental union between the sign, and the
thing signified in the Sacraments. There is a natural or animal union of the
soul and body in man. There is an accidental union between the mind and
learning, found in a learned man. There is an artificial union between the
hand and the instrument; as when the work is predicated of, or denominated of
them both jointly: as a carved work implies both the hand and tool wherewith
it was wrought. There is a moral union between two friends, as David and
Jonathan. There is a civil union between the Prince and the People. There is
an union of dependency between the Creature and the Creator; for in him we
live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17. 28. Finally (to pass by others)
there is a spiritual and mystical union between Christ and believers: which
is called spiritual, especially, from the principal efficient of it, the
Spirit of God, and of Christ; as the Apostle declares, 1. Cor. 12. 13. By one
spirit are we all baptized into one mystical body of Christ.

Now this spiritual union between Christ and the believer, as it comes short
of that first transcendent union in the sacred Trinity in unity, so it does as
far excel all those other unions; yet so, as it seems to partake in some
thing of them all. For first, concerning that stupendous and wondrous union in
the divine Hypostaces or Persons, our union with Christ is resembled to it: as
Ioh. 17. 20. 21. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word; that they may all be one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. And, Ioh. 14. 20. At
that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you.
Yea, Christ and his believers are so united in one, in one mystical body, as
Christ and they are called one Christ, 1. Cor. 14. 12. So is Christ, that is,
Christ and all his members; being there compared to one body compacted of many
members: So is Christ, says the Apostle. So then, as the Father is in the
Son, and the Son in the Father, one God; so believers are in Christ, and
Christ in believers, one Christ. So that the union between the Father and the
Son, and between Christ and us, seems to be alike. It is somewhat like
indeed, but nothing alike: for the Father and Christ are one; so is Christ and
the believer one, but yet in different respects. The Father and the Son are
one, but essentially and naturally: Christ and the believer are one, not
essentially nor naturally, but are made so by grace, as Ioh. 17. 23. That they
may be made perfect in one. So 2. Pet. 1. 4. We are made partakers of the
divine nature by gift. And as Bernard says; Hanc vnitatem nontam essentiarum
cohaerentia facit, Bern. super Cant. ser. 71.
quam continentia voluntatum: This unity is wrought, not so much by the
coherency of essences, as by the correspondency and nearenesse of wills. And
again; Homini and Deo, sua cnique and natura, and substantia est, cum Patris
Filijque co^stet penitus esse vnam: In the union between God and man, each of
them notwithstanding retain their nature and substance proper to themselves;
but the Father and the Son have both one and the same substance. So that in
our unity with God in Christ, there is not confusio naturarum, sed voluntatum
consensio: not a confusion of natures, but a consent of wills.

Secondly, this union between Christ and the believer, is not an hypostaticall
or personal union, such as is between the two natures in Christ; but it is
mystical only, and such as makes the believer in Christ, to be with him one
Christ, yet not personally, but spiritually and mystically, as 1. Cor. 6. 17.
He that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit.

Thirdly, this union between Christ and the believer, is not that Sacramental
union between the sign and the thing signified, since the sign has no benefit
from the thing signified, nor is it any longer a sign, than in the
Sacramental use and application to the believing Communicant, and so the
Sacramental union cease; yet as unto every faithful receiver, wheresoever
the visible sign is administered, the invisible grace signified is together
exhibited, by virtue of the Sacramental union, having dependence on Christ's
promise, and reference to the condition of faith in the Communicant: So such is
the union between Christ and the believer, that wheresoever faith is, there
also is Christ with all his graces present to the believer; for he dwells in
our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.

Fourthly, this union between Christ and the believer, is not natural (or
native, as Bernard calls it) as that between the soul and the body in man;
because the one of them may be separated from the other by death; but Christ
and the believer are never separated, no not in death: for to me to live, is
Christ, and to dye is gain, Phil. 1. 21. For who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? Romans 8. 35. and verse. 38. I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. But herein they agree; as the body has no life but from
the soul: so the soul of every faithful man has no life, but in and from
Christ; as the Apostle says, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ:
Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me,
and gave himself for me. And as the soul and the body make one natural man,
so Christ and the believer make one spiritual and mystical Christ; and all
believers, both of Jews and Gentiles, are made one new man, not natural, but
supernatural in him, Ephesians. 2. 15.

Fifthly, this union between Christ and the believer, is not ^n artificial
union, as that between the hand and the instrument of the Artificer; for the
instrument is subject to wearing, to breaking, and at length, to casting away,
when there is no more use of it: but we are so in the hand of Christ, as we are
preserved for ever; as Ioh. 10. 28. I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. yet
herein it agrees; that as the instrument can do nothing of it self, not move,
not work, without the hand of the Artificer: so we can do no good thing,
without the hand of Christ moving and directing us: as himself says; Without
me ye can do nothing: for he Ioh. 15. 5. Phil. 2. 13.
works in us both to will and to work, of his good pleasure. That as the
Hatchet may not exalt it self against him Esa. 10. 15.
that heweth with it, but yields the praise of the work to his workman; so
says every faithful soul, as Esa. 26. 12. Lord, Esa. 26. 1^.
thou will ordain peace for us: for thou also have wrought all our works in
us, or for us.

Sixthly, this union betwixt Christ and every believer, is not an accidental
union, as between a man and learning, whereby he becomes a learned man: for an
accident may be both present and absent, without the destruction of the
subject; as a man may be learned or unlearned, he may get learning, and lose it
again, and be a man still: but the learning of the holy Ghost, wherewith all
the faithful are inspired* cannot be missing, without destruction to the
soul. He is no faithful man that wants the knowledge of God in Christ, whom
to know is eternal life, and not to know, is eternal death: for all the
faithful are taught of God, as Ier. 31. 33. and 34. verses. Yet herein does
our union with Christ resemble the accidental union, because as no man is
borne learned or borne a Philosopher, but is made so by education and
instruction; so no man is borne by nature the child of God, the scholar of
Christ: but in time becomes a Christian Philosopher, by the instruction of the
Word of God, and the inspiration of the Spirit of God, whereby he is made a
faithful man, and a Disciple of Christ.

Seventhly, this union between Christ and the believer, is not a moral union,
such as is between friends; which though it be founded at the best upon virtue,
yet it is no less mortal, than it is moral; for if the friendship dye not,
before the friend dye, yet death makes a separation: as David lamented the
death of his loving friend Jonathan, the memory of whom lasted for a while in
David's kind usage of Mephibosheth Ionathans 2. Sam. 9.
son; but it soon cooled, upon a small occasion of Mephibosheths false
servant Ziba, who by belying his master 2. Sam. 19.
to David, got half his masters inheritance from him, when himself deserved
rather to have been punished for wronging his master, than so rewarded for his
dissembling officiousness, in bringing a present to David of his masters
store: So friendship is very mortal, it dies often in a man's life time, or
seldom suruiues death. And therefore the Poet said well; Foelices ter and
amplius, Quos irrupta tenet copula; Nec malis d^^ulsus H^^ace.
querimonijs, Suprema citius soluet amor die*

O happy, and thrice happy they
Whom loves knot holds inuiolate;
Nor loosened till life's last day
By back-complaints begetting hate.
But the union between Christ and his faithful ones, though it be somewhat
like that between moral friends, but mortal men; as being between Christ
and his friends, as he calls his faithful, Ioh. 15. 15. I have called you
friends, etc. yet this friendship between Christ and his, excels all other
friendship. The Philosophers could say; Amicus est alter idem: A friend is
another self. And, Animus est non vbi animat, sed vbi amat: The soul is not
where it lives, but where it loves. And, Amicorum omnia sunt communia:
Between friends all things are common. Now these in comparison, as they are in
practice amongst men, are but in a manner mere sayings, nominals rather than
realls: For as Solomon says; Most men Pro. 20. 6.
will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who can find?
Solomon found one among a thousand, which I think was the Prophet, that told
him freely of his folly. Such friends few can find, especially such as Solomon
was. But now whatsoever can be spoken in praise of friendship, is really true
between Christ and the believer, his faithful man: for they are so mutually
each of them alter idem, another self, as that they are indeed oneselfe. Their
souls and spirits are so interchangeably in each other, as the spirit of
Christ does really live in us, and our souls do live in him. We are in the
Spirit, and the Spirit of Christ in us, Romans 8. 9. And, Now I live, says the
Apostle, yet not I, but Christ Gal. 2. 20.
lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Here is true
love indeed, where the soul is not where it lives, but where it loves. And
between these friends all things are most freely common: He partakes of our
flesh, we of his spirit: He of our nature, we of his grace: He of our
infirmities, we of his perfections: He of our poverty, we of his riches: yea,
He of our sins, which he bare upon the Tree, we of his righteousness, the
best Robe. He is called the son of man, we the Sons of God: He the Lord our
righteousness, and we the Lord our righteousness: yea, He and we one Christ.
O incomparable communion! 1. Cor. 12. 12.
O incomprehensible union! Never such an immediate intercourse and community
between friends. And this, not for a day, or a year, or for term of life;
but for life without term. For as Christ's love to his is from everlasting, so
it is to everlasting; it is without beginning, and therefore without ending,
Ioh. 13. 1. So that of this love, between Christ and his faithful friends and
brethren, we may sing the Psalm of David, the burden whereof, is principally
the love between Christ and his brethren: Behold, how good and how pleasant
Psalm. 133*
it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity! It is like the precious
ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, and
went down to the skirts of his garments. As the deaw of Hermon, and as the
deaw that descended upon the mountains of Sion: for there the Lord commanded
the blessing, even life for evermore. This Psalm is a mirror and clear type
of that union and communion of grace between Christ and the faithful. Behold
therefore, it is Christ that makes his faithful ones to dwell together in
unity, to be of one mind in the house of God, Psalm 68. 6. He it is, that
persuades Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem: the Gentiles to become one
Family with the Jew, under Christ, that one head, whose type was Aaron. From
him our head, our high Priest, flows down the oil of grace upon us, unto the
skirts of his clothing, even upon us, whose nakedness he has covered with
the skirts of the robes of his righteousness; of whose fullness we have all
received, and grace for grace. His head is full of the dew of grace, distilling
upon the barren Mountains of his Sion, his Church and chosen, to pour a
blessing upon it, and there to give life for evermore. Such is the union
between Christ and his faithful ones, far passing the love between dearest
friends, even that between Jonathan and David, passing the love of women.

Eighthly, nor is this union between Christ and the believer, a civil union,
such as is between the King and the Subject: for alas! to what disunion and
division is this subject too, especially where the Pope is Lord Paramount,
whenas either his roaring Bulls of excommunication, and deposition of Kings, or
the poisoned steellettoes, or pistols of his all-daring brats, do even tear
the head from the body, as too lamentable experience has proved? True it is,
that Christ is our King, and we his servants, he commands us, we obey him, he
is our Princely head, we his members: but his commandments are not grievous,
his yoke is easy, and his burden light. He has lightened the burden, and
sweetened the yoke unto us, by both having borne the grieuousnesse and
bitterness of it himself alone, and for the remnant, he both bears it with
us, and gives us strength to bear it: yea, he has so loved us, and so shed
his love abroad in our hearts, by his holy Spirit given unto us, that as he
can never deny us the grace and protection of a loving Prince: so he has
given us grace, never to deny him our most humble homage, and loving obedience.
So that never was there such a strait bond between Prince and People, as
between Christ and the Believer.

Ninthly, this union between Christ and the Believer is not a conjugal union,
such as is between a man and his wife; although this be a mystical
resemblance, whereby Christ sets Ephesians. 5.
forth his union with us. For, this Conjugal union suffers dissolution, and
death gives the Suruiuer liberty to marry a new mate. Not so with Christ and
his Spouse. This is a band indissoluble. The marriage band is but during this
life, it holds not in heaven; for there they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage: but this with Christ suffers no divorce, but death is a degree to
the full consummation of it. 1 Cor. 6. 17.
Also the man and the wife are but one flesh: but Christ and the believer one
spirit.

In a word, this union between Christ and the Believer, is not the union of
dependency, as between the Creature and the Creator: for this is common to all
the Creatures, who have their being, life, and sustentation in a dependency
from the Creator: his rain showreth, and his sun shines upon the good and
evil, upon the just and the unjust indifferently. All depend and wait upon
thee, says David, and thou give Psalm. 104.
them their meat in due season; when thou openest thine hand, they are filled
with good; when thou withdrawest Psalm. 145.
their breath, they return to their dust. But the union between Christ and
his, although it be an union of dependency, wherein the Believers eternal
well-beeing has a necessary dependence on Christ: yet this dependence is
proper and peculiar to the faithful, and not common with any other Creature,
unless with the elect Angels, who depend upon Christ for the perpetuation of
their happiness. So that the faithful have their dependence on Christ, not
only as their Creator (being the eternal Word) common with other Creatures,
but chiefly as their Redeemer and Savior, proper to them only; and that not
only for the supply of things temporal, but much more of graces spiritual,
and glory eternal.

Thus by showing what kind of union this between Christ and the Believer is
not, we come to see the more clearly what it is. The Scripture also sets
forth this union by Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22. John 15. 4. 5. Rom 11. 24. Ephesians. 5.
25. Ephesians. 4. 15. 16.
sundry similitudes, especially four: as, between a house and the foundation;
between the vine and the branches, or, the olive root and the tree; between
the man and the wife; between the head and the members. What more near? the
foundation and building make one house; the vine and branches one tree; the man
and wife one flesh; the head and members one body. So Christ and the believer
are one spirit. Being united to Jesus our head, he becomes the Savior of us
his body, Ephesians. 5. 23. Being united to Christ, we are anointed with all his
titles and graces: we are made Kings and Priests to God his Father. Being
united to this foundation, Revel. 1. 6.
we become living stones, growing up to an holy Temple in the Lord. Being
united to this Vine, this Olive, we partake of the sweetness of the one, and
of the fatness of the other. Being united to this Spouse, we are endowed with
all his goods. Being united to this head, we receive the rich influence of
spiritual life and motion, quickening every member: Yea, that which is the
sum of all, we put on Christ; he becomes wholly ours, being made unto us of
God, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and all
in all. Now true it is, that this union is not only internal, invisible,
real, and peculiar to Gods elect, but also external, visible, nominall, and
common to all Christians. So that although all Christians in Common, as well
Hypocrites and false Professors, as the sincere and faithful, may claim a
share in this union, so far forth as it is external and visible, as being
wrought by external and visible instruments, the Word and Sacraments, whereof
all Christians are in common partakers: yet only the Elect and Faithful are
partakers of the internal and true real union with Christ, as being wrought
by a most powerful Agent, the Spirit of Christ, and by a most active
instrument, the Faith of Christ. So that Faith in the hand of Gods spirit, is
the principal, yea, and sole immediate instrument and mean to unite us unto
Christ; even as the spirit in man is the mean to unite the body and soul
together.

CHAP. IX. Of the other Roman Catholic euasions, to elude and frustrate the
evidence of Scriptures concerning sole Faith in Justification.
FOrasmuch as the holy Scriptures do abound with clear evidences, to prove
our Justification by Faith alone, in the only imputation of Christ's
righteousness, apprehended and applied by Faith, altogether excluding works
from having any thing to do in this work: it stood therefore the Church of
Rome upon, to use all art, and wit of men and Angels (I mean bad Angels) to
blunder these Crystal fountains by their distinctions, and to sophisticate
the pure simplicity of truth with their fair false glosses, and farre-fetcht
interpretations. To begin with the Epistle to the Romans, where the Apostle
in setting down the doctrine of Justification, does so often attribute
Justification to faith, without works, or without the works of the Law;
opposing faith against works, grace against merit, the Law of Faith against the
Law of works, as being incompatible means or instruments to justification:
The Pontificians can easily reconcile all, by understanding Vega l* 10. de
inaequal. great. and gloriae iustorune cap. 8. The title whereof is, De
pulcherrima via concilian di Paulum cum Iacobo, quae nobis ex doctrine sancta
Synodi illuxit: Of the most beautiful way of reconciling Paul with James, which
was intimated unto us from the holy doctrine of the Synod.
the opposition to be between Faith, and either those works of the Law which
are ceremonial, or those which are done before a man have Faith; but not of
those works, which are done in the state of grace, after a man have received
faith: as is intimated in the eight Chapter of the Sixth Session of the Council
of Trent. Whereupon* Vega reckoning up sundry opnions, as of some, that take
those works excluded by Paul, not only for legal and ceremonial, but moral
and natural: of others, that say, St. Paul spoke of works going before Faith,
and St. James, of works coming after Faith, etc. At length adds his own
opinion, spun like a copweb, out of the subtlety of his own brain: and all
upon the preposition Ex, diversely taken of Paul, and James, as this quaint
Franciscan has observed. For this preposition Ex, says he, in Paul signifies
merit, and debt: but in James, only cooperation, and co-efficiency: as where
Paul says, that no man is justified ex operibus, by works; he should mean,
none is justified by the merits and due deserts of his own works. And where
James says, That a man is justified ex operibus, by works, and not ex fide
tantum, by faith only, he should mean, that works do concur unto
justification, and not faith alone. But we shall not want a broom to sweep
down this subtle webb. But let us add first another of his webs, which he
also fasteneth upon his Trent-Fathers: namely, That Paul speaks of the first
justification, from which, precedent works are excluded. And James of the
second Justification, in which, subsequent works are included. Now for Vega's
first reason and note upon the preposition Ex, it is no less really absurd,
than seemingly subtle. For, if Paul by saying, Neminem ex operibus
iustificari: None is justified by works, should mean, by the merit or due
desert of his works; then consequently by saying, hominem ex fide iustificari,
that a man is justified by Faith, he should mean, that man is justified by the
merit and due desert of his Faith: which Vega himself in the self same place
denies. Thus the nimble Spider is wrapped and entangled in his own web. And
as for the Trent-Fathers conceit of Paul's first, and James second
Justification, we shall by and by see the vanity of it. For indeed the
justification which Paul ascribes to Faith without works, and that which
James attributes jointly to works with Faith, are so different, as they
differ not in degrees of first and second, but in a most opposite respect, as
much as Justification in the sight of God, differs from Justification in the
sight of man. As we shall more plainly show anon.

Now for Paul's justification by faith, without works, it is clear, that all
works are excluded without exception; not only legal, and ceremonial, and
moral, done before the state of grace, but those also done in the state of
grace: none are excepted, of what nature soever. Paul shuts all out from
justification; for if any be justified by works, yea by works of grace, then
Abraham: for Abraham is propounded not only as a particular believer, but as
the father and figure of all the faithful. But Abraham was not justified by
works, not by any works, not by his best works done in the state of grace.
This the Apostle proves manifestly, Romans 4. 5. To him that works not
(instancing of Abraham) but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
Faith is counted for righteousness: So that Abraham is justified not by
working, but by believing. To this purpose, Gregory surnamed the Great, Bishop
of Rome, upon the seven penitential Psalms, Greg. in 7 Psalm. poenit* in Psa.
51
in the fourth of them, to wit, Psalm 51. upon these words: Et exultabit
lingua mea iustitiam tuam (you must pardon the If it be not a misprinting.
vulgar barbarism of the Latin) the true English is; And my tongue shall sing
aloud of thy righteousness: says, Iustitia Dei fides est: the righteousness
of God is faith. And he instanceth Abraham: Abraham believed God (says he)
and it was imputed to him for righteousness, Quia iustus ex fide viuit:
Because the just does live by faith. Si ergo iusti vita fides est, consequens
est eandem fidem esse iustitiam, sine qua, quisque esse iustus non potest: If
therefore the just man's life be faith, it follows, that the same faith is
that righteousness, without which, no man can be just. Or (says he) the
righteousness of God is, that he will not the death of a sinner. For it seems
just with man to revenge his wrong; but it is the righteousness of God to
pardon the penitent: So he. As therefore Abraham is justified, so every son
of Abraham; to wit, every believer is justified: namely, by faith, and not by
works. Now was not believing Abraham a regenerate person? Did he not bring
forth many fruits of faith, many good works of charity, piety, mercy,
hospitality, obedience, humility, and the like? yet none of these come within
the account of his justification in the sight of God. For to him that works
not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Therefore though the Pontificians, would never so feign foist
and crowd in by head and shoulders, their works coming after faith, whereby
they may be justified: yet they are all thrust out by the Apostle, as those
workers were shut out of Heaven by Christ, Mat. 7. 22. 23. except they could
either bring the Text within the compass of their Index expurgatorius (as they
have done See the Index printed at Madrid by public authority* Ann. 160^. See
also Doctor James of Popish corruptions of the Fathers.
the gloss and sentences of Fathers in the like kind) or prove Abraham an
unregenerate person, or force the Apostle to say, that though Abraham were not
justified by works, but by faith, yet Abraham was justified first by faith,
and then by works.

Yea but (say they) although Paul make no mention of Abraham's justification by
works, yet James, another Apostle, says plainly, Was not Abraham our father
justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the Altar?
Therefore James 2. 21.
Abraham was justified not only by faith, but by works also. Therefore to
loose this Gordian knot, wherein the Pontificians so much triumph, we will use
no other sword (not Alexanders) but the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word
of God, to cut it asunder. At the first sight, Paul and James seem to be at
great odds: the one ascribing justification to faith, without works: the
other to faith and works. In both, the Pontificians understand one and the
same justification in kind, but to differ only in degree or order: as Paul's
justification to be the first, and that of James the second; but both
justifying in the sight of God. But we shall find it far otherwise: namely,
that these two Apostles do speak of two different iustifications, differing
not in degree or order, but in kind and quality: So that Paul speaks of that
justification, whereby a man stands just in the presence of God, which is
attributed to faith, and not to works at all; and James of another
justification, namely, of a testification of a man's says, declaring a man to
be a true believer by good works, which are the proper fruits and effects of
saving and justifying faith. For if James should understand by being justified
See Deuteronomy. 6. 25 the Geneua translation amiss. See the vulgar Latin, pro,
Eritque iustitia nostra, Erit nostri misericors, si custod.
by faith and works together, such a justification, as makes a man just in the
sight of God, then he should directly cross his fellow-Apostle, who shuts out
all works from having any thing to do in our justification in Gods sight: For
Paul says, Rom 4. 2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God. But James says, Abraham was justified by works:
therefore this justification of Abraham by works, was not that justification,
which makes a man to rejoice before God; to wit, the justification by faith,
which Paul directly opposes to justification by works, Romans 4. Now that James
speaks of justification by ^orkes, and not by faith only, as understanding a
testification and demonstration of sound and saving faith, is evident by the
whole passage of his second Chapter; where the Apostle exhorting to works of
mercy and charity, and meeting with false professors, that turned the grace of
God into wantonness, professing they had faith, but made no conscience of a
Christian conversation, to testify the truth and life of their faith by good
works: hereupon he infers, ver. 14. What does it profit, my brethren,
though a man say he has faith, and have no works? can the faith save him?
No, that faith which is without works, is dead, and cannot save a man* Yea,
such a faith is no better than that of Devils. Well, yet thou say thou have
faith. But there is as well a dead faith, as a living faith: a faith common
with Devils, as a faith proper to believers; a saving faith, as a deceiving
faith: Show me therefore whether thou have that living saving faith of true
believers, or no. It is not enough to say, thou have this faith, unless thou
can prove it. It is one thing to say it, another to have it. Now the proof
of it is by the fruits of it, to wit, good works; as the tree is known by the
fruits. For, the living saving Faith, is not an idle, but an operative working
Faith: it is a Faith ever working by love. Therefore as the man says to his
Neighbor, verse. 18. Thou have Faith, and I have works; show me thy Faith
without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. In which words
the Apostle puts a plain difference between a dead, and a living faith, which
yet we are not able to judge of, or to discern one from another, but by good
works; and so speaks here of no other justification by works, but only such,
as is declaratiue or demonstratiue in the sight of men: as it is said here,
Show me thy Faith by thy works. So that we see here, how it is the Apostles
drift to discover the true, saving, living Faith, from a false, counterfeit,
and dead faith, which notwithstanding vain professors so much glory of.
Hereupon the Apostle instanceth the Faith of Abraham and Rahab, which was
proved to be a living and saving Faith, by the fruits and effects of it. Note
the Apostles Context seriously, and with judgment. In the 20. verse. Will thou
know, O vain man, that Faith without works is dead? Was not Abraham our
father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the
Altar? See thou how Faith wrought with his works, and by works was Faith
made perfect? And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says; Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, and he was called the
friend of God. Ye see then, how that by works a man is justified, and not by
Faith only. First, Faith without works is dead: But Abraham was justified by
Faith. But by what Faith? Was it a living and saving Faith that Abraham had?
Yes: How does that appear? By his works, even by the works of Faith, which
gave testimony to his Faith, that it was a living, saving, and justifying
Faith; for by works his Faith was made perfect: not that his works added any
being of perfection to his Faith, but by way of demonstration and testimony
only. As we have the like phrase in Matthew. 21. 16. Out of the mouth of babes
and sucklings thou have perfited praise; not that Gods praise and glory
received any addition of perfection by the mouth of those babes: but only in
respect of the promulgation and declaration of his praise: So here. As also the
Apostle infers in the next words, verse. 23. Thus the Scripture was
fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. Note here, how James varieth not one jot from the truth of the
Scripture, which ascribes justification to Abraham's Faith, without works: for
he uses the very same Scripture which Paul uses, to show justification by
Faith, without works. Yea, but he adds in the next verse, Ye see then, how
that by works a man is justified, and not by Faith only. This conclusion seems
to smile upon the Papists, but in truth it derides their folly; for we see the
Apostle does no other here, but conclude the former premises, showing what is
that Faith, which is imputed to a man for righteousness; to wit, not a dead
and idle Faith, but a living and working Faith, testified by the proper fruits
and effects of it, good works. So that Abraham being said to be justified by
works, and not by Faith only, it is but to prove his Faith by his works, and
that he was declared to be justified by Faith, through the evidence of his
works, whereby he was declared just in the sight of men, to whom Faith comes
to be testified only by good works. The like is to be understood of Rahabs
justification by works; for it is another instance serving to the same purpose
of the Apostle, to distinguish a living and saving Faith, from a dead and
unprofitable Faith. And this the Apostle concludes, together with the Chapter,
with a reason drawn from a similitude: For (says he) as the body without the
Spirit is dead, even so Faith without works is dead also. Note here, how the
Apostle most aptly concludes the constant and uniform current of this
Chapter, concerning the difference between a dead and a lining Faith, which
are as it were the two hinges of the Chapter: As the body without the spirit is
dead, even so Faith without works is dead also. The Pontificians upon this
place do ground their informing of Faith by charity, as if Faith were
altogether without form and life, until charity be infused into it: but their
collection is most improper, and swarueth not only from the property of the
comparison, but also from the maine purpose of the Apostle. For the Apostle
says; As the body without the Spirit is dead: he says not, As the body
without the soul is dead: (...), without spirit or breath: for so the word
signifies. Now if they would herein, as they do upon other occasions
altogether impertinent, consult with Philosophy, it would tell them, that there
are three things concurring to the composition of a living man; the soul, the
body, and the spirit. The soul is that which informs and gives life to the
body; but the spirit, by which they say the soul and body are united, is that
whereby also the man does breathe, and whereby he is known to live. For so
long as there is breath in a man, we know him to be alive, when a man lies in
a swoune or trance, without any motion; to know whether he be dead or no, we
take a Crystal glass, or such like, to discern whether he breathe or no:
if he breathe not, we give him for dead; but if he breathe never so little, we
know he is yet a living man. To this purpose does our Apostle apply this
comparison: that as we cannot know a man from a dead carcass, but by his
spirit or breathing; so no more can we know a living Faith from a dead Faith,
but by good works, which are as it were breathed from it.

Object. But, will some say, The word used by St. James for spirit, may be as
well taken for the soul, which gives life to the body; for so it is often
taken in Scripture for the soul: as Luke 23. 46. and elsewhere. Besides, do
not most Interpreters take it generally for the soul? Why should we not then
rather take it for the soul and spirit of a man that is within him, than only
for the breath which proceeds from him?

Answ. I answer: First as (...) is taken sometimes for the soul, as well as
for the spirit; so also it is used sometime for breath or wind, as our Savior
alludeth, Ioh 3. 8. And (...), is taken for the praecordia, or lungs, whence
the breath is derived. But the question is, how it is to be taken in this place
of St James. For the true meaning of this word in that place, we must (as in
the true interpretation of other Scriptures) observe the tenure of the text and
context. Now the tenure of that whole Chapter of St. James, is chiefly to
discern true Faith from counterfeit. To demonstrate this, he instanceth the
body of a man. Now by what special sign is the body of a man known to live?
By the spirit, says S. James. What spirit? the soul, or the spirit within a
man? or his spirit, to wit, his breath? (for Spirit may signify all these.) By
that spirit, which does most lively and plainly show a man to be alive, and
that is the breath. For when all other signs do fail* as speech and motion of
any limb or member, in so much as a man is senseless and lies for dead, yet
if he breathe, it is an evident token that he yet lives. But when he comes
once to be as the same Apostle says, (...), without this spirit, or breath,
then he is certainly dead. Even so Faith without the breathing of good works,
is dead. And this agrees with that he says there; Show me thy Faith by thy
works. The soul indeed gives the body to live; but it is the breath that
shows the body to live, when the soul cannot. Therefore it seems to my
reason an undeniable conclusion, that Saint James speaks there of the breath
of the body, the most demonstratiue sign of life. And devout Bernard also
excellently to this purpose, and place of James, Vt corporis huius vitam ex
motu suo dignoscimus; ita and fidei vitam ex operibus bonis: As we discern the
life of this body of ours by the motion of it; so also the life of faith by
good works. Nor are we ignorant, that St Augustine Lib. 83. quaestionum,
quaest. 76. to reconcile these two Apostles, says, that Paul speaks of works
done before faith, and James of works after faith: which opinion and conceit
of his, although it not only want, but cross the evidence of Scripture, since
Abraham's offering up his Son was a work of, and so after faith, and yet did
not justify him before God, as Paul plainly teaches (and where Augustine
does never so little swerve from the Scripure, we must crave leave there to
leave him: being else followers of him, as he is of the Scriptures, according
to his own law) yet St. Augustine going about to reconcile James with Paul,
says not there, nor any where else in all his writings, that good works done
after Faith, do justify us in the sight of God: but only that they are
necessary duties of every true believer.

We know also, that Body in Scripture is often taken for the whole Compositum,
or the whole man or person, consisting of soul and body: as Heb 10. 5. A body
have thou prepared me; meaning the whole humanity of Christ. So Romans 12. 1. I
beseech you Brethren, by the mercy of God, that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, etc. meaning the whole man; the soul as well as the body: for the
body without the soul, is not a living, but a dead sacrifice. So the Apostle
here tells us, that as the body; to wit, a man without the Spirit, or without
breathing, is dead: that is, is known to be dead: Even so faith without
works, is known to be a dead faith. And so our Apostles conclusion here, is a
pregnant confirmation of what he had formerly said, concerning the proof and
evidence of a saving and living faith, which is known and distinguished from
an idle and dead faith, only by good works; by the working whereof, faith is
known to live, as a man by breathing. So then it is clear, that Paul's
justification by faith excluding works, is that, whereby we are justified
truly and really in the sight and account of God: and that other justification,
which James speaks of, wherein he joins works with faith, is only a
declaratiue justification in the fight and account of men; to whom we manifect
the truth of that faith, whereby we are justified in the sight of God by our
good works, whereby men take notice that we are true, no counterfeit
believers. We will conclude this place of St. James with the interpretation of
Aquinas In Epist. Iacobi Cap. 2. Iacobus loquitur de operibus sequentibus
fidem, quae dicuntur iustificare, non secundum quod iustificare dicitur
infusio, sed secundum quod dicitur iustitiae exercitatio, vel ostensio, vel
consummatio: res enim fieri dicitur, quando perficitur and innotescit: James
(says he) speaks of works following faith, which are said to justify, not
in that sense that justification is called In the Pontifician sense.
infusion, but in that it is called the exercise, or manifestation, or
perfection of righteousness: for a thing is said to be done, when it is
perfected and made manifest.

In the last place the Pontificians allege Paul to the Galathians, where (say
they) speaking of justification by faith without the works of the Law, he
means, yea and mentions the ceremonials of the Law, as Circumcision:
therefore he does not thereby exclude from Justification, the works of grace
done in us and by us. I answer, first, their allegation is false: for the
Apostle thereby the Law, or the works of the Law, means not only the
ceremonials, but the very morals of the Law, as Gal. 3. 10. for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law, to do them. All things exclude nothing. Secondly, he
speaks of the works of the Law, both ceremonial and moral, as they are
done even by the faithful and regenerate also; and not only by others, that
even in that respect they justify not in the sight of God. To this end the
Apostle says ( Gal. 3. 11.) But that no man is justified by the Law in the
sight of God, it is evident: for, Confer here the term Law, opposed to Faith;
not the Ceremonial Law to Moral.
the just shall live by faith. No man is justified by the Law: therefore not
the regenerate, not Abraham, though he did works of the Law; for he had the
Law already written in the tables of his heart, before it came to be written in
stone. But, say they, Abraham was justified through works. True. But how
justified? In the sight of God? No, says our Apostle. No man is justified by
the Law in the sight of God. In the sight of man he may, as St. James means;
but not in the sight of God, as St. Paul plainly expresses, both here, and in
the forenamed place to the Romans, Rom 4. 2. If Abraham were justified by
works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God. So that the Scripture in
two most evident and pregnant testimonies excludes all justification by works;
yea, by any works, in the sight of God, and before God: that by two witnesses
of holy Scripture this word of grace, of justification by Faith, excluding all
works whatsoever, ceremonial or moral, yea* even in the regenerate
themselves, as was faithful Abraham, the type of all the faithful, might be
established, against all Popish Sophistry, and doctrines of Devils.

Thirdly, admit the Apostle meant only legal Ceremonies, not moral Duties
(though the contrary is manifest) yet of those Ceremonies, Circumcision is
nominated by the Apostle for one special one. Of which he says, Gal. 5. 2.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. Circumcision then is utterly excluded from Justification; and, to
depend upon it, makes a man a debtor Object.
to the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3. But will some say, for a Christian (as these
Galathians were) to hold the necessity of Circumcision still, together with
Baptism, makes Christ unprofitable, and himself a debtor to the whole Law.
But did not Circumcision justify the Jews before the use of Baptism, as
Baptism does now justify, coming in the stead of Circumcision? Surely, much
alike. For if Baptism now justifies, as Pontificians teach, ex opere operato,
then Circumcision once justified; which the same Pontificians deny. But if
Circumcision did not justify the Jews, as the Apostle affirms, and Papists
themselves confess; then Baptism does no more justify Christians: Seeing
that Baptism is the same and no other to us, than Circumcision was to the
Jews; though Papists put a great difference between them: saying, that the
Sacraments of the New Testament do confer grace, ex opere operato, but the
Sacraments of the Old not so. Wherein, as in other doctrines of the mystery of
godliness, they bewray their gross ignorance. But this by the way. But now,
if circumcision, and other ceremonials of the Law of God be excluded from
having any thing to do in our justification in the sight of God, by the
observation of them; then what part can Popish Ceremonies, being not the
ordinances of God, but the inventions of men, yea most of them the doctrines of
Devils, what part (I say) can these challenge in the work of Justification?
How shall the going a Pilgrimage to such a Shrine, or to Rome in their year of
Iubilee, or the observation of Canonical hours, for reciting prayers not
understood, or saying over by the Bead row so many Pater-nosters and Aue-Maries
before such or such an Image, or burial in a Friars Cowle, and a thousand such
trumperies, and mere mockeries, yet all of them very meritorious, with that
notorious Meretrix of Rome; how shall these things come-in for a share in
Justification?

Lastly, we may observe how the Apostle, as to the Romans, so to the
Galathians, does oppose the Law and Faith, as Gal. 3. 12. The Law is not of
Faith. But in what respect does he oppose them? first in respect of their
natures, the one consisting in working, the other in believing: as Romans 4. 5.
To him that works not, but believes, etc. Secondly, in respect of their
opposite conditions. The condition of the Law is, Do this, and live: but the
law of Faith is, Believe, and live, as the Apostle declares at large, Romans 10.
4. etc. Now all this opposition between the Law and Faith, is mainely in the
point of Justification. There is a Justification by the Law, and a
Justification by Faith; but so opposite and incompatible, as they can in no
wise be reconciled together: the one does necessarily exclude the other. Oil
and vinegar cannot be mingled together, but the one will ever floate above the
other, and admit of no mixture: so the oil of grace and of faith can abide no
mixture with the sharp vinegar of that killing letter the Law, in the work of
justification in Gods sight; unless where the Law is entirely and exactly kept
in all points. But otherwise the Law and Faith, the Law and the Gospel, do
sweetly conspire together. For, as for the Ceremonies of the Law, in as much as
they were types, all answering to the pattern of heavenly things showed to
Moses in the Mount, which pattern was Christ, as the Apostle to the Hebrews
most divinely shows: those Ceremonies, those Types, are now all swallowed up,
and for ever fulfilled in the substance and truth, which is Christ: And as for
the moral Law, it is made subordinate to the Faith of the Gospel, so that in
every believer it is the rule of Christian obedience, and holy conversation.
And therefore when the Law was given in Mount Sinai, Jesus Christ stands at the
top, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage: Thou shall have no other Gods, but me, etc.
Now what deliverance was this? A temporal deliverance only? No: it was a
lively type of our spiritual freedom from the Egyptian servitude of sin and
Satan: witness the Pascall Lamb; which slain, the blood sprinkled saved the
Israelites, which was a type of the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of
the world: And, the Sea divided, a type of Baptism; saving the soul, and
drowning sin, together with the power of darkness, Pharaoh and his Host.
So that howsoever the giving of the Law was with much terror, in regard of the
manner: yet in regard of the matter being well understood, it must needs be
most comfortable to all the faithful, who believe in Jesus Christ, the
Deliverer from Egypt; who has freed us from the curse of the Law, and will
work in us both to will and to do the duties of the Law, as fruits of faith,
even of his good pleasure. Indeed that notable and excellent Preface to the
Moral law, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
etc. to the common carnal and unbelieving Jews, was a Riddle: but to the
Eagle-ey'd Believer, Jew or Gentile, it is a most clear Gospel; setting forth
what Jesus Christ has done for us, and consequently what we should do for
him: that as we believe in him, who has saved and redeemed us out of the
house of bondage, and from the servitude of the spiritual Pharaoh; so we
should testify this our faith, in loving, fearing, serving and obeying him, in
keeping those commandments of Love; written not with pen and ink, but with
the finger of Gods spirit; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshie tables of
our hearts. As it is in the Song of Zachary, Luke 1. 74.
That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, should serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.
Therefore servants were called a seruando, as being saved by those, to whom
therefore they did owe their service. In this respect, the Law and Faith, the
Law and the Gospel, are not opposite, but sweetly subordinate the one unto
the other: that as Christ has saved us from the curse of the Law; so he
propounds himself to be served of us, by conformity to the Law, in a Christian
conversation. So that the Tree of life sweetning these waters of Marah, Jesus
Christ sweetning Exodus 15. 25.
and sanctifying the Law unto us, we drink thereof with comfort, to
strengthen us in our way to Canaan, through this wearisome Wilderness. As
David says, I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou have enlarged
my heart. So that Psalm. 149.
Faith and the Law, to wit, the obedience of Gods will, are sweet, yea
inseparable companions, and go hand in hand together throughout the whole
Pilgrimage of this life: but in the work of our Justification in the sight of
God, they are mere strangers one unto the other; yea, sworn opposites, that
can never be reconciled, though the Pontificians would never so feign join
together Faith God's Ark, and their own work Dagon in their Temple, to stand
as copartners in their justification. But Dagon falls down, where the Arc
stands: yea, he loses his head (all devices to plead for himself) and his
hands too, that he cannot do one good deed toward his Justification, but
remains a mere trunck and senseless block. And as the Philistims, while they
boasted they had gotten the Ark of God to their Dagon, were not free but the
more followed with divine vengeance: So the Pontificians, while they brag of
faith and good works as concurring in justification, they are so far from
being saved from Gods wrath, as that they do the more incense him against
themselves. Nor shall they ever be free from feeling, and fearing Gods
plagues, till with the Philistims, they send home the Lord's Ark, with a
sinne-offring: that is, until they repent of this their profanation of the
Faith of Christ; which is that only, wherein Israel must be saved, renouncing
their own works, as having no more hands than Dagon left them, for to work
their justification in the sight of God.

CHAP. X. A plausible objection of the Pontificians, for the confirmation of
their Justification by inherent righteousness, answered: and diverse reasons
added to show the absurdities of Justification by inherencie.
But the Pontificians in the behalf of their justification by inherent
righteousness, object: What difference is there (say they) between Gods
pardoning our debts, and giving us money to pay them? A pretty device indeed:
For so long as they can color and varnish over their hypocrisy by seeming to
ascribe the glory of their inherent justification to God, they think all is
well enough; and if probability might stand for proof, our penny of inherent
righteousness might prove as good silver to satisfy for our debts to God, as
the price of Christ's blood paid for us, and imputed to us. But let Baal plead
for himself, seeing he is a God: And for the deciding of this doubt, we have a
leading case in the Gospel, that will easily stint the strife. The case is
between the Pharisee and Luke 18.
the Publican; both went up to the Temple to pray. The Pharisee prayed thus,
Lord, I thank thee, I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this Publican: I fast twice in the week, I give tithe of all that I
possess. See what notable virtues here be in this Pharisee. But was he
therefore, or thereby justified? No: the Publican rather. But his pride
overthrew all: Yet did he not ascribe his virtues to the work of God in him?
for he thanked God. Whereupon Augustine Aug. de peccatorum merit is and
remiss^l. 2. c. 5*
says: Pharisaeus gratias Deo agendo, ab eo se accepisse omnia fate^atur, and
tamen improbatus est: The Pharisee in giving thanks to God, acknowledges he
had received all things of him, and yet he was vnapproued. And again,
Pharisaeus ille superbe Aug. de verbis Domini ser. 36.
quidem iustum se dicebat, sed tamen Deo gratias agebat: The Pharisee proudly
said he was just, and yet he gave thanks to God. And in another place, Magis
iustificatus descendit de Temple Aug. de vtilit. and necess. poenit. hom. 50.
Publicanus ille, peccatorum confessione sollicitus, quam Pharisaeus meritorum
enumeratione securus, quamuis and ipse gratias egit Deo: The Publican went
down from the Temple more justified, being careful in confessing his sins,
than the Pharisee, who was secure in numbering up his merits, although he gave
thanks to God for them. And so to these two, Augustine does apply that saying
in the blessed Virgins song. He has filled the hungry with good things, and
the rich he has sent empty away. Now the Pontificians may easily see their
own face in this Pharisee. They will be justified by their inherent
righteousness. But that is derogatory to Gods glory. But they give thanks to
God for their inherent righteousness, ascribing it to his gift. So did the
Pharisee. Was he therefore justified? Yea, St. Ambrose goes a little further,
who speaking of this Ambros. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 3.
Pharisee, and his proud confession, says: Aduertit hoc Diabolus, and
perfundit eum vlcere graui, vt non teneret caput, mente carnis inflatus, and in
eo in quo laudabilis fore crederetur, ibi reprehensibilior iudicaretur. Agebat
enim gratias Deo, quod non esset raptor, adulter, iniustus. Qu^m noxie ei
luctatus est serp^ns, and gra^^bus ^um spirit ligauit? studet enim supplantare
Diabolus bonis operibus intentos. Denique probabilior Pharisaeus ingressus est
Templum, quam Publicanus, and condemnatus exiu^: The Devil observes this, and
fills him with a grievous ulcer, that he should not hold the head, being puffed
up with a carnal mind; and wherein he thought to be commended, there he was
judged the more worthy to be reproved: for he gave thanks to God, that he
was no extortioner, adulterer, unjust. How dangerously did the serpent
encounter him, and bound him with grievous chains? for the Devil studies to
supplant those, that are intent and wedded to their good works, whereby to be
justified before God. Whence we may observe, what a dangerous doctrine that of
the Pontificians is, in seeking to be justified by their inherent
righteousness, howsoever they would seem to acknowledge God the author of it.
So that by St. Ambrose his doctrine, they that hold this, hold not the head,
which is Christ, as the Apostle also speaks: They are puffed Colos. 2. 19.
up with a fleshly mind. They are bound in Satan's chains. The Devil fills them
full of ulcers; and they go away not justified, but condemned. And Gregory
says; Propriam laudem quaerunt ex Dei donis: They seek their own praise by
the gifts of God.

But let us more particularly examine the former objection (although it be
grounded upon carnal reason.) What difference (say they) between God:
pardoning our debt, and giving us money to pay it? What difference? very great.
For first, it is no where written in Gods Word, that God enableth man by his
grace, to pay his own debt to God. But that God pardons our debts, is every
where in the Word; and we are taught daily to pray, Forgive us our debts. The
debtor in the Gospel, that ought his Lord ten thousand Talents, Matthew. 18.
but had not to pay: How did he satisfy his Lord? he humbles himself, and
desires his patience, and he would pay him all. How? Pay him all, when he
had nothing to pay? Yes: if his Lord be patient toward him; if he have
compassion on him, and forgive him the debt, as he did. But for God to enable a
man to pay his own debt to God, is as novel a doctrine, as it is a thing
uncouth, and unheard of among men, that a creditor should give his debtor so
much money as to discharge his debt, in stead of forgiving the debt. So that
the ground of this objection is absurd, even among men, much more with God.
Again, the graces of God are never given us for this end, that we should
satisfy Gods justice thereby, but to glorify his mercy, and sanctify his
name in the use of them. Thirdly, the debt wherewith Gods justice is satisfied,
must be of an infinite value, even as his justice is infinitely offended. The
only price of this satisfaction is the blood of Christ, our God and Sauionr.
This blood is of infinite value, to satisfy Gods justice, because it is the
blood of God, Acts 20. 28. But there is nothing inherent in us, no grace, no
virtue, although infused into us by the merit of this blood shed, and dipped
and dyed in it (as Pontificians play upon it) that can be of an infinite value.
For God cannot make us, who are creatures, to be Gods, infinite with himself
the Creator? But if God should enable us to satisfy for our selves, and to pay
our own debts to God, it were to make Gods of us. None can satisfy God for
man's sin, but only God; God-man Jesus Christ. Do we ever read, that God
made man to be his own Savior, as Pontificians blasphemously avouch? I, even
I am the Lord (says God) and ^sa. 43. 11.
besides me there is no Savior. No Savior then but the Lord God. This is
peculiar and proper to Christ alone. Acts 4 12. There is no other name under
Heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved; neither is there salvation
in any other. Salvation then is in Christ alone; in us therefore it is not. In
us it is not to pay our debt for the least sin: we cannot answer him one for
a thousand, as Job says; How should man beiust with God? If he will contend
with him, Job 9, ^.
he cannot answer him one of a thousand. So that for a man to say, he is
justified by his own inherent works, though flowing from Christ's merits, is
to make a Christ of himself. He that aduanceth his graces received of God, to
such a high pitch, as to esteem them satisfactory to Gods justice, is to make
the gifts of God, to be so many Gods. As Ambrose Am^r. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1.
ca. 2.
says; Inexcusabiles facti sunt, qui Deos sibi Dei dona fec^runt, and quae
creata erant ad vtendum, venerati sunt ad colendum: They are become
inexcusable, who of Gods gifts have made Gods to themselves; and those things
which were created to be used, they adore them as an Idol. Only Christ is
that sacred and mystical (...), that fish, in whom is found our tribute-money;
(...)
to satisfy the Majesty of God. This money must be stamped no where but in
Gods own Mint; as the pure silver Oar of it is no where found, but in Gods
own Mines, the holy Scriptures; no other Image or Superscription must be upon
it, but that of Jesus Christ, and none may tender, or offer it up to God, but
only Christ. 1. Tim. 2. 6. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. This pure
ransom, more pure, more precious than gold, will endure no mixture, no allay
of any other metals, much less of any dross. But inherent righteousness in
us, though dipped in Christ's blood, as having received a tincture from it, as
they say, if we offer it to God for current payment, he will easily perceive
it counterfeit coin, of our own mynting, of our own inuenting, no better
than Alcumy, little silver, but much dross in it, even the dross of humane
invention and corruption, which if it be brought to Gods touch, turns color;
if put in the Skale of the Sanctuary, is found too light; if cast into the Test
of Gods fiery justice, it is blown all away in smoke. As Esaias says; Thy silver
is become dross, Esa. 1. 22. Ier. 6. 30.
thy wine mixed with water. And as Jeremy says; Reprobate silver shall men call
them, because the Lord has rejected them. Our inherent righteousness, call it
Christ's merits, or what you will, is at the best but as Piscis in arido. The
fish, while it is in the sea, lives, moves, is full of strength and agility;
but upon the dry land, it straight loses all his vigor, motion, and life it
self, and quickly putrefieth: even so the merits and righteousness of Christ,
being in him, as in their proper element, are most lively and vigorous, strong
and available to satisfy Gods justice, and to plunge all our sins into the
deep bottom of the bottomless deep of his mercies, by that sweet smelling
sacrifice of himself once offered: but take any part of these merits of Christ
out of him, and put them into our dry and parched sandy souls, and they become
of no life, of no validity, to make the least satisfaction for the least
sins; yea, in this respect they stink in the nostrils of God. Our souls are
but broken Cisternes, to contain this pure water of life. God could never yet
find any thing in us; in us, I say, but only faith, whereby to justify us:
and this faith, not as a work of ours justifying us, but as an instrument
applying Christ, by whom, in whom, and for whom we are justified. If God
justify us for righteousness inherent, or dwelling in us, then God should be
said to justify the godly: but the Scripture says otherwise, That God
justifies the ungodly. Romans 4. 5. Now to him that works Romans 4. 5.
not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted
for righteousness. where faith being opposed to working, cannot be said to
justify, as it is a work. A notable testimony to prove, that our justification
is not from within us, but from without us; not in us, but on us; not of him
that works, but of him that believes in him that justifies: Whom? the
godly? Nay: but the ungodly. As Augustine Aug. ^on^es. lib. 10. cap. 2.
says; Tu, Domine, benedicis iustum, sed eum prius iustificaa impium: Thou,
Lord, do bless the just, but first, he being ungodly, thou iustifiest him.
As if he had said, Being first ungodly, thou did justify him, and then
being just, thou Lord do bless him. How then comes this foreign
righteousness upon an ungodly man? The Apostle shows; His faith is counted
for righteousness. How? His faith lays hold on Christ, who is the Lord our
righteousness: being made unto us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, that according as it is written, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord. ^. Cor. 1. 30.


But will the Pontifician say, Do you call the graces of Christ in us
counterfeit coin, dross, reprobate silver, etc. Yes, if ye reckon it for pay,
to satisfy Gods justice withal: in this sense in us, it is mere counterfeit,
dross, reprobate silver, coined in the Mint of Satan's forgeries. It is but as
the Sunne-beame upon a dunghill, raising up a stinking vapor, in stead of a
sweet odor in Gods nostrils. But the graces of God in us, flowing from our
head Christ Jesus, in whom we are first justified by faith, are the matter of
our sanctification, and the consequent fruits and effects of our justification.
Thus, they are a Well of living waters, springing up in us unto eternal life.
Thus, they are a garden of spices, yea of costly Spicknard, yielding a fragrant
smell, while the Sun of righteousness shines upon them. Thus are they more
pure and precious than gold, yea, than much fine gold. Thus are they so many
precious stones, to paue our way that leads to the Kingdom of Heaven: Yea
thus, so many peerless Pearls which adorn our Crown of grace here, and
shall much more gloriously imbellish and beautify our Crown of glory
hereafter. Thus, all our good works, and words, and thoughts, are precious even
in Gods sight through Christ. They will stand before his mercy seat, but they
dare not stand before the Tribunal of his strict and severe justice. They dare
come before God, as a proof of our faith and obedience, but not as a price of
our sin and disobedience. And at the best, cause we have to pray Gods mercy
for them, but in no case to pay his justice with them.

Now there be many reasons, why inherent righteousness is no formal cause of
our justification in the sight of God. First, because it is a mere humane
invention: It has no warrant in Gods Word, and consequently, no warrant at
all. Will the Pontificians herein, as they are willing in other things, stand
to the judgment of their father Aristotle? He says; (...): Arist. polit.
lib. 2 cap. 8.
All things are better determined according to the Law, than according to man's
will: for it is no sure rule. Tertullian said of an error of Hermogenes, about
the creation of the world of a pre-existent matter: Scriptum esse doceat
Tertul. aduers. Hermog. lib.
Hermogenis officina. Si non est scriptum, timeat: Let the shop of Hermogenes
show this to be written. If it be not written, let him fear. Now justification
is a fundamental doctrine, that cannot stand but upon the Sciptures.
Justification is by faith, and faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of God. The word is near thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is,
the word of faith, which we preach: for with Romans 10. 1.
the heart man believes to righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made to salvation. Let Pontificians fear to frame such a justification, as
they find not in the Scriptures. Secondly, because inherent righteousness
does not only diminish the glory, but even abolish the merit of Christ in all
his sufferings. His glory it is, to be our whole and sole Savior; this glory
he will not impart to any creature: for he says; I, even I am the Lord, and
besides me there is no Esa. 43. 11. Stella in Luc. cap. 4.
Savior. Stella observes well, saying; Redemptor and redemptus inuicem se
excludunt: To be a Redeemer, and to be redeemed, are two incompatible things,
and cannot consist together. But the faithful are called, The redeemed of the
Lord, Esa. 62. 12. and the Lord the Redeemer; therefore in no sort can they be
their own Redeemers, unless Christ be denied to be their Redeemer, and they
his redeemed. Again, the merit of Christ's sufferings, was to entitle us to the
entire obedience and righteousness of Christ, to make it as firmly and wholly
ours by imputation, as our sin was his by imputation. But inherent
justification robs Christ of his glory, seeing thereby every man becomes his
own Savior, atleast in part, and so Christ is denied to be a perfect and
alone Savior. And seeing inherent righteousness challenges only a part of
Christ's merits, and consequently, allows him to be but a party-Sauiour, and
so also that he bore our sins but in part, to the end we might fill up what
is wanting, either by our own works, or by the surplusage of some fained
Church-treasure, and works of supererogation or satisfaction. Hence it is,
that Christ being divided, and our righteousness parted between him and us,
that his death comes utterly to be abolished, and of none effect. For as the
Galathians joining circumcision with Christ, and their works with faith* in
their justification came to be abolished from Christ, and Christ profited them
nothing: So all Popish inherency of righteousness, joining Christ's merits and
man's works together, does utterly annihilate and frustrate the death of
Christ. For faith and works are opposite, and exclude each other in the point
of justification. As the Apostle says; If by grace, then it is no more of
works, otherwise Romans 11. 6.
grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace,
otherwise work is no more work. So that grace and works, are unreconcilable
and incompatible in the work of justification. Although the Trent Council
does, Council. Trid. Ses. 6. cap. 8.
according to her manner, most impiously abuse that former place to the
Romans, applying it only to exclude merit of condignity from those works,
which go before justification, though not merit of congruity, according to her
equivocal scope: destroying in one little Chapter the true nature and property
of faith and grace in our justification.

A third reason condemning Popish justification by inherent righteousness, is
because it peruerteth the whole tenure of the Gospel, and those clouds of
testimonies therein, all evidently proving our justification by Christ through
faith, as has been formerly declared. A fourth reason, because it fills the
heart with pride, as we have seen in the example of that Pharisee, who though
he acknowledged God to be the Author of his many virtues, yet because he
rested in them, and placed therein his righteousness and perfection, he failed
of Gods approbation. And we see the Apostle does often strike upon this string,
showing how pride does necessarily follow this justification by works at any
hand: for by faith boasting is excluded, Romans 3. 27. and 4. 2. and 1. Cor. 1.
29. and Ephesians. 2. 9. Not of works, least any man should boast. Implying, that
works in justification, is as the Leaven of the Pharisees, it sowers and swells
the whole lump. And there must needs be an intolerable height of pride in
that man's heart, that dare with Lucifer, ascend into the seat of God, and
aspire to be like the most High, by joining his works and Christ's merits
together, whereby he will be justified in the sight of God, and become a
fellow-Sauiour with Jesus Christ. A fifth reason follows hereupon, That
consequently this doctrine of inherent justification leads a man headlong to
hell. For as it teaches a man to aspire to a partnership with Christ in his
glory, in the work of justification: so it makes him to have fellowship with
the Devil and his Angels, in their eternal condemnation. It is not possible
this doctrine should ever bring a man to Heaven; it being as it were a Ladder,
the one side whereof is of Timber, and the other side of a Reed, joined
together by rotten steps. For man's works are that side of Reed, and Christ's
merits are the other side of Timber of the Tree of life, both joined together
by the steps of unsound doctrine of inherent righteousness: Like those feet,
part of iron, and part of clay, no way cohering together. Dan. 2. 33.


In a word, this doctrine of inherent righteousness, is a false and deceitful
doctrine: which as it can never truly justify a man in Gods sight, so it can
never satisfy the conscience with solid comfort. For, that which iustifies a
man in the sight of God, gives a man boldness and confidence in his presence.
Therefore the Apostle says, Being justified by Faith, Rom, 6. 1. 2.
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have
access by Faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope, of
the glory of God, etc. And chap. 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies. And, Heb. 10. 19. where having
showed that our justification stands in remission of sins; he infers
thereupon, That we have boldness to enter into the Holiest, that is, into
heaven, by the blood of Jesus. This is it that gives us true peace of
conscience in our selves, and confidence toward God. But inherent
righteousness can never give us this peace of conscience, this confidence
toward God, being at the best mingled with infinite imperfections and
corruptions. Even Bellarmine himself confesses, That it is the safest and
securest course to rely upon the only merits of Christ. And we read, that
Stephen Gardener, that bloody persecuter of Gods Saints, lying upon his death
bed, and being demanded by some that stood by, a reason of his faith, how he
looked to be saved: His answer was, That (for his part) he believed, he could
not be saved but by the only merits of Jesus Christ: but (says he) this is a
secret, and must be kept from the peoples knowledge; for if this gap be once
set open, then farewell all good works. Yea Pope Gregory the Seventh, that
notorious Hildebrand, recounting his many pontifical prerogatives; and among
them, that one, That if the Bishop of Rome have any personal defaults, yet
undoubtedly he is sanctified by the merits of blessed Peter: but at length,
having Baron. an. 1076 n. 33.
drunk-in such store of iniquity, like water, as an old leaking ship, now
ready to sink in the very havens mouth; being put to a pinch, upon the
apprehension of Gods approaching arrest, haling him unto judgment; then he
could learn to say, I find my self so surcharged with the huge weight of my
sins, that there remains for me no hope of salvation, but in the sole mercy
Baron. an. 1074 n. 7.
of Jesus Christ. So that the very Arch-Pontificians themselves in their death,
when their conscience is made their judge, renounce their own Doctrine, and
seem to desire to dye good Protestants: like Balaam who wished he might dye
the death of the righteous. But I cannot see by what way such dubbling
Wanderers can come to heaven: because, as in their life they denied the
doctrine of Faith; so in their death they are (for ought we may deem) deuoyd
of the duty of charity. Dye they not in a most preposterous malice and envy?
They would go to Heaven, but would pull the Ladder after them, lest the simple
people should follow them. So the Hypocritical Pharisees, who shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men; neither going in themselves, nor suffering Mat
23. 13.
those that would, to enter in. Thus the Testimony of Roman Catholics
themselves may be sufficient to convince the vanity and falsehood of their
justification by their inherent righteousness. But yet for more confirmation
of the truth, and confutation of this damnable doctrine of Popery; let us take
a brief view of the faith, and opinion, which the Saints of God from time to
time have had concerning their own inherent righteousness. Abraham the father
and figure of the faithful, for all his works, yet was not justified by them
in the sight of God, as the Apostle testifies of him, Romans 4. 2. for if
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God.
This only testimony might stand for all, to prove wherein the righteousness
of all the faithful consists, whereby they stand just in the sight of God;
to wit, not in their inherent righteousness, but in the only righteousness
of Christ imputed, and by faith applied. Thus Job confessed he stood justified,
Job 9 2. How should man be just with God? if he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. And ver. 20. If I justify my self, mine
own mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse. And Chapt. 25. 4. How can man be justified with God? yea, Chapt. 9.
15. whom (says he) though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I
would make supplication to my Judge. Indeed toward his friends he stands
stoutly in the justification of himself, namely, of his integrity and
sincerity, and that he was no hypocrite, as they, no less uncharitably, than
untruly charged him; but toward God he bears himself far otherwise: before
him he humbles himself, he makes supplication to his Judge, and says, Chap.
9. 30. If I wash my self with snowwater, and make my hands never so clean, yet
shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me: for
he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together
in judgment. And Chapt. 10. 14. If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity. If I be wicked, woe unto me: and if I
be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head; I am full of confusion, etc. But
had Job no good works? Yes, look upon his life described in his 29. 30* and
31. Chapters. He was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame, a
deliverer of the poor, fatherless, and friendlesse from the oppressor,
breaking the jaws of the wicked, and plucking the spoil out of his teeth: He
wept for him that was in trouble, and his soul was grieved for the poor. And
though he were a great man, a wise man, a Prince, yet he ate not his morcels
alone, but the poor and fatherless fed with him. The naked limbs blessed
him, being warmed with the fleece of his sheep. What sin was Job addicted
to? and what actions of piety and mercy did he not abound in? Insomuch, as in
respect of his sincerity and integrity of heart, he durst say, If I have
walked with vanity, or if my foot has hasted to Job 31. 5.
deceit, let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine
integrity. And God knew his integrity, giving testimony unto it, that he was a
man perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschued evil. Yet all
this righteousness Job renounceth, when he comes to the strict trial of Gods
Tribunal. For, coming to stand in Gods presence, he says, Chapt 42. 5. I
have heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye sees thee:
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. An admirable type
of a faithful man, not trusting in his own inherent righteousness, but in
the only mercy of God through Christ's merits, whereby only he stands
justified in the sight of God.

Was not David also a holy man, an honest hearted man, after Gods own heart?
yet he professes, Psalm. 71. 15. etc. My mouth shall show forth thy
righteousness, and thy salvation all the day: for I know not the numbers (that
is, the perfections) thereof. I will go in the strength of the Lord God, and
will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. And in the
beginning of the same Psalm, In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me
never be put to confusion, deliver me in thy righteousness. And Psalm 89.
16. speaking in the name of all the faithful, he says; In thy name shall they
rejoice all the day, and in thy righteousness shall they make their boast. And
upon the 32. Psalm, Paul has these words, as a Commentary of David's words,
Romans 4. 6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom
God imputes righteousness without works, saying: Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord will not impute sin. But David disclaimeth the justification of
all inherent righteousness in the sight of God, Psalm. 143. Hear my prayer, O
Lord, give ear to my supplication; in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy
righteousness, And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. And Psalm 30. If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, that
thou may be feared. So Esaias, that Evangelical Prophet, aduanceth Gods
righteousness, and disauoweth man's righteousness. Esaias 54. 17. This is the
heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says
the Lord. Yea, say the Pontificians, our inherent righteousness is of the
Lord. Nay, says Esaias, chapt. 64. 6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all
our righteousness are as filthy rags. Yea, say the Pontificians, before we be
regenerate, and be in Christ. But Esaias speaks of the Church of the Jews, of
the circumcised, to whom circumcision was a sign of regeneration, and of Gods
Covenant of grace, and a seal of faith; and Esaias puts himself in the number.
Was Esaias now unregenerate? And in the name of himself, and the whole Church of
the Jews, he renounceth all inherent righteousness, as filthy rags; in no
sort to be patched and pieced to that garment of salvation, to that robe of
righteousness, namely, Christ's righteousness, imputed and put upon us by the
hand of faith; wherein Esaias and all the faithful rejoice: as he says, Esa.
61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my
God: for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me
with the robe of righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with
ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her Jewels. And in the 43. of
Esaias, verse. 25. and 26. there is a flat opposition between Gods mercy, and our
works in justification: I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. But may not our works come
in as sharers with Gods mercies? What works? The Prophet adds in Gods
person: Put me in remembrance, let us plead together: declare thou, that thou
may be justified. If God plead with us in judgment, we have no evidence of
any works in us, whereby to be justified in his sight.

But our works and obedience to Gods laws are called our righteousness. As
Matthew. 5. 20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. I answer,
this place may well be understood of Evangelical righteousness, opposite to
that legal righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and so Christ points
us to the righteousness of faith in him. But admit our works be called our
righteousness. what then? does it follow that this is our righteousness, to
justify us in the sight of God? Nothing less. For Moses says (speaking of
obedience to Gods commandments, Deuteronomy. 9.) Speak not thou in thy heart, after
that thou art come to possess that good Land, saying, For my righteousness
the Lord has brought me in to possess this Land. No, faith Moses, understand
that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good Land to possess it, for thy
righteousness. Now the Land of Canaan was a type of Gods Kingdom, which we
cannot come to possess by our own inherent righteousness. Whereupon St
Ambrose Ambros. in Psalm 43.
in his enarration upon the 43. Psalm, but according to our account 44. v. 3.
They got not the Land in possession by their own sword, etc. says, Patres
nostri, vtpote proximi and haeredes Patriarcharum, plantati in terra
repromissionis, non suis hoc meritis vindicabant: Our fathers, to wit, the next
successors and heirs of the Patriarchs, being planted in the Land of
promise, did not claim this as due to their merits. Ideo nec Moses cos
induxit, ne Legis hoc existimetur esse, sed gratiae; Lex enim merita examinat,
gratia fidem spectat: Therefore (says he) neither did Moses bring them in
thither, that it might not be reckoned as the work of the Law, but of Grace;
for the Law examineth works or merits, but Grace respects faith. Therefore,
as not Moses, but Joshua or Jesus (forso was his Name) was appointed to bring
the children of Israel into the possession of Canaan, the Land of promise;
which imports also (...). Canaan: which is as much as to show grace, favor,
or mercy.
the Land of mercy, or of grace: So not the Law given by Moses, but Jesus
Christ, by whom came grace and truth: he our true Joshua brings his people
into the possession of grace and glory. Ergo qui non in brachio suo, hoc est,
in sua operatione praesumit, sed in Dei gratia, credens, quod non facta sua
vnumquemque iustificant, sed fides prompta: dicit Domino, Tues ipse Rex meus,
and Deus meus, qui mandas salutes Jacob* Therefore (says holy Ambrose) he that
presumes not in his own arm, that is, in Ambros. ibid.
his works, but in the grace of God; believing, that not a man's works, but
his prompt and clear faith, does justify him: this man says unto the Lord,
Thou art my King, and my God, that command salvation for Jacob. True it is,
that the same Father in another place says; Sola fides non sufficit: Ambros.
in epist. ad Hebr. cap. 4.
operari per dilectionem, etc. Sole faith is not sufficient: it is necessary
that faith work by love, and converse worthy of God. And a little after,
Festinemus, etc. Let us hasten to enter into that rest, because faith is not
sufficient, but a life beseeming faith must be added, and great care used, that
faith be not idle. For it is necessary for every one that would possess
Heaven, to adorn his faith with good works. So he. True: a most pious and
Christian speech; but in all this he says not, that faith alone is not
sufficient to justify us in the sight of God, and so to bring us to the
possession of Heaven: for then he should contradict himself elsewhere, where
he says; Sublatis omnibus operibus legis, sola fides posita est ad salutem:
All Ambr. in Romans 9
the works of the law being removed, only faith takes place in our salvation.
Mark, he says; Sola fides: only faith. And again, the same Father says
elsewhere: Non operibus iustificamur, Ambr. de Jacob. and vita beata. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
sed fide, quon^am carnalis infirmitas operibus impedimento est, sed fidei
claritas factorum obumbrat errorem, quae meretur veniam delictorum: We are not
justified (says he) by works, but by faith; because the infirmity of the
flesh is an impediment to works, but the glory of faith does cover the error
of our works, which faith obtains remission of sins. And again;
Infirmitas excludit a venia, and fides excusat a culpa: Our Ambr. in Apol.
David.
infirmity excludes us from pardon, and faith excuses us from blame. And
setting down his peremptory judgment, grounded upon Scripture, he says:
Arbitramur secundum Apostolum, iustificari hominem per fidem sine operibus
legis. Iustificetur ergo ex fide David, qui per legem peccatum agnouit, sed
peccati veniam ex fide credidit: We definitiuely conclude (says he)
according to the Apostle, that a man is justified by faith without the works
of the law. Therefore let David be justified by faith, who by the law
acknowledged his sin, and by faith believed the pardon of his sin. And
again elsewhere: Deus clementia bonitatis suae semper homini procurans, vt and
quod Ambros. in Romans cap. 11.
sine lege peccatum erat, and in lege, posset deleri: hoc decreuit, vt solam
fidem poneret, per quam omnium peccata abolerentur: That is, God by the
clemency of his goodness, always providing for man, that both sin committed
without law, and in the law, might be blotted out: has made this decree, to
appoint sole faith, whereby all men's sins might be abolished. Now compare
these judicious sayings of this holy man, with that he said formerly, that
sole faith is not sufficient, but a good life must be added* and it will
plainly appear, that he speaks of faith alone, as sufficient to justify us
in the sight of God, and to procure us the possession of heaven; yet he means
not a solitary and dead faith, but such a faith, as is a living and saving
faith, working by love, which has as well a work of sanctification in a holy
life amongst men, as of justification by a holy belief in the sight of God.
For there is frequent mention of a twofold righteousness in the works of
ancient Note.
Fathers: The one of justification before God, which is the righteousness of
faith; the other, of justification before men, which is the righteousness of
works. This second, is via regni; the way to the kingdom: that other of
faith, is caus^ ^egnandi; the cause of our reigning in this kingdom.

Saint Paul also disclaimeth all his former Ph^risaicall life, which, as
touching the Law, was unreprovable, calling and accounting it but dross and
dung. Nay, now after his conversion, having walked holily and faithfully in his
Apostolical vocation and Ministry, so that he knew nothing by himself: 1.
Cor. 14. 4.
yet what says he? Although I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified: but he that judges me is the Lord. And renouncing all his inherent
righteousness, all his desire was to be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith.

To omit the multitude of testimonies of holy men of God, the fathers of the
Church, from time to time, who in their writings do renounce their own
inherent righteousness, as justifying them in the sight of God: Let us, for
conclusion of this point, add a few memorable sayings uttered by dying men,
such as were of a holy life and conversation, now agoing to appear before the
dreadful Tribunal of Gods most strict and impartial judgment, and now
sealing up their faith with their last breath.

Possidonius in his 27. Chapter of the life of Augustine, tells Possidonius in
the beginning of St. Augustines works. See Chemmtius his Examen of
justification
a memorable story. Augustine (says he) told us, that he heard a most wise
and pious answer of Ambrose, of blessed memory, drawing near his end, which he
much praised and commended: for when that venerable Father lay upon his
deathbed, and was desired of the faithful standing about his bed, with
tears, that he would ask of the Lord a longer time of his Pilgrimage here,
he answered them: The like speech did venerable Bede utter at his death: saying
to his friends, I have so lived among you, that I am not ashamed of my life,
neither fear I to dye, because I have almost gracious Redeemer. Remains.
I have not so lived, as that I am ashamed to continue amongst you; nor yet am
I afraid to dye, because we have a good Master. And herein (says Possidonius)
our Augustine now aged, did admire and praise his words, as refined in the
fire, and weighed in the balance. For therefore is he to be understood to
say: Nor do I fear to dye, because we have a good Master; lest he might be
thought to trust and presume too much upon his most sanctified life. But I have
not so lived, that I am ashamed to live among you: this he said in regard of
that, which one man might know of another; for knowing the trial of divine
justice, he said, he relied more upon the goodness of his Lord, than upon his
own merits: to whom also he prayed daily in the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our
debts, etc.

Bernard, when he seemed to draw his last breath, being Guil. Abbas in vita
Bern. lib. 1. cap. 13.
in a trance, he thought he was presented before the Tribunal of his Lord: And
Satan also stood opposite against him, charging him with many wicked
accusations. And when he had prosecuted all to the full, then the man of God
was to plead for himself. And being no whit terrified or troubled, he said: I
confess I am unworthy; nor can I obtain the Kingdom of Heaven by mine own
merits: But my Lord obtaining it by a double right, to wit, by the inheritance
of his Father, and by the merit of his passion, contenting himself with the
one, he bestows the other upon me: by whose gift, claiming it as mine own
right, I am not confounded. At this word, the enemy went away confounded.

There is extant an exhortation of Anselme to a dying brother, set down in
most sweet words. When any brother seems to be extremely oppressed, it stands
both with piety and prudence, that he be exercised by a Prelate, or some other
Priest, with these questions and exhortations under written. And first, let him
be demanded:

Brother, do thou rejoice, that thou shall dye in the faith? and let him
answer: I do. Confess that thou have not lived so well as thou should: I
confess it. Do thou repent of it? I do repent. Have thou a will and
purpose to amend, if thou should have time to live longer? Yes. Do thou
believe that the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, dyed for thee? I believe
it. Do thou believe thou can not be saved, but by his death? Yea. Do
thou from thy heart thank him for this? I do. Give therefore, while there is
life in thee, always thanks unto him, and put thy whole trust in this his
only death. Commit thy self wholly to his death. Cover thy whole self with
this death, and wrap thy self wholly in it. And if the Lord go about to judge
thee, say: Lord, I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thy
judgment; otherwise, I will not contend with thee. If he shall say, that thou
have deserved damnation; say thou, I set the death of our Lord Jesus Christ
between me and my illdeseruings, and assign me the merit of his most
precious passion for my merit, which I my self should have had; but alas have
not.

Let him say again: I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and
thy wrath. Let him also say three times; O Lord, into thy hands I commend my
spirit. And let those that stand about him, answer: Into thy hands, O Lord, we
commend his spirit. And he shall dye secure, and shall never see death.

The same Anselme in his meditations, as it were setting himself before the
Tribunal of Gods judgment, whereby he declares that neither the life of the
regenerate, nor good works can stand against divine justice, but only Christ
the Mediator, says; My life does terrify me: for my whole life being exactly
discussed and sifted, does appear to me either to be sin, or mere
barrenness. And if any fruit appear therein, it is either so counterfeit, or
imperfect, or one way or other corrupt, as it cannot but displease God: for all
of it is either sinful and damnable, or unfruitful and contemptible. But
why do I separate or distinguish unfruitful from damnable? For if it be
unfruitful, it is damnable: For every tree which brings not forth good
fruit, shall be cast into the fire. O therefore dry and unprofitable tree,
worthy of eternal fire! what will thou answer in that day, when it shall be
required of thee, even to a moment, how thou have spent all that time limited
and bestowed on thee to spend thy life in? O extremity! On the one side sins
accusing; on the other justice affrighting: underneath, Hels horrible Chaos
gaping: above, the angry Judge: within, the conscience boiling; without, the
world burning. The righteous shall scareely be saved; the sinner taken tardy,
where shall he appear? To lurk, shall be impossible, to appear intolerable.
Who shall advise me? Whence shall I expect salvation? Who is he that is called
the Angel of great counsel? The same is Jesus. The same is the Judge,
between whose hands I tremble. Pause awhile, O sinner, do not despair. Hope
in him, whom thou fear, fly to him from whom thou have fled. O Jesus
Christ, for this thy name sake, deal with me according to this name: look
upon this wretch calling on thy name. Therefore, O Jesus, be my Jesus for thy
names sake. If thou shall admit me into the large bosom of thy mercy, it shall
be never a whit the narrower for me. True it is, my conscience has deserved
damnation, and my repentance suffices not for satisfaction: but certain it
is, that thy mercy surpasses all misdeedes, etc.

It is recorded of Edward the Confessor, once King of this Island, that lying
on his deathbed, his friends about him weeping, he said; If ye loved me, ye
would forbear weeping, and rejoice rather, because I go to my Father, with
whom I shall receive the joys promised to the faithful; not through my
merits, but by the free mercy of my Savior, who shows Elreidus Riuallensis
Remains.
mercy on whom he pleases.

Thus by these and such like testimonies of holy and devout men, not in their
Rhetorical declamations, to win applause with men, but in their saddest
meditations, as standing in the presence, yea before the dreadful Tribunal of
that just God: it may easily appear, what confidence is to be put in the best
man's works, or inherent righteousness. All these will prove but dry fuel
and stubble, when they come to that consuming Heb. 12. 29. Esaias 33. 14.
fire, to those everlasting burnings. It is an easy matter for a carnal man,
seduced with error, and possessed with the spirit of pride, while he is in
his prosperity, and senseless security, as little considering, as conceiving
the power of Gods wrath, as David speaks; as little knowing the nature of sin,
as the terror of Gods strict justice, to be pussed up with an opinion of a few
poor beggarly supposed good deeds. Just like our first Parents, who when they
had sinned, and so incurred Gods eternal wrath, got a few figge-leaues to
cover their nakedness and shame, thinking themselves now safe and secure
enough. But no sooner did they hear the voice of the Lord God, coming as a
Judge toward them, but for all their figge-leaues, they run and hide
themselves among the Trees of the Garden. Their figg-leaues quickly began to
wither, when once the fire of Gods jealousy began to approach. But let now
the brauest Pontifician of them all, standing so much upon the pantofles of
inherent righteousness, let him lav aside his carnal security, his love of
the world, his wilful blindness, having looked his face in the glass of Gods
Law, and catechized himself according to the strict Canon thereof, etc. and
let him now bethink himself of an account he is to make, and that presently,
before a most severe and impartial vncorrupt Judge, of all his thoughts,
words, works, omissions, commissions; let him take into his consideration (if
he have so much grace and judgment to consider) the nature of sin, which is
such, as the least sin is sufficient to damn him soul and body for ever:
for, He that keeps the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, is guilty of
all. James 2. 10.
And the Law says, Cursed is every one that continues not in all Gal. 3. 10.
things written in the Law to do them. Mark, In all things: yea such is sin, as
it could not be purged, nor man's soul redeemed from it, nor Gods wrath
appeased, nor his justice satisfied, but by the only death of the only son of
God. Tell me, what that justice is, which will not be satisfied: Tell me what
that sin is which will not be expiated, but by the extreme humiliation,
bloud-shedding, death and passion of the dearest son of the eternal God? Tell
me, how severe is that justice, how implacable that indignation against sin,
which would not spare the most immaculate Lamb of God, the pure spotless Son
of righteousness, even righteousness, holiness and innocence it self? These
things well weighed and digested in thy more refined judgment, according to the
standard of the Sanctuary; come now Pontifician, glittering in thy white linen
of thine inherent righteousness, set thy self before Gods dreadful Tribunal,
to receive thy eternal doom, according to thine own deseruings: bring with thee
all thy merits, number now before the judge of heaven and earth thy many
pilgrimages, thy many Prayers, Pater-nosters, Aue-Maries, Canonical hours,
Shrifts, Shrines adored, Saints inuoked, and the like: But thy conscience will
give thee, that all these being but will worship, and humane inventions; of
which God will say, Who required these things at your hands? condemned also in
Esaias, saying, Their fear toward me was Esaias. 29 13.
taught by the precept of men: they will vanish into smoke when they are tried
in Gods Test. Therefore howsoever the Romane-Catholicke Church preferres these
her own Rites, and Ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical obseruances of her own
invention, as being more holy and more meritorious, than those duties of
Christian holiness commanded and prescribed in Gods Word: yet in the more
sober judgment of thine impartial Conscience, know, that if God respect any
righteousness at all in us, it must be that especially, which himself has
commanded. If therefore thou have any store of these, bring them with thee. If
thou can, Tell this Judge, that thou have dealt truly and justly with all
men, that thou have been liberal to the poor, given much Alms, yea perhaps
bequeathed all thy goods and possessions to pious uses, even in thy life time;
and that not to the maintenance of a Monastical Society of lazy and lustful
Abbey-lubbers, but upon the truly poor indigent Brethren of Christ; that thou
have dispossessed and diuested thy self of all earthly preferment and honor,
and so become poor for Christ's sake; thou have exercised thy self with
watchings and fastings, not as man, but as the Lord has commanded; and much
more than all this, if thou can allege for thy self. Well* But all these
things must now be weighed in a just and even balance, not of man's
imagination, but of Gods strict judgment. Now will not he find, think
thou, an infinite lightness in thy best works? will not his most pure eyes
easily discern thy most pious actions to be fraught with many imperfections,
defiled with the mixture of manifold corruptions, as water running through a
puddly cha^nel? he will discover in all these works of thine, besides infinite
defects and faylings in all, thy many sinister ends; the pride of thy heart,
thy self-loue, the love of vain glory, the love of thine own felicity, more
than of the glory of God, and a thousand secret corruptions, lurking in the
secret corners of thy selfe-deceiuing heart. Nay, besides this, thou can not
number up so many good duties which thou have done, as this all-seeing Judge
can number, and set before thee greater and weightier duties, which thou have
altogether omitted. And more than that too, this Judge can muster up unto thee
whole Legions of sins, which thou have committed, the least whereof, all the
men in the world, with all their merits, their arrogant works of
supererogation, the fained treasure of the Church, with Masses and Dirges, and
whatsoever else man or Angel can devise, cannot possibly appease the wrath, and
satisfy the justice of this Judge for. For if all the Creatures in the world
could satisfy Gods justice for one sin: wherefore dyed the innocent Lamb,
and the only Son of God? Well then, in this case what will thou do? whither
will thou fly? where will thou seek relief for thy perplexed spirit? where
comfort for thine appalled conscience? where a sanctuary for thy soul, now
pursued with the hue and cry of diuiue justice and revenge, of hell, and Satan,
of the guilt of thy tormenting conscience for sin? Thy good works and
merits? They cry guilty before Gods throne, of many imperfections, defects,
corruptions. If thy actual transgressions, which are many, if thy total
omissions of duties which thou ought to have done, should be silent, yet
even thy best actions, which thou bring to plead for thee, would, and must
tell the truth, and become a full grand Jury to bring-in the verdict of thy
condemnation. And then thou shall be found such, as the Gospel has doomed:
who pleading their great works before the Judge, received this sentence, I
know you not, depart from me Mat. 7. 22.
ye workers of iniquity. Do thou not think it safest now to be of thy
Brother or thy Father Bellarmines mind, who, howsoever, as a member of the
Papal State, he writ mainely against the truth of justification: yet one time
speaking his conscience, and uttering his private judgment, said, Propter
Bellarm. de iustif. l. 5. c. 7.
incertitudinem propriae iustitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimum
est fiduciam in sola Dei misericordia, and benignitate reponere: Because of the
uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the peril of vain glory, it is
most safe to repose our confidence in the only mercy, and favor of God. Only
herein be unlike this Brother or Father of thine: For this sentence of his
standing in his works, shall rise up in judgment against him at the latter
day, for all his lies spoken through hypocrisy: but let it teach thee, so to
renounce all thy supposed merits, as reposing thy self in the only mercies of
God, and merits of Christ, thou may, flying from Babylon, find mercy and
salvation in the great day of the Lord Jesus.

Let me hereunto add a passage or two, one out of Augustine his Manual; which
Book though it be fathered upon some other Author, yet the chief matter of
it is confessed to be collected out of Augustines Works: In omnibus
aduersitatibus (...).
non inuenio tam efficax remedium, quam vulnera Christi: in illis dormio
securus, and requiesco intrepidus, Christus mortuus est pr^nobis. Nihil tam ad
mortem amarum, quod morte Christi non san^tur. Tota spes mea est in morte
Domini mei. Mors eius meritum meum, refugium meum, salus, vita, and resurrectio
mea: meritu^ meum, miseratio Domini. Non sum meriti inops, quamdiu ille
miserationum Dominus non defuerit. Et misericordiae Domini multae, multus ego
sum in meritis: Quanto ille potentior est ad saluandum, tanto ego securior.
Peccaut peccatum grande, and multorum sum mihi conscius delictorum; nec sic
despero, quia vbi abundauerunt delicta, superabundauit and gratia: In all
adversities (says he) I find not a more effectual remedy, than the wounds of
Christ; in them I sleep securely, in them I rest without fear. Christ dyed
for us. There is nothing in death so bitter, which cannot be cured with the
death of Christ. All my hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my
demerit, my refuge, my salvation, life and resurrection: my merit is the Lords
mercy. I want no merit, so long as the Lord of mercies is not wanting And while
the Lord is rich in mercies, I am rich in merits. The more able he is to save,
the more am I secure. I have committed some heinous sin, and am guilty of many
trespasses, yet I despair not, because where sins have abounded, there grace
has also super abounded. And in the 23. Chapter, Inter b^achia Saluatoris mei,
and viuere volo, and mori cupio: Between the arms of my Savior, it is both
my will to live, and my wish to dye. Another passage to this purpose I find in
Gregory, in the conclusion of that singular work of his Morals; where speaking
of man's good works, and good intentions, Greg. Moral. l. 35. c. 26.
concludes thus: St de his diuinitus districte discutimur, quis inter ista
remanet salutis locus? quando and mala nostra pura mala sunt, and bona quae nos
habere credimus, pura bona esse nequaquam possunt: If (says he) we be strictly
sifted by God, concerning these things, what place would be left for salvation
in them? seeing that both our evil actions are simply evil, and the good
things which we believe we have, cannot be simply good. Which place of Gregory
being alleged by Luther, to prove none can be certain that he does not
always Luther l. artic. art. 35.
mortally sin: although John, Bishop of Rochester, would have Gregory to
mean, not all works, but only such, as we vainly boast of, as Sixtus
Senensis relates: Yet Gregory's Sixtus Seen. bibl. sact. l. 5. annot. 45.
meaning is easily discovered by the title or contents prefixed to the said
Chapter, in these words; Quod Sanctus Gregorius, in his, quae iam recta
intention protulit, vanae gloriae, vel laudis h^manae fauorem subrepsisse sibi
formidat, and pro recompensatione operis, postulat orationem lectoris: that is,
That St. Gregory in those things, which he did with a right intention, fears
lest some affectation of vain glory, or humane applause might have crept in
upon him, and for a recompense of his work, desires the Readers prayers. And
it is plain also by the whole tenure of that Chapter, that Gregory durst not
trust his best works upon the trial of Gods strict judgment: seeing that a
man's best intentions are subject to be tainted with secret pride and vain
glory. And the said Bishop of Rochester may seem too sharp in his censure,
the sequel whereof tends to a flat condemnation of Gregory's best intentions,
as if he had been directly conscious of pride in them, whereas Gregory only
fears least some such corruption might have secretly stolen in upon him.

And to confirm this, and put it out of all question, Gregory in another place
speaks excellently to this purpose: Omnis humana iustitia, iniustitia esse
conuincitur, si districte iudicetur. Greg. Moral. lib. 9 cap. 24.
Prece ergo post iustitiam indiget, vt quae succumbere discussa poterat, ex
sola iudicis pietate, conualescat. D^cat ergo qui etiamss habuero qui^piam
iustum, non respondebo, sed meum ^udicem deprecabor. Velut si apertius
fateatur, dicens, et si ad opus virtutis excreuero, ad vitam non ex meritis,
sed ex venia conualesco: All humane righteousness (says he) if it be
strictly judged, is convinced to be unrighteousness. Therefore a man after his
works of righteousness, had need to pray, that his righteousness, which being
discussed might sink down under the burden, may recover strength again by the
only clemency of the Judge. Let him say then, that though I have done any thing
that is just, yet I will not answer, but will supplicate my Judge. As if he
should more plainly confess: saying, Although I attain to never so great a
proficiency in the way of virtue, yet I come to obtain life, not of merits,
but of mercy. This was the constant doctrine of the Church of Rome, in this
Bishops days.

We will conclude this point, in setting down the judgment of Cardinal
Contarenus, who writ of justification a little Gasper Contarenus. lib. de
iustif.
before the Council of Trent: where, having before of set purpose, examined
the Protestants doctrine of justification, confesses ingenuously (as he had
iudiciously, according to his learning and piety, scand and compared it) that
Luthers doctrine, together with the Protestants, was consonant and agreeable to
Catholic doctrine. For as yet, the Council of Trent had not decreed against
the Catholic faith, which had been maintained by all the Fathers of the
Church in all ages, even down to Contarenus his time, who writ some three or
four years before the first Session of this Council; although the
Schoolmen, specially the Scotists, had according (...)
to the Authors name, darkened and dimmed the truth, whose new doctrine
notwithstanding proved not as yet Catholic, before the Council of Trent
(wherein the Scotists bore no small sway) would needs make it
Romane-Catholicke, in despite of all Catholics. Where also we may note by the
way, the falsehood of that scandal which Pontificians cast upon the Protestants
Religion, as being a doctrine of nouelty, broached first by Luther: Whereas a
Cardinal of the Church of Rome, of learning and piety, after due examination,
found and confessed, that the Protestant doctrine of justification, being the
maine fundamental doctrine of Christian Religion, did consent with Catholic
doctrine. But let us see what this Cardinal says concerning justification:
Attingimus ad duplicem iustitiam, alteram nobis inhaerentem, qua incipimus esse
iusti, and essicimur consortes diuinae naturae; and habemus charitatem diffusam
in cordibus nostris: alteram vero non inhaerentem, sed nobis donatam cum
Christo, iustitiam (inquam) Christi, and omne eius meritum: simul tempore
vtraque nobis donatur, and vtramque attingimus per fidem. Quod autem Deus
donauerit nobis Christum, and omnia cumeo, est Textus Apostoli expressus in
Epistola ad Romanos, Qui filio suo non pepercit, etc. His reor nullum posse
contradicere. Restat iam inquirere, vtranam debeamus niti, and existimare nos
iustificari coram Deo, id est, sanctos and iustos haberi; ea (inquam) iustitia,
quae deceat filios Dei, ac oculis Dei satisfaciat, an hac iustitia and
charitate nobis inhaerente; an potius iustitia Christi nobis donata and
imputata? Ego prorsus existimo pie and Christian dici, quod debeamus niti,
niti (inquam) tanquam restabili, quae certonos sustentat, iustitia Christi
nobis donata, non autem sanctitate and gratia nobis inharente. Haec etenim
nostra iustitia est inchoata, and imperfecta, quae tueri nos non potest, quin
in multis offendamus, quin assidue peccemus, ac propterea indigeamus oratione,
qua quotidie petamus, dimitti nobis debita nostra. Idcirco in conspectu Dei non
possumus ob hanc iustitiam nostram haberi iusti and boni, quemadmodum deceret
filios Dei esse bonos and sanctos: sed iustitia Christi nobis donata est vera
and perfecta iustitia, quae omnino placet oculis Dei, in qua nihil est quod
Deum offendat, quod Deo non summopere placeat. Hac ergo sola certa and stabili
nobis nitendum est, and o^ eam solam credere, nos iustificari coram Deo, id
est, iustos haberi, and dici iustos. Hic est preciosus ille Christianorum
thesaurus, quem qui inuenit, venait omnia quae habet, vt emat illum. Haec est
preciosa margarita, quam qui inuenit, linquit omnia, vt eam habeat, etc. Inde
est, quod experimento videmus viros sanctos, qui quanto magis in sanctitate
proficiunt, tanto minus sibi placent: ac propterea tanto magis intelligunt se
indigere Christo, and iustitia Christi sibi donata, ideoque se reli^quunt, and
soli Christo incumbunt. Hoc non ob eam accidit causam, quod facti sanctiores,
minus videant, quam prius, neque quoniam facti sint animo dim^ssiori and
viliori; imo quanto magis in sanctitate proficiunt tanto maiori sunt animo,
tanto sunt perspicactores. Quamobrem fact^ perspicaciores, magis intuentur
sanctitatis and iustitiae ipsi^ inhaerentis tenuitatem, cum qua perspiciunt
multas maculas, quae eorum oculos factos perspicaciores magis offendunt: ac
propterea reipsa cogno scunt, non sibi nitendum esse sanctitate, charitate and
gratia sibi inhaerente, sed con^ugiendum sibi esse ad Christum, and ad gratiam
Christi ipsis donatam, qua nitantur and incumbant: We attain (says he) to a
double righteousness; the one inherent in us: whereby we begin to be just,
and are made partakers of the divine nature, and have charity shed abroad in
our hearts: the other, not inherent, but given us with Christ; the
righteousness (I say) of Christ, and all his merits. Both are given us at one
time, and we attain both of them by faith. And that God has given us Christ,
and with him all things; it is the Text of the Apostle to the Romans. Romans 8.
32.
These things, I suppose, none can contradict. It remains then to enquire,
whether of these two we are to trust unto, and to be esteemed justified before
God. For my part (says he) I think it agreeable both to Piety and
Christianity, to say, that we ought to rely, to rely (I say) upon the
righteousness of Christ given unto us, as upon a most firm foundation, which
does surely sustain us; and not upon holiness and grace inherent in us. Thus
Contarenus. And again, in the same book: ( Hac sola (inquit) certa, stabili,
nobis nitendum est, and ob eam solam credere nos iustificari coram Deo, id est,
iustos haberi, etc.) We are (says he) to rely upon this only certain and
stable foundation, and for the same only, to believe that we are justified
before God, that is, accounted just. This is that precious treasure of
Christians, which who so finds, sells all that he has, to buy it. Thence
it is, that by experiment we see holy men, who the greater proficients they
prove in holiness, the less they please themselves; and therefore do so much
the more perceive they stand in need of Christ, and of his righteousness
given unto them: and therefore they renounce themselves, and rely only upon
Christ. Neither does this come to pass, that becoming more holy, they see
less than before, or are now more degenerous and base minded: yea, rather the
more they grow in sanctity, the more generous and quick sighted they be.
Wherefore becoming the sharper sighted, they do the more look into the
weakness and slenderness of their inherent sanctity and righteousness, which
they observe to be infected with many spots and speckes, which do so much the
more offend their eyes, the more sharp sighted they grow: and therefore they
acknowledge, that they are not to rely upon any sanctity, charity, and grace
inherent in them, but to fly to Christ, and to his grace given unto them,
whereupon they wholly rely, and repose themselves. These and many other
excellent sayings, has this Cardinal left recorded, beseeming a learned,
godly, and pious Divine, setting forth the true nature of the justification of
a sinner before God. So that by the authority and testimony of this learned and
judicious Cardinal, Gods wisdom and providence so disposing it, it is
evident, that this doctrine of justification, which the Protestants teach and
maintain, was not a new doctrine invented by Luther, but the same which the
Catholic Doctors and Divines taught, until Scotus and his Sectaries began to
broach a new and contrary doctrine (which this learned Cardinal, by solid
arguments from Scripture, confuteth) never created nor decreed for Catholic,
until the Romane-Catholicke Council of Trent.

CHAP. XI. Of the Romane-Catholicke faith it self, what kind of faith that is
which the Church of Rome admits as their Christian faith, or the faith of
Romane-Catholicke believers.
BY that which has been already declared of the Romane-Catholicke doctrine,
touching the justification of a sinner, it is more than evident, that they have
quite barred up the beautiful gate of the Temple of Heaven, blocked up the way
to salvation, beset the Tree of life with their Seraphicall flaming sword of
Anathema, fire and faggot, lest never a Mothers son of Adam should put forth
his hand to taste of it, and so live for ever in the heavenly Paradise. So that
the Romish Doctors, specially the Trent-Fathers, are just like those Scribes
and Pharisees Hypocrites, which shut up the Mat. 23. 13.
Kingdom of Heaven, and for all Peter's pretended keys, take away the key of
knowledge, neither going in themselves, nor suffering others to enter in. Or
they are like to the Philistims, who stopped up those Wels, which Abraham had
dug Genesis 26. 15.
for his flocks, filling them with earth and rubbish. So these Romish
Philistims, envying Isaacs riches, the riches of Gods grace in the children of
the promise, Abraham's seed, have with the earth and rubbish of humane
inventions, and of Satan's Sophistry, stopped up those Wels of salvation, which
Abraham by faith had dug, and found, and enjoyed, and left also to his
faithful posterity to enjoy to the worlds end. And in stead thereof they have
hewed to themselves Cisternes, Ier. 2. 13.
broken Cisternes, that will hold no water, having forsaken the Lord, the
fountain of living waters, as Jeremy speaks.

But yet say, that the Romane-Catholicke Church had not thus stopped up the
Wels of salvation, but that, as the promiscuous Samaritans (who were a perfect
type of the Popish Church: for they meddled not with the Jews, the true
Church; they had a mixed Religion of the true God, and of Idols, false gods;
they had built a Temple in Mount Garizim, Joseph. de Antiquit. Iud. lib. 13.
cap. 17.
not only in imitation, but in emulation and opposition to the Temple in
Jerusalem: So the Romish Church will not meddle with the true Christian
professors, and true Iehudahs, praysers of God, unless it be by treachery and
treason, by powder and poison, fire and faggot, and sword: their Religion is
mixed, and so mixed, as their Idols have quite shouldred out the service of the
true God; and against Christ, the true Temple, whose Religion is Catholic,
and spread over the whole world, as Christ told the Samaritan woman, they have
built John 4. 21. 23.
an Antichristian Church upon the Roman Hills, whose imaginary foundation is
Peter's Chair, and whose gates are opened and shut with Peter's keys) Say (I
say) if, as the Samaritans retained Jacobs Well entire; so the Pontificians did
preserve the Wels of salvation pure, not having despitefully stopped them up, as
the Philistims did Abraham's Wels: yet, as the woman of Samaria said to Christ;
The Well is deep, and thou have nothing to draw withal: so the Well of
salvation is deep, what is there then to draw withal; that, as Esaias says,
ye may with joy draw water out of the Wels of salvation. Esa. 12. 3.
This may therefore be fitly objected to the Church of Rome, which the
Samaritan woman foolishly objected to Christ. The Well is deep, and thou have
nothing to draw withal. Nothing? yea nothing; not so much as a small sheard to
take water withal out of the pit, as Esaias speaks: For there is no Esa. 30.
14.
line to reach, no bucket to take the living waters out of Gods Well, but only
Faith. With this it was, wherewith the Samaritan woman her self, both drew and
drank of the true living water, out of Jacobs true living Well, and the Well
was Christ. With this Faith it was, wherewith the woman with Mat. 9. 22.
the bloody issue drew the living water out of Christ, which washed away the
running bloody issue of her sins: For it was her faith, that made her whole,
and that by Christ's own testimony. With this faith it was, that the blind man
in the Gospel went and washed in the Poole of Siloam, yea in the John 9.
soft running waters of Shilo, Jesus Christ, by virtue whereof he returned
seeing.

But the Church of Rome does not deny faith. True. Yea but every faith will not
reach this Well, nor comprehend this Water: let us see therefore, what that
faith is which the Pontificians hold, and whether it will hold water, as we
say. And now are we come to the maine point of the matter of our
justification: as Soto confesses, that this doctrine of faith Dom. Soto de
not. and great. ^. 2. c. 5.
it self, is the princeps Controuersia, the head controversy between the
Pontificians, and whom they call the Lutherans. But, as the same Soto says,
ibid. Est lis haec de sola fide, adeo tum a suis exordijs abstrusa, tum ob
diuturnam vtrinque pugnam obuoluta ac implexa, vt ad e^uendam veritatem vix
nobis alicunde pateat aditus: This controversy of sole faith (says he) is
both from the first original of it so abstruse, as also by reason of the
continual contentions on both sides, so inuolued and intricate, that to clear
the truth, we can scarce find where to begin. And herein he says perhaps
too true.

But the Pontificians treading this endless maze, may thank their own
Shoolemen, who first drew this Labyrinth, filling it full with the many
meanders of their manifold distinctions, whereby they have so intoxicated even
their strongest brains with often turnings, as it is no marvel, if subtle
Soto himself, and others of his society, do so much busy themselves in vain
to find the right door of faith, as the blind Sodomites were puzzled in
seeking the door of the righteous Lot, which they could not find out. So that
for a man to go about to tread this Pontifician Maze, may seem an endless
labor. But if we repair to the Council of Trent, therein we shall find
the whole spawne of the errors of faith compact in one lump together.

The Council of Trent, or the Church of Rome (which you will) acknowledges
and admits only one kind of faith, namely, an Historical faith, which (say
they) is common to all men, good and bad, yea common to the very Devils
themselves. The sum whereof is set down in the fifteenth Chapter of the sixth
Session, and in the twenty eight Canon: Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 15. can. 28.
Their words are these, Aduersus etiam hominum quorundam callida ingenia, qui
per dulces sermones, and benedictiones, seducunt corda innocentium, asserendum
est, non mode infidelitate, per quam and ipsa fides amittitur, sed etiam
quocunque alio mortali peccato, quamuis non amittatur fides, acceptam
iustificationis gratiam amitti: diuinae legis doctrinam defendendo, quae a
regno Dei non solum infideles excludit, sed and fideles quoque fornicarios,
adulteros, molles, masculorum concubitores, fures, auaros, ebriosos, maledicos,
rapaces, ^aeterosque omnes, qui laetalia committunt peccata, a quibus cum
diuinae gratiae adiumento abstinere possunt, and pro quibus a Christi gratia
separantur: That is, Also against the cunning wits of certain men, which by
Note the sugar-tongued serpent, pr^faning Scripture, by an hypocritical
mis-applying it to others, when it directly taxes seducing Pontificians
themselves.
sweet words, and benedictions, seduce the hearts of the innocent, we are to
affirm, that not only by infidelity, whereby even faith it self is lost, but
also by any mortal sin whatsoever, although faith be not lost, yet the
grace of justification being received, is lost: maintaining the doctrine of
Gods law, which excludes from the Kingdom of God, not only unbelievers, but
also believing or faithful fornicators, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of
themselves with mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, raylers, extortioners,
and all other, that commit deadly sins; from which they might have abstained
by the help of Gods grace, and for which they are separated from the grace of
Christ. In which words, we may observe two remarkable things, concerning the
Popish faith: first, that it has no coherence with the grace of justification,
seeing (as they teach) the grace of justification may be lost, and yet faith
remain still in a man: the second is, that this faith of theirs is common to
whoor-mongers, to adulterers, and all kind of lewd persons, whom they call
believing or faithful, though shut out from the kingdom of God.

To this they add also the twenty eight Canon: Si quis dixerit, amissa per
peccatum gratia, simul and fidem semper amitti: aut fidem, quae remanet, non
esse veram fidem, licet non sit viua: aut eum, qui fidem sine charitate habet,
non esse Christianum: anathema sit: If any man shall say, that grace being lost
by sin, faith together with it, is always lost: or that which remains, is
not true faith, though not a living faith: or that he, who has faith without
charity, is not a Christian: let him be accursed. So that according to Romes
doctrine, a man may have faith, and want grace: and a dead faith with them is a
true faith: and faith without charity may serve to make a Christian. According
to which doctrine, the Devil should have a true faith, and consequently not to
be denied to be a Christian: Even as the Turks call their circumcised,
Mussel-men, that is, true Believers; such true Believers may the Pontificians
be allowed to be. Vega gives the reason of this. Quod sancta Synodus Vega de
mortal. and verial peccat. l. 1. c. 14.
fidem peccatorum fidem veram appellauit, etc. That the holy Synod of Trent,
called the faith of sinners true faith, surely she did it being compelled of
you (O ye Lutherans) being desirous by a fit term to make plain to all men
the Catholic doctrine of the identity of faith unformed and formed. And lest
any hereby should be deceived, therefore she has put this qualification,
licet non sit viua, although it be not a living faith. And yet the same Vega
says there, Quod si Lutherus, etc. If Luther had only said, that which he writ
in his Commencary upon the Galathians, Si vera fides est, etc. If faith be
true, and if a man be truly a Son, charity shall not be wanting; we had
never opposed him. Yea Vega, but take Luthers meaning withal, That wheresoever
true faith is, there is charity; and then you will retract your words, and hold
on your opposition, not against Luther, but against the truth. Soto also Soto
de not and great. l. 2. c. 7.
puts the matter out of doubt, saying, That fides mortua proprie est fides, the
dead faith is the proper faith. And chapt. 8. ibid. That this faith does not
only ficte, fainedly, or falsely, as Lutherans say (says he) sed proprie,
legitime, and vere, but properly, legitimately, and truly, make a man a
Christian, and the Council. Trid. Sess. 6. can. 28.
member of Christ: according to the Text. But thus we come to discover the
Councels reasons, why she calls a dead faith a true faith: as also her meaning,
where she says, That the instrumental cause of justification is the sacrament
of Baptism, which is the sacrament of faith; sine qua, without which faith, no
man ever came to be justified. This might give some color to justification by
faith; saving that they say, They may have faith without justification. And
again in the same Chapter, whereas they equivocate egregiously, saying, That
faith, unless hope and love be added to it, does not perfectly unite us unto
Christ; alleging that of James, Faith without works is dead and fruitless:
and that of Paul, That in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision; but faith which works by love: yet they mean no other
faith, but that which is by nature void of love, and hope, seeing it can
subsist without them. And so consequently the faith that they hold and
maintain, is no living, but a dead faith, which may be in the damned, yea
which is in the very Devils.

And for the further opening and confirming of the Councels mind in this maine
point, let us hear further what her two Champions and Expositors, Vega and
Soto in their learned Commentaries upon this Session of the Council, have said
concerning their justifying Faith. These, as all other Pontificians at this
day, taking the Council of Trent for their guide and rule, as Bellarmine and
others, with one mouth do affirm, That there is no kind of Faith, but one: as
Soto says, Eadem Soto de not. and great. l. 2. c. 7.
vniner sorum fides est: The Faith of all men is one and the same. Indeed in
the sixth Chapter of the same Book, he sets down a twofold acception of Faith:
the first, of that Faith which he calls a moral virtue, which is in the will:
the other, an intellectual virtue, in the understanding. The first he takes
for fidelity in keeping ones word: The second for the credit given to it. In
this latter sense Soto takes that Faith, which is in man toward God: and what
this Faith is, he further shows in the seventh Chapter, where he propounds
two things concerning faith: first, Quod nullatenus duae, sed vna penitus Soto
ibid.
Fides est, qua credimus vniuersa reuelata, sieve historiae sint, sieve
promissiones, sieve praeceptiones, aut consilia: first, that there be not two,
but altogether one Faith, whereby we believe all things revealed, whether they
be histories, or promises, or precepts, or counsels. The second is, Quod
promissionum assensus, ad fidem Catholicam pertinens, non est specialis ille,
quo quisque de se credit, seu recipere modo, seu habere iam gratiam; sed ille
in genere, quo firmiter credimus, Iesum Christum vniuersalem esse Redemptorem,
etc. That the assent of the promises, appertaining to the Catholic faith, is
not that special assent of faith, whereby every man believes of himself,
that he either now receives, or has grace already; but that general assent,
whereby we firmly believe, that Jesus Christ is an universal Redeemer, etc.

Therefore that we may trace these Pontificians to their fourmes or holes, we
will insist in their own footsteps; and first show what species, or kind of
faith they hold: and secondly, what qualities they appropriate unto it in
particular. First therefore what kind of faith they mean, we have had the
testimony of the Council of Trent jointly, and generally; and then more
particularly, the Commentary of Soto upon it: namely, that it is a mere
Historical faith, common both to good and wicked men. To whom also we will
add Vega's judgment and Commentary, who also excludes all kinds of faith,
but this one Historical faith, as any way requisite Vega de iustif. great. etc.
qu. 1.
to justification: Nor does any of them allow unto faith any other work in
justification, but only as it disposes a man thereunto. Let us hear Vega's
own words, who not fearing to blaspheme the doctrine of faith delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, by perverting it to serve his Antichristian doctrine,
says: Et Paulus and caeteri Apostoli, imo and ipse Christus, cum fidei
tribuebunt nostram salutem and iustificationem, Ibid. qu. 2. rat. 1.
cum and eam exigebant ab eis, quibus praedicabant; agebant de fide, per quam
acquirere possumu^, and vere acquirimus iustitiam, docebantque nos
dispositionem, qua nos ex part nostra disponimus ad gratiam; sed ista fides
non est fides formata, aut saltem non in qua^tum formata, habet ista efficere:
both Paul and the other Apostles, yea even Christ himself, when they
attributed to faith our salvation and justification, and required it of those,
to whom they preached; they handled that faith, by which we may acquire, and
do truly acquire righteousness, and they taught us that disposition, whereby
on our part we dispose our selves to grace; but this faith is not a faith
formed, or at least not as it is formed, does it effect these things. And by
and by he explaines this more clearly, saying: Fides formata non est via,
neque dispositio ad institiam nostram, siquidem illa iam habet secum praesentem
iustitiam: Faith which is formed, is not the way, nor the disposition to our
righteousness: for His meaning is, by grace inherent, as hope, and love, etc.
this already has righteousness present with it. It remains therefore that
Vega allows no faith in justification, but that which is unformed, or void
of charity, and that this serves only to dispose a man to justification, which
justification charity possesses, when once it has given form and life to
faith.

Now Vega in the former question, among other sundry acceptions of this word
Faith, does most willingly embrace, and pitch upon that, which signifies
credulity, or aptness to believe, or a persuasion, or a firm and certain
assent: sed in^uidens tamen; but yet vneuident. And omitting others, this he
most divinely proves out of a profane Author and Historian, Titus Liuius. As
also out of the Poet Virgil:

Credo equidem, neque vana fides genus esse Deorum.

I verily believe there is a generation
Of Gods, nor is my faith a vain imagination.
This example Vega worthily puts among others, to demonstrate and exemplify
that faith, which the Pontificians have and hold concerning God, and their own
salvation, by way at least of disposition, as we have said. Now this faith,
taken for credulity, or persuasion, or assent, but vneuident, he diuides into
sundry branches; as either it is humane or divine: humane, when we believe man's
sayings; divine, when we believe Gods sayings. This divine Faith, he
sub-diuideth into actual and habitual. The actual Faith he calls a firm and
certain, but vneuident assent of those things, which are revealed of God. That
it is a firm and certain assent, it exceeds opinion: that it is vneuident, it
is inferior to the intellect or understanding science, and sapience, which are
intellectual virtues, having clearness and evidence. Habitual Faith is a
certain intellectual habit, whereby the understanding is made apt and
disposed to the actual Faith. This habitual Faith he further diuides into
fidem acquisitam and infusam; into faith acquired and infused. Faith acquired,
is a habit fitting us the more easily to believe, being acquired by the
frequency of the acts of Faith. Faith infused, is a certain supernatural
habit, and altogether of a divine condition, infused by God into our
understandings, that by it we may easily, and certainly, and undoubtedly
assent unto divine revelations. Verum hic habitus, etc. but this habit (says
he) may be both in righteous men, and in sinners, as all Catholic Doctors
for certain hold, and experience it self declares. Lastly, he divides Faith
in fidem informem, and formatam; into faith unformed, and formed. Faith
unformed, he calls a habit of Faith, separated from charity. Faith formed, is a
habit of Faith, conjoined unto charity, and having it present with it. Although
these in habit are both one; for as charity joined to Faith, makes it to be
formed: so being removed from Faith again, leaves it as it found it, unformed.
This is the perplexed doctrine of the Pontificians, or Church of Rome,
concerning Faith; who, though they be so barren of distinctions, as not to
find out the true kinds of Faith, grounded on the holy Scriptures, but
Babylonishly confound them all in one: yet again they show their pregnant and
fruitful vein in distinguishing, when as they divide and subdiuide this poor
Faith of theirs into so many parts, as at length it comes to just nothing. Not
unlike to Cyrus King ^erodot. lib. 1.
of Persia, who in his expedition toward and against Babylon, being to pass
over the river Gyndes, which afforded him no Ford to pass, but by shipping;
one of his holy white steeds proudly assaying to swim over, and so being
drowned, he thereupon in revenge of his holy horse, upon that goodly river,
threatened he would so diminish and divide this river, as women should easily
wade over it, and not up to their knees. So he set his numerous Army aworke
for a whole year, to divide the river into three hundred and threescore
branches, and so being as good as his word, passed on the next summer to
conquer Babylon. So deal the Pontificians with saving Faith; which, being as a
goodly river, able to carry the fairest ships of richest freight, bound for the
holy Land, only because it will not suffer their proud inherent holiness, by
the virtue of its own strength, to pass over, they do so cut and mince it,
as they make it common (such is their common Faith) for all passengers, tagge
and ragge, to pass through upon their own legs.

Now let us see which of these branches of Faith, Vega in the name of the
Council of Trent, and Church of Rome, lays special hand on; whether on the
actual or habitual, acquired or infused, formed or unformed. Vega shuts out
all other Faith from the meaning of the Apostle in all those places, where he
attributes justification unto Faith, but only the actual Faith. All habitual
Faith, whether acquired or infused, he peremptorily excludes, maugre all those
that say the contrary, of what authority soever. Now what this actual Faith
is, we have heard by Vega himself, that it is a credulity, or persuasion firm
and certain, but vneuident. Note here, how this Babylonish builder contradicts
and confounds himself in one breath. If this Faith of his be a firm and
certain persuasion, how is it vneuident? and if vneuident, how is it a firm or
certain persuasion? Indeed this Vneuident help^s ad. It is like the picture of
Venus drawn by Apelles, who being not able to delineate and beautify her face
to the life, draws an artificial shadow of a veil or curtain over it. But
what might be the meaning of this word Ineuident? Surely, I find not Vega
very free to explain himself in this point. Only in one place, he seems to
understand Ibid. quaest. ^.
by it, such an assent or faith, as we give merely for the authority of him
that speaks. And so it may very well be said to be ineuident, not only in
regard of any particular persuasion of good toward a man's self, from him that
speaks, but also of the particular truth to be believed. This ineuident Faith
is not unlike the Jesuitical blind obedience; when only the authority of the
commander is respected, not the equity of what is commanded. But the most
commodious property of Vega's ineuidence, is to leave it, as we find it,
ineuident. For the maine drift of the Pontificians is, to fould up Faith in a
cloud, that no man should know it. And therefore Vega, to dazell our eyes,
would have us believe, that the Apostle Paul, where he speaks of justifying
Faith, means not either Faith unformed, or Faith formed in particular, but
Faith in general. O miserable selfe-blinding Cardinal! would you also cast a
mist before the Apostles eyes, that he should not see what he said? was ever
impudency and folly so yoaked together? But what is the reason, that Vega will
not pitch upon one certain and distinct Faith, specially meant by the Apostle?
The reason is not hard to give: For if Vega should say, that the Apostle meant
Faith unformed, then the express words of the Apostle would evidently confute
him, where he commends Faith working by love. And again, if Vega should
confess, that the Apostle elsewhere meant that Faith which works by love,
then it must needs follow, that Faith does truly justify, and not barely
dispose a man to justification, as Vega would have it.

But Vega has another pretty evasion for this. For he says, Aliudest, etc. It
is one thing to say, that those places of Scripture, wherein our justification
is attributed to faith, are to be understood of Faith formed; and another, that
they are to be understood of Faith, which works by love. For although (says
he) others take these two, for one kind of Faith; yet we think these two to
be most distinct, and by no means to be confounded together: Prius enim est,
etc. For Faith working by love, goes before Faith formed by charity: because
(says he) for this end it works by love, that it may obtain the holy Ghost;
and by it charity, wherewith it may be formed. O admirable subtilty, surpassing
all Philosophy, all Divinity! How does Faith work by love, before it have
charity? Or what is that love the Apostle speaks of, but charity? Or is the
Apostles Faith working by love, a Faith unformed? O Vega! let me say that to
thee truly, which Agrippa falsely applied to Paul; Vega, thou art besides thy
self; too much learning makes thee mad. For I am sure Vega cannot answer
for himself, as Paul did, I am not mad, but speak Acts 26.
the words of truth and sobriety. For Vega's words are mere contradictions,
senseless and corrupt, unsavory salt. Such is his sophisticate Sophistry, and
frothy wit, that it may be said to him as the Prophet says to Babylon, Thy
wisdom, and thy Esaias 47. 10.
knowledge, it has perverted thee: or as the Vulgar has it, Has deceiuea
thee. I know, their shift is to say, There is a love in man upon the first
grace, disposing him to justification, whereby he begins to love God above all
things. And is not this love the highest degree of charity that can be? If
this love be not charity, it is mere vanity.

But to sum up the total of that which Rome teaches concerning faith in
Justification, as we find it either expressed or employed in the Council of
Trent, and illustrated by her most pregnant Interpreters: First, they allow or
acknowledge but one kind of Faith in the Scriptures, common to good and bad.
Secondly, that this is the Catholic Faith of the Church, the object whereof
is the whole word of God, written and unwritten. Thirdly, that this Faith is a
mere Historical Faith, which may be in the very Devils and damned. Fourthly,
that this Faith is formed by charity; which while it has, it is a living
faith, but losing it, it is dead and unfruitful. Fifthly, that this Faith, even
without charity, dead and fruitless as it is, yet is sufficient to make a man
a Christian, and a Believer. Sixthly, though they admit of no other Faith to
Justification, yet that this Faith does not justify by their own confession,
but may be in a man that is not justified. Seventhly, that a man having this
Faith, whereby he is made a Christian, and a believer, yet for all that he may
go to Hell. Lastly, notwithstanding all this, yet this Faith is a true
justifying Faith, though it be dead. This is the express perplexed doctrine of
the Church of Rome concerning Faith, without any equivocation at all. Come we
now to examine the truth of this doctrine.

CHAP. XII. Wherein Romane-Catholicke Doctrine, concerning the kind of
justifying Faith, is confuted, and the Catholic Doctrine confirmed: also of
Faiths object, and subject.
FIrst, whereas they allow no Faith in Scripture, but one, which they ground
upon that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Faith; it is evident they build upon
a wrong ground. That there is but one Faith, in the Apostles sense, it is true;
that is, but one saving and justifying Faith: but that this faith is that,
which the Roman Catholics only allow of, is utterly false and fabulous. And
yet they call this the justifying faith, which Vega describes thus: Fides cui
sacrae literae nostram tribuunt Vega de iustif. great. etc. q. 1 propos. 5.
iustificationem, etc. That Faith, to which the holy Scriptures attribute our
justification, is for the most part, and specially, the Faith of the only
Mediator between us and God: or, to speak more plainly, it is the Faith of
Jesus Christ; to wit, a credulity, or persuasion, whereby we certainly and
undoubtedly believe, that we may possibly be saved by him alone; and also other
things, which are delivered either by himself, or by his Church, or by his
Apostles, which we are to believe concerning his life, death, resurrection,
glory, and dignity, and grace. Note here the nature of the Pontifician Faith:
They call it the Faith of the only Mediator, between us and God. This is well
said; but it is with limitation; it is but vt plurimum, for the most part.
Therefore this is not the true Catholic faith, as we shall see anon. Then
they call this Faith a credulity or persuasion, whereby we certainly and
undoubtedly believe. This being that faith which some n^uelists call
Evangelical faith, which they distinguish in kind from faith in Christ.
How! Certainly and undoubtedly believe! This may pass for good Catholic
doctrine. But what do we certainly and undoubtedly believe? namely, Per eum
vnum nos posse saluari, That we may possibly be saved by him alone. So they
place their faith in a possibility of salvation by Christ. But is this all? No:
this faith has for its full and adaequate object, as the entire rule of it,
whatsoever is revealed, or delivered by writing, or tradition, either by Christ
himself, or by his Church, or by his Apostles. So that this faith must be
regulated as well by that which the Church says (and what he means by the
Church, we all know) as what Christ and his Apostles have said; as well by
traditions, Romes unwritten word, as by the written Word of God. Nay, the
Council of Trent goes farther, making the maine rule of faith to be that sense
and meaning, which the Church (always understand of Rome) has or shall set
down, concerning all things written and unwritten. And this is the
Romane-Catholike faith.

Now if this faith of theirs be the justifying faith, how comes it to pass,
that they that have this faith, are not justified by it? And if men having this
faith, may notwithstanding be damned, and carry it with them to hell, how is it
a justifying faith? But with Romes good will, we must not touch upon
particulars. Suffice it, there is one faith, and this is the Catholic faith
of Romane-Catholicke believers.

There is but one faith, say they, whether it be formed or unformed, which they
take from the Scoria of the Schools forge: For Aquinas says, that faith
formed or unformed, is one and the same in kind, and in number, as the Logic
term is. Indeed Aquinas might speak his pleasure of faith Aqu 2. 2. qu. 4.
4. and qu. 19. 5. 1. The vanity of the distinction of faith formed and unformed.
formed and unformed* as being the first Forger of the form of faith. Whereas
if this Scoria be but cast into the Test, it will presently fume into the air.
For, according to Philosophy (Aquinas his professed and pretended proper element)
a thing without form, is non ens: if it be Tohu, it is Bohu too, Genesis 1. 2.
For the form gives the being to the thing. Now the faith of Devils, and of the
wicked, wanting a form, as Pontificians say, is no faith at all. But the faith
of Devils is not no faith; a faith it is, therefore a form it must have. What
form? Indeed, as Scaliger says, the forms of things are hard to be found
out: But every thing that has but a name, must have a form, that gives the
being. Now that the faith of Devils has a form proper unto it, is manifest,
because it has a special act and motion in believing, which springs from
the proper form of it. The act of the Devils faith is to believe that God is,
and that he is true in his word, and just in his judgments; so, as it makes
the Devil to tremble withal. If therefore the Devils faith has a special
form, to give being unto it, then this form puts a specificall difference
between the Devils faith and the Saints faith* For every thing is differenced
in kind from another, by its proper form. As therefore the Saints faith has
a special form, to difference it from the faith of Devils; so the Devils
faith has a proper form, to difference it specifically from the faith of
Saints: as the beasts soul is by the form of it, differenced from a man's
soul. And the form makes the maine difference. But this by the way, to show
how these Philosophical Doctors defile their own nest. To proceed.

That there is but one faith whereby we are saved, all Catholic Divines have
ever taught: but that the living faith, which they call formed, and the dead
faith, which they say is unformed, should be all one faith in kind, this is a
mystery never known, nor I suppose, ever so much as dreamt of by any of the
ancient Catholic Doctors of the Church. Leo, surnamed the Great, who was
Bishop of Rome about the year of Leo sermon. 14. in Natiuit.
Christ, 440. while as yet the faith of that Church was truly Catholic; he
says: Vna fides iustificat vniuersorum temporum Sanctos: and ad eandem spem
fidelium pertinet, quicquid per Mediatorem Dei and hominum, lesum Christum, vel
nos confitemur factum, vel Patres nostri adorauere faciendum. A sentence worthy
to be written in golden letters. One faith (says he) does justify the Saints
of all times: and it appertains to the same hope of the faithful, whatsoever
either we confess already done, or our Fathers adored should be done by the
Mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ. Note here, this good old Bishop of Rome
acknowledges one faith. What faith? A justifying faith. What? A faith common
to reprobates? No: such as justifies the Saints. What Saints? Those of the
Popes Canonizing? No: The Saints of all times; such as were long before the new
order of Saints instituted by the Pope, long after St. Leo. Such Saints as are
not mentioned in the Popes Calender: namely, all those Saints of the old
Testament, whereof the Popes Rubricke has none. As the same Leo says: Omnes
Sancti, qui Saluatoris nostri tempora praecesserunt, Leo ibid. sermon* 10.
per hanc fidem iustificati, expectantes vniuersalom credentium redemptionem in
semine Abrahae: All the Saints, who lived before the times of our Savior, are
justified by this faith, expecting the universal redemption of believers in
the seed of Abraham. And in his fourth Sermon upon the Epiphany: Hoc est, quod
iustificat impios, hoc est, quod ex peccatoribus facit Sanctos, si in vno,
eodemque Domino nostro Jesus Christo, and vera Deitas, and vera credatur
humanitas: This is that which justifies the ungodly, that is, of sinners
makes Saints, if in one, and the same our Lord Jesus Christ, both the true
Deity, and the true humanity be believed. He puts this particle of
believing the truth of Christ's two natures in one person, as pointing at the
Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches, which in his time were very hot, and tended
to overthrow the truth of his two distinct natures in the unity of his person.
This I note by the way, left the Pontificians should say, that this good Leo
meant only a general faith concerning Christ. But we see the Catholic
doctrine of those purer and more virgin times of the Church, was, that there
was but one justifying faith, and this not common to good and evil, elect and
reprobate, promiscuously; but such as did truly justify the wicked, and of
sinners make Saints. So that whosoever had this faith, were effectually
justified, and, without the help of the Popes Calendar, made real, not
titular Saints. Augustine also says: Vna fides est, quae omnes saluos facit,
qui ex carnali generatione Aug. de peccat. merit* and remis* lib. 2* cap. 29.
in spiritalem renascendo saluantur, terminata in eo, qui venit pro nobis
iudicart and mori: It is one faith that saves all, which of carnal
generation, being spiritually regenerate, are saved; their faith being bounded
in him, that came to be judged, and to dye for us, the Judge of quick and
dead. And again; Ea fides iustos sanauit antiquos, quae sanat and nos (id est)
Aug. de not. and great. lib. contra Pelag cap 44.
Mediatoris Dei and hominum, etc. That faith healed the righteous of old, which
heals also us (to wit) the faith of the Mediator of God and men, etc. So that
there is but one saving and saluing faith of all the regenerate. And this is
according to the express doctrine of the holy Scriptures, which put an
unreconcilable opposition between a dead Faith and a living Faith; between
that Faith which is common with the Devils and Reprobates, and that which is
proper and peculiar to the elect Saints. Hence it is, that the Scripture calls
that Faith, whereby we are justified, a holy Faith: yea, a most holy Faith,
Jude 20. Also, the Faith given to the Saints, Jude 3. It is called also, Fides
electorum; the Faith of the elect. Tit. 1. 1. St. Peter calls it a precious
Faith. Therefore saving and justifying 2. Pet. 1. 1.
Faith, being that most holy Faith which is proper to the Saints, and to the
Elect, it cannot possibly be the same with that Faith, which is in the
Reprobate and Devils, but differs from it both specie and numero; in kind
and number, as the Logicians speak.

This doctrine of justifying and saving Faith, peculiar and proper to Gods
elect Saints, and not common with any other whatsoever, is further confirmed by
the Catholic Doctors of former ages. Gregory surnamed also the Great, Bishop
Greg. Moral. lib. 16. cap. 13.
of Rome, about the year 590. in his Morals speaking of Faith; says: Electi
omnes eum, quem fide cognouerunt, videre quoque per speciem anhelant; cuius
amore flagrantes aestuant, quia eius dulcedinis suauitatem iam in ipsa suae
fidei certitudine degustant: All the elect (says he) do strive to see him by
face, whom they know by faith; with whose love being inflamed they boil,
because they now in the very assurance of their faith taste of the delicacy of
his sweetness. This Bishop of Rome does denominate and appropriate the Faith,
whereby we now know God, and hereafter shall certainly see God face to face,
to the Elect only, and to all the Elect. And in his Homilies upon Ezechiel, he
says: Omnes Electi, sieve qui in Greg. super Ezech. lib. 2. hom. 17.
Iudaea esse potuerunt, sieve qui nunc in Ecclesia existunt, in Mediatorem Dei
and hominum crediderunt, and credunt, qui praeeunt, and qui sequuntur, Osanna
clamant: Osanna autem latina lingua, Saluae nos, dicitur; ab ipso enim salutem
and priores quaesierunt, and praesentes quaerunt, and benedictum qui venit in
nomine Domini confitentur: quoniam vna spes, vna fides est praecedentium atque
sequentium populornm: All the Elect (says he) whether those that were in
Judea, or which now are in the Church, have believed, and do believe in the
Mediator of God and men; which go before, and which follow after, crying,
Osanna. Now Osanna in the Latin tongue is interpreted, Save us: for of him
both they that went before have sought, and those that live now do seek,
salvation: and confess him to be blessed, that comes in the Name of the
Lord: because there is one hope, one faith of the People, past, present, and to
come. St Augustine Aug. contr. duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonific. l. 3.
speaks to the same purpose, Antiqui omnes iusti, ex fide, qua nos viuimus,
vna eademque vixerunt, Incarnationem, Passionem, Resurrectionemque Christi
credentes futuram, quam nos credimus factam: All the ancient just men, lived by
that one and the same faith, by which we live: believing the Incarnation,
Passion, and Resurrection of Christ, which was to come, which we believe
already fulfilled. What clearer testimony can be desired, to set forth the
unity of that saving faith, which is common and proper to all the Elect people
of God in all ages, in the communion and propriety of which faith, none but the
Elect alone have a part.

But the same Gregory says elsewhere, in the title of one Objects
Greg. dialog. l. 4. c. 2.
of his Dialogues, Quod sine fide neque infidelis viuat: That even the infidel
does not live without Faith. But what Faith? himself answers, Habent etiam
infideles fidem, sed vtinam in Deum: quam si vtique baberent, infideles non
essent: Infidels have faith (says he) but I would to God it were faith in God:
which faith if they had, they should not be infidels. Let me here add one
authority of Fulgentius an African Bishop, who lived between Fulgent. de
incarnat. and great. Dom. nostri Iesis Christi. c. 22.
the times of these two Bishops of Rome: Virtus est fides, non qualis in
Daemonibus inuenitur, sed qualem Deus Sanctis suis donat, quos ex impietate
iustificat: Faith is a virtue, not such a faith as is found to be in the
Devils, but such as God gives to his Saints, whom he justifies from sin.
Therefore faith being a virtue given to Gods Saints, whereby they are
justified, how can this Faith be in the Devils, or Damned? And Aug. l. 50.
homiliarum hom. 17.
St. Augustine to the same purpose, speaking of Peter's Faith, proper to the
Elect, says, Dic, quae fides? Quae per dilectionem operatur. Hanc daemones non
habent fidem, quae per dilectionem operatur, sed soli serui Dei, soli Sancti
Dei, soli fide filij Abrahae, soli filij dilectionis, filij promissionis; ideo
est and charitas dicta: Tell me, what faith had Peter? That which works by
love. This faith which works by love, the Devils have not, but only Gods
servants, only Gods saints, only the sons of Abraham by faith, only the
sons of love, the sons of the promise; therefore it is called also charity.
Note here, how St. Augustine puts a distinct difference, between that kind of
Faith of Gods saints, which is never separated from charity, but always
working by love; and that in the Devils and damned, which is not capable of
charity, no more than the Salamander of heat. Discernenda est ergo fides
Daemonum a fide Sanctorum. Plane discernenda Ibid.
vigilanter and diligenter: Therefore (says he) the faith of the Devils is to
be discerned from the faith of the Saints: Yea, it is to be heedfully and
carefully discerned.

Yea, the whole current of ancient Fathers tun mainly to prove, that saving
and justifying Faith, is a Faith proper to the Elect and Saints of God; and
merely distinct in kind and nature from that faith, which is common with
reprobates and devils. Hence it is, that they give saving and justifying Faith
such Epithets, and Attributes, as do distinguish it from the faith, which is
in the reprobate and damned. As they call it Sancta, integra, vera, viua, non
reproba fides, etc. A holy, entire, true, living, not a reprobate faith. Origin
says, Certum est, Origenin Leuit. c. 3. hom. 3.
quod remissionem peccatorum nullus accipiat, nisi detulerit integram, probam,
and sanctam fidem, per quam mercari possit Arietam, cuius natura haec est, vt
peccata credentis abstergat: It is certain, that none can receive remission of
sins, unless he bring an entire, godly, and holy faith, where with he may buy
the Ram, the nature whereof is this, to take away the sins of the believer.
And again, Si fidem obtuleris, tanquam precium (hoc est Siclum sanctum)
Christo velut Ariete immaculato in hostiam dato, remissionem accipies
peccatorum: If thou shall offer thy faith, as a price (that is the holy Sicle)
having Christ as an immaculate Ram offered up in sacrifice, thou shall
receive remission of sins. This ancient Doctor of the Church calls faith a
price, as Peter calls it a precious faith. Chrysostom upon the third 2 Pet. 1.
1.
Chapter to the Romans, says, What is the Law of Faith? Chrysostom. in Rom cap. 3
sermon 7. (...) Theoph. in Johan. cap. 3. S. Basil. dicit, (...) And again,
(...), etc. Basil. regul contract. definit. 80.
To be saved by grace. He declares the power of God, that not only he saves,
but also justifies, and glorifieth, without the help of any works, but
requiring only faith. If therefore God do save, and justify, and glorify us
by faith, without the help of any works concurring in our justification; then
surely wicked and godless men, so remaining, whatsoever other faith they may
have, they have nothing to do with this justifying Faith, by which most
properly we are called Fideles. Theophylact says, Qui credit in Filium, non
iudicatur. Nunquid si immundam egerit vitam, non iudicatur? Maxim quidem. Non
enim vere fideles sunt eiusmodi: He that believes in the Son, is not
condemned. But if a man lead an impure life, is he not condemned? Yes
doubtless. For such men are no true believers. St. Basil says, What is the
property of a Christian? Faith working by love. The Faith then of a Christian,
is not separate from love: for it is always operans, working by love. And the
same Father adds: What is the property of Faith? A full persuasion without
reasoning, etc. where the same Father shows other common properties of faith;
as it apprehends the truth of Gods Oracles, and is true it self, without
adding or detracting. Our Saviors words in the third of John, v. 16. are very
powerful, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Whence issues this conclusion, Whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, shall
never perish. But wicked men, by the confession of Pontificians, although they
believe, do perish. Therefore that faith or belief which wicked men have, is
not that faith or belief in Christ, which will not suffer any man to perish.

St. Augustine to this purpose, upon these words, Credo in Deum, etc. says,
Non dicit, Credo Deum, vel credo Deo, quamuis and haec necessaria saluti sint.
Aliud est enim credere illi, aliud credere illum, aliud credere in illum.
Credere illi, est credere vera esse, quae loquitur: credere illum, credere quia
ipse est Deus: credere in illum, diligere illum. Credere vera esse, quae
loquitur, multi and malipossunt: credere autem ipsum esse Deum, and Daemones
possunt: credere vero in Deum, soli nouerunt, qui diligunt illum, qui non solum
nomine Christiani sunt, sed and factis and vita, quia sine dilectione fides
inanis est: cum dilectione fides Christiani, sine dilectione fides Daemonis: I
believe in God, etc. He says not, I believe that God is, or I believe God:
although also these are necessary to salvation. For it is one thing to beleeu
him, another to believe that he is, and another to believe in him. To believe
him, is to believe those things are true which he speaks: to believe that he
is, is to believe that he is God, or that God is: to be believe in him, or into
him (as the Scottish Dialect or Phrase does more lively express it) is to love
him. To believe those things to be true which he speaks, even many wicked
men may do it: and to believe that God is, even the Devils can also do it:
but to believe in God, they only can skill, which do love him, which are
Christians not only in name, but also in their deeds, and life, because faith
without love is vain: with love the faith of a Christian, without love the
faith of Devils. So this holy Father: As elsewhere throughout his works, he
teaches this as the Catholic doctrine, constantly maintained in the Church of
Christ, That saving and justifying faith, is a faith merely distinct and
different in kind and nature from that faith, which is in wicked men, and in
Devils, clean contrary to the Roman Catholic doctrine. as the like place we
alleged before in the sixth Chapter, out of his 29. Tract upon St. John. And it
is also used by the Gloss upon Romans 4. Vega cites the place by way of
objection, but leaves it unanswered, as we have formerly showed: For indeed it
is unanswerable. And therefore but only in that one place, and that by way of
objection, Vega in all that voluminous Book of Justification never meddleth
with Credere in Christum, keeping him close to his Text, to wit, the Council
of Trent; which in that whole and large Session of Justification not once
mentions Credere in Christum, as is above noted. As also his fellow-Commenter
Soto has not in all his Commentaries upon this same Session of Trent, (...),
not the least mention of Credere in Christum. Let us a little take a second
survey of St. Augustines former speech, wherein he plainly sets down a
threefold kind of believing: all which are necessary to salvation, as
concurring in every true believer; yet so, as the two inferior kinds of
believing are common also to the ungodly, and the Devils themselves; as to
believe that God is, and that he is true in his Word. But that faith, whereby a
man believes in God, is the highest kind of faith, and proper only to those
that are saved, and common to none else whatsoever. We cannot better
demonstrate the true difference between these three distinct kinds of faith,
than by paralleling, or comparing them with those three kinds of souls, A
comparison.
which the Philosopher sets down: the first and lowest kind of souls, is
that which is in plants and trees, called anima vegetatiua, a soul which has
life without sense: the second kind of souls, is that which is in the brute
beast, and is called anima sensitiua, or the sensitie soul, which has life
and sense, but is void of reason: the third kind of souls, which is the
highest and noblest, is that which is in man, called anima rationalis, or the
reasonable soul, which has not only life, and sense, but also reason. So
there is one kind of soul in the plant, another in the buite, another in man.
And as the sensitive soul of the beast, which contains also life in it
(which is the soul of the plant) is but one soul, and differs in species
and kind from the soul that is said to be in the plant: so the reasonable
soul of man, containing in it both life and sense, the one common with the
plant, the other common also with the beast, is but one soul, and differs in
specie, or kind from the two other kinds. So it is in the three kinds of
faith, which St. Augustine differenceth in their distinct species, or kinds,
by three distinct phrases of speech, Credere Deum: credere Deo: and credere in
Deum. Credere Deum, To believe that God is, is the lowest kind of faith, and
is in the very Devils: Credere Deo, or to believe God, is the second kind of
faith; containing also, and implying the former, to wit, to believe that God is
(for a man cannot believe God, unless he believe that God is:) and this faith
is in wicked and godless men: But credere in Deum, to believe in God, which is
the true saving and justifying Faith; containing also and implying in it the
other two, of believing God, and believing that God is, is the highest kind of
Faith, and proper only to the elect Saints, and servants of God. A^ the same
Augustine says: Si creditis in eum, creditis eum; non, si creditis Aug. tract.
29. in Johan.
eum, creditis in eum: If ye believe in him, ye believe him; not, if ye believe
him, ye believe in him. As therefore the soul of man, is not the same in kind
with the soul of the beast, and the soul of the plant, though each be called
anima, or soul; so saving faith, which is to believe in God, is not the same
in kind with the faith of Devils, and wicked men. And as the soul of the
beast, though it have both vegetation, which is the soul of the plant, and
sense also, proper to it self, yet is but one soul; and man's reasonable
soul, although it have both vegetation and sense joined with reason, yet is
but one entire soul, vegetation, sense, and reason, being three distinct
faculties of one and the same soul in man: So the faith of wicked men,
although it contain the faith of Devils, yet is but one faith in them; and
saving faith in the godly, is in kind but one saving faith, although it
contain in it all the kinds of faith, which concurring in the Saints of God,
are so many distinct faculties or properties of one and the same saving and
justifying faith. And as the vegetable soul or life of the plant, as it is
considered alone in the plant, is a distinct kind from the other souls, as of
the beast, and of man; but being considered as it is in the beast, cease to
be a distinct kind of soul, being now only a faculty or property of the soul
of the beast: and as the sensitive soul of the beast, is distinct in kind
from other souls, as it is the soul of the beast; but being considered as it
is in man, cease to be a distinct kind of soul, being now only a faculty
or property of the reasonable soul of man: So credere Deum, or credere Deo, to
believe God, or that God is, are distinct kinds of faith in the Devils, and
wicked men, distinct also in kind from credere in Deum, to believe in God,
which only Gods Saints do: but credere Deum, and credere Deo, concurring with
credere in Deum, in Gods Saints, are not now distinct kinds, but faculties and
properties of one and the same saving faith, distinct in kind from that of
Devils, and wicked men, and proper only to Gods Saints. Thus have we, as
plainly as we can, illustrated by a similitude the three distinct kinds of
faith, in Devils, in the Damned, and in the Saints, proved and confirmed by
Scriptures and Fathers, but mainly against all reason and sense impugned by the
Church of Rome, a cruel and unjust step-dame to saving and justifying faith.

But, say the Pontificians, this faith of theirs, which at the Objection.
best is, Credere Deo; to believe God, is the only Catholic Faith, as that
Faith, whose object is the whole Word of God in general, written and
unwritten, written verities, and unwritten traditions: and that according to
the sense and interpretation of the Church of Rome, or which is the sum of
all, the Pope. We are not ignorant of the deepnesse of Satan Answ.
herein. But as they cannot abide credere in Deum (which they could heartily
wish were put out of their Creed, as in effect they have already done) so
neither can they endure, that the promises of God in Christ revealed in the
Gospel, should be the special and prime object of Faith. Only they allow it
a room in the crowd of all other things, revealed in the whole Word of God,
written and unwritten, etc. But it is so crowded into a narrow corner, as they
have in a manner quite choked it; for, as their Champion and interpreter Soto
says: Eadem vniuersorum fides est, cuius vna, eademque perexigua Soto de not.
and great. l. 2. 6. 7.
particula est de promissionibus: There is one faith of all, which has one
particle, and that a very small one concerning the promises. Alas! what a poor
diminution is here; Particula, non pars? is not this diminitiue enough, but he
must put small; yea, perexigua, very small, unto it, and so leave a very small,
not part, but diminitiue particle for faith in the promises of God? But
Romane-Catholikes must be content with this poor pittance of faith, no
otherwise believing Gods promises, but as other Histories revealed in the Word,
as the Council of Trent teaches in her sixth Session, and sixth Chapter:
Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 6.
But else, she makes no mention at all of believing in the promises of God, and
by faith applying them to our own souls. No, the Church of Rome is of another
spirit: she wants that can did ingenuity, to acknowledge this gracious mystery
of Christ, and of the Gospel. So that these Pontifician Romane-Catholickes,
place only the truth of God (and well too, if they joined not their own lying
traditions) as the general object of faith; namely, as a true History to be
believed. As Soto commenting upon the forenamed place of the Council, Soto
ibid.
says: Ratio Christianis credendi, est summa infallibilisque Det veritas; haec
autem eadem perlucet in reuelatis omnibus, sieve ad Historiam pertineant, sieve
ad Promissiones: The reason inducing Christians to believe, is the sovereign
and infallible truth of God; and this same shines in all those things that are
revealed, whether they pertain to the History, or to the Promises. But how
does he understand the faith of these promises? Sane quas credimus (says he)
non solum vere esse factas; sed esse firmissima^, quantum ex part Dei, nisi
nos reuitamur: which promises indeed we believe, that not only they were truly
made, but are most firm, as touching Gods part, unless we resist. But as for
special Faith in believing and applying the promises of God, quod non
pertineat; that it appertains not to Catholic Faith (says Soto) is most easy
to demonstrate: Fides enim Catholica ex sola diuina assertione, vel promissione
pendet; quod autem quisque aptus sit, and idoneus promisso beneficio
suscipiendo, ex humano sensu, and cooperatione etiam pendet: For (says he) the
Catholic Faith depends upon Gods only affirmation, or promise; but that any
man may be apt or fit, to receive the benefit promised, does depend upon the
sense, and also the cooperation of man. And so he concludes; Ergo huius Fides
non est Catholica: therefore this man's Faith is not Catholic. So that by
Romane-Catholicke Doctrine, a special Faith in the promises of God in Christ,
is not the Catholic Faith: for by Catholic Faith, they understand a
general Faith, such as is the Catholic Faith of all Romane-Catholickes. And
hence it is also, that they place Faith only in the understanding, as
assenting unto the truth of God in his Word; and not in the will, in applying
and apprehending the goodness and grace of God revealed in the Word.

Now to clear the truth in this point; The Catholic Faith is so called, not
in respect of the generality of it, as if justifying Faith were only a
general Faith, or because the general object of it is whatsoever is revealed
in the Word as a History: but because the true Catholic Faith, is the Faith
of all the Elect of all times, to the end of the world, and because this Faith
comprehends all Faith in it. For the true Catholic Faith does both credere
Deum; believe that God is, and credere Deo; believe that whatsoever is
contained in the holy Word of God written, is true: and also, credere in Deum;
believe in God; that is, in especial, believe the promises of God in Christ
revealed in the Gospel, that they are not only true, in respect of God who
promises, but that they do belong to every believer in Christ in particular.
As Saint John says (speaking of the blessed estate of Gods children, both
here, in that they are now the Sons of God, and hereafter in the perfect
vision of God) Every man that has this hope in 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure. The Apostle Paul setting forth
the nature of justifying Faith, in the example of faithful Abraham, he bounds
it mainely upon the promise of God in Christ, as the special object of Faith.
As, Romans 4. 13. Romans 4. 13.
The promise that Abraham should be the heir of the world, was not to him, or
to his seed, through the Law, but through the righteousness of Faith: for if
they which are of the Law, be heirs, Faith is made void, and the promise
made of none effect. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by grace, to
the end the promise might be sure to all the seed: not to that only, which is
of the Law, but to that also, which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the
father of us all. And verse. 20. He staggered not at the promise of God,
through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving glory to God. So we see
that the promise of God, is the special object of justifying Faith. And hence
it is, that all true believers, who are the children of Abraham, are called the
children of the Promise, Romans 9. 8. They which are the children of the flesh,
these are not the children of God: but the children of the Promise are counted
for the seed, and heirs of the Promise. Heb. 6. 17. Yea the promises of God in
Christ are the very sum of the Gospel; as the Apostle declares very amply in
the third Chapter to the Galathians. As verse. 8. The Scripture foreseeing, that
God would justify the Heathen through faith, preached, before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. So we see plainly, that
the special object of Faith, is the Gospel of God; and the Gospel of God, is
the promise of God in Christ. This was the sum of all Christ's preaching; The
Kingdom of God is at hand; repent Mark 1. 15.
ye, and believe the Gospel. And so Gal. 3. 22. the Apostle sweetly
concludes this heavenly Doctrine: The Scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.
Hence also was the Land of Canaan, being a type of the Kingdom of Christ,
called the Land of Promise: and Abraham and his sons, coheires of the same
Promise. What Promise? For he loooked for a City which has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10. And by faith he waited for this promise,
verse* 9.

The Pontificians would feign have that faith, whose praises are so predicated
in that 11. Chapter to the Hebrews, to be understood of their kind of
Catholic faith: to wit, a general historical faith. And they allege the
third Verse, and the sixth Verse, etc. Verse. 3. Through faith we understand
that the worlds were framed by the word of God: Hence they conclude their
Historical faith. And, Verse. 6. He that comes to God* must believe that God
is, etc. Hence they infer, that Faith is nothing else, but a certain assent
concerning the truth of God in his essence, and in his Word revealed, and in
his promises in general only. But if there were no other place of Scripture,
to set forth the full nature of true, saving, and justifying Faith, this one
Chapter were abundantly sufficient. For the Apostle sets forth this Faith in
this Chapter, in his full proportion and lineaments, in all the properties of
it. As first, that this Faith believes the truth of Gods essence, as he has
revealed himself in his Word, verse* 6. and not only as God is, in himself,
of absolute Being; but that he is that God, who gives a Being: as to all
creatures in general, so in especial, to all his promises made in Christ to
his Elect. For which cause, when God sent Moses to be the Minister of his
peoples deliverance, wherein Gods promise to Abraham and to his seed, came to
be accomplished, he bad Moses tell the people, (...), I AM has sent me unto
you, Exodus 3. 14. Which name of God does not only signify his essence in
himself considered, but how he gives here by a being to his Evangelical
promises, to bring them all to pass in due time. This is his name for ever, as
God himself professes, verse. 15. Thus the Lord is said to make himself
known to the children of Israel, in that their actual deliverance out of
Egypt, so long before promised to Abraham, by his name (...) Jehovah, which
comes of the root of the former name (...), a name of his essence. In which
name Jehovah, God says he was not known to Abraham, as Exodus 6. 3. Not but
that Abraham by faith knew God in this name, that he was true in all his
promises: but he was said not to know God by this name, because he did not
experimentally see the accomplishment of his promise. And thus to believe that
God is, is not only a bare historical or natural faith, that there is a God,
which is in the very Devils; but it is a true Evangelical faith, believing
Gods truth in his promises, which is such a faith, whereby God is pleased, as
the Apostle says there in the same verse. But a bare historical faith cannot
please God: for then the Devils faith might. The Apostle amplifieth this,
proving that this faith believes the truth of God in all those things
contained in his Word, whether they be matters of story, as verse. 3. or of the
promises of God, as verse. 6. or of the threatenings of God, verse. 7. etc. But
principally, he does by many famous examples set forth the noble properties of
this faith, in applying the special promises of God unto it; in which Chapter
the word Promise is expressly mentioned no less than sixth sundry times, but
closely flows, and that abundantly, through all the veins of the Chapter. So
faith believes, that God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. verse.
6. By faith Abel offered his more excellent sacrifice. How by faith? for his
sacrifice was a type of the true sacrifice, Christ Jesus, the promised seed.
Genesis 3. 15. By faith Enoch was translated. Was not this by faith of that better
life promised in Christ? By Faith Noah, warned of God, prepared the Arc, to
the saving of himself and house: Was it not by Faith in the promise of God? By
Faith Abraham, being called, went out, etc. Was it not by Faith in Gods
promise? For he was the heir of the promise, and looked for a City, etc. v.
10. By Faith superannated Sarah conceived: for she judged him faithful that
had promised, v. 11. All these embraced the promises, v. 13. 14. etc. By Faith
Abraham, after he had received the promises, offered up his only Son, v. 17.
What was it, but the promise of God, whereupon by Faith Isaac blessed his
Sons, v. 20. and Jacob his? v. 21. How came Joseph at his death to mention
Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, and (as if himself also, even after he was
dead, had a share in that deliverance) give a charge concerning his bones, but
by Faith in Gods promise, now approaching? Why did Moses reject the honors,
pleasures, and treasures of Egypt, preferring the reproach of Christ before
them all, and choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God: but
that by Faith he had a respect to the recompense of reward, the promise of
God? And so of their passing through the Red Sea: and of Rahabs red thread,
etc. still their Faith was pitched upon Gods promise. But Pontificians must have
leave to discover their gross ignorance in the mystery of Faith, and so to
err, not knowing the Scriptures; being just with God to send them the spirit
of giddiness, lest they should come to know that most precious truth, which
they so willingly and maliciously oppugn.

Is the promise of God in Christ therefore such a little ^tomus, such a
perexigua particula, such a small mote in the eye of Faith? Nay, rather the
promise of the Gospel, does challenge the chief respect, to be cast upon it
by the eye of Faith, as the most glorious and beautiful object it can find in
all the Scriptures. Christ, the promised seed, the fairest of ten thousand, is
therefore called the Word of God, as being the sum of both the Testaments, as
being the mercy-seate, upon whom the two Cherubims did six their constant
eyes. He was the desire of Patriarchs, Prophets, and Kings. Abraham with the
eye of Faith saw his day, and rejoiced; it gave him full contentation: yea, the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that followed, and the preaching of the
Gospel, all comprehending and setting forth Gods precious promises; were such
as the very Angels desired to look into. And St. Augustine Aug. Enchirid. cap.
5.
says, Certum propriumque fidei Catholicae fundamentum Christus est: The sure
and proper foundation of Catholic faith is Christ. Who shall then forbid
Faith to fasten its eye upon this lovely object? or to build upon this sure and
proper foundation? True it is, that Faith denies no part of holy Scripture, of
what nature soever, the due respect and credit. It gives free assent to the
whole Word of God, it subscribes to the truth of every least tittle contained
therein, credendo Deo, by believing God: but that which Faith does chiefly
appropriate and apply to it self, is the promise of God in Christ, credendo in
Deum, by believing in God. Even as the eye, casting a direct ray or beam upon
the object, which it chiefly aymeth at, does so look upon it, as though it
seem to see nothing else, but that only object; yet it sees all things
besides round about it, in a more general view: so Faith, the eye of the
soul, although it cast the direct beam of belief upon the object it most
affects, to wit, Christ the Savior, in whom all the promises of God are, Yea
and Amen, to the glory of God the Father; yet withal, it does not restrain
its general influence of belief, from any part of Gods Word, no more than the
eye of the body does shut it self from seeing any other thing present before
it, than that particular object, to which the radius or beam directly points.

What need more testimonies? yet the ancient Fathers of the Church have not
left us without witness in this point. I will use but one or two for breuity.
Chrysostom. in Genes. cap. 15. hom. 36. (...) etc*
Chrysostom says, This is the property of true Faith, when as the promise
being made, not after a manner customary, or familiar with men, we (...).
confidently believe the power of the promiser. Thou see, how even before the
event and accomplishment of the ^^omises, Abraham in as much as he believed,
receives a sufficient reward: For, to believe the promise of God, was imputed
to him for righteousness. Therefore to believe Gods promise, is both able to
make us just, and shall cause us to obtain the promises. By Faith we procure
righteousness, and obtain the good promises. And the same Father upon the
tenth to the Romans, says, Hoc potissimum peculiare est fidei, vt promissa
Dei Chrysostom. in Romans cap. 10. hom. 17.
cuncta complectamur: This is chiefly peculiar to Faith, that we embrace all
the promises of God. Thus we see this holy man places the promises of God in
Christ, as the prime object of justifying Faith. St. Ambrose says, Si exclusa
fuerit promissio, Ambrose in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 3.
sine dubio frustratur Fides Abrahae: Quod ne audire quidem se patiuntur
Iudaei, scientes, quia promissio ex Fide est Abrahae. Quae promissio ex Fide
iustificat, non per Legem, sicut and Abraham iustificatus ex Fide est. Hi ergo
haeredes sunt promissionis Abrahae, qui illi succedunt, suscipientes Fidem, in
qua benedictus and iustificatus est Abraham. Testimonium ergo promissionis
Abrahae testamentum appellatur, vt post mortem eius Haeredes essent in
promissione, Filij eius facti per Fidem: That is, If the promise be excluded,
without doubt the Faith of Abraham is made void: which not even the Jews
themselves endure to hear, knowing, that the promise is of the Faith of
Abraham. Which promise does justify by Faith, not through the Law, as also
Abraham is justified by Faith. They therefore are Heirs of the promise to
Abraham, which succeed him, by entertaining the Faith, wherein Abraham is
blessed and justified. Therefore the testimony of the promise to Abraham is
called a Testament, that after his death they might be Heirs in the promise,
being made his Sons by Faith. So Ambrose. Thus we have the testimonies of
two faithful witnesses, testifying this most Catholic doctrine of Faith, not
only of Abraham, but consequently of all the faithful, That the promises of
God in Christ are the maine object of saving and justifying Faith. And these
witnesses shall stand in stead of many. Hence it is, that Faith in Scripture is
called Confidence or Affiance, because it embraces the promise of God in
Christ, as the proper object of it: as we touched before.

In a word, those famous ancient Creeds, universally received in the Church,
especially the Apostolical, the Nicene, and Athanasius his Creed; all of them
called the object of Faith, as being the abridgement of the Word of God: what
do they commend unto us, as the maine and sole object of saving and justifying
Faith, but Jesus Christ, his incarnation, passion, resurrection, ascension,
session at Gods right hand, etc. together with the fruits we reap from this
tree of life, as to be made his living members, believing the holy Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints, the Remission of sins, the Resurrection of
the body, and the life everlasting? all, the effects and fruits of Gods
promises in Christ.

But (say the Pontificians) faith is an act of the understanding, Soto de not.
and great l 2. c. 7. Designatur subiectum fidei esse intellectiuam potentiam,
etc.
as being seated in the intellectual part of the soul, and not in the will:
and therefore it is but a bare assent to the truth of Gods word in general,
and so also of the promises contained therein; and no special affiance in the
goodness of God particularly toward a man's self. And so they make only the
truth of God revealed, as being apprehended and assented unto by the
understanding, to be the object of faith, and not the goodness of God
contained in his promises, as being entertained and embraced by the will.

But for the clearing of this point, we may frist observe how the Church of
Rome, as in other points of doctrine, so in this maine point of Faith, does
most pitifully interfeere. For which cause, let me here insert a passage in the
Provincial Council of Colen, celebrated Anno 1536. some nine years before the
Council of Trent; which will partly confirm what has been formerly said
concerning the nature of true Faith, and confront this Pontifician objection
now in hand.

This Provincial Synod sets down a threefold kind Enchirid. Council.
Colon. Prouincial. de sacramento poenitentiae. page 87. Printed at Paris 1554.
of believing, following therein St Augustine upon the Creed, Credo in Deum,
which we have a little before cited. We will set down the very words of the
Synod, which acknowledges Duplicem seu triplicem esse fidei, seu credendi
rationem. Siquidem vna est, qua Deum esse, ac caetera, quae Scriptura
commemorat, non aliter quam historica quadam fide recitata, vera credimus. Vnde
and historica fides appellatur, quam nobiscum Daemones communem habent. Altera,
qua Deo credimus, quae persuasio and constans opinio est, qua fidem and
promissionibus and comminationibus diuinis adhibemus; quam habent iniusti cum
justice communem. Tertia fidei ratio est, qua in Deum credimus, solis pijs
peculiaris, quae certissima quaedam fiducia est, qua totos nos Deo submittimus,
totique a gratia and misericordia Dei pendemus. Haec and spem complectitur, and
charitaten^ indiuiduam comitem habet. Prima credendi ratio, seu fides illa
Historica, si solam accipias, informis est, and veluti adhuc mortua. Altera
vero, qua Deo tantum credimus, nec dum tamen erga Deum religiosa pietate
assicimur, manca. Sed tertia, qua in Deum credimus, pioque affectuin eum
tendimus, ea demum viuida, atque integra fides est, etc. That is: There is a
twofold or threefold sort of faith, or believing: One is, whereby we believe
that God is, as also other things, which the Scripture relates, we believe to
be true, no otherwise than by a kind of Historical faith recorded, whence it
is called an Historical faith, which the Devils have in common with us. The
second is, whereby we believe God, which is a persuasion, and constant
opinion, whereby we give credit both to Gods promises and threatenings; which
faith the wicked have in common with the righteous. The third sort of faith, is
that, whereby we believe in God, which is peculiar only to the godly, being a
kind of most certain confidence or affiance, whereby we wholly submit our
selves unto God, and depend wholly upon the grace and mercy of God. This faith
does also comprehend hope, and has in it charity, as an individual companion.
The first sort of believing, or that Historical faith, if you take it alone,
is without form, and as yet in a manner dead. The second, whereby we only
believe God, and are not yet affected toward him with a religious piety, is
lame. But the third, whereby we believe in God, and are carried by a pious
affection toward him, this is that lively and entire faith. Thus the Council
of Colen. How different from the Council of Trent? yea, the two first kinds
of faith the same Synod, upon the Apostles Creed, puts into one, as common with
Devils and wicked men, which believe and tremble: Sciunt enim and Daemones
Illum mentiri non posse: For even the Devils do know that God cannot lie. So
that by the confession of Colen, the Pontifician faith (by their own
confession) being no other of it self, but an Historical faith, is no other
faith, but that which in the very Devils and Damned. And whereas the Synod of
Colen acknowledges a third kind of faith peculiar to the godly, which always
has hope and charity inseparably with it, this crosses the doctrine of Trent,
which allows no special or peculiar faith to the godly, but such a faith as
is common to the wicked, and which is, and may be altogether void of hope and
charity. And whereas Colen calls this peculiar faith of the godly fiducia, or
an affiance and confidence in the grace and mercy of God, in especial manner
to every believer: the Pontifician Council of Trent utterly disclaimeth this
fiducia, or strong affiance in Gods favor and mercy, allowing Gods gracious
promises, but the least part in the general object of their faith, which faith
of theirs, they make to be only an assent to the truth of God, and no affiance
in the promises of God; for as much as the Pontificians place their faith in
the understanding, and not in the will. Although otherwhiles (as liars use to
do) forgetting themselves, when they would advance the blindness of their
implicit faith, they deny it a place in the understanding, and seat it rather
in the will, though not for any good will. For Bellarmine would have faith to
be defined Bellar. de iustif. lib. 1. cap. 7.
rather from ignorance, than from knowledge; yet because of the two, they had
rather exclude confidence from faith, than science or knowledge; they consent
in general to make choice rather of the understanding, than of the will,
wherein to seat their faith.

Now the occasion (as I said) of mentioning the Council of Colen, was chiefly
to show their judgment concerning the subject of Faith; to wit, in what part
of the soul it is inherent, as in the proper subject: whether in the
understanding, or the will, etc. The Synod of Colen undertaking to decide this
point, says; Noc hoc omittendum est, fidem secundum duas priores credendi
rations, in intellectu consistere; secundum tertiam vero, etiam in voluntate:
quod actio fidei sic acceptae (quod est credere, fidere, and adhaerere Deo) non
solo intellectu, quem fides illuminat, sed and voluntate, quam accedente
charitate inflammat, perficiatur: Nor is this to be omitted, that faith
according to the two first sorts of believing, does consist in the
understanding; but according to the third sort also, in the will: because the
action of faith in this acception (which is to believe, confide, and adhere
unto God) is accomplished not in the understanding only, which faith
illuminateth, but also in the will, which by the access of charity it
inflameth. So by the judgment of this provincial Synod, this sola efficax,
syncera, integra, and salutifera fides, as the Synod calls it, ibidem: this
only effectual, sincere, entire, and saving faith, is resident not only in
the understanding, which faith informs; but also in the will, which faith by
love inflameth. And whereas the Pontificians would utterly exclude faith from
having any place in the will, because, say they, faith may be separated from
charity: the same Synod, ibidem says: Hoc constat, eam fidem, qua in Deum
credimus (quae sola efficax, syncera, integra, and salutifera est) nec infundi,
nec accipi, sine spe and charitate: This is evident, that that faith, whereby
we believe in God (which only is the effectual, sincere, entire, and saving
faith) can neither be infused, nor received without hope and charity. For as
the same Synod adds out of the Apostle (1. Cor. 13. a place which the
Pontificians urge to prove, that their Romane-Catholicke faith may be void of
charity) Nam quod alibi Apostolus ait, Si habuero omnem fidem, etc. For that
which the Apostle says, If I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and had not charity, I am nothing: is not so to be understood (says the Synod
of Colen) as if the entire and sincere faith could be received without
charity; but rather it seems to be spoken Hyperbolically, by way of
exaggeration and aggrauation, as Chrysostom and Theophilact take it: the more
to enforce the practice of charity, consisting of so many excellent duties and
perfections.

Thus have we cited this Synod of Colen, not that we hold it any standard rule
for the Doctrine of Faith (although Vega blame it for speaking too broad of
justification, and especially of imputation) but to show how in this point of
Faith, this Synod, a little more ancient than the Council of Trent, does
differ from the Doctrine of that Council in many things; wherein this Synod is
not far from the true way to the Kingdom of God: saving that now whatsoever
is in this Synod, or any other contained, must submit it self to the censure,
examination, interpretation, and approbation of the Council of Trent, whose
definitive sentence has irrefragably passed upon all Catholic Doctrine,
binding it to good behavior, that it should not carry the least weapon, that
might endanger the throat of Romane-Catholicke Religion. To this Synod also, we
may add the authority of the learned honest Cardinal Contarenus, who lived at
the same time, and a little before the Council of Trent wrote of
Justification; in which Treatise he faith: Notus Fidei incipit a voluntate,
quaeobediens Deo and Fidei, efficit vt intellectus assentiatur, absque
haesitatione traditis a Deo; and ideo promissionibus diuinis confidat, and
concipiat ex illis firmam fiduciam, quae pertinet ad voluntatem, and quasi
circulo quodam, iucipiat a voluntate haec Fides, and desinat in voluntate: The
first act or motion of Faith begins at the will, which obeying God and Faith,
causes the understanding to assent to the things delivered of God, without
doubting; and so to trust in Gods promises, and of them to conceive a firm
affiance, which pertaines to the will, and that this Faith, as it were in a
circle, begins at the will, and ends in the will. So that we see this good
Cardinal held the will to be the prime subject of saving Faith.

But now a little to illustrate the former point, concerning the subject of
Faith, and the manner of inherency which it has in a believer, and to clear
the truth of it by Scriptures, and by ancient Fathers of the Church. The
Romane-Catholicke doctrine is no less absurd and erroneous in the object of
saving Faith, than in the subject of it. They run from one extreme to another,
as the Poet says; Dum vitant stulti vitiae in contraria currunt: Fools from
one extremity of folly run into the contrary. But as the true Catholic
doctrine, although it exclude no part of Gods Word, as the object of Faith in
general, but yet restrains the special object of saving Faith to Christ,
and the promises of God in him; so though it deny not Faith to have a place of
inherency in the understanding, yet it intitleth it not only to the
understanding, but to the will, to the memory, to the affections, and all the
faculties of the soul, as so many Manfions to intertain this noble Queen
Faith, where she may keep her Court of residence for her self, and all her
train of Graces that attend her. Or we may compare the several faculties of
the soul, to so many rooms or chambers in the soul, wherein, as in a
magnificent Palace, Faith resideth, whose presence, as a Prince, puts life into
every part, and whose prerogative it is to prescribe to each of her virgin
hand-maide Graces their proper taskes, her self putting her own hand to every
work, acting, directing, assisting, adorning the office of each Grace, whereby
it is made both acceptable to God, and profitable to men.

The Catholic Doctrine then concerning the subject of The subject of saving
faith.
Faith, is, That Faith inhereth or resideth not only in the understanding, but
also in the will, in the memory, in the affections, and in every faculty of the
soul. This is the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures; and therefore Catholic.
The Scripture says; Cord creditur ad iustitiam: With the heart man believes
unto righteousness. And again it says, Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith. And again, Acts 8. 37. Philip said to the Eunuch, If
thou beleeuest with all thy heart. And again, Acts 15. 9. Purifying their
hearts by faith. By these and such like places of Scriptures it is evident,
that the proper subject of Faith is the heart of man. Now by the heart, is
meant every power and faculty of the soul, and not only the understanding (as
Aquinas understands the forenamed place of Acts 15. 9. that by purifying of
the heart, is meant the illuminating of the understanding) but also the will,
the memory, the affections, and every faculty of the soul of man. First, the
Sriptures oftentimes by naming the heart, means the understanding. As
Ephesians 1. 18. (...), the vulgar Latin renders it word for word:
Illuminatos oculis cordis vestri: The eyes of your heart being illuminated: but
our English translation has it, The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened; thereby giving the true meaning of the place, that by the heart
there is meant the understanding. So the Lord faith, Matthew. 13. 15. Ne cord
intelligant: Lest they understand with their heart. In 1. Kings 3. 9. Solomon
asks an understanding heart. In 2. Cor. 3. 15. the veil over the Jews heart,
was a note of their blindness and ignorance in the mystery of Christ.
Secondly, heart in Scripture is often taken for the will. As Acts 7. 39. The
Israelites in their hearts turned back into Egypt: that is, their will was so,
if they had had power. So Acts 11. 23. Barnabas exhorts, that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord: that is, with a ready will, and constant
resolution. So 1. Cor. 7. 37. He that stands firm in his heart, having power
over his own will, and has decreed in his heart. Thirdly, the heart is taken
for the memory. Luke 1. 66. All that heard, laid up those things in their
hearts: that is, in their memory. So Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Take heed to thy self, lest
thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from
thy heart: that is, from thy memory. And, Deuteronomy. 11. 18. Ye shall lay up these
my words in your heart, etc. that is, ye shall remember them continually, as
signs bound upon your hands, and as front-lets between your eyes. Hence it is
that the Latins use Recordari, Recordari, a Cord dicitur.
for to remember, or to record, implying that remembrance is an act springing
from the heart. Hence also does our Savior call the heart, the treasury,
Matthew. 12. 35. which agrees with the memory, called Thesaurus rerum; the
Treasury of things. Fourthly, heart in Scripture, is also taken for the
affections and passions of the soul. Matthew. 6. 21. Where your treasure is,
there will your heart be also: that is, your affection. So Romans 1. 24. God gave
them up to their own hearts lusts. And Psalm 62. 10. If riches increase, set
not your heart upon them. Thus all the motions, and inclinations, and
cogitations in man, are referred to the heart, as the prime fountain, whence
they all originally flow. So all the virtues intellectual and moral, are said
to be in the heart: we say, A wise heart, a good heart, a valiant heart, an
humble heart, an honest heart, etc. And the contrary, as we say, A foolish
heart, a wicked heart, a faint heart, a proud heart, a deceitful heart, etc.
Of a valiant man, we say, He has a Lions heart; and of a coward, He has the
heart of a Hare; and of a meek man, He has a Lambs heart: As Nabuchadnezzar
for his pride, had a Beasts heart given him, that is, a brutish disposition,
to live like a Beast, as he did.

Now the issue of all this is, that faith is that same radical grace, wherein
the whole life of the Saints of God, all holy graces have their being, and
existence of holiness, and from whence they grow and flow, even as all the
branches from the root, and the streams from the fountain. For, as the heart
is the fountain of all the faculties of the soul, of the understanding, of
the will, of the memory, of the affections, motions, cogitations, etc. all
which are signified by the heart in Scripture: so Faith being in the heart, as
in the proper seat and subject; and being said to purify the heart, it gives
us to know the excellent nature of Faith, which is to diffuse its virtue to the
purifying and possessing of every part and faculty of the soul. For,
possessing the heart, it possesses and fills the whole soul. It illuminates
and informs the understanding, it reformes and conformes the will, it
confirms it with hope, it inflames it with love, it prompts the memory with
holy meditations, and remembrances of Gods love and goodness, it moderates and
tempers all the affections and passions, it directs the motions, and
cogitations of the soul to their right end and scope: and in a word, the
office of this faith, is, to be the immediate instrument of Gods holy spirit,
to sanctify the whole soul and body; as the Scripture ascribes the work of
sanctification to faith as the immediate Instrument, Acts 26. 18. Sanctified by
Faith in me, said Christ to his new convert Apostle. The Council of Trent it
self confesses, that faith is the root of other graces. Faith (say they) is
the root of all Justification: placing their justification in hope, and love,
etc. How then is Faith the root? If it be the root, the root is not a bare
disposition to a tree, as they would have Faith to be to their justification.
A dead root cannot bear a living tree: but like root, like tree. But a root
naturally produces and shoots forth the tree: for the life and substance of
the tree is originally in the root, and comes from the root. Take away the
root, and the tree witherereth: for it lives in the root. And the root
gives life to the tree, not the tree to the root. As the Apostle said to the
ingraffed Gentile, once the Wild Oliffe, Thou bear not Romans 11. 18.
the root, but the root thee. With what reason then can the Pontificians say,
That charity, which is the branch, not the root, gives life to the root, which
is Faith? Herein how far themselves differ from senseless stocks, or come
short of the vegetable trees, I define not. Now as the whole tree draws
hislife and nourishment from the root: so all the fruits of holiness have
their life and nourishment from faith; for faith is the root of them all. And
as the Apostle says, If the root Romans 11. 16.
be holy, so are the branches. But Faith, the root of other graces, is holy,
yea most holy, as Jude speaks: therefore hope, and love, and all other graces
growing in and from Faith, are sanctified by and from Faith; for as much as
Faith is rooted in Christ, from whom it receives the life, as of justification,
so of sanctification. Hence it is, that devout Bernard says excellently to
this purpose: Primum syncera radix sancta fidei in terra humani Bern. de ordine
vitae lib.
cordis plantatur; cumque fides plene adulta fuerit, velut quaedam magna est
Arbor, diuersa in se habens poma, exquibus reficitur anima plena Deo: First,
the sincere root of holy Faith is planted in the ground of man's heart; and
when faith is fully grown up, it becomes as a great Tree, having in it sundry
sorts of Apples, wherewith the soul, being full of God, is refreshed. Without
Faith (says the Apostle) it is impossible to please Heb. 11. 6.
God. But whatsoever action proceeds from Faith, therein it pleases God. By
Faith was Abels sacrifice made acceptable to God. By Faith Enoch, walking with
God, pleased God. And are not all those actions of the Patriarchs and Saints
of God, related in that eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, all referred to
Faith, as the root from whence they sprang, and received their life and
loveliness? It is Faith that graceth every action of the just man: for the
just man shall live by his Faith. Whatsoever fruit grows not from this root,
it is sin. Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin: is as true in general of
saving Faith, as it is in particular of the Conscience, called Faith by the
Apostle, Rom 14 23.

Now the reason of all this, that Faith gives life and being to every grace,
for as much as every grace is radically in faith; is, because where faith is,
Christ is. Now Faith is in the heart, and consequently Christ dwells in the
heart by Faith. And if in the heart, then in every part, and faculty of the
soul and body. So that as the soul quickneth every part of the body: so Faith
quickneth and sanctifies every faculty of the soul. As St Augustine says,
Fides, quae credit in Deum, vita Aug. de cognit. verae vitae c. 37.
animae existit, and per hanc iustus viuit: Faith, which believes in God, is
the life of the soul, and by this faith the just man lives. And elsewhere he
says: Vnde mors in anima? quia non Aug. in Johan. tract. 45. ex cap. 11.
est fides. Vnde in corpore? quia non est ibi anima. Ergo animae tuae anima
fides est: Whence is death in the soul? because faith is not there. Whence in
the body? because the soul is not there. Therefore the soul of thy soul is
Faith. And as the soul is in the body, Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet
part: The whole soul is in the whole body, and whole in every part: So, Fides
tota est in toto, and tota in qualibet part; Whole faith is in the whole
heart, and whole in every faculty of the soul. Hence the Apostle, making
himself the instance of the life of faith, says, I am crucified with Christ.
Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. Christ therefore is not to be found in that part or
faculty of the soul, where faith is not. If Faith be not in the will, Christ
is not there; and so in the rest. And where Christ is not, there is no life, no
sanctification. Our wills therefore, our memories, our affections, our motions,
and cogitations are dead, profane, all out of order, if Christ be not, and
live not in every one of them. And Christ is not in any of them, if Faith be
not there. Hence it is, that Faith is all, because as the root, it contains
all graces. In the understanding it knows God, in the will it hops and
loves God, in the memory it thinks of God with thankfulness for his
mercies, in the affections it fears God, it sorroweth for sin, it patiently
suffers, it rejoices in God, in all it serves God. How so? From Faith it
is, that the understanding knows God in his Son Jesus Christ, the knowledge
of John 17. 3.
whom is eternal life. And therefore Divines by knowledge in that place,
understand Faith. And St. Augustine says, Intellectus Aug. in Johan. tract. 29.
merces est fidei. Ergo noli quaerere intelligere, vt credas: sed creed, vt
intelligas: Understanding is the reward of Faith. Do not therefore seek to
know, that thou may believe: but believe, that thou may understand. From
Faith it is, that the will hopes in God, loves God, and cleaves unto him: and
so in the rest. And therefore St. Augustine places Aug. de verbis Apostoli.
ser. 33.
Faith in the will, saying: A Domino praeparatur voluntas hominis, vt sit fidei
receptaculum: The will is prepared of the Lord, to be the receptacle of faith.
And again, Omne quod non est Aug. contra duas Epist. Pelagio. ad Bonifac. l.
1. c. 3.
ex fide, peccatum est. Ac per hoc bona voluntas, quae se abstrabit a peccato,
fidelis est, quia iustus ex fide viuit: Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.
And therefore the good will, which withdrawes it self from sin, is
faithful, because the just man lives by Faith.

Hence it is, that Bernard says, Credere in Deum, est in eum Bern. flores de
fide.
sperare, and eum diligere: To believe in God, is to hope in him, and to love
him. And again: Vera and plena fides vniuer sa praecepta complectitur: A true
and complete Faith comprehends all the Commandments. Hieronymus Osorius in
his first Hieror. Osorius de iustitia l. 1.
Book de Iustitia, has these words: Fides continet omnem religionem atque
pietatem: omnes enim virtutes ex fide apt nexeque sunt, and cum illa
sanctissimo vinculo colligatae atque implicitae sunt: That is, Faith contains
all religion and piety: for all virtues are by Faith consorted and connexed
together, and with it are bound and intwined in a most holy knot. But yet I
dare not warrant the Reader, that he shall find these words in Osorius from
henceforth, seeing in the Index at Madrid, these very words are commanded to
pass the flames of their Index expurgatorius. And in the second book he
says: Ergo cum Ibid. lib. 2.
Fides totum animum regat, and in Verbi diuini studium rapiat, consequens
necessario est, vt non cernatur solum in credendo, sed etiam in obediendo:
Therefore seeing Faith does govern the whole soul, and draw it to the study
and love of Gods Word, it follows necessarily, that it is seen, not only in
believing, but also in obeying. But these words also undergo the same doom
with the former. Yea, why should Pontificians make it so strange that Faith
should have all other graces inseparably coupled with it; seeing that even
their Doctors, Aristotle and Cicero do teach, that all moral virtues are
conjoined and combined in one: and he that has one, has all? and that
Iustitia est omnis virtus: Justice is every virtue. It is a marvel, that they
have escaped Purgatory, seeing that not even Gratian himself has had the
grace to be favored of them, his Gloss but bordering upon Tullies Offices:
for where he says; Sed quomodo possum habere talem Fidem (that is, to remove
Great. de consecrat. distinct. 4. Gloss.
mountains) and non charitatem? cum qui habeat vnam virtutem, habeat omnes.
Cap. vlt.
Nonpossem quidem, nisi miraculose: that is: But how can I have such a Faith
(to remove mountains) and not charity? since he that has one virtue, has
all. I could not have it, but miraculously. All these words must out, as ye
may see in Collat. censurae, in Gloss. iuris canon. number. 84. His excellent
Majesty also, in his peerlesse Paraphrase of the Revelation, Chapt. 20. says,
That God by Faith only justifies man, which not withstanding is done
according to his works, because they, as the fruits of Faith, cannot be
separated from it, and bear witness of the same to men in the earth. S.
Augustine says: Quid est ergo credere in eum? credendo amare, credendo
diligere, Aug. de verbis Apost. sermon. 33. ^om. 10.
credendo in eum^re, and eius membris incorporari: What is it then to believe
in him? by believing to love him, by believing to affect him, by believing to
go into him, and to be incorporated into his members. Paulus Fidem, quae per
dilectionem Aug. Enchir. c. 8
operatur, approbat atque commendat, quae vtique sine spe esse non potest:
proinde nec amor sine spe est, nec sine amore spes, neque vtrumque sine Fide:
Paul approves and commends that Faith, which works by love, which cannot
be without hope: therefore neither is love without hope, nor hope without
love, nor both without Faith. And upon the 139. Psalm he says: Fides sic est
in anima, vt radix bona, quae pluviam in fructum Aug. in Psa. 139 Praesatio.
ducit: Faith is in the soul as a good root, which brings the rain into
the fruit. And St. Chrysostom says; Fides est Chrysostom. de fide Abrabae. sermon.
Religionis sanctissimae fundamentum, charitatis vinculum, amoris subsidium.
Haec sanctitatem firmat, caestitatem roberat; gubernat sexus, gradus prouehit,
officia cuncta custodit. Fides mandaeta tenet, praecepta seruat, promissae
consummat: Faith is the foundation of the most holy Religion, the bond of
charity, the supply of love. It confirms sanctity, it strengthens chastity, it
gouernes all sexes, it promotes all degrees, it observes all offices. Faith
keeps the commandments, practices the precepts, accomplisheth the promises.
And much more to this purpose, according to his golden elegancy. Ambrose also
says, there are Ambros. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 22.
in Faith great prerogatives and dignities. What be they? Piety, Justice,
Sobriety, Charity, Discipline, or good Government. And in a word, St. Augustine
says: In ipsa Fide sunt omnia Aug. in Psalm. 32. Euang.
opera, quae diligit Deus: in Faith it self are all those works, which God
loves. Thus Faith being in the heart, as in the proper subject of inherency,
and so consequently, in the whole soul and every faculty thereof, as the life
and soul of the soul, animating every power and property of it; it follows,
that as moral justice is every moral virtue (as the Philosopher speaks) so
justifying Faith, which is reckoned for righteousness, is every grace and holy
virtue, as being the living root, and holy seed, sustaining, quickening,
supplying, sanctifying all other graces, which are as so many fruits growing
upon this Tree of life, as Revel. 22. 2. holy Faith being the foundation,
whereon all graces are built, the ground whereon they grow. Hence they have all
their rise and motion, yea their formal and essential goodness. For
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. If we hope not from Faith, if we love not
from Faith, if we be not patient because we believe, and so in the rest: Hope,
Love, Patience, and the rest, are so many sins. For as Faith is the ground or
foundation of things hoped for, so of things loved, of things suffered, and the
rest. And why may not so many habits of grace grow upon the same root and
stem of Faith, as so many distinct fruits upon the same Tree of life? Yea,
the Apostle elsewhere also tells us, that from Faith do spring not only peace
of conscience Romans 5. 1. etc.
toward God, but access unto all grace, rejoicing under hope of the glory of
God, Patience, Hope, Love, etc.

Thus it is evident by the authority of the holy Scriptures, and by the
testimonies of ancient Fathers, that saving and justifying Faith, is not a
Faith common with Devils and Reprobates, as being in nature and kind a dead
Faith; but it is proper and peculiar only to the Saints and Elect, as being a
holy and living Faith, which receives not life from any infusion of charity
into it, but is a living root, from whence do spring, and wherein do live all
holy graces, as Charity, Hope, Patience, Meekness, etc. That this is called
also the Catholic Faith, not because it is common to good and bad, or because
it has for the general object of it, the Word of God, as it is a true
History, containing things done, and to be done, whether they be acts,
precepts, threatenings, or promises, one with another: but because it is the
Catholic Faith of the Elect, from, in, and to all ages past, present, and to
come, whose general object, though it be the whole Word of God, yet the
special object of it is Christ Jesus, the word incarnate, and the special
promises of life made unto us of God in him.

Now by this which has been already said, we may easily see the sequel and
issue of all the rest of those privileges and marks, that the Pontificians
put upon their Catholic Faith. For seeing they admit of no other Faith in
kind, than the Historical, we will easily yield unto them, that this their
Faith may be, and is in the very Devils and Damned. We will yield them also,
that their Faith being dead of it self, and without form or being, and
receiving life, form, and being from Charity, may also upon the loss of
Charity, become as well dead and unformed again, as before it received life
from Charity. But whereas they say, that this Faith, dead as it is, and being
fruitless and without Charity, yet is sufficient to make a man a Christian and
a Believer: we allow them this also thus far, that it may make them such
Christians and Believers, as to send them to hell, amongst the Devils and
Damned, their fellow-Beleeuers, as their fideles fornicarios, adulteros,
molles, musculorum concubitores, fures, etc. their faithful fornicators,
adulterers, effeminate, Sodomites, and Catamites, thieves, and other such their
Christian believers, whom by Trents own confession, their Faith excludes
Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 15.
from the Kingdom of Heaven. But this Faith of theirs, being no other in
kind, but that which is common with the damned: to wit, of it self, dead and
fruitless; let them devise never such precious wares to stuff it withal, as
Charity, Hope, and the like, to put life into it, it will prove no more a
living Faith, than Michals Image, with the pillow 1. Sam. 19.
stuffed with Goats hair laid under the head of it, proved a living man: And
so consequently, it can never make a man such a Christian and Believer, as to
bring him to the possession of Gods Kingdom. But are they to be accounted
Christians and Believers, that go to Hell? Yes surely, as good as
Romane-Catholickes: for such only they account their Christians and Believers.
Well, let them enjoy their privilege. In the mean time they must know, that
God has another kind of believing Christians. For as the Apostle says: As he
is not a Jew, that is one outwardly, nor that Circumcision, Rom 1. 28. 29.
which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew, that is one within, and
Circumcision that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise
is not of men, but of God: So he is not a Christian, that is one outwardly,
neither is that Baptism, which is outward on the flesh; but he is a
Christian, that is one inwardly, and Baptism that of the heart, in the spirit,
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. But the
Romane-Catholicke Christian believers, are they that have received their
outward form of Baptism, and profess themselves members of the
Romane-Catholicke Church, be they otherwise never so damnable in their lives.
What says Bernard in his Sermon ad Pastores? Neminem vestrum credo esse Bern.
sermon. ad Pastores.
haereticum: omnes creditis, etc. I believe none of you is a heretic: you all
believe one God in Trinity, that Christ suffered, and was buried, that he
descended and ascended: But does this faith make a man a Catholic? By this
faith, the very Devils should be Catholics; for (as St. James says) they
believe and tremble. But not that faith, which is common with Devils and men,
makes a true Catholic, but that only which is common to men with Angelical
spirits. What faith is that? That which works by love So he. Therefore, by
Bernards doctrine, faith void of charity, which is common with Devils,
howsoever it may make a Romane-Catholicke, and so says Bernard, it may the
Devil as well, but a true Catholic it cannot make. St. Augustine also puts a
maine difference: saying, Cum dilectione fides Christiani, sine dilectione Aug
in Epist. Johan. tract. 10.
fides Daemonum: the faith of a Christian is joined with love, the faith of
Devils is without love. He is therefore a Christian, that has such a faith,
as has love joined with it: and consequently, they are no Christians, but
rather of the number of Devils, as being members of the Devil, whose faith is
without love. And the same Austine elsewhere, plainly declares who are the
faithful: saying, Corpus Christi est Ecclesia, Aug. in Psalm. 56.
non ista, aut illa, sed toto orb diffusa. Tota autem Ecclesia constans ex
omnibus fidelibus, quia fideles omnes membra sunt Christi, habet illud caput
positum in coelestibus, quod gubernat corpus suum: etsi separatum est a
visione, sed annectitur charitate. Totus Christus caput est, and corpus eius:
The body of Christ is the Church, not this or that Church, but diffused over
the whole world. And the whole Church consisting of all the faithful, in as
much as all the faithful are members of Christ, has that head now set in the
heavenly places, which governs his body: and although it be separated from
vision or sight, yet it is knit unto him by love. For whole Christ is the head,
and his body. So we see St. Augustine confesses none to be faithful, but
such as are the members of Christ; nor any his members, but the members of his
body, the Church: nor Christ's Church to be any one particular Church, as the
Romane-Catholicke Church, but indeed the Catholic Church, spread over the
whole world. Now if none be faithful, but such as are the members of Christ,
of his Church, of his body, and Christ is the Savior of his body, and not one
of his members can perish, yea, not a hair of their heads shall perish: how
then are they members of Christ (since Christians, since faithful) that have no
part in that salvation, whereof the whole body is partaker? But such are
members of Christ, though not perfectly united, as Trent says, Chapt. 7. and
Vega commends it. But St. Augustine knew no such members of Christ. Although by
Aug. Epist. 23. Bonifacio.
a common appellation or account, all Christians, as being baptized, are called
Faithful, in as much as they have received the character of Faith, which is
Baptism, as Augustine says: yet properly, and in a strict sense, none are
true believers, but such as are endued with a true, living, holy justifying
Faith in Christ, whereby they are perpetually and inseparably united unto him,
as living members of the same body, to reign with him for evermore. So Saint
Paul does exemplify this, in describing a true Jew: He is not a Jew, that is
one outward; neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: but
he is a Jew, that is one within, and the Circumcision of the heart, in the
spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. St.
Chrysostom says, Whence art thou made holy? (...); Chrylost in Epist. ad
Colos. 1. Chrysostom. ad populum Antioch. homil. 21.
Whence art thou called faithful? Is it not therefore, because thou art
sanctified by the death of Christ? Is it not therefore, because thou beleeuest
in Christ? And again: Fidelis propterea vocaris, quoniam and credis Deo, and
ab eo creditam ipse iustitiam habes, sanctitatem, munditiam animae, in filium
adoptionem, regnum coelorum: Thou art therefore called faithful, because both
thou beleeuest God, and have from him granted unto thee righteousness,
sanctity, purity of soul, adoption of a son, and the kingdom of heaven.
Seeing therefore (by the Doctrine of Scriptures and Fathers) faith and
salvation cannot be separated, me thinks, the Council of Trent had done
more politickly, if with the loss of charity, they had suffered faith quite to
be lost too, rather than retaining it, to be damned with it.

Further, for as much as the Pontificians admit of no other faith to
Justification, but an historical faith; we easily grant that which they so much
desire, That their faith does not justify them at all, but may be in them,
though they go to hell for it, as themselves do teach. Whereas the faith of
believers, which believe in Christ, has the property to save, and not suffer any
to perish. For Christ says (if we may believe Christ, rather than the Popes
infallibility in the Council of Trent) Whosoever believes John 3. 16.
on the Son of man (or the Son of God) shall not perish, but has eternal
life. And v. 18: He that believes on him, is not condemned. Yes, says the
Council of Trent, he that is a believer may be condemned, though still he
continue a Believer. Lastly, since for all this, that their Faith cannot
justify nor save them, yet notwithstanding they will have this to be a true
Faith, though a dead faith. I et us yield them this also, that the Roman
faith is a true dead Faith, or a true Faith of the Devils and damned. Else what
true Faith is it? Gregory, once Bishop of Rome, says: Vera fides est, quae in
hoc, quod verbis Greg. in Euang. homil. 29. tom. 2
dicit, moribus non contradicit: That is true faith, which in that it
professes in words, it contradicts not in manners. And a little after: Fidei
nostrae veritatem, in vitae nostrae consideratione debemus agnoscere; t^nc enim
veraciter fideles sumus, si quod verbis promittimus, operibus complemus: We
ought to acknowledge the truth of our Faith, in the consideration of our life;
for then are we truly faithful, if that which we promise in words, we perform
in deeds. And St. Ambrose says, Nunquam fides Ambros. de incarnationis Domini
sacramento lib. cap 1.
vera turbatur, True faith is never troubled. How is then the Pontifician faith
a true faith, albeit a dead faith, seeing (according to Gregory) what it
professes in words, it contradicts in deeds? and according to Ambrose, it is
not free from trouble, being ouer-whelmed with horror of Conscience? yea, St.
Hierome says: Cum dilectio pro^ul abfuerit, and fides pariter abscedit: When
charity is away, there faith also is gone with it. To sum up all in a word
that has been said of this point; the Notes of difference between the true
Catholic saving Faith, and the Romane-Catholicke faith, are these, and such
like:

1. The true Catholic justifying Faith brings every one that has it, unto
salvation, and such shall never perish, John 3. 16. and 18. and 1. Pet. 1. 9.
The end of saving Faith is the salvation of our soul. But the Romish faith
does not, by their own confession, bring every one of them that has it, unto
salvation: Therefore the Roman Catholic faith is not the true Catholic
justifying Faith.

Secondly, the true Catholic saving Faith is a free gift of Gods grace, given
for Christ's sake, as Phil, 1. 29 and Ephesians. 2, 8. But the Romish faith is no
free gift of Gods grace, as being in the very Devils; which faith also the
Council of Trent separateth from grace, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 15.
saying, that grace may be lost, though not faith: Therefore the Romish faith
is not the true Catholic saving faith. Whereupon Bellarmine, Bellar* de
libero arbit. l. 1. c. 6.
as the mouth of all Pontificians, says: Fides infusa non perit, gratia
recedente, vt Catholici omnes fatentur: Infused faith perishes not, when grace
is gone, as all Catholics confess. So that Pontifician faith is no grace
with them, and no marvel then if justifying faith be in no grace with them
also. But how is their faith infused? This may seem to make faith a gift of
God. Let Bellarmine himself resolve it: he says, Bellar in his fifth general
controversy* lib. 2. cap. 31.
That all men may believe if they will, when the Euangell is preached: and so
the Pontifician faith is of them disclaimed to be a special gift of Gods
saving grace.

Thirdly, The true Catholic saving faith is a confidence in the promises of
God in Christ, it being the foundation of things hoped for in Christ, the
special object of it, Heb. 11. 1. But the Romish faith, being no other in its
own nature, but that which is common with the very Devils, by their own
confession, is altogether without hope, having no respect to things hoped for,
no more than the Devils, for all their faith, have: Therefore the Romish faith
is none of the true saving justifying faith. There be many other differences,
which follow in this Treatise.

In stead of adding more to this place, it shall suffice to conclude this
Chapter with the definition of saving and justifying faith; which may fitly be
thus defined. Justifying faith is a special free gift of God his grace,
whereby a sinner believing in or into Christ, being thus united unto him, is
made Et mayor Catech. Nowell. desinitur fides sic. This the Church of Engl.
doctrine.
partaker of all Christ's merits and righteousness, and is by the same faith
certainly and infallibly persuaded, that all his sins are remitted, and
himself in Christ perfectly justified in Gods sight: this faith also as a
living root, containing in it all other graces, as hope, love, patience,
humility, etc. For the proof of each part of this definition, we need not
here stand upon, as referring both to the foregoing, and ensuing Chapters,
where they are amply proved. Now, that I call justifying Faith a gift of God, I
note the efficient cause of it to be God; whereby it is also distinguished from
the faith of Devils, which cannot be called the gift of God. Secondly, that I
call it a free gift of Gods grace, as Phil. 1. 29. this excludes all precedent
works in man, as merits of congruity, or of any preuious repentance, making a
man acceptable to receive Faith in Christ, which jumps with the merit of
congruity. Thirdly, that I call it a special gift, I exclude all reprobates
from having any communion with this Faith, it is specially and peculiarly and
solely given to the Saints, Jude 3. special also in regard of the nature of
it, being a gift of grace, flowing from Gods special love in Christ unto his
elect Saints. Fourthly, whereby a sinner, etc. I note, that whosoever has this
Faith, is empty of all inherent righteousness of his own; he must be a sinner,
the general subject, wherein Faith dwells. Fifthly, by believing in, or into
Christ, I note the proper act of justifying Faith, differencing it from all
other kinds of faith; as also, that Christ is the proper object of justifying
Faith, and not the whole Word of God in general. Sixthly, being by Faith united
to Christ, and so made partaker of all Christ's merits and righteousness, I
note, that Faith is the immediate instrument, whereby we are made one with
Christ, and so have our perfect communion with him in all his righteousness
and graces; in so much as by virtue of this union by Faith, Christ and all true
believers are all one mystical Christ. Seventhly, by being certainly and
infallibly persuaded of the remission of sins by faith, I note the native
property of justifying Faith; which is, to assure a man of his salvation; and
that in a greater or lesser measure, according to the proportion of Faith
measured out unto us; and that faith also assures us of our justification in
Gods sight, as laying hold upon Christ, who is our righteousness: which
certainety and assurance is such, as it necessarily excludes all vain
presumption. For how can a man that is truly and infallibly certain, be said
therein vainly to presume? Lastly, I call this Faith a living root, whence
all other graces spring; to note the true difference between this justifying
faith, and the Pontifician faith, which in its own nature is dead, until (say
they) it be quickened by charity infused into it: to note also how vain that
common cavil and quarrel of Papists is against our doctrine of justification
by Faith alone, as a doctrine tending (say they) to Libertinisme, and to cast
off all care of good works; whereas our faith, whereby we are justified, is
such, as being not a dead, but a living root, including in it all other
graces, it causes the believer to be as a living tree, planted by the rivers
of waters, and bringing forth his fruit in due season, whose leaf also does
not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.

CHAP. XIII. Of the generality and uncertainty of Romane-Catholicke Faith:
the generality of it confuted, by the contrary confirmed.
BEsides the forenamed properties and limitations of that kind of faith, which
Pontificians appropriate to themselves, though common (by their own
confession) with the Devils and damned; we cannot omit two other special
marks, whereby they would dignifie and commend this their faith unto the
world. The first whereof, is the generality and implicity of this faith: the
second, is the uncertainty of it. We join these two together, generality and
uncertainty, because the former is a necessary inducement to the latter, and
as it were the foundation of Babels tottering Tower of uncertainty. For, grant
once such a generality of faith as they require, and the uncertainty of it will
easily follow.

Now concerning generality of faith, we noted before out of Soto de not. and
great. l. 2. c. 7.
Soto, that they utterly disclaim that special faith in Christ, and in the
promises of God in him. I may here fitly apply that sentence used by his
Excellent Majesty in his late speech to the honorable house of Parliament, which
I humbly crave leave to borrow, Dolosus versat^r in vniuersalibus: The
deceitful man loves to walk in universalities or generalities. The
Pontificians in this their universality or generality of faith, deal like the
timorous, and therefore cautelous Hare, who to deceive her pursuers or tracers,
makes many doubles, and crafty windings out and in, that uneath it is for the
most sagacious pursuer, to deprehend, or find her out. Their end is, that
faith, in the height of sins deluge ouerflowing the soul, might have no solid
and firm ground, to pitch and rest her foot upon. And herein lies the mystery
of their Antichristian iniquity, to pull men quite away from Christ, that in
matter of faith they may wholly depend upon that Papal imaginary
infallibility, having no other security, than to pin their souls upon a
sinful man's sleeue: Which Vega does not a whit dissemble, saying, Deus
summam salutis fidelium in Sacerdotum Vega lib. 13. de lapsis and eorum
reparatione. c. 31.
posuit potestate: That God has placed the sum of the salvation of the
faithful in the power of the Priests: the sum whereof is the Pope, the
Archpriest. But of this more in the proper place. But for their faith, it must
be general in two respects: first, in respect of the generality of the object
of Faith, the whole Word of God (as they say) written and unwritten, an
unlimited object: secondly, in regard of the generality of men to be saved or
justified, as they teach. They must neither in particular believe the promises
of God in Christ, nor any man must believe that the promises of God belong unto
him in particular. To which purpose Soto says, Fides Catholica, Christianae
familiae necessaria, vtpote qua Christiani Soto ibid.
censemur, non est specialis illa, qua indubitato credit quisque, ac constituit
sibi, remitti peccata propter Christum, and esse in gratia Dei: sed ille
assensus in genere, quo firmiter credimus Iesum Christum, vniuersalem esse
Redemptorem, etc. that is, The Catholic Faith, necessary for the Christian
family, as whereby we are reputed Christians, is not that special Faith,
whereby every man does undoubtedly believe and resolve with himself, that his
sins are forgiven him for Christ's sake, and that he is in the favor of God;
but that general assent, whereby we firmly believe, that Jesus Christ is the
universal Redeemer, etc. as we touched before. Now the grounds of this their
general Faith, we find in the sixth Chapter of the sixth Session of the
Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 6.
Council of Trent, of the manner of preparation to justification: as first,
for the belief of things revealed and promised, the general object of it: and
secondly; In spem eriguntur, fidentes Deum sibi propter Christum propitium
fore, etc. Men are brought to hope, believing that God will be, or may be
merciful to them for Christ's sake. Mark, they do not say, believing that God
is merciful unto them, but that he will be, or may be, as Vega interprets it;
Se posse saluari: that they may possibly be saved. And when they speak of a
particular justification of any one man in the present tense, then also they
express it by an indefinite speech, and general phrase: Credentes a Deo
iustificari impium per gratiam eius, etc. Believing that a sinner is justified
of God through his grace: not that a man's self is justified. For, for a man to
believe in particular, that himself is truly justified by Christ, such a man
they anathematize and curse, Can. 14. yea, this Faith is ibid. Can. 14*
so general, and so little respects Christ as the object of it, as that
Vega, in his Commentary upon the said sixth Chapter of the sixth Session, says:
Persuaderi potest, non solum iustificari Vega lib. 6. de praepar. adult. ad
iustif. cap. 19
posse homines, sed and saluari sine fide Christi explicita: It is very
credible, that men may not only be justified, but also saved, without the
explicit, or clear, and unfolded Faith of Christ. Where note, that they not
only exclude the necessity of a distinct Faith in Christ, but also put a maine
difference between justification and salvation: For a Pontifician may be
justified, and yet not saved. Vega adds his reason: for (says he) although
Christ bound all men to believe the Gospel, when he commanded his Apostles,
that they should preach it throughout the whole world, and pronounced them
damned, that believed not: yet seeing there may be an invincible ignorance of
the Gospel (that is, either for want of the means, or by reason Ignorantia
prauae dispositionis. cap. 18. ibid. in fine.
of a wicked and perverse disposition, as they say) this shall be no impediment
in this respect, why they may not be both justified and saved, which shall
observe other natural precepts. Thus the Council of Trent, with her
Pontificians, deal with Faith and Justification, as Cheaters, who when they
play with Nouices, do so shuffle and pack the Cards, that they make the game
sure on their own side, and all to cheat the other of his money. So the
Pontificians cheat their simple people of their silver, and souls too, by
shuffling the particular saving faith in Christ, with such sleight of hand, in
the whole pack of general faith, that they are sure never to rise sauers.

Well, come we now to show the vanity of this general faith, by setting
against it the special particular faith, which Gods Word teaches and
requires of every one that is truly justified, and so consequently perfectly
saved.

We have spoken before sufficiently of the proper and special object of saving
faith: to wit, Jesus Christ, the sum of the Gospel, and the substance of all
Gods promises. Therefore we will now confine our speech to the specialty and
particularity of saving faith, in respect of the common subject of it; to wit,
every believer in particular. It is the Catholic Doctrine of the holy
Scriptures, that every believer must have a special, particular, proper faith
of his own; yea a clear, explicit, and unfolded faith in Christ: that he is
not only the Redeemer of mankind in general, nor only that we may be saved
by him, but that every one in particular, do believe Christ is his Redeemer
and Savior. This is the special property of saving faith, particularly to
apply Christ, with all Gods promises in him, to my soul, and thy soul. The
Scriptures are very pregnant for the proof of this point; both in the Law, in
the Prophets, and in the New Testament. In the Law, this particular faith is
shadowed unto us by three remarkable types: one of the hand, another of the
eyes, and the third of the Sicle of the Sanctuary. To which also we may add
the particular sacrifice, which every man was to bring for his own sin: We
will begin with the last. In the Law, every man was to bring a particular
sacrifice for his particular sin. Leuit. 4. 27. 28. If any of the common
people sin, etc. not only the Priest, as verse. 3. nor only the
Congregation, verse. 13. but if any one of the common people sin, etc. then
he shall bring: What? an offering in general? no: he shall bring his
offering, as a Kidde without blemish, for his sin which he has sinned. Now
this offering without blemish, what was it, but a lively type of Christ, as of
the Lamb without 1. Pet. 1. 19.
spot, as Peter speaks, who was offered up, and sacrifised for every sinner,
believing in particular? For the further confirmation of this point; in the
second place, every man bringing his particular offering, for his particular
sin, was to lay his hand upon his offering, as Leuit. 4. 29. Thus the Priest
must do also, verse. 4. thus the whole Congregation must do, verse. 15. All
must lay their hands upon their sacrifice. Now what is meant by the hand, but a
particular faith in every believer, apprehending and applying Christ, to the
taking away, and purging of his sin? This we touched before in the point of
imputation, where we showed that the hand thus laid upon the sacrifice, was a
figure of faith. Origin Orig. in Leuit.
applies the laying on of the hand, to the imposing of our sins upon Christ,
the true sacrifice. Hence it was, that together with the imposition of the
hand, the sins of the offenders were confessed over the sacrifice, and put
upon the head thereof, Leuit. 16. 21. So that this imposition of the hand, as
it did figure the laying of our sins upon Christ, whereby he became sin for
us, by imputation, bearing them upon him: So also it was a reciprocal
signification of the imputation and application of Christ's righteousness to
every believer, whereby we become the righteousness of God in him: the hand
of faith coming between, laying our sin upon Christ, our sacrifice, and
receiving his righteousness unto us. Among the Hebrew Doctors, Maimony says
of this imposition of the hand, or hands, that deaf men, fools, children,
Maimony in tract. de sacrif. offerend. cap. 3.
servants, weomen, the blind, and the stranger, might not impose their hand
upon the sacrifice. Now we know, that the deaf, fools, and children, are
void of actual faith; servants, weomen, blind, and strangers, might be, in a
mystery debarred and excluded: for servants were types of the servants of
sin: weomen, we know, were denied the use of Circumcision; they were not
reckoned in the number of those six hundred thousand, that came out of Egypt,
who were all men of war, types of Christ's Soldiers, who must be of a
Masculine virtue. And Abraham, the Father of the faithful, is said in
Scripture, to beget sons, but not daughters: Abraham non genuit filias, says
Origin. But this was in a mystery only; as Melchisedechs birth and death are
not mentioned in Scripture, and that in a mystery. The blind were of the
nature of the deaf; and the strangers, argued those Ephesians. 2. 12.
that were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenants of promise, as the Apostle speaks. Not, that I mean, these were
denied to have any part in Gods Covenant, but in a mystery and type only, as
we have said. Also the same Rabbi says, that this imposition of the hand must
be done by a man's self, and not by another, as the just man shall live by his
faith, not by another faith. Abac. 2. 4. It must be done with all a man's
might: as Philip said to the Acts 8. 37.
Eunuch, If thou beleeuest with all thy heart. And immediately upon the
imposition, the sacrifice was slain; figuring our faith in Christ's blood, Rom
3. 25. Origin compares faith to the figure of the holy Sicle, Leuit. 3. Siclo
sancto comparandus Origin super ^euit.
nobis est Christus, qui peccata nostra dissoluat. Siclus sanctus fidei nostrae
formam tenet: We must with the Sicle of the Sanctuary purchase unto us Christ,
who may take away our sins. The holy Sicle is the figure of our faith: for
(says he) if thou shall offer faith as a price, Christ, as it were the
immaculate Ram, being given to be sacrificed, thou shall receive remission of
sins. Now this particular faith in Christ, is absolutely necessary for every
one that will be saved. And therefore the same Origin concludes: Certum est,
quod remissionem peccatorum nullus accipiat, nisi detulerit integram, probam
and sanctam fidem, per quam mercari possit Arietem; cuius natura hoc est, vt
peccata credentis abstergat. Et hic est Siclus sanctus, probata (vt diximus)
and syncera fides, id est, vbi nullus perfidiae dolus, nulla hereticae
calliditatis peruersitas admiscetur, vt synceram fidem offerentes, precioso
Christi sanguine, tanquam immaculatae hostiae diluamur: It is certain, that no
man can receive remission of sins, unless he being an entire, approved, and
holy faith, wherewith he may purchase the Ram: the nature whereof is this,
to blot out the sins of the believer. And this is the holy Sicle, an approved
and sincere faith, that is, where no perfidious fraud, nor perverse heretical
craft is mingled, that offering a sincere faith, we may be cleansed with the
precious blood of Christ, as of an immaculate sacrifice. Every man therefore
must bring a special, particular, holy, sincere faith of his own, wherewith,
as with a holy Sicle, he may purchase Christ; and which, as his hand, he must
lay hold on Christ, which no man else can do for him. His general implicit
faith, to believe as the Church believes: that is, to believe he knows not
what, will not serve the turn.

This special particular faith in Christ, requisite in every believer, in
every one that looks for salvation, is lively prefigured by the eye: as Numb.
21. 9. if a Serpent did bite any man, when he beheld the Serpent of brass,
he lived. This brazen Serpent was a lively figure of Christ crucified. A man
bitten with the Serpent, is every sinner: the way for him to be healed, is to
look upon the brazen Serpent lifted up upon the pole; that is, upon Christ
crucified. Every man that was Serpent-bit, he must look upon the brazen
Serpent with his Job 19. 27.
own eyes, not with any others eyes: as Job said, I shall see him with these
eyes, and none other for me. Christ himself applies John 3.
the truth to the type: As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness; so
must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have life everlasting. As therefore none of the stung Israelites
were cured, but those that looked with their own eyes upon the brazen Serpent;
so none of the Israel of God is healed of the sting of sin, but by his
special, clear, viue Faith, as the Crystal eye of his soul, looking upon
Christ crucified. As St. Augustine upon the place applies it: Interim modo
Fratres, vt a peccato sanemur, Aug. in Joan. tract. 12. c. 3.
Christum crucifixum intu^amur. Quomodo qui intuebantur illum Serpentem, non
peribant morsibus Serpentium: sic qui intuentur fide mortem Christi, sanantur a
morsibus peccatorum: Now Brethren (says he) that we may be cured of our
sin, let us look upon Christ crucified. As they which beheld that Serpent,
did not perish by the bitings of Serpents: so they that by Faith behold the
death of Christ, are healed of the bytings of sins. As therefore every one
must look with his own eyes, and that not upon every object, but upon the
Serpent, and live: so every sinner must look with the clear eyes of his own
faith, and that upon no other object, but Christ crucified, that so he may live
eternally, and be healed of all his infirmities, as David says, Psalm. 103.

If we look into the whole Word of God, we shall find this particular faith of
every believer to have been in all the Saints of God. The Prophet Abacuc says
of every just man, Abac. 2. 4.
The just man shall live by his Faith: by his own Faith, not by another. This
was Abraham's faith (the Father and Figure of all the Faithful) who hearing
Gods promise concerning the blessed seed, to wit, Christ, in whom all the
Nations of the earth should be blessed, as the Apostle applies it, Gal. 3. 16.
he thereupon believed. How believed he? not as the Pontificians would have it,
by a general faith concerning the truth of that which God had said: for it is
not said barely Abraham believed God, but* Abraham believed in the Lord, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness, Genesis 15. 6. And the Apostle says,
That Abraham staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in Faith, giving glory to God, Romans 4. 20. and therefore it was imputed
to him for righteousness, v. 22. But the Pontificians willsay, this was a
special Faith, which Abraham had, not common to ordinary and common believers.
No such thing: for look what kind of Faith Abraham had, the same kind, though
happily not in the same measure and degree, have all true believers. This the
Apostle plainly resolves in the next words, saying: Now it was not written
for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him: but for us also, to whom it
shall be imputed, if we believe on him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from
the dead, who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification. If therefore Abraham had a special and particular faith, then
every true Believer has the like faith in him. But Abraham had a special and
particular Faith: for, first he believed in God: secondly, he believed in God
especially concerning the promise, the substance whereof was Christ. This Faith
was imputed to Abraham for righteousness. If it had not been Abraham's special
Faith, how had it been imputed to him for righteousness? It was Abraham's
peculiar, proper, own Faith, looking with open eyes upon the promise of God
(which promise was Christ, whose day Abraham, though a far off, saw and
rejoiced) which was imputed to him for righteousness. Thus it is with every
true believer, whose own special, clear, Chrystall-ey'd Faith, beholding and
applying Gods promise in Christ, is particularly imputed to him for
righteousness. This the Apostle concludes in general, from the example and
instance of Abraham, and makes it the common case of all true Believers,
saying, Rom 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his Faith is counted for righteousness. This being so clear a
Conclusion, what need we add further testimonies? Christ himself said to
Thomas, when he confessed, and said, My Lord, and my God: Thomas, because thou
have seen me, thou have John 20. 28. 29
believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. Where
note two things: first, Thomas his Faith in applying Christ to himself,
saying, My Lord, and my God: and secondly, Christ's deduction, showing the same
Faith to be in every true believer, the property of which Faith, is, to apply
Christ to himself, as Thomas did, and to say with the voice of faith,
confessing Christ, in his death and resurrection, testified by those scarres in
his sacred side, My Lord, and my God.

In a word, all those The most ancient and authenticke Creeds require explicit
faith in Christ, and the promises of God in him.
Creeds used in the Church from all antiquity, do unanimously, and with one
joint consent, confirm this Catholic truth of that special explicit,
clear, particular Faith in Christ, required in every true believer. For first
of all, they do all say, I believe in God, etc. not, We believe. So the
Apostles Creed: the Nicene Creed says, I believe in one God, etc. not, We
believe. Athanasius his Creed says, Whosoever will be saved, before all
things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith, etc. that is, Every
man in particular must believe. And this particular Faith is required, not only
in regard of every believer, but also in regard of the special object of
Faith; which is no confused, or universal (I wot not what object) but a
special object, to wit, the saving knowledge of God in Christ, and the promise
of life in him. Look upon all the Creeds, which the Fathers call the object of
Faith, as containing the sum of that which we are to believe to our
salvation; and do they not mainely present to our Faith, Jesus Christ, and him
crucified? Nor this only in general, that Christ is the redeemer of the
world; but the specialties of this redemption are set down; to teach us, That
not a general implicit faith will serve the turn, but it must be a
particular explicit faith, comprehending all those particulars in the Creed,
declared at large in the Word of God. Thus the foundation of Popish uncertainty
of Faith being removed, to wit, a certain uncertain implicit general faith:
the building it self threatens immediate ruin.

CHAP. XIV. Of the uncertainty of Romane-Catholicke Faith.
THe Council of Trent being in general an enemy to the certainety of Faith,
which gives a true believer an assurance of his salvation: and withal
considering how evident both Scriptures and Fathers were in this point, so
strongly propugned and maintained by Luther* and thirdly the Council it self
in the canuase of this point, while it was in consultation, or rather in
contention, being divided into contrary parties and sides, some holding for
certainety, as Catarinus, and others for uncertainty, as Vega, and others; as
the History of the same Council does notably discover. Therefore Histor.
Council. Trid. lib. 2.
it became the politic spirit of the Council to use all cautelous
circumspection in the definite concluding of this point, contriuing it under
such vmbratilous and sub-obscure terms, as that they might seem neither
grossly to oppose the open truth, nor yet displease that party of the
Council, that seemed to incline to the truths side, nor yet leave Luther
uncondemned for defending the truth, nor yet betray their own cause, which was
to advance the uncertainty of Romane-Catholicke Faith: Uncertainty being the
very hint, which gave occasion to the Serpent boldly to insult, and so to
overthrow mankind. For when Eve said, lest ye dye: the Serpent finding her
staggering, takes the advantage, and strikes her with a downright blow to the
ground, Ye shall not dye at all.

But let us see the mystery of Trents iniquity in their wily winding up this
bottomless bottom of their implicit Faith Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
in the uncertainty of it. In the ninth Chapter of the sixth Session they have
these words, Quamuis necessarium sit credere, neque remitts, neque remissa
vnquam fuisse peccata, nisi gratis diuinae misericordia propter Christum:
nemini tamen fiduciam, and certitudinem remissionis peccatorum suorum iactanti,
and in ea sola qui^scenti, peccata dimitti, vel dimissa esse, dicendum est: cum
apud Haereticos, and Schismaticos possit esse, imo nostra tempestate sit, and
magna contra Ecclesiam Catholicam contentione praedicetur vana haec; and ab
omni pietate remota, fiducia. Sed neque illud asserendum est, oportere eos, qui
vere iustificati sunt, absque vlla omnino dubitatione apud semetipsos statuere
se esse iustificatos, neminemque a peccatis absolui, nisi eum, qui certo credat
se absolutum and iustificatum esse: atque hac sola fide absolutionem and
iustificationem perfici; quasi qui hoc non credidit, de Dei promissis, deque
mortis and resurrectionis Christi efficacia dubitet. Nam sicut nemo pius de Dei
misericordia, de Christi merito, de Sacramentorum virtute and efficacia
dubitare debet: sic quilibet, dum seipsum suamque propriam infirmitatem, and
indispositionem respicit, de sua gratia formidare, and timere potest: Cum
nullus scire valeat certitudine fidei, cui non potest subesse falsum, se
gratiam Dei esse consequutum. Thus far the whole ninth Chapter. That is,
Although it be necessary to believe, that sins neither are, nor ever were
remitted, but freely by divine mercy for Christ: yet no man boasting of
confidence and certainty of the remission of his sins, and therewith wholly
No rest or peace to the wicked.
resting, ought to say, that his sins are, or have been remitted: seeing this
vain confidence, void of all piety, both may be amongst Heretics, and
Schismatickes, yea and is now in these our days, and is preached with great
contention Certainty of faith a great adversary to Romane-Catholickes.
against the Catholic Church. But neither is that to be affirmed, that they
who are truly justified, ought without any doubting at all to conclude with
themselves, that they are justified, and that none is absolved and justified
from sins, but he that certainly believes that he is absolved and justified:
and that in this sole faith, absolution and justification consists; as if a
man not believing this, should doubt of the promises of God, and of the
efficacy of Christ's death and resurrection. For as no godly man ought to doubt
of the mercy of God, of the merit of Christ, and of the The Pontifician Opus
operatum yoaked with Gods mercy and Christ's merit.
power and efficacy of the Sacraments; so every man, while he looks upon
himself, and his own proper infimity and indisposition, may be Faith of
fearful Devils approved and commended.
afraid and fearful of his own grace: seeing no man can know by the
certainty of faith, wherein there may not lie some error, that he has obtained
the grace of God.

Now I desire the Christian indicious Reader to observe the sundry passages,
and as it were the several threads of this Copwebbe. First, like the painted
Whore, she sets afaire face or preface upon the matter, as attributing
remission of sins to Gods mercy for Christ, which every one must necessarily
believe (she could say no less, though in the vp-shot of the matter, she would
have men to believe nothing less) but in the next place she comes with a
by-blow, and condemns the confidence and assurance of faith, under the terms
of boasting. And therefore prefixeth this title before the Chapter; Contra
inanem Haereticorum fiduciam: Against the vain confidence of Heretics: A
notable pack of cunning, well beseeming the mystery of iniquity. They do not
go bluntly to work, to beat downright that confidence and certain
assurance, which is in a true justifying faith, but slily they wound it, as
Ioab did Ab^er under the fifth ribbe, as being in none but him, that vainly
boasts and braggeth of the assurance of his justification. Indeed, if this
assurance were nothing else but a vain confidence and boasting, they say
something. But while they join this certainty and assurance of Faith with
vain boasting, they plainly discover their masked hypocrisy, by mixing and
confounding the pure gold of Faith, with man's dross, as if they were both one,
to be faithfully assured, and vainly confident. But this assurance, whatsoever
it is, it must be in Heretics, and Schismatickes, Catholics must have
nothing to do with it, as being a vain confidence. Yet vain as it is, they
confess it to be a great and vehement enemy to the Catholic Church; to wit,
the Romane-Catholicke Church. In which Church, none must so certainly believe
the remission of his sins, as to exclude all doubting; especially in regard
of his own indisposition and infirmity, being fearful of his own grace: and
no marvel if such be full of fearful doubtings, that build their salvation
and justification upon their inherent grace. But the conclusion is peremptory,
just like the Serpent's in the third of Genesis, beginning smoothly, but ending
roughly, like the Sotherne wind; Ye shall not dye at all. So Trents
conclusion is, that no man can know by the certainty of faith, whether he have
the grace of God, or no.

Furthermore, the same Council for the confirmation of the said Chapter, to
uphold their tottering uncertainty of faith, has planted three or four
Canons, full charged with Anathemaes. As Can. 12. Si quis dixerit, Fidem
iustificantem nihil Council. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 12.
aliud esse, quam fiduciam diuinae misericordiae, peccata remittentis propter
Christum; vel eam fiduciam solam esse, qua iustificamur: anathema sit: If any
man shall say, that justifying Faith is nothing else, but a trust or confidence
in the mercy of God, remitting finnes for Christ; or that this confidence or
trust is that only, whereby we are justified: let him be accursed. Faith is
then something else, than a trust or confidence in Gods mercy. What else?
namely a diffidence in Gods mercy. And Can. 13. Si quis dixerit, omni hominiad
remissionem peccatorum assequendam necessarium esse, vt credat certo, and
absque vlla haesitatione propriae infirmitatis and indispositionis, peccata
sibi esse remissa; anathema sit: If any shall say, that it is necessary for
every man, for the attainining the remission of sins, to believe certainly,
and without any doubting of his own infirmity and indisposition, that his
sins are remitted: let him be accursed. Note here, another by-blow at the
certainty of Faith, but seeming to be laid upon the shoulders of humane
frailty and indisposition; as if remission of sins depended upon our own
strength and disposition. But I marvel, why the Pontificians so much distrust
their own indisposition, about the certainty of justification, when they so
much dignifie their natural disposition unto justification; save only that
(for the love of their worldly pomp, pleasure, and profit, one special proppe
whereof is their uncertainty, causing the simple seduced people to rest wholly
upon their Priest, Pope, and Purgatory, as their last Sanctuary of their
troubled souls) they are not disposed to give God the glory, and to seal to
themselves the comfort of justification by the certainty of Faith: which
certainty of Faith they must needs extremely hate, when to disgrace it, they
are feign to disparage their own strength and disposition, which otherwise
they do so much deifie and adore. And as if man's disposition in the state of
grace, being accompanied and assisted with grace, came short of that
disposition which goes before grace; and as if man's disposition were not as
able to confirm him in grace, as to prepare him unto grace. But we will not
envy them their indisposition to the assurance of grace, no more than we
admire that grace of theirs, which can give no solid comfort and assurance to
the soul and conscience.

But let us hear what Trent further says, Can. 14. Si quis Can. 14.
dixerit, hominem a peccaetis absolui, ac iustificari ex eo, quod se absolui,
ac iustificari certo credat: aut neminem vere esse iustificatum, nisi qui
credat se esse iustificatum: and hac sola fide absolutionem, and
iustificationem perfici, anathema sit: If any shall say, that a man is
absolved, and justified from sins, in that respect that he certainly
believes he is absolved and justified: or that none is truly justified, but
he that believes he is justified: and that absolution and justification is
perfected by this sole faith: let him be accursed. Note here, that the Council
of Trent differs not one hairs breadth, from denying faith it self to be
absolutely necessary to justification; as we shall more plainly discover her
mind herein hereafter. And Can. 15. Si quis dixerit, hominem renatum and
iustificatum, teneri ex fide ad credendum, se certo esse in numero
praedestinatorum; anathema sit: If any shall say, that a man regenerate and
justified, is bound by faith to believe, that he is certainly in the number of
the predestinate; let him be accursed. And to conclude, the 16. Canon is also
annexed as a blade in this reed: Si quis magnum illud vsque in finem
perseuerantiae donum se certo habiturum, absoluta and infallibili certitudine
dixerit, nisihoc ex specialireuelatione didicerit; anathema sit: If any shall
say, by an absolute and infallible certainty, that he shall certainly have that
great gift of perseverance unto the end, except he shall know this by special
revelation; let him be accursed. Thus have we set down the whole mystery of
Pontifician uncertainty of faith in gross, as we find it engrossed in the
Council of Trent: For the further unfolding whereof, let us consult the
authenticke Commentaries of the Council.

But first, observe we here what a deal of pains they have bestowed about
this one point of Uncertainty; and that partly, for the reasons formerly
alleged in the beginning of this Chapter: but principally do they impugn
this bulwark of the Certainty of faith, because it is a maine opposite to all
their humane inventions, wherewith, as so many rags, they have patched up
their meritorious Capuchin-garment of justification. As the learned Chemnitius
has well observed in his Examen upon this point, saying: Nec sane nullae sunt
cansae, Chemnitij Examen de fide Iustisic.
etc. Nor is it without cause (says he) that the Pontificians do so eagerly
contend for the maintenance of their Uncertainty: for they well perceive, that
the whole negotiation of Pontifician Merchandise, is sustained by this means.
For the conscience, seeking some certain and firm consolation, when it hears
that faith it self, even when it apprehends Christ the Mediator, ought to
doubt of the remission of sins, it begins to devise a mass of inventions, as
vows, pilgrimages, inuocations of Saints, Pardons, Dispensations, Croisadoes,
Bulls, Masses, and a thousand such like, being all but untempered mortar, to
build their Castle of Uncertainty in the Air. The conscience in this case,
being like the unclean spirit in the Gospel, which seeking rest, and finding
none in the wavering Uncertainty of Pontifician faith, takes unto himself
seven other spirits worse than himself, and so the conscience becomes more
unclean, more unsettled than it was before.

Now in the further laying open of this mystery of Uncertainty, if we should
follow the infinite perplexities and windings, which we find in their most
authenticke Commentaries upon this point, we should tread an endless Maze, as
tracing them in their uncertainties. Vega writes a large Commentary upon the
forecited ninth Chapter of this Council of Trent. And Soto spends four large
Chapters upon it. No marvel to see men wander wide in a wilderness of
uncertainty. But we will deal with them, as the Prophet says concerning the
wild Ass. A wilds Ass used to the wilderness, Ier. 2. 24.
that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, in her occasion who can turn her
away? All they that seek her, will not weary themselves, in her month they
shall find her. So these Pontificians, wandering in the wild disconsolate
desert of doubtfulnesse and distrust, snuffing up the wind of vain opinions
at their pleasure, cannot be auerted from their aberrations; and for a man to
pursue them by the foot, were to weary himself: he shall easily find them
out in their month, when and where they disburthen themselves of the fruit
they travailed withal. We will therefore only touch those weighty reasons,
which they bring for the establishing of their uncertainty.

Soto has reserved and marshalled this point of Uncertainty, together with the
arguments of it, in the latter end of his third and last book de natura and
gratia, as being his Roman Triarij, to help at a dead lift. And indeed, the
maine doctrine of justification, has such an inseparable relation to this
point of Certainty, as this being denied and removed, the whole doctrine of
Faith falls to ground. And therefore coming to this point, we may well apply
the Proverb, Ad Triarios iam res redijt: The matter comes now to be tried by
the Triarij, in whom resided the maine shocke, dint, and vpshot of the
battle. As Soto says, Sentio ego pro mea exiguitate Soto de not. and great.
lib. 3. c. 10.
ingenij, etc. I am of opinion, according to the slenderness of my capacity,
that if there were no other argument, that we are not justified by faith
alone, than that hence it would follow, that a man is certain he is in the
state of grace; we should for this only cause deny justification by sole
faith: such is the evidence (says he) that faith makes no man certain of his
salvation. Et tamen aduersarij, etc. And yet the adversaries (says he) by
their perverse argumentation, do even hence especially reason and conclude,
that we are justified by faith alone, because otherwise no man were sure of his
justification: for such a strong evidence do they take it, that every one ought
to be certain of his salvation. Thus Soto. And on the other side Luthersaith:
Etiamsi nihil praeterea peccaetum fuisset Luther. in Genesis cap. 4^.
in doctrina Ponteficia, etc. Although there had been no other fault in the
Pontifician doctrine, than that they taught, that we ought to stagger and
waver, mis-deeming and doubting of the remission of sins, of grace, and our
salvation; yet we had just cause to separate our selves from that Infidel and
mis-beleeuing Church. So he. The case therefore standing thus, between
Certainty and Uncertainty, in the matter of salvation, that thereupon depends
the winning and losing of the field: it concerns both sides to be no less
sollicitous of the well managing of their forces, if not much more than the
ancient Romans, and their opposite enemies the Albanians: Liu. lib. 1. Do^. 1.
when both sides resolved and concluded to pawn their perpetual liberty and
state to each other, upon the success of one conflict between three
twin-brethren, called Horatij, on the one side, and other three twin-brethren,
called Curatij, on the other.

First therefore let us take a view of the state and strength of the
Pontifician party. To omit their many distributions of certitude, as either in
regard of the object, or of the subject, or some divine, some moral, etc.
wherein both Soto and Vega do infinitely confound themselves: take we notice
first in general, what kind of certitude they admit and allow of, and what
they reject and disallow. The certitudes or certainties which they allow of,
are these: First, a certitude of Catholic Faith; to wit, a general Faith
concerning the truth of all things revealed in the Word of God, etc. which
certitude they call a firm and certain assent (though obscure) to the
general truth of Gods Word. And this they Soto de not. and great. lib. 3. c. 10.
call the certitude, in regard of the object, the assent whereof cannot be
deceived: So that they confess a certain general certainty. And this is
suitable and proportionable to that kind of Faith which they hold; namely, a
general Faith. So that their general certainty stands upon very good reason;
for how can their certainty be any other, but general, when their faith is no
other but general? for as he said, As the man Judges 8. 21.
is, so is his strength: So, as the faith is, such is the strength of it.
Certitude therefore being the property of faith (as we shall show hereafter)
then faith being general, the certitude thereof can be no other than general.
Secondly, they do also seem to admit of a certain particular certainty of
faith, but with such limitation, as they make it to be a most uncertain
certainty, such as may be either true or false. To this purpose, Vega defining
certainty to be a certain assent, void of Vega lib. 6. de incertitud. great.
cap. 2.
all doubting, whose proper object is truth; hereupon he thus infers: Itaque
licet certi nequeant proprie dici de sua gratia, nisi qui se certo and vere
credunt esse in gratia: tamen certo assentiri se esse in gratia omnes illas and
possumus, and debemus asserere, qui absque vila cunctatione and trepidatione id
sibi de se persuadent, sieve vere hoc sentiant, sieve falso: Therefore (says
he) though none can properly be said to be certain of their grace, but those
that certainly and truly believe that they are in the state of grace: yet we
may and ought to affirm, that all they do certainly assent they are in the
state of grace, who without all doubt or fear do persuade themselves hereof,
whether their opinion herein be true or false. Et non nunquam etc. And often
times (says he) Philosophers and Divines do so abuse these terms, as that
they affirm, that all that have a certain assent of any thing, are absolutely
and simply persuaded thereof. Quamobrem, etc. Wherefore the Fathers (to wit, of
Trent) in this ninth Chapter, doubted not to say, that Heretics and
Schismatickes do boast of the certainty of the remission of their sins, when
notwithstanding they certainly knew, that that certainety was rather a most
vain persuasion of their Justification. And so Vega concludes: Neque dubium,
quin latin possimus dicere, apud Haereticos nostrae tempestatis non esse suae
gratiae opinionem, sed certitudinem: Nor do we doubt, but that we may say in
plain terms, that the Heritiques of our time have not an opinion of their
grace or justification, but a certainety. Note here (judicious Reader) that the
Pontificians do allow of a certain uncertain particular certainety of Faith,
namely, such as may be either true or false. They might better have said just
nothing: saving that they cautelously put this clause by way of prevention,
that if a particular certainty of Faith be never so manifestly proved, yet it
may prove at hap-hazzard, either true or false. And this Vega would demonstrate
by a distinction, saying, There is a twofold certainty: Per se, or Quoad nos:
Either a certainty in regard of the truth it self believed, or in respect of
our apprehension, which may be deceived; according to the Councels own Text.

In a word, in his fifth Chapter following, he sets down four limitations of
certainety, that are extra controuersiam, without all controversy, allowed of
the Pontificians. First, that every man may have a knowledge of his
justification by divine revelation, and that this has been truly revealed to
some holy men, although but to few, and them Gods greatest familiars, as the
blessed Virgin, and the Apostles. Secondly, it is certain, that all righteous
men may by some certain signs, and probable arguments, or tokens and
conjectures, attain to a probable notice and opinion, or (as they call it) a
coniecturall certitude of their justification. Thirdly (says he) it is
certain, that no mortal man, without divine revelation, can attain in this
life to the certainety of evidence of his justification. Fourthly, it is also
certain, that no man can, without divine revelation, certainly know another
justification, unless happily when he shall have baptized a child.

To these limitations we may here add the substance of that which Vega sets
down in the 46. Chapter of the same book: the title whereof is, Possunt viri
spirituales certitudinem assequi de sua gratia: Spiritual men may attain a
certainty of their grace and justification. By spiritual men, he understands
those that live in a state of perfection, as they term it. Yet this certainety
is so rarely found among such, as (after much ado, and wavering this way and
that way, Vega being uncertain what to think of this certainety) at length
he is resolved upon the point, and gives us a rare instance of Saint Anthony,
whose birth of faithull and religious Parents, whose Christian and holy
education, whose firm faith in believing all which the Church of Rome
believes, whose care not to offend, but to please God in all things, whose
voluntary poverty, whose inoffensiue and innocent life, full of charity, whose
humility, whose daily coming to Mass, and frequent Shrifts, whose watchings
and fastings, and other infinite devotions, induced Vega to think, that this
certainty of salvation may happily be found in some spiritual men. But he must
be a St. Anthony at the least, who is possessed with this certainety. So few
receive this gift, as Christ said of continency. No, not Martyrs themselves,
says Vega, Chapter 43. His words are, Neque adduci possum, vt credam aliquem
Martyrem aut habuisse, aut habere potuisse certitudinem de sua iustificatione,
etc. Nor can I be induced to believe (says he) that any Martyr either had,
or could have the certainety of justification, unless God revealed it unto
him, as also their perseverance, and crown of blessedness laid up for them;
that so they might the more cheerfully and courageously persist in their
confession.

With these limitations do the Pontificians confine their allowance of the
certainty of Justification: First, it is only general, not special or
particular. Secondly, if particular there be any, they say it may be true or
false. Thirdly, this special certainty is given to none, but by special
revelation, and that to some special choice persons; as the blessed Virgin,
and the Apostles. Fourthly, just men may have some coniectural signs, and
probable opinions of their justification. Fifthly, if any had this special
certainty, then certainly St. Anthony; a privilege, which not even the holy
and faithful Martyrs are capable off, without special revelation, says Vega.
His reason is, because even Heretics may be Martyrs, and constantly dye for
Christ. This is the state of Pontifician doctrine about certainety and
uncertainty of faith in justification. Certainety of the true Catholic
faith, opposite to Romish uncertainty.


Against which, we oppose the truth of Catholic doctrine concerning the
certainety of Faith. First, to their first limitation we oppose, That the
certainty of Faith is not general, but particular and special. Secondly, to
the second, that this certainty cannot be false, but always infallibly true:
and that not only in regard of the truth of Gods word in general, which
certainty may be in dogmaticall and historical Faith, but also of Gods
special promises in Christ, which it is the property of saving faith
certainly to apply and appropriate to the believer, that undoubtedly they
belong to him in particular. Thirdly, to the third, that neither this
certainety is simply and only a special divine revelation, nor peculiar only
to a few, but it is the proper virtue of saving and justifying Faith, and is in
every true believer, in whom true saving faith is found. Fourthly, to the
fourth, that this certainety in every man justified, is no coniecturall matter,
gathered by probable signs, but a certain, clear, firm evidence of Faith.
Fifthly, to the fifth, As for St. Anthony, much might his privilege be, as
having the Patronage of Pigs, and Cattle, which the Priests do solemnly on St.
Anthonies day bless in his name, and so they are free from all diseases and
disasters all the year after: and therefore the Pigges Masters or Dames are
very Hogs, if they requite not the Priests pains with the best Pigge. But for
all St. Anthonies works of devotion, if they had been of a far higher and
holier nature, they make but little for this evidence of certainety, but rather
the contrary. For the more a man confides in his good works, the more
unsettled he is in the certainety of justification. And for Martyrs, I mean
Non poena, sed causa facit Martyrium. Euangelium facit Martyrium. Cypri.
Christ's Martyrs if they have not this certainty, then none ever had it. As for
Heretics, they cannot dye for Christ, while they dye in the quarrel of their
Heresy. Thus we have the state of the question on both sides. As for Veg's
fourth allegation in his fifth Chapter forementioned, That no man can
certainly know, but by special revelation, whether another man be justified
or no, this is impertinent to the present purpose, and so we leave it extra
controuersiam.

But display we our forces now in the open field, and try we our cause by the
dint of truth. First, that the Pontificians should so stiffly stand for their
uncertainty of Faith, they have great reason, in regard it is the strongest
supporter (uncertain as it is) of the Tower of Babell, as we touched before. A
troubled unsettled conscience like the troubled sea. Jude 13.
It is the troubled Sea, where Romes Peter-men find the best fishing. As the
Jews said of Christ, ^f we let him thus alone, all the world will go after
him, and the Romans will come and take away our kingdom: so the Roman
Pontificians may say, If we should allow of certainty of Faith, all the people
would forsake us, and we should lose our Kingdom. What would become then of
the merchandise of souls, of Purgatory-Masses, and Dirges, and Trentals, so
rich a trade in Romes Court, if the People might purchase salvation by faith,
yea, and rest assured of it, without any dependence of humane inventions?

But let us examine the former limitations of Pontifician certainty apart.
First, they admit only of a general certainty, but no particular. And reason
good: for (as we said) their Vega de incertitud. great. c. 25.
Faith is only general. And this their certainty they place in the
understanding, as they do also their faith. The object of this certainty, is
the general truth of Gods Word. So that this is such a certainty, as the very
Devils and damned may have: for they believe and tremble. Why? but because they
are certainly persuaded of the truth of Gods Word. And as the Pontifician faith
is common with the wicked: so also their certainty, which is the fruit of such
faith. Secondly, in that they say, that certainty may be true or false,
according to the disposition of him in whom it is; this is absurd. For, how can
a thing be certain, and yet false, unless it be certainly false, or a false
certainety? Certainety and falsehood are incompatible, and merely opposite.
Indeed it is one thing to be certain, another to seem certain, which
seeming certainty is nothing else but opinion. Thirdly, that they deny
certainty of faith in justification, but by special revelation; this agrees
with their maine doctrine of faith, which indeed has no other certainty in it,
than such as is in the reprobate: and whereas they restrain their special
revelation to some few, this shows the iniquity of Pontificians, in making a
Monopoly of Gods grace, and indeed a mere nullity of saving Council. Trid.
Sess. 6. can. 15.
Faith. Fourthly, their probable conjectures of their justification, are
altogether abhorrent from the nature of Faith in Christ, and mere illusions.
Such probabilities are impossibilities of salvation. But it is a good reason
for the Pontificians, why they should deny certainty of Faith, if the best
certainty be only coniecturall probability. Fifthly, say they, only spiritual
men, living in the state of perfection, (as devout St. Anthony) may have a
certainety of salvation, built upon his good life. This is another strong
reason, why Pontificians exclude certainty of Faith of salvation, seeing it is
rather grounded upon good works. To these they add two other reasons, why no
man can be certain of his justification, because (say they) The reason is
naught, if he mean that the knowledge of predestination must precede the
knowledge of our justification. For we do not therefore believe our
justification, because we must first know our predestination: but we come to
know our predestination by the fruit of it, justification.
no man by the evidence of faith, can be certain of his predestination: For,
indeed if a man cannot by faith be certain of his predestination, he cannot
be certain of his justification. The reason is good. Lastly, say they, a man
cannot be certain of his justification, that is not certain of his
perseverance in grace to the end. But no man (say they) can be sure of
perseverance: Therefore no man can be sure of his salvation. These two last
reasons are inferred upon the fifteenth and sixteenth Canons of the Council of
Trent. Thus have we in general, as it were in a light velitation or skirmish,
spent a small volley upon the Pontifician forces, which march against
certainety of faith. Come we now to join the maine battle; wherein we will
observe this order of sight: first, we will show the weakness of those
arguments they bring for their uncertainty: secondly, we will make good, and
fortify those arguments, authorities, and reasons, wherewith the Catholic
truth of the certainty of faith, is maintained and confirmed.

First, for the Pontifician reasons and allegations for their uncertainty of
faith, we find sundry of them set down in the history of the Council of
Trent, together with the Histor. Council. Trid. lib. 2.
answers unto them, forced from the Canuase of the opposite parties: some
holding, that the opinion of certainety of grace was an intolerable arrogance:
others, that that certainty in its kind was meritorious. The first of these
were for the most part Dominicans, grounding their opinion of uncertainty upon
the authority of Thomas Aquinas, Bonauenture, and the Schoolmen. Also upon
reason, saying, That God would not make man certain of grace, lest swelling
with pride, and opinion of himself, he should despise others; as knowing
himself to be righteous, and others notorious sinners. Also, that Christians
would grow sleepy, sloathfull, and careless of good works. In which respect
incertitude of grace was profitable, yea meritorious. For perturbation, or
trouble of mind, is that which at first afflicts men; but to those that have
learned to bear it, it becomes at length meritorious. Besides, they cite
places of holy Scripture; as out of Solomon, That man knows not whether he be
worthy of hatred or love: out of the Book of Wisdom, That a man must never
be free from fear of sin, that it is pardoned: out of the Apostle, That we
must work out our salvation with fear and trembling: and that St. Paul
professes of himself, that though his conscience did not accuse him, yet he
was not therefore justified. These reasons and testimonies, besides many others
(says the History) did chiefly Seripandus, Vega, and Soto allege and amplify
out of the Fathers.

On the other side (says the History) Catarinus with Marinarus, did out of the
same Fathers allege places to the contrary, that it might appear, that the
Fathers, as they saw occasion, did attemper their Sermons to the present
occasions; sometimes to animate the doubtful and dejected, sometimes to
repress the presumptuous, still submitting themselves to the authority of the
Word of God. They said (to wit, Catarinus and Marinarus) that as often as
Christ is observed in the Gospel to forgive sins, so often he said, Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. And that it seemed absurd, that Christ
would minister to any man occasion of presumption or pride, or to deprive all
of that, which might be matter of profit or merit. Also, that the Scripture
bound us to give thanks to God for our justification, which unless we be sure
we have received, with what face (yea with what affection) shall we give
thanks? Since it is folly to acknowledge a benefit, which thou know not,
whether it be given thee or no. Surely St. Paul does clearly enough affirm
this certainety, when he would have the Corinthians sensible, that Christ is in
them, unless they be reprobates; and when he says, that therefore we have
received the spirit of God, that by him we might understand, what is given us
of God. And again more plainly, That the holy spirit does bear witness to
our spirit, that we are the Sons of God. And that it is also a part of great
impudency, to accuse those of presumption, that believe the holy Ghost speaking
unto them. Ambrose affirming, that the holy spirit does never speak unto us,
but withal it makes known unto us, that it is himself that speaks. And
Christ says in John, That the world cannot receive the holy Spirit, because it
neither sees nor knows him; but his Disciples should know, that he should
be and abide in them. Whence (says the History) Catarinus did very wittily
conclude, that that man dreamed, who affirmed that grace was voluntarily
received, and yet that a man knew not whether he has it or no: as if to the
receiving of a thing by a voluntary motion of the mind, it were not necessary,
that he which receives it of his own accord, should know, that both the thing
is given unto him, and that he truly receives it, and being received,
possesses it.

The History further says: the weight of these reasons forced those, which
before accused this opinion of rashness, first to give place, and then thus
far to yield, that although for the most part a man cannot have assurance in
this point, yet he may seem at least to have some conjecture. They also denied
not certainty to Martyrs, nor to the newly Baptized, and to others being
assured by special Revelation: and that which at first they called conjecture,
they were afterward brought to call moral faith. Yea Vega himself, who in
the beginning admitted only of probability, yielding to the weight of reasons,
began to favor certainty; but lest he might seem to approach too near the
opinion of the Lutherans, he did profess only so great certainty, as might
exclude all doubting, and could not deceive: but he would not acknowledge it
for the Christian faith, but only humane and experimental. And declaring his
opinion by a similitude: As (quoth he) he that has heat, is certain that he
has it, and he were void of sense, if he should doubt of it: So he that has
grace in himself, does feel it, nor can he doubt, but that he feels it;
but in the sense and apprehension of his soul, not by divine revelation. But
the other Patrons of certainty, being compelled of the adversaries, to set
down their meaning in express and plain terms, whether they believed, that
man might have certainty of grace, or whether they thought a man bound to
believe it, and whether that faith were divine or humane: at length they
professed, seeing that faith was given by the testimony of the holy Ghost, that
it could not be left to man's liberty, and seeing every man is bound to believe
divine revelations, that that faith was no otherwise to be called, than divine.

And when they seemed to be pressed with the straits of the Dilemma, which was
objected; to wit, that that faith was either equal to the Catholic faith, or
unequal; if it be not equal, then it excluded not all doubtfulnesse; if
equal, then that a righteous man ought as firmly to believe he is justified,
as the very Articles of his Creed. Catarinus answered, that this faith was
divine, and as certain excluding all doubtfulnesse, as the Catholic faith it
self; but yet that it is not the very Catholic faith. For that faith, which
every man gives to divine revelations made unto him, is also divine, and
excludes all doubt: but when the Church receives these revelations, then that
faith becomes universal and Catholic; yet in regard of certainty and
freedom from doubting, every man's private faith is no way inferior unto it,
but that the Catholic faith exceedes this only in the universality. Thus all
the Prophets had first a private faith concerning all things revealed unto them
of God, then after that, they were received of the Church, they had the
Catholic faith of the same things. This opinion (says the History) at the
first sight, seemed hard even to the sauourers of Catarinus; to wit, all the
Carmelites, whose Doctor John Bacon did maintain it; as also to the Bishops of
Senogalia, Wigornia, and Salpia, to whom at first that degree of faith seemed
to be precipitious and perilous; but afterward having diligently weighed and
examined the force of the reasons, it was approved with an admirable consent of
the most approved of the Bishops: but Soto crying out, that it was too
favorable to the Lutherans; others again affirming, that Luther was not to be
condemned, if he had said, that this faith does follow after justification: but
condemned, for saying it is the justifying faith.

And as for the reasons brought on the contrary part, they answer, that we
ought not to give heed to the judgments of the Note the judgment of some
Pontificians themselves concerning their Schoolmen.
Schoolmen, seeing they take the grounds of their opinion from Philosophical
reasons: since humane Philosophy may judge amiss of divine instinct. Again,
that Salomons authority makes not for this purpose. He that would draw these
words [No man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred] to this
purpose, then he should conclude hence, that every most wicked sinner
continuing in his sins, should not know whether he be hated of God or no. And
much less is that saying of Wisdom to be applied to this purpose; and that
there is a fallacy in the Greek word (...), which does not signify sin
already remitted (as it is in the vulgar translation) but the expiation and
propitiation for sin; and the words of the wise man do admonish the sinner,
not to heap up sin upon too much confidence of obtaining pardon, and not of
pardon already obtained. Nor must we ground an Article of faith upon an error
of a Translator. (Such was the judgment in those times concerning the vulgar
edition, of those that had made it authentical, which is easy to be observed
by the As we noted before out of Vega, rejecting the vulgar latin, when it
makes not for his turn.
books set forth by those, which were present at the decree of the
approbation.) Also that the phrase of the Apostle ( work out with fear and
trembling) is an Hebraisme, which does not enforce a doubtfulnesse, but
reverence, or godly fear; for as much as even servants do exhibit fear and
trembling to their Masters, with whom they are dear and gracious. Finally,
that the place of Saint Paul made for them, if it be taken for justification.
For that he says, he is guilty of no defect, and yet that he is not therefore
justified; a man may easily infer, that he was justified another way, which
confirms certainty. But the true meaning of the words is, that St. Paul
speaking of defect in his function of preaching the Gospel, does affirm, that
his conscience does not accuse him of any omission; nor is he therefore so
confident, as that he dare say, that he has performed all the parts of his
office, but commits the whole judgment to God.

And so the History concludes thus: He that has not looked into the opposite
writings of those, that were present at these disputations, and which the
authors themselves were careful to commit to print upon this argument; would
scarce believe, how many things were discussed about this Article, and with
what ardency, not only of the Divines, but also of all the Bishops, who were
persuaded that their opinion was right, and that they had hit upon the truth:
So that the Cardinal of St. Cross, saw that many had more need of a bridle
than of spurs; and by frequent digressions from the purpose, and passages to
other questions, he often would express his desire of putting an end to this
controversy. It was twice propounded in the Synod of the Prelates, to
relinquish altogether this question, as being ambiguous, long, and tedious: yet
affection bearing sway, they fell back upon it again. Thus far the History;
which though somewhat long, yet I hope the Reader will not think it more
tedious in the reading of it, than I have done in the inserting of it: which I
have the rather done, that it might the more appear, how, this point of
certainty (having on the one side evidence of truth to confirm it, and on the
other, humane wit and affection to oppugn it) did puzzle and perplexe the
whole Synod, and fill them full of uncertainties. We see those reasons and
authorities alleged by the adverse faction, who were for uncertainty, very
acutely and pregnantly answered by In this Council of Trent, if the most
learned and judicious of them, had not been ouerswayed by humane affection, no
doubt, but the truth had prevailed in a great measure.
Catarinus, and those with him. Also whereas they catched here and there at
some passages of the Fathers, seeming to favor their doctrine of uncertainty:
it is well noted by the History, that the Fathers might sometimes by
accommodating their exhortations to the people, as the occasion required,
repress the insolency of such as were presumptuous, and vainly confident in
the assurance of their salvation, howsoever they continued in sin: whereas
the Fathers in their maine discourses of faith, speak most clearly in the
confirmation of the certainty of justification, as we shall see hereafter.

Come we now to Vega's incounters with the certainty of faith: he takes great
pains to beat the air, what with answering, what with urging arguments for
his Pontifician Goddess Uncertainty, now an Article of Romes faith. He
undertakes, according to his rare dexterity, to answer all opposites, and to
expound or moderate the meaning of such authorities, as are alleged out of the
Scriptures or Fathers; Vega lib. 9. de incertitud. great.
making them by some pretty quaint distinction, to speak just as him lists.
The first place he brings for his uncertainty, is out of Job 9. 20. If I
justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me; if I say, I am perfect,
it shall also prove me perverse. Vega makes much ado about this place, fending
and proving: but the very sight of the Text is sufficient to confute his folly,
in applying it to his uncertainty of justification, when as this place does
give such a deadly wound to their justification it self by their inherent
righteousness, which holy Job here utterly disclaimeth. But does Job here
utter one syllable of the uncertainty of his faith, in God his Savior and
Redeemer? Nay, does he not protest the contrary? Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him. And verse. 18. Behold, Job 13. 15.
now I have ordered my cause, I know that I shall be justified. Who is he that
will plead with me? What clearer testimony could this holy man give of his
strong confidence and assurance of his justification by faith in God? So that I
marvel Vega would at all meddle with the example of Job, who throughout his
book is such a clear mirror of a true believer, whose faith is fortified
with all confidence and assurance: saving that he can easily impute Jobs
certainty to a special revelation, and not to the property of faith. But let
not Vega with his iugling, by casting a false mist, think so easily to eclipse
the clear beams of truth.

With the like success he is tampering with David and Solomon. He alleges
that of David, Who can understand his errors? Hereupon he infers, if a man
do not know his sins, how can he be sure of his justification? To this
allegation, we need use no other answer, but Bernards exposition, which Vega
himself both obiecteth, and takes upon him to answer, that these words of
David are understood only of venial sins, not of mortal. This Vega
confessing to be verisimile; very probable, and likely to be true: yet
answers, that seeing mortal sins are more truly and properly sins, and
do more defile the soul, than venial sins, why should these words be
restrained only to venial sins? I will not now enter into a discussion of
venial and mortal sins, a distinction most grossly and impiously abused by
the Pontificians: but this I say, that according to the judgment of
Pontificians of venial sins, they must needs confess, that these words
David must be meant only of venial sins: that is, such as the Pontificians
call venial. The very word in the vulgar Latin will bear no other sense,
Delicta, which signifies slippes, or errors, or certain defects, and
omissions, such as the Pontificians rank amongst their venial sins. But
this place of David makes nothing at all against certainty of faith. For what
if a man, yea the holiest man, if David do not know his sins, his slippes,
and errors? yet while he complains hereof, and confesses them in general
unto God, praying, O cleanse thou me from my secret faults: what hinders, but
that God cleansing him from all his faults, should seal unto him the certainty
of the remission of all his sins, apprehended by a lively faith? As David says
in the 32. Psalm, Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered, etc. But how shall a man come to be certain of this his
blessedness? David instanceth it in himself, verse. 5. I acknowledged my sin
unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin. How
did David know that God had forgiven his sins, seeing he says peremptorily,
Thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin? Did not David know this by the
certainty of faith? Vega, I know, has his answer at his fingers ends, and will
say, that David came to know this either by special divine revelation, or else
by Nathans pronouncing David's absolution, saying, The Lord has put away thy
sin. Yea, but David tells us in the next words, that this was not his case
alone, but it was common to every godly man in particular: For this (says
David) shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may
be found. that is, Every godly man should have the like comfortable success
upon his repentance, as David had, and say with confidence, as David did, Thou
forgauest the transgression of my sin.

But Vega, suspecting the strength, of the Father's authority, he adds thereto
the Sons; to wit, Salomons, Pro. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from my sin? Quis, Who? That is, few or none, says Vega;
since interrogations in Scripture, and in the Fathers, are commonly taken for
negations. And he produces Hieromes exposition, upon the second of Joel, Who
knows, if God will repent, and pardon? Quod ait, Quis? etc. That he says,
Who? it is to be thought either impossible, or very hard. For Salomons saying,
Who can say, I have made my heart clean? True: who can say it? yea I challenge
all the Pontificians in the world: which of them, for all his satisfactory
merits, can assure himself, that he has made his heart clean? Vega shall not
need to seek out authorities to prove, that by Who, is meant none, or scarce
any. For we will easily grant to Vega, that never a Pontifician of them all,
not one, can say, and that truly, and with assurance of his own conscience,
that he has made his heart clean.

But Vega (as it seems) distrusting the former evidences, as not clear and
certain enough to confirm his uncertainty; he adds an impregnable argument,
saying, Si hoc non sufficiat testimonium, etc. If this testimony be not
sufficient, certainly that which Solomon writes in his Ecclesiastes, should
satisfy all men. What is that? Eccles. 9. 1. Sunt iustiatque sapientes, and
operaeorum in manu Dei: and tamen nescit homo, vtrum amore an odio dignus sit;
sed omnia in futurum seruantur incerta, eo quod vniuersa eueniant iusto, and
impio, etc. So runs the vulgar Latin: that is, There are righteous and wise
men, and their works are in the hands of God: and yet man knows not, whether
he be worthy of love or hatred; but all things for the time to come are kept
uncertain, seeing that all things come alike to the just, and to the wicked,
etc. First, concerning this place, which Vega brings to satisfy all men, any
reasonable man would have thought Vega himself had been satisfied with the
pregnant answer of Catarinus, and others in the Council, to this very place.
Well; but let us see further the vanity of Vega's argument gathered from this
place. First, we must know, that here (as elsewhere in infinite places) the
(...)
vulgar Latin swarueth extremely and senslesly from the original. The
original goes thus word for word, No man knows either love or hatred, by all
that is before them; as our last English Translation (the most exact of all
other) has rendered it. So that the sense is clear, That no man by these
outward things, which are before us, or in our sight, can know either the love
or hatred of God toward him: and the reason is added, All things come alike to
all, and there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked, etc. But
whereas the vulgar Latin says, All things for the time to come are kept
uncertain: first, there is no such thing in the original: and besides, to
strain these words to Vega's sense, or the Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 12.
quoted in the Margent.
Council of Trents, to prove the uncertainty of man's salvation, is to wring
blood from them, and to turn a man's inside outward, as if the certainty of
salvation depended upon the uncertainty of outward worldly things, as poverty,
and riches, health, and sickness, prosperity, and adversity; which come alike
to all men, righteous and wicked, yea Heathen and Christians: yea, and if
Vega's sense stood good, then it should follow (as we alleged before out of
the History) that the most wicked men, living and continuing, and obstinately
persisting in sin, and impenitency, should not know whether they were worthy
of Gods hatred or no; whereas even the most ignorant Heathen has an accusing
and condemning conscience Romans (...)
within him, that tells him he is worthy of the hatred, and not of the love of
God. So that Vega, for all his winding wit, and wrangling about this place,
does but laterem lauare, spend his labor in vain, thinking to win credit
and authority to his uncertainty from this place of Solomon. As if Solomon in
his Ecclesiastes should recant what he had writ in his Proverbs, where he
says, That the wicked fly, when no man Pro. 28. 1.
pursues: but the righteous are bold as a Lion: If the righteous (and none are
righteous, but those that be justified) be as bold as a Lion, then certainly
they are not appalled with fears and doubts, and the uncertainty of their
estate: for that were with the wicked to fly, when none pursues, being
afraid at the very shadow of their guilty conscience.

Vega runs on in his Uncertainty; he fights as one that Vega l. 9. de incert.
great c. 11.
beats the air (to use that phrase of the Apostle:) and in his eleventh
Chapter of the same Book, he heapeth up sundry testimonies: first, out of
Daniel 4. 27. Peccata tua el^emosynis redime, and iniquitates tuas
misericordijs pauperum; for sitan ignoscet delictis tuis: So runs the vulgar
Latin. But the Original runs thus: Break off thy sins by righteousness,
and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor: So Pagnin himself renders
it by Vega's own confession. ibid.
if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. But we need not in this place
quarrel the vulgar Latin: that is, Redeem thy sins by alms, and thine
iniquities by mercy to the poor: perhaps God will pardon thy sins. What
makes all this for Vega's uncertainty of Faith? For it is not required that the
certainty Note here, how impertinent this place is for Vega: since he would
prove by it uncertainty of faith of a man's own salvation, whereas the place
speaks of Daniels uncertainty of another salvation.
of Faith should extend to the certain discovery of another justification:
suffice it, that true Faith does assure a man's self of his own justification.
But Daniel there speaks not of any uncertainty of remission of sins in him*
that has it, but in a wicked man, that as yet has it not. Again, by redeeming
of a man's sins by Alms, is not meant a meritorious expiation of sin by
satisfaction to God, but this redeeming may be understood of making
restitution to the wronged, which is a testimony of Repentance, as we see in
the example of Zacheus. Or this redeeming might be in regard of preventing
temporal judgments. Ahab, upon his hypocritical humiliation, obtained a
repriuall of Gods sentence against him, though not an absolute discharge. So
propitious is God to the true humiliation of a faithful man, when not even the
painted image of piety goes unrewarded.

The like place he produces out of Joel 2. 14. Quis scit, si conuertatur, and
ignoscat, etc. Who knows, whether he will return and repent, and leave a
blessing behind him? The like also out of Jonah 3. 9. Who knows, if God will
return and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?
Both these places are of one nature with that of Daniel; being understood of
temporal punishments, and that threatened to others, nothing concerning the
certainty of Faith in the remission of a man's own sins. Nor unlike is that
place he alleges out of Acts 8. 22. where Peter says to Simon, Repent of
this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may
be forgiven thee. Peter speaks not of the uncertainty of his own Faith in the
remission of his own sins: but of that wicked Simon. Peter knew that Repentance
and Prayer to God was a special means to procure pardon of sins; and
therefore exhorts Simon to repent and pray: yet withal Peter knew, that not
every repentance obtains pardon at Gods hands, no more than that of Judas, or
that of Esau, who for all his tears was rejected. But let us hear Vega's
judgment upon this place: Cur Prophetae isti, and Petrus, qui constantissime
praedicabant Deum misericordem esse, and valde praestabilem super hominum
malitijs, istis haesitationis notis vtebantur, nisi vt docerent, non leuiter
oportere credere nos esse iustificatos, neque statim ad qualemcunque
poenitentiam debere nobis-metipsis promittere remissionem peccatorum? that is:
Why did those Prophets, and Peter (who most constantly preached that God is
merciful, and very ready to forgive the sins of men) use these notes of
hesitation or doubting, but to teach us that we should not lightly believe that
we are justified, nor presently upon any kind of Repentance, that we ought to
promise to our selves pardon of our sins? Thus far Vega's inference is
pretty tolerable, referring his uncertainty of the pardon of sins, to any
slight or ouerly Repentance. Herein he jumps with that, which we said even
now, of Judas and Esau's repentance. And besides, faith of justification is not
a light belief. But shall we hear Vega express his mind clearly and
ingenuously, without any ambiguity? He adds: Mihi quidem (vt ingenue dicam,
quod sentio) sic olim locuti Prophetae isti, videntur, vt iam tum deterrerent
iust^s ab ista certitudine remissionis suorum peccatorum (quam quidam his
temporibus iustificatis omnibus perswadere moliti sunt) and ea forma loquentes,
arma nobis subministrasse videntur, quibus omnes hos, vt fic dicam,
certitudinarios reuinceremus: that is, It seems to me (that I may ingenuously
speak, what I think) those Prophets did heretofore speak thus, that they
might then skare righteous men from that certainety of the remission of their
sins (which certainty, certain in these times have labored to persuade all
those that are justified of) and speaking in that form, they seem to convey
weapons into our hands, whereby we should vanquish all these certitudinaries
(as I may so say) or patronizers of the certainty of faith.

Now welfare Vega yet, for his candid ingenuity, that he vtters his mind
plainly as he thinks. How is it possible else, that ever we should have
discovered the corruption of his heart in this point: as first, to make no
difference between the righteous and the wicked; and to draw an argument from
the example of wicked men, as Nabuchadnezzar, Simon Magus, and such like, that
because their repentance was doubtful, and so consequently the pardon of their
sins; that therefore the righteous and godly men should be deterred and
afraid of the certainety of the remission of their sins upon their true
faith and repentance? And whereas he thereupon triumphs, that these kinds of
forms of speech used by the Prophets, and the Apostles, are weapons put into
the hands of Pontificians, wherewith to beat down the maintainers of
certainety: what are these weapons, but such Withes and flaxen Coards,
wherewith Dalilah thought to bind Sampson, and so to betray him into the hands
of the uncircumcised? But as Sampson, having his seven Nazaraicall locks still
upon his head brake them all as rotten tow: so the truth of Faith cannot be
bound, having the seven spirits of God, whereby it retains invincible
strength. But the best is, Vega dare not peremptorily conclude it, but only
says, out of his ingenuity, that the Prophets seemed to him to speak so, Multa
videntur, and non sunt.
and that they seemed to convey such weapons into the Pontificians hands. We
will therefore let these pass as seeming arguments, well beseeming
Pontificians to use as their best weapons.

To these he adds a place out of Ecclesiasticus, as the manner of Pontificians
is, to equal Apocryphal Books with Canonical Scriptures, accounting them
equally Canonical, as they do also with as good reason their Apostolic
Traditions. But we will not here take up the quarrel with them in this point.
Nor need we to be afraid of the place which Vega alleges: which is, De
propitiato peccato, noli esse sine metu: Eccle 5. 5.
Of sin pardoned, be thou not without fear. This place also was answered in
the Council by Catarinus, as we have recited before, out of the History. For
it is not spoken of sin already pardoned, but de propitiatu peccatorum, of the
future pardoning of sins, as the vulgar Latin (set forth by the Doctors of
Louan) has noted in the Margin, and Vega himself adds the same, in the
variety of reading. And the sequel of that place is clear and evident, that a
sinner must not be bold to commit sin, upon presumption of pardon. And
therefore it is expressed in the future tense, even in the vulgar: Et ne dicas,
miseratio Dei magna est, multitudinis peccatorum meorum miserebitur: And say
not thou, the mercy of God is great, he will pardon the multitude of my
sins. So little makes this place for Pontifician uncertainty, as it also no
whit crosses the certainty of faith; whose property is not to presume that God
will be merciful, though I sin, but to believe that God is merciful to me
upon my present repentance.

And for that of the Apostle [ I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
iustified] urged by Vega for his uncertainty, in his 12. Chapter, I refer the
Reader to the answer made before in the History of the Council, which is sound
and good; and needs not any thing to be added unto it, although Vega spend a
whole large Chapter about it, but all to no purpose in the world, but to
exercise his unlimited liberty to say what he list.

But having thus raked the Scriptures together, to make a heap of testimonies
for the confirmation of his uncertainty; he proceeds in his 13. Chapter, to the
authorities or the ancient Fathers. To which in brief, to avoid tediousness,
we may answer in general, as the History has well noted, that the Fathers
sometimes did attemper their speech to the depressing of the proud and
presumptuous, as if either men had no sin at all in them, or that sinning,
they had Gods mercy at command. And we are to note also, that where the Fathers
speak of the uncertainty of man's justification, or rather of the certainty of
their unrighteousness; it is most evident and clear, that then they speak of
man's righteousness of sanctification, wherein they are never perfect in this
life. But I cannot here omit to set down one special place, wherein Vega much
triumphs, taken out of St. Augustine. Vega's words are these: Inter omnia,
quae legerim in Augustino, apertissime Aug. in. Psalm. 50 or 51. verse. 8.
proposito nostro fauent, quae, etc. Among all, which I have read in Augustine,
those words do most clearly favor our purpose, which he writes upon the
exposition of those words, Incerta and occulta sapientiae tuae manifestasti
mihi: that is, Thou have revealed unto me the uncertain and hidden things of
thy wisdom. Whereupon Augustine says; Quae incerta? Quae occulta? Quia Deus
ignoscit talibus peccatoribus confitentibus, and punientibus sua peccata: What
uncertainty? What hidden things? Because God does pardon such: to wit, sinners
confessing, and punishing As Aug. de vera and falsa poe^itentia c. 19
expresses himself: saying, Poenitere est poenam tenere, vt semper puniat in
se vlciscendo, quod commisit peccando: ille poenam tenet, qui semper punit,
quod commisisse dolet. tom. ^.
(or repenting of) their sins. And Augustine adds, as Vega also alleges;
Nihil tam occultum, nihil tam incertum: Nothing so secret, nothing so
uncertain. And Vega here leaping over Augustines amplification and exposition
of his meaning, he only adds Augustines conclusion: Hoc incertum, patefecerit
Deus seruo suo David, etc. This uncertain thing, God revealed to his servant
David. For when standing and accusing himself, he said, Peccaui, I have
sinned: forthwith he heard of the Prophet; that is, of the Spirit of God,
which was in the Prophet, The Lord has put away thy sin. Well, now let us a
little insist upon these words of Augustine, which Vega ingeniously confesses,
do most clearly favor their cause of Pontifician uncertainty, of all other
that he has read in all Augustines works. First, whereas Augustine taking
the vulgar Latin for the only Text which he follows, uses the word
incerta. I answer, there is no such word in the Original for incertum. The
words in the Original are, (...) that V^e sa^huum^ Cho^mah Thod^igneni.
is, word for word, And in the secret, or in the hidden part (as our last
translation well renders it) thou shall make me to know wisdom. Not a word of
uncertainty. Therefore Vega takes a very uncertain ground, yea rather a mere
Boh^ or emptiness, whereon to build his uncertainty. Besides, since Augustine
going upon an unwarrantable ground, taking that for Text which Gods Word
knows not; are we therefore bound presently to take his exposition for
Gospel? And whereas he applies those uncertain and hidden things to the
remission of sins: we know Augustine oftentimes abounds with rare conceits;
but else, how this application or exposition should result from the Text,
unless raised up by the strength of conceit, the Text it self gives us no
evidence to see. But that we may not seem too strait-laced, in limiting the
ouer-lauish liberty of the vulgar Latin: if we take down both the Text, and
Augustines Gloss at one bit together, it will not choke us, nor cause us to
surfeit; especially, if we take all the ingredients of it. For it is with
Scriptures and Fathers, as with Physic: if the Dosis have either more or fewer
ingredients, than the wise Physician prescribes, it may alter the whole nature
of the Physic, and in stead of health, procure more hurt to the body. And
here I must tell you, that Vega deals with St. Augustine, as either a
negligent, or rather malicious Apothecary, who for some sinister respects,
leaves out some special ingredient out of the composition. Or else (to go no
further than the Scripture) he treades in the very steps of the Tempter, who
craftily left Psalm. 91. 11. Matthew. 4. 6.
out the most material word in all the Text (which was, In all thy ways)
without which, we have no warrant of Gods protection, and so Satan by his
false fingering, would have made the promise of God of none effect. So plays
Vega. For as we noted even now, Vega in relating Augustines exposition, leaves
out the most material thing, which Augustine notes in his explaning and
applying those Incerta, or uncertain things to remission of sins. And that
is the instance he gives of the Ninevites. That we may recollect all to one
entire head, which Vega has so torn asunder, we will set down Augustines
words whole together: Incerta and occulta sapientiae tuae manifestasti mihi:
they be the words of his vulgar Text. Whereupon he infers, Quae occulta?
Quae incerta? Quia Deu^ ignoscit and talibus (id est, poenitentibus.) Nihil tam
occultum, nihil tam incertum. Ad hoc incertum, Niniuitae poenitentiam egerunt:
dixerunt enim, etc. What hidden? what uncertain things? Because God pardons
even such: that is, penitent persons. Nothing so hidden, nothing so uncertain.
Upon this certainty the Ninevites repented: for they said, though after the
Prophet had threatened, though after that voice, Though the Text be, Yet 40.
days.
Three days and Niniuie shall be destroyed: they said among themselves, that
the mercy of God was to be entreated. They said thus, reasoning with
themselves, Who knows, if God will return, and show mercy? It was
uncertain, when they said, Quis nouit? Who knows? But having once repented,
they reaped certain mercy, etc. So Augustine. Do we not see here a manifest
difference between Augustines own application of uncertainty, and Vega's
strained application? Vega would apply this uncertainty of the remission of
sins to the time past, understanding it of sins already pardoned, as if a man
were altogether uncertain that his sins are pardoned, when they are already
pardoned. But Augustine tells us plainly, that he understands this uncertainty
of remission of sins in the future tense, that is, concerning the uncertainty
of sins to be pardoned, for which God denounces express judgments, as in the
example of the Ninevites. God has threatened peremptorily, that within forty
days Niniuie should be destroyed. What should the Ninevites now do in this
case? They believe God, that he was true in his word: Yet they resolve to
repent speedily. But to what purpose, when now the sentence was already
pronounced of him that cannot lie? Yes (as knowing that such like threatenings
are conditional) they would at least put it to an adventure, Who knows, if
God will return, and pardon? It may be God will show mercy. No marvel if the
Ninevites were doubtful of the pardon of those sins, which they knew they had
committed, but had not yet repented of. But whence proceeded this their
uncertainty? From their faith? No; but Augustine tells us the reason: Quia
peccata magna erant Niniuitarum, dixerunt, Quis nouit? Because the Ninevites
sins were great, they said, Who knows? So that their uncertainty proceeded
not from the defect of faith, but from the excess of their sins. But as they
were uncertain before they repented; after they had repented, they found
certam misericordiam, certain mercy, says Augustine: witness the
preservation of themselves, and their City. As therefore the Ninevites were
uncertain (in regard of the grieuousnesse of their sins, and the greatness
of Gods judgment already peremptorily threatened) whether they should find God
favorable or no, in reuersing his sentence, and preserving their City; but
afterward upon their repentance found the certainty of Gods mercy, in sparing
them, whereof the sparing of their City was a certain and infallible argument:
So sinful men, burdened with the guilt and horror of sins, and borne
down with the terror of Gods wrath threatened in his Word, may well be
doubtful and uncertain how God may deal with them, although they resolve
with themselves to repent, and humble themselves; but after upon their true
repentance, God being merciful in pardoning their sins, they find now certam
misericordiam, certain mercy: the certainty whereof is the very effect of Gods
mercy, applied and sealed to the conscience by a lively faith, no less assured
of the pardon of sin, than the Ninevites were of the preservation of their
City. Thus Vega's triumph is like his Country-treaties, very plausible and
current, and will gain much, if but believed, and the cunning conueyances be
not discovered. And by this success of Vega in this one authority, which he sets
down as a masterpiece, we may easily sum up the account of all his other
allegations out of the Fathers for this purpose, what will they amount to.

To the Fathers, he adds the authority of Schoolmen for uncertainty of
grace, in his 14. Chapter, and so forwards to the 19. Chapter. But let him take
his Schoolmen, we do not envy the Council of Trent their authority, as out
of whose Channels is gathered the Sink of Romane-Catholick faith. So that
while Vega alleges his Schoolmen, he is as the Fish in the sea, or a Cock
upon his own dunghill. Herein I will do, as Christ directs, concerning the
Pharisees, let them alone, they are all blind leaders of the blind. And for
Philosophers, as Aristotle, etc. Vega will have them all of his side, and takes
it in great snuff, that any adversaries of Pontifician uncertainty, should
allege any Philosopher to be for them. As he says in his 44. Chapter, in
answer to those that produce even Philosophical reasons to oppugn
uncertainty: Laterem lauant, cum nobis putant aduersari Aristotelem: as much to
say, as in the Proverb, They but wash the Blackamore, when they think to have
Aristotle to be our adversary. Well, let them take Aristotle, the
Schoole-Doctors, Chapt. 14. Scotus, Chapt. 15. famous Schools, Chapt. 16.
Divines, Chap. 17. yea the infallible definition of the Sea Apostolic, Chap.
18. when they have done all, what will they gain but incertainty? embracing
(as Ixion) an empty cloud of fear and perplexity, in stead of Juno, the true
substance of solid comfort. They may be certain of keeping their weak fort of
uncertainty vnsurprised, the maintaining whereof brings unto themselves in the
end certain ruin, and sudden destruction. Let Popish faith be always
uncertain, doubtful, fearful, perplexed, wavering with every wind of
error, of terror; let it be such (since it will not, since it cannot be any
other, than of Devils.
those that believe and tremble) as can never James 2.
be persuaded of the remission of sins, of Gods favor and mercy in Christ.
Seeing they will needs be uncertain, let them be uncertain; as the Apostle
says, He that is ignorant, let him be ignorant. In the mean time, as we
yield to the Pontificians the uncertainty of their faith: so let them suffer us
to maintain the certainty of true and saving Catholic faith, which is such,
as the gates of Hell shall never prevail against. True it is, that Vega has
spent at the least 20. Chapters, from the 19. to the 39. wherein he moyles in
sweat and dust, laboring to answer all objections that his adversaries bring
for the confirmation of certainty of salvation: wherein he deals like a
cunning thief, who knowing which way the Bloud-Hound will pursue him, strawes
saw-dust, or some such like thing, to sully the tract, and dead the sent, and
at least to retarde and fore-slowe the pace of the pursuer, while himself in
the mean time may escape the more easily. Or like the female Fox, which being
pursued at the heels, with her train dasheth her urine into the dogs eyes,
that uneath they are able to pursue any further. Such is Vega's holy water,
which he sprinckleth in our way, thinking thereby to inueagle even the most
sagacious. Or else he would put us to our shifts, as the Philistims did the
Israelites, who having taken all their armor and weapons from them, would not
suffer them the use of any iron tool, but such as they must frame in their
Forge, and sharpen with their tools. But blessed be God, we are long ago freed
from the spiritual bondage of these spiritual Philistims; we can tell better
how to weald our own weapons, and handle them better in our own hands, than
according to the direction and limitation of these usurpers; and taking our
own weapons into our own hands, we shall the better defend the truth against
all those oppositions which Vega, with all his Pontifician power, makes against
it. And when we have spoken, then (as Job said) Mock on. But, fearing lest I
have tired the Reader by leading him through the many windings of Pontifician
Uncertainties, which like an ignis fatuus, may easily divert the Traveler from
his plain path, by leading him through inuious and wild Wastes: let us here
pawse and breathe a little, and so pursue our purpose in an entire discourse by
it self; wherein also we must look for sundry skirmishes and assaults, which
the adversary will not let to make upon our very Trenches.

CHAP. XV. Of the Certainty of true saving justifying Catholic Faith.
Leaving the Uncertainty of Salvation to the Pontificians, as their uncertainty
of Faith, in regard of their incertainty in their grace, incertainty in their
baptism, incertainty in their Sacraments, incertainty in their absolution,
incertainty in their Mass, incertainty in their Priests disposition,
incertainty in their penance and conversion, incertainty in their contrition,
incertainty in their satisfaction and merits, incertainty in their Monastical
life, incertainty in their Saints, incertainty in their charity, incertainty in
their righteousness, incertainty in their holy Ghost inhabiting in them,
incertainty in their in ucation, incertainty in their laying down their life
for Christ, their incertainety in purgatory; while they acknowledge none other
certainty, but a moral, coniecturall certainety, which at the best is
doubtful and deceitful; all which, not only Soto and Vega, but also
Bellarmine in his Books of justification (justifying all that either the
Council of Trent, or her Commentators, Vega and Soto, or Andradius, and others
their fellows, have writ concerning this point; yea, and much more, but that I
would not go out of my Text, and prefixed bounds, of the Councels proper
Commentaries) have amply set down. Come we now to encounter this Roman
Catholic uncertainty, with the Catholic doctrine of the certainty of Faith.
But before we can come to lay a firm foundation of this certainty of Faith,
which Pontificians call nothing else, but a vain heretical presumption: we
must dig up, and remove one maine heap of Rubbish and Sand, which the
Pontificians have put to choke up the haven of true rest, and to undermine all
certainty of Faith, and whereon they have cobbled up their tottering Tower of
uncertainty: for the maine ground of their uncertainty is the Bulla Pii Quarti
super forma iuramenti professionis fidei. Affixed to their Council of Trent.
authority of the Church, on which must depend the verity and certainty of the
Scriptures themselves. Which being so, what marvel is it, if they utterly
renounce all Certainety of Faith, and of Salvation? For, what certainty of
Faith can there be, if the holy Scriptures, the object and ground of Faith, be
not certain? And, what certainty can there be in the Scriptures, if they must
depend upon the authority of the Church, for their certainetie? And, what
certainty can there be in the Church, if this Church be no other than the
Church of Rome? And, what certainety can there be in the Church of Rome, when
it wholly depends upon Bulla Pii Quarti P. R. super confirmatione Consilii
Triden. and Sexti de officio delegati. lib. 1. Papa est Lex anima^a in terris:
The Pope is aliuing Law upon earth. And he is said to have all Laws in the
cabinet of his breast, as their extrauagants say.
the only breast of a sinful man, upon whose infallibility notwithstanding
the whole Pontifician Church cannot find, no not the least footing for any
Certainty of Salvation to stand upon?

But to remove this heap of Rubbish: although for multiplicity of Controversy
it be grown to a mighty Mountain, which may seem to exceed the strength and
labor of Hercules himself to remove; yet I trust with one small grain of
Faith, to ouerturne this Mountain into the Sea. For first: whether was the
Word of God, or the Church more ancient? Was not Gods Word? For, by the voice
thereof was the Church first called. Where was the Church when the Gospel
began first to be revealed? Genesis 3. 15. As yet the whole world in Adam and Eve
lay buried in Apostasy; and now totus mundus in maligno positus, the whole
world lay in wickedness, till this Word of the Gospel of the promised and
blessed seed of the woman made a separation, and did constitute a Church. So
that the first ground and foundation of the Church, is the Word of God; as it
was also of the first frame of the Creation. Hereupon the Apostle says, That
the Church is built upon the foundation of the Apostles Ephesians. 2. 20.
and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, in whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. The
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, is the Old and New Testament, whereof
Christ Jesus is the chief corner stone. Away with the blasphemy of the
Council of Lateran, that calls the Pope, Leo the tenth, the corner stone,
and the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and many such blasphemous titles, which are
proper and peculiar only to the person of Christ. But that either the Church,
or the Pope of Rome, had any such authority and power over the Scriptures, it
was never known in those purer times of the Church, when the sweet and
salutiferous streams of the waters of life were not as yet poisoned and
imbittered with that Luciferian wormwood star, that fell from heaven. It
Revel, 8. 10. 11.
was in those primitive and virgin times the Catholic Doctrine of the
Church, That the Church was to be ruled by the Scriptures, and not the
Scriptures by the Church, much Aug. Epist. lib. Epist. 130. Cirtensibus.
less by any one man. St Augustine says, De Catholica Ecclesia id credant
homines, quod Diuinae Scripturae dicunt, non quod linguae humanae maledicunt:
Let men believe that concerning the Catholic Church, which the Divine
Scriptures do say, and not which men's tongues do mis-say. By which place we
see, that the Catholic Church is to be estimated according to that which the
Scriptures testify of it. Therefore not contrary. And in his Book of the
unity of the Church, Ecclesiam Aug. de vnitate Eccles. c. 16
suam demonstrent, etc. Let the Donatists show me their Church, not in the
tales and rumors of the Affricans, not in the Synods of their Bishops, not in
the learning of their disputants, not in their deceitful signs and prodigies;
for we are forewarned and fore-armed against such things by the word of the
Lord: but in the prescript of the Law, in the predictions of the Prophets, in
the songs of the Psalms, in the Shepherds own voice, in the preachings and
labors of the Evangelists, to wit, in all the Canonical authorities of the
holy Books. Nor so (says he) as that they collect and quote such places, as
are obscurely, or ambiguously, or figuratively spoken, which every man
interprets at his pleasure according to his own sense. For such places cannot
be truly understood and expounded, unless first those which are most plainly
delivered, be by a firm Faith entertained. Note here the Catholic doctrine
of those times, teaching, that the authority and sense of the Scriptures
depended not upon the Church, but the authority of the Church upon the
Scriptures, and the Scriptures were to be interpreted by themselves, to wit,
the more obscure places by the more plain; as he speaks often elsewhere in
his Books De doctrina Christiana. I will add one place in steed of many: Quis
Aug. de Baptismo contra Donat. lib. 2. c. 3.
autem nesciat, etc. Who can be ignorant (says he) that the holy Canonical
Scripture, as well of the Old, as of the New Testament, is contained within its
own fixed limits, and that it is so preferred before all the latter writings
of He excepts none, no not the Bishop of Rome.
Bishops, as that it may not be disputed or doubted off, whether it be true
or false, whatsoever is found written in it: and for the writings of Bishops
which either have been, or are written after the establishment of the Canon of
Scriptures, they have been subject to the wiser judgments, and grauer
authorities of some more skillful and learned Bishops, and might be censured
by Councels, if ought therein swarued from the truth: and those very Councels
themselves, which are provincial, do without scruple submit to the authority
of plenary Councels, assembled from the universal Christian world; and of
those plenary and general Councels, oftentimes the former are corrected by the
Not a word of the Bishop of Romes authority over general Councels. Those former
ages were ignorant of it.
latter, when by some better experiment of things, that which was shut, is
opened, and that which was hid, is made known, without any swelling of
sacrilegious pride, without any strouting of arrogance, without any contention
of bleake envy, with holy humility, with Catholic peace, with Christian
charity. So that Bishops are corrigible by provincial Councels; these by
general Councels, and these also by some latter Councels, as being all subject
to imperfection. But the holy Scriptures come under the ferula of no Bishop or
Council to be censured. Nay, as Augustine says: Titubabit fides, si
diuinarum Scripturarum vacillat authoritas: Faith will stagger and stumble, if
the authority of the divine Scriptures do waver. And he taxes the Manicheans
of this impiety and sacrilege, that they went Aug. contra faustum Manichaeum,
lib. 32. cap. 19.
about quite to take away the authority of the Scriptures, approving any thing,
not because they found it written in that supreme authority, but because their
fancy took a liking to it; therefore they approved the Scriptures. And so
their private sense must give authority to the Scriptures, which they frame to
their own fancy, and not the Scriptures give authority to their Doctrines.
What difference then is there between the Pontificians, and the Manicheans in
this maine point?

But the Pontificians of old, object unto us one special authority out of St.
Augustine, to overthrow all that he has said for the supreme authority of
the Scriptures above the Church. His words are (which they object, and wherein
they greatly triumph, to prove the authority of the Church above the
Scriptures) Ego Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Aug. contra Epist.
Manich. quam vocant sundamenti. lib. cap. 5. tom. 6.
Ecclesiae commouer^t authoritas: that is, I should not believe the Gospel,
unless the authority of the Catholic Church did move me. Now if we observe
the occasion of this saying of Augustine, it will easily appear that he had
no such meaning, as to prefer the authority of the Catholic Church, before
the authority of the holy Scriptures; for then he should with one breath
contradict the whole tenure of all his writings, wherein he still aduanceth
the authority of the Scriptures above all, as irrefragable, supreme, and
subject to no authority. Now the occasion of this speech of Augustine, was
this: Manicheus, a grand Heretic, writes an Epistle to Augustine, wherein he
styles himself, Manichaeus Apostolus Jesus Christi prouidentia Dei Patris: that
is, Manicheus the Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the providence of God the Father.
Whereupon Augustine says; Haec sunt salubria verba, de perenni ac viuo font:
These are wholesome words, from the eternal and living fountain. But with your
good patience (says Augustine) if it please you observe what I require. Non
credo, istum esse Apostolum Christi; quaeso ne succenseatis, and maledi^ere
incipiatis, etc. I do not believe, that this is an Apostle of Christ; I pray
you be not angry, and fall a reuiling: for you know that I am resolved, to
believe nothing rashly that you say. I ask therefore who this Manicheus is?
you will answer me, an Apostle of Christ. I do not believe it. Now thou have
nothing, what to say, or do; for thou did promise me the knowledge of the
truth, and now thou constrainest me to believe that which I know not. But
happily thou will read the Gospel unto me, and out of that thou will assay to
prove the person of Manicheus. Now if thou should find any man, who as yet
does not believe the Gospel, what would thou do if he said unto thee, I do
not believe it? Ego vero Euangelio non crederem, nisi, etc. For I should not
believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic Church did move
me. Quibus ergo, etc. whom then I have obeyed, when they said, Believe the
Gospel; why should I not believe them, saying unto me, Do not believe
Manicheus. Elige quid velis: Choose which thou will. If thou will say, Believe
the Catholics: they admonish me to give no credit to you. Wherefore, giving
credit to them, I cannot but not believe thee* if thou shall say, Do not
believe the Catholics, thou go not the right way to compel me by the
Gospel to the faith of Manicheus, seeing I believed the Gospel it self,
being preached unto me by the Catholics. And so forth to this purpose
Augustine pursues his discourse. So we see the question is about the truth of
Manicheus his title, calling himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. This he
obtrudes and thrusts upon Augustine, to give credit to it. Augustine (and that
worthily) makes question of it. He would have him prove it by the Gospel,
Well. But Manicheus foysteth in some counterfeit Gospel, wherein he styles
himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ; a Gospel, that was never acknowledged for
Canonical Scripture. But Manicheus will have it received for Gospel. How
shall it be tried? Is it therefore Gospel, because Manicheus says it? Or does
the Gospel depend upon the testimony of one man? No, says Augustine:
Pagan-Infidels are brought to receive and believe the Gospel, by the preaching
of the Catholic Church, which has from time to time kept the Canon of
Scriptures entire, without the mixture of counterfeit Gospels. By this
authority of the Catholic Church, to wit, by the preaching of the Gospel by
the Church, Augustine himself, when he was a Manichee, was won to the faith
of the Gospel. Hence it is, that instancing himself for one, that as yet
believed not the Gospel, he says, Ego non crederem Euangelio, etc. I should
not (that is, I, if I were as once I was, an unbelieving Manichee) I should not
believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic Church did move
me. So that he makes the comparison between the authority of the Catholic
Church, and the authority of one man, Manicheus. The question is, Whether
Augustine, if he were a neutrall believer, as yet neither believing that
Gospel which Manicheus brings, never heard of before, nor that which the
Catholic Church preaches, and has ever taught, should rather be induced by
the peremptory authority of one sole man, to believe a new Gospel, than by the
authenticke authority of the Catholic Church of Christ, to believe the
everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ, comprehended in both the Testaments, and
perpetually received, preserved, professed, preached, and believed of the
Catholic Church from all ages. In this case Augustine inclines and cleaues to
the authority of the Catholic Church. And what true Catholic does not
reverence the authority of the Church of God; bringing him to Christ by the
preaching of the Gospel, as the Samaritan woman brought her neighbor Citizens
to Christ? But being brought unto Christ, after they had heard him themselves,
they said to the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying; for we have
John 4. 42.
heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of
the world. So every believer may say, I was first induced, and as it were led
by the hand and voice of the Church, to believe the Gospel of Christ: but
after that I have heard, received, and believed Christ himself speaking in the
Scriptures, I now believe not for the Church, or any man's saying, but for the
authority of Christ, and the Scriptures themselves. As Augustine ingeniously
says to Paulina, Aug Paulinae Epist. 112.
Nolo authoritatem meam sequaris, vt, etc. I would not have you follow my
authority, that you should therefore think it necessary to believe any thing,
because it is spoken by me: but believe either the Canonical Scriptures, or
the truth that does inwardly teach, and give testimony thereof. For if a truth
be once confirmed by the evident authority of holy Scriptures; to wit, those,
which in the Church are called Canonical, it is without all doubting to be
believed. And in his third book against Maximinus, an Arrian Bishop, disputing
August. contra Maxim. Arrian. Epist. lib. 3. c. 14.
about the word Homousion, Augustine says; Nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debe^
Ariminense, etc. Neither ought I to urge the authority of the Nicene Council,
nor you that of Ariminum: for neither am I bound to the authority of this, nor
you of that: but both of us are bound to the authorities of the Scriptures,
common witnesses to us both, and impartial to either: So let thing with thing,
cause with cause, reason with reason, contend. Such was the Catholic Doctrine
of those times, wherein Augustine lived, that the authority of the Canonical
Scriptures, was above all other authority, either of Bishops, or provincial
Synods, or general Councels. In those times the man of sin had not thus
exalted himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, as to
usurp authority over the sacred Scriptures, whose authority is venerable: as
Augustine says, Omnia quae proferuntur August.
a sanctis Scripturis, plena veneratione suscipere debemus: All things
whatsoever are delivered out of the holy Scriptures, we ought to entertain
with all reverence. As Tertullian says: Adoro Scripturaeplenitudinem: I adore
the fullness of the Tertul. aduersu^ Hermog. lib.
Scriptures.

But what need we further testimonies to vindicate this Catholic truth, that
the authority of holy Scriptures was ever above the Church? yet we will only
add a testimony or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word
may be established. In St. Chrysostomes works, the uncertain author (but
allowed of all, even of the Pontificians themselves) upon the 24. Chapter of
St. Matthew, upon these words, Then, when ye shall see the abomination of
desolation stand Chrysostom. in Mat. 24. hom. 49. ab incerto autore.
in the holy place, let them which are in Judea, flee to the mountains: says
thus; that is, When ye shall see wicked heresy, which is the Army of
Antichrist, standing in the holy places of the Church, then they which are in
Judea, let them fly to the Mountains: that is, they which are in
Christianity, let them betake themselves to the Scriptures. For as a true Jew
is a Christian, as the Apostle says; He is not a Jew that is one Romans 2. 29.
outward, but he that is one inward: So the true Judea is Christianity, whose
name does signify Confession. And the Mountains are the Scriptures of the
Apostles and Prophets: as it is said of the Church; her foundation is upon the
holy Mountains. And why at this time does he command all Christians to betake
themselves to the Scriptures? Because at this time, since Heresy has invaded
the Churches, there can be no trial of true Christianity, nor other refuge for
Christians, which desire to know the truth of faith, but the holy Scriptures.
For formerly it was known many ways, which was the Church of Christ, and
which was Gentilisme: but now those which would know which is the true Church
of Christ, cannot know it by any other means, but by the Scriptures. Why?
Because all those things, which are proper to Christ in the truth, the same
also heresies have in a figure or similitude: they have likewise Churches, they
have likewise the Divine Scriptures themselves, likewise Bishops, and other
Orders of Clerks, likewise Baptism, likewise the Eucharist, and all other
things, and in a word Christ himself. Therefore if any would known which is
the true Church of Christ, how can he, in the confusion of so great a
similitude, discern it, but only by the Scriptures? And many other things to
this purpose does the same author there set down, sending us to the
Scriptures, as the only touchstone, to try the true Church from the false,
counterfeit, and Antichristian Church. If therefore the true Church of Christ
be known only by the Scriptures; then surely the Scriptures depend not upon
the authority of the Church. But that must needs be the Antichristian Church,
that challenges and usurps an absolute power over the Scriptures, which for
their authority and sense must be beholden to the Church, to wit, the Church of
Rome, to wit, the Pope. And the same Author in Chrysostom. in Mat. 23. homil. 24.
the 44. Homily, upon the 23. of Matthew, faith; Heretical Priests does shut
the gates of truth, to wit, the holy Scriptures: for they know, that if the
truth should once be made manifest, then their Church is to be forsaken, and
themselves must come down from their sacerdotall dignity to a popular
baseness. and neither themselves do enter into the truth of the Scriptures,
because of their avarice; nor suffer others to enter, by reason of ignorance.
But in a point so clear, and not once called into question among the Fathers
of former ages, but only by a sort of Heretics, as the Arrians, and
Manichees, and the like; still the authority of the Scriptures was preferred
above all, till of late days, the Church of Rome having called from the dead
the old heretical usurpation, has cried down this authority of the
Scriptures. We shall not need to produce more authorities out of the Fathers to
vindicate the Scriptures authority above the Church, or any man whatsoever. Let
us conclude the controversy only with one question. The Church of Rome
challenges authority over the Scriptures: I would feign know who gave her
this authority? For whatsoever authority the Church of Rome has, if she have
it not from the Scriptures, of what worth is her authority? And, if she have
her authority from the Scriptures, how comes she to challenge authority over
that, from whom she receives her authority? unless the Church of Rome deal
with the Scriptures in the case of authorities, as she has dealt with the
Emperors in the case of supremacy. For the Bishop of Rome first received his
supremacy over other Bishops from the Emperor, having it confirmed by that
usurping Parricide Phocas: This supremacy not long after grew to that height,
as that it ouer-topt the imperial Soueraignety it self, and so the Pope began
to usurp authority over the Emperor, of whom he received his supreme
authority. Thus he deals with the Scriptures. For the Pope cannot but
confess, that what authority he has, is grounded upon the Scriptures, else
his authority is of no value: yet notwithstanding the Pope is not ashamed to
avouch, that now the authority of the Scriptures does wholly depend upon him.
But if the Popes authority be such, as it has no ground nor foundation in the
Scriptures, then he must prove it to be some divine Numen, falling unto him
immediately from Heaven; like the image that came down from Jupiter, so adored
of those Ephesians, whose Goddess, Diana, Acts 19. 35.
was so famous. Nor ever was that image, nor that great Goddess Diana more
adored of the Ephesian world, than this imaginary unlimited transcendent power
of the Pope over Scriptures, and all, adored of the Pontifician world. But say,
some Angel from heaven brought him this power in a box. Unless this power
have utterly taken away all power and Authority, yea and truth from the
Scriptures, it cannot escape Paul's Anathema, which Augustine applies, and
wherewith we will shut up this point: Sieve de Christo, etc. Whether Aug. contra
literas Pe^illiani Dona^istae. lib. 3. cap. 6.
it be of Christ, or of his Church, or of any thing whatsoever pertaining to
our faith and life, I will not say, We (for we are not to be compared to him
that said, Although that we) but as he adds there, If an Angel from heaven
shall preach unto you besides that which you have received in the Legal and
Evangelical Scriptures, let him be accursed. Now what can be of greater
moment concerning faith and life, than the Popes authority over the Scriptures;
which being not found in the Scriptures, it is, together with the Pope and all
his worshippers, branded with Anathema. Which leaving to the Pontificians, let
us now come to pitch the certainty of salvation upon the immovable Rock of
the holy Scriptures.

Now for the Catholic doctrine of the certainty of justification, we affirm
against all Pontificians, That this certainty is no probable conjecture, no
general hope, no plausible opinion, no deceivable persuasion, no vain and
heretical presumption, no special revelation, no peculiar donation to this or
that Saint: but that this certainety is the native and inbred property of a
true justifying Faith, a persuasion that cannot be deceived, common to every
true believer, though after a different degree and measure, in some greater, in
some lesser, in some stronger, in some weaker, according to the measure of
Faith, and the mixture and allay of humane frailty, fighting one against
another in every regenerate man, as lacob and Esau in the same womb; shaken
with temptations, not subdued, sustaining long fight, but ever at length
victorious; and when at the weakest, yet it is certain, Marc. 9. 24.
beeeuing, though with unbelief, Romans 4. 18.
against hope believing in hope, above hope, under hope.

For the confirmation of this truth, we call the two Testaments to witness.
The Hebrews have three special words, whereby they express the nature of
true justifying Faith, as touching the certainety of it. One is, (...), Emun,
which signifies Faith, the root where of is Aman, which signifies to
nourish: to which David alludes, Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good,
so shall thou dwell in the Land, (...), and thou shall be sed by Faith; word
for word as Tremelius renders Tremel and pascere fide.
it. And in the sixth of John's Gospel, the Lord joins believing on him, and
feeding on him, together, as both one^ As St. Augustine says, Creed, and
manducasti: Belecue, and thou have eaten. Now this word which the Hebrews use
for faith, signifies also truth, or that which is firm, stable, or settled.
And what can be more firm or certain, than truth? The Prophet Esaias has a
very elegant exposition of this word, (...), if ye believe not, ye shall not be
established. Esaias 7. 9.
To believe, and to be established, both coming of the same root in the
original. Hence also comes the word Amen, used in all languages, which is a
note of believing, and assenting to the truth, and as it were sealing it unto
us. And the Apostle uses it for a note of certainty, 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the
promises of God in Christ, are Yea, and in him Amen, etc. that is, Most true
and certain. Faith therefore is no doubtful conjecture, or wavering hope, but
a most certain belief, firm as truth it self.

Another word used by the Hebrews for Faith, is (...), betach, which
signifies trust, security, confidence and affiance. This word is used by Esaias,
notably to set forth the confidence and security of Gods Saints; as Esaias 32.
17, where speaking of the full revelation of the Gospel in the coming of
Christ in the flesh, he says, Then the work of righteousness shall be
peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness, (...), and assurance, or
security for ever, as the vulgar Latin renders it. Note here, that the effect
of the righteousness of Gods Saints, is assurance and security in believing.

The third word used in the Old Testament for believing, is (...), Chassah,
which signifies so to believe, trust, or confide in God, as to make him our
sure sanctuary and resting place, under whose protection the Believer is safe
and secure, as the Chicken under the wing of the Hen; as we read this word
used in Ruth 2. 12. (they are the words of Boaz to Ruth) The Lord recompense
thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under
whose wings thou art come to Heb. Lachasoth.
trust. And David uses the same word in the same phrase of speech, Psalm. 36.
7. How excellent is thy loving kindness O God! therefore the childen of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. As the Lord uses the same
comparison to the vnbelceuing Jews, How often would I have gathered you
together as the Hen Mat. 23. 37.
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Thus we see the
true nature of Faith, as it is expressed by significant words in the Old
Testament, all of them setting forth the certainty and assurance of Faith in
God. So that the certainty which believers have of their justification, is not by
any extraordinary revelation bestowed upon this or that Saint in particular,
but it is of the very essence and nature of justifying Faith it self: and
therefore in whomsoever this faith is, there also is the certainty of Faith,
securely reposing it self in the bosom of Gods mercy, and under the wings of
his holy protection.

Come we to the new Testament: where let us begin with that excellent
description, which the Apostle makes of saving and justifying faith, peculiar
to the Saints of God, of Heb. 11.
whom he sets down an ample Catalogue in the 11. Chapter to the Hebrews.
Faith (says he, verse. 1.) is the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. The Greek Text is very emphaticall and
significant. First therefore to (...)
acquit this faith, from being that, which the Pontificians would have to be;
to wit, a mere Historical faith, common with Reprobates and Devils, the
Apostle shows the object of it to be, (...), things hoped for, (...), things
not seen: such as the Apostle means, 1. Cor. 2. 9. the things which the eye
has not seen, which God has prepared for them that love him: which fall not
within the reach of that faith, that is common to the wicked, who are
altogether hopeless, and love not the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore the faith
here described by the Apostle, is the faith of Gods elect alone, who only have
the hope of eternal life. Secondly, this faith is called (...), the substance
(as also the vulgar Latin has it) or subsistence of things hoped for: that
is, Faith makes those things that are hoped for, to be so sure and certain, as
if they were already in our possession. Or (...), is as much as an vnder-proppe
or basis, supporting and sustaining us with constant patience, in the assured
expectation of those things hoped for, as yet unseen. So that it signifies a
most steadfast vnmoueablenesse of faith. As 1 Cor. 15. 58. It is called also
(...), an evidence, demonstration, or argument (as the vulgar Latin) of things
not seen. Now what is more sure and certain than an evidence, or plain
demonstration? Whereupon St. Chrysostom upon these words, says, O what an
admirable word he uses, saying, the argument of Chrysostom. in Heb. 11. 1. homil.
21. (...) etc.
things not seen? for an argument or demonstration is in things most manifest.
Therefore faith is a vision of things not appearing, and it brings us to the
same certainty, to the which we are brought by things which are seen. So that
neither about the object of things which are seen, can it be called
credulity, or incredulity: nor again can it be called faith, but when a man
has certainty concerning those things which are not seen, more than
concerning those things which are seen. For because those things which are yet
in hope, are reputed as yet without substance, or subsistence, and faith gives
unto them their substance; not that it adds any thing unto them, but it self
is the substance or subsistence of them: For the purpose; the resurrection is
not yet fulfilled, not yet present or subsistent, but faith makes it to subsist
in our soul: this is it which the Apostle calls (...), or substance. So
Chrysostom. Yea this word (...), as it imports a subsisting, signifies also
animum praesentem, a confidence or full assurance of the mind. And it is
sometimes used in authors for a fastening, or a close joining together, as a
joint, (...), a fast iuncture. And such is faith, which Theophrast. (...) 5. de
causis plantarum.
joins the object and the subject together, making the things hoped for, to
be as it were in our present possession. It is also the evidence of things not
seen, presenting them visibly and sensibly before us; like a most clear
perspectiue glass, which presents and attracts, as it were the most remote
object nearer to the eye, for the clearer view of it. Thus Abraham, and those
other Saints of the Old Testament, saw these invisible things afar off with
the eye of Faith, Heb. 11. 13. and were persuaded of them, and embraced them,
as the Apostle excellently declares Thus if saving and justifying Faith be
the substance, the subsistence, the assurance, the confidence, the coherence of
things hoped for; if the evidence, the argument, and demonstration of things
not seen, prepared for such as love God, and revealed to us by the Spirit: how
then is not this Faith most sure and certain of justification, and eternal
salvation?

This is further confirmed by sundry other authorities of holy Scripture, as
Ephesians. 3. 12. In quo habemus fiduciam and accessum in confidentia, per fidem
ipsius (as the vulgar Latin renders it well) that is, In whom (to wit, Christ)
we have boldness and access with confidence, through the faith of him. Now
what boldness or confidence can a man have, without assurance and certainty?
And, Heb. 3. 6. Christus tanquam Filius in domo sua* quae domus sumus nos, si
fiduciam and gloriam spei, vsque ad finem firmam retineamus: Christ as a Son
over his own house; which house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and
the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. Now the strength of a house does
mainly stand upon the firmness of the foundation. And the Apostle (as we
have heard) calls Faith the foundation of things hoped for. And Heb. 4. 16.
Adeamus ergo cum fiducia ad Thronum gratiae, vt misericordiam, etc. Let us
therefore come with boldness unto the Throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. And Heb. 10. 19. Habentes
itaque fratres, fiduciam, etc. Having therefore brethren, boldness to enter
into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, etc. accedamus cum vero cord in
plenitudine fidei, etc. let us draw near with a true heart (...).
In full assurance of Faith; having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, let us hold fast the
professioe of our Faith without wavering: for he is faithful that promised,
etc. And 1. Ioh. 5. 13. 14. Haec scribo vobis, etc. These things I write unto
you, that believe on the Name of the Son of God, That ye may know that ye
have eternal life, etc. Et haec est fiducia, quam habemus ad eum: And this is
the confidence that we have in him, etc. Thus we see what glorious Elogies or
Praises the holy Ghost gives to saving Faith, the proper effects whereof are
assurance, truth, confidence, boldness: which the vulgar Latin so often
translateth Fiducia, a word much envied by the Council of Trent, and
extremely inueighed against, yea and shamelessly injured by Vega; who taking
upon Vega lib. 14. de peccato mortali and ven^^li.
him to interpret the meaning, and to measure out the latitude of Fiducia, does
pitifully mangle and mince it; saying, that it has some certain agreement
with Faith, but so as it is distinct from certainty, and that it is a kind of
motion of the appetite, and that it may be in deadly sinners, trusting that
they are justified, when they are not; and that it is a probable persuasion of
obtaining our desire; and that this probable persuasion of obtaining the mercy
of God, is a most fit means to the obtaining of Faith. So that in the
conclusion, this Fiducia, is by Vega preferred to be set in the rank of
preparatory graces, saving, that I do not see how Fiducia can be a means to
beget Faith, seeing he puts Faith also among his preparatiues: and also in
another place says, That Theological Faith is the beginning of Justification,
which Faith may be in those that sleep, and want the use of reason; and
Fiducia is only an act, or a consequent passion issuing from it. O miserable
perplexities! How do these Pontificians torment their wits, in making infinite
doublings, to make men lose the right path! like the Lapwing, which wearieth
her self partly with her own plaining voice, and partly with her deuious and
extrauagant fluttering about, far enough from the mark, yet so as if she
were still about it, and all to deceive and divert the Fowler from coming
near her nest.

But the Doctrine of the certainty of saving Faith, is further confirmed by the
holy Ghost. As Ioh. 3. 33. The Lord says, He that has received his
testimony, has set to his seal, that God is true. What seal is this, but the
seal of Faith? So the Lord applies it, verse. 36. He that believes on the
Son, has everlasting life. And St. John ioynes them both together, setting
the seal of Faith to the testimony, 1. John 5. 9 10. (...) This is the
testimony of God, which he has testified of his Son: He that believes on
the Son of God, has the testimony in himself. Faith then is the seal of
Gods testimony; and what greater certainty or assurance can be, than in a
seal? Also Matthew. 9. 2. Confide fili, etc. Son, be of good comfort (or be
confident, as the original word signifies) thy sins be forgiven thee. So
verse. 22. Confide filia, etc. Daughter, be confident, thy Faith has saved
thee. So that the confidence of saving Faith in the remission of sins, is not
only in the masculine sex, Son be confident; but even in the female and
weaker sex, Daughter be confident, thy Faith has saved thee, go in peace.
This certainty of Faith is also confirmed by a comparison taken from building.
Christ Jesus is the Rock, whereon every believer as a house is built. This
building is so strong, as no floods of persecutions, nor winds of temptations
can shake it down. Hence Esaias 28. 16.
Esaias says of God, and God of Christ, Behold, I lay in Sion for a foundation,
a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation: He that
believes shall not make haste. What is this, that he says, He that believes
shall not make haste? Haste (we know) is a sign of fear, which causes
slight: fear is a token of a guilty conscience in wicked men, who fly, and
haste away, when none pursues: But the righteous is as bold as a Pro. 28. 1.
Lion. A Lion hastes not away at the sight of men; such is he that believes,
he makes no haste: but as David says, Psalm. 112. 7.
his heart stands fast, and believes in the Lord. So Paul and Peter, both
speaking by the same Spirit, expound the same place thus, Romans 9. 33. and 1.
Pet. 2. 6. Behold, I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone, etc. and he that
believes on him shall not be confounded, or, shall not be ashamed. Now what
is it, that makes a man confounded or ashamed, but sin; and shame, the
punishment of sin? But he that believes on the Son of God, this precious
cornerstone, has his sins remitted, and his shame removed: there remains
not so much as the least stain or guilt of sin in his conscience, whereby to
affright or ashame him, or that he should for fear or shame make haste.

Now certainty being a native and inherent quality of Faith, is not therefore
any extrinsicke or accidental thing, given out of special grace to such and
such believers, as it were by extraordinary revelation, as if some few of Gods
special Favorites, had this granted and engrossed unto them, in the nature of
a Monopoly. But this certainty, is as inseparable a quality of saving Faith, as
the heat is of fire. And therefore certainty of Faith is common to all true
believers, without exception. Not only Job had it, nor only Paul, but all and
every true believer; the poor Palsie-man, who while his Matthew. 9.
body was trembling, as it were in a motion of trepidation, yet his Faith was
fixed in his orb. The silly weak woman had no less strong Faith to stay the
running issue of her blood, than the valiant Joshua had, in staying the course
of that Psalm. 19.
Gyantlike-running Josh. 10.
Sun. For the woman said within her self, If I may but touch the hemme of
his garment, I shall be whole: not, I may perhaps be whole, or, I have a
probable persuasion or coniecturall opinion to be made whole; but, I shall be
whole. In a word, this Faith, yea this certain confident Faith, this substance
of things hoped for, and this evidence of things not seen, was in all
believers of the Old Testament, none excepted, whereof the Apostle gives us a
summary Catalogue, in the 11. to the Hebrews. Tell me, what shall we say of
the very women? (a sex, whom the Pontifician Church much scorneth in the point
of Faith) yet the Apostle says of them, That by Faith the women received their
dead raised to life Heb. 11. 35.
again; others of them were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they
might obtain a better resurrection. But I trow, if they had not been
certain, but doubtful of their salvation, would not the sense of their
tortures in their more tender bodies, the natural fear of death in their more
passionate minds, and the love of life, have easily persuaded them to have
accepted deliverance, being offered? Would they (think you) so easily have
parted with their live bird in the hand, upon the uncertain hazard of two in
the bush? No, it was their Faith, and the certainty of their Faith, that made
them despise present life, and embrace present death, because they were sure to
receive a better resurrection, than the receiving of their temporal life from
a temporal death. Devout Bern. Epist. 190.
Bernard says, Nonne si fluctuat fides, inanis est and spes nostra? Stulti
ergo Martyrs nostri, sustinentes tam acerba propter incerta, nec indubitantes,
sub dubio remunerationis praemio, durum per exitum, diuturnum inire exilium: If
Faith waver, is not our hope also vain? Our He means the old Martyrs of the
Church, that suffered for the true religion, not the new Martyrs of Rome, that
justly suffer for rebellion and treason.
Martyrs then were fools, to undergo such bitter torments for uncertainties,
nor to make no doubt, under a doubtful recompense of reward, to go into a
long exile by a hard passage. Yea, says the Apostle (and he speaks it in the
behalf of all true believers, Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem) we know that
if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens. We know it: and
it is by Faith that we know it; and what greater certainty than knowledge?

And to conclude, the Apostle makes this knowledge of Faith to pertain in
common to all believers, and so in common, as peculiar only to Gods Elect; since
they that want this certainty of Faith, are Reprobates. Examine your selves
whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves: Know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? Therefore a
man by examining himself, may know whether he be in the faith; a man, by
proving himself, may know that Jesus Christ is in him. If he cannot at all
come to know that Christ is in him (and if he never can be certain, but ever
remains doubtful of it, so that he knows it not) then he is a reprobate,
if he persevere in this doubting and doting ignorance unto the end. Then by
the Apostles rule (and the rule is infallible) they that doubt of their faith,
of their salvation by Christ, of their justification, are concluded to be
reprobates. What shall then become of the whole Pontifician Church, who teach
and profess, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 12 13. 14.
yea, who peremptorily decree and command, that none under pain of Anathema,
do believe certainly, and without doubting of his salvation? O Reprobate
Church! But leaving them, we see the Apostles peremptory command to the
Corinthians, and so to Christians, so to examine themselves, so to prove their
own selves, as that they know (and knowledge is certain) that they are in the
Faith, and that Jesus Christ is in them. Whosoever has not this knowledge,
this certainety of Faith, is by the holy Ghost doomed and damned for a
Reprobate, whatsoever the Council of Trent say to the contrary.

Ob. But the most firm believer is not without doubtings, yea, such as
sometimes do border and trench upon despair, through some fierce assault of
tentation. It is true indeed. But this doubting is not the effect of faith,
but rather a defect, or weakness of Faith, while the act of it is for the
time suspended, or suppressed; God so disposing it for our trial, and further
approbation. As the soul remains intyre, even in deliquio, though it have not
for the time its organicall operations in the body: So of Faith. Faith may be
brought even vsque ad deliquium, to an extreme fainting in our sense and
apprehension, and as it were to the last gasp: yet Gods Aqua coelestis, is
never wanting to revive it. Faith may for the time be asleep in a man's heart,
as Christ was in the ship, while the heart is even covered over with waves of
temptations: yet being awakened by prayer, by and by the Coast is cleared
again, and faith, recovering its native strength, assures the heart, as the
Angel did Paul in that dangerous Acts 27.
Navigations, That none in this little Bark of ours shall perish, Acts 28. 1.
but safely arrive upon the Honey-hauen of Melita, even at that true
Honey-flowing-land of Canaan.

Indeed Faith suffers many paroxismes, or fits of tentations: but all such
fits are but as so many fits of an Ague in the Spring, which make a man the
healthier and stronger all the year after. What if Faith now and then do
sleep? yet sleep, we know, though it bind up, and as it were deaden the
senses for the time, that uneath a man sleeping is discerned from a dead man:
yet, this very deep sleep tends to the refection of the body, and makes it
arise more vigorous, even as a Giant refresht with wine, or as a Dazie,
drooping all the night, displayes its cheerful looks at the approach of the
morning sun. The Sun may be eclypsed or clouded a while, but anon breaks
through all interpositions and oppositions, with the fresh darts of his
piercing beams; and during the Eclipse, it lacked none of its light in our
understanding, but we lacked the light of it in our sense: So Faith may be
eclipsed or ouer-clouded with tentations for a time, yet lose none of its
virtue, saving only we are not so sensible of it, till at length it have
overcome the tentation. The fire that is raked up close under the embers,
though it cannot now be seen, yet it is fire still, and is the better peserued
against the next morning, to feed upon new fuel: So Faith, though it be not
easily discerned, while it lies covered under the dead ashes of deep
contrition and humiliation for sin, and of mortification, yea of tentation;
yet it is the better preserved, that while heaviness for sin may endure for
a night, yet the joy of Faith returns in the morning, as it were feeding it
self with new works of obedience, flaming forth in a Christian life. So that
Faith, be it less or more, is always in its own nature certain, though not
always alike in our sense and apprehension.

The most fruitful Tree is not free from winds and tempests, whereby it is
shrewdly shaken; yet for all that, it is not hindered, but rather helped (as the
Philosophers speak) in bringing forth more plentiful fruit in his season;
since the root thereof, firmly fastened in the ground, is not loosened, but
rather enlarged, to receive a fresh supply of sap from the earth, to become
the more fruitful. Such is a faithful Psalm. 1.
man, whom David compares to a Tree, planted by the rivers of water: who though
he be shaken with sundry winds of temptation, yet he brings forth his fruit
in due season, his leaf not withering, and his actions prospering; since his
Faith, as the root, is fixed in Christ, having the River of the water of life
flowing from Gods holy Spirit to nourish it continually: for, as Esaias says,
Chap. 27. 10. In measure in the branches thereof will thou contend with it, in
the day when he blows with his fierce wind. God moves the branches of his
living Trees, and that in measure, by afflictions, and temptations, but the
roots are untouched. A ship, we see, lying at hull in the Harbor, is tossed
and tumbled on this side, and that side, yet being fastened by the Anchor, it is
not subject to wrack; yea, being now under sail, exposed to the winds and
waves, yet it is wafted onwards to the intended Port by the direction of the
wise Pilot, sitting and steering the Helm according to his Card and Compass:
So the faithful man, even when he rides securely in the Harbor of
Tranquillity, as David did, Psalm. 30. when he said, In my prosperity I shall
never be moved; yet God turning away his face for the time, he is troubled:
but keeping his Anchor-hold of hope, both sure and steadfast, and adhering to
God, by faithful prayer and humble supplication, he is preserved from wrack,
keeping still his faithful station. Or let him lanch out into the Deep, and
hoyse up sail for some noble voyage, though he be driven with fierce winds;
yet Gods Spirit sitting and steering the Helm of his Faith, by the Card of
Gods Word, he brings him at length safely to the Haven, where he would be,
although through most extreme difficulties. So we see, the fruit of saving
Faith may be suppressed, yet the root not supplanted: the act of it may be
suspended, yet the habit not lost: Faith may sleep, and yet live: it may be
eclipsed, yet hold on his course: faint, yet not fail: sick, yet not to
death: bruised, yet not broken to pieces: shaken and weather-beaten, yet not
suffer utter shipwreck: languish, yet not perish.

Bernard alleging St. Augustines words, to wit, Fides, non coniectando, vel
opiniando, habetur in cord, in quo est, ab eo cuius est, sedcerta scientia,
acclamante conscientia: that is, Faith is found in the heart, wherein it is, of
him whose it is, not by conjecture, or opinion, but by certain knowledge, the
conscience according with it. Bernard thereupon infers these words: Ego
securus in Magistri Gentium sententiam pergo, and scio quoniam non confundar.
Placet mihi (fateor) illius de fide definitio. Fides est (ait) substantia rerum
sperandarum, argumentum non apparentium. Substantia (inquit) rerum sperandarum,
non inanium phantasia coniecturarum. Substantia nomine aliquid tibi certum
^ixumque praefigitur. Non est enim fides estimatio, sed certitudo: I do
securely follow the judgment of the Teacher of the Gentiles, and I know, that
I shall not be confounded. His definition of Faith (I confess) pleases me
well. Faith (says he) is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence
of things not seen. The substance of things hoped for, not the fantasy of
vain conjectures. Under the name of substance thou have something certain and
fixed laid down. For faith is not opinion, but certainty. So Bernard. And this
was the Catholic Doctrine of the ancienter Fathers of the Church. St.
Chrysostom upon the words of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 19. Chrysostom. in Heb. 10.
bom. 19 (...) etc.
Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the most holy by the blood
of Jesus: says: Whence is this boldness? from remission of sins. And upon the
22. verse. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, etc.
He says, (...); (...) Which of us draw near? He that is holy by faith. And
that with a true heart in full assurance of Faith. How is that? (...). We must
so beleeu, as if we did with our eyes behold things visible before us. And much
more certainly. (...) etc. For in these things we may be uncertain, and so
be deceived: but faith cannot be deceived. And here we are led by sense:
but in matter of faith, we are led by the spirit. And upon the Epistle to
the Romans, Chapter 4. where the Apostle Chrysostom in Romans c. 4. sermon. 8. (...)
says, verse. 21. Being certainly persuaded, etc. Chrysostom says, Observe,
that he says not simply, He believed, but, He was certainly persuaded. For
such a thing is faith, that it is more manifest and clear, than those
demonstrations which are deduced from reason; and does more persuade than they.
For he that is persuaded by reasons, may be induced by other reasons to waver
in his judgment: but he that is settled upon faith, has now long ago
carefully guarded, and guirt about his hearing, as it were with a Rampart or
strong Wall round about, lest he should be infected with perverse speeches.
And a little after, It is the property of a weak, pusillanimous, and wretched
mind, not firmly to believe. If therefore at any time it happen, that any do
flout us for our certainty and confidence in believing, let us again object
unto them incredulity, as to those that are wretched, pusillanimous, foolish
and weak, and which have no better understanding than the very Asses. For, as
to believe, is the point of a magnanimous and noble mind: so to be
incredulous and wavering, is a sign of a most foolish mind, light, and
abased, even to the bruitishnesse of the unreasonable Beasts. Therefore (says
he) leaving these, let us imitate the Patriarch Abraham, and glorify God, as
he also gave glory to God. And what is it that he says, giving glory to God?
He considered Gods righteousness, and his never sufficiently comprehended
virtue and power; and so conceiving in his mind a thought worthy and beseeming
such a person, he got a most certain persuasion of the promises. So he. Thus
we see this holy man disclaimes all hesitation or doubting in faith; he
propounds the pattern of Abraham, whose faith was most certain, whom we are
to follow in the same steps, as the Apostle says, Romans 4. 12. for the promise
is made sure to all the seed, to all those that are of the faith of Abraham,
verse. 16. He that wants this certainty of faith, does not truly believe, as
Chrysostom says, he understands no more than a beast, than the very Asses,
he is of a base and pusillanimous spirit, he denies to give glory to God,
which, as Chrysostom says, is the most excellent property of a Christian man's
life. Let the Pontificians, and among them Vega, with his Council of Trent,
look to their credit in this point, least as men without understanding, they
be found like to the beasts that perish.

St. Basil says, (...), what is the Basil. Ethica in fine definitionis 80.
property of faith? an vndoubting assurance, or full confidence void of
distrust. The same Sain: Basil also in another place says, That faith, beyond
all reasons of Sciences and Arts, does Basil. in Psalm. 115.
draw the soul to a consent; yea, and that faith relyeth not upon Geometrical
or necessary demonstrations, but is iufused into the soul by the operations of
the holy Ghost. And again; Faith is an undoubted assent to those things which
are Basil. in asce^ica
heard, in a certain persuasion of the truth of those things which are
preached by the grace of God: which Abraham showed (says he) having
testimony, that he doubted not through distrust, but was strong in the faith,
giving glory to God; and being certainly persuaded, that he which had promised,
was able also to perform.

Tertullian before him, says; Fides integra secura est de salute: Tertul. lib.
de Baptismo.
sound and entire Faith is secure of salvation. But shall we need to bring
candles to show us the light of the Sun? The Sunshine of the Scriptures
has so clearly manifested the truth of the certainty of faith, that the
ancient Doctors of the Church, borrowing their light from that Sun, are as so
many Stars witnessing the same truth. So as not so much as a cloud of
doubtfulnesse is to be seen in them as touching this point; howsoever the
Pontificians, dazzled with the bright beams of truth, would also cast a mist
before faiths eyes, and would Vega de incertitud. great. cap. 32. 33. 34. etc.
Where he takes upon him to interpret the authorities of the Fathers, making
against Pontifician uncertainty.
persuade us, that where the Fathers speak of the certainty of faith, they
mean some moral or experimental certainty; distinctions, which their simple
hearted spirits never dreamed of in this kind: and where the Fathers speak of
our manifold infirmities and weaknesses, that are in our nature, and of those
doubts and fears that arise from our carnal corruption, the Pontificians
would persuade us, that they mean of the doubts and fears that are in faith.
So witty are the Pontificians in their selfe-deceiuings.

Now besides this native certainty of saving faith in every believer, there be
many other accruing and concurring helps, serving to seal up this infallible
certainty of faith, with all fullness of assurance. As first, the infallible
testimony of the Spirit of truth, witnessing to our spirits, to the spirit of
faith, that we are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 16. And Gal. 4. 6. Because ye
are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
crying Abba Father. And Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom also ye trusted, after that ye
heard the Word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation: in whom also, after
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is
the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession, to the praise of his glory. This place is very pregnant, and worthy
our best attention. The holy Ghost is called the seal, wherewith we are
sealed, and the earnest of our inheritance. Now a seal and earnest, are
Symboles of assurance. But mark; this seal and earnest is given us, after
that we have believed. So that here is the seal of the Spirit annexed to the
seal, and certainty of our faith, ad corroborandum titulum, as the Lawyers
speak, to strengthen our title: That (as the Apostle says) by two immutable
things, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
upon the hope set before us, which hope we have as an anchor of the soul*
both sure and steadfast; and which enters into that within the veil, whither
the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchisedech. So 1. Ioh. 4. 13. Hereby we know, that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. Faith then
being certain, and confirmed also by the seal of Gods Spirit, what more
certain? Hence it is, that Bernard, writing Bern. e^ist. 19^
to Pope Innocent, against Abailardus, says; Abailardus fidem definiebat
aestimationem; qu^si cuique in ea sentire and loqui, quae libeat, liceat: aut
pendeant ab incerto, in vagis ac varijs opinionibus nostrae fidei Sacramenta,
and non magis certa veritate subsistant. Nonne si fluctuat fides inanis est and
spes nostra? Sed absit, vt putemus in fide, vel spe nostra aliquid, vt is
putat, dubia aestimatione pendulum, and non magis solum, quod in ea est, certa
ac solida veritate submixum, oraculis and miraculis diuinitus persuasum,
stabilitum and consecratum partu Virginis, sanguine Redemptoris gloria
resurgentis. Testimonia ista credibilia facta sunt nimis. Si quo minus, ipse
postremo Spiritus reddit testimonium spiritui nostro, quod filij Deo sumus:
that is: Abailard has defined faith to be an opinion; as if it were lawful
for every one to speak and determine of faith, as they lifted: or as if the
mysteries of our faith depended upon uncertainty, in wandering and wild
opinions, and did not rather subsist in a most certain verity. For if faith
be wavering, is not our hope also vain? But far be it, that we should think
that there is any thing in our faith or hope, wauing (as he thinks) in a
doubtful opinion, and not rather the only thing that is in it, is supported
with the certain and solid truth, persuaded by oracles and miracles from God,
established and consecrated by the To wit, by Christ.
birth of the Virgin, by the blood of the Redeemer, and by the glory of him
that rose again. These testimonies are most credible. If they were not
sufficient, the Spirit himself in the last place, does give testimony to our
spirit, that we are the Sons of God. Quomodo ergo fidem quis audet dicere
aestimationem, nisi qui Spiritum istum nondum accepti, quiue Euangelium aut
ignoret, aut fabulam putet? Scio, cui credidi, and certus sum, clamat
Apostolus; and tu mihi subsibilas, fides est aestimatio? How then dare any man
call faith an opinion, but he that has not as yet received that Spirit, or who
knows not the Gospel, or reputes it a fable? I know whom I have believed,
and am certain, cries the Apostle; and do thou whisper, faith is an
opinion? So Bernard. So that in Bernards time, who lived between four and
five hundred years ago, the darkness of Egypt had not as yet so ouer-spread
the earth, but that some light shined in the land of Goshen, to give light to
Gods people: Nor had the deluge of Apostasy, breaking forth from the great
deep of the mystery of iniquity, and falling down in Cataracts from the top
of that Skye-threatning seuen-hild City, sitting upon many waters, so
ouer-flowed the firm ground of Christian faith, but that the Dove of Gods
Elect, might find some place to pitch the foot of the certainty of salvation
upon.

There be also sundry other accessory testimonies, to establish every true
believer in the certainty of his salvation: as the holy Scriptures, wherein is
set down the truth of Gods promises. The Scriptures are strong and evident
testimonies of God: and therefore called the Two Testaments of God. Search the
Scriptures (says Christ) for in them ye find everlasting John 5. 39.
life, and they are they which testify of me. And, John 20. 31. These things
are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God,
and that believing, ye might have life through his Name. St. Augustine upon
the words of the Psalm, Aug. in Psalm. 144.
God is faithful in his words, etc. says, Noluit sibi credi dicenti, sed
voluit teneri Scripturam sanctam, etc. God would not have his bare saying to be
believed so much, as he would have the holy Scripture to be firmly holden;
even as if you should say to a man, when you promise him any thing; Thou do
not believe me, behold, I give thee my writing for it: for seeing one
generation goes, and another comes, the Scripture of God ought to remain,
as a certain handwriting of God, which all passengers reading, may hold fast
the way of his promise, etc. And Bernard says, upon these words, Matthew. 8.
Speak but (...)
the word only, etc. Bonum est, si dicantur verba; sed nihilominus bonum est,
si scribantur verba, etc. It is good, if the words be spoken; but yet it is
good also, if the words be written. For the word flies away irrcuocable,
unless it be committed to writing. Scriptura, etc. The Scripture makes the
word both stable and visible. St. Ambrose says; Sermo plurimus Scripturarum
Ambros. de ^a^n and ^^ ^^ lib. 2. ca^. 7.
animam confirmat, and quodam spiritalis gratiae colorat vapore: The plentiful
speech of the Scriptures does confirm the soul, and as it were color it with
a certain vapor of spiritual grace. And upon the Epistle to the Romans.
Chapt. 1. verse 2. In the holy Scriptures. Hoc ad cumulum, etc. This he Ambr.
in ^pist. ad Romans ^a^. 1.
added to the heap of his true protestations, that he might cause the greater
faith in the believers. And Theophilact Theoph. in Lu^. 16.
upon Luke 16. They have Moses, and the Prophets, etc. says, Nothing is so
profitable, as the diligent searching of the Scriptures; for by searching of
the dead, the Devil may deceive us: but those which soberly search the
Scriptures, nothing can deceive them; for they are the lantern and light
whereby the thief is discovered, and taken tardy. So that the holy Scriptures
are a strong foundation to build the certainty of Faith upon.

So the holy Sacraments, which are the seals of Gods Testaments, they are all
the seals of our faith, Romans 4. 11. A point that has much puzzled and
perplexed the Pontificians, for as much as both the ancient Fathers are full of
testimonies to this purpose, and the Pontificians themselves do ascribe so
much to the efficacy of the Sacraments (as conferring grace ex opere operato,
as they term it) whereupon might seem to follow a necessity of certainty of
grace in all those that are partakers of them. But such is their inueterate
enmity against this certainty, that rather than they will show the least favor
toward it, they are content to diminish a little from the power and efficacy
which they ascribe to their Sacraments. But first, for the Fathers; Vega very
stoutly, and Vega lib. 9. de incertitud. gra^. cap. 41.
as he would seem, ingeniously professes to act the adversaries, that is, the
Protestants part, in alleging their proofs for the certainty of faith, sealed
by the Sacraments, both out of the Scriptures, and out of the Fathers. But
whatsoever the proofs and authorities be, Vega very wittily (as his manner is)
reduces all their answers to these three heads. First, Admit, says he, that
those things required to the worthy receiving of the Sacraments, be certain
and fixed, yet no man can be certain, that he has omitted nothing requisite
thereunto: for there might be remaining in him some error, or invincible
ignorance before the receiving of the Sacrament, and so in regard of his
indisposition, he is uncertain of any grace received or ratified by the
receiving of the Sacrament. And so Vega makes a man's justification, to depend
upon the worthiness or unworthiness of his own disposition, or preparation
in coming to the Sacrament; whereof, say they, as none can be certain, that
it is, as it ought to be, but the contrary rather: so neither can he be
certain of any grace received by the Sacrament. But as the good King Ezechias
prayed 2. Chron. 30. 18. 19. 20. verse.
for the comers to the Sacrament of the Passover, saying, The Lord God pardon
every one, that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his Fathers,
though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary (that
is, so exactly as he ought.) And the Lord hearkened unto Hezechias, and healed
the people: So though we come short (as the best do) in the performance of
holy duties, according to that perfection, which the Lord requires; yet there
is place always left for humble prayer, both to procure Gods pardon for our
faylings, and his special grace and blessing in our reverent use of his holy
Ordinances. But this in brief by the way to confute Vega's folly. Secondly, he
answers, That though there be no error, nor invincible ignorance remaining
in a man, that is to receive the Sacraments, yet (says Vega) I do not see it
every way certain, that those things are sufficient, which are accounted
requisite to justification with the Sacrament of Baptism, or Penance. For it
is not certainly received of all, that these Sacraments do confer the first
grace. As the Master of the Sentences, Alexander Hales, and Gabriel Biel, are
of the contrary opinion. And since these opinions, says he, are not condemned
expressly by the Church, although the opposite opinions be much more probable:
therefore there is place left for all kind of doubtings and hesitations about
our justification; as well after the receiving of the Sacraments, as before: So
that there is no more ground, whereof to gather the certainty of grace, because
of the Sacraments received, than by reason of our own disposition.

But his third answer is the maine one he stands upon: for he says, Vtque
radicitus totum hoc argumentum subruamus and eneruemus, dico tandem, etc. And
that we may overthrow this whole argument by the roots, and utterly disable
it, I say thirdly, etc. Here we cannot choose but erect our expectation unto
some prodigious exployt to be performed by this Champion. What will he doc? He
comes Sampson-like, and makes no more reckoning to pull down the pillars,
whereon the whole frame of Christian faith stands, than Sampson did to pull
down the house upon the Philistims heads. But let Vega beware he pull not an
old house upon his own head. Well, Dico tandem, etc. I say once for all, that
although it may Ad Triarios res redijt.
be certain by faith, that any kind of repentance for sins, with a purpose
of keeping the Commandemets, and a desire to receive Baptism, be, together
with Baptism and Penance, sufficient to obtain grace; yet it does not follow,
that our grace may by faith be certain unto us. For although it may appear
evidently to every one, whether he has these things or no; yet none can be
certain by faith, or evidently, that he is truly baptized or absolved:
because there is necessarily required unto the accomplishing of these and all
other Sacraments, an intention in the Priest, to do that which the Priest The
Priests intention a Supercedeas to all certainty of faith.
does, as is decreed in the seventh Session of this our Council, Can. 11. But
of that intention in the Priest, no man, without divine revelation, can by
faith or evidence be certain. And so forth, to this purpose. Thus does Vega at
one blow stagger the certainty of faith confirmed by the Sacraments; nay, not
only stagger it, but strike it dead, if certainty (as the Pontificians in
their Council have decreed) must depend upon the intention of the Priest, in
the time of consecrating the Sacraments, and without the Priests intention, the
whole Sacrament is void and vain: and whether the Priests intention were
going a wool-gathering or no, no man knows. Into such a miserable exigent of
uncertainty have the Pontificians implunged themselves; as into the very Gulf
of Hell, where doubt and despair dwells.

Now for those divine helps to the native certainty of saving Faith, we may
sum them up, and reduce them to this gradation: As first, Gods Word; Dictum
Iehouae: secondly, Gods promise: thirdly, his oath: fourthly, his handwriting:
fifthly, his scale: sixthly, his carnest or pledge, 2. Cor. 5. 5. So that God,
as it were by so many steps and degrees, leads our Faith to the very top of
the impregnable Rock of all infallible and immovable certainty. Another
accessory testimony The testimony of a good conscience.
confirming the certainty of faith, is a good conscience; which is not only
conscientia recte factorum, but faciendorum: not only a good conscience, in
regard of our life past, wherein we have endeavored to live uprightly, and
heartily repented us of whatsoever we have mis-done, either by omission or
commission: but also in regard of the time to come, while we resolve in a
sincere purpose of heart, and endeavor with all our power, to serve God in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Of the good conscience
of the life past, the Apostle speaks, whereby the certainty of his faith is
sealed up unto him, 2. Tim. 4. 6. 7. I am now ready to be offered, and the time
of my departure is at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith. Whereupon he concludes in the certainty of
Faith: Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day. And, of his good
conscience for the time to come, he speaks, Phil 3. 13. Brethren, I count not
my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I
press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Also, Heb. 13. 18. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good conscience
in all things, willing to live honestly. Now the conscience of a man is
weighty, and magn^ ^^ero.
in vtramque partem, as the Orator said. It is a powerful testimony either to
accuse, or to acquit a man. As Romans 2. 15. The Apostles good conscience was a
comfortable testimony unto him, Acts 23. 1. So 2. Cor. 1. 12. Our reioyciug is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world. Now a good conscience has many branches, either as
it reflects upon Faith; so it is privy to the remission of sins, and
reconciliation of the soul with God: or as it respects our love, both of
God, and of the godly in especial. Love is another seal of Faith, as 1. John
3. 18, My Godly love a seal and badge of the certainty of salvation
little children, let us not love in words, neither in tongue, but in deed, and
in truth. And hereby we know, that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. And verse. 14. We know that we have passed from death unto
life, because we love the brethren. Yea, this is such a badge, as all men may
know us to belong to Christ, John 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another.

Another seal of the certainty of Faith, is affliction for Christ's cause.
Hereupon the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 1. 5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. And hereupon he groundeth the
certainty of his hope, not only touching himself, but also the Corinthians
themselves, verse. 7. And our hope of you is steadfast, knowing, that as you are
partakers of the sufferings, so shall you be also of the consolation. Yea, the
afflictions which Gods children suffer for Christ, are occasions and means to
fasten our faith the more surely upon God: as verse. 9. We had the sentence of
death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which
raised the dead. The Apologue of the Traveler, may be a Moral unto us in this
matter. The Sun and the Wind played each their part by turns, to see which
could first cause the wayfaring man to cast his cloak off. The Wind blowing
and blustering upon him, caused him to buckle it closer to him: but the Sun
working upon him with his warm rays, at length made him weary of his weed,
and to cast it aside. So preualent are the blasts of afflictions to cause the
Christian Pilgrim, to buckle his mantle of Faith closer unto him; when as the
flattering gleames of outward prosperity, do cause oftentimes a feeble
fainting in the soul. To this purpose the Apostle says excellently, 2. Cor.
4. 8. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed: we are perplexed, but
not in despair: persecuted, but not for saken: cast down, but not destroyed.
Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Iosus (The Apostle
keeps his Cloak close about him, for all the storm) that the life also of
Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. And verse. 16. For which
cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is
renewed day by day. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. For our suffering
with and for Christ, is a sure token of our reigning with him. Romans 8. 17. If
so be that we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together with him.
Hereupon the Apostle rejoices, yea, and glorisieth in this behalf, 2. These.
1. 4. We our selves glory in you, in the Churches of God, for your patience and
faith, in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure, which is a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted
worthy of the Kingdom of God; for which ye also suffer, seeing it is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you,
and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, etc. And, Romans 5. 1. etc.
Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by Faith into this grace, wherein we
stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we glory
in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works patience; and patience,
experience; and experience, hope; and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us.
So that by these places of holy Scripture, we may note what a strong evidence
and assurance of salvation, a faithful man receives from the use of
afflictions, such as he suffers especially for Christ's cause. They are
infallible tokens unto us of Gods righteous judgment to come: yea, they are
the very Characters of Christ. As the same Apostle says, Gal. 6. 17. From
henceforth, let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks (...)
of the Lord Jesus. As if the Apostle had said: Let no man go about to disturb
my Faith, or to trouble and blunder the clear crystal fountain of that
Evangelical Doctrine, which I have both preached and practiced, with the
mixtures of legal Ceremonies, and carnal Rites: for I am ready to seal up
with my dearest blood this my Faith and Doctrine, bearing already about in my
body the ignominious marks (as the world accounts them) of the Lord Jesus, as
the most certain seals and testimonies of my rejoicing in Christ Jesus; by
which rejoicing I dye daily. In a word, the afflictions of Christ, are the
Christians highway to Heaven. Acts 14. 22. Paul confirmed the souls of the
Disciples, by exhorting them to continue in the Faith, concluding, that we must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. So that a Christian
asking the way, by which he must travel to the Kingdom of Heaven, his
Country; and being told, that the way through which he must pass, is a very
narrow and strait passage, encumbered with many difficulties and dangers,
strowed with thorns and briars, beset with band-dogs, and wild beasts,
crawling with serpents and snakes, and lying through a barren and desolate
desert, where he must look to find but hard entertainment, suffer much
hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, etc. will not this Christian Traveler,
meeting with such signs and tokens of his way, chawked out unto him aforehand,
persuade himself, that he is now in the right way to his Country? Whereas if
he meet with pleasant paths, through fertile fields, and bespangled
meadows, and pleasant groves, and crystal riuelets, to refresh and delight
him, and in stead of saluage wild beasts, and serpents, find courteous
entertainment, and kind usage of the Natives and Patriots of the Country: may
he not justly suspect he is out of his way? For as one says; Non est ad astra
mollis e terris via: Seneca.
The passage from earth to Heaven is not strowed with Roses. Afflictions then
being the way to Gods Kingdom, the Christian man's Country, it is a strong
evidence, that he is one of Gods Sons and Children, whom the Father thus
chasteneth, Heb. 12. 6.
as the Apostle says.

Another means to strengthen our Faith in the certainty of it concerning
salvation, is our manifold infirmities; a thing not more strange, than true*
For, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 12. 10. When I am weak, then am I strong.
Therefore, says he, I take pleasure in infirmities; most gladly therefore will
I rejoice in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. Now
the reason why our infirmities and weaknesses do tend to our further
strengthening in Grace and Faith, is, not out of the nature and property of
infirmities, but because they drive us from reposing confidence in our selves,
to rest the more strongly upon Christ. This is like that (...), the Philosopher
speaks of; As in the winter season, Well-water is more warm than in summer,
being environed round with cold frost, which causes the native heat to
recollect it self inward: So Faith being compassed about with many
infirmities, is thereby occasionally moved to recollect his strength together:
and is then strongest, when the flesh is weakest. As the Apostle says, When I
am weak, then am I strong. This is that, whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor.
1. 25. calling it the foolishness of God, which is wiser than men; and the
weakness of God, which is stronger than men: For (says he) ye see your
calling, brethren, how that not many wisemen after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called: but God has chosen the foolish, weak, and base
things of the world, to confound the wise, strong, and honorable of the world.
What Is the reason? The Apostle adds it, That no flesh should rejoice in his
presence: For of him are we in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; that
according as it is written, He that 2. Cor. 12.
glories, let him glory in the Lord. Thus Gods strength is made perfect in us,
through our weakness.

Finally, that which the Pontificians make a block to stumble, or a shelfe to
split and wrack the certainty of their salvation; even that does the Scripture
put as a faithful station to harbor in, and a firm ground to anchor on: and
that is fear. As they allege that of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 12. 13. Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God, which works in you,
both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. But the Pontificians, as if they
would profess themselves altogether strangers and aliens from this mystery of
grace, they do most grossly pervert and Council. Trid* Scs. 6. cap. 13.
wrest this place of the Apostle to a quite contrary sense, as if by fear and
trembling, the Apostle should teach us to doubt of our salvation. Indeed, as
Trent takes fear; namely, for the slavish and servile fear, such as is in the
Devils, and such as is suitable to Romish faith, no marvel if it be full of
anxiety and perplexed horror: but taking it as the Apostle means it, for the
filial and godly fear that is in Gods Saints and Sons, it is free from
anxious perturbation. But it is evident, that the Apostle speaks of fear and
trembling in regard of Gods power in working in us, and of our own manifold
infirmities and disabilities to perform any good duty, as of our selves. For
the Apostle testifies, It Phil. 2. 12. 13.
is God that works in us both to will and to do, and that of his good
pleasure. Whereupon St. Augustine says; Vnde, Cum timore Aug. de not* and
great. contra Pelag. cap. 33. tom. 7.
ac tremore? nisi quia superbia etiam in ipsis recte sactis cauenda est, ne
homo, dum quod Dei est, deput at suum, amittat quod Dei est, and redeat ad
suum: Whence is this, that he says, With fear and trembling? but because pride
is to be prevented even in our best actions, left while a man account that his
own, which is due to God, he lose even that which is Gods, and return to that
which is his own. And upon the 103. Psalm, Aug. in Psalm. 130. concio 4.
upon the same words of the Apostle, Augustine says; Quare cum tremore? Quia
Deus operatur. Quia ipse dedit, non ex te est, quod habes: cum timore ac
tremore operaberis. Nam si non tremueris eum, auferet quod dedit: Why with
trembling? Because it is God which works. Because he gave, and it is not of
thee, which thou have: therefore thou shall work with fear and trembling. For
if thou will not tremble before him, he will take from thee that which he
gave. And he adds that in the second Psalm, Serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice unto him with trembling. Si cum tremore exultandum est, Deus aspicit,
fit terraemontus; aspiciente Deo tremant corda nostra, nam ^unc ibi requiescet
Deus: If we must rejoice with trembling, God looks, and the earth quaketh;
when God looks on us, let our hearts tremble, for then God rests there.
Audi illum alio loco, etc. Hear him in another place, Upon whom shall my
Spirit rest? even upon him that is poor, and of a contrite Esaias ^^.
heart, and that trembles at my word. So that our fear is our security, our
trembling our rest and rejoicing. Thus we become Gods habitation for his Spirit
to rest on. So far is our fear and trembling from doubting and uncertainty,
that our trembling heart becomes a fair object of Gods gracious countenance.
Upon him will I look; and a firm subject of his eternal residence, upon him
will I rest, says the Lord. Or if we refer fear and trembling to the
consideration of the day of Christ's coming in Majesty, when every tongue shall
confess, and every knee bow unto him, which the Apostle in the same Chapter a
little before mentions, expounding it of our appearing before him at that
day, Romans 14. 11. Yet this fear and trembling, is so far from working in us
wavering and doubtfulnesse of our salvation, that S. Augustine writing upon the
147. Psalm, says: In Euangelica lectione territi Aug. in Psalm. 147. in
prooemio
sumus de die nouissimo. Terror ille securitatem parturit. Territi enim
praecauemus; praecauentes, securi erimus: In the reading of the Gospel we are
afraid of the last day. This terror begets security. For being afraid, we
take heed betimes; and taking timely heed, we shall be secure. And to
conclude this point, the wisdom of God says clearly, Pro. 14. 16. In the
fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children shall have a place of
refuge. Thus whereas the Pontificians teach their people to doubt of their
salvation, in regard of their own indisposition: Gods Spirit reareth up a
Temple of rest upon our trembling heart (as once he established the stable
earth upon the tremulous waters) teaching us to rejoice in our indisposition
and infirmities, and to exult in our trembling, because his strength is made
perfect in our weakness, because our rejoicing and glorying is not in our
selves, but in God, who works in us both to will and to do, and that of his
good pleasure. So that the true believers own infirmities, are strong motines
to drive him out of himself, and to rest wholly upon God, who is his only
strength. What is the reason then, that the Pontifician, so much depressing and
vilifying his own indisposition, in regard of certainty of Faith, is not also
moved thereby to renounce himself, and repose his Faith the more firmly upon
God? The reason is, for that as on the one side, they advance beyond all
measure the power of their naturals, as their free will, and the like, both in
receiving and retaining of I wot not what inherent grace, whereon they build
their justification: so on the other side, they do as much depresse their
indisposition (as they call it) not that thereby they might be driven out of
themselves, to seek rest in God, but that in a Babylonish and confused mixture
of a high and low conceit of themselves, they might build an imaginary Tower
reaching up to Heaven, whose foundation and whose fabric is nothing else, but
tottering uncertainty. And were it not that God had altogether confounded these
Babylonish builders, not only in their language, but in their very judgments,
me thinks, in their natural policy, they might have salued or saved the
credit of their disposition (which otherwise they so much adore) by not
mentioning it at all, and in stead thereof have magnified their naturals, and
inherentrighteousnesse to the very skies: and so all their certainty of
salvation would even mole sua, of it own accord, fall to the ground, according
to their own desire. For, once persuade a man, that his salvation has but any
part of dependence upon his own natural abilities; and then, the more you
possess him with an opinion of his own worth, the further off he is from all
true certainty of salvation. For as the deeper Seas have the loftier surges,
tossing the ship now up to Heaven, now down to Hell, so that the passengers
stagger too and fro like Psalm. 107.
a drunken man, and are at their wits end, as David speaks: So the higher a man
is mounted from the firm ground of sole saving Faith, upon the swelling surges
of his own inherent righteousness, the more is his conscience, upon every
wind of temptation, rolled up and down, now to the top of vain presumption,
now to the bottom of deep despair, having not the least anchor-hold of true
hope, whereon to stay his brittle Bark. But since the Pontificians acknowledge
no other justification, but that which is inherent, whereupon does necessarily
follow uncertainty, as a fruit of the same tree; and seeing this certainty at
the best can be no other, but a vain presumption and false confidence, which
they maliciously brand the certainty of true Faith withal: therefore let them
at their pleasure cry up, or cry down their own coin, to hold their Merchants
in suspense of making any saving trade by the certainty of salvation, because
such certainty grounded upon their inherent righteousness, must needs be
mere presumption.

CHAP. XVI. Of Pontifician uncertainty in regard of predestination, and
perseverance in grace.
THE Pontificians, denying the certainty of predestination, Council. Trid. ses.
6. Can. 12. 13
and so consequently of perseverance in grace, do make the uncertainty of both
the maine ground to build the uncertainty of their faith upon. Concerning
predestination, the Trent-Councell says in the 12. Chapter, the title whereof
is, To take heed of the rash presumption of predestination: Nemo quamdiu in hac
mortalitate viuitur, de arcano diuinae praedestinationis mysterio vsque adeo
praesumere debet, vt certo statuat se omnino esse in numero praedestinatorum:
quasi verum esset, quod iustificatus, aut ampliu^ peccare non possit, aut si
peccauerit, certam sibi resipiscentiam promittere debeat. Nam nisi, ex speciali
reuelatione, sciri non potest, quos Deus sibi elegerit: that is, No man while
he lives in this mortality, ought so to presume of the secret mystery of
divine predestination, as that he certainly believes, he is altogether in the
number of the predestinate: as if it were true, that a man once justified,
either cannot sin any more, or if he sin, ought to promise to himself
certain repentance. For it cannot be known, but by special revelation, whom
God has elected to himself. Note here, that the Council puts no difference
between the certainty of faith, concerning predestination and rash
presumption, still referring all certainty to special revelation from God. So
that I would ask these Pontifician Fathers, that if a man by special
revelation being assured of his predestination, should thereupon confidently
affirm, that he is certainly in the number of Gods elect, and predestinate
unto life eternal; whether they would not also judge this to be rash
presumption. But this by the way. And Chapter 13. the title whereof is, Of the
gift of perseverance: Similiter de perseuerantiae munere, de quo scriptum est,
etc. Likewise of the gift of perseverance, whereof it is written, he that shall
endure to the end, he shall be saved, etc. Nemo sibi certi aliquid absoluta
certitudine polliceatur; tametsi in Dei auxilio, etc. Let no man promise to
himself any certainty by an absolute assurance; although all men ought to
place and repose a most firm hope in Gods help, etc. but with fear and
trembling let them work out their salvation in labors, in vigils, in
almes-deedes, in prayers, in oblations, in fastings, and in chastity: for they
ought to be fearful, knowing that they are borne again unto the hope of
glory, but not yet unto glory, etc. Note here, that the Pontifician Council
calls perseverance a special gift of God, thereby meaning, that it is a gift
merely distinct from faith, and no fruit of justifying faith. Now the Catholic
Doctrine teaches, that although perseverance be a gift of God, yet it is not
so distinct from true saving faith, but that it is also a proper fruit thereof.
Note here also, how though in general they say, that all men ought to have a
most firm hope in Gods help, yet their maine doctrine is, to drive men to
fearfulness and doubtfulnesse what shall become of them, seeing they tie their
gift of perseverance to the most uncertain condition of their own standing.
As the Council elsewhere says; Deus sua gratia semel iustificatos non
deserit, nisi ab eis prius descratur: God does not forsake those that are once
justified by his grace, unless first he be forsaken of them. But come we to
the Commentaries upon this Text of the Council.

First, concerning the point of predestination, whereon depends perseverance in
grace: I commend the Reader to the History of the Council of Trent, where he
may in one brief view, see how humane devices, and labyrinths of ungrounded
distinctions, were set on work to undermine this foundation: some of them
holding the Orthodoxe truth concerning election and reprobation, alleging the
example of Jacob and Esau, Romans 9. together with sundry other proofs out of
the Scriptures. But a second sort condemning this as a hard, cruel, inhumane,
horrible, and impious opinion, that it made God an accepter of persons, unjust;
that it overthrew free will; that it drowned men in the gulf of despair; that
it made others careless and presumptuous. And therefore, that God willing to
have all men saved, purposed to offer the same means to all, and whom he
foresaw would apply their free will to receive grace offered, those he
predestined to be saved: Others whom he foresaw would not obey, but refuse
to cooperate with God, those he did reprobate to damnation. Otherwise, there
appeared no reason, why God in the Scriptures so often complains of sinners,
labors to reclaim them, and win them unto him, if there were not in the means
of grace offered a sufficiency to save, and in men a liberty and ability to
receive them.

Hereupon the History setting down the censure of these two opinions, says,
That the first contained a great and hidden mystery, humbling man's conceit on
the one side, and advancing Gods grace on the other. The other more plausible,
popular, specious, and apt to puff up man with pride, and herein agreeing with
the Friars vain, professing rather artificial curiosity in preaching, than
accurate and sound Divinity; and to the Courtiers it seemed more probable, as
more agreeable with politic respects. It had especially two stout
maintainers, that were Bishops. And they which defended it, building upon
humane reasons, thereby showed their pregnant wit above others: but when they
came to testimonies of the Scripture, they easily failed in their cause. So the
History.

In the third place, he recites the opinion of a third sort, of whom Catarinus
is specially named, who, to mitigate and moderate the matter, confesses, that
there is a certain number of the predestinate unto life, but those very few,
whom God out of his special grace purposed effectually to call, and save. As
for the rest, God would have them also to be saved, affording them sufficient
means, but leaving it to their own will to accept, or refuse them. And these
latter were of two sorts; some that receiving the means, were saved, though
they were none of Gods elect; and of these there was a great number: Others,
refusing to cooperate with God, who would have saved them, are therefore
damned. That the cause of the predestination of those first few, was the only
absolute will and pleasure of God: and of those other, Gods preuision of their
accepting and using of Gods help, and their cooperating with it: but the cause
of the reprobation of the Iast, Gods preuision of their perverse will in
refusing Gods help, or in using it ill. This division is much like that which
we find in Plato's Phedo; where all men are sorted into three ranks: First,
Plato in Ph^done.
of such as are very good, but very few; and those dying, go straight to
Heaven, to the Elizian fields. The second, of those that are stark naught,
whereof there are very many; which dying, go immediately to Hell, whence there
is no redemption: and the third sort, are of a middle condition, neither very
good, nor very bad; who dying, are cast into a River in Hell, where continuing
for a year or two, till they be thoroughly purged, they are after that removed
into Heaven. But that River in Hell is long ago with the extreme heat of Hell
fire so dried up, as it is now become a hot dry stoue, called Purgatory, where
that middle sort of Pontificians, who are neither of the number of special
predestinate, nor of the worst and refuse of the rest, but such as by the
virtue of their free will, accept Pontifician grace offered them, are for a
time entertained in those hellish flames, till either their unclean souls, or
their Executors full sachels and powches be thoroughly purged. But this is by
the way.

But from the heat of those altercations, in the time that these things were a
hammering in the Councels forge, let us Vega.
come to see, what their learned Commentator Vega, has in cold blood set down
concerning this point of predestination, according to the Councels definitive
sentence. Duo sunt, etc. There are two things, which the To wit the
Trent-Fathers, so usually termed by equivocation.
Fathers define concerning the mystery of predestination: First, they decree,
That not every one that is justified, is predestinate, and that the grace of
justification may befall even those that are not predestinate, because he that
is justified, may lose his justification once had, and never after recover it.
And this (says he) the Fathers delivered in these words of the 12. Chapter,
Quasi verum esset, etc. As if it were true, that he that is once justified,
could either sin no more, or if he did sin, ought to promise to himself
certain repentance. Sed multo adhuc apertius, etc. But much more plainly in
the 17. Canon, in these words; Si quis iustificationis gratiam, etc. If any
shall say, that the grace of justification happens to none, but such as are
predestinate to life, and all others, who are called; to be called indeed, but
not to receive grace, as being by Gods power predestinate to evil: let him be
accursed. And, says Vega, by the name of predestination, they do in this
place understand an eternal preordination of some to blessedness: or, which
is somewhat more plain and familiar, a certain and firm purpose, whereby God
from eternity would bestow blessedness upon some men. Now by all this it
appears, that the Trent-Fathers hold, that others may be justified, besides
those that are predestinate and preordained unto life. So that it seems, the
Councels definitive sentence concerning predestination, concluded upon
Catarinus his opinion before cited; that besides the certain number of the
predestinate unto life, who are but a few, there are another sort left at
large, and at their own liberty, who receiving grace offered by the
cooperation of their free will, are also justified as well as the other.

Secundum vero, etc. And the second thing, which the holy Synod has here
taught her faithful ones concerning justification, is, that the mystery of
predestination, is so hidden and secret, as no man without divine revelation
can know, who those be, whom God has predestinate. Verba, etc. The words of
the Council are in the 12. Chapter; Nam nisi ex speciali reuelatione sciri non
potest, quos Deus sibielegerit: For it cannot be known, but by special
revelation, whom God has chosen to himself. Quare in principio, etc.
Wherefore in the beginning of this Chapter, the Fathers do wholesomly admonish
all believers, that no man, while he lives in this mortality, do so far
presume, as certainly to assure himself, that he is in the number of the
predestinate. Thus have we, I hope, without any equivocation, the full meaning
of this holy Synod concerning predestination, and the certainty of it.

As for the point of perseverance, which Vega coupleth with predestination as
necessarily depending upon it, we shall need to add no more, but what the
Council it self says expressly enough in Can. 16. cited by Vega: Si quis
magnum illud vsque in finem persevere antiae donum se certo habiturum, absoluta
and infallibili certitudine dixerit, nisi hoc ex speciali reuelatione
didicerit, anathema sit: that is, If any shall say, that he shall certainly
have that great gift of perseverance unto the end, by an absolute and
infallible certainty, unless he shall learn this by special revelation, let
him be accursed. And this (says Vega) confirms that which the Fathers said
of predestination. Now the cause (says he) for which all righteous men ought
to be afraid of their perseverance, and that none can arrogate to himself
such a great certainty as this, unless it By some good chance, doubtless.
happen unto him by divine revelation, the Fathers have opened in those words
of the 13. Chapter, Veruntamen, etc. But let them that think they stand, take
heed, lest they fall; and so unto the end of the Chapter. Thus we have the
state of Pontifician Doctrine, touching the certainty of justification, in
regard of predestination and perseverance.

For the maine substance of these Trent-Fathers Decrees and Canons, touching
predestination and perseverance, we shall try what truth is in them, when we
come to set down the opposite doctrine of the Catholic Faith. In the mean
time, let us a little weigh the moment of Vega's arguments Vega lib. 12. de
incertitud. praed. stinat. and perseuerantiae. c. 2*
for the defense of the Council. In his second Chapter of his 12. Book, Of
the uncertainty of predestination and perseverance, after a goodly flourish and
triumphall tripudiation, as if the field were already won, before he had
struck stroke, he says, Habemus certissima and fortissima argumenta, etc. We
have most certain and strong arguments, whereby to confirm and defend the
Doctrine delivered here by the Fathers, and to vanquish the contrary heresies.
And first, to prove this definition of the Fathers, says he, Non omnis, etc.
Not every one that is justified, is predestinate. We have many places of
Scripture to serve our purpose, proving, that there have been many in the state
of grace, and afterward have fallen from it, and at length damned. For
example, Saul, that was elect to be King of Israel, is said (1. Sam. 9. 2.) to
be electus Saul, one of Vega's Elect.
and bonus, an elect and good man; so that there was not a better than he,
among all the children of Israel. Now (says Vega) being said to be bonus and
electus, elect and good (as the vulgar Latin has it) it is manifest, that he
was then in the state of grace: for the Scripture (says he) does not adorn
men with such praises, which are out of the state of Gods grace. But (says he)
Saul afterward fell; and was rejected and damned. I answer: Saul is there
called an elect man, in that he was a choice, and goodly tall young man, proper
of personage, insomuch as none was found comparable to him for personage and
stature; for he was taller by the head and shoulders, than any of the people.
Does this prove that he was one of Gods eternal election? Or does God elect
men to salvation, for the goodlinesse of their person? No: we see the
contrary, 1. Sam. 16. 7. That Saul dyed a reprobate, and desperately, we easily
grant it: But that Saul ever was in the state of grace, Vega says nothing yet
to the purpose to prove it, nor ever can he. I rather marvel, why Vega
omitted a more probable argument, to prove Saul to have once been in the state
of grace; to wit, because the Spirit of the Lord coming upon him, he was
turned into another man. An argument which some other Pontificians urge: yet
Vega alleges St. Augustines censure of Saul, who concludes him to be a Aug.
lib. 2. ^^ ^implic. qu. 1.
reprobate, saying, The example of this Saul, makes against some proud
heretics, which deny that any of the good gifts of the holy Ghost, may be
given to those, that do not appertain to the condition of Saints. Which
saying of that worthy Father, does plainly prove, that Saul was never of the
number of Gods Saints; and that even wicked and reprobate men may have
notwithstanding some special gifts of the holy Ghosts, and yet be never a whit
the nearer to the state of grace. Saul was said to be changed into another man,
when Gods Spirit came upon him; not in regard of conversion from sin unto
God, or from a wicked life to the state of grace: but of a private man, whose
thoughts reached no higher than his fathers Asses, he was made a Prince, and
endowed with Princely qualities of wisdom and courage, the gifts of Gods
Spirit, whereby he was enabled for such a weighty government. Yea, we are not
afraid to put this case to the trial even of a Bishop of Rome. Gregory, the
last good Greg. lib. 4. ca. 3. in 1. Reg. 9.
Bishop of Rome, says thus of Saul: Saul electus dicitur, non secundum
gratiam, sed secundum iudicium. Bonus dicitur, vt divine aequitatis dispositio
commendetur. Bonum profecto est, quicquid est iustum, etc. Saul is said to be
elect, not according to grace, but according to judgment. He is called good,
that the disposition of divine equity might be commended. That indeed is good,
whatsoever is just, etc. And he illustrates this by the instance of
Ecclesiastical Pastors. Per iustitiam quippe Dei, Pastores reprobi, etc. For
by the justice of God* reprobate Pastors are permitted to climb to the
regiment of holy Church; but they which are evil by their iniquity, are good
by divine dispensation: and now by the secret ordination of God, they are
elected, who at the last, in the universal judgment, shall be reprobated.
Therefore a reprobate shepherd, because by divine dignation he is appointed to
that office, may be called elect: and because he is justly permitted, he may
be called good. And because he is thought fitter than others to execute Gods
judgments, therefore none is said to be better than he among the children of
Israel. Seeing therefore it cannot be proved, that Saul was ever in the state
of grace, but the contrary is manifest, even by the judgment of him, who was
once Bishop of Rome; no marvel, if he dyed a desperate Reprobate.

Hereunto Vega adds Salomons example, that being endued with extraordinary
wisdom from God, and so standing in the state of grace, he afterward fell
away, and Vega Solomon one of Vega's Reprobates, though once Elect.
labors to prove, that Solomon dyed a Reprobate. For answer; that God gave
such wisdom to Solomon, this proves him no more to be in the state of grace,
than that which was given to Saul. This wisdom given to Solomon was famous
indeed, but for ought we find, it was no other, but a natural and moral
wisdom, and knowledge, whereby he might the better judge that great people,
committed to his charge, as Solomon himself says, 1. Kings 3. 9. and know the
nature and property of all creatures, as 1. Kings 4. 29. 30. 31. etc. Not that
I deny, but that Solomon might now be in the state of grace, and no doubt but
he was: but that he was not therefore in the state of grace, because of his
extraordinary wisdom given unto him. For do not we know, that for a
natural and moral wisdom, even Heathen men, as many Pagan Philosophers,
have far excelled many of Gods Saints? Again, as we deny not, but that young
Solomon was now in the state of grace; so we deny, that he ever fell totally
away from this estate. It is true, he fell fearfully, but not totally: for
Solomon fell not away totally.
mark what the Scripture says expressly, 1. Kings 11. 4. It came to pass,
when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods;
and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David
his father. And in the 6. verse. Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father. Whence note, first,
that it is said, When Solomon was old. Indeed old age when it comes to dotage,
is dangerous, and very slippery: but to dote upon women, yea many women, wives
and concubines, so many hundred of them, and those also strange women, of a
strange Religion; alas, poor old Solomon, how were his affections distracted,
and his thoughts even pulled asunder, as it were by so many Furies, as there
were fancies in his women's heads! Well, by this means, the byas of his
affections wheeling about his women, as so many Mistresses, caused his heart to
decline from his direct course, tending toward the maine mark, which was God.
But this declination, it was no flat Apostasy; for now the worst was, that he
went not fully after the Lord his God; his heart was not perfect with the Lord
his God, as was the heart of David his father. His former single heart began
now to double, his upright heart began now in victa aetate, in his verging or
stooping old age, to grow crooked. Yet for all this, he kept him upon his
feet, he still stood in the state of grace, although with much staggering: and
though his left foot failed him, yet his right foot remained firm; though
the left foot of his affection went after his strange women, and so was drawn
with them after their strange gods; yet he had the right foot of his affection
upright to God-wards. Which I speak, not to excuse or mitigate his sin: for
it was most fearful and lamentable, and to be bewailed with sad repentance
and a flood of tears: But taking Gods Word for my warrant, I affirm, that
though Salomons fall was fearful, yet it was not total; his heart had not
quite forsaken his God.

Again, as Salomons fall was not total, so neither was it Salomons fall as
not total, so not final.
final: For we have his Ecclesiastes, as an eternal monument of his entire
repentance and conversion from vanity to God. And as an infallible token of a
true penitent, he styles himself the Preacher. He lays aside his royal
Crown, diuests himself of all his Princely titles and ornaments, and in stead
thereof, takes on him the humble, but holy style of a Preacher; not only to
preach repentance unto others, but to persuade them by the strongest argument
of his own practice, and the best evidence of his own experience. And the
Wisdom of God shows it self admirable, in making choice of Solomon to be
the Penman of that excellent Book of Ecclesiastes, every line whereof, he
that runs may read in the face of wise Salomons own experience: in which
mirror, every natural man may clearly see his own full proportion. Solomon
had no more strange wives and concubines, than the world has minions of
strange vanities, which every carnal man, according to the variety of his
fancy, as his Idoll-Goddesse, adoreth. Now God in his mercy willing to admonish
the vain world, and to reclaim vain men from their sundry Idol-pleasures,
and withal the more strongly to allure them, in his wisdom, makes special
choice of Solomon to be his Preacher. Why so? Solomon was the wisest man that
ever was, from the first Adam, before the second Adam, Christ, and so of all
men in the world, could give the exactest judgment, and truest censure of the
nature of all things under the Sun. Besides his incomparable wisdom, he had a
most abundant experimental knowledge of all earthly things, whatsoever might
seem excellent in the eye and judgment of flesh and blood; yea, he was most
industrious and studious, eagerly searching into the depth and height, and all
the dimensions of worldly excellency; till I might see (says he) what was that
Eccles. 2. 3.
good for the sons of men, which they should do under the Heaven, all the
days of their life. Would thou then know, thou worlds doting Lover, what the
true nature of the world, and of all that is in the world (as the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life) is? Hearken to the Preacher,
yea ask Solomon, the wisest of men. Ask him in any kind, he will resolve
thee, as he did the Queen of Sheba, and other Princes that came to hear his
wisdom; whom he resolved in all their questions. Travail not to any of the
Philosophers, to enquire of them wherein thy Summum bonum consists: for when
they have told thee all they can, thou will come as far short of giving them
credit, as they will do in giving thee true counsel. If they tell thee, that
riches, pleasures, and honors, are all vain things, and no felicity to be
found in them: thou will but laugh at them, as men at least experimentally
ignorant of the nature of those things, whereof they never had the use and
possession. Ask Diogenes of honor, and he prefers his Tubbe before Great
Alexanders Triumphs; and tramples on Plato's pompous pride, with a greater
pride of poverty. And in a word, thou will answer them all, with ignoti nulla
cupido: they therefore despise these thing, because they never tasted the
sweetness that is in them, at least in the worlds apprehension. But come to
Solomon, who not only knew the nature of these things better than all those
Heathen wise men, but also made it his study, yea, and his practice too, to
know them by an infallible experience; and his judgment will be found to be
above all exception. And what is his judgment of all these things? what
profit, or what pleasure, or what contentment found he in any, or in all of
them? This is his definitive sentence of them: All is vanity, and vexation of
spirit. Thou had better far to believe him, than go about to try. He
stands as a Sea-marke to warn all wordly Merchants, yea the greatest Princes
and Potentates of the earth, to beware of those Rocks, and Shelues, and
Syrtes, whereon himself suffered woeful shipwreck. But yet, if vnheedily,
thou have fallen upon the same Rocks, behold also Solomon standing as an
example of penitency to all men. For as he teaches all men to eschew the
deceiptfull pleasures, profits, and preferments of the world; so he inuiteth
them to follow with him the true and sovereign good; concluding his Book
thus, Let us hear the end of all, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for
this is whole man; for God will bring every work to judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil. A noble precedent of a penitent
soul; not only to repent himself, but to become a royal Preacher of
repentance to others. So did his father David, Psalm. 51. where, repenting of
his sin, and having pleaded for Gods mercy and favor, to the 12. verse. then
as a special fruit of his reconciliation with God, he says, Then will I
teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. So
that this is the vp-shot of all this discourse of Solomon, to give God the
glory in Salomons repentance, and in his choosing of him, to be both a
Pattern and a Preacher of repentance to the world. If I have been longer
herein, than perhaps may seem suitable to the present purpose, I must crave
pardon; although I shall not repent me, if by this means I shall be any
occasion of converting any young Alipius from the Circensian pleasures of this
vain world, to the imitation of Salomons repentance; as St. Augustine thanked
God, for Aug confess. lib. 6. cap. 7.
having been a means of converting Alipius from the Circensian games,
wherewith he had been so bewitched. Which, says Augustine, was upon this
occasion: Alipius being present at one of my Rhetoric Lectures in Carthage, I
took occasion, being offered, to delight my Auditory with a Simile taken from
the Circensian games, wherewith Alipius being taken, Augustine confesses; Tu
scis, Deus noster, quod tunc de Alipio de illa peste sanando non cogitauerim:
Thou know, O God, that at that time, I did not so much as think of curing
Alipius of that pestilentiall disease. Or as the same Augustine, contrary to
his usual manner, having made a digression besides his intention from his
purpose, was as it were by Gods all-directing provident hand, led out of his
own way, to reduce a wanderer into the right way. For by his digression, he
was a means to convert one Firmus a Merchant, but a Manichee unto the true
Faith: Possid. in vita August. cap. 15.

But to return to our purpose. Notwithstanding the Book of Ecclesiastes be a
most clear evidence of Salomons repentance, since it cannot be denied to be
his, both by the title of it, and the whole passage of the book; yet Vega
labors tooth and nail to make a Reprobate of him. One of his reasons is,
because the Scripture makes no mention of his repentance, as of David's. But I
hope, the book of Ecclesiastes he will allow to be Scripture. But shall we
take all those for Reprobates, whose sin the Scripture records, but makes
no mention of their repentance? What then shall become of holy Moses, whose
infidelity at Meribah, in not honoring the Lord by his obedience and faith, is
recorded in Scripture, yea so, as there is not only no mention of his
repentance; but, as if his sin remained unpardoned, and he deceased in Gods
displeasure, he was not suffered to come into the land of Canaan for that very
cause. Did not therefore Moses repent him Numb. 20. 12.
of his sin? or dyed he in Gods displeasure? or must he not come into the
Kingdom of Heaven, whereof Canaan was a type? But Vega prosecuting the matter
very eagerly, alleges also his proofs, not only out of Ecclesiasticus, to
no purpose (but not a word of Ecclesiastes) but also out of St. Augustine and
Cyprian; who indeed do speak somewhat difficultly and doubtfully of Solomon,
as making his example a matter of terror, and so it is no doubt.

But there are also other Fathers to counterballance them, and for the Doctrine
of final falling away from grace, we shall see their judgments at large. Yet
at length, Vega himself is willing to condescend so far to indifferency
herein, as he is content to wave the matter, so it be granted, that though
Solomon did repent, whereof there are such pregnant proofs, yet at least his
example of falling may confute (as he says) Iouinian, that denied the just
could once fall away from the grace received.

Another example he brings of Judas, who (says he) had Example of Judas.
once grace, and fell away from it. For Judas was in the state of grace, at
what time he was chosen to be an Apostle; else he had not bin admitted to that
dignity. And that he both had, and lost this grace, Christ proves; saying, Of
those whom thou gave me, have I lost none, but the son of perdition. So
Vega. But tell me, Vega, what grace had Judas, when he was chosen to be an
Apostle? Had he the true grace of justification, whereby he was accepted with
God? Where prove you this? You might remember your School distinction, which
may well enough be admitted; to wit, of gratia gratis data, and gratia gratum
faciens: the first, a grace freely given, to enable men to the work of the
Ministry, and such like; whereof Christ speaks, Freely you have received,
freely give: but the other Matthew. 10. ^.
is that grace, which makes a man accepted with God through Christ; whereof the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1. 6. where having spoken in the Verse before of Gods
predestinating us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, according to
the good pleasure of his will; he adds, To the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved, etc. Now Judas being
made an Apostle, had the former grace given unto him, to enable him to preach,
and do miracles, and to discharge the duty of an Apostle: but the other
grace, to make him accepted in the Beloved, according to Gods eternal purpose
in predestination, whereof the Apostle there speaks, we deny that ever Judas
had that grace. Yea, Vega himself confesses, that Judas was not of the number
of the predestinate to life eternal, but that notwithstanding he had the grace
of justification. Unless Vega equiuocates in the word Grace, meaning only a
certain favor of God toward Judas in making choice of him to be an Apostle.
If Vega mean so, we grant that it was a great favor indeed; but that Judas
was so in the grace and favor of God, as to be adopted for one of his
Children, and so accepted in his beloved Judas had not saving grace.
Son, we utterly deny; nor can Vega with all his Sophistry ever prove it.
Christ says indeed, Of them whom thou have given me, I have lost none, but
the son of perdition. Was Judas then given to Christ by his Father, in such a
special manner as the rest of the Apostles were, who were also holy and elect
vessels of mercy? Gods giving there unto Christ, is in a twofold respect to be
considered: First, as all the Twelve were Apostles; so God gave them all to
Christ, without difference, to serve him in the ministry of the Gospel. For
the wickedest Apostle or Minister of the Gospel, has as great power and
authority given to him execute his function, as the holiest of all. The wicked
Scribes and Pharisees must be heard with all attention and reverence, sitting
in Moses Chair; that is, teaching Moses Doctrine. But secondly, the Twelve
were given to Christ as men; and so they were given in a most different
respect, and to a diverse end. Our Savior says, Have not I chosen you Twelve,
and one of you is a Devil? Judas was a Devil (that is, a deuillish man, a
Devil incarnate, as wd use to say of a most wicked man) when God gave him to
Christ; and as a man, a wicked man, he was given to Christ to be his Minister,
that he might also be his betrayer, as the Scriptures had foretold. But the
rest of the Apostles were given to Christ, as men elect and predestinate in
Christ to life eternal. So was not Judas given to Christ, even the enemies
being witnesses. St. Augustine hereupon says, upon the words of Christ, John
6. Have not I chosen you Twelve, and Aug. quaest. super Genes. lib. 1. qu. 117.
tom. 4.
one of you is a Devil? Vt non ad electionem etiam ipse pertinere videatur:
That (says he) Judas might not seem to appertain to the election. Non enim
facile, etc. For the name of Elect is not easily found in an evil man, unless
when evil men are elected by evil men. Quod si putauerimus, etc. If we shall
think that he also was elect, that by his treason the Lords Passion might be
accomplished: that is, that his malice was elected to some purpose, since God
can make a good use even of the wicked. Illud, etc. Let us attend to that he
says, John 13. 18. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen: Vbi
declarat, etc. Where he declares, that none but good men appertain to the
election. Ac per hoc, etc. And hereby, that which is said, I have chosen you
Twelve, is spoken by a Figure Synecdoche: that by the name of the greater or
better part, that also might be said to be fulfilled, which does not belong to
the name it self. So Augustine. And also upon the same words of John 6. in his
exposition of the 55. Psalm. Nonne vos, etc. Have not Aug. in Psalm. 55.
I chosen you Twelve, and one of you is a Devil? Ergo and Diabolus electus
est? Is even a Devil then elected? Aut si electus non est, etc. Or if he be
not elected, how did he elect Twelve, and not rather Eleven? Electus and ille
est, sed ad aliud. Electi vndecim ad opus probationis, electus vnus ad opus
tentationis: Judas was also elected, but to a diverse purpose. The eleven were
elected to the work of approbation, that one was elected to the work of
temptation. So Augustine. So that as the election of the Twelve, was for diverse
ends; of the Eleven to their salvation, and of Judas, to become an instrument
of Christ's death, to his damnation: So Gods giving of the Twelve to Christ, was
for different purposes; for though all of them were chosen to be Apostles, yet
Eleven of them were also chosen to be vessels of grace, not only to convey it
to others, but to conserve it in themselves: but Judas, a Devil, a son of
perdition, was chosen not only to be an Apostle, but the betrayer of Christ;
God well using an evil instrument, as Augustine says. In the mean time, let
it not seem strange, that the Pontificians so highly dignifie Judas, as to
give him once a place in the state of grace: for as St. Augustine reports,
the Aug. de haeresibus ad Quodvult-deum. lib. 6. 18. Cainites.
Devil wanted not a sort and sect of Heretics, called Cainites (because they
worshipped Cain, who murdered his brother) who also held Judas in very high
esteem, as some certain divine creature, even for betraying of Christ,
because (say they) he knew it was a work, that would prove profitable to the
world. But seeing Vega, with his Pontificians, will needs make Judas an
example of a man, once in the state of saving grace, let them take him as
Christ calls him, a Devil; such was elect Judas: and so we shall not envy,
but pity the case of these men, that confess themselves to be in no better
state of grace, than Judas once was.

But Vega, in behalf of the Council of Trent, prosecutes his arguments, to
prove the uncertainty of predestination and perseverance, in five whole
Chapters together, from the third to the seventh; showing himself a true
Pontifician, in doubling and iuggling with the truth. But his arguments are so
slight, and his instances so impertinent, that I will not spend time in the
reciting of them. Only I will name the head of them, that the Reader may
thereby estimate the whole body. As, That some predestinate have sometimes been
out of the state of grace; as namely, before their effectual calling: and some
after their effectual calling, as falling from grace by every mortal sin,
as the Pontificians teach. And as they may fall from grace, so the wicked (he
must needs mean the reprobate, as opposite to the elect; for else, all men by
nature are wicked, and there is no difference, as the Apostle Romans 3. 22. 23.
speaks) the wicked (says Vega) may be received into grace, as the
predestinate may fall from grace. And so we yield unto him, that the wicked;
that is, the reprobate, may be as well received into grace, as the
predestinate and elect may fall from grace totally or finally. But we still
affirm, and shall by and by confirm it, that the elect of God cannot fall
totally and finally from grace: and no more can the reprobate be ever received
into grace.

But Vega's seventh Chapter seems to be full of moment, the title whereof is,
De consensu Doctorum, and Ecclesia totius in Iouinianum and Vicle^um: Of the
consent of Doctors, and of the whole Church against Iouinian and Wiclefe. Note
here a point of Pontifician bravery, and serpentine subtilty together: First, a
goodly flourish of the consent of Doctors, and of the whole Church; and then to
disgrace the Doctrine of predestination, as a nouelty, and an opinion of
fingularity, he fastens it upon Iouinian and Wiclefe, as the prime authors of
it. Now because the Chapter is long, and full of allegations, as his manner is
in his serpent-like gate; let it suffice us to take the contents of the whole
in a few words. And because we will not be our own caruers, we will take
Vega's own words, in the beginning of the Chapter: Praedestinatos and
iustificatos posse cadere a Dei gratia, and necessariam esse omnibus
perseuerantiam vsque ad mortem, vt perueniatur ad palmam, satis potest ex
praedictis constare: sed vt constet consensisse semper huic veritati Ecclesiam,
quod nos vbique ostensuros esse sumus polliciti, adiungam ijs, quae iam
citauimus, aliquot alia testimonia Doctorum, quae hanc veritatem luculenter nos
docent: that is, That the predestinate and justified may fall from the grace of
God, and that perseverance unto death is necessary for all, that they may come
to the Crown, it may sufficiently appear by that we have said before: but
that it may appear, that which we have every where We are too well acquainted
with your Pontifician promises.
promised to show, that the Church has always consented to this truth, I will
add to those already cited, some other testimonies of Doctors, which do
clearly teach us this truth. These words are the ground of the whole Chapter;
wherein observe, that the maine thing Vega shootes at in this Chapter, is to
prove, that therefore the predestinate, and those that be justified may fall
away from grace, because (forsooth) perseverance in grace unto the end is
necessary for all. Now though this ground be most false and absurd, yet his
whole Chapter tends to prove, that because upon the necessity of
perseverance, the Doctors of the Church use many exhortations to men to
persevere, whose testimonies to this purpose Vega heapeth up in great number:
therefore the Doctors of the Church do all consent, that a man that is
predestinate to life, may fall away from grace. It is Vega's own collection:
for else, says he, why do these Doctors use so many exhortations to men, to
strive to continue in the faith, not to be secure until the end? for this is
the sum of all his testimonies that he alleges. In the prosecution of all
which, I cannot better compare Vega, one of Trents chief Questers, than to a
Spaniell, which taking his scope in a large field, traversing up and down, in
and out to find game, puts up many a Foul, but still the more he prosecutes
them, the faster and farther they fly from him. So deals Vega. He takes the
whole Church, a large field to quest in, he startles many a Doctor and Father,
foolishly thinking in his own sent, to make them his own; but in the vpshot,
they fly the farther from him. As here. The Fathers exhort men to constancy,
and perseverance in the grace of God, not to be negligent and careless, not
to be carnally secure, but so to run, as they may obtain. True; and such
exhortations are most godly and necessary: for they are special means and
motives to stir us up to attain that end of our faith, the salvation of our
souls, to which we were predestinate, and preordained of God. For as God has
appointed us to the end, so he has appointed us also to the means, as Ephesians.
2. 10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. Exhortations
therefore, and pious admonitions are very necessary, as special means to draw
us on along to our wished end, as a stiff gale of wind, filling the sails of
our deuoutest affections, until we arrive at our appointed port. And whereas
Vega would peruersly conclude hence, that because we must take heed least we
fall, as the Council of Trent alleges out of the Apostle, therefore the
predestinate to life may and do fall away: hence rather we may conclude the
contrary, that seeing God has predestined us to the end, which is our full
and final salvation, and has chalkt us out the way and means, by which we
come to reach and attain to this end, as to walk carefully and heedfully,
fearing to displease God, sollicitous to serve God; to take heed of carnal
security, and all false and groundless confidence: therefore continuing on in
this path, observing these means, tending unto the end, we do hence gather to
our selves stronger assurance every day, that we shall at length, most
certainly attain to the end of our most Christian race, and so obtain the
Crown of life. For as St. Peter, exhorting the faithful to diligence and
perseverance ^. Pet. 2.
in holy duties, as means leading to the end: says, If ye do these things,
ye shall never fall: for by this means an entrance is made unto you
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
What? Did St. Peter mean, that the faithful should be doubtful, or
uncertain of their salvation? or were they so much nearer to falling away from
grace, because he warnes them so much to be careful to keep their way, and to
continue in the means? No; the contrary: for by this means, an entrance was
administered abundantly into the Kingdom of Gods glory. And this is the
unanimous scope of all the testimonies of those Doctors and Fathers of the
Church, which Vega so multiplyeth, going about to corrupt so many witnesses, to
give in evidence for the instability and slipperinesse of his Pontifician grace.

Now for his eight Chapter, which he spends about answering some places in St.
John's Epistle, seeming, as he says, to make for the Heretics, as Iouinian,
etc. we will speak of it in a fitter place by and by, when we come to confirm
the Catholic truth; and in the mean time leave Vega dazeling his own eyes,
by his ouer-daring of the glorious Sun, and scorching his own wings, in
fluttering about the bright flame of Gods Word, which for all his huffing at
it, he shall never be able to put out. But he goes on, to prove that no man
can know his own predestination and perseverance, but by divine revelation. In
his 10. Chapter, he brings Salomons saying, and such like, Blessed is the man
that fears always; as Pro. 28. 14.
though the fear of God were an enemy to Christian assurance in this kind:
since it confirms it much more; the holy fear of God being a certain fruit
and effect of predestination, leading to perseverance, as both we have, and
shall further make good. He alleges also against the certainty of
perseverance, that of Solomon, Pro. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow:
for thou know not what a day may bring forth. Here the Pontifician still is
like himself, bewraying his malice against the truth, as if certainty of grace
were a boasting. Nothing less. For while we entertain certainty, we exclude,
and utterly abandon boasting and presumption; certainty and presumption being
incompatible, yea contrary one to the other, and cannot possibly cohabit, and
dwell together in one heart. For there is nothing more vain than boasting,
nothing more uncertain than presumption: besides, Solomon there speaks of to
morrow, as our Savior, Matthew. 6. 34. and as St. James, Chapt. 4. Verse. 13. 14.
that men should not be either over anxious, and sollicitous, or over
presumptuous of to morrow, about their worldly affairs; Whereas thou know
not, says James, what shall be on the morrow; for what is your life? you may
as a vapor vanish away before to morrow. So that in these things that are in
regard of us contingent, a man can have no certainty. But salvation stands not
upon any tickle terms of contingency, as we shall see anon. And whereas Vega
alleges Bernard, as denying the certainty of election and predestination,
because, says Bernard, the Scripture is against Bern. in Septuages. sermon. 1.
Eccles. 9. 1.
it, which says, Man knows neither love nor hatred, by all that is before
them: although we be not absolutely bound to believe any man's authority in
alleging the Scriptures, when it is plain he mis-vnderstandeth, or at least
mis-applyeth the place, as Bernard, under correction, does here; since it is
plain and evident (as we showed before) that the Preacher speaks of these
outward things, as prosperity and adversity, which are no certain marks of
Gods favor or displeasure, as being common to all men promiscuously, as well
the righteous as the wicked: yet we are not so straight-laced, as not to
embrace even Bernard himself in this point. For if the certainty of salvation
rested upon man's testimony, we might as soon rely upon Bernards authority,
as another. But where Bernard speaks properly and iudiciously in applying the
Scriptures, none is more clear than he in this matter: So that in the very
same Sermon, out of which Vega pickes so much matter, as he thinks makes for
him, Bernard does consute Vega's mis-conceit of his meaning, confirming that
truth, which we anouch. For where Vega leaves off, Bernard goes on, and says:
Propter hoc data sunt signa quaedam, and indicia manifesta salutis, vt
indubitabile sit, eum esse de numero Electorum, in quo ea signa permanscrint.
Propter hoc (inquam) quos praesciuit Deus, and praedestinauit conformes fieri
imaginis Filij fui, vt quibus certitudinem negat causa sollicitudinis, vel
fiduciam praestet gratia consolationis: For this cause (says he) there are
certain signs, and manifest tokens of salvation given, that it might be
indubitable, (out of all doubt) that he is of the number of the Elect, in whom
these signs do abide. For this cause (I say) whom God foreknew, he also
predestined to be made conformable unto the image of his Son; that to whom
the cause of solicitude or fearfulness does deny certainty, the grace of
consolation might give even a confident assurance. So Bernard. Whence we see,
that whereas immediately before he had said, that which Vega alleges for his
own purpose (alleging authorities of Fathers, as Satan did the Scriptures, by
peece-meale) Generationem istam quis enarrabit, etc. Who shall declare that
Generation; to wit, of Gods Children, whereby they are both begotten and
preserved in grace, that they cannot fall away, as Bernard there excellently
shows? Quis potest dicere, Ego de electis sum, etc. Who can say, I am one of
the elect, I am one of the predestinate to life, I am of the number of Sons?
Quis haec, inquam, etc. Who, I say, can say these things; the Scriptures
gainsaying: Nescit homo, etc. Man knows not whether he be worthy of love or
hatred. Whereupon he adds, Certitudinem vtique non habemus; sed spei fiducia
consolatur nos, ne dubitationis huius anxietate penitus cruciemur: We have not
certainty; but God does comfort us with a confidence of hope, lest we should be
altogether tormented with anxiety of doubting. Thus far Vega alleges out of
Bernard. But note here, Bernard speaks not of uncertainty in regard of faith;
but in regard of humane frailty, which he calls the cause of solicitude or
fearfulness: and so he concludes, not leaving Gods Children in a miserable
uncertainty, since they have many infallible and manifest signs and tokens of
their salvation, that they are, without all doubt, in the number of Gods elect;
having the grace of consolation to make them confident, that they are
predestinate to be made conformable to the Image of the Son of God, although
they want not in the mean time, the clogs of carnal infirmities, that do
often impeach and check their Cheery and Christian confidence, while the
beams of faith are ouer-clouded with the vanishing vapors of fleshly fear,
until the storm of the afflicted and conflicting conscience be over, and the
cloud wasted by the prepotent sunne-beames of grace, which will not long be
eclipsed, or suspended from shining upon the faithful soul. But of Bernards
authority for the point of certainty more clearly anon, where his eyes are not
dazeled or deceived by a false light, at least, by a mis-apprehension and
mis-application of the true light.

Now to conclude Vega's arguments, from the 11. Chapter, to the end of his 12.
Book, he yields thus far, That a man may come by some signs to have some
probable conjecture and opinion of his predestination, and perseverance in
grace. The title of his 11. Chapter is in these words: Ex beatitudinibus
Euangelicis, probabilis potest colligi nostrae and aliorum praedestinationis
seu perseuerantiae opinio: By the Evangelical beatitudes, there may be
gathered a probable opinion of our own and others predestination or
perseverance. And those several beatitudes, he mustereth up in so many
Chapters to the end of the Book; as Humility, Meekness, Mourning, Hunger and
Thirst after righteousness, etc. as they are laid down, Matthew. 5. in all
which Chapters Vega does but fight with his own shadow: where we leave him,
and come to the Catholic truth.

CHAP. XVII. Of the certainty of Catholic and true justifying Faith, in
regard of the certainty of predestination unto grace, and perseverance therein
unto glory.
BEing now, by Gods grace, to speak of the certainty of saving Faith, in
regard of predestination and perseverance; that we may not seem to build,
without laying first a foundation; it is requisite, first of all, to lay down
the true state of the Doctrine of predestination, as we find it revealed in
the Scriptures. And so much the rather, because the Pontificians have so
miserably mangled it, seeking by their cunning underminings to blow up (wherein
they are very expert Pioners) and so to throw down the most goodly frame of
Christian Faith, like those their typical Babylonian Edomites, who said of
Jerusalem (the type of Gods Church and Chosen) Raze it, Raze it, even to the
foundation thereof. For the Psalm. 137.
Church of Christ, consisting of all the Elect, is mainly founded upon the
eternal decree of Gods predestination.

So that in this case, we are not to forbear to speak the truth, because
carnal minded men have from time to time carped and cauelled at this Doctrine,
as we read in the Council of Trent: For as St. Augustine says, Number propter
Aug. de bono persevere. lib. 2. cap. 16.
malos vel frigidos, huius sententiae (nempe praedestinationis) veritas
deserenda, aut ex Euangelio delenda putabitur? Dicatur verum, maxim, vbi
aliqua quaestio, vt dicatur, imp^llit, and capiant, qui possunt: ne forte cum
tacetur, propter eos, qui capere non possunt, non solum veritate fraudentur,
verum etiam falsitate capiantur, qui verum capere, quo capiatur falsitas,
possunt: that is, Is the truth of this Doctrine (to wit, of predestination) to
be forsaken, or shall it be thought worthy to be cancelled out of the Gospel,
because of those that are wicked and cold? Let the truth be spoken,
especially, where any question does enforce it to be spoken, that they may
receive it, who are capable of it: lest happily, when it is concealed, in regard
of those that are not able to receive it, they who are capable of the truth,
whereby falsehood may be detected, be not only defrauded of the truth, but may
be taken with falsehood. And a little after: Nonne potius est dicendum verum, vt
qui potest capere, capiat, quam tacendum, vt non solum id ambo non capiant,
verum etiam qui est intelligentior, ipse sit peior? Instat inimicus gratiae,
atque vrget modis omnibus, vt credatur secundum merita nostra dari; ac sic
gratia iam non sit gratia. Et nos nolumus dicere, quod test Scriptura possumus
dicere: timemus enim videlicet, ne loquentibus nobis offendatur, qui veritatem
non potest capere; and non timemus, ne tacentibus nobis, qui veritatem potest
capere, falsitate capiatur. Aut enim sic praedestinatio praedicanda est,
quemadmodum eam sancta Scriptura euidenter loquitur, vt in praedestinatis, sine
poenitentia sint dona and vocatio Dei: aut gratiam Dei secundum nostra dari
merita consitendum, quod sapiunt Pelagiani: that is, Is not the truth rather to
be spoken, that he which can receive it, may receive it, than to be concealed,
that not only neither can receive it, but also he that is more intelligent,
may be made worse? The enemy of grace is instant, and urges by all means,
that it might be believed, it is given unto us according to our merits; and so
grace should now be no more grace. And yet we will not speak, that which by
the testimony of the Scripture we may speak: for we fear, forsooth, lest if
we speak, he be, offended that cannot receive the truth: and we do not fear,
lest while we are silent, he which is able to receive the truth, may be
deceived by error. For either is predestination so to be preached, as the
holy Scripture does evidently declare it, that in those that be predestinate,
the gifts and calling of God may be without repentance: or else we must
confess, that the grace of God is given according to our merits, which is the
opinion of the Pelagians. And again in the same book, Chapt. 21. Nimiae
contentionis est praedestinationi contradicere, vel de praedestinatione
dubitare: It is too much peruersuesse to contradict predestination, or to call
it into question. Yet Saint Augustine denies not, but that wisdom and
discretion is to be used in the preaching of it. For (says he) it is not so
be preached to the ignorant multitude, as that the preaching of it may seem
worthy of reproof. For dolosi, vel imperiti medici est, etiam vtile
medicamentum sic allegare, vt aut non prosit, aut obsit: It is the property of
a deceiptfull, or an unskillful Physician, so to apply even a wholesome
plaster, as that either it do no good, or else hurt. Which was the provident
wisdom of his sacred Majesty, our gracious Sovereign, in his late iniunction
to Ministers; not to debar them from the free and lawful, yea the most
useful and comfortable preaching of that divine Doctrine of predestination, as
occasion served: but rather to give direction, at least to younger Divines,
lest through want of mature judgment in the manner of opening that mystery,
and applying of it, they might happily put a stumbling block before the
iniudicious and ignorant hearer. For otherwise his excellent Majesty does
himself bear royal record to this divine Doctrine, in his learned Paraphase
of the Revelation, the 20. Chapter, in the latter end, in these words, The
book of life was opened, to the effect that all those, whose names were
written in it: to wit, predestined and elected for salvation, before all
beginnings; might there be selected for eternal glory.

Now have not we in these times the same just cause of speaking this truth, in
regard of those Pelagianizing enemies of the grace of God, the Pontificians and
their accomplices, as Augustine had against the Pelagians? both of them
contending to overthrow the truth of predestination, being the ground of the
free grace of God in saving mankind, and to establish man's merits and
righteousness, as the motive cause of the grace of God. Therefore in this so
important a cause, having to deal with so many importunate adversaries of this
fundamental truth, we must not be meale-mouthed, lest we come to verify that
of our selves, which Gregory once said of some: Nonnulli, dum veritatis
Discipuli esse humiliter negligunt, Greg. moral. 6.
Magistri errorum fiunt: Many, while out of a kind of humility, they neglect to
be the Disciples of the truth, they become the Masters of errors. Come we then
in the fear of God, to free our selves of the envy of his great glory, in
setting down this great mystery, wherein the glory of Gods rich grace does
most clearly shine, and show it self.

Predestination then is an unchangeable act of Gods good Predestination defined.
pleasure and will, whereby he has from all eternity of his free grace,
elected out of the corrupt mass of mankind, fallen in Adam, a certain number
of men, whom he has purposed effectually to bring to eternal salvation, by
the only absolute means and merits of Jesus Christ, and by other conditional
and subordinate means appointed by him for the receiving and applying of
Christ, and walking in him, even unto the end: leaving the rest of men in their
original corruption, to their further and final condemnation. The Scripture
makes good every part of this definition. First, for the subject of it, which
is predestination, the (...).
word is there often used, which signifies a fore-determining, or appointing,
or preordaining of a thing. But about the name, or the thing, there is no great
question made. The very adversaries are forced to confess it, at least in
part. Now for the Predicate of the definition, it is an act or decree, called
sometimes in Scripture, (...), Gods Council, as Ephesians. 1. 11. sometimes (...),
Gods Purpose, as Romans 8. 28. sometimes (...), as 1. Pet. 1. 2. which is such a
foreknowledge, as is not only a bare prescience, but a Praescitum, an
established or decreed See Beza and Erasmus on Romans 8. Quid sit Dei (...)
foreknowledge; as the Latins call a decree of the people Plebiscitum: and
also the decree or judgment of a cause, Cognitio, or trial, or knowledge. So
(...), or praecognitio, or foreknowledge of God, is his witting and willing
act or decree. The Apostle therefore in the forenamed place ( Romans 8.) does
join the purpose of God, and his foreknowledge together, as one and the same
thing, verse. 28. 29. For we know that all things cooperate or work together
for good to them that love God, being the called according to his purpose: and
he adds, For whom he fore-knew, those he also predestined to be conformed
to the image of his Son. So that to predestinate to a conformity unto Christ,
is an act of Gods foreknowledge or fore-decree, conducing unto, or producing
the end, to the which God decreed or purposed. Which (...), foreknowledge, or
fore-decree of God, is very emphaticall and significant, containing in it, as
we said before, not a bare prescience (much less that this foreknowledge in
God, was led or moved by the event of those things, which he saw would come to
pass in the creature, according to which event he should predestinate men to
salvation or damnation, because he foresaw they would be such and such, as the
Pontificians, and whosoever symbolize with them in this matter, possessed or
tainted with the spirit of the Pelagians: of which Augustine speaks) but this
foreknowledge in God here, having special and sole reference to the Elect in
Christ, it imports a knowledge not of apprehension only, but of love and
approbation, as God is John 1. 48. When thou wast under the figtree, I knew
the^.
said to know his own, 2. Tim. 2. 19. but not to know the rest, as Matthew. 7
23. and God thus fore-knowing of his, does with all predestinate them to
salvation. Hence it is, that the Scripture never speaks of this
foreknowledge in God respectively, as it appertains to this his eternal
purpose toward mankind, but it is always applied to the Elect only. As Romans
11. 2. God has not cast away his people, whom he fore-knew. So 1. Pet. 1. 2.
Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father. And Romans 8. 29. Whom
he fore-knew, them also he did predestinate, etc. Yea and Christ also, that
elect one of God ( Esa. 42.) in whom we are elect, is said to be fore-knowne of
God; that is, foreordained, as 1. Pet. 1. 20. (...), fore-known or
foreordained of God. So Acts 2. 23. Christ was delivered by the determinate
Council, (...), and foreknowledge of God: which foreknowledge, or
fore-appointment of God, is so proper to Gods Elect, as no where in all the
Scriptures, is it to be found applied to the Reprobate. It is no where said in
the Scripture, that God did reprobate those, whom he fore-knew. But on the
contrary, Gregory says, Greg. moral. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Nescire Dei, reprobare est: Gods not knowing, is to reprobate. As he applies
that place, Luke 13. 27. Depart from me, I know you not, etc. So that Gods
(...), or foreknowledge, is the ground of his predestination, respectively to
the Elect, whom he did so foreknow, as he did love, approve, and like, and so
predestinate, or fore-ordaine to life.

But some Pontifician spirit may object: Gods prescience or foreknowledge,
though it be understood for a knowledge of approbation, yet this approbation
was in respect of his prescience of apprehension, foreseeing that such and
such men, would be such and such in their willingness to receive grace
offered; and thereupon to his foreknowledge of apprehension, he joins the
foreknowledge of approbation. This objection plainly argues, that the spirit
of those ancient Heretics, the Pelagians, is risen again, and has possessed
the minds of all such obiectors. To which I shall need to shape no other
answer, but only to use the same, which Augustine made to the Pelagians, to the
very same purpose. Praesci^bat (ait Pelagianus) qui futuri essent sancti and
immaculati, Aug. de praedest. Svnct. l. 1. c. 18. Sic Arminiani, noui nostri
Pelagiani. Nonne ergo certo futurum, quod praesciebat Deus? Tum quorsum quaeso
vniuersalis gratia? Satis est, si gratia ijs tantu^ offeratur, quos Deus
praesciuit accepturos, caeteris non item. Sed contra vniuersalem gratiam, site
Chrysostom. in Romans 8. hom. 15. in haec verba, (...); etc.
per liberae voluntatis arbitrium, and ideo eos ante mundi constitutionem in
ipsa sua praescientia, qua tales futuros esse praesciuit, elegit. Cum dicat
Apostolus, Elegit nos in ipso ante mundi constitutionem, vt essemus sancti and
immaculati. Non ergo quia futuri eramus, sed vt essemus. Nempe certum est,
nempe manifestum est; ideo quippe tales eramus futuri, quia elegit ipse,
praedestinans, vt tales per gratiam eius essemus: The Pelagian says, God
fore-knew such as would be holy and immaculate, by the freedom of their will,
and therefore he chose them before the foundation of the world in his very
prescience, whereby he fore-knew they would become such. Whereas the Apostle
says, He chose us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy, and without spot. Not therefore, because we would become such, but
that we should be such. This is certain, this is manifest; that therefore we
would become such, because he did choose us, predestinating us, that we should
become such by his grace. We need not to add any other testimonies of the
Scriptures; the whole current of them runs all along with us in this point,
carrying us to the full Ocean of this grace of God, as will further appear
throughout this whole definition. True it is, that St. Augustine himself was
once of that opinion with the Pelagians, Pontificians, and our new Pelagians,
concerning Gods prescience; as understanding it to be nothing else, but a
preuision of future things and events, and thereupon to have grounded his
decree. Which opinion Augustine ingenuously retracteth and recanteth in his
first book of his Retractations, and the 23. Chapter.

Secondly, as predestination is an act, or decree, so it is an immutable and
unchangeable act. With God is no variableness, nor shadow of change, James 1.
17. And Romans 11. 29. (...), the free gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. If the Stoickes did attribute such a perfection to a wise man, as
that he should not be subject to repentance: then those men are stocks, and
Sapientem nullius rei poenitere. Cic.
unwise men, yea wicked and intolerably presumptuous, that dare impute a
mutability to Gods decrees, as depending upon the uncertain events of man's
fickle will. No, says the Apostle, The foundation of God stands sure, and has
this seal, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
The Lord knows who are his. What stands surer than a foundation? and what
foundation so sure, as Gods foundation? Yea, it is a sealed foundation, never
to be cancelled or abrogated: Infinitely more sure, than the decree of Darius
concerning Daniel, which like the Law of the Medes and Persians, alters Dan.
6. 8.
not. For even Gods decree toward his servant Daniel, did frustrate the end
and purpose of that wicked decree, as it was intended by the Persian
Counselors. Quis tollit praedestinationem Aug. in Psalm. 32. Consilium Domini
manet in ae^ernum, etc.
Dei? Ante mundi constitutionem vidit nos, fecit nos, emendauit nos, misit ad
nos, redemit nos: hoc eius consilium manet in aeternum, haec eius cogitatio
manet in saecula saeculorum: Who takes away the predestination of God? Before
the foundation of the world he saw us, he made us, he mended us, he sent unto
us, he redeemed us: this counsel of his remains for ever, this thought of
his heart is permanent unto all ages. And Anselme in Romans 8. Praeposuit Deus
Electos ad vitam venire, cuius propositum mutari non potest: secundum hoc
propositum, non secundum suum meritum, vocati sunt a Deo, vt sancti sint: God
purposed to bring the Elect to life, whose purpose cannot be changed:
according to this purpose, not according to their merit, are they called of God
to be holy. Neither does the immutability of Gods decree stand upon his bare
prescience, as if it were no otherwise immutable, but as God did foresee the
events of things would be so and so, in which respect only his decrees should
be said to be mutable, that the adversaries of the truth might seem to
confess a kind of immutability in God, but framed according to their mutable
fancies: but this decree of God has its foundation in the immutable will of
God. And therefore it follows in the definition, That predestination is an
immutable act of Gods good pleasure and will. This part of the definition is
proved abundantly by the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined us unto
the adoption. of Children by Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will. And verse. 9. Having made known unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself. And verse.
11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of
his own will. Whereupon Augustine having to this very purpose recited the same
Scripture Aug. de praedest. Sanctor. l. 1. c. 18
at large, says, Quis haec audiat diligenter, and intelligenter, and audeat de
hac, quam defendimus, tam clara veritate dubitare? Who can hear these things
diligently, and intelligently, and dare doubt of this so clear a truth, which
we defend? Now Gods will is the prime, absolute, and independent cause of his
decree and act of predestinating us to salvation. Yea, voluntas Aug. Sent. 58.
Dei (says Augustine) est prima and summa causa omnium corporalium,
spiritual^umque motionum. Nihil enim fit visibiliter* and sensibiliter, quod
non de inuisibili and intelligibili summi Imperatoris Aula, aut iubeatur, aut
permittatur, secundum ineffabilem iustitiam praemiorum, atque poenarum,
gratiarum and retributionum, in ista totius creaturae amplissima quadam,
vniuersaque republica: The will of God is the prime and supreme cause of all
both corporal and spiritual motions. For nothing is done visibly and
sensibly, which is not from the invisible and intelligible Court of the supreme
Emperor, either commanded or permitted, according to the unutterable justice
of rewards and punishments, of favors and retributions, in this kind of
spacious and universal republique of the whole creature. And Ludouicus Viues
notes upon St. Augustines words, Qui voluntatem Aug. de ^iuit. Dei, l. 9. c.
23. Voluntas Dei certissima, quam potentissima est.
Dei spectant, certissimam originem, e qua vniuersa profiscuntur, spectant.
Idque quoniam aliud non sit in mando, quam quodea vult: They which look upon
Gods will, do look upon a most certain cause or fountain, from whence all
things do flow. And that, because there is no other thing in the world, than
what his will wills. This is according to that of the Apostle, saying, That
God works all things after the counsel of his own will. The will of God then
is the prime and supreme cause of all* And this will is in himself, and of*
himself alone; it depends nor upon any thing out of himself, as upon the
creature, or the actions of men foreseen, but it is in himself, Voluntas Dei
intra se est, non extra se. Ephesians. 1. 9.
and not without himself, as Ephesians. 1. 9. Having made known unto us the
mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed
(...), in himself. Now this absolute independent will of God, is, as we see,
set out by sundry attributes: as, The Purpose of his will, the Counsel of his
will, the good Pleasure of his will, verse. 5. 9. 11. By the Purpose of Verse. 11.
his will, is set out Gods immutable determination: by the Counsel of his
will, Gods unsearchable wisdom: and by the good Pleasure of his will, his
unspeakable goodness, mercy, and free grace in the work of ordaining man
unto salvation. So that the Counsel, and Purpose, and good Pleasure of Gods
will in appointing us unto salvation, was not suggested into the mind and
disposition of God, by the means of any either faith or works in us, which
God foresaw we would have: but our faith and other good fruits of it are
therefore in us, because God according to the Counsel, Purpose, and good
Pleasure of his own will, did appoint us unto salvation. As Augustine says
excellently to this purpose: Fiunt electi, Aug. de praedest. Sanct. l. 1. c. 17.
non qui eliguntur, quia crediderunt, sed qui eliguntur, vt credant. Hanc enim
vocationem and Dominus ipse satis aperit, vbi dicit, Non vos me elegistis, sed
ego elegi vos. Nam si propterea electi erant, quoniam crediderant, ipsi eum
prius vtique elegerant credendo in eum, vt eligimererentur. Aufert autem hoc
omnino, qui dicit, Non vos me elegistis, sed ego vos elegi. Et ipsi quidem
procul dubio elegerunt eum, quando crediderunt in eum: vnde, non ob aliud
dicit, Non vos me elegistis, sed ego vos elegi; nisi quia non elegerunt eum, vt
eligeret eos, sed vt eligerent eum, elegit eos: quia misericordia eius
praeuenit eos, secundum gratiam, non secundum debitum. Elegit ergo eos de
mundo, cum hic ageret in carne; sed iam electos in seipso, ante mundi
constitutionem. Haec est immobilis veritas praedestinationis and gratiae: They
are elect, not who are elected, because they believed, but who are elected,
that they might believe. For this calling the Lord himself also does
sufficiently declare, where he says, You have not chosen me, but I have John
15.
chosen you. For if they had been therefore elected, because they had believed,
then they had chosen him first, by believing in him, that they might merit to
be chosen: but he does altogether take away this, who says, You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you. And indeed they certainly choose him, when
they believe in him: whereupon, for no other cause he says, You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you: but because they chose not him, that he
might choose them, but that they might choose him, he chose them: because his
mercy prevented them, according to grace, not according to debt. Therefore he
chose them out of the world, when he lived here in the flesh: but being
already chosen in himself before the foundation of the world. This is that
immovable verity of predestination and grace. And a little after, Elegit ergo
Deus fideles, sed, vt sint, non quia iam erant: God Aug. ibid.
therefore elected the faithful, but, that they might be faithful, not
because they were already faithful. And alleging that of St. James ( James
2.) Has not God chosen the poor in this world, that they might be ri^h in
faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him? He thereupon concludes: Eligendo ergo facit diuites in fide, sicut
haeredes regni: Therefore by electing them he makes them rich in faith, as
also heirs of the Kingdom. And before in the 10. Chapter, Ad hanc vocationem
(electionis and propositi Dei) qui pertinent, ^mnes sunt docibiles Dei, nec
potest eorum quisquam dicere, credidi vt sic vocarer: praeuenit eum quippe
misericordia Dei, quia sic vocatus est, vt crederet: Whosoever do appertain
to this vocation (namely of Gods election and purpose) they are all taught of
God; nor can any of them say, I believed* that therefore I should be so called*
since the mercy of God prevented him, because he is so called, that he might
believe. And lib. de Patientia. Christus non iustos, sed iustificandos elegit:
Christ did not choose those that were already just, but those who were to be
instified. Thus we see this holy man, following the word of Christ, concludes
the Purpose, Counsel, and good Pleasure of Gods will, to be the prime,
original, absolute, independent cause of man's salvation. As he says
elsewhere: Praedestinatio est praepaeratio graciae, gratia autem est ipsa
donatio, s^u praedestinationis effectus: Predestination is the preparation of
grace, and grace is the gift it self, or the effect of predestination. Aug.
Enchirid. cap. 94. 95. 99. tom. 3.
And in his Enchiridion: Vnum ex paruulis eligendi, alterum relinquendt
causavna erat, Dei voluntas: cuius enim vult, miseretur Deus, and quem vult,
obdurat. Miseretur scilicet magna bonitate, obdurat nulla iniquitate, vt nec
liberatus de suis meritis glorietur, nec damnatus, nisi de suis meritis
conqueratur. Sola enim gratia redemptos discerit a perditis, quos in vnam
perditionis concreuer at massam ab origin ducta causa communis. Et, nisi per
indebitam misericordiam nemo liberatur; and nisi per debitum iudicium nemo
damnatur: There was one and the same cause of Romans 9.
electing the one, and leaving the other of the children (to wit, Jacob and
Esau) even the will of God: for God has mercy upon whom he will, and whom he
will, he hardens. He shows mercy out of his great bounty, he hardens
without any injustice, that neither he that is freed, might glory of his own
merits, nor he that is condemned, might complain but of his own demerits.
For it is only grace which separateth the redeemed from the condemned, whom
the common cause, derived from the original, had confounded altogether in one
mass of perdition. And, but by undue and undeserved mercy, none is delivered;
and but by due and deserved judgment, none is condemned. Thus this holy man.
So that whatsoever exceptions or objections, cauils or calumnies, either the
malicious or ignorant enemies of this truth take up against it, as blaming God
for an accepter of persons, in preferring one wicked man before another, being
all naught, without exception or difference, in Adams corrupt loins; they do
but shoot their arrows against the Sun: or as that famous Naturalist
Aristotle, who would desperately drown himself in that Septemfluous Sea of
Euripus, for spite that he could not find out a reason for the ebbing and
flowing of it. Or it is, as the Apostle uses a familiar comparison, as if the
Pot should expostulate with the Potter, and demand a reason why he made it such
and such. The reason of Gods will is a mystery, as the Apostle shows; the
effects whereof are made known unto us, but the prime Ephesians. 1. 9.
cause locked up in Gods own breast. To prye into this Arcanum, or secret, what
is it, but with the Bethshemites to peep into God's Ark, and so to perish by a
fearful plague? Can Emperors and Commanders in any Army have their wills
presently obeyed, and put in execution, without demanding a reason of them?
nay, can that great mystery of iniquity impose upon their disciples blind
obedience unto their most damnable and diabolical designs, proceeding from
that Dragons will, which animateth the Beast, a reason whereof to demand, were
as dangerous to the party demanding as he by the execution of the command
might prove dangerous to others: and cannot God have his will absolute and free
to himself, though it be most just, wise, and perfectly good, but the vilest
and basest of men dare affront it, and either call God to an account for a
reason, why he so wills, or else they must conclude, that their own wills,
for the goodness of them, must be the reason and cause moving God so to will?
Yet if they will needs have a reason of this supreme will of God, whereof we
speak, let them know, God so wills, because it is his good pleasure. If that
will not satisfy thee, because I relate it, hear the Apostle. He having Romans
9.
said, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens: and
thou replying, Why then does God yet complain? for who has resisted his will?
But O man (says he) who are thou that replyest against God? Whereupon St.
Augustine says: Talibus Aug. Epist. 105. ^ix to compres^ytero.
dicamus cum Apostolo (non enim melius illo inuenire possumus, quid dicamus) O
homo, tu quis es, qui respondeas Deo? Quaerimus namque meritum obdurationis,
and inumimus. Merito namque peccati vniuersa massa damnata est; nec obdurat
Deus impertiendo malitiam, sed non impertiendo misericordiam. Quaerimus autem
meritum misericordiae, and non inuenimus, quia nullum est, ne gratia euacuetur,
si non gratis donatur, sed meritis redditur: To such replyers let us say with
the Apostle (for we cannot find what to say better) O man, who art thou, that
replyest against God? for we enquire for the merit of obduration, and we
find it. For by the merit of sin the whole mass is condemned; nor does God
harden by infusing of malice, but by not imparting of mercy. But we enquire
for the merit of mercy, and we find it not; because it is not at all, lest
grace be made void, if it be not given of gratuity, but rendered of duty. And
to conclude this point with S. Augustine in a word, Aug. de bon^ perseuerant.
cap. 12. com. 7.
Conficitur itaque gratiam Dei non secundum merita accipientium dari, sed
secundum placitum voluntatis eius, in laudem and gloriam ipsius gratiae eius,
vt qui gloriatur, null^ modo in seipso, s^d in Domino glorietur: qui hominibus
dat, quibus vult, quoniam misericors est; quod and si non det, iustus est: and
non dat, quibus non vult, v^ notas faciat diuitias gloriae suae in vasa
misericordiae. Dando enim quibusdam, quod non merentur, profecto gratuitam, and
per hoc veram suam gratiam esse voluit. Non omnibus dando, quid omnes merentur,
ostendit. Bonus in beneficio certorum, iustus in supplicio caeterorum: We
conclude therefore, that the grace of God is given not according to the merits
of the receivers, but according to the good pleasure of his will, unto the
praise and glory of his grace, that he that glories, should by no means glory
in himself, but in the Lord: which gives to men, to whom he will, because he
is merciful; which if he do not give, he is just: and he gives not to whom
he will not, that he may make known the riches of his glory, upon the vessels
of mercy. For by giving to some that which they merit not, it is that he would
have his grace to be free, and so to be grace indeed. And by not giving to all,
he shows what all do deserve. So he is good in pardoning some, just in
punishing the rest. Like unto a creditor, who having sundry debtors, deeply
and indifferently engaged unto him, it is in his free power and choice which of
them he will freely acquit, and of which he will justly require his own.

Now to shut up this point of the definition, which is that, whereon all the
rest depends, we find in the Scriptures, that there is no one part of the
gracious mystery of man's salvation, but it is expressly and particularly
referred to the will and good pleasure of God, as the prime and supreme cause
of all: That the Son of God, Jesus Christ, came into the world, to 1.
take our nature upon him, to be incarnate of the Virgin Mary, and to become
our Mediator, and to accomplish the work of man's salvation, it is wholly and
in every part ascribed to the will and good pleasure of God. How often does
Christ himself say in the Gospel, I came down from Heaven not to do mine
own will, but the will of him that sent me? Ioh. 6. 38. It Col. 1. 19.
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and (having made
peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, etc. His death and passion, were the fruits of Gods will and good
pleasure, Esa. 53 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to
grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, etc. and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. His preaching here on the
earth, and revealing the mystery of God unto Babes, was from his Fathers good
will: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy fight, Mat. 11. 26. I hope
they will not deny or question any of this, as by pretending any merit in us,
to precede or procure as a motive, from God, any part of this grace of
Redemption. And yet I know not what they mean, when they ascribe to the Virgin
Mary a merit at least Ex congruo, why she should be the Mother of God.

That we should be saved by such a means as the preaching 2.
of the Gospel, which is Christ crucified (a means contemptible in the eyes
of the world) it is Gods good pleasure. It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching, to sau^ them that believe, 1. Cor. 1. 21. The whole administration
of the Word of God, is according to his own will, Heb. 2. 4. Our regeneration,
^ohn 1. 13
is not according to the will of the flesh, nor the will of man, but of God.
And James 1. 18* Of his own will begat he us, by the Word of truth, that we
should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. So also our salvation. 1.
These. 4. 3. This is the will of God, even your sanctification. It is he that
works in us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. The
perseverance of Gods Saints and Elect in the state of grace, until they come
to full glory, is the will of God. John 6. 39. This is And who has ^^^sted his
will?
the Fathers will, which has sent me, that of all, which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, And Mat.
18. 14. It is not your Fathers will, that one of these little ones should
perish. That we inheriteternall life, it is Gods good pleasure. Luke 12. 32.
Fear not, little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. So also, John 6. 40. It is the will of the Father to give us eternal
life. The Scriptures abound in setting forth the glory of Gods will and good
pleasure herein. Admirable is the wisdom and counsel of God, that he has
in the holy Scriptures so punctually and particularly pointed out unto us the
pleasure of his will, taking place in every part and passage of the work of
our Redemption, as altogether depending upon that prime, independent, eternal
will, and good pleasure of God, in his free purpose and appointment of us unto
eternal life. Let all adversaries here stop their mouths, and be covered with
confusion of face, that go about to rob God of this his great glory, while
they would have Gods electing of us, to depend upon the free will and work of
man, and Gods will and pleasure to be no more but a consequence of their wills;
which qualities and actions in them, God foreseeing from all eternity (say
they) did thereupon will, that such should be saved; according as he saw they
would both receive grace offered, and retain the same unto the end. And this
they will have to be the very substance, and whole contents of the Gospel. O
for a Gagge for this new Gospel! Nay, no Gospel, but it is the old spell of
the Serpent; which subtle though it were, yet it is foolishness with God. Ye
shall be as Gods, knowing good Genes. 3.
and evil. That is, as some learned Interpreters note upon it, the Serpent
would persuade mankind (as indeed he did) that he should not need any
further Gods wisdom and counsel for direction; themselves should be
thenceforth (...), selfe-wise sufficient, yea even as Gods, knowing all things.
And Solomon says, He that is selfe-wise, is a fool, yea a fool of all
fools. Well, yet this Doctrine of the Serpent did not directly (though by
consequence it did) exalt man above God, but only seemed to place him in an
equal rank with him. But this Doctrine, built upon that foundation of the
Serpent, is now erected so high, as it surmounts the Throne of God. Now must
God become inferior to his creature, his So^ereigne will must dance
attendance at the door of man's will. Only they have left God his bare
prescience, as if he were no better than a poor Prognosticator, or
Fortune Tellers. And yet if this hellish and blasphemous doctrine were to be
found only amongst those ancient Heretics, the Pelagians, or among their
successors, the Pontificians, it were but dignum patella operculum; no
marvel, if they that are of their Father the Devil, do the works of their
Father. The Lord Christ keep out, or whippe out this dotage, yea this doctrine
of Devils, out of his School. Let such unclean Birds never nestle or roost in
Christian Nurceries. But pass we to the next point in the definition.

From the perennious and pure fountain of Gods will and pleasure, do flow all
the rivers of the waters of life toward the creature: as first in Gods
eternal electing out of the corrupt mass of mankind, a certain number of
men. This election of God, is the prime and proper act of his good pleasure and
will. As Ephesians. 1. 4. 15. Verses. So Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 7. 8. Verse. where we have a
type of his election in the children of Israel, flowing from the free love and
favor of God. But this reflecteth upon that before, sufficiently confirming
this* Again, this election is of a certain number of men. I say, of a
certain number, not of all, as some absurdly affirm, which is against the
nature of an election. For, Electio est aliquorum, non omnium: Election is of
some, not of all; as the word it self also imports, signifying to gather out
from among others. Again, a certain number, and definite; not uncertain, and
indefinite, as the Pontificians teach. The number of the Elect of God is a
certain and fixed number: Hereupon Augustine says; Qui praedestinati sunt in
Regnum Dei, eorum ita certus Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 13.
est numerus, vt nec addatur eis quisquam, nec minuatur ex eis: The number of
them that are predestinate unto the Kingdom of God, is so certain, that
neither any can be added unto them, nor diminished of them. This is according
to the truth of God, 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure, having
this seal, The Lord knows who are his. If the Lord know who are his, he
knows how many are his; and if how many, there is a certain number of them,
else the Lords knowledge were uncertain. Christ says also, I know mine, and
am known of mine: yea, he calls his own sheep by name. Christ knows the
certain number of sheep, that belong unto his fold. And their names are
enrolled in Heaven. Heb. 12. 23. And Christ says, few are chosen in comparison
of the residue. And, Pauperis est numerare pecus: Christ the Shepherd can
easily number his little flock. Yea, he that numbereth our hairs, does he
not number the persons of his elect? Therefore the servants of God are sealed
in their foreheads, and the number of them is set down, of all the Tribes of
Israel, Revel. 7. Indeed in the 9. Verse, a great multitude did John see, which
no Man could number. But they are certain with God. So the number of Gods
elect is certain, as certain to God, as the number of the Stars of Psalm.
147. 4. 5.
Heaven, which God calls all by their names. So great is the Lord, so great
his power, and his understanding infinite.

Object. But it may be objected, that election appertains to all
indifferently, as being left to every ones choice. For the Scripture says,
that God would have all men to be saved, as 1. Tim. 2* 4* and Rom 11. 33. God
has shut up all in unbelief, Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 14.
that he might have mercy upon all. But these places prove not that Gods
election belongs to all, for then the Scripture should be opposite to it
self, which says elsewhere, That few are chosen. But as St. Augustine well
notes, this All is simply meant of all the Elect. As he says, Omnes homines
vult saluos fieri, vt intelligantur omnes praedestinati, quia omne genus
hominum in eis est: sicut dictum est Pharisaeis, Decimatis omne olus (Luc. 11
42.) vbi non intelligendum est, nisi omne quod habebant: that is, God would
have all men to be saved, meaning all the predestinate, because in them is all
sorts of men: as it was said to the Pharisees, Ye tithe all kind of herbs;
where we are not to understand but all that they had. As also St. Ambrose
says, Quamuis magna pers hominum Saluantis Ambros. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1.
gratiam repellat, aut negligat, in electis tamen and prescitis, atque ab
Omnium generalitate discretis, specialis quaedam censetur vniuersitas. Pro
part mundi, totus mundus; and pro part hominum, omnes homines nominantur:
Although a great part of men reject, or neglect the grace of the Savior, yet a
certain special universality is accounted in those that are elect, and
fore-knowne, and separated from the generality of All. For a part of the world,
the whole world; and for a part of men, all men are named.

Next, this certain number is elected out of the corrupt mass of mankind,
all corrupt in Adams loins, after his fall. Therefore, the elect are called
vessels of mercy; and mercy implies misery. Hence the Apostle, very aptly
compares the corrupt mass of mankind to a lump of Potters clay; and clay is
nothing but dirt. Also an example of Gods election we have in Jacob and Esau,
in the same place, Romans 9* which two, are set out as types of all mankind;
Jacob of the Elect, and Esau of the Reprobate. Now to what time or condition,
had Gods act or purpose of separating these two, one from the other, special
reference? Namely, while they were yet unborn, and before they had done good
or evil, that the purpose of God, according to election, might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls; it was said unto her, The elder shall serve
the younger; Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. So that God did in his
eternal purpose elect Jacob, and reject Esau in their Mothers womb, before
they had actually done good or evil; but not before they had both of them
alike contracted the corruption of original sin in their Mothers womb.
Hence it is, that presently after man's fall, Genesis 3. the Lord God first
reuealeth the mystery of his will, in his eternal purpose toward mankind,
in putting an enmity between the Serpents seed, and the Woman's seed, both
Angels and Men. The Serpents seed are the Reprobate, a generation of Vipers,
of their Father the Devil: The Woman's seed there, are the Elect: first
Christ, and in him all the Elect, who are blessed in him, and who, with Christ,
are at continual enmity with the Serpent and his seed, Michael and his
Angels, fighting against the Dragon and his Angels, the bond-womans son
persecuting the free-womans son in an allegory, Gal. 4. Thus Gods election
had a special reference to the corrupt mass, out of which he chose us to
salvation. So Ezech. 16. Abraham, the Father of the faithful, for his nativity
and birth, was an idolatrous Amorite. Jerusalem, the type of Gods Elect, was
chosen in her blood, ver. 5. as the Lord says, None eye pitied thee, but thou
wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that
thou wast borne; and when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I said unto
thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Live.

Now this election of God, in choosing out of the corrupt mass and lump of
mankind, such as shall be saved, does necessarily imply, that this election is
of his free grace, as is expressed in the definition: which is a point worthy
our special consideration, although indeed, this free grace of God, is the
very life-bloud (as it were) which runs through the whole body, and fills
every vein of the definition. It is called an election of grace, Romans 11. 5.
To this grace it is, that the Apostle (ravished with the admiration of Gods
incomprehensible love, and breaking forth into a grateful acclamation and
benediction of God for it, as if now he had but newly come forth, or were
still in his rapture in the third Heaven) refers and ascribes the whole
work of our salvation, To the praise of the glory of his grace (says he)
wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. And in the
seventh Verse, In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins, according to the riches of his grace. And Chapt. 2. 4. etc. God who
is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we were
dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved)
and has raised us up together, etc. That in the ages to come, he might show
the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us, through Christ
Jesus. What greater love, what greater grace, what richer mercy, than for God
to cast his eye of favor upon us, even when we were dead in sins? As the
Apostle says also, Romans 5. 8. God commends his love toward us, in that
while we were yet sinners, when we were enemies, Christ dyed for us. And in the
vulgar Latin, set forth by the Divines of Louain, printed at Antwerpe, 1584.
in the fourth to the Romans, Verse 5. we find these words in the Text, Ei
vero qui non operatur, credenti autem in eum, qui iustificat impium, reputatur
fides eius ad iustitiam, secundum propositum gratiae Dei: Now to him that
works not, but believes in him, that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
reckoned for righteousness, Secundum propositum gratiae Dei.
according to the purpose of the grace of God. Now these last words are not in
our vulgar translations, nor in most Greek Copies; but the Louain Doctors have
noted in the margent, that they are found in some Manuscripts, and Greek
Copies. And it were to be wished, that they had added no worse than this into
that their translation; for it is but that, which is the general Doctrine of the
Gospel of Christ. For the preaching of the Gospel, what is it, but a beam of
this grace of God shining upon sinners? as Tit. 2. 11. The grace of God, that
brings salvation, has appeared unto all men. And the Gospel, is the Gospel
of the grace of God, Act. 20. 24. And the Word of God, is the word of his
grace, verse. 32. And Acts 14. 3. Yea, we find the very same words in the
Apostle, 2. Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling,
not according to our works, but (mark) according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began; but is now
made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, etc. So that the
ground of our salvation by Jesus Christ, is the mere grace of God; by this
grace we are saved, by this grace we come to inherit eternal life: for
eternal life is of the grace of God, it is (...), the free gift of his grace,
And we are heirs of the grace of life, 1. Pet. 3. 7. The Apostle Paul was so
in love with this grace, that all his Epistles are perfumed throughout, as it
were with this precious ointment. He names it not so little as a hundredth
times. The salutation of each Epistle has grace in it: yea, the Apostle sets
it as his mark at the end of every Epistle, and would have all his Epistles
known by that mark to be his. As he says, 2. These. 3. 17. 18. The
salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle, so
I write, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. So that besides
other probable arguments, I finding this mark at the end of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, I conclude it to be Paul's Epistle. No one Apostle ends his Epistle
with the prayer and wishing of grace, but only Paul. Indeed* the Revelation
ends so: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

Thus Gods gracious eternal purpose, in electing to salvation such, as in his
special favor he was pleased to foreknow, being the prime and original
cause, whereon depends the whole frame of our effectual salvation: it teaches
us a maine difference between the first Covenant, and the second. The first
Covenant was made with the first Adam in Paradise, which indeed did merely
depend upon man's will, to keep it, or to break it. Do this, and thou shall
live. This was that first Covenant; which, Man failing to keep, and so
forfeiting his estate, God now makes a second Covenant in the second Adam,
which he will not (as he did in the first) hazard upon man's will or ability in
the keeping of it; Gods wisdom well weighing, that if Adam in his perfection
so easily and quickly brake the first Covenant, though he had both will and
power to keep it: how much more man now, corrupt and weak, would never be
able to keep the second Covenant. And therefore to make sure work, God takes
a contrary course in the second Covenant; which, that it may for ever stand
firm and immutable, he has established it upon the sure foundation of his
own good pleasure and will, wherein is no shadow of change.

Well, the conclusion is, Gods free grace and favor is the ground of our
election, it is the foundation, whereon depends our whole salvation; we are
elected, we are saved, all by grace, according to his purpose and grace. This
grace of God, the Pontifician Church cannot away withal, as being an enemy to
all their Doctrine. And therefore the Council of Trent has excluded, yea and
condemned the grace of God, as the sole efficient cause of salvation: for Ses.
6. Can. 11. the words be, Si quis dixerit, etc. gratiam, qua iustificamur, esse
tantum fauorem Dei: anathema sit: that is, If any shall say, that the grace,
whereby we are justified, is only the favor of God: let him be Anathema, or
accursed. If Romes Curse were of force, then woeful were the case of St. Paul,
that does so often and mightily magnify the grace of God in our justification;
yea, the only grace and favor of God, excluding works, as not having the
least share with Gods grace therein. Nay, the whole Word of God, which is the
Word of his grace, and the Gospel of his grace, must fall under Romes Curse.
Howsoever the equiuocating Romanists would foyst and shuffle in their works,
by the name of grace: by which indeed they destroy and overthrow the grace of
God.

Object. But say some, It is sufficient that we grant, that Gods grace does
manifest it self in providing for us, and offering unto us means, whereby we
may be saved, without which means, because we cannot be saved, therefore we
are said to be saved by the grace of God.

Answ. Is that sufficient? O enemies of the grace of God, and of your own
salvation! Will you so limit Gods grace? Will ye so eclipse the glory of his
grace, as to confine it within such narrow bounds? Indeed great, and
infinitely great was Gods love, in so loving the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that all that believe in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting. But did his gift depend upon man's acceptance, that it might be
effectual if man would, otherwise not? Then, as Esaias says, Who has believed
our report? Had not then this great love of God been utterly lost? Had not
this gift been such, as no man would receive it? For what says the Scripture?
All have sinned, and (...), come Romans 3. 23.
short of the glory of God. The natural man (...), perceives not, receives
not this gift: it is far above out of his reach. He may say, Who shall fetch
Christ from above, that I may have him within my reach? What reach? The Devil
had him within his reach, when he carried him up to a high mountain. But thou will say, God reaches out Christ unto thee in his Word. The Word is near
thee; True. But where is thy hand to put forth to receive him? Thy hand must
be a lively faith: for to believe in Christ, is to receive him as Gods gift.
But faith also is the special gift of God. Therefore, says the Apostle, By
grace are ye saved, through faith; and not of your selves, it is the gift of
God. Now herein does the glory of Gods grace shine forth, and gloriously
display it self, that he has not only in his rich mercy provided us the means
of salvation, making tender of it unto us in his Word: but he effectually also
gives it unto us, giving us a mind and means to receive it. As St. John
says, He has given us a 1. Ioh. 5. 20* John 6* 44.
mind, to know him that is true. And Christ, No man can come unto me, except
the Father, which has sent me, draw him. And again, No man knows the
Father, but the Son, and he to whom Matthew. 11. 27.
the Son will reveal him. And ( Matthew. 16. 17.) Peter having confessed
Christ to be the Son of the living God, Christ answered him, Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-Iona: for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven. As the Apostle also, 1. Cor. 12. 3. No man can say,
that Jesus is Christ, but by the holy Ghost: that is, No man can truly
acknowledge him to be his Christ, but by the holy Ghost. Otherwise, the very
Devil, seeing his miracles, and feeling his power even over them, confessed,
saying, I know who thou art, Luke 4. 34. and 41.
the holy one of God: and, Thou art Christ the Son of God. Yet the Devil did
not this by the holy Ghost; nor was it by any power of Gods grace. But herein
stands that grace of God: first, in choosing us freely of his mere love and
mercy; not foreseeing us to be good, but finding us to be evil, shut up in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon us. Secondly, not only in providing
and offering means of grace, but also in effectual giving and bestowing grace
upon all those whom he has chosen, giving them grace to receive grace, that of
his fullness we might all receive, and grace for grace* as it follows in the
definition.

Now as God out of his mere love, grace, and favor, did from all eternity
elect and appoint a certain number of men, fallen in Adam; unto salvation: So
for the effecting of this his eternal purpose in time, he did also appoint
the means, whereby he would bring those unto the end of their salvation. The
means is twofold: First, the only absolute meane^ which is Jesus Christ:
Secondly, an inferior and conditional means, whereby we are made capable to
receive Christ, with all his benefits. First then, Christ is that only
all-sufficient and absolute means, whereby God would effectually work
salvation unto us; upon, and to whom the eye of his grace principally and
immediately reflecteth, in his electing of us. So Ephesians. 1. 4. He chose us in
him, and Ephesians. 3. 11. according to the eternal purpose, which he purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord* Now there is no other name under Heaven, given among
Acts 4. 12.
men, whereby we must be saved; neither is there salvation in any other. And,
other foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, Jesus Christ, 1. Cor.
3. 11. Jesus Christ, God-man, is the Center, in whom all the lines of Gods love
and mercy to mankind do meet. Thus are we chosen in him, before the
foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. Thus are we blessed with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places, in Christ, ver. 3. Thus are we predestined
unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, verse. 5. Thus has God made us
accepted in the Beloved; to wit, Jesus Christ, in whom the Father is well
pleased, verse. 6. Thus have we redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, verse. 7. Thus in
the dispensation of the fullness of time, God does gather in one all things in
Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even In him, verse.
10. Thus in him we have obtained an inheritance, to which we are
predestined, verse. 11. Thus in him believing, we are sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise. Now in that God did of his mere grace elect us unto
salvation, therein appears the wonderful mercy and love of God toward us:
in that he made choice of his own Son to be the only sovereign means of
this our salvation, therein appears also the infinite wisdom of God, to
seal up, and to reveal unto us his incomprehensible love. Thus is Christ
called the power of God, and the wisdom of God. In him are hid all the
treasures of Gods wisdom. This is that deepnesse of the riches of the wisdom*
and knowledge of God, wherein the Apostles admiration was swallowed up, and
wherewith the blessed Angels themselves were transported with rauishment, Luke
2. Romans 11. 33.
13 14. This wisdom of God in Christ, God-man, all the Devils could not, for
all their subtilty, comprehend; neither can all the wisdom of flesh and blood
conceive it: it is foolishness to the Gentile, and a stumbling block to the
Jew. Who can conceive, that the Son of God could suffer, and dye? Yet this
did Jesus Christ in that Hypostaticall union of his two natures. Who can
conceive, that a man should fully satisfy the justice of God for the sins of
the world? And yet this did the man Jesus Christ; that one Mediator between
God and Man, the Man Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. 5. Nothing but
the precious blood of God, could reconcile us to God, in appeasing his justice
toward us: nothing Acts 20. ^8.
but the blood of God, could purchase for us the favor of God, and eternal
life. So that in Jesus Christ is revealed unto us, (...), the manifold wisdom
of God, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 3. 10. In him alone, and none but him,
is the Father well pleased with us. So is Christ the only sovereign absolute
means, in whom as we are elected, so we are also saved.

Yet to the end, that all the elect might be made effectually partakers of the
love and favor of God in Christ, the wisdom of God has also ordained
subordinate, conditional, and ordinary means, whereby we should receive
Christ for ours. These means are the Word of God preached, whereby faith is
begotten in us, through the operation of Gods Spirit, and the holy Sacraments
administered, whereby our faith in Christ is sealed and confirmed in us. By this
faith it is, that we lay hold upon Christ, whereby he is made ours, and we made
his, being mystically united unto him, and so in him adopted the Sons of God
by grace, as we showed at large before. Now I call these ordinary and
conditional means, not simply absolute, as Christ is; because although by the
means of these, to wit, the Word and Sacraments, men are ordinarily brought
unto salvation in Christ: namely those, who come to be made capable of the
ordinary means; yet in case any of the elect cannot come to the use of the
ordinary means, as Infants dying before Baptism, and many Children dying
before they come to hear the Word of God; and so actually, in regard of the
ordinary means to believe God, being an absolute and free agent, that can
work above means, and without means, above all that we can think (as says
the Apostle) is not so bound to the ordinary conditional means, but that he
can, and does without them save all those that belong to the Covenant of grace,
elected in Jesus Christ, the only absolute means.

Again, I call the Word and Sacraments conditional means, because, though
they be not so absolute so to tie God, as if he could not save us without
them; yet they be so conditional, as we may not look to be saved, but by
them, if God do give us opportunity to use them, and make us capable of them:
For God did no less ordain these ordinary means, whereby we should come
ordinarily to receive Christ; than he did ordain Christ himself, the only
absolute means whereby we must be saved. Hence it is, that St. Augustine,
according to his manner, says excellently: Tunc Aug. de praedest. Sanct. lib.
9.
voluisse hominibus apparere Christum, and apud eos praedicari doctrinam suam,
quando sciebat, and vbi sciebat esse, qui in eum fuerant credituri; quod posset
sic dici, Quando sciebat, and vbi sciebat esse, qui electi fuerant in ipso ante
mundi constitutionem: Then was Christ willing to have himself made manifest
unto men, and his doctrine to be preached among them, when he knew, and where
he knew there were such, as should believe in him; which may be thus explained,
When he knew, and where he knew those were, who had been elected in him before
the foundation of the world. So that Christ has appeared, his Gospel is
preached, principally for no other end, but to manifest Gods glory in the
saving of his elect. So it is an infallible mark; wheresoever God sends the
means of salvation in the preaching of his Word, there is some of his elect to
be called, and saved. Hence it is, that the holy Ghost gives special
direction and commission to preach in such and such places only, for the time:
namely, where his elect were. Thus was Philip commanded to go preach to the
Eunuch, Acts 8. So Peter to Cornelius, Acts 10. The Apostles are inhibited to
preach the Word in Asia; for the time was not yet come, Acts 16. 6. They were
restrained also by the same Spirit of God, from preaching in Bithynia, verse. 7.
So that this was a sign, that as yet God had no people ready for his Word in
those places. As the Lord himself renders the reason why he will have Paul to
continue in Corinth, and to preach the Word boldly against all opposition; For
(says the Lord) I have much people in this City, and I am with thee, to
preserve thee from all enemies, Acts 18. 10. So Christ was not sent, but to the
lost Sheep of the house of Israel, to those whom his Father had given him out
of the world: for who were they that believed, but so many as were ordained to
eternal life? Acts 13. 48. Again, as Gods wisdom did ordain these ordinary
and conditional means, whereby his elect should be made effectually partakers
of Christ, in whom they are elected: So in the last place, by the grace of
Christ, in the use of these means, we are sanctified and made conformable to
Christ, to walk in him, even as he has walked, in all holy obedience. For as
God in Christ did elect and ordain us to the end, which is to be saved; so
also he has ordained us to all the means tending to this end: which means are
in no sort, to be severed from Gods eternal purpose in saving us: for as he
did before all time appoint us unto salvation in his Son; so before all time
he did appoint the manner, and means, and way, wherein we must walk unto the
end of our salvation: as it is said in the definition, Even unto the end; that
is, till we come to the end of our Christian race, to receive the end of our
faith, the salvation of our souls.

This end is that very thing, to which we are ordained and elected in Christ.
As by grace we are elected unto grace, so also to persevere in grace unto
glory: For the foundation of God stands sure, and has the seal, The Lord
knows who are his. Now has God laid a foundation, and shall not he finish?
No, he is the wise builder. Whom he loves, he loves to the end. As it is said
of Christ, Having loved his own; that is, John 13. 1.
from everlasting: he loved them unto the end; that is, to everlasting. For the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance: Romans 11. 29.
It is not possible for the elect to be deceived; that is, seduced from Christ,
Matthew. 24. 24. Does any fall away, and apostatize from the truth? It is not
from the grace of Christ that they fall; for they never had it: but they fall
away from that temporary profession of faith and conversation, wherein for a
time they continued. So St. John, speaking of 1. Ioh 2. 19.
Apostataes, and revolted Antichristians, says, They went out from us, but
they were not of us; for had they been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest, that
they were not all of us. Whereupon Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 12.
Augustine says; Ne^ nos moueat, quod Filijs suis quibusdam Deus non dat istam
perseuerantiam. Sunt enim quidam, qui Filij Dei propter susceptam vel
temporaliter gratiam, dicuntur a nobis, nec sunt tamen Deo. De quibus Johannes,
Ex nobis exi^runt, sed non er ant ex nobis. Non er ant ex numero Filiorum, and
quando era^t in fide Filiorum. Non enim perit Filius promissionis, sed Filius
perditionis. Euerunt isti ex multitudine vocatorum, non-ex paucitate electorum:
Nor let it move us (says he) that God does not give this perseverance to some
of his Sons. For there are some, who because of a temporary grace received
are called of us the Sons of God, and yet with God they are not so. Of whom
John speaks, They went out from us, but they were not of us. They were not of
the number of Sons, no not when they were in the faith of Sons. For the
Son of promise perishes not, but the Son of perdition. Those were of the
multitude of the called, not of the small number of the elect.

But here it may be objected, that St. Augustine confesses, Object.
that those that fell away, were once in the true faith; and therefore, a man
may fall away from true faith, and consequently from grace finally and totally.
But Saint Augustine Answ.
clears this in many places of his Books, showing, that a man cannot fall
away from the faith of the elect. As Fides Aug. de ^ide and operi. cap. 16.
^om. 4.
Christi, fides gratiae Christianae; id est, ea fides quae per dilectionem
operatur, posita in fundamento, neminem per^^ permittit: The faith of Christ,
the faith of Christian grace; to wit, that faith which works by love, being
built upon the foundation, permits none to perish. And therefore where he
speaks of such as were once in the faith, and fall from it, he means not
the proper faith of the Elect, but the common faith of Christians. As he also
says, Appellamus nos and electos Christi Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 5.
Discipulos, and Dei Filios, quia si^ appellandi sunt, quos regeneratos p^e
viuere cernimus: We do call men even the elect Disciples of Christ, and the
Sons of God, because they are so to be called, whom we see to be regenerate,
and to live godly: but By regenerate, he means those that are baptized, and
so seem by their external profession to be truly and really regenerate. Aug.
ibid.
if they have not perseverance, they are not truly called, since they are
called that, which they are not. And therefore, Quia non habuerunt
perseuerantiam, sicut non vere Discipuli Christi, ita nec vere Filij Dei
fuerunt, etiam quando esse videbantur, and ita vocabantur: Because they had not
perseverance, as they were not truly Christ's Disciples, so neither were they
truly the Sons of God, even when they seemed to be so, and were called so. Of
this sort and sense is another place of St. Augustine to be taken, which the
Author of the new Gagge for the old Goose, for haste (as Charity may deem)
rather than either of malice or ignorance (not easily incident to a man of such
rare and extraordinary learning) has perhaps casually, in such a New Gagge for
an old Goose. Chapter 20. Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 18.
swift flowing current of discourse, dropped from his Goosequill. His
allegation out of St. Augustine, is in these words: Credendum est quosdam de
filijs perditionis, non accepto dono perseuerantiae vsque in finem, in fide,
quae per dilectionem operatur, incipere viuere, and aliquandiu fideliter and
just viuere, and postea cadere, neque de ha^ vita, priusquam hoc eis
contingat, auferri. The author of the Gagge seems to allege this place to
prove, that a man may totally fall away from grace, since from faith working by
love. And the words, as he alleges them, seem to favor that opinion, as if
it were Augustines definitive conclusion, for all peremptorily to believe it,
Credendum est. But as a guelt man, though he have all the other signs of a
man, has lost his virility, the chief difference of his Sex: so this
sentence being but a little guelt, how much is it made to degenerate from the
Masculine style of St. Augustine? For Augustine speaking there of the gift of
perseverance, infers this sentance, thus: Propter huius vtilitatem secreti,
credendum est quosdam, etc. For the benefit of this secret, (to wit, of
perseverance) credendum est: where we are to note, that these first words,
left out by the Author, are a special qualification and limitation of our
faith herein; namely, how far forth, and in what respect Augustine would have
us think so, that men may fall from that faith, which works by love, to the
end, that thereby they should be more careful to keep their standing;
therefore he says, Propter huius vtilitatem secreti. A clause in no case to
be neglected; for little though it be, it leaueneth and seasoneth the whole
lump. As the same Augustine elsewhere says, Deus melius esse iudicauit,
miscere quosdam Aug. de b^no. persevere. l. 2. 8.
non perseueraturos, certo numero Sanctorum suorum, vt quibus non expedit in
huius vitae tentatione securitas, non possint esse securi: God judged it
better, to mingle some that should not persevere, with the certain number of
his Saints, that they, for whom security in the tentation of this life is not
expedient, might learn not to be secure. Now that Augustine, by that faith
working by love, mentioned in the former allegation (from whence he would have
us believe, for our own profit and proficiency in perseuering, that the
reprobate fall) did not mean that true real faith of the Saints and Elect,
which works by love; but only such a faith, in appearance and common
account: besides many other places, and those also which we have forecited;
that one may convince it, where he Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 7.
says upon 2. Tim. 2. 19. Horum fides, quae per dilectionem operatur, profecto
aut omnino non deficit, aut si qui sunt, quorum deficit, reparatur antequam
vita ista finiatur, and deleta, quae intercurrerat, iniquitate, vsque in finem
perseuerantia deputatur: The faith of those, which works by love, either does
not fail at all, or if there be any, whose faith does fail, it is repaired
before this life be ended, and the inquity, which came between, being blotted
out, perseverance is deputed even unto the end. Yea, he says definitiuely,
Fides eius, qui aedificatur super Petram, Aug. ibid.
pro qua etiam or auit Christus, ne deficiat, non deficit: His faith that is
built upon the Rock, for the which also Christ prayed, that it should not
fail, fails not. And Christ says expressly, That the house built upon the
Rock, fails not, Mat. 7. ^5.
but stands firm against all winds and waves of tentations. The Rock is
Christ, and the house upon this Rock, is every true believer. But say, that
former allegation out of Augustine, had been altogether set down by him,
either in those terms, or in that sense as the Author cites it; what if one
such speech tending that way, should have fallen from that excellent holy man?
shall that one preponderate the whole tenure of St, Augustines works? Nay,
rather let it be interpreted by his other sayings, than they be overthrown
and euacuate by this. And let the learned Author of that book of the Gagge, so
maintain the truth of Christ in the maine current of his other writings, as
they may not only extenuate, but wholly expiate and expunge (to omit other
things) at least this blot, dropping from his pen. Augustine, though a most
excellent light in Gods Church, yet wherein he saw his errors (such was his
rare humility, and dextrous ingenuity) he writ a Book of Retractations. But
for his Doctrine in the point of the Saints perseverance in the state of grace,
unto the end, it is so clear, and consonant to the Scriptures, that it needs
no retractation; and as uneasy it is almost by any wit to be perverted, as
subverted. Only let not a misalledged place, or a mis-conceiued allegation out
of Augustine, stand as the Rest, whereon the state of the Doctrine of the
Church of England must lie at hazard. Nor ever let it be said, that the
Doctrine of the faith of the Church of England is any other, than the Doctrine
of the Catholic faith, which is built upon the holy Scriptures, the only
adaequate object and rule of Catholic faith.

Now the ground and foundation of perseverance in grace unto the end, is the
eternal decree and act of Gods good pleasure and will, in predestinating and
electing a certain number of men out of the corrupt mass of mankind, to be
saved in and through Jesus Christ. So that the certainty of perserance of the
elect Saints, depends upon the immutability of that foundation of God, which
stands sure, and has Gods seal upon it, The Lord knows who are his. And it
is worth the 4 Tim. 2.
noting, yea very material for the understanding of the scope of the Apostle
in that place, to observe the words immediately going befoee, verse. 18. where
speaking of the heresy of Hymeneus and Phile^us, by whose means the faith of
some was overthrown: and least some hereupon might conclude, that therefore
Gods elect may fall away from faith, the Apostle preuents, or at least remoues
that objection, inferring in the next words, Nevertheless the foundation of
God stands sure, etc.

Yea this foundation of God stands so sure, as that it stands not idle and
empty, but still in all ages, in all places where Christ is preached, the elect
are effectually called, and built upon it, until the full and final
consummation of the holy and heavenly Temple of God. So that as the Apostle
says, Romans ^.
Whom God did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he
also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Note here the
golden chain of man's salvation. Our glorification is chained to our
justification; our justification to our effectual vocation; our effectual
vocation, justification, glorification, begun here in grace, and consummate
hereafter in glory, are all chained inseparably to predestination, Aug. de
praedest. Sanct. lib. 2.
Gods foundation. Whereupon S. Augustine says, Quos praedestinauit, ipsos and
vocauit, illa scilicet vocatione, secundum propositum; non ergo alios, sed quos
praedestinauit, ipsos and vocauit: nec alios, sed quos ita vocauit, ipsos, and
iustificauit: nec alios, sed quos praedestinauit, vocauit, iustificauit, ipsos
and glorificauit, illo vtique fine qui non habet finem: Whom he predestined,
them he also called, to wit, with that calling which is according to his
purpose; therefore none else, but whom he predestined, them he also called:
nor any others, but whom he so called, them he also justified: nor any others,
but whom he has predestined, called, justified, them he has also glorified
unto the end, that has no end. And De fide ad Petrum Diaconum. cap. 3. Aug. de
fide ad P. Diaconum. cap. 3.
Illi cum Christo regnabunt, quos Deus gratuita bonitate sua praedestinauit ad
Regnum: quoniam tales praedestinando praeparauit, vt Regno digni essent,
praeparauit vtique secundum propositum vocandos, vt obediant: praeparauit
iustificandos, vt accepta gratia recte credant, and been viuant: praeparauit
etiam glorificandos, vt Christi cohaeredes effecti, Regnum coelorum sine fine
possideant: They shall reign with Christ, whom God of his free goodness has
predestined to the Kingdom: for because by predestinating he has prepared
such, that they should be worthy of the Kingdom, he has prepared them to be
called according to his purpose, that they should obey: he has prepared them
to be justified, that having received grace, they should believe aright, and
live well: he has prepared them also to be glorified, that being made coheires
with Christ, they might possess the Kingdom of heaven without end. Thus we
see the maine reason of the Saints perseverance in grace unto the end, is
grounded upon the immutability of Gods election. So that the enemies of the
truth, and of Gods glory, and lovers of their own glory, know well enough,
that their Doctrine of uncertainty, and of falling away from grace, cannot
stand, so long as Gods foundation remains sure: therefore they have labored
tooth and nail to undermine and blow up this foundation of God, that so men
might be as a tottering house built upon the sand; or as a Ship without an
anchor, tossed up and down, and running upon the danger of every rock and
shelue, as St. James compares the faithless man to the winde-driuen wave,
James 1. 6.

Now as God has preordained and elected us, as to the end of our salvation, so
to the means ordinary and conditional, the Word and Sacraments, whereby we
should be in time effectually called to imbraoe by faith the only absolute
means of our salvation, Jesus Christ, in whom we are elected, and by whom we
are mightily saved: So also he has ordained and appointed us unto holiness
of life and conversation, wherein we should walk and persevere unto the end of
this life, as it is in the definition. For good works, being the proper,
immediate, and necessary fruits of justifying Faith, they become also the
ordinary highway to the Kindgome. They are via Regni, though not causa
Regnandi: the way of the Kingdom, but not the cause of making us Kings.
Hereupon the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1. 4. That God has chosen us in Christ
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love. And Chapt. 2. 10. We are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in
them. Here the Apostle speaks of the new creature, of the regenerate man,
created, or re-created in Christ Jesus; created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, that we should walk in them. For the good works of a regenerate man,
as they are evidences of true faith, so they are excellent means to preserve
us from falling, and to make us persevere in grace unto the end. Therefore St.
Peter says, 2. Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore, Brethren, the rather give diligence to
make your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall
never fall. These things; namely such as he spoke of in the fifth, sixth, and
seven Verses: to wit, all kind of good works. For so (says he) an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Object. But some will here object, that for as much as the Apostle does use [
If] here, as putting the assurance of our election upon Ifs and Ands: therefore
if a man continue not to do these things, he shall fall; and so consequently,
the assurance of our perseverance is only conditional: So that it rests in us,
either to stand or fall from grace.

Answ. For answer hereunto: True it is, that the adversaries of this truth
catch at all shadows, whereby they may any way obscure this clear Doctrine,
that so all men might remain still in the shadow of death; as Adam would have
Genes. 3.
done, when he thought to hide himself from God, by taking shroud under the
shadowie trees. Hereunto they add sundry places of Scripture, as all such,
where there is either any exhortation to take hold of grace, or any admonition
to take heed of falling: As 1. Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed, lest he fall. And Romans 11. the Jews fall is propounded
to the called Gentiles, as an example of admonition, verse. 20. Because of
unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith: Be not high
minded, but fear. And to omit many other, they allege one maine place out of
Ezech. 18. where God threateneth, That if the righteous forsake his
righteousness, and commit iniquity; in the iniquity that he has committed,
he shall dye, and his former righteousness shall be remembered no more. From
these and such like places the adversaries would conclude, That a man may fall
totally and finally from grace; or at least they would wave the matter, and
leave it indifferent: since (say they) we find such opposition in the Scripture
about this point. Nay (say they) we can bring as many places, that make against
certainty of election, and perseverance in grace, as can be brought for it. So
that the adversaries (I need name none but the Pontificians; for all that hold
of their wicked Doctrine, though they seem to abhor the name of
Pontificians, yet indeed they are one with them) the adversaries (I say) are
hereupon very peremptory and insolent, because not understanding the
Scriptures, but perverting them to their own destruction, they think they are
as fast and full on their side, as against them. Hereupon at the leastwise they
would, I say, wave the matter, and make it indifferent, whether side a man
choose. So that by hook or by crook they would bring in a new Divinity, as
Copernicus and his followers, a new Philosophy; who, making demonstration, that
the earth may as well move round about in 24. hours, as the heavens; therefore
his disciples conclusion must be, that not the heavens, but the earth moves
about once in 24. hours. The motion whereof has caused this brain-sicke
giddiness in these new Philosophical Heretics, or Heretical Philosophers.
But the grounds of Divinity in this point in hand, are far more demonstratiue
and certain, than that of Copernicus his Philosophy. For he can find no
certain demonstration of the heavens motion, but that he can stop with his
versatilous wit; no more then my brain, earthy as it is, can be moved to
believe his earths motion. But these Nouel-Diuines, must needs confess, that
the Doctrine of Gods election, effectual vocation of the Elect, and their
perseverance in grace, is very clearly set down in the Scriptures. Which being
so, while they would oppose other places of Scriptures against it, what do
they else, but go about to make God a liar, that with him should be Yea and
Nay? For if the Scripture be contradictory in the matter of salvation, then it
should be no better than a lie; and so God, the author of the Scripture, a
liar. But let God be true, and every man a liar. Yea, let the Scriptures be
true, uniform, consonant, and like themselves, and all such wresters and
peruerters of the truth, liars. But they cannot bring any one sentence of
Scripture, to contradict this truth of the certainty of Gods election. The
Scripture says, The foundation of God stands sure, and has the seal, The
Lord knows who are his: but where can the adversaries bring one place of
Scripture contradictory, which says, The foundation of God is uncertain,
without seal, The Lord knows not who are his? The Scriptures says of
Apostates They went out from us, but they were not of us; for had they been of
us, they had continued with us: but where says it the contrary, that Apostates
were once the true Children of God, sealed up in Gods foundation, and known of
God to be his, and that they were once really of the number of Gods Elect? The
Scripture says, It is impossible to deceive the Elect, and to seduce them from
Christ. The Scripture says, He that is borne of God, sins not; neither can
he sin, because he is borne of God: that is, he cannot sin unto death;
namely, by sin fall away from God finally. Where says it, That he that is
borne of God does sin unto death, and so falls totally and finally from
God? Indeed, if as Archimedes, that famous Mathematician and Engineer, who was
so confident of his Art, that he durst say, he would remove this whole
terrestrial Globe, if he had but a Ground or Base to fasten his Engine upon
(although the Base must needs be far bigger than the Moveable.) So they, if
they could find such a solid ground in Scripture, serving their own opinion,
and preponderating the eternal immovable truth of Gods election, as thereupon
they could pitch their artificial Engine; much might be, that these rare
Engineers, might Giant-like, be able to reere Mount Pelion upon Mount Ossa, and
so climb to the top of Olympus: while by their faith, as a grain of scelerata
Sinapis, they command the immovable mountain of Truth (if the foundation of
it did not stand the more sure) to be cast into the floating sea of their
fleeting imagination.

But (say they) the Scripture speaks doubtfully in many places, as in those
fore-alledged and other. To which all I answer in one word, that none of those
fore-alledged places do cross or contradict the truth of God. Nay contrary,
they are all as means, to bring the purpose of God to its small period and
effect. For, Be not high minded, but fear: Let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall: Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: If
ye do these things, ye shall never fall: If a man abide not in me, he is cast
forth as a branch, and is withered: If the righteous forsake his righteousness,
and commit iniquity: and if there be any other Scriptures of this nature,
either exhortatory or admonitory (besides that they are excellent restrictiues
to all sorts of men in general, God extending his restraining grace even to
wicked men) they are all necessary precepts, and sovereign preservatives and
antidotes, especially to the elect of God, to preserve them from falling. These
places do not imply, that Gods elect may fall away: but they serve as means to
prevent them, that they do not fall. Now God has (as I said) not only
ordained the end, but all means tending thereunto. Of which means, those many
exhortations and admonitions in Scripture are a special part. To this purpose
Augustine speaks excellently: Tene quod habes, ne Aug. de correp. and great.
cap. 13.
alius accipiat Coronam tuam. Quod autem etiam perseueraturis Sanctis sic ista
dicuntur, quasi eos perseueraturos habeatur incertum; non aliter hoc audire
debent, quibus expedit non altum sapere, sed timere. Hinc and Apostolis
dicebatur, si manseritis in me: dicente illo, qui illos vtique sciebat esse
mansuros. Et per Prophetam, si volueritis, and audieritis me; cum sciret ipse,
in quibus operaretur and velle. Et similia multa dicuntur, propter huius
vtilitatem secreti, n^ forte quis extollatur, sed omnes etiam qui been currunt,
timeant, etc. that is, Hold that which thou have, lest another take thy Crown
(they are the words of the holy Ghost.) Now that Apoc. 3. 11.
these things are so spoken even to the Saints that shall persevere, as if it
were uncertain whether they should persevere; they ought not to hear of this
otherwise, whom it behooves not to be high minded, but fear. Hence also it is
said to the Apostles, If you shall abide in me: himself speaking it, who knew
full well that they would abide in him. And by the Prophet, If ye be willing,
and will harken unto me; when himself knew, in whom he would work even to
will. And many such things are spoken, for the profit of this secret, lest any
should be puffed up; but that all, even those that run well, should fear.
Hence it is that the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 3. 16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Note here how the holy
Ghost, unto the Doctrine of the Scripture, joins reproof and correction, as
necessary means to bring Gods servants to perfection. So that those places of
Scripture, which deter men from presumption and security, Gods Children make
use of them, as means to keep them in the way, not as stumbling blocks to
take offense at, whereby to fall.

If any here object that of Gregory, Video Paulum, etc. I see Paul called out
of that cruelty of persecuting, to the grace of Apostleship; and yet he so
fears, amidst Gods secret judgments, as that even after he is called, he
fears to be a castaway. For he says, Castigo, I chastise my body, etc. 1.
Cer. 9. and Phil. 3. I follow if I may comprehend, etc. Yea it was now said of
him by the voice of the Lord, He is a chosen vessel unto me: and yet for all
that, chastizing his body, he fears lest he should be reproved, or cast
away. Does Gregory hence conclude, that the elect is uncertain of salvation,
Greg. moral. lib. 29. cap. 9.
or that it is possible for him to become a reprobate? Nothing less. For note
what the adds there: Debet profecto, in spe esse non solum securitas, sed
etiam timor in conuersatione, vt and illa certantes foueat, and iste torpentes
pungat: There ought surely, there ought to be not only security in our hope,
but also fear in our conversation; that both the one (security in hope) may
cheer those that fight, and the other (fear) check and spur them that
faint. Vnde, etc. Whence (says he) it is well spoken by the Prophet, They
which fear the Lord, let them hope in the Lord. As if he said plainly, That
man's hope is vainly confident, who refuses to fear God in his conversation.
And lib 9. cap. 27. he further clears his mind herein, Sciendum est, quod
viri sancti ita incerti sunt, vt confidant; atque ita confidunt, vt tamen ex
securitate non torpeant: We are to know, that holy men are so uncertain, as
that they are confident; and are so confident, as that notwithstanding they
droope not through security. So that such like places of Scripture, as teach us
to fear and tremble, being rightly understood and applied, they are so far
from shaking the certainty of our election and perseverance in grace, that they
tend exceedingly to the establishing of it. Yea they serve also to stop all
foolish and carnal men's mouths, that would (forsooth) in Christian policy
have this Doctrine of God smoothered and suppressed, as tending to make men
careless of the means of salvation: Whereas on the contrary, seeing the
wisdom of God has tied the means of salvation so inseparably and
conditionally to his own purpose and good pleasure in our election: therefore
all men being alike endangered unto God, should not persist in their rebellion,
to their further damnation, but should use all diligence in the use of those
means, by which God does work salvation unto us.

Tell me (if politic respects may take such place) A Kings subjects being all
fallen (without exception) into a Praemunire, having forfeited their estates and
all: if now the King out of his special grace and favor, have resolved with
himself to pardon such a number of them, as seems good unto him, whose names
he enrolleth in his book of Arcana regni, not purposing to pardon any more, but
these only; yet withal has appointed such and such means to be used, and
conditions to be observed, as he prescribes, and so thus far publishes by
Proclamation to all his subjects, that such is his determination and good
pleasure, to pardon and spare a certain number of his subjects, such as
himself, out of special grace, has made choice of; but the number of the
persons, and who they be, he concealeth in his breast, but reuealeth to them the
means whereby he will save them: will any of his subjects be so desperately
minded, as to say thus with himself, The King has resolved to pardon a
certain number, and no more, and to receive them to favor by such means as
he commands, by obeying such and such Laws; but since I am uncertain,
whether I be one of that number or no, I will not take the pains to use any
such means, nor so much as endeavor to observe those conditions, though never
so easy, which he requires in that behalf? Nay, will not all rather harken
to the conditions, being all of them gracious, and no way grievous, every one
for his part hoping, that he may be one of that number, whom the King has
resolved to receive to grace and favor again, yea, and highly to advance in
his Kingdom? If it be but a running Lottery, wherein the whole Country is
coosened, though there be but a few prizes to many blankes, yet how forward are
men to adventure their money, some pawning their very beds, and all to be
cheated? We see there is no Papist so uncharitable, that though his near
kinsman, be it Father or Mother, or so, dye never so wicked, yet at the least
in hope he is but in Purgatory, how will he empty his purse, yea how often, for
so many Masses, to release him out again? although it be a most desperate
adventure; nay, he will not stick perhaps to go a long Pilgrimage, and to do
some tedious Penance enjoined him by a sinful Priest, and all for the pardon
of that sin, whereof notwithstanding neither the Priest can give, nor
himself receive any assurance of pardon by such means at Gods hand- And shall
not all men endangered to God for soul and all, be ready to entertain and
observe all such conditions, prescribed by God, whereby they may be saved, and
without which they cannot be saved?

Yes (say these selfe-wise carnal Vniuersalists) if we were but in as much
hope of Gods favor, as we may be of a prize in a Lottery, we would hazard
all we have, skin for skin, and all, to save our life. Yea, or if it were in
our own power, so to use the means prescribed, and the conditions imposed, as
that thereby we might be saved, notwithstanding we knew, that God had
determined to save but a few of many; we should be willing to use our best
endeavor, in hope of the Kings favor. But the case between God and man is
otherwise. We are indeed all of us fallen into a Praemunire, and have forfeited
our whole estates, lives and liberties, for our Rebellion. But we hear, that
though the King of his special grace, have purposed to pardon, and to prefer
a certain small number in comparison of the rest; but withal, that this
pardon must be procured by such means, as no one of all his subjects, is in
himself of ability and power to use, and put in practice, unless the King
also give unto him a special strength to do that which the King requires:
therefore what should I trouble my self for the matter? I know the worst of
it; and seeing it is not in my power to help my self, let the King do what
he will: If I be one of those, whom he has purposed to pardon, what should I
need to take care any further? But if not, what need I bestow labor in vain?
Yea, but withal observe, though the grace, and the means, and the power of
right using the means be of the King, because he will have all the glory of
working that, which all man's strength and wit could never have accomplished:
yet the King to his former decree has added another clause, that
notwithstanding the Kings purpose and decree, which may not be altered,
notwithstanding the right use of the means of procuring his pardon, depend
upon him alone; yet the King has peremptorily commanded all his subjects, none
excepted, that if any shall dare to contemn, or neglect those means, which
he has prescribed for the good of those, whom they chiefly concern, that man
shall not only not be pardoned for his former rebellion, but be bound over to
a further condemnation, to suffer greater torments and tortures, than otherwise
he should have done. Tell me now in this case, what subject would be so
foolehardy, as openly to contemn and reject the commandment of the King? and
not rather to do the best that lies in him to observe those things which he
commands; seeing that of endeavor may come much good: but of contempt,
certain condemnation. Even thus stands the case between God and us: we have
all sinned, and forfeited our estates with God. He, of his mercy, has purposed
to save a certain number of us condemned persons; he has withal prescribed
the means, whereby he will save that special number: yet the means are such,
as though in their own nature they be gentle and easy (for Christ's yoke is
easy, and his burden light) yet in regard of our impotency, it is in Gods
power only to enable us to use the means aright. Now, though God give his
special grace and strength to none, but those whom he has appointed to save;
yet forasmuch as we are ignorant who those be, whom he has ordained to save,
and every man may as well think himself to be of the number, as any other;
and seeing though he cannot of himself so much as will that which is truly
good, but God works in us both to will and to do, even of his good pleasure:
yet because God has commanded all men indifferently to receive and entertain
his commandments, and conditions, which wilfully to refuse, despise, and
oppugn, heapeth upon a man further condemnation, which was the miserable case
of Corasin, Bethsaida, and Jerusalem, with her contemning, oppugning Jews: and
because God has reserved this secret number to himself, both how many they
be, and who they be, whom he has purposed to save, none knowing himself to be
of the number, till he be actually and effectually called, and have received
the white stone, the mark of his election, with the new name of the Son of
God in it, which no man knows, but he that has it; nor any being so wicked,
but he may prove to be one of the number of Gods elect, and so to be
effectually called in due time: and because for any man to judge himself,
while he lives in this world, to be of the number of the reprobate, is a
desperate judgment, yea a prejudice of Gods purpose and grace, and a rash
presumption, as daring to prye into Gods secrets, and to determine that as
certain, which God has left uncertain: therefore for a man to cavil at this
truth of God, and thereupon to frame frivolous and foolish unreasonable
reasons, to resist and contemn Gods ordinance; what is it but to heap upon
himself greater and greater condemnation? God will not in the mean time have
his truth dissembled, his glory diminished, his mercy despised, and his justice
disparaged. Let no man dare to say, Why does he yet complain? Who art thou,
vain man, that pleadest against God? take thou heed thou give not God
further occasion to complain of thee: Shall thy politic, or rather
braine-sicke reasons, be wiser than Gods wisdom? God has willed it so: And
his will is above all humane reason. And Gods will is nothing but divine
reason, yea wisdom it self. But yet as a man, to answer thy reasons with
reasons: Thou deniest the certainty of election, at least thou would not have
it published and preached. Why? What Is thy reason for it? Because it makes men
careless of the means. It is false; it is not Gods good will and pleasure
which he has published, but it is thine own perverse and corrupt will, that
makes thee careless and contemptuous. But by this reason of thine, which thou
can sub-diuide into many branches, but all growing from the same carnal
root, to satisfy thine own foolish reason, in desiring to have this glorious
truth of God dissembled or suppressed: thou would destroy two precious
things, infinitely more dear than a thousand worlds.

The first is the glory of God, which is so nothing much manifested, First.
as in this act of his, concerning his good pleasure in the disposing of
mankind. It is that summary doctrine of Gods glory. So that to suppress, or
supplant this truth, is to strip God of his excellent glory. It is the saying
of a judicious and learned Divine, Viciatur and adulteratur Religio, ^imulac
minimum Calvin. in Praecept. 1. Exodus 20. in initio.
aliquid detrahitur ex Dei gloria: Religion comes then to be corrupted and
adulterated, when once Gods glory suffers the least detriment or diminution.
No (say they) we do not take away Gods glory; for we acknowledge his
preventing grace. Just so did those adversaries in Augustines time, with whom
he had to deal, of whom he says: A Pelagianorum Aug. de bono persevere. lib.
2. cap. 16.
porro haeretica peruersitate tantum isti remoti sunt, propter quos haec
agimus, vt lice^ nondum velint fateri praedestinatos esse, qui per Dei gratiam
fiant obedientes, atque permaneant, iam tamen fateantur, quod eorum praeueniat
voluntatem, quibus datur h^c gratia: Now these men (says he) with whom we
have to deal, are so much remote from the Heretical perverseness of the
Pelagians, that although they will not be brought to confess, that they which
by the grace of God are made obedient and remain so, are predestined; yet
notwithstanding they confess, that this grace preuents the will of those, to
whom it is given. But how? Augustine discouers their deceit; Ideo vitque ne
gratis dari credatur gratia, sicut veritas loquitur, sed potius secundum
praecedentis merita voluntatis, sicut contra veritatem Pelagianus error
obloquitur: This must be so (forsooth) lest grace should be thought to be given
gratis, as the truth speaks, but rather according to the merits of man's
precedent will, as the Pelagian error gain-saieth the truth. So that in the
conclusion, the Pelagians and Pontificians, with their confederates, conspire
in the maine, not only to diminish, but even to demolish the glory of God.

The second precious thing which thou would destroy, is Second.
the salvation of the elect: Thou to make a reprobate by thy carnal reason to
become at the best a formal hypocrite, puffed up with the swelling pride of
his selfe-righteousnesse, would destroy that gracious purpose of God, in
saving impotent man, which purpose of God is the only cause of the effectual
saving of men: For, take away this purpose of God, and no man should be saved.
And not only Gods purpose to save some, whom he will, does in time effectually
bring them unto the state of grace in Christ: but also is so far from making
them careless, as it makes them the more careful to continue in the state of
grace. Yea, not only so, but God does endowe all his with a care, and mind,
and will, and power, to continue in his favor and grace. And to this end, all
things work together, cooperate for good to them that love Romans 8. 28.
God, to them that are called according to his purpose. Has God given me the
grace of faith, to believe in his Son Jesus Christ, whereby I come now to
know, what I knew not before; namely, that I am of the number of Gods elect,
preordained to salvation before the foundation of the world? Am I hereupon
careless how I live, because I have received the evidence of Gods favor
toward me in Christ? Nay, now I begin to be more careful, than ever before,
that I may also attain to the end of my salvation. And I am so much the more
encouraged hereunto, not only because I am ordained of God unto it, but
because now the Spirit of Christ dwells in me, strengthening, encouraging,
comforting, confirming me more and more in the obedience of faith, and sealing
me up unto the day of Redemption. I know that God has appointed to save me,
but not without means. He has made the means easy unto me, and he has
given me both a mind and power to observe the conditions, where I, through
carnal infirmity still dwelling in me, fail; yet still the means is in my
way, which is to be renewed by repentance, humiliation, and obedience. I cannot
now ever be resolved, that because I know I am one of Gods elect, therefore I
will sin, and live as I list: but because I am one of Gods elect, redeemed by
Jesus Christ; therefore my whole resolution is, continually to set forth the
praises of him, that has called me out of darkness, into his marvelous
light. St. John was of another mind than these men, where, 1. Ioh. 3. speaking
of our knowledge and assurance of our blessed estate, in, and through, and with
Christ, he adds, verse. 3. He that has this hope, purges himself, even as
he is pure. So that the more certain our faith and hope is of eternal life,
the more careful it makes us of fitting and preparing ourselves thereunto. For
he that has this hope, purges himself.

Tell me: a Prince being borne heir apparent to a Kingdom, because he is
assured that none can prevent him of his right, is he therefore careless of
his course of life, running riot, and playing the young Prodigal, and not
rather disposes himself, or at least is carefully brought up under Tutors and
Governors for that end, that by learning obedience in his youth and nonage, he
may know the better how to Command, when he comes to weald the Scepter? Now the
Child of God, by his new birth, is borne heir apparent to the kingdom of
glory; therefore while he is in his minority, in the Principality of grace,
and because now he has many infallible arguments to assure him of the
Kingdom, is he either himself so careless, or is his heavenly Father so
improuident, as not every way to furnish him with those graces, beseeming such
a Prince, whereby he may in time be thoroughly furnished, and accounted worthy
to sit with Christ in his Throne? Because old Symeon had a revelation by the
Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Luke 2. 26.
Lord's Christ: Did he therefore (as knowing God to be true in his promise)
neglect his ordinary meat, and other means for the sustentation, and
preservation of his life, because he was to live certainly until he should
see the Lord's Christ? Because King Ezechias had a gracious promise from God,
2. King. 20. 6.
that he should recover of his pestilent disease, and within three days be
able to go up unto the house of the Lord, and moreover, that he had fifteen
years added of God unto his days; was Ezechias therefore careless of using
the means for his recovery, which the Lord had prescribed, and so for the
prolonging of his life, which the Lord had promised? Did he not, according to
Gods direction, take and apply the lump of dry Figgs to the plague sore, and
so recovered? so that within three days he went up unto the house of the Lord,
to offer the Sacrifice of praise. So the elect of God, being now effectually
called to the state of grace, they have a promise from God, that they shall
never see death (that spiritual death which Christ speaks of) till they see
the Lord's Christ face to face, and know him by beatificall vision, even as
they are known: are they therefore careless of the spirirituall food of their
souls, the Word and Sacraments, whereby they are preserved till they come to
the fruition of this beatificall vision? And being desperately sick of the
pestilence of sin, and having health promised, and remedy provided, are they
therefore so careless, as not to put forth the hand of faith, to apply Christ,
(that lump of figgs, that cluster of grapes, that balm of Gilead) to their
pestilential sore, that recovering perfect health thereby, they may after three
days be raised up, and be able upon the feet of their holiest affections to
ascend unto the house of the Lord, not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens, there to sing Haleluiahs of praise to God for evermore? I will
conclude this with S. August. first, for the confirmation of this Catholic
truth; Aug. de bono persevere. li. 2. cap. 17.
Non solum ergo praedicatione praedestinationis ab hoc opere (nempe,
sanctificationis) non impeditur (electus) verum ab hoc adiuuatur, vt cum
gloriatur, in Domino glorietur: Therefore by the preaching of predestination,
the elect is not only not hindered from this work, to wit, of sanctification,
but also is helped hereunto, that when he glories, he may glory in the Lord.
And again for confutation of Pelagian and Pontifician (I had almost said also
Arminian) falsehood, who say all with one voice, Si non vultis obedientiam ad
quam nos accenditis, in nostro Ibid. cap. 19.
cord frigescere, nolite nobis istam Dei gratiam praedicare, quam Deum dare
fatemur, quam et nos vt faciamus hortamini: If (say the Pelagians) ye will not
have that obedience, to which you inflame us, to frieze in our hearts, do not
preach unto us that grace of God, which we confess God is the giver of, and
which you exhort us to do. Augustine thus concludes against such: Ego autem
nolo exaggerare meis verbis, sed illis potius Ibid. cap. 17.
cogitandum relinquo, vt videant quale sit, quod sibi persuaserunt,
praedicatione praedestinationis audientibus plus desperationis quam
exhortationis afferri: hoc est enim dicere, tunc de sua salute hominem
desperare, quando spem suam non in seipso, sed in Deo didicerit ponere: cum
propheta clamet, Maledictus omnis, qui spem ponit in homine: Now I will not
exaggerate the matter with my words (says he) but I rather leave it to them to
consider, that they may see what that is, which they have persuaded themselves,
that by the preaching of predestination, the hearers are possessed rather with
desperation, then with exhortation: for this is all one, as to say, that then a
man despaireth of his salvation, when he has learned to put his hope not in
himself, but in God: whereas the Prophet proclaymeth, Cursed Ier. 17. 5.
is every one that puts his hope in man. Therefore, says he, Miror, homines
infirmitati suae se malle committere, quam firmitati Aug. de praed. Sanct. lib.
^. c. ^^
promissionis Dei: I wonder, that men had rather commit themselves to their
own infirmity, than to the certainty of Gods promise. But who be they that
receive not this Gospel of God? The Apostle resolves it, 2. Cor. 4. 3. If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the God of this world
has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.
And who are they that pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction, but as
St. Peter says, the unlearned and the 2. Pet. 3. 16.
unstable? such as are unlearned in the mystery of Christ, and unstable in the
faith of Christ. And even that fore cited place of Ezech. 18. which these men
hold as the Cittadell and strongest Fort where they have planted all their
munition, is (besides many other) sufficient to argue their judgment of too
great leuity. For what righteousness (I pray you) is that, which the Prophet
there speaks of? Is it that righteousness, whereby we are justified in Gods
sight? Nothing less. For that righteousness is properly the state of grace.
Nay, it is plain, that the righteousness there mentioned, is only a moral
external righteousness, such as we find in Genesis 18. 26. What if there be
fifty righteous in Sodom? that is, so many moral men, that were not tainted
with the crying sins of that City. Was there any other grace to be expected
among the Sodomites, than only a restraining grace, which yet not ten in the
whole City were found to have? And that the Lord speaks of moral
righteousness here, read the 5. 6. 7. 8. and 9. Verses of the same Chapter of
Ezechiel. But it is there said, That a man shall live in that righteousness,
and shall not dye. True. But how live? Is it not spoken in regard of temporal
death, and temporal judgments, threatened in the former Chapter, to which
also the Proverb in the 18. Chapter has reference; which Proverb also gave
occasion to this whole Chapter? Where the Lord showing himself to be an
upright and impartial God, both just and merciful, concludes with an
exhortation to repentance and conversion; which is the proper use and vp-shot
(as we said before) of all such places of Scripture. But to conclude hence,
that because it is said here, If the righteous forsake his righteousness: that
therefore Gods elect may fall finally from grace: What is it else but to
conclude, That all that are called righteous in the Scriptures, are the elect
of God; and so consequently, that the very Elect may fall finally from grace;
and also that those righteous, mentioned Matthew. 9 13. whom Christ came not to
call, if they persevere in that their Pharisaicall righteousness, shall not
dye, but therein live eternally.

But for as much as these Pontifician Pelagians, or call them what you will,
how soever their Doctrine go as yet veiled, as wanting fit opportunity to
venditate it self publicly upon the Stage, although it begin to vent it self
already, not in obscure corners, but in the Scorners Chair, as having no small
Patrons and Advocates to plead its cause, if the season served: yet because
this Canker begins to spread it self, yea even in the purest Church of Christ;
nay, ceazing upon the very eyes themselves, so that in time we may fear, lest
as Laban, they obtrude upon us bleare-eyed Leah, in stead of cleare-eyed
beautiful Rachel; not wanting plausible reason to make it Genesis 29. 26.
good, how contrary to faith soever, as Laban did, saying it was not the manner
of the Country. Let these for the better commendation of their politic
Doctrine, give us some taste and proof of the goodness of it. It seems they
have much to say for themselves: but if their Doctrine be built upon such firm
ground of policy and wisdom, as (seeing Gods wisdom is no longer able to do
it) to make men more careful of living well, let these great Reformers of the
world give us a precedent in the reformation of their own house As Anacharsis
said to Solon, professing he would reform the whole City: Begin first, said
he, to reform thine own house. Plutarch. invita Solonis. Cic. de Oratore.
lib. 3.
. No doubt these men are of a most refined stamp, sublimated to the very
quintessence of humane purity, and perfection of virtue. Well, audiamus bellum
puerum, as Cato said: Let us hear, nay let us see, these fair Lamia's.
Indeed deformed Lamia, being finely flowted by the Orator, for his prating,
could answer for himself, Vultum mihi fingere non potui, ingenium potui: I
could not frame unto my self a fair feature, but wit I could. Then said Cato,
Audiamus disertum: Let us hear the witty youth. But these men have been able
to frame unto themselves both beauty and wit; wit, to invent and compose a new
plat-forme of virtue, a new way to Heaven: and beauty to express this virtue,
and to demonstrate this way with the very hand of their own immaculate
exemplary life. Let them therefore come forth upon the Stage, and act before us
but a Scene of their Christian life. We are willing to be Spectators of this
rare spectacle, and will be as beneuolous to give them a Plaudite, if they
deserve it, as by their fame and claim we are erected to a high expectation of
their performance; for we expect to see them act the parts (not as common
Actors and Comedians act others good parts upon the Stage, whence (...) or
Hypocrites have their names, as Gregory says, Haereticorum hypocrisis decoros
ipsos hominibus Greg. moral. l. 3. cap. 18.
ostendit: The hypocrysie of Heretics makes them appear beautiful unto
men:) we expect (I say) to see them act the parts, not of the ordinary rank
of morallmen; but as they profess to go before others in learning and wit: so
let them go before all men in sanctity of life and conversation: which if they
do not, their own Doctrine shall turn to their greater condemnation. For
seeing they attribute so much to their natural abilities, if they make it not
good in their own practice, God will say unto them, Out of thine own mouth
will I condemn thee, thou evil servant. Have thou so much power to do good,
and do it not? If the Lord condemn that fear at the best, which is taught
toward him by the precepts of men: how shall he confound those, that for all
their humane politic precepts, come infinitely short Esaias 29. 13.
of the fear of God in their lives? But if not only defect of the true fear
of God be found in them, but excess of all corruption do bear sway in their
lusts, if they be extreme proud, covetous, ambitious, malicious, contemners of
the true servants of God, if back-biters, selfe-louers, lovers of pleasures
more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof: what reward shall they have for all their new devices and quaint
doctrines? What honor with God? What credit with men? What comfort in
themselves, but horror of conscience? What else can be expected of such, as
have lost, or never had the true faith? Can a bad tree bring forth good fruit,
says Christ? Gregory compares such to brazen Pipes, Sonum been loquendi
habent, Greg. Moral. lib 33. cap. 16.
sed sensum been viuendi non habent: They have the sound of saying well, but
they have not the sense of living well. But take their works at the best, yet
seeing they flow not from the holy root of sound faith, they are but as many
flowers, whose color is beautiful, but their savor banefull. Such do stincke
odious in the pure nostrils of God: yea they are abominable to the Church of
God. As the same Gregory says; Quia nonnunquam haeretici, quanto magis in
perfidiae errorem dilabuntur, Greg. ibid. l. 20. cap. 7.
tanto amplius in exteriori sese operatione custodiunt, ita vt agere prae
caeteris magna videantur; sancta vniuersalis Ecclesia cuncta eorum opera
despicit, quae ex authoritate fidei non prodire perpendit: Because sometimes
heretics, the more they sink into the error of perfidiousnesse, so much the
more warily do they keep themselves, in their exterior operation, so that
they may seem in comparison of others, to do great things: the holy
universal Church does despise all their works, which it considers not to
proceed from the authority of faith.

Now having spoken of the nature of Predestination, according to the express
tenure of the holy Scriptures; come we to set down the certainty of
Catholic and true justifying Faith, in regard of the certainty of
predestination unto grace, and of perseverance therein unto glory. The
Pontificians allege and object, That we cannot be certain of our salvation;
but depend always doubtful, because (say they) we cannot know who is
predestinate, and who shall persevere in grace without special revelation. Now
true it is, that no believer can know whether another be predestinate, or shall
persevere, but by special revelation. Samuel came to 1. Sam. 16. 1.
know King Saul to be a reprobate, by special revelation. Ananias Acts 9. 15.
came to know persecuting Saul to be an elect vessel, by special revelation.
So Paul came to know, that Clement, Phil. 4. 3.
and other his fellow laborers, had their names written in the Book of life.
Again, no man, how wicked soever, can know or conclude with himself, that he
is a reprobate, but either by divine revelation, as Saul came to know this by
Samuel 1. Sam. 15. 26.
from God, or else by the effects of final impenitency and desperation: such
as commit the sin of the Holy Ghost especially. But that every true believer
may, and does come to know himself to be of the number of Gods elect, and
predestinate unto life, and that not only by extraordinary revelation from the
Spirit of God, but by the illumination of justifying Faith, and consequently is
hereby assured of his perseverance in grace unto glory; is a Doctrine most
evident in the holy Scriptures.

Two general points therefore come here to be handled: First, that every true
believer in Christ, may and does certainly know, that he is one of the number
of Gods Elect. Secondly, that every true believer may, and does know certainly,
that he shall persevere in grace unto glory.

For the first of these: Every true believer in Christ, may and does certainly
know, that he is one of the number of Gods Elect. And this he knows first
by Faith. The Faith of Gods Elect is as a crystal perspectiue glass, though
which every true believer clearly sees himself enrolled in the Book of
life: Rejoice in this, says Christ, that your Luke 10. 20.
names are written in Heaven. Now how can any man rejoice of that, whereof he
is uncertain and doubtful, and which he knows not? So that for the Elect to
rejoice, that their names are written in Heaven, in the Book of life, must
needs imply a certain knowledge, that we are of the number of those, whose
names are written in the Book of life; as also some in the Trent-Councell
iudiciously alleged from this very place. But the adversaries object, that
this was spoken in especial to the elect Disciples, to whom Christ gave a
special revelation of their election. I answer with Augustine upon these very
words of the Gospel of Christ, Aug. in Psalm. 130.
In this rejoice, that your names are written in Heaven: Nullus fidelis habet
spem, si nomen eius non est scriptum in coelo: No faithful man has any hope,
if his name be not written in Heaven. So that Augustine applies this speech
of Christ to all the faithful. As he there says, Non eos voluit gaudere ex
eo, quod proprium habebant, sed ex eo, quod cum caeteris salutem tenebant. Inde
voluit gaudere Apostolos, vnde gaudes and tu. Christ would not have his
Disciples to rejoice of that, which they had proper to themselves (namely, of
casting out Devils, and of doing miracles) but of their own salvation, which
they had common with others. For that very cause would he have his Disciples
rejoice, for which thou also reioycest. Omnium fidelium, qui diligunt Christum,
qui ambulant viam eius humiliter, quam ipse docuit humilis, nomina scripta sunt
in Coelo. Cuiusuis contemptibilis in Ecclesia, qui credit in Christum, and
diligit Christum, and amat pacem Christi, nomen scriptum est in Coelo;
cuius^ibet quem contemnis, etc. The names of all the faithful, which love
Christ, which humbly walk in his way, which his humble self prescribed, are
written in Heaven. The name of every contemptible one in the Church, which
believes in Christ, and loves Christ, and loves the peace of Christ, is
written in Heaven; even of every one, whom thou contemnest. And what comparison
between such a one, and the Apostles, who did so great miracles? And yet the
Apostles are checked, because they rejoiced in a private good, and are charged
to rejoice of that, whereof even that contemptible one rejoices. So Saint
Augustine. So that the Apostles rejoicing, that their names were written in
Heaven, was not peculiar to them, but common to every true believer, the most
contemptible whereof, is no less commanded to rejoice, that his name is
written in Heaven, than the Apostles themselves were. If therefore all the
faithful must rejoice, that their names are written in Heaven, then they must
needs certainly know, not coniecturally suppose, or vainly presume, that they
are of the number of Gods Elect. For else, to rejoice of that, where of they
have no certain knowledge, were but the flash of a false joy. But Christ bids
us rejoice truly and really. All therefore, whose names are written in Heaven,
know it to be so, since they are bid to rejoice of it. And if this knowledge
come not but by revelation, yet it is no special revelation to some few
believers only, but it is given to all true believers in common. Yea, all the
elect, even every true believer, knows this by his Faith, and the fruits of
it, as Hope and Love, etc. This the Apostle shows, 2. Cor. 13. 5. Examine
your selves, whether ye be in the 2. Cor. 13. 5.
Faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? A most emphaticall speech. Examine:
What? your selves. Wherein? Whether ye be in the Faith: yea, Prove your own
selves herein: And let this be the proof of your Faith, to know your selves to
be in Christ, and Christ to be in you. For this is proper to the elect of God,
yea, to all the elect in Christ, to know themselves to be of that number, even
by the proof and testimony of their Faith. Which knowledge he who never
has, is a Reprobate, by the Apostles Sentence. For if Christ be in you, then
are you of the number of Gods elect: and Christ dwells in us by Faith; and by
Faith, we know that Christ dwells in us; by which, we know that we are not
Reprobates: And if we know we are no Reprobates, then we know certainly,
that we are of Gods elect. Hereupon Saint Augustine says: Fides, quae per
dilectionem operatur, si est in vobis, Aug. de verbis Apost. ser. 16.
iam pertinetis ad praedestinatos, vocatos, iustificatos; ergo crescat in
vobis: Faith, which works by love, if it be in you, you do now belong to the
number of the Predestinate, of the Called, of the Justified; therefore let
Faith grow in you.

Saint John also shows this excellently, saying, He that 1. John 5. 10.
believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself. So that our
Faith in Christ, is our infallible witness, that we are Christ's, and Christ
is ours; and so consequently, that we are predestinate and elect in Christ.
For if any man doubt of this Record of Faith, what it is, and wherein it
consists, the same Apostle makes it yet more evident, ( Verse 11.) saying;
And this is the Record, that God has given to us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son. And can we have this Witness, this Record of Faith in
ourselves, and not thereby certainly know, that we are of the number of Gods
elect, when we thus find the infallible proof and effect of it in us?
Eternal life is the infallible effect of our election. But by Faith we know
that we have eternal life: For this is the Record, even our Faith. Yea, this
infallible knowledge is that which the Apostle does purposely write, to inform
us of: For Verse 13. he says, These things have I written unto you that
believe in the Name of the Son of God. To what end? That ye may know: What?
That ye may know, (not, that ye may have some probable conjecture, but that
ye may know) What? that ye have eternal life: Not only that ye shall have
it, but that ye already have it (than which, nothing is more sure and
certain) and that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of God. And this is
the confidence that we have in him, etc. Now, has every true Believer
eternal Life? And does he know this by Faith? And does he not then know,
that he is of the number of Gods elect? Let all Pontifician Sophistry here
stop the Mouth of Contradiction: Let it submit to the invincible and clear
Truth of God.

Thus having declared the infallible certainty of Salvation, sealed unto us by
a lively justifying Faith; which makes a man so persuaded of his Election and
Predestination, as that it makes him to rejoice that his name is written in
Heaven: it follows now, in the next place, to show the certainty of Faith,
as touching our perseverance unto the end. Now our perseverance in Grace, is a
necessary consequent effect of our Election and Predestination in Christ unto
Glory: So that being sure we are of the number of Gods Elect, we are also
sure, that we shall also continue and persevere in Grace unto the end,
whereunto we are elected. As Augustine says: Quis in aeternam August.
vitam potuit ordinari, nisi perseuerantiae dono? Who could be ordained to
eternal Life, without the gift of Perseverance? So that for a man to know he
is written in the Book of Life, of Gods Election, is consequently to know,
that he shall persevere unto the end. Do we know, that God loves us in
Christ? Then do we also know, that unto the end he loves us. We know, that
he that has begun the good work of Grace in us, will also perform it unto
the end. We know, with the Apostle, that nothing shall separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8.
The Pontificians would feign restrain the Apostles persuasion, and extend it
no farther than to himself, as a special revelation of the certainty of his
own salvation. But he says expressly, Nothing shall separate V^; he says
not, Me alone, but Us. As he plainly expresses elsewhere, saying: We know,
that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
Building of God, a House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. He
says not only, I know, but We know. Saint Augustine upon these words of
Christ (You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that
ye should go, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain)
says thus* Quibus verbis eis non solum iustitiam, verum etiam in illa
perseuerantiam Aug. de correp. and gra^ia, c. 12
se dedisse monstrauit. Christo enim sic eos ponentevt eant, and fructum
afferant, and fructus eorum maneat: quis, audeat dicere, Forsitan non manebit?
Sine poenitentia sunt enim dona and vocatio Dei, sed vocatio eorum, qui
secundum propositum vocati sunt. Pro his ergo interpellante Christo, non
deficiet fides eorum, sine dubio non deficiet vsque in finem: that is, By which
words of Christ, says Augustine, he declared, that he gave unto them not
only Righteousness, but also Perseverance in the same. For, Christ so
ordayning them, that they should go, and bring forth fruit, and that their
fruit should remain; who dare then say, Perhaps it shall not remain? For the
Gifts and Calling of God (to wit, the Calling of those, who are the Called
according to his purpose) are without repentance. Christ therefore making
intercession for these, their Faith shall not fail, without doubt it shall not
fail unto the end. Who then shall dare to say the contrary? Yes: the
all-daring Pontificians dare say, Forsitan non manebit; Perhaps Faith shall not
remain: and, It is doubtful whether such Faith shall continue unto the end.

But me thinks I hear the Pontificians say, Saint Augustine does not yet say,
That the Elect do know certainly, that they shall persevere unto the end. No?
Quis audeat dicere, Forsitan non manebit? Who dare say, Perhaps it shall not
continue? And shall the Elect themselves, who bring forth this Fruit, and have
this Faith, say, Perhaps they shall not persevere? Or, that their perseverance
is doubtful? Yea, if none ought to doubt of it, much less themselves. The
same Augustine says again: Aug ibid.
Quando rogauit Christus, ne fides Petri deficeret, quid aliud rogauit, ni^i vt
haberet in fide liberrimam, fortissimam, inuictisfimam, perseuerantissimem
voluntatem? When Christ prayed, that Peter's Faith should not fail; what else
did he pray for, but that in his Faith he might have a most free, most firm,
most invincible, and most perseuering Will? And Christ's prayer cannot be in
vain, as Augustine says. Now, if Faith have a most constant Will to
persevere, does not the Faithful certainly know that he shall persevere,
since he cannot but know his own Will; as also, that this Will of his is
established by Christ's effectual prayer? Aug. contra mendacium ad Consen ium,
c. 6. to. 4.
Hence, Saint Augustine to Consentius, says: Quis it a euanescat, vt existimet
Petrum hoc habuisse in cord, quod in ore, quando Christum negauit? Nempe in
illa negatione intus veritatem tenebat, and foris mendacium proferebat: Who so
vain, as to think, that Peter had that in his heart, which he had in his
mouth, when he denied Christ? For in that denial, he held the Truth
inwardly, and uttered a Lie outwardly.

But (say they) this was spoken specially to Peter. Object.
No, says Saint Augustine: Dicente Christo, Rogaui pro te, ne deficiat fides
tua; intelligamus ei dictum, qui aedificatur super P^^ra^s: Christ saying, I
have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not: let us understand it to be
spoken to him, who is built upon the Rock. By which place we see, that Saint
Augustine did neither hold Peter to be the Rock: nor that stability of Faith
was given to him alone, but to every one built upon the Rock.

But the Pontificians object, that both Saint Augustine and others do say,
that God only knows who are the predestinate unto life. And Bernard says,
Solus Deus scit, quos elegerit a principio: Only God knows whom he has
chosen from the beginning.

I answer, that when Bernard or Augustine, etc. say thus, it is evident they
mean, that God only knows this secret immediately, and of himself alone;
also from eternity, and before the elect themselves, namely, before their
effectual vocation, come to know it: but that the Saints themselves, being now
effectually called, do know this mediately; to wit, by means of their Faith
given them of God, and by the infallible testimony of the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in all the faithful: let us hear what Bernard says; Quando sine
testimonio electos suos deserat Deus? Bern. in Octaua Paschae: Ser. 2.
Aut certe qu^nam eis esse poterat consolatio inter spem and metum,
sollicitudine anxia fluctuantibus, si nulluns omnino electionis suae habere
testimonium mererentur? When does God leave his elect without witness? Or what
consolation, I pray you, could they have floating in an anxious doubtfulnesse
between hope and fear, if they could obtain no testimony at all of their
election? Quam enim requiem habene potest spiritus noster, dum
praedestinationes suae nullum adhuc testimonium tenet? For what rest can our
spirit have, while it retains as yet no testimony of its predestination? And
for perseverance the same Bernard says: Quis nos separabit Bern. de triplici
^ohar. Sermo.
a charitate Dei? Hoc glutine, agglutinauit nos sibi ille diuinus intuitus a
constitutione mundi, vt essemus sancti, and immaculati in conspectu eius, in
charitate. Scimus enim, quia qui natus est ex Deo, non peecat, quia generatio
coelestis sernat eum, Generatio coelestis est aeterna praedestinatio, qua Deus
praeuidit eos conformes fieri imagini Filij sui. Ex his nullus peccat; id est,
in peccato perseuerat: quia nouit Dominus qui sunt eius, and propositum Dei
manet immobile: Who shall separate us from the love of God? With this glue,
that divine look and respect of God upon us has from the foundation of the
world cemented us unto himself, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him, in love. For we know, that he that is borne of God, sins not,
because the heavenly generation preserves him. The heavenly generation is the
eternal predestination, whereby God did foresee, that we should be made
conformable unto the image of his Son. Of these, none sins; that is, none
perseuereth in sin, because the Lord knows who are his, and the purpose of
God abides immovable. So Bernard.

Now of the certainty of Faith in the particular apprehension and application
of the whole mystery of our redemption, we have spoken largely before in the
fifteenth Chapter. Only let me add here one saying of Bern. super Cant. ser.
18.
Bernard: Noli me tangere (inquit, John 20.) hoc est, desuesce huic seducibili
sensui: innitere Verbo, fidei assuesce: fides nescia falli; fides inuisibilia
comprehendens, sensus penuriam non sentit. Denique transgreditur fines etiam
rationis humanae, naturae vsum, experientiae terminos. Disce id habere certius,
id tutius sequi, quod illa suaserit. Noli me tangere: nondum enim ascendi ad
Patrem meum; nam tangi a fide voluit: Touch me not, says Christ; that is,
dis-wont thy self with this seducible sense: rest on the Word, acquaint thy
self with faith; faith that knows not how to be deceived; faith that
comprehends things invisible, does not feel the want of sense. For it
transcendeth the bounds even of humane reason, the use of nature, and the
limits of experience. Learn to account that for more certain, to follow that
more safely, which faith shall persuade thee of. Touch me not; for I am not
yet ascended to my Father; is as if he had said, he would then be touched by
faith.

Besides the sure and viue testimony of faith, we have the attestation of Gods
holy Spirit, the testimony whereof is no less infallible, than it is most
evident in the heart of every true believer. This holy Spirit assures all
those, that believe in Christ, and belong to him, both of their election and
perseverance. This Spirit witnesses Romans 8. 16. 17.
to our spirits, that we are the Sons of God; that is for our election and
adoption: and the Apostle adds, If sons, then also heirs, yea coheires with
Christ of his Kingdom: that is for our perseverance. This Spirit seals all
believers, and is the earnest of our inheritance. Till when? Even until the
redemption of the purchased Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
possession, unto the praise of his glory: that is, until the consummation of
all our blessedness in and with Christ. Therefore is the Holy Ghost the seal
and earnest, even of our perseverance unto glory. This Spirit is that
Anointing, whereof Saint John speaks, The anointing, which ye have
received of him, abides in 1. Ioh. 2. 27. 1. Ioh. 3. 24. 1. Ioh. 4. 13.
you. And again, Hereby we know, that he abides in us; by the Spirit, which
he has given us. And again, Hereby we know, that we dwell in him, and be
in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.

The Pontificians, and Vega by name, being consciously convict, and pressed
with these clear evidences, are feign to fly to most miserable shifts and
euasions. Forsitan, etc. says Vega: Perhaps, this is as true, as John's
fellow-Apostles were then living, when John wrote this Epistls.
Perhaps it appears Vega lib. 9. de incertitud. great. cap. 19.
more probable, that either Saint John spoke these things of himself only,
and his fellow-Apostles: or else, that he speaks not here of the mansion and
habitation of the Spirit in some particular persons, but of his general
residence in the Church. Yea moreover, says he, that testimony, whereby Paul
proves, that the faithful do not unfitly call God Father, as we call him in
the Lords Prayer, is not any inward testimony, whereby the Holy Ghost does
testify to every righteous man, that he is absolutely the Son of God by
grace: but this testimony (forsooth) is that glorious and most excellent
testimony, whereby the Holy Ghost, by admirable signs and wonders, and
peculiarly by his visible descending (Acts 2.) has openly testified to all the
world, that they are the Sons of God, which did receive the Faith of Christ,
and his Baptism. But to assay to answer these Pontifician Peraduentures, and
seeming Probabilities, what were it else, but to go about to shape a coat for
the Moon? Such lunaticke interpretations, such miserable tergiuersations, such
slye euasions, such absurd and senseless shifts, such false and profane
glosses, deserve no other answer than to be hissed and exploded out of every
common School, yea whipped also and lashed out of Gods Sanctuary, for such
their monstrous and shameless profanation of the sacred Truth.

FINIS.

