THE SEA-MANS DIRECTION IN TIME OF STORM.

Delivered in a Sermon upon occasion of a strong stormy Wind lately happening.

By IER. BUROUGHS.

MATTHEW. 8. 27. The Winds and the Sea obey him. LONDON: Printed by T. Pain and
M. Simmons. 1640.

To the Reader.
IT has been the way of God in speaking to men, and drawing their hearts to
him, to apply himself to them, in those things they have skill of and are
acquainted with. When Christ was revealed to the Wise men that came from the
East, it was by a Star, they were Astronomers, and conversed much in the
contemplation of the Stars, and God speaks to them accordingly: When our
Savior called Fishermen to follow him, he tells them. He will make them
Fishers of men; he expresses himself unto them in their own way: Wherefore
it being my lot to live where multitudes of Mariners, especially of mine own
Contrymen daily come, and my Auditors being in great part of such, I was
willing to take the opportunity of that great work of God, that sore and
grievous tempest that was lately so terrible as made the hearts of many to
shake, to add the word suitable to Gods work, to labor to conveigh some
spiritual truth, by the advantage of that impression that was then upon their
hearts, little thinking then that such present thoughts hinted by such an
occasion, should ever be more public then in mine own Congregation: but
knowing what need Mariners have of Sermons, and considering how few they hear,
because I could not preach to them where their chief business lies (upon the
Seas) I was willing to send this Sermon to them, that they might have it by
them: many Sabbaths they spend hearing none, seldom hearing any. It may be the
sutablenesse of this subject may invite them to read, especially it being the
desires of many of them who heard it, and found some work of God upon their
hearts by it, to have it by them; at first I was unwilling to let such sudden
things appear so public, but after considering, that some poor Saylors boy
at least might get some good by them, I yielded. I publish not this Sermon
because I conceit any special excellency in it, that cannot be expected (it is
the same for the frame and substance of it that was preached the next day after
the occasion: Some things are added and enlarged, especially concerning the
nature of the Winds.)

But because I know nothing of this subject published, and some way it may be
useful, and a little good is worth much of my time and labor, who knows what
a truth, what a hint fitted to the apprehensions of people in their own way
may do; therefore here you have it, and the Lord prosper it to you.

Yours in Christ, I. B.

Imprimatur,

Jo. Hansley.
October. 14. 1640.
THE SEA-MANS DIRECTION IN TIME OF STORM.
Psalm. 148. 8. Stormy Wind fulfilling his word.
A Word spoken in season Pr. 25. 11.
how good is it! it is like Apples of Gold with pictures of Silver: Silver
pictures do set out the golden Apples, and the golden Apples do grace the
Silver pictures; so words that are gracious fitted to their circumstances, they
are graced each by other. A good word spoken at any time is a golden Apple, it
has worth in it, but fitted to circumstances, it has beauty added to it; and
not So Arias Montanus. Super rotis suis.
only beauty, but efficacy too; for so it is in the Original, words upon
their wheels, when they are rightly fitted to their circumstances, being
spoken in due season, then they go upon their wheels, and pass along like a
triumphant Chariot; whereas if these be omitted, they are drawn out as a Cart
is drawn on without wheels; like Pharoahs Chariots, when God took off their
wheels, they drove heavily.

As Saint Augustine said of the outward Accedat verbum ad elementum and fit
Sacramentum: Accedat verbum ad opera Dei, and fiunt documenta pietatis
adjumenta.
element in the Sacrament, let the word come to the element, and it is made a
Sacrament; so I may say of Gods works, let the word be added to Gods works,
and they are instructions, great helps to Godliness.

There is a great threat against those who regard not the works of God,
Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands,
he shall destroy them and not build them up, Psalm. 28. 5. That such a curse
may not befall us for our regardlesnesse of this work of the Lord in this
dreadful stormy wind, I have chose this Scripture; that as Job heard the Lord
speaking out of the whirlwind, so you this day by this Scripture may hear
the Lord speaking to you out of that stormy tempestuous wind, that but
yesterday was so terrible to you: Sensitive things move much, yet the
impression of them holds not long; it is good therefore to take the advantage
of your hearts, and that presently.

The title of this Psalm, is Hallelujah, praise ye the Lord: it is a Psalm of
praise by way of excellency above others, it begins and ends with, Praise ye
the Lord; all sorts of creatures in heaven and earth, air and seas, are called
to join in this work, but especially man: of all creatures in the world God
expects his praise from man in a special manner; the ways of God toward man,
being the most glorious above that they are toward any of his other works,
toward him his name indeed is excellent above the earth or heavens; God will
have active and passive praises from man, and amongst men above all from his
own people, his Church whom he has chosen to be a people near unto him, the
high praises of God are to be in their mouths, Psalm. 49. 6. They are not only
to rejoice in their God, and in his glorious works, but to be joyful in a
glorious manner, to rejoice in glory, not only to sing the praises of the
Lord, but to sing aloud upon their beds, verse. 5. God himself is the praise of
his Saints, as we have it in the 16. verse of this 148. Psalm, not only the
works of God, but God himself, he is their praise both actively and
passively, he is their praise, their glory, their excellency, and he, even he
himself is the subject of their praise.

Gods people are his glory, and God is the glory of his people; They are his
glory, Psalm. 78. 61. he delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory
into their enemies hand; God is their glory, Psalm. 3. 3. Thou art my glory and
the lifter up of my head, and thus God and his people glory one in another,
every where the Name of God is great, but God is known in Judah, and his Name
is great in Israel, Psalm. 76. In his Temple every man speaks of his glory,
Psalm. 29. 9. wherefore to him be glory in the Church, Ephesians. 3. 21. The glory
that God has from his people, from his Church, is another manner of glory then
he has from all the world besides; wherefore let not us fail of giving God
the glory of his great works, of this his mighty work. Our subject then, at
this time, is the praise of God in one of his great works of Nature, the work
of God in the wind, the stormy wind fulfilling his word.

Wherein we have these two things: 1. What it is wherein God is to be praised,
the subject of his praise; the stormy wind.

2 The reason why, from the effect, Fulfilling his Word. For the first, Stormy
wind, the Wind of storm or tempest, so the words are, the tempestuous Wind;
the word is sometimes used for Ventus turbinis.
a whirlwind, Dan. 11. 40.

The Wind, especially when it is in its strength tempestuous and stormy, has
much in it to set out the glory of God.

God is to be praised in this great work of his, God glories much in this
creature: The Scripture makes much use of it, to set out the greatness and
Majesty of God by it, as:

1. God challenges his propriety in Psalm. 147 18. He causes his wind to blow,
it is Gods Wind, and therefore the glory of it is peculiar to him, he it is
that is to be acknowledged in it, we are to rise higher then the natural
causes of it. It is said of the earth, that God has given it to the children
of men, Psalm. 15. 16. but he keeps the propriety of the Winds in his own
hand, they move in the Heavens, and depend upon the Heavens, so that the
Heavens, with all that in them is, are the Lords in a special manner, but the
earth has he given to man, to subdue unto himself for his use, this way or
that way as he pleases: he has not given any such power over any thing in the
Heavens, nor over the wind, them he reserves in his own hands.

2 The Wind is one of the wonders Psalm. 107. 24. 25. they that go down to the
Sea, see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep; what wonders? he
commands and raises the stormy wind. Although something may be known of
this creature in the natural causes of it, yet it is a wonder above all that
we can know of it.

3 He is said to walk upon the Psalm. 104. 3. and this is made one expression
wherein God appears very great, clothed with honor and Majesty.

4. God is said to ride upon the Sam. 22. 11. and to fly upon the wings of the
Wind, Psalm. 18. 10. this is spoken after the manner of men, to show his
glorying in this creature, although God moves not from one place to another,
much less has need of any thing to move upon, or to further any motion. In
that it is said he rode upon the Cherub, Vt sciamus ipsos ventorum Impetus
ejus mandato per angelos gubernari. Calv. in Psalm. 18.
some thinks it implies, Gods governing of the force of the Winds by the
Angels, for the Angels are represented by the figure of Cherubins, as Genesis 3.
24. God placed Cherubins to keep the way of the tree of life: Besides, he is
said to ride upon the Cherub, alluding unto the Arc of the Covenant, where
Gods special presence with his people in covenant with him was, where there
were two Cherubins covering the Mercy seat, which was the place where God
promised to meet with his people, and to commune with them, Exodus 25. 20, 21,
22. So that this expression here in the Psalm is to declare, that that God
which appears so glorious in the Wind, is the same God that sits upon the
Cherubins upon the Mercy-seate, that God that is in covenant with his people to
be their God, and to do them good for ever: it is a very useful note to
consider of, when the people of God see his glory in his great works, and
particularly in this of the Wind, they should look higher then other people,
and see more of God in it then others can do; others can see and acknowledge
God to be the supreme cause of it, but those who are godly, should look upon
God as their God between the Cherubins upon the Mercy-seate; this power, this
glory, is the power and the glory of that God that is in covenant with me, my
reconciled Father in Jesus Christ: here would be a comfortable beholding God in
the winds indeed.

And further here in a Song of praise, in the day when David was delivered from
the hands of all his enemies, God is said to ride upon the Cherub, and to fly
upon the wings of the Wind, to show the readiness and the swiftness of Gods
working for the help of his people, he rides upon his chariot, yea, he flies
swiftly to their deliverance; our motion is dull and heavy in our duty toward
God, but God is lively and swift in his ways of mercy to us. Hence we have
that notable expression, Isa. 31. 5. As Birds flying, so will the Lord of Hosts
defend Jerusalem, defending also he will deliver it: As a Bird that sees her
young one in danger, flies hastily to deliver it: So the Lord hastes to defend
Jerusalem.

Again, he rides upon the Cherub: this notes the work of God governing them
this way or that way, as one riding in a Chariot: thus the Heathens feigned
their God Aeolus to bridle the winds, and bring them up and down whither he
would.

5. He holds the Winds in his fists, Prove. 30. 4. The glory of God, Isay 40.
12. is set out by measuring the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meting
out the Heavens with his span: it is as great in this, that he holds the Winds
in his fist; for what is more incapable of holding then the Wind? yet so
powerful and mighty is the hand of God, that he holds the Winds themselves as
it were in his fist. The Seventie translate the words, in his bosom, and this
is suitable to a sixth impression the Scripture has to set out the glory of God
in the Wind.

6. He brings the Winds out of his Psalm. 135. 7. He causes the vapors to
ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes Lightning for the Rain, he
brings the Wind out of his Treasuries: That which we treasure up is of some
worth, and we therefore treasure it, because we would keep it sure and
secret. Thus the Wind is a creature, in which there is much excellency, much
of God in it, of great use, as we shall further hear; and God keeps it sure,
although nothing seems to be more uncertain then the Wind, yet God has every
blast locked up in his treasury, and it cannot stir without him, and the
nature and the motions of the Wind are very secret and hidden things. All the
works of Nature are in Gods treasury, God has a treasury of Nature as well as
a treasury of grace: The snow and the hail are said to come out of Gods
treasuries. Job 38. 22. Have thou seen the treasures of the snow, or have thou
seen the treasures of the hail which I have reserved against the time of
trouble? The Lord promises in the 28. of Deuteronomy. 22. to them that obey him, to
open unto them his good treasure; the treasure of Nature is a good treasure,
there are many good blessings in it, yet such as he gives sometimes to the
wicked, Psalm. 17. 14. He fills their bellies with his hid treasure; but Gods
people as they are a peculiar treasure to God, Exodus 19. 5. so God has a
peculiar treasure for them, a treasure in Heaven, Luke 19. 22.

7. God weighes the Winds, Job 28. 5. He makes a weight for the Winds, this is
made a special evidence of Gods propriety, in understanding the way of
wisdom, as appears, verse 20. Whence comes Wisdom, and where is the place
of understanding, seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close
from the Fowls of the air? by which Hierome understands, proud, lofty,
aeriall, high spirits, who love to soar aloft, and to be above in the clouds;
Wisdom is hid from them: but rather thus, it is to be found in no place in the
World, the Fowls of the air never saw that place where it is: Destruction and
Death say, we have heard the fame of it; that is, such as are now swallowed up
of destruction and death, the abstract being put for the concrete, as we have
often in Scripture, as Revel. 20. 14. Death and Hell were cast into the
Perditio pro perditis, mors pro mortuis.
lake of fire. These who are destroyed and dead, they now know something what
true Wisdom is, they find by woeful experience, what it is to neglect God,
and to cast off his fear, and to follow the vanity of their own hearts; now
they see what would have done them good, and what has undone them for ever;
but though men, neither living nor dead, know what true Wisdom is, yet God
understands the way thereof, verse. 23. How does that appear, that only true
Wisdom dwells with God? amongst other things this is one special, he makes a
weight for the winds, that is, either by ordering them in a just proportion,
that there shall not be the least particle of them spent further then may
serve his purpose; or thus, he makes a weight for the Winds, he gives to the
Winds their poyse, that they should move this way or that way, according as
he pleases.

8. The Lord makes the Wind his Psalm. 104. 4. Who makes his Angels spirits, so
it is in your books, but the word translated spirits, signifies Winds, and is
to be understood of them; for the scope of the Psalmist is to show the glory of
God in his great works of Nature. The word translated Angels, signifies
messengers in the Hebrew, as the Greek: But the Apostle in the first of the
Hebrews quotes this Scripture, and applies it to the Angels, verse. 7. And of
the Angels he says, he makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flaming
fire; to this, Calvin upon the 104. Psalm, justifying the former
interpretation, answers, It is not the intent of the Apostle to expound the
meaning of the Prophet, but sets out an Analogy or likeness betvveene that
obedience the Winds yield unto God, and that which is performed by the Angels;
and so the meaning is, that as God uses the Winds his messengers, to go
hither and thither, as he pleases, for the fulfilling his Word, so he uses
the Angels for his service, and they obey accordingly; so that this visible
sensible World is, as it were, a glass of that glory the Lord has in the
higher World above in the Heavens, and we may be the rather induced to
conceive that the Apostle makes use only of an Allegorical sense of that
Scripture, because we find many times in the New Testament places quoted out
of the Old, and applied not according to their proper sense, but some according
to their typical, and others their allegorical sense, as many might be named,
I will only show you one place quoted out of the Psalms, as this is, and that
by the same Apostle, the place of the Psalm that is quoted, is Psalm. 19. verse.
4. Their line is gone out through the earth, and their words to the end of the
World; it is apparent this is spoken concerning the heavens, their line, that
is their rule or delineation, which is a means to teach the simple, as Isay
28. 10. or by line is meant a building frame which is made by line and rule;
Job. 38. 5. speaking of Gods creating the earth, he has this expression, Who
has stretched out the line thereof? The Greek Translators translate the word
sound, which word the Apostle also uses, quoting this place, Romans 18. 18. And
further, whereas it is said, their words to the end of the World, is meant
those testifications that the frame of the Heavens have, together with their
course and order, to witness to the world the glory of God in them, whereby
they do, as it were, cry aloud to men, to behold the glory of the great God:
Now the Apostle in the 10. to the Rom applies this place to the preaching of
the Gospel by the Apostles that were sent out, he brings it to show that
unbeleevers could have no excuse for their unbeleefe: But I say, have they not
heard? yes verily, for their sound went into all the earth, and their words
unto the ends of the World; wherefore, although that place in the 104. Psalm,
by way of Allegory may be applied unto the Angels, yet firstly and properly it
is to be understood of the Winds, every Wind is as a messenger of God sent to
us about some errand or other, and happy are we, if we have that care and
skill, that may find out what their message is, what the meaning of God in
them is, that they may never return without doing the work for which they
were sent, and certainly one way or other they will perform their work, as
we have it in the Text, they will fulfill his Word: In the 55. of Isay, verse.
10, 11. The Word is compared to the Rain that comes down from Heaven, in that
it returns not in vain; so neither will the winds that come from Heaven, yea
as messengers from the God of Heaven, they will not, they cannot return in
vain.

9. This is a creature that God delights Job, as to humble him so thoroughly, as
he might be prepared for deliverance, he speaks again and again to him out
of the Wind, chap. 38. and 40.

10. Christ makes use of this creature, Joh. 3. 8. The Wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it
comes, nor whither it goes, so is every one that is borne of the Spirit; and
God made use of this miraculous work of his, in sending the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles, Acts. 2. 2. There was the rushing of a mighty Wind, and filled
all the house where they were sitting, and they were filled with the Holy
Ghost; here was a mighty, glorious, blessed breathing, that came in upon the
Apostles with this mighty rushing Wind; although there cannot be expected such
a filling with the Holy Ghost accompanying this mighty rushing wind that we
have had; yet if God blesses this his Word added to it, there may be some
work of the Holy Ghost upon the hearts of some, not only at this time, but
occasioned by this thing; yea, the work of God in the Wind making way for the
Word and Spirit to enter into you hearts. Thus you see what use the Scripture
makes of the Winds, to set out the glory of God by.

But further, there are six things wherein the Name of God is to be praised
in the Wind.

1. If we consider the nature of it, what it is, it is a creature, heard,
felt, but little understood, some guessings there are at it, but what it is, is
a great Aer motus.
secret in nature: some say it is only air moved up and down; others, vapors
raised up to the middle Region, and there by the cold beaten back, and so
moving in the air collaterally: hence there are no winds above some mountains
which reach beyond where these vapors ascend, and are beaten back, as that
mountain Olympus, where the footsteps of ashes strowed abide from year to
year, vapors thickened are clouds, vapors in the clouds rolling when they are
heat incensed and break forth they are lightning, and the breaking of the
clouds by them the Thunder-crack; if the vapor be beat back before it be
thickened then it is Wind, if after the thickning then it is rain, if congealed
on high then it is snow, if not congealed till it come to the lower part of the
air then it is hayle. The reason that is given of the collateral motion, is,
the vapors, being so light as they cannot descend far, yet being beat down,
and likewise met with by other vapors, hence they are forced to move in a
collateral motion in the air. Pliny a great searcher out of secrets of
nature, in his natural History, l. 2. c. 45. speaks very doubtfully of the
Wind, whether it be, says he, the spirit of Nature that ingendreth all things
wandering to and fro, as it were in some womb, or rather the air broken and
driven by the several influences and rays of the straying Stars and
Planets, and the multiplicitie of their beams; plain it is that they are
guided by a rule of nature, not altogether unknown, although it be not yet
unknown. This great Diver into Natures secrets, confesses ignorance in this of
the Winds, and although he had not confessed it, yet that which he says of
the nature of them, would have discovered all his knowledge of them to be but a
wild guessing. There is much wisdom in finding out the nature of creatures so
far as they may be known. God may have much glory by our sight of his
workings in them. Pliny in the 46. chap. of the forenamed Book, speaking
further of the Winds, marvels, that in so blessed and joyous a time of peace,
as he says his was, wherein they had a Prince that took such delight in the
progress of all good arts, and gave such great rewards to learning, that yet
men searched after the knowledge of things no more then they did, whereas
others before the^ sought out the secrets of nature, for no other reward, then
to do good unto posterity; but now, says he, men's manners are waxen old, and
decay, the minds of men are blinded and bent upon nothing but covetousness:
This is his complaint, much more cause have we to take up this complaint
against Christians, who have other manner of motives to provoke them to take
pains to find out the glory of God in the creature, then Heathens could have,
and if we labor to see God in his creatures, so as to give glory to him, to
fear him, to magnify him, there is another manner of reward that we may
expect, then any they could have to encourage them: howsoever, if we cannot get
the knowledge of the secrets of Nature in this creature, wherein certainly
there would be much of God discovered unto us: yet we may all behold so much of
the power and Majesty of God in it, as to cause us to fear him, and this is
true wisdom beyond all the knowledge of the secrets of Nature: for so we have
it, Job. 28. v. 8. after the glory of God was shown in the Winds, v. 25. as in
other creatures. The conclusion is, unto man he said, Behold the fear of the
Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.

2. God is to be praised in the rise Psalm. 107. 25. He raises the stormy
Wind. Our Savior says, Joh. 3. They blow where they list, no man knows
whence they come, nor whither they go: We see the Winds arise many times when
there are no clouds to beat back any vapors by the thickness and coldness of
them, the second causes that God uses in this, are hidden from us only, we
are sure of the supreme cause, it is he that raises the stormy Wind.

3. God is to be praised in the power Psalm. 48. 3. Thou breakest the ships of
Tarshis with an east Wind; of power and force to turn over ships, houses, rend
Trees, to raise dreadful waves, yea they rend the very Earth, the Mountains
and the Rocks, as 1 King. 19. 11. There was a strong Wind that rent the
Mountains, and tore in pieces the Rocks. This is the hand of God, whereby he
overturneth the Mountains by the roots, of which Job speaks, Chap. 28. 9.
This is that voice of the Lord that breaks the Cedars, yea the Cedars in
Lebanon, the strongest Cedars of all. This is the voice of the Lord that
shakes the Wilderness, of which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 29. 5, 8.
Sabellicus an L. 10. c. 5.
Historian tells of many thousands of Cambyses his Soldiers, being at dinner
in a sandy place, of a sudden a tempest arose and covered them over with sand
and choked them, that they perished. That a vapor should have such strength,
sets forth the mighty power of God; what is weaker then a vapor, therefore man's
life is compared to a vapor, and yet many together, how dreadful are they! The
waters are called the mighty waters, and yet what is weaker then water, but
much congregated has a mighty force, that carries with it as much majesty
almost as any creature whatsoever; yet a vapor is a weaker thing then water,
yet many of these joined, how fearful is the force of them in the Wind! God
is able to use them for great things, to daunt the proudest, stoutest spirit
under Heaven, to shake, as the Psalmist says, the Cedars in Lebanon, not only
literally, but metaphorically, the highest and loftiest spirit that is: How
dreadful then is the power of God himself, which has nothing in it but
infinite, and so much as no addition can be made, of many of the weakest things
in the world has such an amazing strength, then that which is so great, as no
addition can be made, and all in it infinite; oh how full of glory and Majesty
is that power.

The natural cause of the power of the Winds that men give, is from the kind
of vapor, of which they are: the more earthy vapors are and hot, the stronger
the Winds: Hence many times Summer Winds are exceeding strong; and many times
in hot countries, because the earth is more open, and the Sun having power to
draw up more gross earthy vapors, there are mighty tempestuous Winds,
exceeding strong whirle-winds, according to that, Job 37. 11. Out of the South
comes the whirlwind, the southern parts are hot.

4. God is to be praised in the variety Eccles. 1. 6. The Wind goes toward the
South, and turns about unto the North, it whirleth about continually, and
returns again according to its circuits. It has its various circuits
appointed by God which way it shall turn, although their motion seems
exceeding unsteady and changeable, up and down without any certain rule, yet
5. Quaest. not. l. 5. c. 18. Ingens naturae beneficium. Dedit ventos, ut
commoda cujusque regionis fierent communia, non ut Legiones equitemque
gestarent, nec ut pernicios^ gentibus arma tra^sveberent. Non ideo non sunt
ista natura sua bona, si vitio male u^entium nocent.
they observe their circuits wherein they run their compass, as God appoints
them: In some places of the World their motions are steady and constant, which
Mariners call their Trade Wind.

5. God is to be praised in the use of the Winds, God has made them to be of
great use in the World: Seneca calls them, a mighty benefit of Nature, although
many times much hurt comes by them, as he says, De Caesare majore, it was
wont to be said of him, and he brings in Livy for an Author, that it was
uncertain whether it had been more profitable for the Commonwealth that ever
he was borne, or that he had not been borne; so says he of the Winds, in
regard of that harm comes by them, it may be questioned whether the good or
the hurt be the greater, but he means principally the hurt that comes by the
abuse of them in Navigation; for instead of furthering men to pass up and
down into one another country, they carry them to war one with another:
God gave the Wind, that the good of Countries might be made common, not to
carry Armies, Horsemen, weapons, pernicious to Nations; thus he, but howsoever
as himself says, we must not account those things to be good, which by ill
use turn to hurt; it is true of this work of God, as in all other creatures,
they are of special use many ways, as great blessings to us, as,

1. For purging the air, much infection of the air is driven away by them,
the air is cleansed and kept sweet with the motions of the^, which otherwise
would corrupt as the standing Waters do; Job 37. 21. The wind passes and
cleanses: so Jer. 4. 11. A dried wind toward the daughter of my people, not to
fan, nor to cleanse: God threatens afflictions to come in wrath, not as the
Wind comes to fan and cleanse the air, but as a whirlewind to destroy.

2. For the scattering of the clouds here and there, up and down* in the
World, by them God shakes as it were his Waterpots, by which he waters the
Garden of the Earth, as Job 37. 11. Also by watering he wearieth the thick
cloud, he scatters his bright cloud, and it is turned round about by his
counsels, and this is done by the breath of God, as it is, verse. 10.

3. For altering of seasons, for bringing in cold or hear, as Job 37. 9, 10.
Out of the South comes the whirlewind, and cold out of the North, by the
breath of God frost is given, and verse. 17. He quieteth the earth by the South
wind, he brings warmth that way.

4. For Navigation in which Art there is much of the Wisdom of God seen, and
if it be rightly used the goodness of God to mankind is very great in it.

In the 28. of Esa. from the 24. v* to the end, the Lord challenges to himself
the glory of teaching the Plowman the art of plowing the ground and threshing
out the corn; his God, says the Text, verse. 26. does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him, and verse. 29* This also comes forth from the
Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in council, and excellent in working. Now
if this art be from the Lord, and if God shows himself wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working of this, how much more is that excellent Art
of Navigation, whereby men come even to subdue the Seas to themselves, to find
out and draw forth the riches of them, whereby they pass up and down over the
whole World, to see the ways of God, and the riches of God, throughout the
Earth, whereby the several parts of the world are known each to other, and
communicate each to other the wonderful blessings of God, surely it is God
that instructs men in this, it is he that gives them understanding, and in this
much more is the Lord wonderful in counsel and excellent in working.

How little of God in the great works of Nature should we know and enjoy, were
it not for the Art of Navigation; but what were man's skill or industry therein,
if God did not further it by the use of the Winds, the work of God is very
observable in these two works of Nature: The one in scattering of Springs and
currents of waters up and down in secret veins and in open passages of the
earth to make fit for habitation, and the other in appointing the various
motion of the Winds to work up and down upon the Seas, to make them fit for
Navigation.

5. That use that we have here mentioned Fulfilling his word, of which in the
next point.

6. A great work of God appears Mark. 4. 39. The Wind ceased, and there was a
great calm, Isa. 27. 8. He stays the rough Wind: Many times when it is most
rough and boisterous, he stays it on a sudden; so as Mariners may see much of
the hand of God in it toward them, in which God is much to be praised, for by
this the Lord rules the raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof arise he
stilleth them; and mark how the Psalmist magnifies God in this work, Psalm.
89. 8, 9. O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy
faithfulness round about thee. Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, when the
waves thereof arise thou stillest them. How soever natural causes may be used
by God for this, yet we must acknowledge God in them, and his work above them
in stilling the Winds and seas.

The natural causes that are given are the spending the vapors, or the
vanishing of those clouds that beat them down, or the consuming of those
vapors they meet with that kept them From falling or constringing the earth
that no more arise: something there is in these: Hence rain often asswages the
Winds, by condensing and pressing down those vapors that before moved
collaterally, but let God still be praised, and have the glory above these:

For Application first,

If God be so glorious in this creature, hence those are justly rebuked, who
hear, and feel, yea and see in the effect of it so much of God, and yet do
not give him the glory of it, they do not praise him in the stormy Wind, they
can speak of it, and tell you how it was, how suddenly it came, how strong it
blew, how it rent their sails, and split their Masts, and tore their Cables,
and burst their Anchors, how it smote upon their houses, and made their beds
shake under them; how dreadful the noise of it was, with what violence it
came, as if the house would have fallen upon them, how their hearts did even
shake within them for fear, but not a word of God in all this, they say not in
their heart, Let us now fear this God that raises, continues, calmeth these
Winds, let us now fear him howsoever heretofore we did not fear him,
although heretofore we were profane, and vile, and have lived without God in
the World, yet let us now fear this God, who is great in power, glorious and
excellent in his workings in the Heavens, and Earth, and Seas: when does there
any word come from men, to put one another on to the fear of God upon this?
Brethren, God is to be honored in the least of his works, much more in those
that have power and majesty in them: we take Gods name in vain, if when he
appears in his great works, we adore him not, we fear him not, we magnify
him not, we praise him not in them: we are much led by sense, and if we take
not notice of his glory, to have our hearts wrought upon when he comes to our
senses, and that in such a powerful and glorious way, it is a sign that our
hearts are exceedingly stupid, that they are much estranged from God. Those
works that we see the second causes of, we scarce mind God in them at all
(although God should not be the less minded, because of second causes, seeing
all the work, all the power and efficacy of the second cause, is in the virtue
of the first; as it has no being but by it, so it is not able to stir
without it) but now as for this creature, the stormy Wind, we know but very
little, scarce any thing of the second causes; and therefore if God be not
acknowledged and praised in this, in what shall he be acknowledged and praised?
works that are ordinary we little mind God in them, which is a great evil
in us; hence the Lord, because he would be minded by us, he comes many times
in strange and terrible ways to us in his creatures, raising them higher then
ordinary, putting more Majesty and terror in them then ordinary, as he has
done in this, and shall he not be magnified and praised in this? It is the
lowest honor that we can give to God, to be moved by such works, wherein his
glory comes apparently and powerfully to sense; there are other manner of
things of the glory of God, that appears to raised reason, were it that the
eye of reason were clear, and but elevated in a natural way to that height it
is capable of; yea to that height it might be, were it not so much drowned in
sense as it is, there were high and glorious things of God to be seen by it,
that might make us fall down upon our faces and adore him: But how great then
are the things that appear to the eye of Faith? those are things to take up
the heart indeed, to fill the heart with astonishment, to draw it up with
ravishment, to overpower it with the glory and divine luster of them, to
satisfy it with admirable infinite contentment, those are things fit for
Angels to pry into, for the most spiritual raised heart to contemplate in, for
the most enlarged spirit to fill it self with; for by them the Saints are
filled with all the fullness of God, as the Scripture speaks, Ephesians. 3. 19. In
those things especially a Christian should be exercised. The glory of God in
these creatures, is for the lowest, the meanest, the dullest of all, for
children, for those who are not out of the School of Nature; yea, for those
who are in the lowest form of Natures School; and therefore it is a good
observation of Jerome upon that place, Mat. 8. when Christ rebuked the winds,
and calmed them, the Text says, the men were afraid. The men, says Jerome,
that is, the Mariners and others which were in the Ship, not the Disciples; or
if any shall contend and think they were the Disciples, yet they are called the
men, because yet they knew not our Savior. The Works of God have a voice as
well as his Words, as Exodus 4. 8. If they will not hearken to the voice of the
first sign, they will hearken to the voice of the latter. God speaks by this
voice to these who are the most dull of hearing; God has another voice to
speak to his Saints by, the voice of his Word, yea a more inward secret voice,
the voice of his Spirit, although he speaks to them likewise by his other
voice; wherefore not to hear the voice of his works, this argues a heart
desperately sottish, and even altogether living as without a God in the World.

Those who are exercised in the highest things of God, should not neglect
these, but they must be spiritual in beholding the glory of God in them, in a
higher way then others are or can be, they should fill their hearts with
spiritual Meditations raised from them, they should look upon the power and
glory of God in them, as the power and glory of that God in whom their souls
have special interest, the power and glory of their Father, as Psalm. 48. 14.
This God is our God for ever and ever; the beginning of the Psalm is, Great is
the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and amongst other subjects of his praises,
verse. 7. he instances in this, Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an East
wind, and his conclusion is this, God is our God for ever and ever. This power
is that which is engaged to work all the good that God intends, or has
promised unto his people; this glory is that which shall put glory upon his
Saints for ever, all contained in this, This God is our God for ever.

Quest. But how are we to praise God in this stormy Wind?

Answ. The Name of God is great in it, and therefore surely he is greatly to
be praised,

1. By raising our thoughts to the The voice of the Lord shakes the
Wilderness, Psalm. 29. 9. that is, the wild beasts of the Wilderness, and
shall it not shake our hearts; shall our hearts be more hard and stupid then
the hearts of those wild and savage beasts in the Wilderness? It shakes the
most lofty Cedars, what are our spirits? how lofty? how hardened with pride and
folly, if they do not shake, if they tremble not before such a God as this?

It is a notable speech of Elihu, Job 37. 1. At this also my heart trembles,
and is moved out of his place at this; at what is it that his heart so
trembles? his voice roareth, he thundreth with the voice of his excellency,
verse. 4. God thundreth marvellously with his voice, great things does he which
we cannot comprehend, verse. 5. Out of the South comes the whirlwind, verse.
9. The Wind passes and cleanses, verse. 21. Wherefore upon this great work of
God, together with others, he concludes, verse. 22. With God is terrible
Majesty, touching the Almighty we cannot find him out. He is excellent in
power, verse. 23. Men do therefore fear him, verse. 24. It is a time now indeed
to fear the Lord, to lie down with low humbled trembling hearts before him;
its no time to vex and fret, and rage, as it is the practice of some when
grievous tempests and storms arise, and put them to trouble and danger, they
vex and rage against the Winds, when the Winds cause Seas to rage, their hearts
are in as great a rage as the Seas, swearing and cursing most dreadfully in
this their rage, their cursed hearts some out their filth, according to that
description of the wicked, which we have, Isa. 57. 20, 21. the wicked are like
the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast out mire and dirt;
there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Oh the abominable mire and dirt
that is cast out by such hearts at such times, when God calls for the most
fear of him, trembling before him, subjection unto him, what is this but even
to dart up our arrows against the Heavens, and to fly even in the very face
of God himself. I have read Herodotus lib. 2.
of a people in Africa, who being troubled with strong Winds, driving heaps of
sands upon their fields and dwelling places, they gathered an Army to fight
against them, but with so evil success, that themselves were buried under
hills of sands driven upon them by the Winds. It is no less madness in these
who curse and rage in times of tempests, these are fighters against God; it is
the infinite patience of God, that that cursed breath that comes from them at
those times is not stopped.

2. Let us praise God in this stormy so much above us in it, we see how he can
make a vapor terrible unto us, so that we cannot stand before it; we see at
what advantage he has us by the Winds, to overturne our houses, to dash our
ships in pieces by it: Mark how Job was affected when God spoke to him out
of the Whirlwind, c. 38. 1. compared with c. 40. 3, 4. Then Job answered the
Lord, that is, when the Lord had spoken to him out of the winds, Behold I am
vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth: once have I
spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further: And
again, compare chap. 40. 6. with chap. 42. 5, 6. the Lord speaks to him
again out of the Whirlwind: that God delights to make use of this creature
to speak to men by, to humble them, you heard before; but here you see the
effect of this, what power there is in it to do that which God intends by it.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, (says Job) but now mine eyes
have seen thee, wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes: This makes a
Job, a holy, godly man, to abhor himself in dust and ashes before this great
God.

3. Let us upon this labor to purge sinking heartquake in us. Pliny says,
that the Eagle is not afraid of Thunder, the greatest tempests of Thunder do
not affright her, whereas other fowls shake and tremble at it, and the beasts
of the field get into their shelters: thus spiritual hearts who converse much
with God, and keep themselves up on high, they are not terrified with such
things as fill the hearts of others with amazing terrors: hearts that are
heavenly are like the air above the middle Region, free from tempests and
storms. It is very observable that which we read of David, Psalm. 18. he
there sets out the glory of God in the Earthquake and dreadful Tempests; The
earth shook and trembled, the foundations of the hills moved and were shaken
because he was wroth: there went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out
of his mouth devoured, he did fly upon the wings of the wind, his thick
clouds passed, haile-stones and coals of fire. The Lord thundered in the
Heavens, and the highest gave his voice, etc. Yet observe, verse. 16. David
draws comfort out of all this, He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out
of many waters. These grievous Tempests, these dreadful storms were not to
over-whelme me, to sink me in the waters, but the Lord took me, that God who
appeared thus dreadful in these storms and tempests, yet this God took me,
and drew me out of many waters, and verse. 19. He delivered me, because he
delighted in me.

4. Give glory to God in blessing God has preserved you, and you are alive,
and yet enjoy the day of grace: the goodness of the Lord has been to you
that which he promised, I say 32. 2. A hiding place from the Wind, and ^ covert
from the tempest. It was the free grace of God toward you, only his goodness
that has been your safety, for what could you do to help yourselfe? it may
be you cried and prayed to God, but what could your prayers do, who were, and
it may be still art, a profane wretched creature, the course of whose life is
a way of enmity against the great God of the whole World?

It is reported of Bias the Philosopher, who sailing among a company of rude
Mariners, they being in danger by a storm, the Mariners fell on praying and
crying out to their gods. Bias calls to them, to hold their peace, lest the
gods should hear them, and so they should all fare the worse for their sakes:
The worst that is in such dangers, will cry out, and sometimes fall on praying,
but how should that prayer be accepted that comes out of that mouth, out of
which so many oaths came a while since, which is defiled with so many
blasphemies, and not yet purged by repentance? wherefore whenever thou have
been delivered, and others have perished, admire at the free grace of God
toward thee, give him the glory of it, and let God be thus praised in the
Stormy Wind.

5. Give God the glory of this work

I have read of a people who erected an Altar to the Winds, and once a year
Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 22.
spent a whole night in their devotions to the Winds, to seek calm winds,
because of the great hurt they often suffered by them: but we have learned
otherwise, namely to look beyond the Winds, to seek God, acknowledge him the
raiser and orderer of them; this is part of that divine worship that is due to
God, that he should be acknowledged and sought in these things, although it be
but a common work of his providence, yet he expects to be sought to in it;
prayer has shut the Heavens and opened them, prayer has power over Heaven,
and Earth, and Air, and Seas, and Winds: it has power to prevail with God,
much more power over any creature whatsoever. We read, 1 Samuel 7. 9, 10. when
Samuel offered to God but a sucking Lamb, presently a grievous storm arose,
The Lord thundered with thunder upon the Philistines: And Revel. 8. 4, 5. The
smoke of the incense came with the prayers of the Saints ascending before God,
then the Angel took the censer and filled it with the fire of the Altar, and
cast it into the earth, and there were voices, and thundrings, and lightnings.
All the Devils in Hell have not that power over the Winds, that the prayers of
the Saints have.

We have a famous story of the power of the prayers of the Christian Soldiers
in Marcus Aurelius his Army, Lib. 5. 6. 5.
recorded by Eusebius, who praying to God in time of great drought, when the
Army was like to perish for thirst, they procured a great tempest against the
enemies, which put them to flight, and overthrew them, and a refreshing rain
to their own Army, whereupon they were called the Lightning Legion; upon
which Aurclius was much moved, and favored the Christians much after it, and
wrote in their behalf, acknowledging it the hand of God, as a fruit of their
prayers. If prayers have power over the rain, over thundering and lightning,
then surely over the stormy Wind: If therefore you seek not God in this, if
you think it is nothing that prayer can do, you are more heathenish, and
fuller of Atheism, then the most rude heathen. Matthew. 8. 24, 25. When a
tempest arose Christ was awaked: When a storm arises God must be sought.

6. Consider if storms and tempests and Tempests raised and raging in men's
consciences.

For the first, Isa. 28. 1, 2. the Lord pronounces a woe against the Drunkards
of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is as a fading flower. Behold the Lord has a
mighty strong tempest, A destroying storm, and a flood of mighty waters. The
clouds gather apace, and hang exceeding black and dreadful over many places,
as if God had reserved us to fearful stormy days. Gods way has been in the
sweet calm of peace for a long time in the sweet Sunshine of his Mercies; but
Nahum 1. 3. The Lord has his way in the Whirl wind, and in the storm; Yea,
even that God that is slow to anger, yet has his way in the storm, and in that
way God is seeming now to come. Eliah could foresee a great rain by a cloud no
bigger then a man's hand, we may foresee not only rain, but the great storm
and tempest of Gods displeasure gathering, near by clouds that arise which are
bigger then a man's hand, for behold even the Heavens are black: we have
feared the gathering them often, but because they have bin dispelled, we have
promised peace to our selves. God has his times so to our selves. God has his
times so to gather them, that they shall not be scattered until they have
fulfilled his Word; The prudent man fore-seeth the evil, and hides himself,
Pro. 22. 3. Evil men understand not judgment, but they that seek the Lord
understand all things. What are the thoughts, the fears of those who do most
seek the Lord? observe what they do; if they understand any thing of Gods
mind, then a storm is coming. It is observed of the Bees, that before a
storm you may see them come apace to their Hives; what are the Hives of the
Saints but the public Temples of God: These have the promise of God to be a
place of refuge, a covert from storm, Isai. 4. 6. These are the chambers that
God now calls his Saints into, Isa. 26. 20. Come my people, enter into your
chambers, shut your doors about you, hide your selvss as it were for a little
moment, until the indignation be overpast; for behold the Lord comes out of
his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, the earth
shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain. These are the
Pellaes to which God calls you, if you think your Ite ad Pellam.
selves so settled in your places, as that you cannot stir, take heed lest the
storm be to you as it is threatened, Job 27. 21. The East Wind carries him
away, and a storm hurleth him out of his place. You know the speech of Eliah
to Ahab, when he see the clouds arise, make haste lest the rain prevent you, 1
King. 18. 44. so I to you, make haste lest the storm prevent you. when an
enemy takes in a Town by storm, it is very terrible. Oh how dreadful then
will it be to that people whom the Lord shall come against as an enemy, and
after many offers of conditions of peace rejected he shall take them in by
storm. It is the pride of men's hearts that is the cause they fear not this;
wherefore, my prayer shall be according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 83. 15.
Lord make them afraid of thy storm: I do not, I will not pray as in the
former part of the verse, Lord persecute them with thy tempest: Oh no, if it
may be, the Lord keep it from them, neither do I pray Lord make them afraid
with thy storm, but Lord make them afraid of thy storm.

For the second, how terrible are storms raised, and raging in men's
consciences?

When the wrath of God in a man's soul shall persecute him as the Wind, as Job
complains, chap. 30. 15. Terrors are turned upon me, they pursue my soul as
the Wind, and chap. 9. 17. He breaks me with a tempest; When God shall say
to Conscience, go persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with
thy storm; after great calmes there uses to arise grievous storms: many of
you have had a long calm of peace and prosperity, you may expect Sed
tranquillitas ista tempest as erit.
a storm a coming. God who is said, Psalm. 107. 29. to make the storm a
calm, can as soon make thy calm a storm: the vapors that cause the tempest
arise insensibly, but when they grow to a tempest they have mighty power; so
sins are committed and multiplied insensibly, they lie by heaps in the
conscience; you feel nothing of them now, but at last if you look not to it,
they will cause a dreadful tempest, and especially when the hearts of men are
most swelling with pride. Mariners observe, that usually before great tempests
there are great swellings at Sea; it is so usually before great
Conscience-tempests, the more swelling any wicked man's heart is the nearer, the
more dreadful is the tempest like to be. Many of you have in your time been
in most fearful tempests, that have made your hearts to ache within you, but
you must look for another manner, a more dreadful tempest, when not vapors in
the air, but the wrath of an infinite God in the Conscience shall shake and
rend your hearts, the terrors of the Lord following you will cause another
manner of rage in the heart, then ever stormy wind caused in the mighty waters,
Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, this is the portion of their cup. It is called the portion of
their cup, says Saint Augustine upon the place, because of the just measure
and proportion Gods Justice observes in the dealing out punishment to sinners,
as we heard before, God is said to have a weight for the winds; so for this
storm and tempest that comes upon the wicked, the Lord weighes it, it comes
upon them proportionable to their sin; were you ever struck with fear when
you have seen the huge floods of waters rolling and ranging in the Seas, being
driven by mighty winds? what fear then will possess your hearts, when you
shall see the floods of ungodnesse comes in upon you, how will the terrors even
of Hell then compass you about? it is an expression of David, Psalm. 18. 4, 5.
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodliness made me
afraid: So Arias Montanus Impietatis
turns it, howsoever he may mean of ungodly men, yet the word bearing the
other reading, we may also apply it to the ungodliness of men, then the
sorrows of Hell compassed me. The Lord give you a heart to foresee this
storm, and to prevent it. We read, Exodus 9. 20. when God threatened to send
upon Egypt a fearful storm of hail, those who feared the Word of the Lord,
made their servants and Cattle to flee into their houses; so this day you hear
from the Lord a storm threatened, let every soul that fears the Word of the
Lord seek to flee into a shelter, there is no other shelter that can keep it
off, but only the Lord Jesus Christ; that which is said, Isa. 32. 2. is true
of him, a man shall be a hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the
tempest.

7. Let us yet rise higher in praising God in the stormy Wind, by considering
in our hearts, if God be so dreadful now in this one creature, how dreadful
then will he be, when he shall appear in all his power, in all his wrath, his
Justice and holiness, what shall the glory of the great God be hereafter, of
which the Scripture speaks so much? when he shall cloth himself in glory and
majesty, in the full brightness of them, when the Heavens shall depart like a
scrowle, and the elements melt with fervent heat, when all the World shall be
on fire about him, the voice of the Lord has shaken the earth; but he says,
yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also Heaven, that will be a
dreadful day indeed, when the stars of Heaven shall fall unto the earth, as
a Fig Tree casts her untimely Figs when she is shaken of by a mighty Wind,
when every Mountain and Island shall be moved out of their places, when the
Kings of the earth, and the great and mighty men shall hide themselves in the
Dens, and in the Rocks and Mountains, Revel. 6* 13, 14, 15. A stormy Wind
that shakes off the fruit of trees here, we account great, but such as shall
shake the Heavens, and cause the stars to fall as the fruit, the untimely
fruit of a Fig Tree, how dreadful must that needs be, beyond all
apprehension? and yet in such a stormy Wind will God one day appear in his
glory, when not only children and women, and a few fearful people shall be
afraid, but the Kings, the Captains, and the great ones of the earth shall
tremble, and hide themselves, and wish the Mountains to fall upon them, and
the hills to cover them from the Wrath of the Lord.

Thus I have endeavored to show you how you should glorify God in his work:
to be moved with it in a sensitive way, that is no more then the bruit beasts
are; the swine will run up and down, and cry in a stormy wind, yea when it is
coming, being sensible of it before you are, but Job 35. 11. God teaches us
more then the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser then the fowls of
heaven; therefore God looks for another manner of glory from us Sed Diabolica
est baec scientia, says Calvin upon the 29. Psalm. quae in naturae
contemplatione nos retinens a Deo avertit.
men, then from them, and more from us Christians then from men; God has given
to the reasonable creature to search out the causes of things, we must take
heed we do not stay ^ill we arise to the supreme, the highest cause.
Philosophers dispute of the inferior causes; It is devilish knowledge that in
the contemplation of nature holds us in nature, and keeps us from God, says
Calvin upon the 29. Psalm; and further he has this expression, If one desires
to know a man, he neglects the looking upon his face, and fastens his Merito
ridebitur ejus stultitia.
eyes upon his nails, his folly is to be derided; so, says he, while men
wholly mind the inferior causes of things, as works of nature only,
neglecting God the highest cause of all.

And in this our giving glory to God, we must labor to be as spiritual as we
can, then the work will abide upon our hearts; but if we be only moved in a
sensitive way, the impression of all will soon vanish, and come to nothing.

The second point follows, Fulfilling his word.

Doct. Whenever God sends a stormy Wind, he sends it to fulfill his word.

The Winds you heard before were Gods messengers, this is evermore their
errand, to fulfill his word.

There is a fourfold word of God that they are sent to fulfill.

1. The word of his decree: what he has purposed, determined to bring to
pass, this is one creature the Lord calls forth out of his treasure to fulfill
this, and therefore it shall come at that time, in that place, and work in
that power, and abide that time, that shall be fittest for the accomplishment of
this word of his Decree.

2. The word of his command: if God calls for it, it must come if; God speaks
to it, it shall go and prosper to that he sends it for; it is one of Gods
Hosts, at the beck of this great Lord of Hosts, and for the fulfilling this and
the other word, the Winds are called for out of his treasure of Wisdom and
power.

3. The word of his threat: what soever ill God has threatened against sinners,
that comes under the power of this creature to be an executioner of, it
fulfils. Hence, Jer. 51. 1. it is called a destroying Wind, and Ezekiel. 13. 13. a
stormy Wind in my fury. If there be any threat against any man in a ship, or
any that have interest in it, the Lord many times sends his Winds to fulfill
that word of his. When Jonah sinned against God in flying from his presence,
the Lord raised a tempestuous Wind to follow after him, as a Pursevant that
would never down until it had arrested him, and made him to know what it was
to sin against the Word of the Lord: that Wind and tempest that is now up may
be a fruit of Gods displeasure for such or such a sin of thine, it may be
committed long since, and so it comes out of the treasury of Gods wrath.

4. His word of promise to convey a blessing: and thus they come out of the
treasury of Gods mercy, to fulfill that word of promise. All things shall work
together for good to them that love God. Godliness has the promise of this
life, and that which is to come. When God enters into covenant with his people,
all second causes are linked together to work good unto to them, as Hos. 2. 21,
22. I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and so it is true
of all others; that which is said of the clouds driven about by the Winds, is
also true of the Winds themselves, Job 37. 13. He causes it to come whether
for correction or for mercy; sometimes for correction, and sometimes for mercy.

For use, and that first more generally: Use.
1. Here we may learn to have high and honorable thoughts of the word of the
Lord, seeing God has such glorious ways for the fulfilling of it; where the
Word of the Lord is, there is power; Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not
one jot or tittle of his Word. God prizeth every tittle of his Word above
Heaven and Earth, he had rather lose Heaven and Earth then any part of his
Word; howsoever thou prizest it at a low rate, and art not willing to lose a
base lust, the least outward advantage for the Word, God will shake the Heavens
and Earth for the fulfilling his Word; yea, rather dissolve them, and bring
them into nothing, rather then he will not fulfill every particle of it. If God
has made these his glorious work, to be subservient for the preservation and
accomplishing his Word, then surely his Word is above them; wherefore, although
much of Gods Name be in these, yet there is more of his name in his Word:
Hence is that excellent, place Psalm. 138. 2. Thou have magnified thy Word above
all thy Name; Gods work is honorable and glorious, Psalm. 111. 3. But his Word
is in a special manner, the very glass of his holiness and glory, in which
we behold his glory with open face, and so as we are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. and if Gods name be more in his word
then in his works, a gracious heart will see God more there, and fear God as
appearing there more then in any thing else, as we read of Eliah, 1 King* 19*
11, 12* although the mighty wind and fire passed by, yet his heart was not
taken with fear so much as when the still voice came, because the Text faith,
God was there; although the voice was a still voice, yet because God was there
more then in the other, therefore Eliah feared more; this place of Scripture is
abused by many who bring it against Ministers preaching the Law in a zealous
manner, making God to appear terrible to sinners; they say God was not in the
fire, nor in the whirlewind, but in the still voice, but it is clear, there
can be no such inference gathered from thence, as many seek to gather, for
even in this still voice, God came with a message of most fearful wrath
against the people; Go, says he, and anoint Hazael, Jehu and Elisha, that
he that escapes the sword of Hazael, Jehu may slay, and him that escapes the
sword of Jehu, Elisha shall slay. See what a terrible threat was this that came
from God appearing in that still voice; and Elias himself after Gods appearing
thus in the still voice was no less terrible in his Ministry then before, for
in the 2 of Kings 1. see how severe and fiery he was, he prays for fire to
come down from Heaven to destroy the Captain and his fifty; and again the
second time, for fire from Heaven to destroy the second Captain and his fifty,
he ceased not until the third came in a way of submission; and indeed that
manner of Gods appearing to Elias, first in the mighty wind, then in the
earthquake, then in the fire, and at last in the still voice, was to show Elias
how he would have him to appear in his Ministry, namely first in terror, and
then more mildly; and in that it is said that God was not in the wind, nor in
the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in the still voice, it was to show you
that Elias, and so other Ministers of God should be to the people as that
mighty wind, as the earthquake and fire, till God appears in them, and when
they see God in them, then to be as a still voice unto them: but this by the
way, for the clearing this Scripture from the abuse of it.

Use 2. If the Winds be for the fulfilling Gods Word, and that in those
several ways; Hence let us learn that when any great Winds and Tempests
arise, it is not for nothing that they arise, there is some special reason
that God has for the raising and continuing of them; God has always some
special aim in them for the fulfilling of some word or other of his; many
people when they hear of and feel grievous tempests, boisterous violent
Winds, they think and say, there is conjuring abroad, and that is all the use
they make of them; God is neglected, he is not so much as once mentioned by
them. I find a Canon Si quis credit quod Diabolus tonitrua and fulgura and
tempestates sua authoritate facit sicut Priscilianus dixit Anathema, sit Con.
B^acarens. c. 8.
in a Council above 1000. years ago, made against such as shall attribute
tempests, thundrings, and lightnings to the Devil, as if he caused them;
whosoever believes this, says the Council, as Priscillianus did, let him be
Anathema. It is true, if God will permit the Devil, he has much power over
corporal things, to make great changes in them, to do great things by them,
as we know what he did by Gods permission against Job, and when his children
were feasting, there came, says the Text, Job 1. 19. a great Wind and smote
the four corners of the House: It is observed by some, there was a special
work of the Devil in drawing the Wind round about the house; how could one
Wind else take the four corners of the house? Origin thinks those Winds were
only the Devils themthemselves cluttering about the house, and striving who
should do mischief soonest: the same word in the Hebrew that signifies the
Wind, signifies also a spirit. Certain it is, if God should let him loose, he
were able to overturne our houses every day, and suddenly to destroy us all;
but howsoever God may permit him sometimes as his executioner, yet the supreme
cause of raising and ordering is God, for special ends, which the Devil is
forced against his will to further, and there is not the least vapor, or any
of the most contemptible creature that he has any power over, but by
permission, and therefore, neither Angel, nor Devil, nor any power in Heaven
and Earth can raise or continue any Wind, but as an instrument of God. When God
has some work to do for the fulfilling his Word, it were a great shame for
any who profess godliness, to be afraid of the Devil in this kind: The Nec
in porcorum gregem Diaboli Legio habuit potestatem; nec potestatem habet ut in
oves Dei saeviat Tertul. de fuga in persec.
Devil, says Tertullian, has no power over Swine, much less over Gods
Sheep: what God has to do in that proportion he raises the Wind, according
to that expression you had before, that God had weights for the Wind, add to
this that place, Psalm. 78. 50. He weighed out a path for his anger; for so are
the words: in your Books, it is only he made a way to his anger; but
consider then these two places together, thus, God first weighes a path for his
anger, how much he intends to execute, and then he weighs the means, that is
the Winds, according to the former expression in Job; just enough for the
execution of so much anger and no more, and so proportion them, and this beyond
all second causes makes the Winds greater or less, continuing longer or
shorter time, which few think of.

But thus much for the application more generally, but more particularly from
these four considerations of that word they come to fulfill, from the first,
the word of his Decree.

1. Hence we learn the certainty of the fulfilling of all Gods Decrees, all
creatures work for this end; we may purpose and decree things, but every
little thing is enough to hinder, but the word of Gods Decree shall stand for
ever, Heaven and Earth, and Air, and Seas, and all creatures must work and
give forth all their power and efficacy for this, therefore certainly none
can fail.

2. Whatsoever falls out by the Wind, take notice of it as the fulfilling of
the word of Gods Decree, and make use of it accordingly: do not think it came
by ill hap, or chance, or only through unskilfulnesse, or neglect of such or
such, so as to think if these things be taken heed of another time, there need
be no fear that such things will fall out again; yes, if this came to fulfill
the word of Gods Decree, howsoever such and such means furthered it, although
they had not been, God could have have had many other ways to have made these
winds to have fulfilled this word of his, and so may do some other time when
such means shall not fall out.

From the second, the Word of his command.

1. Here learn the Sovereignty and greatness of God that has these creatures
at his command. Who is this, said the Mariners concerning Christ, whom the wind
and Seas obey? so let us say, who is this Lord, how great is his command? who
are you then that dare resist the command of this God? Shall Heaven and Earth,
Seas and Winds fulfill Gods word, and art thou he that dare stand out against
it, to resist it, to rebel against it? Job 38. 1, 2* it is said, that God
spoke to Job out of the whirlwind, and said, Who is this that darkneth
counsel? Now the Lord speak to your hearts out of every stormy Wind; who is
this that dares stand out against my command, great things have yielded and do
daily yield to Gods word, as Psalm. 29. 5, 6, 7. It breaks the Cedars, it
divides the flames of fire. What a heart then have thou that dare, that
can stand out against it?

2. Seeing the boisterous Winds obey the word of command, when thou feel
boisterous raging lusts in thy heart, look up to this God, cry to him to give
out a powerful word of command to still them: Likewise, O Lord, thou who
rulest the raging Sea and tempestuous Winds, and they are still, O that thou
would rebuke these raging distempers of my heart, which raise a grievous
tempest in my soul, that they may be still. Chrysostom upon the 8. of
Matthew, speaking of those winds that raised tempest upon the Seas, which
endangered the Ship wherein Christ and his Disciples were, makes use of an
Allegorical sense comparing the Ship to the Church, and those winds to the
Devils that raise tempests to endanger the Church; certainly the lusts of a
man's heart are more dangerous winds, they raise a tempest more dangerous then
all the Devils in Hell are able to raise; but the Lord that is able to still
the one, is able to still also the other. Psalm. 65. 7. These two are put
together, The stilling the noise of the Seas, the noise of the waves, and the
tumults of the people: It is the same power of God that does both, and the same
power that must still the tumult of a man's own heart.

3. From the third particular, The Winds are sent to fulfill the word of Gods
threat.

Use 1. How sure then are Gods threats to be fulfilled, when all Gods creatures
are appointed to see them fulfilled; every creature stands ready as if it said,
Lord shall I go to make good such a threat gone out against such a man, for
such a sin committed at such a time? if God says to the winds, go pursue
him, attach him, never cease until my word be fulfilled against him, certainly
they will go and will fulfill Gods word to the utmost, although it be for thy
utter ruin, and sending thee down to thine own place: although some word of
Gods threat may seem to lie as it were dead a while, yet God has ways to
raise it up and to make it good to the full, and amongst other means this
creature is often used for this end. 1 Samuel 3. 12. In that day, says the Lord,
I will perform all the things which I have spoken against Eli. The words are,
I will raise up all the words I have spoken against him: it may be there has
been some word of threat lien long against thee; now the Winds are sent to
raise up this word, let it lie never so long, it must rise at the last, all the
powers in Heaven and Earth will work to raise it up, rather then it shall
always lie thus, it certainly must rise at one time or another, and, as it is,
verse. 19. None of the words of the Lord shall fall to the ground: The
expression is Metaphorical from a dart cast at an enemy, if it be cast by a
weak hand, or not directed right, instead of sticking in the thing it is cast
at, it falls to the ground; but Gods words spoken by the Prophets shall not do
so, they will be as darts that shall certainly stick in the sides of wicked
men, and none of them shall fall to the ground, and amongst other means, the
mighty Winds are sometimes used by God, to carry the dart of the Word of his
threat strongly upon Conscience, to make it stick fast and to abide until it
fulfills Gods purpose, and not fall to the ground.

2. Here you see what a dangerous thing it is to be, especially to go to Sea
under the power of a threat; as soon as God has thee at Sea, if he calls for
a Wind out of the treasures of his wrath, and bids it fulfill such a threat,
where art thou? it is a bold adventure for thee to put out to Sea before thou
have cleared all with God and thine own Conscience: if all be clear, then
the blessing of Zebulun, Deuteronomy. 13. 26. may be upon thee, Rejoice O Zebulun in
thy going out: Zebulun was the Mariners Tribe, and his blessing was to rejoice
in his prosperous voyages, in his expectation of them, to rejoice when he went
out, when he set to Sea: if before your going out you have made all peace
between God and you, so that there be no word of threat to be fulfilled upon
you, then, but not before, can you rejoice at your going out.

3. When thou art in any danger in regard of stormy Winds, consider, advise
with thy conscience what threat it is, against what sin of thine the word of
the Lord is gone forth, that this stormy Wind comes to fulfill; conscience will
tell thee, here is a terrible tempest, and it comes to fulfill the word of the
Lord, that word of the Lord that thou have slighted, contemned, despised; now
comes this tempest to put honor and majesty upon that word, and to fulfill it:
it cries out to thee, the word of the Lord, the word that thou heardest such a
day, against such a sin, in such a place, thou have escaped it all this
while, thou thoughtest thy self free from it, out of its danger, but now it
pursues thee, it comes in this stormy wind to be fulfilled on thee.

Thou thoughtest the Word was but as wind, and that that wind should shake no
corn, as Jer. 5. 13. The Prophets shall become wind, now they become Wind
indeed. I remember I have read a story, that Hospinian in his History of
Jesuits relates of Henricus a Jesuit at Ingolstate, who said in his Sermon,
that it was no good sign of a Catholic to joy much in hearing of Sermons, but
rather the sign of an Heretic, who delight themselves with those things as
the Ape with a nut; for, says he, Sermons pass away presently as wind; but
his delight is to hear many Masses: is this a distinguishing sign between a
Catholic and an Heretic, fit for a Jesuit to give; such vile unworthy
thoughts have carnal hearts of the Word, but it is indeed and shall be Wind
that shall shake thy heart one day, although for the present it seems to be
hardened as the Rock, Isa. 63. 6. we read of a threat that their iniquities
like the Wind should take men away; the guilt of thine iniquity, together with
the stormy Wind, is like to take thee, and carry thee away to thine own place:
when the stormy Wind blew so as it endangered those Mariners in the 1 of Jonah,
the text says, They consulted to cast lots, that they might know for whose
cause it blew: It is good for thee when thou art in a stormy Wind to consult
with thine own heart, is not this tempest raised against me for my sin?
surely if thou would ask the question to thine own heart, for what cause
is it that it is so dreadful; the answer will be, it is because thou have not
fulfilled the Word of the Lord, by thy humiliation before it, by thy obedience
unto it, and therefore it comes now to fulfulfill the Word of the Lord upon
thee.

4. If ever you have escaped dangerous Tempests, learn for ever to have higher
thoughts of the Word of the Lord then you have had, to reverence it, to humble
thy soul before it, to obey it: Oh let me fulfill the Word of the Lord now by
humiliation, by obedience, that the stormy Wind do not do it so as shall be
more grievous to me; if yet thou dare resist his word, when the Lord shall
have raised again another stormy Wind, and caused his terror to be upon thee,
it may be then thou will cry, O Lord now I will fulfill thy Word, Lord deliver
me, and I shall be more careful for ever to fulfill thy word, thy word that
commands me to keep thy Sabbaths, thy word that commands me to sanctify thy
Name, thy word that commands me to be chaste and sober and religious; Lord if
my life may be spared, it shall appear I will regard thy word more then ever I
have done; God may then answer, nay, this stormy Wind shall fulfill my word, I
will rather have my glory out of thee by fulfilling my word upon thee by this
tempest, then expect from thee what thou will do to the fulfilling of it. It
may be some of you have heretofore in your distress thus promised the Lord,
and the Lord has heard your cries, and has spared you: if God has been
gracious to you, do not now return to folly. The first time as I remember
that Pharaoh acknowledged that he had sinned, was upon the dreadfulnesse of the
Tempest, Exo. 9. 27. Though I have sinned, the Lord is righteous, I and my
people are wicked: So it may be you have done, but take heed now it be not
with you as it was with Pharaoh, verse. 34. when he saw the tempest was over,
he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart; you are delivered from the tempest,
do not now sin more, do not now harden your hearts; Oh let conscience now
plead with you for the fulfilling your own word, take heed now, do not
thrust away conscience when it comes to you to put you upon what you have
promised to God in your distress. 1 Timothy 1. 19. the Scripture speaks of some,
who make shipwreck of faith, and put away their conscience: when you have
escaped one ship-wracke, take heed of a worse shipwreck, namely that of faith,
and of putting away conscience; the word that is there translated, put away, is
more then putting, it is thrusting away, casting off with violence, the same
word that is translated in Romans 1. 12. 13. cast off the works of darkness,
when temptations to the work of darkness come, it is good thrusting them away
with violence; but take heed you do not so with your consciences, when they
come upon you, urging on you the performance of what you engaged your self to
God in the time of danger. It may be in time of danger you cast out your goods
to save your lives, now cast out your lusts to save your souls, either your
sins or your souls must perish: know that though you forget your promises,
yet God looks after them, and will call to account what becomes of them, they
are to be seeds of a godly life; now then take heed that when you vow to and
covenant with God, you do not sow the Wind, that phrase the Scripture uses
for losing our labor, when nothing comes of our endeavors, as Hos. 8. 7. but
that is not all, that no good comes of our promises, but certainly if in them
you sow the Wind, there will something come of them, if not a harvest of a
reformed life, yet reap you shall, you shall reap the Whirlwind, they will
be the seeds of most dreadful miseries to you afterward. That which one
Theodericus answered to Sigismund the Emperor when he would know of him what
he should do to be happy, may I say to you; Consider, says he, what you would
wish you had done at such and such times when you had grievous pain of the
stone and gout, and do that now; so I unto you, would you be happy, consider
then when you have been in grievous storms and dangerous tempests, what would
you wish you had done, do that now; when company, when temptations draws to
evil, consider then, will this be my joy if ever God brings me into the like
grievous tempests again, would I have done thus at that time? at such times
then men are convinced of the ways of God, and could wish themselves godly:
Yea, I remember I have read of an expression that Xenophon has, that all men
in their sailings desire for their companions to have men rather religious then
Atheists, because of their often dangers and fears, by reason of Tempests; now
your hearts rise against them, but at such a time you could be glad to be
with them, and to be as they are, except you be Atheists your selves; O labor
now to be, such as then you are convinced is the best and most safest to be,
religious: if it be good then, it is good now. There has been much fear
struck into your hearts at such times, but know there may be much trembling at
Gods great works, and yet God not feared; As at the giving of the Law, the
people were terrified when they saw and heard those terrible things at Mount
Sinai, and yet afterward God says, Oh that there were a heart in this people
to fear me. God does not own all that skaring of theirs before for any true
fear of his Name; the Lord therefore grant, that that fear which in such
times has possessed your hearts, may prove and appear to be not so much the
fear of dangers, as the true fear of the great God appearing to you in such
great and dreadful works of his; that if there were any stirrings in your
consciences before now by such a sight of God causing his fear to be upon you,
those beginnings may be brought forth to a good and blessed issue, that though
your hearts stuck before, and could not be brought off without much ado to
any thing that was good, yet that now this work of God may bring them off,
and now there may be an everlasting divorce between your hearts and those evils
which before did cleave so close and fast unto you; As we read, Psalm. 29. That
the voice of the Lord in tempest causes the Hindes to calve; now they are
creatures that do not calve without great difficulty, but the fear that is
upon them at such times causes them to bring forth their young: you have had
many stirrings of heart, but yet nothing has come of them, the Lord cause the
fear of his great name now to be effectual, that those stirrings may bring
forth something for the honor of God and your own peace.

5. Let us take notice of Gods fulfilling his Word by this stormy Wind: what
word of his was fulfilled amongst us, whatsoever hurt has been done by it,
whatsoever judgment has befalne any upon this, it is for the fulfilling some
word of the Lord, the Lord give you all hearts to fulfill that work of
humiliation and obedience that this work of the Lord calls for from you; there
has not been known in these parts in the memory of man the like effect of a
stormy Wind, as this has brought forth: We read of that wind 1 King. 19. where
the Text says, God was not in the Wind; we cannot say so of this, for verily
God was in this wind, and that very remarkably; O that he might* be honored
in it; that as in nature strong Winds clear the air from corruption, so this
may be so blessed by God to cleanse your conscience from some defilement.

6. From the fourth particular, the word of his promise.

When you have prosperous winds, look at them as coming to fulfill a word of
mercy, Psalm. 89. 8, 9. Who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy
faithfulness round about thee: Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, the waters
thereof arise, thou stillest them. The Psalmist acknowledges the work of God
in the ruling and stilling the waves of the Sea (which he does especially by
the use of the wind, as a fruit of Gods faithfulness) that is ordered by God
for the fulfilling the word of his promise; if you can take this as a fruit of
the promise, how comfortable will it be unto you. Gods riding upon the Cherub,
and flying upon the wings of the Wind are put together, Psalm. 18* 10. The
Cherubins did cover the Mercyseate, when he comes to us upon the wings of the
Wind, this must needs be full of comfort; you Mariners if you be gracious and
godly, whenever you see the Lord coming to you in the Winds, you may see him
likewise upon the Cherub his Mercy-seat, and what encouragement is this in the
ways of God, others see him coming from his Throne of Justice dividing the
flames of fire in his wrath; if God has fulfilled any word of Mercy by a
prosperous Wind, let it engage thee to him for ever, and cause thee to improve
that mercy thou have by it for God, we read, Deu. 33. 19. that Zebulun the
Mariners Tribe, as you heard before, when they had a prosperous voyage, they
should call the people to the Mountains of the Lord, there to offer sacrifices
of righteousness, because of the fulfilling of Gods promise to them, that they
should suck of the abundance of the Seas; has God given you the blessing of
the Seas? then stir up one another to come to the Mountain of the Lord, that
is, to the Church of God, to offer the sacrifices of righteousness, to give
God the praises due unto him* And to close all, if a prosperous Wind be
comfortable, because it fulfils a word of mercy, how comfortable then are the
breathings of Gods Spirit in the soul fulfilling the good Word of the Lord,
promising to give his Spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11. 13. and take only
one note from hence, so we have done, when God gives his Spirit, he gives all
good: the comparing of this place of Luke with Matthew. 7. 11. is very
observable, there it is, How much more shall your father give good things to
them that ask him; and in Luke, How much more shall your Father give his
Spirit to them that ask him; showing, that God in giving us his Spirit, gives
us all good things; the Lord grant unto us evermore the blessed breathings of
his Spirit.

FINIS.

