Truth and Falsehood: Or, A Comparison between the Truth now taught in England,
and the Doctrine of the Romish Church: with a brief confutation of that Popish
doctrine.

Hereunto is added an Answer to such reasons as the popish Recusants allege,
why they will not come to our Churches.

By Francis Bunny, sometime fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford.

GAL. 1.9. If any man preach unto you otherwise than that ye have received, let
him be accursed.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims, for Rafc Iacson, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the white Swanne. 1595.

To the right worsh^^full Company of Ironmongers in London, Francis Bunny,
sometime their Scholar, wishes increase of knowledge, and zeal of the truth,
with abundance of all spiritual graces here, and a happy life with God
elsewhere.
IF the children of Ruben and Gad, Numb 31.21, 2^
might not setle themselves to rest and ease til the Lord had cast out his
enemies from his sight, but that they should sin against the Lord, and their
sin should find them out: (for it is great reason, that they that have one
inheritance promised, should take pains together to get the same, and put from
it their common enemies) then how much more shall God find us guilty, if so
many and mighty enemies, seeking by all means possible, to keep us and our
brethren from the possession of the truth here, and so from that spiritual
Canaan, and heavenly Jerusalem elsewhere, we seeking our quiet estate, and
contenting our selves with our own happy life, do not our endeavor to scatter
and confound according unto our place and calling, the common enemies to our
salvation. When the children of Ruben and Gad, Josh. 22.1^
and the half tribe of Manasseh, had builded them an altar in their country,
for a remembrance that they were to be accounted Israelites, although Jordan
parted them from the other tribes, and the rest of Israel had thought that they
had builded it to offer sacrifices upon the same, the whole congregation of the
children of Israel gathered them together at Shiloh to war against them: For
they thought it to be every man's part, to oppose themselves against Gods
enemies, and to be forward in defense of his glory. Seeing the^^ fore a common
cause requires common help, and they that ^ he not keep a good watch in the
place that is appointed unto them, and in their calling, do as much as in them
lies, betray the cause: Matthew. 25.30.
and such as do not occupy their talent, shall be Cast into utter darkness as
unprofitable servants: I have thought it good, according to my slender skill,
and simple talent, to oppose my self against our adversaries, in defense of
Gods glory and the truth: even against them, who are both the most dangerous
enemies to our souls health and the continual disturbers of all common
wealths. The first, they endeavor by their false doctrine: the other, by their
most perilous and endless practices. Insomuch, as of the troubles that are
this day in the world, the Cardinal of Loraine seems to have made a true
confession even in the council of Trent. For our sakes, brethren (says he)
is this storm risen, therefore cast us into the sea. Indeed not for their
sakes only, Gentil. exam. council. Trident. sess. 22 lib. 4.
but by their means, are these troubles come upon this part of the world.
Now the multitude or malice of our enemies must not discourage us from doing
our duty: but how much more they increase in number, so much the more diligent
should we be: and their cruelty and malice should increase our courage against
them. But in vain do we withstand them with our tongues and pens, if the
Christian Magistrates do not put to their helping hand: who have also their du
y to do in the church of God, as well as they, to whom the ministry of the word
is committed Moses and Aaron, the prince and the priest were brethren, to teach
us what mutual help the one of them must make to the other. Kings and Queens
(if they forget not their duty) must be nursing fathers and nurces to Gods
church. Psa. 49.23.
They must cherish and norish it, they must love and defend it. And as
idolatrous princes, the slaves of antichrist, have one mind, ^^ ocal. 17.12,
and shall give their power and authority to the beast, and shall fight with
the Lamb, 13
as we see it is come to pass in these our days: even so should all godly
Princes and Magistrates be ashamed, that, zeal of Gods glory, and love unto
his truth should not knit them as fast together, and make them as willing to
maintain the good cause: as superstition, ambition and malice prevails with
the wicked, to make them so (...) bornly to strive against Gods undoubted word.
Such princes (...) in scriptures commended unto us, as have been ready to
maintain truth, set forth Gods word, and regarded the sincerity of the
same: and have on the contrary withstoode superstition, put down idolatry, and
compelled their people unto the service of God, both according to the first and
second table of the Commandments. And on the other side, it is left as a
stain unto the memory of others, that they did not take away occasions of
idolatry, and remove such stumbling blocks out of men's ways. If then we could
in such a godly consent, as the Prophet Sophonie says, serve the Lord with one
shoulder, the civil magistrates, Zophon. 3.9.
by the sword, we by the word: they by correction (if need require) we by
exhortations: they by punishments, we by threatenings, remembering that both the
one and the other must one day make an account of our stewardship, and answer
for our defaults: then I doubt not but God would bless our godly labors, with
great increase of knowledge and godliness. But, as in the end of this treatise, I
have made some exhortation unto magistrates, to consider of their duty in this
point, so have I also thought it my part to maintain to my power, Truth
against Falsehood even Gods word against men's inventions. And for this cause
have I taken this travel, to set down the sum of that that we teach,
especially in such matters as are principally in question amongst us: and on
the contrary, what our adversaries teach concerning the same. Which I thought
to be necessary, because our doctrine is many times by the adversaries
slandered, especially before such as are ignorant, as though it were far
otherwise than in truth it is. And that the truth more easly may appear, what
is taught by them and us, he that lists may see with little labor, even as it
were at one view both our opinions. Neither do I undertake to set down all
that we teach concerning those articles, but only the points that do
especially belong to the controversies that are between us. Then also have I
set down the principal arguments whereby they confirm their doctrines, and
endeavor to confute them. Wherein especially I allege M. Bellarmines reasons
(though not always) because he is accounted learned amongst us, and also
comes after others, so that he has seen what others have, and has taken
out of them what he likes. And as in all this treatise, my endeavor is to
prove (I trust with some good effect) that the doctrine of the church of Rome
is not catholic, so that it may the better appear, I have toward the end set
down an abridgement of Vincentius Lyrinensis, whereby I trust the meanest that
sees it shall be able to judge, how they make an unjust claim to the catholic
religion. And although I know my own wants, and could rather submit my self to
be a scholar unto many, than a teacher almost of any: yet because (I know not
how) my mind gives me, that this manner of writing may do some good,
especially among the unlearned that are desirous to be taught, I thought my
duty forced me to take this in hand, though I want many helps and means
that other have. And, to whom should this my labor (such as it is) be due
rather than unto you, next after that place where I did suck as it were my
first milk of learning, and laid almost the foundation of that knowledge (such
as it is) that God has endued me withal? By your good liberality, I
confess my self to be the better enabled to do any good (be it never so
little that I can do) in the church of God. To your Worships therefore I
confess this my travel to be due, as a simple token of my sincere heart,
which would have yielded a better remembrance, if my ability could have
affoorded it. And the rather do I dedicate this Book unto your W. Company,
that you, seeing the meaning of bestowing your exhibition (which is to bring up
Laborers in Gods harvest, teachers in his church) to be in some part performed
in me, who first in Oxford received your liberality, as I doubt not but you
have seen much more plentiful fruit in many other you may the more willingly
continue your godly course, and not be weary of your well-doing. Accept in good
part (I pray you) this simple gift, and if you see in it but my desire to do
good, give glo^ y to God, to whose good grace I commit you and yours, and my
self to your good prayers. From my house at Ryton in the Bishoprike of Durham.

Anno 1595.
A necessary Table, of all the principal matters contained in every chapter
of this Book.
THAT the Scriptures or word written, is only Gods word, and not traditions
Chapter 1 That this word is sufficient Chapter 2 The Scripture a sure rule
Chapter 3 Scriptures easy Chapter 4 That only the canonical books of the
old and new testament are this written word or Scriptures Chapter 5 What the
catholic church is, that in the creed is mentioned Chapter 6 That the
catholic church mentioned in the articles of our creed is not visible or to
be seen Chapter 7 The church here militant upon the earth may err Chapter 8
Of the marks of the church, or how we may know the true church Chapter 9 What
a sacrament is, what is the effect of it, or what it works: how many
sacraments there are Chapter 10 Of the sacrament of Baptism Chapter 11 Of
Confirmation Chapter 12 Of the Lords supper, and Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Savior Christ, and namely of transubstantiation Chapter 13 That
the wicked receive not in the sacrament Christ's body and blood Chapter 14 That
the cup ought not to be denied to the lay people, which thing the papists do
Chapter 15 Against their sacrifice of the Mass, or of the altar, as they call
it Chapter 16 Of true and christian repentance, and of the Popish Sacrament of
penance Chapter 17 Of lawful calling into the ministry, and against the
sacrament of Orders, as they call it Chapter 18 Of matrimony, that it is not a
sacrament, and that it is lawful for all. Chapter 19 Of anoiling or extreme
unction, that it is not a sacrament Chapter 20 Of original sin, what it is,
and whether concupiscence be sin, or not. Chapter 21 Of the works of infidels
and such as are not regenerate Chapter 22 Of Baptism, whether it do
extinguish and kill in us original sin or not Chapter 23 That we have not of
our selves free will or power to deliver our selves from sin Chapter 24 That
by our works we cannot be justified: and against the doctrine of merits
Chapter 25 Of justification by faith, and what faith is? Chapter 26 That good
works are necessary duties for all christians to perform Chapter 27 Of
prayer: to whom, and how we should pray Chapter 28 Against Images in churches
or any where else for religions cause Chapter 29 What fasting is, and of the
true use of fasting Chapter 30 Of Purgatory Chapter 31 An Abridgement of
Vincentius Lyrinensis, with observations upon the said Author Chapter 32 An
exhortation to christian magistrates for to defend this truth Chapter 33
FINIS.
That the Scriptures, or written word, is only Gods Word, and not traditions.
CHAP. 1
THE PROTESTANTS
The rule of faith and life.
BEcause it is confessed of al, that gods word must be the rule and square of
our faith and life, of our religion and conversation: It is very meet, that
first we enquire, what is this word of God? And we affirm, What is gods word
that that only which is contained in the Books of the old and new
Testament, is the very true word of God. First, because we are so often and
earnestly charged not to add any thing to it, or to take any thing from it.
Secondly, this is proved by the practice of the godly of all times. The Jews
most religiously kept the word written with great sincerity, and made it the
Touchstone to try their actions by, and by it, they reformed such things as
were amiss, in religion especially. As in Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and
others it may appear. Christ also and his Apostles confirmed that which they
taught out of the Scriptures: yea they confirmed and expounded the Law Mat. 5.
and preached no other gospel tha^ that which before was promised by the
Prophets. Romans 1.2.
And accounted them accursed that should preach any other. Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.
Lastly, the Fathers of the purer times of the Church, did not only with open
mouth submit their writings and doctrines to the judgment of the Scriptures,
but also they tried doubts, established all trueths, and confuted all heresies,
only by this word written.

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of ROME not suffering herself to be hemmed in within so narow
lists, Prou. 22.28.
has removed the ancient bounds which their fathers made, and faineth, that
God (who has hitherto had but one voice) now in our days should speak with
two tongues. What is gods word in the To. church.
For they make Gods word to consist of two parts, namely, of the word written,
which we call the Scriptures, and unwritten, which they call Traditions.
Traditions.
And the traditions (say they) were either delivered by the Apostles themselves
to some special men, and therefore are called Apostolic, or else are set down
by the Church, and for that cause called Traditions of the Church. Traditions
equal with the word.
Now traditions are made equal, and to be received with as great reverence as
the Scriptures, even by the Council of Trent, Ses. 4. decre. 1 Preferred before
the word.
and the most modest Papists But there are others, who in their excess of
impiety, prefer the tr^ ditions before the word written, and make them of
greater force than it, as Pighius in his Ecclesiastical hierarchy, Eccl.
Hierar. lib. 1. cap. 4. Thesi. 9. In his preface.
and Wolfgangus Screckius. Nay, in that he will by traditions have all doctrines
tried he manifestly subiecteth the pure written word of God, to the profane
devises of man.

But to take away the proppes of this their ruinous building, let us see what
grounds or foundations (for so Melchior Canus a learned Papist terms them)
they lay, of this their doctrine.

Melchior Canus in his common places of Divinity, and Bellarmine in his
controversies, lib. 3. cap. 3 Bellar. lib. 4 (...)
of Gods word d^ written, and others also, set this down as a most nece^^^rie
principle, That the Church is more ancient than the Scriptures. As in truth
the Church was more than two thousand years before there was any written word
of God in books, and therefore Bellarmine infers, That the Scriptures are
not simply necessary.

from the beginning, John 1.1 what word that is that is written.
is that very word of God, that was so long after the beginning written for
the Jews, and is now delivered unto us. We must therefore take heed that
they deceive us not by the double signification of the word Scripture, which
sometime expresses the manner of delivering the word, namely, by writing, and
so we confess, the scripture was not so ancient as the church by mo than two
thousand years, but sometime the word Scripture signifies the word it self
which is delivered unto us, as it is commonly now taken, and in this place must
so be understood. And so has the word written been from the beginning. That
is to say, that the self same word, which God, by word of mouth (as we say)
and by tradition did teach the patriarchs, he afterward did cause to be
written, which word we call the holy scriptures. And further also we must
remember, that one manner of delivering the word of God, Diverse manners of
delivering the word at diverse times.
is fit for one time, and an other manner of delivering it for an other time.
As may appear by that which has been said, how that God has in his infinite
wisdom seen it needful, to deliver it one way before the Law, in an other
sort under the Law, and the Gospel, although not in like measure in both
these latter times. So that this argument cannot stand good: The scriptures
have not been written in the first age amongst the patriarchs, therefore they
are not necessary now amongst us in these days, to whom God has by them
revealed his word. Which argument is strongly confuted by Chrysostom that
learned and ancient Father. In Matthew. hom. 1.
But to these men, who are (as Tertullian calls the Heretics of his time)
lucifugae scripturarum, De resurrect. carnis.
such as shun the light of the scriptures, and flee from it, I may say as the
same Tertullian speaks in an other place, De prescript.
Believe without the Scriptures, that ye may also believe against the
Scriptures. Let them seek the desert of their own devises, and follow the
trod of their own traditions, to find out some covert for their
superstitions, but let us content our selves to dwell in the cities of the
Law, the Prophets, the Gospel, and the Apostles which are the Scriptures, and
not go out of them, In Mich. li. 1
as Saint Jerome speaks, For every word of God is pure, Prou. 30.5, 6
he is a shield to those that trust in him. Put nothing to his word, lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

That this Word is sufficient. CHAP. 2
THE PROTESTANTS
This word is sufficient.
NOw this written word of God, because it is sent us from that most gracious God
that has loved us, and chosen us in Christ before the foundations of the world
were laid, Ephesians. 1.4
that we might be holy and with out blame before him: and is brought unto us by
that most excellent Prophet, In whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge: Coloss. 2.3
and therefore can teach us, Heb. 3.2
who also is faithful, and therefore will deal truly with us, yea, who so
heartily loves us that he died for us, and therefore doubtless will be
careful to teach us what behooves us to know: Seeing also the Apostle saint
Paul does testify, that he kept nothing back that was profitable, Acts 20.20
27
but showed them all the council of God: We therefore believe (the Scriptures)
to be written Ioh. 20.31
that we might believe, and believing might have eternal life. 2. Tim. 3.16,
And that the whole scripture given by inspiration of God is profitable to
teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, 17
That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works,
that is, that the Scripture is so sufficient and perfect, that it has no want,
it needs no supply, nothing must be added.

THE PAPISTS
BUT the Church of Rome knowing that Tertullian wrote truly, De resurrect.
carnis.
That Heretics, if they be made to prove that they say by the Scriptures, can
not stand: do find fault that they should be so straightly limited and tethered
that they may believe or receive nothing but that is in the scripture. Andrad.
Orthod. explic. lib. 2
And therefore they neither shame nor fear to charge the word written with
insufficiency. Bellarm. li. 4 cap. 4 Gods word not sufficient.
For so does Bellarmine in flat terms. And therefore he, Melchior Canus, and
the Censure of Collen, and the rest of them, do out of this principle gather
an unanswerable argument, as they imagine for traditions, because (say they) the
Scripture sp^ aketh not of many things necessary to be believed. Are not these
such workmen as the Apostle wills us to take heed of, Phil. 3.2
Beware of evil workmen, yes verily, for they are deceitful workmen, 2.
Cor. 11.13
if you mark them well. For whereas they should try their work by the line
and the square, they contrariwise try their rule by their work. And whereas
they should reject all doctrines that are not agreeable to the word of God,
they make that to be GODS word that will allow of their doctrine: so that
traditions must needs be Gods word, because they maintain that which the
Scripture aloweth not of.

The argument for traditions, and against the sufficiency of the Scriptures.
Many things there are necessary to be believed, that are not expressly set
down in the Scriptures: yea, many things that are neither plainly neither
obscurely in the Scriptures (say all the Papists) namely, Canus in his second
and third grounds: Lib. 3. cap. 3
Therefore the Scriptures are not sufficient.

For answer: the antecedent or first part of the argument is untrue: For
whatsoever is to be believed, is either plainly set down, or necessarily to be
gathered out of the Scriptures, otherwise our Savior Christ should not seem
to have plainly dealt with the Jews, when he bids them Search the
Scriptures (making no mention of any traditions) and adds his reason, John
5.39
They (the scriptures) bear witness of me, but this is manifest by the
places before alleged. Contra lit. P^^ il. lib. 3. cap. 6
Wherefore S. Augustine does account him accursed, yea he so pronounces him,
that will teach any thing either of Christ, or of his Church, or any thing
else that appertains either to faith, or to our life, besides that which we
have received in the Scriptures of the law and the Gospel. Mark how he says:
the Scripture serves us for all turns. Therefore the Author of the imperfect
work upon Matthew, even in the beginning, Hom. 1
compares the Scripture to a Storehouse of some rich man, wherein one may
find whatsoever he wants: so says he, in this book, every soul may find
that which is necessary. And Athanasius alluding to the place of S. Paul 2.
Contra gentes.
Tim. 3.16. says, The holy scriptures given by inspiration, are sufficient to
teach us all truth. It is therefore far better that we with Tertullian should
adore the fulness of the Scriptures, Cont. Hermogenem. Lib. 3. cap. ^
than be partakers with those heretics of whom Irene complains, who when by
the Scriptures they were convinced, accused the Scriptures themselves, as if
something were amiss in them, and that they are not of authority sufficient,
they are diverse, and the truth can not in them be found of them that know
not the traditions, for they were delivered, not by writing, but by word: which
are the very words of the church of Rome. So that a man can not so aptly paint
out our popish heretics, as if he take his pattern by those ancient
heretics: For not one Ape is liker to an other, than they are.

The Scripture a sure Rule. CHAP. 3
THE PROTESTANTS
The scripture a sure rule.
ANd seeing that God by his prophet David has testified, Psalm. 19.8
that the Law of the Lord is perfect, and has by the Prophet Esaias sent us to
ask council in doubtful cases. Esaias 8.20
To the Law and to the Testimony. Yea, and our Savior Christ, Luc. 16.17
when Dives moves Abraham to send some to his five brethren, to teach them,
sends them to Moses and to the Prophets to learn of the^, verse. 29
and tells the Saduces, That they err, Math. 22.29
because they know not the Scriptures. Lastly, seeing the Apostle S. Paul
incourageth Timothy to keep well that he had learned, because, says he, 2.
Tim. 3.15
thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee
wise unto salvation. We therefore willingly confess and constantly believe, that
we have a most sure word of the prophets, 2. Pet. 1.19
to the which we do well if we do take heed as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, until the day dawne and the day star arise in our hearts. And
therefore we do account this Word written to be the most certain and
infallible rule of our faith or conversation.

THE PAPISTS
But the Papists, who can get nothing but by the crooked measures of their
traditions, to bring them into credit with men, do highly commend them,
sometime comparing them to Theseus his thread, Screckius prefa^.
whereby he was directed out of the laborinth, and unto the Touch stone whereby
all doctrine should be tried, Ibidem.
and make it as great a fault to break traditions, Andrad. Orthod. explic.
lib. 5 and lib. 3
as if Christ with his own mouth had spoken them, yea, sometime greater, and so
make them at the least equal to the written word, that is, to the undoubted
word of GOD. And on the other side do altogether deface and disgrace the
Scriptures, calling them Inke-Diuines that stick to them, Eckius de scripturis.
and comparing them to a Leaden rule, Eccl. Hierar.
so does Pighius, or a nose of wax, Explic. dial. 4
as the Censure of Collen does most profanely: both the which blasphemous and
godless reproaches against the Scriptures, are defended by Andradius, Li. 2.
orthod. Explication.
as catholic and sound sayings, because he thinks (as they do) that they
may be changed and drawn to any interpretation. Bellar. lib. 4 de verbo non
scripto cap. 4 and 5
And therefore they teach that the very Scriptures without traditions, are not
altogether necessary. And all this is to persuade the simple, that the
Scriptures are not a certain Judge of faith or rule of life.



mayor or former proposition, is not simply true, but with these additio^s:
whatsoever may aptly, or without doing violence to the words, be so drawn unto
sundry opinions, is an uncertain r^^^. And hereby will soon be gathered the
falsenesse of the minor, which affirms the scripture to be such. For although
out of one sentence of scripture a man may gather diverse good lessons, and
that with good fruit to others, and approbation of all men, so long as those
interpretations are agreeable to the rule of faith: yet when any evil thing in
faith or life is thereby maintained, without all doubt the words are then
wrested, and it cease to be Gods word. Now this is not the fault of the
word, but of man's corrupt affections which abuse the same. Romans 7.12.
For the Law truly is holy, and the commandment is holy, just, and good. And
as Epiphanius says, Here Is. 70
There is no discord in the Scripture, nor one sentence disagreeing from an
other. And in an other place, Here Is. 76
All things in the holy Scripture are clean enough to them that with godly
consideration will come unto that divine word, and have not conceived in
themselves the work of the Devil, indeuoring to throw themselves into the pit
of death. Even as saint Paul says, If our gospel be yet hid, 2. Cor. 4, 3, 4
it is hid in them that are lost, in whom the god of this world has blinded
their minds. And what is Gods word the worse, if the wicked will not know it,
2. Pet. 3.16
or the unlearned or unstable pervert it to their own destruction? I will
therefore conclude with that golden saying of Iustine the martyr. I would wish
others to be of that mind, Justin. Col. cum Tryphone Iud.
that they would not swerve from our Saviors words: For they can put religion
into them that wander from the right way, and refresh with most sweet rest,
them that are exercised therein.

The Scriptures easy. CHAP: 4
THE PROTESTANTS
Scripturs easy.
WE also teach the scripturs to be easy, not because we think nothing to be
hard in them, or that they are easy to every one, but we affirm with
Chrysostom, 2 Thessalonians. 2 hom. 3.
All that is necessary is easy in them. So that with a mind humbled, and
craving of God to be instructed, men study them. The simple may learn by them
their duty toward God and man, and how to behave them selves in their
particular duties. And whereas by the Papists own confession the x
commandments are very easy, Bellarm. de verbo Dei lib. 3. cap. 2.
no man can deny but that Gods threatenings against sin, and the promises of
mercy, and many other things in this written word are as easy. Yea why were
the prophets sent unto all sorts of men, why do the apostles write unto all,
but because much, if not all that they do write or say, might be understood
even of the simple?

THE PAPISTS
ANd on the contrary, the church of Rome fearing least the light of the word
should discover the darkness of their blind devotions, do what they can to
discourage the people from being exercised in the Scriptures, lest knowing the
truth, they should detest their superstitions and idolatries, and for this cause
they cry out with open mouth, that the scripture is too hard to be
understood, and too dark for ignorant men to meddle with the same. Whereby
they have brought many ignorant and lay men into that foolish and unchristian
conceit, that they think it a great deal more dangerous for them, even for
their souls health, to be occupied in reading or hearing some piece of holy
Scripture, than the wanton and unchaste Books of profane men, which corrupt
good manners, and breed noisome lusts that fight against the soul.

But because this is a great stumbling block in the way of the ignorant, it
shall not be amiss somewhat particularly to examine the Arguments that are
used to prove the hardness of the scriptures. Bellarmines is this. David
prays thus, Give me understanding, and I will search thy law. Open mine eyes,
Lib. 3. cap. 1. de verbi Dei interpr.
and I will consider the woonderous things of thy law, show the light of thy
countenance upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes: therefore the
Scriptures are hard.

David's prayers were not to have his natural or outward man only instructed
(for who can imagine that the prophet David, being so well acquainted in Gods
book, could not understand Gods law) but to have his mind and inward man
lightened and directed: and therefore this proves not the sense of scripture to
be hard: for the like prayers are to be used of them that think it to be most
easy. Secondly, even the law, which they confess to be easy, has not only
the literal sense, but should also be a bridle unto the affections and
thoughts of men, Matthew. 5
as most plainly appears in those Commentaries which our Savior Christ
makes upon the sixth, seventh, and fourth commandments. Romans 7.14
In which respect also S. Paul does call it Spiritual, although Bellarmine
seem to account the commandments to be but Natural. The Precepts (says he)
of the x. Commandments, seeing they are natural, may easily be understood.
David therefore may there pray (as all christians ought to do) that he may know
by Gods word, not only how to rule his actions, but also his words and
affections. This the^ does not prove the scripturs to be hard concerning such
good lessons as out of the literal sense may be learned, but he proves that
unless God lighten us, we cannot see the spiritual meaning, Psa. 119.27.
which he calls, the marvelous things of the law.

Lib. 2. ca 47 Contra Celsum lib. 7 In Exodus hom. 12
His third argument is taken from the Fathers. Irene says, in the scriptures I
commit many things to God. Orig. says, the scripture is dark in many places.
And in another place, that we must pray night and day, that the lamb of the
Tribe of Judah will come, and that he will vouchsafe to open the book that is
sealed. Bellarmine when he took these weapons in hand, did but fear his own
shadow. That Basil and Gregory Nazianzene did seek, not by their own
presumption, but by other men's writings that were before them, to attain to
the understanding of this written word, Ruffinus does well to commend them. But
I am sure that Bellarmine himself will not thereof conclude, that they
understood nothing of themselves or without teachers, or that all the
scriptures are hard. He brings in Chrysostom saying, that the deep things
therein cannot be attained unto without great labor, and that Christ would
have the Jews not to read only, but to search them also. If of this he
conclude therefore, all the scriptures are hard, his argument is to be denied,
for that it has no truth in it: if he say therefore, many things are hard,
we say so with him. Ambrose also, who says, The holy scripture is a sea.
Ambrose does not in that place call it a Sea, because it is so deep that the
bottom can not be found, but because it is so plentiful that it yields
abundance to all, as appears, not only by the sentence next after that
alleged by Bellarmine, but also by that conclusion that he gathers a little
after, saying: Therefore the holy Scripture has diverse rivers, Thou have to
drink the first time, the second time, and the last time. Therefore, although
saint Ambrose say, that the scripture has in it depths, yet does he not say it
is all dark. Hierome in his epistle to Paulinus writes, that without a
teacher the scriptures can not be learned, and briefly going through every
book by name, he shows, that in them are many and great difficulties, or
rather mysteries, for he finds in them sundry allegories. S. Jerome in that
place as soon as he has made an end of reckoning up of those books, and
showing the mysteries that are therein, he shows the cause why he did so: I
would not (says he) have thee to be offended with the simplicity and baseness
of words in the Scriptures. Hierome, is, that Hierome was studious in the
scriptures from his youth, and also went to Alexandria to confer with Dydimus
of all that he did doubt of in the scriptures. The simple may see, this makes
not against us: Hierome studied them hard, therefore all the scriptures are
hard: Or, he conferred with Dydimus of that he doubted, therefore all are hard.
Hierome is, That the whole Epistle to the Romans is wrapped into great
obscurities. Hierome either speaks hyperbolically as many times the fathers
do, or else by these obscurities he means such mysteries as may be gathered
out of the scriptures, but not such doctrines as we must learn out of the
same. And who knows not that the fathers do many times so are higher, and
find out greater mysteries, than the text will well afford. Augustine he has
four testimonies. The first says, that such as rashly read, are many times
troubled, because that some things that are obscurely spoken do greatly blind
them. Augustine makes, Confess. lib. 12. cap. 14
having entered into a deep meditation what may be signified by these words
heaven and earth in the beginning of Genesis, as appears by the chapter going
before, and also by sundry of the chapters following, and therefore this his
admiration, O the wonderful depth of thy words! etc. does not prove all the
scripture to be hard. Nay seeing that the story of the creation may there be
plainly understood, it must needs follow, that his meaning was not to say
that Gods word is hard, but rather, that men may in the same consider of deep
matters, as I answered to the last place out of S. Hierome. Augustine are
these: There is so great depth of christian learning, that I might therein
profit daily, if from my childhoode unto my old age, with much time, earnest
endeavor, and a sharper wit, I could study it only. And lastly, In the holy
Scriptures I know (says Augustine) not so much by far as I am ignorant of.
Ambrose, that the scriptures are plentiful. So that he says here nothing
else than in another place of that third epistle, out of the which the former
of these two places is taken, The manner (says he) of speaking used in the
Scriptures al may come to, but very few can pass through, and so afterward
shows how sundry good things all may receive by them. Lastly, the two
testimonies, out of the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, Hom. 44
and that out of Gregory upon Ezech. Hom. 6. which give two reasons why the
scriptures are obscure, a^^ also like the rest, nothing against us. For the
author of that work upon Matthew does plainly show in the same homily, that he
means, the scripturs to be obscure to them that will not read them, these
are the words: Therefore the truth is not hid in the Scriptures, but it is
dark, not so that they who seek it may not find it, but so as they can not
find it that will not seek it. And the same also appears by the words of the
place alleged out of Gregory by Belarmine. For one reason of the obscurity
is, says he, that he may get that by labor, which by idleness he can not. And
then also because the knowledge of the scriptures is not gotten but by labor
and pains taking, they are not so lightly esteemed.

Augustine says, He gives milk to young ones, De verbis dom. ser. 38 fulgent.
ser. de confessor.
that when they are elder he may give them stronger meat. And as the matters
contained in the scriptures are heavenly and spiritual, so the heavenly minded
man, and he that is spiritually minded shall judge of al things. 1. Cor. 2.15
And it shall not be unperformed that God has promised, The secret of the
Lord is revealed to them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14.
and his covenant, to give them understanding.

may of the scriptures gather much fruit, if they will diligently, and with
calling upon God for help read the same. So that in brief this is all that
these fathers have said, either that many things are hard, which no body
denies, or else, that none can so sound the depth of them, but that something
may always be added thereto: and therefore that with diligence the scriptures
must be searched, and without loathsomnes, yea with reverence received. But
that we may, the more easily and evidently see how little these fathers do
make for them: it is necessary to see with what purpose, and to what end these
say, that they do write of the hardness of the scriptures. Namely, not to
discourage men from reading of them, but to stir them up to more diligence
and carfulness in reading them. As may appear by the earnest and vehement
exhortations, which the ancient fathers do make, not only to all men
generally, Hom. 9. in epist. ad Coloss.
but even to lay men in particular and especially. Hear (says Chrysostom)
all ye lay men that are present, and that have wives and children, how the
Apostle commands even (you especially) to read the Scriptures, and not to
read them only as it were by chance, but with great diligence: with many other
such like exhortations in that place, as also in many other of his writings.
Saint Hierome in sundry of his epistles unto godly women exhorts them to
diligent reading of the same, he also, to entice them to be conversant therein,
dedicateth unto some women some of his treatises upon the scriptures. Yea, and
in his preface unto Paula and Eustochium two women, before his first book upon
the epistle to the Ephesians (which is the place out of which Bellarmines
second argument out of Hierome was fetched) does highly commend the study and
knowledge of the scriptures. And in his preface unto his second book, does
extol Marcella, for her diligent study therein, Hom. 20 in Ios.
preferring her before himself, Thou will say (says Origin) the scriptures
are hard, yet it is good to read them. And wishes that we all would do as it
is written (namely) Search the Scripture^. ^^^nelius Agryppa reports, (...)
S^.
that in the first Nicene council it was decreed, that no christian man should
be without a bible in his house. And Chrysostom exhorts even lay men, and
that very earnestly, to get them Bibles, Hom. 9 in Coloss.
or at the least the new Testament. So then we see to what intent the Fathers
tell us, that the Scriptures are hard, namely, because they would not have us
to be careless in the study of them, and negligent, or to imagine when we know
somewhat, that we need know no more, but as Hierome would have us to do,
Epistol. ad P^^ li^ um.
We must crack the nut, if we will eat the kernel. We must take pains to
get knowledge, assuring our selves that we can never learn too much, because
we can never know enough. And saint Augustine in his Confessions says, Li^
6. cap. ^.
they ought to b^ read of all. But the Papists, in complaining of the hardness
of the scriptures, shoot at an other mark, that is, to make the simple people
afraid, that they meddle not with it, that they read it not, neither yet
hear it read unto them. So that besides the other slanders wherewith they
seek to stain Gods word, proclaiming it not to be sufficient, but that it
wants many things, and may be wrested to any fence, they add this also, that
it is hard, and therefore dangerous for them that are not learned to read it.
And this is the very cause why they speak so much of the hardness of the
scriptures, as not only their writings and words proclaim in all places, but
also their cruel executions against such as have had in their mother tongue,
For libr. ^. (...) is and Momun. in the beginning.
I say not the bible or the New Testament, but even the Lords prayer, or the
ten commandments, which they would seem to allow unto the people.

Gregory Nazianzene does write, In Apolog^^.
that some ancient men amongst the Hebrews report of a custom which the Jews
had, which he also commends, which was, that some places of the scriptures
were not permitted (...) body to read before they were five and twenty years
old, but the rest of the scripture they should learn, even from their
childehoode. Where note that they make no difference of any state, calling, or
sex, but of age only, and that when they were five and twenty years old,
they might read any parcel of Scripture. But the Papists permit not any
parcel of the scriptures to the lay people, nay hardly to their priests, but
only as they will follow such sense thereof as they appoint. Yea, I have
known bachellors of divinity admitted to read some book of the master of
sentences, as the use then was when they proceeded, so that this was their
conclusion: They are hard, therefore you shall not read them. That the
scriptures are so hard as they are, Papists to be blamed for hardness of the
Scripture, by their
and to so many, none are to be blamed but the church of Rome, that so much
complains of their hardness, but in truth are sorry they are so easy: as is
most plain to see, first, in that they would not have them in the mother
tongues, but when they see there is no remedy, but that the scripture will be
published whether they will or not, they send us a Testament from Rhennes,
Translations,
so full of Hebrew, Latin, and Greek words, turned into English letters,
that all the world may see that they mean nothing less, than that they that
read it should understand it. And yet they cry, The scripture is hard.
Secondly, they are the cause of the hardness of the scriptures, when in the
most plain places that are, they will not suffer men to follow that sense,
which the words themselves, and the circumstances both before and after do
afford, Interpretations.
but they must have their interpretation from the church of Rome, without whose
approbations they must neither trust their own eyes for seeing, nor their ears
for hearing, neither yet their wit for understanding of any thing. When they
change the very sense and words, and where they find Lord, they put Lady, as
in that blasphemous book called the psalter of the Virgin Marie they do
through the whole psalms, and some other places.

When the first promise that was made of that blessed seed that should break
the head of the serpent, they apply as much as they dare unto the Virgin
Marie, when these words shall be current stuff, to prove worshipping of the
Saints departed ( In as much as ye have done it to the least of these my
brethren, Math. 25.40
ye have done it unto me, which are spoken of our goodness to Gods needy
creatures alive) as Eckius imagines in his common places: De vener. sanct.
when (I say) the people are taught thus to understand the scriptures, must
they not needs be hard? Lastly, the greatest cause of this hardness, is,
that the people are not acquainted with them, for they are forbidden to read
them: nay, Forbidding to read scripture.
it has been death to have them found with the lay people. And still there
are, that in corners seek to persuade ignorant men and women, that there can
be almost no greater danger unto their souls, than to read the scriptures.
Wherein they show themselves to be nothing of the mind of Phillip, Acts 8.31,
35
who forbade not the Eunuch to read the scripture, but taught him: neither
like to the fathers of the church some hundreds of years after Christ, whose
care was to exhort and draw the people to the diligent reading of the same.
And whosoever they are, that with diligence, humility, and prayer, do
continue in the reading of the scriptures, (as we see in sundry by experience)
shall be able in reasonable manner to avoid and pass through those six
impediments that I before alleged out of Bellarmine, and shall have minds
exercised, as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks, Cap. 5.14
and that not without great fruit, to discern good and evil.

And thus we may see how little the fathers make for that which the church of
Rome teaches in this point. For the fathers say thus: The scriptures are hard,
therefore you must read them diligently. The church of Rome clean contrary:
The scriptures are hard, therefore you must not read them. Therefore let us
detest as a most pestilent position that dangerous doctrine of the church of
Rome, knowing that whosoever (be he never so ignorant) with reverent reading
seeks to find, and with devout prayer asks knowledge of God, shall find
much knowledge and comfort in his godly and christian exercise. For, Hieron.
ps. 147.
The word of God is most fat and fertile, It has in it all delicates. And thus
to conclude: seeing the scriptures only are Gods word, and they are so
sufficient and plentiful, that in them the hungry may have food, the poor,
treasure, the rich, direction, the sick, physic, the whole, diet, the
sorrowful, comfort, the ignorant, knowledge, and the foolish, true wisdom:
to be short, seeing there for all wants we find a remedy, and seeing that rule
is so true that it cannot deceive, so straight that it can not be crooked, so
constant to it self that it changes not: lastly, seeing it is so easy, that
by diligence and prayer, the godly may not learn only, but grow and increase
daily from knowledge to knowledge, let us account them as deadly enemies to our
souls, who seek to draw us from this sufficient and certain written word of
God, to the doctrines or traditions of men, what glorious names soever they
give them. What shall we then account of the popish crew that are not ashamed
to teach the Scriptures to be dangerous, because evil men abuse them, so does
the drunkard, drink, the glutton, meat, the proud, apparel, the covetous,
riches, and the evil men, all Gods graces: yet all these things are good, and
so is Gods word holy and undefiled. But now to the second point.

That only the Canonical books of the old and new Testament are this written
word or Scriptures. CHAP. 5
THE PROTESTANTS
Seeing that the rule of the Catholic faith must be known, De verbo dei lib.
1. cap. 2.
and certain, for if it be not known, it can not be a rule unto us, if not
certain, it is no rule at all, as Bellarmine has very well noted, and only
those scriptures which we according to the ancient use of the Primitive church,
and the common consent of those purer times, do call Canonical, are that sure
rule that can not deceive (for therefore have they that name, because they are
for trial of doctrines, as the rule or line for trial of works:) it is
certain that no other word can be that infallible word of God and certain rule
of faith and religion, but only the Canonical Scriptures. These only have
been of the godly Fathers accounted to have been written by those whom God
endued with his spirit for that cause: Council. Laodicenum ca. 59. Hieron. ad
Paulinum and prologo Galeato.
Out of these only the Fathers permit matters of controversy to be tried.
And in expounding of these that we call Canonical, they have bestowed their
godly labors: yea and them only to be certain, and such as were never
doubted of among Catholic men, De verbo dei lib. 1. cap. 4.
Bellarmine himself confesses, and it is a ground or principle acknowledged
of all men.

THE PAPISTS
Notwithstanding this name Canonical which the ancient fathers have given to
these Scriptures only, to testify that they are only the certain canon and
rule of faith, notwithstanding also such pre-eminence and excellency, Bellarm.
de verbo Dei li. 1. ca. 2. compared with that cap. 4.
as not the Fathers only, but themselves also do yield unto the Canonical
scriptures to be of all other the most certain rule, and most infallible
touchstone in all matters of controversy, the Council of Trent is not ashamed
to command (and that under pain of being accursed) to receive these books
that are contained in the Bible, with like reverence and devotion, and to make
them of as good credit as the canonical Scripture: I say, even those
Apocryphaes, in which are many things absurd, and whose very name shows them
to be unknown from whence they came, who were not found in the Hebrew, nor
accounted by the Jews to be Canonical. And so they do match that word, that
all men always, and even themselves acknowledge to be less certain, with
that which they know that no good man ever doubted of.

S. Hierome having reckoned up those books which now in our Bibles are
accounted canonical, and no other, ^ rologo in lib. Reg. qui Galeatus dicitur.
Ruffinus in symbol. prolog in Proverb.
has, Whatsoever is besides these must be put amongst the Apocrypha. Yea to be
short, they do allege them, because they may be read to the edifying of the
people, but not to confirm the authority of any ecclesiastical doctrine, as
saint Hierome says of Tobie, Judith, and the Machabees, and Ruffinus also
upon the Creed.

De doct^ ina christian. lib. 2. cap. 8.
The second argument is taken out of Augustine, because he reckons up the
books which we call Canonical, and also the Apocrypha, and calls all
Canonical. So does the third council holden at Carthage also, Cap. 47
with some other ancient writers. Augustine, and of those Fathers, shall their
bare authority without reason be heavy enough to weigh down so many fathers and
reasons, as (partly) I have alleged to the contrary, and might have alleged
many mo? But their meaning is plain enough. For although S. Augustine, and
that Council of Carthage, and others say, that all those books are canonical,
yet we must understand them according to their meaning. They divided all the
scripturs, that went in the name of scriptures, but into two parts. Those which
they called Apocrypha, De ciuit. Dei lib. 15. ca. 23 l^ b. 3. cap. 25 Eusebius.
had many fables, as may appear by saint Augustine: now all the rest they
called Canonical, so that they comprehend under that name, all that Eusebius
and others do understand, both by such books as were without all controversy
received of al men, and such as were not generally received of all, but well
liked of many. And they comprehend all these in one name, not only because that
in comparison of the other that were fabulous, these were good, but also
because they were read commonly of them, although not for establishing of any
doctrine, as before I have showed, yet for reformation of manners. And that S.
Augustines meaning was not, to make like account of all, appears not only by
that rule which himself sets down, in that very chapter, after he has
reckoned up those Books canonical, Those canonical books which are
generally (says he) received by the common consent of all Churches, De
doctrine christiana li. 2. cap. 8. 30
are to be preferred before them that are rejected of many (but of those whom
we call Apocrypha, Origin, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Melito, Hierome, Ruffinus,
and many other have doubted) but also by his practice. For it will appear how
that sometime himself doubts of some of them, which we deny to be canonical,
namely of the Machabees he writes thus against the second Epistle of
Gaudentius the Donatist, Lib. 2. cap. 23
This piece of Scripture of the Machabees, the Jews do not so account of as of
the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, unto the which the Lord gives
testimony as unto his own witnesses, saying, Al things must be fulfilled which
are written in the Law, the Prophets and the Psalms of me, but it is received
of the Church, not without profit, if it be read or heard soberly. Wherein
first I note, that the Jews, with whom the word of God was kept, before it
came to us, did not account it canonical. Secondly, note how he magnifieth the
witness of the scriptures which are indeed canonical, calling them the Lords
own witnesses: And thirdly, how coldly he intertaineth the books of
Machabees, saying, the church reads them, and that with profit, if they be
read soberly, by reason of some good examples in them. But yet more plainly in
his Books of the city of God. Lib. 18. c. 36.
The reckoning of time (from the restoring of the Temple) is not found in the
holy Scriptures that are called Canonical, but in other writings, amongst
which are the Books of the Machabees, which the Jews reckon not canonical,
but the church does, because of the extreme and strange sufferings of some
Martires. Wherein we see how that S. Augustine says, that we know not the
story of those times, after the temple was built by any canonical writer, but
yet by the Machabees we know it, therefore the Machabees are not canonical:
And yet the church accounts them (says he) canonical, because of the
examples of the Martyrs in them: As if he would have said, Although those
Books be not indeed such as you may build your faith upon, yet they are for
some things worth the reading. Which two places I stood upon the rather,
because Bellarmine alleges them, De verbo de lib. 1. cap. 15.
especially this latter, as a special pillar to hold up those Books of
Machabees. But how truly, let the Reader judge.

disprooue Gods word. And therefore is it so often repeated by Bellarmine
handling this point, That the Council of Trent has allowed such Books. De
verbo dei lib. 1. De ecclesia.
So that he iumpeth right with that which most blasphemously Eckius has set
down, and that twice within few lines (he liked so well of it,) That the
Scriptures are not authentical (or canonical,) without the authority of the
church. And Canus sets himself to make a full discourse against them, that
say, Lib 2. de locis Theol. ca. 6
That the Scripture needs not the approbation of the church. And thus they
must reason. The church has allowed those books to be canonical which you
call Apocrypha, according as did also the ancient fathers, therefore they are
canonical. 2. Tim. 3.16.
The whole scripture is given by inspiration from God. Therefore the scripture
is the word, not of man, but of God. Secondly, let us see how this word came to
us, whether by tradition of the church or by special revelation. Which also is
plainly answered by saint Peter, saying, 2. Pet. 1.21
that prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. What will we then say? shall we
imagine that God would direct by his holy Spirit the mouths of his servants to
speak, but not their pens to write? God forbid. Thirdly, the men whom it
pleased God to use as his means in setting down this word, were known unto
the church of that time wherein they flourished, and their calling so confirmed
unto the godly, that without all doubt or wavering they received those writings
as Gods word, because they knew the authors thereof to be directed by Gods
spirit.

And this is the difference that the ancient fathers do make, between those
Books of scripture, whose authors were known, and their books always
received, and

therefore called Canonical, that is, such as deliver rules for life and
doctrine that are infallible: and those other that are called Apocrypha,
because either it was not known who wrote them, or else it was not known that
they were endued with such a spirit, as they could not err in any thing. And
therefore their Books were not received of the church then. Is it not then
intolerable pride in the church of Rome, to command silence unto God
himself, and not to suffer him to speak, but when they give him leave, and to
proclaim it unto the world, that even his word is not of credit, unless it be
by their approbation and allowance of the same. And yet thus do they say when
they affirm, that the Scriptures are not Canonical, but by the approbation of
the Church. Yea, some make them no better than Esopes Fables, if the Church
allow not of them. O blasphemy intolerable! if this their argument might be
allowed, then the church of Rome, which falsely challenges to be the church,
Cause. 15. Quaest. 6. ca. Autoritatem. D^ st. 34. c. sector. did. 82. presbyt.
would soon prove their abominable Idolatries and heresies, to be true
religion. And therefore do they challenge this authority, and strive for it.
And the Pope sometimes dispenses against the Apostle, as their Canonists do
note, and sometimes a Council dispenses against the apostle, and all this is,
to challenge unto their church this prerogative, that it may deal with Gods
word as it will.

When Gregory the thirteenth pope of that name confirmed the order of the
fellowship of the blessed virgin Marie (a new devised order, and come up since
the order of Jesuits) in his Bull he confirms and ratifieth all such
privileges as they have or shall have, Notwithstanding any Constitutions or
Ordinances Apostolic, or whatsoever may be against it. Did you ever read or
hear any speak more like the beast mentioned in the Apocalips, Apoc. 13.5, 6
who had a mouth given unto him that spoke blasphemies? But to be short, I will
against their argument oppose this. Whatsoever scriptures are not given by
inspiration of God spirit, and by the godly received into the canon of the
scripturs, those are not the word of God, though they have the approbation of
the latter churches: but such are the Books which we call Apocrypha, which
the council of Trent would make of like authority with the canonical
Scriptures, therefore those Books are not the undoubted word of God. And how
can any body imagine, that that which once has been not canonical, can by
continuance of time, and confirmation of men become canonical, or that which
God has not vouched worthy to be his word in times past, that now at the
last he should acknowledge the same, as though he were now changed or had
repented him of his former opinion.

Admit once this doctrine of theirs, and farewell all certainty in religion.
For men will wander from one thing to an other, as we see in the kingdom of
darkness and Popery where there is no end of devotions devised, and
inventions of men. So that that which was good christianity in the days of
Christ and of his Apostles, is now holden to be far from the perfection of a
godly life, unless we do help it with our will-worshippings, and by the
obeying the precepts of the church. Nay, grant them this, and then that word
written that we have, it shall speak nothing but Romish, so that whatsoever
is the meaning and true sense of the scriptures, yet God must be taught to
speak as the church of Rome will have him. De verbo dei lib. 4. cap. 11.
To this end tends that common axiom received of them all, and used by
Bellarmine. The true sense of the Scripture hangs of unwritten traditions. So
that believe them, and they will easily confute any adversaries. For first they
allow for scripture what they will. Secondly, that which they must needs
confess to be Scripture, must be expounded by their unwritten Traditions.
That (I say) that is written by that which is unwritten, the certain by the
uncertain. Like to Procustes his bed, which who so lay in it, if he were too
long, he was cut shorter, if he were too short, he was stretched out longer. So
must all be made fit to their traditions. Seeing therefore the Canonical Books
have so manifest a testimony, not only of the godly, but even of the
adversaries themselves, and the credit of the Apocrypha by so great
authorities is suspect: I will conclude with bel^ armines words: ^
That he is not well in his wit, that not regard^ ng ^^ e Scripture, the surest
and safest rule, w^ ll refe^ re h^ mself to the judgment of the inward spir^ t
which is often deceitful, and always uncertain, as in truth the Papists do.
For they will make you believe that because they are guided by the holy Ghost,
they cannot err in their traditions. This rule then of Gods written word in
the Canonical books of the old and new Testament, being set down, as a rule
most sure to tr^ e all doctrines with, let us now proceed to examine other
matters in controversy among us, when I shall first have answered a common
objection, wherein all the most ignorant sort especially of Papists do
maruellously trust and triumph, and do therewith deceive others, such as them
selves are.

How shall I know the scriptures (say they) to be the scriptures, but by the
authority of the Church? I will not answer although I might very well) that
absurdly they call that in question, whereof there is no doubt among us. For
neither we nor they deny Gods word. It is known of all, it is received of us
all. Therefore they put case of that there is not, neither is likely to be
amongs us. But for their sakes that are ignorant, I answer plainly and shortly
out of Saint Augustine. Co^ fe^. li. 6. cap. 5.
Thou (Lord) have persuaded me, that they are blame worthy not who have
believed thy books, which thou have so settled almost in all nations, but they
that have not believed them And that I should not hear them if perchance any
would say to me, How know thou that those books (the scripture) are given
to mankind, by the spirit of one, very, and most true God? Yea, Saint
Augustine there confesses, that when he was but a nouice in religion, yet was
he persuaded, that God would never have made the whole world so to reverence
the Scriptures, but that he meant to be believed in them, and to be sought out
by them. We see then by saint Augustine, that not only that common account
that the whole world (not the Church only) makes of the Scriptures, should be
sufficient to stop our mouths for asking that question; but also that he flatly
tells us, that God would not have us to hear such faithles and fruitles
objections. But I know, they will by and by come upon me with that place of
Augustine, Cont. epist. (...). c. 5.
I would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Church should
move me thereto. Out of which, they will perchance conclude as grossly, as you
heard Eckius has done, That the Scripture it self has no credit, but as the
Church will bestow it upon the same. But Melchior Canus a learned Papist does
gather otherwise out of that place, and does in deed truly answer this common
objection for us, out of the said words of S. Augustine, concluding thus.
Therefore it teaches not, Locor. Theo, lib. 1. cap. ^.
that believing the Gospel is grounded upon the authority of the Church, but
only that there is no sure way, whereby either Infidels or Nouices in faith
may come to the holy Scriptures, but the consent of the Catholic Church. Yea,
he has taught a little before in that Chapter, that although to have faith,
certain external means and helps are required, yet those move us nothing,
without the working of Gods holy spirit. And he much misliketh of them that
teach, that our faith must rest upon that point, That we believe that the church
is true, or cannot err. For thereupon he gathers this absurdity, that our
faith should be grounded upon the truth, not of God but of man. He also plainly
affirms, that if a man should ask, how the faithful do know that God has
revealed that which they believe? they cannot answer by the authority of the
Church, but it is by the inward light of Gods spirit that they know the same.
If now thou ask me how I know the Scriptures to be the Scriptures, I answer
out of Canus, not by the authority of the Church, but by the motion of Gods
spirit, and witness thereof. If thou urge that place of Augustine, Canus
tells thee that they who are become Christians, are not so brought to believe
the Scriptures but only Infidels, and Nouices in religion. So that this place
serves nothing to object against us, who profess Christianity already, and
believe the word which the Manichies did not, of whom, and to whom Saint
Augustine there writes. But we had need out of that place to admonish you,
that in respect of that reverence which with one consent all that profess
Christianity do yield unto the scriptures, you would be ashamed so to deprave
and despise them, so to abuse and reject them at your own pleasure, as you
always have done. You make unlawful that which God has mad lawful: as for
example: It was lawful in the Apostles time, for every Priest, Dion. Carth.
1. Tim. 3.
Bishop, and Deacon to have one wife, but now by the appointment of the Pope
they may not have a wife, says a friend of your own, a bird of your own
nest. So that not the scripture, or the will of God, but the word of the Pope
must be the rule of our life: so that whereas Augustine for the Church believed
the scriptures, you for your Churches sake control the scriptures, and disobey
them. And for the establishing of that undue honor which they would bestow
upon the most happy mother of Christ the virgin Mary: Mark the boldness of
Durand, a great pillar in the Popish Church, Rathon^. di^. li. 4. rub. 6.
who writes thus. Although it is said (in the Scriptures) that Christ rising
did first appear to Marie Magdalen, yet it is more truly believed, that first
of all he appeared to his mother. Is it not plain, how that to establish their
foolish toys, he gives the lie to that word that is only true? O gross
boldness! Seeing therefore this word has not only testimony within us
which is the strongest witness, but also with so great consent is known to be
Gods word, be ashamed now to call it into question, or to put it to the trial
of the Church (by which the Papists always understand the Romish Church)
whether it shall be allowed for current or not. For in deed this blasphemous
sense (which as I have showed, even their own friends can in no wise like of)
is now the common exposition of those words of S. Aug. I will not believe the
scriptures, unless the Church of Rome do allow the Books for Canonical, and
expound them as she shall think good. And thus much to answer this their
common objection.

What the Catholic Church is, that is mentioned in the Creed. CHAP. 6
THE PROTESTANTS
WE say with the Apostle Saint Paul, that the catholic church which is spoken
of in the Creed, s. Tim. 3.
Is the house of God, the pillar and ground of truth. And with the fathers,
that it is the company of all the faithful of all times, and of all places.
And with Saint John, The Bride of the Lamb, Apoc. 21, 9.
and the body of Christ. And therefore that the wicked and faithless are not
of this Church, nor can be counted of this company.

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of Rome to get a Catholic Church, admit good and bad to be of
their Church, namely reprobates, wicked, Bellar. de Eccle. li. 3. cap. 2.
and ungodly ones. Neither do think that they need any inward virtue to be
of their Church, but only that they profess religion, and be under the Pope.
Well may they in some sort seem to have a Catholic Church, because all is
fish that comes into their net, but holy and apostolic it shall not be, nor
Catholic as in the Creed is meant.

Wherein this is worthy to be reproved in them, that whereas they cry out in
word and writing, The Catholic church of Rome, and unless you believe the
Catholic Church, you cannot be saved. And for proof hereof they allege this
article, I believe the Catholic church, yet when they should tell us what this
Catholic church is, whereunto we must so necessarily be subject, they only
paint unto us I know not what Romish Church, The catholic church in ye Creed,
and the Romish contrary.
which is no more like the true Catholic church, than that church of Israel,
when it was started aside from the true worship of God, was like to the true
church of God that remained amongst the people of the Jews, as by these few
reasons may appear. The catholic church is One, One
that is to say, one company, and united and knit together by one spirit, and
the self same graces, but the reprobate and ungodly (who fill up a place in
the Romish catholic church) neither are one company with the Saints, nor
united to them by the same spirit and graces, to be partakers of the communion
of Saints: Therefore that catholic and the Romish catholic Church are not all
one. Secondly, that Church is Holy, Holy
and that not in part, but perfectly, even without spot or wrinckle. Ephe.
5.26.27
For in our Creed we do not speak of the church that is, but that shall be, not
that which we see with our eye, but by faith, not that which is perfected, but
hoped for, which we shall not in deed behold with our eyes, Revel. 21
until it come down from heaven, as saint John speaks of the heavenly
Jerusalem, Apoc. 11
which (as witnesses saint Ambrose) does represent the Church that shall be
after the end of the world. Apoc. 21
Of which mind is also saint Augustine. But the Romish catholic church is of
omnigatheroms, as people go to faires or markets, of all sorts and qualities.
And although a man have not one good thing in him, not one crum of honesty,
he is good enough to make up a number in the Church of Rome, but such a church
is not holy, and therefore not that that is mentioned in the Creed. Thirdly
that church is catholic, Catholic.
that is (as all the godly have acknoledged it) the mother of all Christians,
the company of all the saints both in heaven and upon earth. But the Romish
catholic church receives only them that acknowledge the bishop of Rome to be
their head. If then they dare not affirm the pope to be the head of them that
are in heaven, I trust they will not from henceforth charge us to be injurious
to the church of Rome, if we affirm it not to be the true catholic church.
If they reply, that the church may be called catholic in other respects than
in that only which I have mentioned. I grant it. But the question amongst us
in deed is, whether the church of Rome be the true catholic church, which even
by our creed we are bound to believe. Which the papists affirm, and therefore
would have the world to imagine that we despise the catholic church which is
mentioned in the creed, when we upon just causes depart from that Romish
church, which has set it self, these many years against Gods church. As for
the principal arguments whereby they would prove that they say, do nothing touch
the catholic church, which is the thing in question, but only the state of the
church in this life, and therefore are not worthy the repeating. But among
other absurdities which they are forced to grant, for to defend this their
untrue assertion, this is blasphemous, although they all defend it, That some
of the members of Christ's body shall not be saved. As though there were not
virtue enough in Christ, to quicken all them that are grafted into him, whereas
in truth, He that has the son has life. That is also absurd, that if the
wicked and reprobate be of the church of Christ, as they say, the^ they are
members of two bodies, for they are of the church malignant, as they must needs
confess: which is as false as that one hand may belong to two men. Lastly how
absurd is it that the catholic church should acknowledge the Pope for her
head? She is a city or house, she can therefore have but one foundation: she
is a fruitful Vine, she can have but one root: she is a Dove, she can have
but one mate: she is Christ's body, she can have but one head: she is the
Lambs bride, she can have but one husband. The foundation of this house, the
root of this Vine, the mate of this Dove, the head of this body, Ephesians. 1. and.
5.
the husband of this wife, is Christ. Although most impudently the Bishop of
Rome, and most blasphemously, do take upon him to be the husband to that
wife also, C. quoniam, de Immunitate. 6.
or else, to take Christ's wife from him. We (says he) being unwilling to
neglect the upright dealing or justice of us, and of the Church our spouse.
What greater blasphemy than this can there be? Saint Paul says, 2. Cor.
11.2.
I have prepared you for one husband, not for two, and he names him to be
Christ, who though he be absent, yet is he also present, absent in flesh, but
present in power and spirit, and so will he be always with his, Math. 28.20
Iho. 14.16.17.18
even unto the end of the world. So that the church has no need of that
ministerial head, that cannot be but in one place at one time: seeing
Christ's spirit is his Vicar in his church, Ter. prescipt.
which can be in all places at once, as the church is scattered in many places
through the whole world.

That the catholic Church mentioned in the Articles of our belief, is not
visible, or to be seen. CHAP. 7
THE PROTESTANTS
BEcause the Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, is that heavenly
Jerusalem that is mother of us all, Gal. 4.26
and comprehends (as S. Augustine says) not only that part that wandreth
upon earth, Enchir. ca. 56.
from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same, but that also
that is in heaven: And the company of Christians for the time in earth, is not
the universal Church, but is only a small part thereof, In the preface to his
book of Images.
(as Sander a papist confesses:) It follows that that Church which is spoken
of in the Creed, is not that small flock that wa^dreth here in this world: And
so consequently, that that catholic Church, because the far greatest part
thereof is in heaven (and so not to be seen) cannot be seen of us. And for
that cause are we taught, to say, I believe the holy Catholic Church, but
things that are seen, are not, nay cannot be believed. For, faith is the
ground of things that are hoped for, Heb. 11.1
and the evidence of things that are not seen. Therefore, either must we deny
I believe the holy Catholic Church, to be an Article of our faith, or else
must it be confessed, that the Catholic Church is invisible.

THE PAPISTS
But that whorish Romish Church, which has nothing to commend her, but an
outward painting, that consists of worldly glory (where as the glory of
Christ's true spouse is chiefly inward) and a show of succession in the chair
of them that were known to be good men, Psalm. 45.5^
but not in their faith and godliness: least that men should seek to know the
Church by the word, which is that only infallible mark that our savior Christ
gives, John 10.3, 4 5.27 Ephe. 2.20 De vnitate Eccles. cont. Petil. ca. 10
and likewise Saint Paul to the Ephesians, and Saint Augustine does highly
commend the same, so that if he err from the true Church, seeing Christ has
given him so good a mark of her, he confesses himself to be too blame for
it. Least that (I say) men should occupy them selves in this word written,
seeking to find the Church there, this seducing sinagogue does bear us in
hand, that the true Church must be glorious to the eye, and easy to be seen,
and that there is no other Catholic Church but such a one. And then they
know, that there is not in all the world such a one, that makes so fair a
show to be found, but only that of Rome, which is lively described by Saint
John, Revel. 17.
in the Apocalips.

And although this is a common principle in the Catholic Church, and in every
bodies mouth, That the Catholic church is visible, which Campion in his third
reason, and Turrian against Sadeel, Camp. rat. 3.
do manifestly affirm. Yet I know not how it comes to pass, that even the
greatest pillars of popery, do not so much as define the Catholic church, and
deal (as I think) in this question very fearfully, as may appear, not
only by Melchior Canus in his fourth book, Loc. Theolo. de eccle. milit. ^^
b. 3. cap. 12.
but especially by Belarmine, who appointing a whole Chapter for proof of this
point, yet dares not, in the very title of the Chapter, set down that is in
question, that is to say, that the catholic Church is visible, (for so they
say) but only this is the title of that chapter, that the Church is visible.
Which if he mean it of particular Churches, we say also that they may be
visible: If he mean it of the catholic Church, which is the thing in
question, why is he afraid to say so? Surely even his own conscience told
him, that of all the arguments that he has in that place, there is not one,
out of which he may conclude, That the Catholic Church, catholic (I say) in
that sense that I have proved it to be taken in the Creed, is, or can be
visible to us in this world. And therefore craftily he leaves the question,
and falls to other matters. I therefore see no cause why I may not truly and
boldly conclude, Apoc. 21, 2, 9
that that Heavenly Jerusalem, and bride of the Lamb, that spouse of Christ
mentioned in the Apocalips, which in deed Saint John saw but by vision only,
is the same catholic church that we speak of in the Creed: but whilst we
wander here we can not see it, but by faith only. But when Christ our head
and captain shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power, 1.
Cor. 15.24
then shall the glory of the Church in deed appear, then shall she be
exalted above the mountains, In Apoc. Hom. 18
as Saint Augustine confesses. Yea, then shall the Church be made perfectly
catholic, when no member shallbe wanting unto it. Then shall the godly, not by
faith as now, but even with their renewed eyes see her, and her beauty.

The Church here militant upon the earth, may err. CHAP. 8
THE PROTESTANTS
ALthough that part of the catholic Church which is already entered into her
Masters joy, Mat. 25.21
cannot err, yet this part that is here upon the earth, because it consists
of men, who are subject to infirmities, neither are they endued with the
spirit, but in some measure, neither is it conversant or remaining, but in the
valley, not of misery only, but of ignorance also: it therefore may be subject
unto errors for a time, although it shall never be quite overcome of the same.
For their errors shall be either of small importance, or short continuance.

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of Rome would make us believe their garden will bring forth no
weeds. And that the ignorant might with reverence receive and believe
whatsoever they say, with great confidence they sound it every where, that the
church of Rome cannot err. And by the church they do not mean all (for they
will not so much esteem of the lay people) but the Bishops, yea the Pope
himself although he but one man, yea, and many times a most vile and lewd
man, yet they will in no wise that he may err, speaking iudicially in matters
of faith.

Now, for the Arguments whereby they would uphold their error, the first sort
is grounded upon some places of Scripture, wrested and abused for their
purpose, as, when the Scriptures promise the assistance of Gods spirit, to
teach us, or direct us. And of these some are more particular than other.

Luke 22.32
Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith should not fail,
therefore Peter could not err. And if Peter could not err, neither his
successors (as they surmise. Ver. 57, 58, 60
) Mat. 26.74
Shall we then say, that Christ was not so good as his promise? God forbid.
Christ therefore prayed not that Peter might not err at all, or that his faith
might not any thing faint, but that it might not altogether fail. Or, to use
the words of Theophilact, Theo. Lu. 22
That if the leaf of his faith did fall, yet the root should not die. Christ's
prayer therefore was not that Peter should not err, but that he should not
continue in error, and so it prevailed. And therefore here is no privilege
for the church of Rome, or the Pope, that they may not err, because we see
Peter himself had no such privilege. Neither was this prayer of Christ's, for
Peter only, as is most plain by the Evangelist saint John, John 17.20
I pray not for them only, but for all that through them shall believe in my
name. It was therefore for all the Apostles, yea for all the believers.
Although Christ spoke there particularly to Peter, (as Theophilact says)
perchance, because he was bolder than the rest, In Luke 22
and proud because of that was said unto him. And by this that has been
said, appears the answer to the other places of the scripture that seem
more general.



In John 16
Theophilact in my judgment most notably shows, that when Christ had
promised to send the holy Ghost which should lead into al truth, least any body
should thereby imagine that the holy Ghost is greater than Christ, if it can
make us partakers of greater and mo things than Christ can, he adds, He
shall not speak of himself, that is, he shall speak nothing of his own, but
that is mine. For he that says (he shall speak) whatsoever he has hard, does
signify, that he shall teach nothing but that which Christ has taught. And
these are the very words of Theophilact, whereby he does not only say, that
the holy Ghost can add nothing of his own to that which Christ has taught,
and so may not bring into the church any new doctrines, as the church of Rome
does under this color, but also, that it is a diminishing of Christ's glory,
and a preferring of the holy Ghost before Christ, to suppose that the holy
Ghost can or may teach any thing in Gods church that has not bin taught by
Christ himself. Wherein he mightily beats down that proud brag of the
church of Rome, whereby they seek to exempt themselves from all error, because
they falsely challenge unto themselves, that their doctrines and traditions are
unwritten verities, and to be believed as well as Gods word, as coming from
this spirit, whereas they are nothing consonant to that which Christ taught,
and therefore the spirit had no commission to teach the same. Yea in vain
they say they are directed by Gods spirit, when as they teach that that Gods
spirit neither can nor will teach, because Christ has not taught it before.
Neither do we derogate any thing herein from the power of the spirit, whose
direction if we could follow, we should never do amiss: but impute it to our
own weakness, and ignorance, and corruption, whereby it comes to pass, that
even the godly many times grieve Gods spirit, and suffer him not to have his
perfect work. Other arguments also they have, but they have scarce any show of
truth, and therefore I think them not worthy answering: for their places out
of the fathers do commend the faith of Rome that then was, and their
constancy in the same, but what is that to this degenerate church of Rome that
now is: of the church whereof we may say as one says of their city, that a
man will seek Rome in the midst of Rome: So a man will seek the church even
in the midst of their most show of religion, and yet not find it.

Of the marks of the Church, or how we may know the true Church. CHAP. 9.
THE PROTESTANTS
WE must judge of the tree of the church, by the fruits that she brings
forth, that is, by the faith or religion that she teaches, the confession or
profession of the same that she makes, the exercise of the same that she
uses, but we cannot judge truly of these her fruits, but only by the
scriptures as in the five first chapters has been showed: therefore the true
and infallible tokens or marks of the true church, are to be had out of the
word of God, or the Scriptures.

THE PAPISTS
Now the Papists will have their church to be the true church, because she
has (by unjust claim) a good name to be called Catholic, Name catholic.
Antiquity. Continuance. Greatness Succession
because she is ancient, and has lasted long, she is great, and has always
borne fruit, such as it was: for these are the first five notes reckoned up by
Bellarmine, Lib. 4. de notis eccles.
and indeed their chiefest, which especially they rest upon. And may not an
evil tree have all these properties? Yes verily. And as for the rest of his
marks, in the judgment of an indifferent Reader, they will never be accounted
true marks of the Church, excepting those notes wherein he seems to consent
with us, to try the church by the word, namely, by holiness of doctrine.

Because I have in another treatise showed (I trust) sufficiently, that those
marks of the church which they make greatest account of, neither are any true
marks, and that we may make as good claim to them as they can: it shall now
be sufficient briefly to pass over this point, and with one or two arguments
to answer this question.

The scripture the true note of the true church.
Those marks of the church, whereby we may truly know the church, and not be
deceived, those I say only are the true marks of the church:

But the scriptures only are such: Therefore they only are the infallible
marks.

The mayor or first proposition no man will deny. And that the Scriptures are
such may appear by infinite testimonies. De pec. merit. and remiss. lib. 1.
cap. 22.
Saint Augustine says, it can not deceive, nor be deceived. And against the
Donatists de bapt. lib. 2. cap. 6. calls the Scriptures, the holy wey-scales
or balances. Cap. 1.
And in his book de bono viduitatis, he says, that the holy scripture does
set him his rule how to teach. And to be short, writing upon saint John's
Epistle he says, that Against deceitful errors, In Ioh. epist. tractatu 2.
God would set a strength or stay in the scriptures. And Chrysostom says upon
Genesis, Hom. 12. in Genes.
that the Scripture will not suffer him to err or go astray, that hears it.
And therefore Gregory Nazianzene sometimes calls the Scriptures, The Kings
high way. Matthew. 24.
And our savior Christ, although he foretold the danger of error a little before
he suffered, yet does he not give the Disciples any such marks whereby they
should know the true Christ or true church, as the Papists speak of, but he
earnestly commends his word unto them, Ioh. 14.15, 23. and 15.7. And
fervently prays unto his father to sanctify them with his truth, Ioh. 17.3,
17
namely, with his word: for he knew that to be the way to keep them from
error. By all which it appears, that the scriptures only are accounted that
perfect rule, not only by the judgment of the fathers, but also by the
practice of our savior Christ. But most plainly S. Chrysostom. says, Opere
imperf. hom. 49
That the true Church can be known only by the Scriptures. I know that
Bellarmine answers this place in his 4. book de verbo Dei, ca. 11. after two
sorts. First, that the book sauoureth somewhat of Arianisme. But in these
words, what Arianisme can Bellarmine find. Yea Bellarmine himself does in
other places allege this book. But his second answer I confess is very
forcible. For he tells us, that in a book printed of late that place is left
out. Have they not (think you) answered the place strongly, when they have
thrust it quite out of the book? If they had used Chrysostom only in this,
sort yet were it too bad dealing, but it may appear by Franciscus Iunius his
preface before the book called Index Expurgatorius, that they have left few of
the Fathers uncorrupted. I would to God therefore that this and such other
gelding and falsifying of the fathers, by that deceiving church of Rome, which
seeks to make them al say as she does, could stir up the christian princes
that profess religion in a godly care, to provide for the safety and
maintenance of religion, and the truth thereof in time to come. Which in my
judgment can not well be performed, except that, to prevent the credit of
those falsified copies, which within short time are almost only like to
remain, because the ancient, which are the truest, will be worn out, the godly
Princes by common consent would take some speedy order for printing of all the
fathers, according to the ancientest and most pure copies that might be found.
The second argument is this. Whatsoever notes do not teach it to be evidently
true, that the church whereof they are the notes, is the true church of God,
may deceive, and therefore are not certain notes of the true church: But such
are the notes that the Papists would have us to believe, therefore they are but
deceitful notes. De verbo de^. lib. 1. cap. 2.
The mayor or first proposition is most true, and may well be proved out of
that axiom or rule that Bellarmine sets down, saying, De notis eccles. li.
3. ca. 3.
That the rule of the catholic faith must be sure or certain. The minor or
second proposition, is Bellarmines own confession, even in the self same
words that I have set down. Therefore it follows necessarily, that we must
not trust the notes of the catholic church set down by them.

CHAP. 10.
Before I begin to set down the difference in doctrine between the church
of Rome and us, concerning those Sacraments which we acknowledge to be
instituted for Sacraments by God, which is indeed my especial purpose, that
in few words the Reader may take a view, both of the one and the other, I have
thought good, very briefly, to note unto you two or three points, wherein in
the general doctrine of the Sacraments, we justly dissent from them, because
they do dissent from the word of truth. Wherein, my purpose is not to enter
into the dark and dangerous subtilties of the Schoolmen, who herein agree
not among themselves: but only to point unto the plain truth, and the
falshoode contrary to the same.

What a Sacrament is, what is the effect of it, or what it works, how many
Sacraments there are.
THE PROTESTANTS
What a sacrament is
A Sacrament is an external sign instituted and appointed of God, to be used
in his Church, by the receiving whereof every faithful man and woman, is
assured of eternal graces. I know that this word Sacrament may be taken more
largely, and is sometimes, especially by saint Augustine, and after his time,
but this is the true definition of a Sacrament in that sense that we use it,
for the two Sacraments used by us in our churches. And though we call it a
sign, yet we say withal, that it is a very effectual, and (as I may so call
it) a powerful sign, A powerful sign to increase or strengthen faith.
to strengthen and increase our faith, and make us take more sure hold of the
promises, the perfourmance whereof the Sacraments do (as it were) seal up in
our hearts: neither does the sacrament work this, or has this effect, in
respect of any virtue that is included in these visible signs, but because God
has appointed them to be the seals of his promises, as the Apostle witnesses
of circumcision, and Tertull. De Poeniten. Romans 4.11
of Baptism. For as the seal being set to the writing, does assure him to
whom the writing is made, of the perfourmance of such covenants as therein are
contained, and yet not because of the print in the wax, but because it is
known to be his seal who has made the covenants with him: even so the
Sacraments do serve to confirm and increase faith in the faithful, not
because there is any such power in those visible creatures, which are the
external thing in the same, but because we are assuredly persuaded, that God
has appointed them to that end. And as the Sacraments do thus serve to
strengthen and increase our faith, Profession of our faith.
so thereby also do we make profession of this our faith, and in token that we
have this persuasion settled in our heart, we come to receive such Sacraments,
as God has appointed to testify between him and us, of his graces toward
us. And for this cause, when the Eunuch desired to be baptized, Phillip
answered, Act. 8.36, 37
If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may. Nay, the Sacraments are but
unprofitable to them, which without faith do receive the same, Mar. 16.16.
but he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. We therefore do not teach
the Sacraments to be but bare signs (as some would make the simple to
believe, but that they are such signs as God has made to work effectually by
the power of his Spirit, in the hearts of the faithful, to assure them of
Gods good graces. Now of such Sacraments as in the beginning I have defined,
we have but two, How many Sacraments there be.
that is to say, Baptism, wherein we are entered into Christ's family, and the
Supper of the Lord, wherein we are nourished in the same. For although the
people of Israel had many representations of Gods favor toward them, to
assure the faithful of sanctification and justification, yet Circumcision was
commanded without exception, Genesis 17.10
to all the males (in who^ also the women were consecrated to the Lord) and the
eating of the paschall Lamb, belonged to all the congregation of the children of
Israel, Exodus 12.47.
whereas their other ceremonies were for the most, performed by the Priest. And
in like manner although we may have sundry visible signs of invisible grace,
yet such sacraments as the sacrament of Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord,
neither the scriptures, nor the fathers for 400. years after Christ did
acknowledge any other than those two. For as for Saint Augustine, he takes the
word Sacrament so largely that he accounts for Sacraments many things that
are not by the Papists themselves accounted Sacraments.

THE PAPISTS
BUT the Papists do define a Sacrament to be, Council. Trid. Catechis.
A thing subject to the senses, which by Gods institution, has power both to
signify, and to work, Holiness and Righteousness. So that by this it is
easy to understand what virtue and efficacy they will give to the Sacraments.
Yea, it is by Bellarmine plainly confessed, that they teach a Sacrament to
have that strength of it self, De Sacram. lib. 1. cap. 11
that it can sanctify and justify. And that we may the better understand
what they mean hereby, De Sacram. lib. 2. cap. ^
with one consent they teach, and Bellarmine by name, that the Sacraments do
work these things without either faith, or any inward motion. So that their
meaning is, that the very work it self of receiving the Sacrament, even by
virtue of that sacramental action, Bellarm. de Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 2.
does give to the receiver grace. How blasphemous this doctrine is, may
appear, first, because they do manifest wrong to the spirit of
sanctification, in ascribing unto these visible and external creatures,
whereof the Sacraments do consist, that which only gods spirit can work in
us, by putting into our hearts, Ierem. 32.4^
the fear of God, Ierem. 31.33 Ezec. 36.25 Romans 15.9
and uniting his law in the same, and purifying our hearts by faith. And
therefore is this spirit called Holy, or the spirit of sanctification, because
it only can make holy. Secondly, to give unto the Sacraments power by the
virtue thereof to justify, is injurious unto the blood of Christ, which
precious ransom is able only to take away sins, and to make us appear just
and righteous before God. Then also this doctrine is absurd, as may be proved
in a word or two. If it be true that the Papists teach, then did not our
Savior Christ teach us the true use of the Sacrament, when he said, Do this
in remembrance of me, for he should rather have said, Do this to sanctify
and save your selves. But to think that Christ taught us not the true benefit
of the Sacrament, is too gross wickedness: Therefore is it very absurd, to
ascribe that virtue to the Sacrament or outward sign. Secondly, if the
Sacrament do give grace (as they say) or, if it do sanctify or justify of it
self: then the infantes that die before they can sin actually, because they
are baptized, must needs be saved, although they be not of that number which
God has chosen unto himself before the foundations of the world were laid.
Which to affirm is nothing else, but to tie our salvation, Ephesians. 1.
not to Gods grace in electing in Christ whom he would, but to such external
means, as have always been accounted but helpers to our faith, as the
Apostle teaches by the example of Circumcision in Abraham, To. 4.10, 11.
but no workers of salvation. And to be short, how agrees this that they say,
that the Sacrament has strength or force to work Holiness or Righteousness,
with that which they also say, That infants when they are baptized, De Sacram.
Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 11.
have not any new motions or inclinations like unto the actions of faith and
love. If the Sacraments work not in them such effects, who have not any
actual sin to let or hinder, how shall we think they work in others that are
strongly assaulted with the lusts of sin? Therefore let us not ascribe such
working unto them, but unto Christ, who is made unto us righteousness and
holiness. 1. Cor. 1.30
As for the number of seven Sacraments, two of them we acknowledge, with the
Fathers of the Primitive church, Baptism and the Lords Supper. As for the
other five, either they have no commandment in the word, or no visibl signs,
or, to be short, no warrant in the word, or Primitive church, to be such
Sacraments as the other two are. Although we deny not but the things have had,
and many of them yet have their godly use in Gods Church.

Of the Sacrament of Baptism. CHAP. 11.
THE PROTESTANTS
WE acknowledge Baptism to be, as it were a Gods-peny, and earnest of our
entrance into Christ's family. Wherein we are both fully assured, that (by the
blood of Christ, which is figured by that water) our sins are so washed away,
that they shall not be imputed unto us: and also the promise of that spirit
of regeneration whereby we grow to be new men, is sealed up in our hearts, so
that therein the faithful are ingraffed into Christ, to be made partakers of
al his treasures, and namely, that he may be unto us sanctification and
redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30.
And as therein our faith is thus norished, so is it also a public
testification and witnessing of our profession, so that we do, not only
believe with our heart unto righteousness, but also show that we are not
ashamed of the gospel of Christ, and for that cause we wear that badge of our
profession, and cognizance of our religion.

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of Rome, lest we should (constantly believing the promises, and
using the Sacraments according to Christ's institution) take sure hold of Jesus
christ, and to acknowledge our salvation to be by him only, in whom the word
and Sacraments send us to seek it: teaches us, that the very Sacrament of it
self has such force and virtue, as that it does extinguish and quite abolish,
Andrad. Orthod. Explic. lib. 3.
not only the danger and condemnation (the reward due to sin,) but also
the very corruption of the same. And on the contrary, that the very infants
that die before they be baptized, Bellarmine de purgat. lib. 2. cap. 6
have their place of torment appointed unto them, where they must be purged.
So that as they give the power of killing sin in us unto the Sacrament, which
only belongs unto Christ; Romans 6.
so in this latter point they do in a manner make Christ scant able for to
save without the sacrament, and teach sin by other means than by Christ only
to be purged.

De sacr. baptism. li. 1. ca. 4
Now, the first reason whereby Bellarmine will proo^^, that the Sacrament of it
self has such force, of th^^ (...) does work in us holiness, and abolish
sin, and therefore, that without it no man or woman can be saved, is that
place of saint John, Ioh 3.5
Unless a man be borne again of Water and of the Spirit, he can not enter
into the kingdom of God. And for the better credit of his assertion, he
tells us, De peccatorum merit. and remiss. lib. 1. cap. 30.
that saint Augustine in his first book of the merits of sins, and the
forgiveness thereof, the thirtieth chapter, does show, that these words are
not a commandment, but declare the means of salvation: as though saint
Augustine would make the Sacrament as necessary to salvation, as meat for our
life, or physic for recovery of health, for these are the examples alleged
afterward by Bellarmine. But he belieth that learned father, for he has not
any such thing in that place, although indeed he handle that place of
scripture largely there.

But first before I enter any further into the consideration of this point,
lest I should be mistaken, as though I accounted the Sacrament of no
necessity, I affirm it to be so necessary, that if it may be had according
unto Christ's institution, and any man or woman shall wilfully refuse the same,
by this their contempt they do wilfully cut off themselves from the body of
Christ, and so make themselves incapable of such graces as God in Christ
bestows upon his. But if otherwise any man, woman, or child, being desirous
to enter into the fellowship of the holy covenant, and to be incorporated by
that Sacrament into the presence of Christ, shall die or depart out of this
life, before they can attain thereto: God forbid that we should think either
so uncharitably of them, as to judge them unworthy of Gods mercy: or so hardly
of God, as that he would alter his eternal council, for want of this
external sacrament: or so slenderly of the virtue of Christ his blood, as that
without this water it can not wash us from sin. No doubt many died in the
wilderness, before the Israelites came to the land of promise, that had not
the sacrament of circumcision, and also afterward, by all likelihoode, in
Babylon. The thief upon the cross, of whose salvation we make no doubt, was
not baptized. Yea, the order that God uses in saving us, does teach us, that
without the Sacraments we may be saved, Romans 8.30 Ephesians. 1.4
because that election or predestination goes before calling, whether it be
internal by the spirit, or external by the word and Sacraments. Therefore we
must either imagine Gods election not to be certain, which is blasphemous, or
else, that all that are elect are saved, although they have not opportunity to
receive that external seal of Gods covenant. Therefore I say, that Baptism
is very necessary, and in any wise to be used and received of them, that may
according to Christ's institution have the same. But we detest that doctrine of
the Papists, that teaches it to be so necessary, that whosoever is not
baptized, can not be saved: whereupon they permit lay men, yea women to
baptize, whereas the virgin Mary might not baptize, as Epiphanius notes,
haeres. 97. and so profane that holy sacrament in altering Christ's
institution. But rather we say with Tertullian de paenitentia, We are not
washed, that we may cease to sin, but because we have ceased to sin,
seeing in heart we are washed. Which words, because Bellarmine lib. 2 de
effect. sacrament. cap. 10. can not answer, he full wisely makes as if he
never saw them, and says nothing unto them.

And now to return to the Objection. Howsoever saint Augustine esteems of
the necessity of Baptism, he teaches with us the true use of Baptism,
against the Papists, even in the book alleged by Bellarmine, speaking of the
infants he says thus: Lib. 1. ca. 26.
They stand in need of those benefits of the Mediator, That they being
offered by the Sacrament and charity of the faithful, and so being
incorporate into the body of Christ which is the Church, may be reconciled unto
God: that they may be made in him living, safe, delivered, redeemed, and
lightened. Mark that Saint Augustine most plainly ascribes unto the
sacrament, to offer and incorporate us into the church, but to God (not to the
sacrament) to quicken, save, deliver redeem, and lighten us. And seeing we
see, that S. Augustine in the place alleged by Bellarmine, makes nothing for
him, but in the same book in an other place makes much against him: let us
see what other of the ancient Fathers do gather out of that place of saint
John, whether they reason out of it as Bellarmine does. Chrysostom out of
this place shows, Homil. 24 in Ioh.
that in that water spoken of there is represented unto us our Burial,
Mortification, Resurrection, life, and adds: As it is an easy thing for us
to be dipped in, and being pulled out to breathe again, even so is it for God
to bury our old man, and to put on us the new man. And hereby thou may
understand, that the virtue of the Father, the Son, and of the holy Ghost
fulfilleth all these things. What can be more plain than these words of
Chrysostom, to teach us, that this working virtue is ascribed unto God, and
nothing at all to the Sacrament, Theophilact. in Ioh. 3.
as the Papists teach us. And yet Theophilact is more plain, Even as in this
bodily seed Gods grace works all: even so in Baptism the Water is but an
underling, and it is the Spirit that works all. So that I cannot see how
this ancient Father, if he had directly spoken against this popish doctrine,
whereby they ascribe so much virtue unto the Sacrament, could have used (if
he had lived in our time) more effectual words to reprove the same. If then
we grant that that place speaks of Baptism, as many of the Fathers have
thought, yet that which the Papists infer thereupon follows not, for we
see, the working of grace is only attributed to the spirit of God, contrary
to that they do teach. Bellarm de Sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 3
For they will needs have us to believe, that the Sacrament it self by
receiving of it, gives grace. But good reasons may be yielded, why by water in
that place, the water of Baptism can not be meant. First, because our savior
Christ spoke there to Nicodemus, who knew nothing of the principles of
religion, and therefore Christ teaches him, that we have not in our selves any
thing to work our salvation, but we must be borne anew. It is unlikely that
our savior Christ would instruct him of the necessity of baptism, who as yet
never knew the promises, which in baptism are sealed up unto us. Secondly,
Verse 6.
Christ going about afterward to explane his meaning, in the next verse
makes mention of the spirit only, and not of the water, whereas if he had
spoken of baptism, and had made it of such absolute necessity, that in no
case a man might be saved without it, he would not have left it out in that
place, especially where he shows how we are borne anew. Thirdly, that which
is done in the sacramental water, may very well be perceived both of them that
feel it, and of them that see it, or hear it: but this new birth that is
spoken of in that place, how it is wrought a man can not perceive, as our
savior Christ tells us: Therefore by likelihoode, Verse 8.
not the water of baptism is there spoken of, but that water which God
promises by his Prophet Ezechiel, and is called, Ezec. 36.24.
the clean water, because of that notable cleansing and holiness, which no
material water, be it never so excellent can work, but only Gods cleansing
spirit, that is, The clean water there spoken of. And this is the only
argument out of the scriptures which Bellarmine has for the necessity of
Baptism. But in his second book, where he speaks of the sacraments in
generally what force they have, he alleges some more, Lib. 2. cap. ^ de
Sacram.
as that of saint John the Baptist.

He (speaking of Christ) baptizeth with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Matthew.
3.11
His reason is sufficiently answered, by gathering it into an argument. Christ
baptizeth with the holy Ghost: therefore baptism of it self gives grace. For
the question among us is, what virtue is in the Sacrament it self: and he
tells us what Christ can do in it. As if he should say, Christ, when he
healed him that was borne blind, made clay of spittle, and bade him go wash in
Siloam, Ioh. 9
therefore the clay put upon the eyes, and the water of Siloam, by their virtue
made him to see.

Mar. 16.16
Again, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. By this we may as
well conclude, that faith saves, (which in any wise the papists like not of)
as that baptism saves, for it is said of both indifferently. But let us mark
his argument again, that we may see how he proves his assertion. He that
is baptized, shall be saved, therefore the sacrament of baptism has of it
self that virtue to save. For this is it that he must prove. But see how
weakly he performs it. First, whereas Christ promises salvation to them
that believe, and are baptized, Bellarmine draws these words, to declare how
this salvation is wrought in us: which is not here handled. Secondly, Christ
speaks here of believing or faith, which directs us unto him, in whom our
salvation that is promised in the word, apprehended by faith, and sealed up in
the sacraments, is performed and perfected, that is, Christ Jesus. And how does
this prove the virtue of the sacrament in it self? The like is to be said of
that place that he brings out of the Acts, Acts 2.38
Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins. As for his last place out of the
scriptures, which is out of Peter, mark (I pray you) how he seeks to hide
the truth: saint Peter says, Baptism saves us by the resurrection of
Christ. 1. Pet. 3.21.
which makes nothing against us. But Bellarmine to make his argument seem
stronger, alleges only the former words, Baptism saves us, as though it
did so by it own virtue: and never makes mention of the latter words,
Through the resurrection of Christ, for that is against him, and shows from
whence baptism has her virtue and efficacy. And this being well considered,
it will perchance not be hard to answer unto much of that which they can say
for this their dangerous doctrine, That the Sacrament of it self, even by the
very receiving of it, gives grace to the receiver. And for the necessity
thereof, I have said before in this chapter, in the answer to the first
reason, so much as (I trust) may satisfy the godly Reader.

Of Confirmation. CHAP. 12.
THE PROTESTANTS
But as for Confirmation, as it was used in the Romish church, although we have
just cause to reject it, and much less can we account it a Sacrament, which
has neither commandment in the word, nor promise of spiritual graces: yet
we do not deny but that the people of God, in respect of their manifold
wa^ts, have great need continually to have their ignorance instructed, their
dullness reformed, their weakness strengthened, their godly endeavors bettered,
and their knowledge increased. And for this cause is it very needful, that
the children, which because they are infantes when they are baptized, can not
at their baptism yield account of their faith, should be taught when they
are older, the principles of religion, and make before the Bishop and other
present, profession of their faith, and that by godly exhortation they should
be moved openly to continue constantly in that holy profession, and God should
be prayed unto, to continue and increase his good graces in them. And this
holy Confirmation, I doubt not, would do much good in the Church, if it were
often used.

THE PAPISTS
BUT in steed hereof the church of Rome commends unto us a kind of
Confirmation that consists of a number of foolish and unprofitable
ceremonies. And to make it more readily and reuere^tly to be received, they
would persuade the ignorant, that it is a Sacrament. And not content therewith,
this devise of theirs they do highly commend, Bellarm. de sa. li. 2. ca. 28
as that It is more excellent than Baptism it self, in respect of the effect
of grace, because therein is given the fulness of the spirit: (mark their
blasphemy, for the fullness thereof is given to Christ only, to al us by
measure. Coloss. 1.19 Ioh. 3.34 Romans 12.3.
) And that it does consummate and perfect Baptism, Bellarm. li. 2. de Confir.
cap. 11.
and gives greater grace than Baptism does. What copper, or counterfeit coin
dare not these men commend unto us for good gold, who dare so confidently to
prefer the greasy devise of man, before the holy institution of Christ
himself? And make more account of that which themselves do confess to have no
warrant in Gods word, than of Christ's holy Sacrament.

De Sacram. confir. li. 2. cap. 2.
But let us consider how Bellarmine defends this, who for his learning is much
accounted of, and that worthily, amongst the papists, so that his want of
proof does plainly show the weakness of his cause. Whereas there are but
three things necessarily required in a Sacrament, as he truly confesses,
visible sign, promise of grace, and Gods commandment, (which much weakeneth
that which he said of the working power of the Sacraments, as appears in
the tenth chapter) he will prove, that confirmation has all these three. He
proves first, that this Sacrament (as he terms it) has promise of grace:
and why? Because the holy Spirit is promised.

Is not this clarkely handled, and strongly proved? God promises the holy
Ghost: therefore confirmation has the promise of grace. Secondly, the visible
sign is (says he) the laying on of the hands upon the head. But the popish
confirmation has not laying on of hands, neither is it necessary now a days,
by their own confession. Belarm. de confir. li. 2. cap. 13
For these are the ceremonies that do belong to that their Sacrament. First,
the Oil must be consecrated by prayer, secondly, by crossing: for without a
cross (says Bellarmine) nothing can be consecrated. Wherein Bellarmine gives
Saint Paul the lie, because he never spoke of the cross, when he said, 1.
Tim. 4, 4, 5
Every creature of God is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer: and
Bellarmine says, nothing is sanctified without the cross. But perchance he
will say that oil is none of gods creatures, as indeed, in respect of the use,
or rather abuse of it, it is not. Thirdly, the Bishop must breathe upon the
cruet or cup of oil. Fourthly, he must say to the oil, All hail holy oil. O
foolish blasphemy. Then are there other ceremonies, but not essential in this
Sacrament the Godfather, Certain prayers, thirdly the Pax, then a blow upon
the cheek, fifthly, A ragge tied about the forehead, sixthly, He must not wash
his forehead, for seven days. Think you this slouenly Sacrament has any such
grace as they would have us to believe that it has, when as they fear that
washing where the oil was, may hinder the virtue of it? seventhly, it must be
at Easter and Whitsuntide used; lastly, they that receive this Sacrament, must
be fasting. But of the laying on of hands there is no mention, unless you will
say, that he that gives him a blow upon the ear, lays his hands upon his
head. And as for that it is reckoned among the ceremonies that are not of the
substance of this sacrament. But Bellarmine in another place says, De effec.
Sacram. lib. 2 cap. 24.
that then is that ceremony of laying on of the hands performed, when the
Bishop makes the cross in the forehead. But that is not so: for the laying on
of hands was done upon the head, and was borrowed from the old law, of that
which they did unto the sacrifices when they brought them to be offered, they
did by that ceremony of laying their hands upon the head of the sacrifice,
consecrate (as it were) the same to the Lord. Number. 27, 24
And when God commanded Moses to consecrate Iosue to succeed him, and to
comfort and encourage him to the work that he had to do, he does lay his
hands upon his head. Mat. 19, 16 Acts 6.6 1. Tim. 4.14 2. Tim. 1.6
According to which example Christ laid his hands upon the children, and the
Apostles upon the deacons, and others, Acts 8.17. and the Elders, and Paul
upon Timothy. Now mark how it is proved that Popish Confirmation has the
outward sign of a Sacrament. The Bishop does cross the party to be
confirmed, in the forehead, therefore he lays hands upon his head. Well then,
this their sacrament has no promise (as I have showed) neither has it any
visible sign that was used and appointed by Christ and the Apostles. Now what
commandment has it, which is the third thing that is set down by
Bellarmine, De effect. sacram. lib. 2. cap. 24. Lib. 2. cap. 2 de sacram.
confirm.
without which a Sacrament cannot be? Bellarmine flatly confesses that it has
no express commandment in the scripture, but in stead of a commandment, he
delivers us the execution or practice of it, for so himself says. Why then
I may thus reason: A sacrament must have a promise of grace, a visible or
sensible sign, and a commandment from God, or else it cannot be a sacrament,
as Bellarmine confesses: but confirmation has neither promise of grace, nor
visible sign, nor commandment from God: therefore it is no sacrament. Their
arguments out of the fathers make a greater show. It is well yet that they
cannot press us but with the authority of men. Notwithstanding, this may be
briefly said for their authorities from the fathers, that either they are such
as have no writings extant, but only such scraps as they for their own
purpose have gathered together, and therefore are witnesses of us worthily
suspected: or, such as have no sound credit of any indifferent man: or lastly,
such as make nothing for them or against us in this question. For the Papists
will have their Confirmation to be a sacrament, the matter whereof must be
Oil and Balm: but neither do the most learned fathers make mention of the
Balm, neither are the Schoolmen agreed amongst themselves, that it is
needful for this sacrament, Lib. 2. de sacram. Confirm. cap. 9
as Bellarmine confesses. Yea, they think it absurd, that a sacrament should
be appointed by our savior Christ, the matter whereof should be so rare to
find, so uncertain whether we have the true thing or not, and so costly, as
hardly it can be gotten, and it is doubted of some whether there be now any
true Baulme or not. And this their sacrament is built upon so uncertain
foundations, that Alexander Alensis, and Bonauenture, two old pillars of
Popery, cannot find that it was instituted before the counsel at Melda. Out
of all which it is easy to understand, that as this Confirmation has not in
Gods word any show of warrant to make it a sacrament: so neither out of the
fathers can any certain argument be gathered for the same. But such are all
heretics, Iren. lib. 5
and such as imagine they can find out somewhat beside the truth, following
those things that are spoken diversely and in sundry sorts, and walking weakly,
not being always of one mind, are led about like blind men, by blind guides,
they shall and that worthily, fall into the hidden pit of ignorance, ever
seeking the truth, but never finding it. Which judgment of God here mentioned
against the heretics, we see to be fallen upon the Papists, who had rather
wander in such uncertain and blind ways, than be ruled by the infallible
word of God.

Of the Lords Supper, or Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior
Christ, and namely of Transubstantiation. CHAP. 13
THE PROTESTANTS
WE teach, that by those visible signs of bread and wine, the body and blood
of our savior Christ is so lively, and effectually represented and offered unto
our faith, that the faithful receivers, in the same Supper, do as truly
receive by faith Christ himself, with all his treasures and graces, to the
comfort and food of their souls, as they receive the bread and wine with
their mouth to the nourishment of their bodies. And that this our spiritual
nourishment may be the more lively represented, the substance of the bread
and wine must needs remain for our bodily nourishment, as in Baptism
likewise the water remains unchanged, to signify our spiritual washing. So
that as we change not the substance of these creatures, without which they
cannot be a Sacrament, so we teach Christ to be received spiritually, and
therefore most truly of the faithful receiver.

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of Rome, not content with this spiritual and true receiving of
Christ, do teach, that by the words of consecration (as they call them) the
very bread and wine have their substance changed into the body and blood of
Christ. So that Christ, whom in the Creed we confess to be ascended into
heaven, and that he shall come from heaven to judge the quick and the dead, is
by that means brought into every Pix: which overthrows the nature of man,
which he took of the Virgin Marie, for man can be but in one place. Whereby
also there follow such inconveniences, that it is with them a great question,
whether the Mouse that eats the host, Hom. par. 3 quaest. 80 artic. 3.
do eat Christ's body, or not: some affirm it, and some answer, to say she
does, Glos. did. 2 de consec. cap. Qui been. Durand. ra^. diu. lib. 4 rubr. 41.
is not greatly absurd, because the most wicked men do eat it. Others say,
that it miraculously cease to be Christ's body. But seeing the first
miracle is wrought by the words, I pray you how has the Mouse wrought this
second miracle, in making it cease to be Christ's body, and said nothing?

Seeing this doctrine of Transubstantiation, does bring with it, so gross, or
rather so monstrous absurdities, a man would think that no Christian would
stand in defense of the same. For how can we not abhor such teachers, as
endeavor to make us believe, that the most wicked persons may eat the flesh of
Christ, John 6.
Which whosoever eats shall live for ever, as our Savior Christ does often
tell us. And yet to defend their Transubstantiation, Bell. de euch. lib. 3. ca.
9.
they defend this as a good and fruitful opinion. Who will follow such guides,
as lead us into such marshes, as themselves know no way to get out. Such is
the question which before I touched, whether the Mouse do eat the body of
Christ if he eat the host. A question not moved by us, as Bellarmine would
seem to make men believe, De Ecuhar. lib. 3. cap. 14.
and therefore would make us like the Jews, Pagans and Heritikes, but moved
and disputed by themselves, as may appear by the master of Sentences, lib. 4.
did. 13 in did. 2. de consecrat. cap, Qui been: and also in the place before
alleged out of Durand. Yea, Bellarmine is not a little troubled about this
matter in the place next before alleged. For first he sets down flatly,
That although Christ be truly in the Sacrament, yet can he not be hurt, and
therefore not eaten with Mice, but the forms only of bread may be eaten. The
absurdity hereof I will not stand upon in this place. But Bellarmine will
show us this by a demonstration: The Divinity (says he) is every where,
and yet not consumed by fire, nor defiled by filth. Is this good divinity, to
make the body of Christ not subject to corruption, because ye godhead is not:
Glorified it is, and therefore not corruptible: but deified it is not. This
seems to be all one with the heresy of Nestorius, who taught that Christ
had a defiled body. But afterward master Bellarmine, perchance not liking
very well of his first answer, seems to me to have changed his opinion, as
after shall appear. But here in my judgment he is of another mind than
Durand has learned of Pope Innocentius, of the which I spoke before in the
comparison. For there Durand says, that it miraculously cease to be Christ's
body. But, if we apply this similitude brought by Bellarmine, it should seem
that he will have Christ's body to remain, but not to be hurt, as the deity
which is every where, continues, and yet is hurt of nothing. But if he be of
one mind with Pope Innocentius, and Durand, I would then feign know, where
that body of Christ that cease to be in that Mouseaten host, does rest, or
what becomes of it. But in the end of that Chapter: because many (says he)
mislike that Christ's body should be eaten of Mice, or beasts: When he was an
infant, he might so be: and therefore why may he not much more now in another
shape, and when he cannot be hurt thereby, be eaten of them? Before he said,
he could not be eaten: Now he says, he may. Whereby, it appears he knew
not well what to say. These straights are they brought unto, whilst they seek
to maintain that their doctrine of Transubstantiation. See of this point Bell.
de Euch. li. 1 ca. 9. in the beginning.
Now beside these, and many other absurdities which follow this doctrine of
transubstantiation, as that Christ has his own body: the darkness and hardness
of that doctrine is such, as that the schoolmen cannot agree upon it, how
Christ's body should be in the form of bread. Whosoever should read the third
book that master Bellarmine writes of the Eucharist, wherein he endeavors to
establish this doctrine, De Euch. li. 1. cap. 6.
shall find it too hard for them that have many years professed learning, to
understand their subtilties in this point. And who then can imagine that our
savior Christ would deliver unto his Church for Sacraments which should be
common to all those things that should contain such hidden mysteries as the
very learned men cannot understand? De doct. Christ. li. 3. cap. 9.
Nay Bellarm. thinks it absurd so to think, or that saint Augustine would
have commended our Sacraments as most easy, when all the learned find these
popish opinions to be most intricate and hard. We have seen the absurdity of
this doctrine: now let us view the weakness of the proof.

In the scriptures (for the most part) they can find but one place, Take,
eat, this is my body. Tit. Transub. Ioh. 6.51
For that which Eckius in his Enchiridion alleges out of the sixth of saint
John his Gospel, The bread which I will give is my flesh, his own friends
think it not worth citing for this point. For what a reason is this? The
bread which I said before came down from heaven is my flesh: therefore the
Sacramental bread is transubstantiated into the body of Christ. But for those
words, This is my body, alleged out of the three first Evangelists, and
saint Paul, because they are the very rock and refuge, which at all needs
they have recourse unto, for help of this their doctrine of
Transubstantiation, it would be somewhat particularly examined. Sundry
arguments therefore I have to induce me to affirm that this place can not
prove transubstantiation. The first is this: If these words This is my body, do
prove transubstantiation, then is that doctrine proved by plain and express
words of scripture: But, by express words of scripture that doctrine cannot
be proved, therefore that place proves not Tra^substantiation: The truth of the
first proposition is apparent, because either the plain and literal sense of
these words prove that doctrine, or else it is not proved thereby. And the
minor or 2. proposition is not mine, but it is the words of Mel. Canus a
learned Papist and of D. Chadsy. De locis Theol. li. 3. cap. 3. Disp. cum Pet.
Mart. de Eucharistia.
Therefore the first being true, and the second being by them confessed, the
conclusion must needs be strong against them. The second argument master
Bellarmine will afford me. The Sacraments are instituted and appointed by such
words as may give least occasion of error or doubt, for this Bellarmine
proves in many words, De Euchar. li. 1. ca. 9.
and by many reasons, But so to expound this place, that Transubstantiation
should be forced out of it, brings many obscurities and doubts, therefore
Transubstantiation is not to be proved out of these words. The first
proposition is Bellarmines (as I have said) and therefore I need not prove it.
That so to expound the words, This is my body, that Transubstantiation should
be proved out of it, is to make Christ speak very obscurely and doubtfully,
appears by their manifest wringing and wresting of the place. For the word
(This) spoke by Christ, Bellar. de. Euchar. li. 1. cap. 11.
when he had the bread in his hand, they will not have to be understood of the
bread, no, nor of the body of Christ, but something contained under the form
of bread, as Bellarmine out of Thomas of Aquine, and out of Guitimund teaches.
And I pray you, when shall the people understand what that third thing is that
is contained under those forms. But why should I look for this at the hands
of the unlearned, seeing that the learned can not show what this is. Are not
such dark devises the cause of many errors? Where now is (I pray you) that
plainness and aptnes of speech in the institution of a sacrament, which before
Belarmine commended? Not in such unsavory subtilties. Bellarmi. de ^^^^ ar.
li. 3. cap. 8.
Yea, it is by him flatly confessed, that although, in respect of that regard
they have of the councels and the Church, their Divines agree herein, yet in
the manner thereof they disagree very much. But what should I stand upon this
point? cap. 9.
Bellarmine which in the first book of the Eucharist, does make his argument
against Luther. of the easiness and of the plainness of the words that
belong to the institution of the Sacrament, proouing that of necessity they
must so be, least thereby men should take occasion of error or doubting, and
condemns Luthers doctrine as obscure: as though he had been then in a sound
sleep, and now were well wakened. li. 3. cap. 8.
In his third book he commends their doctrine unto us concerning the
Sacrament, because it is exceeding hard, and condemns ours because it is so
easy, that every body may understand it. Well, to be short, thus I reason,
The words of the institution must be taken in the plainest sense or meaning:
But that sense that is wrested out of them for Transubstantiation is not
plain: Therefore that sense of those words must not be taken that teaches
transubstantiation. Thirdly, the circumstances of the place it self are flat
against this doctrine of transubstantiation. For if any thing else had bin
signified by the word This, then that which Christ took and brake, that is,
the bread, it could not but very much have astonished them that were present,
that speaking as it were of the bread, he should have meant any thing else.
But to have taught, that it had been his very natural body indeed, it would
have made them much more wonder than they did ^^^ e sixth of Saint John's Gospel,
when they said, Ioh. 6.6^.
This is a hard saying, who can hear it. For, if they could not abide to hear
our Savior Christ say, they must eat his flesh, and drink his blood, how
much less would they not only have heard this said again, but also seeing
him sit at the Table, and having taken bread into his hand, to pronounce that
that bread was his natural body, that was borne of the Virgin Marie, and
that they must so eat him? But they knew, that about Sacraments, sacramental
speeches are to be used. And never imagined that because he said, This is my
body, therefore that bread should be changed in substance to the body of
Christ, no more than there should be an alteration in Christ, because he says,
I am the door, I am the vine, yea no more than the cup it self was changed in
the words of consecration, into another thing. They knew, that it is not such a
kind of speech, as is used when God is purposed to make any thing: Genesis 1.
Let there be light: let there be a firmament. It is not a speech of
commanding, but of showing or declaring, when he says: This is my body. And
therefore they made no such doubts, they did not so much as ask any question
how it could be, that he whose body they saw sitting with them at the table,
could have also an other body, though invisible, yet a very true and natural
body, hidden in those forms of bread. And as the Apostles did never imagine
so grossly of Christ, and so absurdly, that he had two bodies, the one visible,
the other invisible, the one sitting at the table, the other lurking in the
forms of bread, but did eat that which Christ took, brake and gave to them,
that is to say, bread: so Saint Paul does flatly call it bread, 1. Cor. 11.27
28. de Euchar. li. 1. cap. 14.
yea, and that after the words of consecration. And although Bellarmine would
seem to answer this argument, and indeed justly cyteth the answer which is
commonly made to it, that it is called bread, not because it is so now, but
because it was so: for, (says he) it is not needful that if sometime that
be used, yet that should be used always: yet neither will the answer that
he best likes of serve the turn: For, (says he) it is called bread
according to the Hebrew phrase, which calls all meat by the name of bread.
Now, to strike him with his own weapon, if it be so sometimes, must it so
signify always? I am sure master Bellarmine will not so say, for then shall
we doubt what it was that our Savior Christ took for the institution of the
Sacrament. And if he dare not say, that so it must be always, then must he
give better reason why here it should not be so, or else we cannot believe
him. Especially seeing the Apostle immediately before, speaking of the
institution of the Sacrament, has showed how our Savior Christ took bread,
which I trust master Bellarmine will there confess to be bread in deed, and
not other food: why should he then without proof or reason, say here it is
more generally taken, to apply it perchance to the food of the soul? Yea,
this reply may serve for all the answers that he has to this argument,
because it is not enough for him to say, such a word may so be taken
sometime, but he must prove that it must in this place so be taken. Moreover,
if you consider of that which they call the form of bread, it is no other in
color, taste, or fashion, than it was: it putrifieth and corrupts as soon
as when it is not consecrated. Which to affirm, if it were transubstantiated
into the body of Christ, were in my mind absurd and blasphemous. Lastly, we
see by the practice that the godly have sometime used, that the fathers in the
primitive Church thought not the bread to be transubstantiated: For if they had
known of any transubstantiation, they would not have burned that which
remained of the Eucharist, as Hesichius, Hesich. in leuit. Ori. in Leuit.
and also Origin upon Leuiticus show that they did. Thus then by many reasons,
I trust it sufficiently appears, that the church of Rome cannot without great
violence done to the place, wring tra^substantiation out of these words, this
is my body: In Ioh. tract. 47.
for Christ is many things by similitude, which he is not in deed, a rock, a
door, etc. as says S. August. And so we may see the words to be most easy
and plain, if according to the manner of such sacramental speeches, we
understand the word (Is. 1. Cor. 10.2
) The rock was Christ, that is, it was a figure of Christ: so here, This is my
body, that is, ye figure of my body, Cont. Adimant. c. 12.
as S August. most plainly expounds in this place, saying: The lord made no
doubt to say, this is my body, when he gave the figure of his body. And thus
much to take from them that one weapon which they have wrested from the
scriptures to fight against us wtal. Now ye which they can bring against us out
of the writings of men, can have no such force, and therefore is not so
dangerous.

to the places out of the fathers for transubstantiation. Inst. Apol. 2 near
the end
And yet it will not be amiss, to take a short view of that which they allege
out of the Fathers of the purer ages, namely that lived five hundred, or six
hundred years after Christ. Justinius Martyr is the first whom he names, out
of whom he gathers, That the meat whereof our flesh is nourished, that is
the bread sanctified by the prayer of the word of God, is the body of the
Lord. Wherein I note first, that because he speaks of meat, whereof our
flesh is nourished, he acknowledges no change of the substance of the bread:
for it must be the substance of the bread that nourishes our bodies, no
change, I say, but Sacramental, in regard whereof, he has said a little
before, that we receive it not as common bread, because that being so
sanctified, it is a Sacrament of the body of our savior Christ. The^, the
substance of the bread being proved, even by these words, to remain, it is
nothing hard to see what he means, when he says, it is the body of the
Lord. For it is nothing else then it is, that is, it signifies the body of
the Lord. Col. cum Trypho. Iud^ o.
Which exposition I have from himself, who says in an other place, That
Christ has delivered us bread, for the Remembrance of his body that is taken
up (into heaven.) Where he does not only show the Sacrament to be a Memorial
of Christ's body, which here is to be proved, but also, that his body is
absent and in heaven, in that he says, it is for a remembrance of his body
that is taken up. And in the same book afterward, ye same father says, that
By the dry and moist nourishment (the bread and wine) we are admonished of
those things, which it is said Christ has suffered for us. Where, by calling
the^ nourishment, and that of our bodies, for such nourishment belongs to
the^, he plainly denies any alteration of the substance in those visible
signs: and then further shows the true use of ye sacrament, which is, to
admonish us of Christ's suffering for us. Out of Iren. he allegeth these words:
How shall they know, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
that that bread wherein thanks are given, is the body of their lord; but yt
Iren. did not dream there of any Transubstantiation, it is plain by his words
that follow immediately, when he faith, that the Eucharist consists of two
things, the earthly, and the heavenly. If the bread were transubstantiate, it
could not be called an earthly thing. Moreover, he writes in that place
against the heretics that said, there was another God the father, besides him
that made all things. Now he infers, if they should say true, how shall
they know that that bread is the body of their Lord? Whereby it appears,
that his purpose is here, not to show what is in that bread, but which Lord it
represents unto them: As the very next words in that sentence declare,
which are these, If they say not, that he is the son of him that made the
world: so that the chiefest force of this reason after Irene his true meaning,
is in this word, Their Lord. And besides, to call the sign by the name of that
which it signifies, the body of Christ, for the sacrament of the body of
Christ, is very agreeable unto the Scriptures: but such manner of speeches are
but a weak proof for transubstantiation. Next comes in Tertullian, but so
maimed and mangled, that thereby master Bellarmine proclaims unto the world,
that he meant nothing less, than to have the truth known. Out of him he
alleged these words: Con. Marcionem li. 4. near the end
The bread which he took he made his body, saying: this is my body. A man
would think this were a very plain place, but Bellarmine deals falsely
herein. For when Tertullian has spoken for him what he would have him, then he
stops his mouth least he mar all. For the very next words are, that is
the figure of his body. Now, let us take the whole sentence together, and so
try what he can make of it. The bread which he took he made his body,
saying: this is my body, that is, the figure of my body. And after also, to
show what he meant by that he said he made it his body, he delivers it in
other terms, he calls it his body. If then master Bellarmine will ask,
how the bread can be made his body? Tertullian tells how, Li. de Euch. 3.
cap. 18.
Sacramentally, or figuratively. So that this bold question of master
Bellarmine comes out of season, like a triumph before the conquest. His
fourth witness that he produces, Cyp. de coena domini.
is Cyprian, whose words are these: This bread which the Lord did reach to his
disciples, being changed, not in shape or form, but in nature, by the
omnipotency of the word, is made flesh. This testimony he esteems as the
club of Hercules, that no man can withstand: De Euch. li. 2 cap. 9.
and therefore in another place, alleging it, he says thus: This testimony
cannot be answered, although the adversaries have often assayed to answer it.
Let us then examine a little this unanswerable place. And first, it is
confessed by Bellarmine, that that book is not Cyprians, and therefore the
father of that book is uncertain, but yet we will not deny it, but answer
the place, if we can. How the bread is made flesh, has been sufficiently
declared in the answer to the former arguments: so that all the hardness is in
this, how the bread is changed, not in form, but in nature. First, that is
true in respect of the use that it is put to: For as it is a sacrament, and
represents unto us our nourishment in Christ: so must it truly nourish our
bodies, it being changed in us to that end, and now, not the accidents, but
the substance of bread, can work this nourishment. And therefore, if we take
nature for substance, it may well so be expounded, and agree with that which
Justinius Martyr says, as before is said. And admit, that nature does here
signify substance, let us see what they can prove by it. They say the
substance of the bread ceasseth, and is quite taken away: But Cyprian says,
the bread is but changed in nature, but still it remains bread you see, for
he so calls it. Therefore because he utters it in such a manner, it is most
certain, that he means not by that word nature, the substance of bread, but
something else. Nature therefore is sometime taken for the disposition, or for
the property or use of a thing, as the author of the book of Wisdom says,
Sap. 7.20
That God had given him knowledge, of the nature of beasts. In like manner, Romans
1.26. Ephesians. ^.3 Iam. 3.7
We were by nature (says saint Paul) the children of wrath. And saint James
says, The whole nature of beasts, has been tamed by the nature of man. So
that this word nature, very often does not signify the substance. And here it
cannot signify the substance of the bread, because the substance of it cannot
be changed, but yt it must also be annihilated, or brought to naught, therefore
he speaks but of the use or property of it, that it is altered. And doctor
Chadsey, a learned Papist, as was any in Oxford in his time, does confirm this
my answer: For when Peter Martyr disputing against D. Tresham, had pressed him
with an authority of Theodorets, Dialog. 1
which was this: Christ ho^nored those signs which we see, with the names of
his body and blood, yet not changing the nature, but to nature adding grace.
And he (as it seems) not liking well of D. Tresham his answer, this Doctor
Chadsey disputing another day, took upon him to answer such places as master
Martyr had before alleged against master Tresham: and amongst others he
answers this place out of Theodoret thus: I say that Thodoret means as
other fathers do, who, when they say that the nature remains, they mean the
property of the bread. I trust then, it will not be any heresy for me to
expound nature, the properties of the bread, seeing doctor Chadsey a catholic
does it. We see then, that this unanswerable argument, that he made so great
account of, and bragged that it could never be answered, is long since fully
answered by one of his own friends, and he knew not of it. Ciril is his fifth
witness, not that learned father that was bishop of Alexandrie, but another that
was B. of Jerusalem, Ciril. Ierus. cathec. Mistagog. 4
whose books are but lately set forth by themselves, that now bring him in for
a witness, and therefore we may doubt whether he be well dealt wtal. Out of him he
aledgeth 3. places: He once turned water into wine, and shall he not be worthy
to be trusted that he turned wine into blood. Behold here (says master
Bellarmine) a real change. And why so? I know he will answer: because it was
so in the water, for it was really changed into wine: and therefore also saint
John, John 2, 11
who reports the story, says, it was a miracle. Now to change wine into
blood, is as great a miracle, and therefore it is likely, that if there had bin
any such miracle wrought, some or other would have noted it for a miracle,
seeing so many have spoken of that matter: namely three Evangelists, and S.
Paul. Master Bell. knows, that the fathers use many times to speak very
hyperbolically, and to amplify with excessive speeches ye matters that they
would set forth, as here this Ciril does: and yet we must not gather thereof
such a real change in the wine, as I have said was in the water: but this is
spoken to win that at our hands, that he in that place moves us unto, that we
should not think the sacramental wine to be but bare wine. His second
witness for master Bellarmine, is after in that place, Under the form of
bread, the body is given, and in form of wine, the blood. Whereupon master
Bellarmine again insulteth thus: Behold the accidents of bread which remain.
We grant it, but not the accidents or show of bread only, but the substance
also, and that he has not yet denied: therefore let us see his third place.
Know this for a certainty, that this bread which is seen of us, is not
bread, though thy taste perceive it to be bread. In deed he speaks here far
otherwise than the ancient fathers do, in that he says, It is not bread:
For there is not one of the fathers, for at the least six hundred years after
Christ, that ever spoke so, but this man only. And therefore howsoever he
amplifieth the matter in words, to bring unto the holy Sacraments due regard,
which the fathers at those times upon great causes did much endeavor, Catec.
Mist. 3
yet he is not to be thought to have meant otherwise than that he said before,
that it is no more common bread. For although, if they regard but the taste,
they shall find no change, yet that sacrament is an authentical seal of our
faith, which assures us, that Christ is spiritually given unto us. And thus
much briefly of these authorities: that men may see, that they are not so very
plain, that infallible arguments may be gathered out of them.

But now I must needs speak somewhat of the Author. And first for the Book
it self, Lib. Eccles. hist. ^. ca. 23.
out of which these places are alleged, it seems to me, that saint Hierome
has somewhat burnt it in the ear, when he says, that he wrote it when he
was but a young man, noting thereby (perchance) his young and slender judgment.
And of himself Ruffinus says, Lib. 2. ca. 40
That he did change sometime in faith, and in Communion often. And Socrates in
his Ecclesiastical history says of him, that being summoned to answer some
accusations that were laid against him, he fearing to come to his trial, for
two years together appeared not, and therefore was deposed. What reason then,
that we should be content to stand to his trial for matters in question, that
was himself afraid to be tried by the learned men of his time: Or that he
who was deposed from his seat, by them that best knew him (yea, and that, as
it seems by Ruffinus his saying of him, for some heresy) should now sit as
Judge, yea or else be allowed as witness in so weighty matters? As for saint
Ambrose, De iis qui initiantur mist. cap. 9.
whom next he alleges, he makes not against us. He says indeed, that the
bread is that which Nature has formed, but that Blessing has hallowed. Which
is nothing else but that which has been answered before, that it is not
common bread, but as Theodoret says, Theod. Immutabili^, dialog. 1.
the Nature not being changed, to Nature is Grace added. And that this is S.
Ambrose his meaning, is most plain, (not only by that which he afterward
says in that very chapter, Before the blessing of the heavenly words, an
other thing is named: after the consecration, the body of Christ is signified)
but also most evidently in his books of the Sacraments: Lib. 4. cap. 4.
where speaking of the change that is in these visible signs, he uses these
words: If there be so great virtue in the word of the Lord Jesus, that the
things that were not, began to be, how much rather can it work that they
(the visible signs in the Sacrament) be that which they were, and be changed
into an other thing. By which he can mean no other but a sacramental change,
because he flatly affirms, that these signs are that which they were. The
first place that he alleges out of Chrysostom. is this: It is he that does
sanctify these things (the outward elements and change them: In Matthew. Hom. 83.
but that he speaks of a sacramental change only, his own words a little
before, in that place, do prove. For, in teaching how that by these sensible
creatures, he delivers unto us things not sensible, he brings his example
of Baptism, wherein I know they will not say the water is transubstantiated.
And yet Chrysostom makes no difference between it and the sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, but that in them both, in like sort by sensible
creatures, insensible graces are delivered. But most plainly in an other place
does he confute that which the Papists would force out of these words,
namely, the change of the substance of the bread, saying: Before the bread is
sanctified, Ad Caesarium monachum.
we call it bread, but the divine grace having sanctified it by the Priest, it
is freeed from the name of bread, and is vouched worthy of the name of the
Lords body, although the nature of the bread abide in it. Whereby we see, the
change that he speaks of is in the use, not in the substance of the bread.
In the latter place Chrysostom says thus: Do thou see bread, De Euchar.
in encaenus.
do thou see wine? do these things go to the draught as other meats do?
God forbid. Think not so. For as wax being put into the fire is made like
unto it, none of the substance remains, nothing abounds: even so here
think the mysteries to be consumed by the substance of the body.

In which words he brings nothing for Popish transubstantiation. For although
they do teach, that the substance of the bread is perished, yet the accidents
they teach still to remain, and ever they say, that Christ is present in the
sacrament under the forms of bread and wine: But when wax is cast into the
fire, there is not so much as a show that there has been wax, but all is
consumed: Therefore this similitude makes not for transubstantiation. And in
truth whosoever shall read that whole sermon, shall easily perceive, that
Chrysostom. there does but by rhetorical amplifications exhort the people, so
to be affected when they come unto the holy sacrament, that their eye should
not be occupied about any earthly creatures, but their mind altogetherr
exercised in heavenly cogitations, according (says he) unto the promise that
you made unto the Priest when as he said, Lift up your minds and hearts, and
you answered, I have it lifted up unto the Lord. Which is according to the
council which he gives unto us in an other place, that especially in these
holy mysteries, Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 83
we should not only behold that which is before our eyes, but especially
remember his words. But it were too tedious to answer every place
particularly that they do allege, and out of this which is already spoken,
it is easy to answer any thing that they can bring out of the fathers for
five or six hundred years. But if any man will ask, why our savior Christ
does give unto the bread the name of his Body, and to the wine, the name of
his Blood? And why the fathers do so call these outward signs, the body and
blood of our savior Christ, I will answer with Theodoret an ancient father:
Dial. 1. Immutabil^^.
He would have them that are partakers of the divine mysteries, not to be
occupied in thinking of the nature of the things that are seen, but in
respect of the change of the name, to believe the change that is made through
grace.

As for the Councels which they bring for proof of this doctrine, Bellarm. de
Euchar. lib. 3 cap. 23
the first of them was more than a thousand years after Christ, whereby it may
appear, how late this doctrine is: whereupon Scotus a schooleman does
confess, that this transubstantiation was not a doctrine of faith before the
council of Lateran, although Bellarmine reprove him for it. Seeing now this
their lately hatched doctrine does bring with it so many absurdities, is
darkened with so many doubts, has no warrant in the Scriptures, no ground in
the ancient fathers, and is not to be accounted as an article of faith (even by
the confession of them that speak of the greatest antiquity of it much more
than five hundred years since:) let us take heed of them, who cry
continually, Antiquity, Antiquity, and yet endeavor to bring in new doctrines
and devises of their own, and to turn away the hearts of the ignorant from
the true ancient faith, delivered by Christ and his apostles, and sincerely
preserved many hundred years in the church of God. But of this, because it is
one of the special points of doctrine wherein we dissent, I have stood longer.

That the wicked receive not in the Sacrament Christ's body and blood. CHAP. 14
THE PROTESTANTS
BEcause that whosoever has eaten the son has the son (for he is meat
that perishes not) Ioh. 6.50
and he that has the son has life. 1. Ioh. 5.22
And on the contrary, De ciuit. Dei lib. 21. ca. 25 De consecra. did. 2. vt
quid paras ex Augustino.
as saint Augustine says, He can not eat Christ's body, that is not in his
body. Lastly, seeing he can not be torn with the teeth, but must be received by
faith, we therefore teach, that although the wicked may be partakers of the
visible signs, yet they can not be said to eat or receive the body and blood
of our savior Christ. And with Saint Augustine, In Ioh. tract. 59
that they may eat, as Judas did the Lords bread, against the Lord, but the
bread the Lord, they can not eat: which doctrine is most plain, and brings
with it no absurdities or doubts

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of Rome, Iren. lib. 4 cap. 34.
forgetting that the Sacrament consists of two things, that is to say, the
material bread, and that which came down from heaven, which is Christ: do
add unto these a third, namely, Bellarm. de Euchar. li. 1 cap. 23
the effect of the body of Christ, or his spiritual graces: making thereby a
separation, and, as it were, a divorce between the body of Christ, which they
teach, the wicked may receive, and those graces which can not in deed be
separated from the same, and cannot be given to the ungodly. Whereby they do
wrap themselves in such a cloud of doubts, as all the Papists in the world, will
never be able to answer: M. Bilso^ part. 4.
whilst some say, that this body goes no further than to the teeth: some
allow it to have passage but to the stomach, but not to abide there: some to
continue there also: yea, some say that it goes as other meat into the belly
and yet remains still Christ's body so long as the form of the bread
remains: yea, and that it may be voided either upward or downward, and
received of man or beast.

Although this unreconcilable difference that is among them, in so material a
point of their religion, namely, what is become of the body of Christ, after the
wicked have received the same: and these filthy blasphemies, and detestable
shifts that they are driven unto, for defense of their heresy, be a sufficient
confutation, both of that doctrine of transubstantiation, from whence do
spring all these filthy pudles and sinckes, and also of this other, that the
wicked may eat the body of Christ, which is but a sour grape of that
unkindly root: yet for the better satisfying of the ignorant, I will (by Gods
assistance) take a short view of their arguments, whereby they endeavor to
prove that the most wicked men may eat the body and drink the blood of
Christ. Now their chief and almost only proof is taken from
transubstantiation: of the untruth of which doctrine, I trust I have spoken
sufficiently in the former chapter.

And now therefore, that I may conclude, that if the wicked can not eat the
body of Christ, unless the bread be changed into the body, as themselves will
confess: then, because there is no such change, therefore the wicked eat not
his body. But one show of an argument they make out of the scriptures: 1. Cor.
11.27, 29
He that eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, and after, eats and drinks judgment unto himself, making no
difference of the Lords body. Out of which place they reason to this effect:
The wicked or unworthy receivers, can not be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, unless they receive it: But they are guilty of them, and receive
judgment to themselves thereby: Therefore they receive the body and blood of
the Lord. The minor or second proposition is true, for saint Paul says it. But
the first is most false. For although the wicked can not be, neither are
partakers of the body and blood of Christ: yet because they come not to the
sacrament which was instituted of God (to offer and assure us of the heavenly
graces) with such reverence as they ought to do, and in such sincerity as
behooves them, therefore are they accounted (and that woorthily) to despise the
things themselves that are represented by those visible signs. And this is it
that S. Paul finds fault with the Corinthians: For that by despising the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, they showed their contempt of the
thing signified thereby. And therefore S. Ambrose Ambrose.
says even upon these words: Because it is the Lord, whose blood he drinks
in mystery. S. Hierome Hierome.
yields the reason why he is guilty of the body and blood of Christ, Because
he has accounted as vile, the Sacrament (mark his words) of so great a
mystery. Not therefore are they guilty because they eat Christ, but because
(says he) they despise the Sacrament of so great a mystery. And Theophilact
Theophilact
upon these words says, He that receives it unworthily, shall be no
less guilty of wickedness, than if he shed the very blood of the Lord.
Where we see, that Theophilact does compare the unworthy receiving of the holy
sacrament, with the shedding of Christ's blood, and so makes them two diverse
things. And therefore, in his judgment, it is not all one to receive the
Sacrament, and to receive Christ. So that by these places it appears, that
the wicked may be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, which are by the
holy Sacrament represented and sealed up unto the faithful, and yet not
receive the body and blood of Christ. Yet by the way, I must needs note the
false dealing of Andradeus a popish writer, who to make the Apostles argument
the stronger for him, does falsify his words. And therefore where the
Apostle says, he that eats of this bread, and drinks of the Lords cup
unworthily, he says, He that eats the Lords body, Orthod. ex. pli. lib. 7.
and drinks of his blood. But it is no great fault in popery to abuse the
Scriptures, and to add to them, or take from them, as they think good. We
see therefore, that this clean meat is for clean men: this holy banquet is
for holy guests, as they had wont to cry. For, De benedict. patria^ chapter c. ^
as saint Ambrose says, This bread is the food but of the godly. And why?
because, Our abiding in him, Cypr. de co^na Domini.
is our eating of him, and our drinking of him, is our incorporating into him,
our services being subjected, our wills conjoined, and our affections united
(to him.) Therefore the eating of his flesh, is a certain earnestness and
desire to abide in him. Which things to be in the ungodly, the Papists will in
no wise affirm. Many testimonies might be alleged, but with one shift they
think to answer all. The answer of the Papists.
Christ his body and blood (say they) may be received of the wicked, but not
the fruit or effect thereof. And may Christ be received of any, and they not to
live by him? Confutation of it.
Can he that is full of all grace and power, be at any time, as it were, robbed
of the same? God forbid. For, if they will speak of his conuersing among the
Jews, and of his being among many whilst he was upon earth, that got no good
thereby, the reason thereof is plain: it was because they received him not.
Ioh. 3.19, 20.
But to say, that any may receive him, and is not partaker of his graces and
benefits, is most expressly against the words of our Savior Christ, Ioh. 6.57.
He that eats me, shall live through me. They can not therefore offer a
greater disgrace to our Savior Christ, than to say, that any can receive him,
and yet not be partakers of his heavenly graces. So that whilst they take upon
them the defense of the wicked in some sort, they set themselves, even wilfully
to reproach the holy one of Israel. But if it should be granted to them, that
the wicked may eat Christ, how, or when will they agree, what shall be done
with that body and blood of Christ that they so eat? For themselves deny, that
the souls of the wicked are norished by him. And that their bodies should by
his body be norished is too absurd. What then becomes of his body and blood,
which they say the wicked receive? To answer this question resolutely and
definitiuely, they have not yet agreed, they never will, they never can.
Therefore, until they can answer directly to such inconveniences, as of
necessity follow the doctrine that they teach, let us believe, that Christ is
the food of the faithful only, because none other but they do receive him.
Let us not hear them, who in the sacraments, which should be, and are indeed
most plain and easy, teach us wholly to look for miracles, as do the
Papists. For Christ is present by miracle, and absent by miracle, if they say
true. And so, when all learning and scriptures fail, then they persuade us,
that we must seek for a wonder, and so make them that will give credit to
them in these their gross devises, the wonders of the world for their folly.
But enough of this.

That the Cup ought not to be denied unto the lay people, which thing the
Papists do. CHAP. 15.
THE PROTESTANTS
BEcause it is needeful for the nourishment of our bodies, to have, not meat
only, to satisfy our hunger, but drink also to quench our thirst in. And
that Christ would represent unto us in his Sacrament, the perfect nourishment
of our souls, whereunto nothing could be added, because that nothing should be
wanting: For this cause did our Savior Christ institute his sacrament of these
two parts of our nourishment, and gave as well the one of them as the other
unto his Apostles: Commanding them also as well to take and drink of the cup, as
to eat of the bread. And the Church also did practice this more than a
thousand years. But of late, the council of Constance, Anno 1415. Sess. 13.
did forbid it, and command the Sacrament to be received but in one kind.

THE PAPISTS
SO that the church of Rome, not regarding the express commandment of our
Savior Christ, neither the practice of Gods Church, much more then a thousand
years after Christ, neither that fulness of comfort that we learn by the
bread and wine, that Christ is unto us both meat and drink, that is, the
perfect and sufficient food of our hungry and thirsty souls, have robbed the
lay people of the one half of the Lords supper, proclaming thereby unto the
world, that they are disobedient against Christ's commandment, injurious to
his people, and that in steed of the continual and ancient practice of the
Primitive Church, they establish their own new devise. Lo, what cause have
they to brag of their ancient faith?

And for the upholding of this their doing, against both Truth and Antiquity,
they bring some reasons. Fisher sometime bishop of Rochester in his book
against the assertions of Luther, Artic. 16.
to defend that it was lawful for the church to alter the institution of
Christ, and therefore to take away the cup from the lay people, alleges the
example of the Apostles, who are said to baptize in the name of Christ only,
whereas the sacrament of baptism, Acts 8.16. and 10.48 Matthew. 28.19.
was commanded, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. But, to bishop Fisher the papist, I oppose Bellarmine the Jesuit, and a
papist who writing of the sacrament of baptism, Lib. 1. cap. 3.
plainly denies, that the Apostles baptized in the name of Christ only, and
largely proves it: and shows, that where it is said, that they baptized in
the name of Jesus, or in the Lords name, the meaning is, that they baptized in
the faith of Jesus, or by his authority, or with baptism which he instituted,
or in his name, but not in his name only. So that this reason which Fisher
makes for to prove the authority of the church herein, De Euch. lib. 4. cap.
28.
is very sufficiently answered by Master Bellarmine. It is therefore
needful, he should make a supply of some other argument, to prove that,
seeing he has taken that weapon out of their hands. Let us therefore see how
he mendeth the matter. The church (says he) may ordain, and prescribe those
things, that belong not to the substance of the sacraments, and are not
ordered by the word of God: But the rite of eating under one kind, or under
two, is such: Therefore it may be ordered and prescribed of the Church. These
are his very words: this is his argument, whereof the mayor or first
proposition, (as himself says) is most true, and therefore we grant it: but
the minor, which is, that to eat in one kind, or in both kinds, is not of
the substance of the sacrament, or ordered by the word of God, that is most
false. And because it contains two points, I will briefly touch them both.
Where he says it is not of the substance of the sacrament, whether we receive
in one kind or in two: it is in my judgment, even against all reason and
testimony of antiquity, and the very nature of a sacrament. For the sacrament
must needs consist of matter and form. The matter is the bread and wine (I
speak of that which Irene calls the earthly matter. Iren. li. 4. ca. 34
) To the form of this Sacrament belong these words, He brake bread, and gave
them, and said: take, eat, Math. 26.26 27
this is my body. He took the cup, blessed and said, drink ye all of this
etc. Yea and neither of these can be well omitted, but that thereby we are the
less occasioned to meditate, of the efficacy of Christ's death and passion.
For, as the breaking of the bread that it might be given to us, yt our bodies
might be nourished thereby, is a representation of Christ's body which was for
us tormented: so the drinking of the cup is the representation of the shedding
of Christ's blood for us. Moreover let us consider, what is that which they
would have the material part or rather a substantial part in this sacrament. To
receive the sacrament as appears by ye censure of Collen, Expl. dialog. 9
expl. Theol. lib. 7.
and Andradius, but in what kind it is received is not material (say they:)
Mark their boldness. In the institution there is not one word that wills
us in such general terms to receive the Eucharist or Sacrament, but express
words to will us, to Take and eat the bread, and to drink of the cup: and
yet that which God does not mention, they will have to be of the substance of a
sacrament: and that which is expressly set down in the word, they may choose
whether they will do it, or not.

But how does Bellarmine prove, that the rite of communicating in on or two
kinds, De Euch. li. 4. cap. ^ 8.
belongs not to the substance of the sacrament. The use of a thing (says he)
that is permanent, is not the substance of it: but, the communicating is the
use of the sacrament, which sacrament is a thing permanent: Therefore the
communicating in one or two kinds is not the substance of it. The whole force
of this argument consists in that which is chiefly in question amongst us,
that is, whether the sacrament is a thing permanent, or not. And we upon just
cause deny it. And therefore his argument is a plain fallacy, called the
begging of the thing that is in question, and can be no strong reason against
us. By a thing permanent they understand, that the Eucharist is not only a
Sacrament (as they say their other sacraments are, and as baptism is in
respect of the use and receuing of it) but also that it being consecrated once
to be a sacrament, continues so to be, whether it be received or not. Which
opinion they hold stiffely for the maintenance of their adoration, and
carrying it about. For they teach it still to be a sacrament, howsoever they
use it. Out of which absurd principle he gathers this false and detestable
doctrine, that they may change this point of Christ's institution, as they will.

But we knowing, that the Sacraments are only helps for our infirmities,
and instituted to supply our wants, and that the eating of the bodily food in
the Sacrament, and so applying it to the nourishment of our our bodies, is that
which represents unto us most lively our receiving of Christ by a true faith,
to the nourishment of our souls: detest and despise those captious and curious
subtilties whereby the papists do seek to defend their wonderful boldness,
in changing the very institution, and in breaking the express commandment of
Christ. Wherein we have for our warrant, the word of Christ, which bids us
eat and drink (and therefore it can not be but arrogant presumption for man
to forbid that which Christ has commanded, howsoever he will pretend, that
it is not of the substance of the Sacrament.) We have also the practice in the
primitive church, which is testified by Isichius, In Leuit. lib. 2. cap. 8.
which used for to burn that which remained of the sacrament: Origin also
reports the same. Which they would not have don, if they had thought as do
the papists, that it had been transubstantiated into Christ's body, or else
that it had been, as here they affirm, a sacrament, although it be not
received as Christ commanded it should be.

Seeing therefore these men that would seem pillars in the church of Christ,
do pick quarrelles at his ordinance, and make exception to his commandment,
and all to writhe their necks out of his yoke, and to free themselves from his
laws, like lewd servants, which will not frame themselves to do that which
would best please their masters, but that only which they must be forced to
do whether they will or not: let us now see how in the second point, they do
seek to pervert the very decree it self that Christ set down concerning this
matter, to make men believe, that he meant no such thing, as in truth he did.

The second part of his assertion is, that it is not ordered by the word of
God, what shall be done in that point. This is an intolerable boldness. Does
not our savior Christ take order, as well for the cup, as for the bread? Does
not he that says, Take, eat, say also, Drink ye all of this? If any man
will answer as Bellarmine does in one place, De Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 27.
that they were not both given at one time, and therefore that properly to
speak, the Supper of the Lord consists but of one kind, he should plainly
declare, that he has rather a desire to contend than to know the truth. For
what is it to us how long time was between the one commandment and the
other, so that we know, that both the one and the other is instituted of
Christ. Yea the Apostle saint Paul very plainly tells us, 1. Cor. 11.
that the order both for the cup and the bread is delivered to him of the Lord,
That which I received of the Lord, I delivered unto you. And then he shows
Christ's institution for the bread and also the cup. But with full mouth, and
one consent they tell us, that that commandment belongs to the Apostles
only, and not to all the disciples. And yet saint Matthew says, Math. 26.26
he gave it to his disciples. Yea, and Christ commands, Drink ye all of
this: And has not said concerning the bread, eat ye all of this (although
we deny not, that every one having proved themselves should eat of it.) But
seeing God has given a more express commandment unto all for the cup, than
for the bread, why should they rather restrain lay men from receiving the cup,
than from the bread? Again, does he not say to all them, Drink ye all of
this, to whom before he said, Take eat? Yes verily, for the text is plain,
both in the Evangelists and saint Paul. But the bread must be given to al,
they confess, therefore why not the cup also? And that which saint Paul wrote
concerning the use of the Sacrament, it is plain he wrote unto all the church
of Corinth (not only by that place which Kemnitius alleges, 1. Cor. 1.2.
To all that call upon the name of the Lord, and that he writes unto the
church of Corinth, De Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 25.
which Bellarmine does seek to answer, rather least he should seem to say
nothing, than that in truth, he says any thing worth the setting down) but
also by the punishment that followed the abuse of the sacrament. For this cause
many are weak and feeble amongst you, and many sleep. Which came upon them,
not that did eat of that bread only, but also that drunk of that cup
unworthily. And it cannot be imagined, that either the ministers were so bad at
that time so generally, that so many of them would have offended therein: or if
the fault had been in them, the Apostle would more particularly have reproved
them: neither were they then so many in one place, that it could have been
truly said of them, that many are weak, and many sleep, or are dead.
Therefore, whereas many were punished amongst the Corinthians for unworthily
receiving both the bread and the cup, and this word (Many) cannot, as I have
proved be there referred to their Teachers only, it follows that this
punishment was amongst the lay men, as well at the last, as amongst their
ministers: and therefore that the lay men in the church of Corinth received the
cup.

And thus much of that wicked assertion, wherein they do affirm, that it is
lawful for the church to alter this part of Christ's institution, and also to
take away the cup.

Now to a second, and as wicked a proposition as the other. Wherein they
teach, that it is needelesse to be received in both kinds. And to prove this,
Bellarmine takes some pains in three whole chapters. De Euch. lib. 4. cap.
21, 22, 23
In the first two he shows, that the whole sacrament may be received under
one kind: and therefore in the last he teaches, that no more good is to be
gotten of the sacrament under both kinds, than under one. And although we can
not allow of that concomitance, as it is termed, that is, that inseparable
conjunction of the body and blood under either of the signs, which especially
he proves in the first chapter of those three, namely, the one and
twentieth, that the whole substance of a sacrament is found in either kind, as
he teaches in the two and twentieth chapter: yet if we should grant those two
points, that which master Bellarmine would conclude in the three and twentieth
chapter can not follow. For what if Christ may be wholly received under one
kind? Yet it should not follow, that under one as effectually he may be
received, as under both. For, as before I showed, his death is more lively
represented by the bread, and his bloudsheding by the wine. And that which more
effectually represents it, is more profitable than that which less
represents the same. And it is too much sauciness so to control the
wisdom of God, that when he says, Drink ye all of this, which is a plain
commandment, any foolish man dare say: It is to no profit: it can do you no
good. As for the causes that are alleged by Gerson and other, why the popish
church thought good to take away the cup from the lay people, they are so
foolish and frivolous, that a man would think rather that they iested, than
spoke in earnest. But what cause soever man can pretend to alter yt which
Christ has ordained, it does but testify, that he thought not Christ wise
enough to prevent such inconveniences, as he by his wisdom has provided for.

Seeing therefore the church cannot forbid that that God commands (whatsoever
causes they will pretend, and if they might, yet the causes set down by the
Romish church, either are blasphemous, or at the least frivolous) it is a sure
way for us, rather to regard gods holy commandment, and follow the
institution of our savior Christ, than to follow any the devises of man. And
when he commands, drink you all of this, it is a great sin, and
dedeserueth Gods wrath, for any man to answer, I will not receive the cup,
because the Pope and the Popish church of late has forbidden it.

Against the sacrifice of the Mass, or of the Altar, as they call it. CHAP. 16
THE PROTESTANTS
Now to their gross absurdities, and manifest deprauings of the institution
of Christ, they add also their blasphemies, against the sacrifice of Christ
Jesus, which as he was once offered, Heb. 10.10.14
and by that one offering for sins, has consecrated for ever the^ that are
sanctified. Heb. 9.12.
And has obtained eternal redemption for us: so we confess that by that one
sacrifice he is the propitiation for our sins, 1. John 2.2.
which he offered for us upon the cross, and cannot be daily offered by the
Priest, without great wrong to Christ's eternal and only Priesthood, and
without great presumption in that priest, that dare offer so excellent a
sacrifice, neither without derogatio^ to the virtue of his death.

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of Rome teaches, that in the Mass, the priest (a sinful man)
does offer up that most holy sacrifice Jesus Christ unto God the father, a
sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead: yea, for the greatest
sins that we commit. As for original sin, they confess, that Christ has
taken that away by his sacrifice, but our voluntary sins, which therefore
also are more odious, must be taken away by this sacrifice, that the priest
offers upon the Altar: So have they turned the Sacrament into a sacrifice,
Christ's holy ordinance into a blasphemous Idol, and al for their own gain,
that the Priests might be hired to use this remedy for the sins of the
people: this salve for all sores.

De Missa. li. 1. cap. 6 Out of Ge. 14.18
The first argument that Bellarmine has for proof of this unbloody sacrifice
of the Mass, is at large handled by Bellarmine: but the effect of it is this.
The thing figured must be like to the figure: But Melchisedech, who was the
figure, offered to God bread and wine, as a sacrifice: Therefore also must
Christ offer his body in form of bread, Bell li. 1. ca. 7. de Missa. Heb. 7.
and his blood in form of wine, for a sacrifice. First, his first proposition
is not simply true, but only inasmuch as the one must be figured of the
other. But in what things Melchisedech is a figure of Christ, none can better
tell than the Apostle to the Hebrews, who fully handles that matter, Col. cum
Tryph. fol. 36
and yet does not once mention this sacrifice. And therefore we may gather,
that Melchisedech was no figure of Christ in that point: For if he was, then
was not the Apostle faithful to omit so necessary a point. Justin also has a
notable comparison of them, but he does not touch that in one word. Secondly,
a sacrifice must be offered: but this bread and wine was but brought forth for
so does their own translation testify. Thirdly, a sacrifice must be offered
to God: this place mentions no such thing, and therefore most likely that it
was brought to refresh Abraham, and his soldiers. Whereby we see, that
Bellarmines minor has no truth in it, wherein he affirms that Melchisedech
offered bread and wine to God in sacrifice. Lastly, what a consequence is this:
Melchisedech offered to God bread and wine in sacrifice: therefore Christ
offered himself in form of bread and wine. Rather is this a strong argument
to the contrary, if we should grant that he did offer the bread and wine to
God, which has no probability in it: But I say, if that should be granted,
we might thus reason: The thing figured must be like to the figure: but
Melchisedech who was the figure, offered but bread and wine, therefore Christ
offered nothing else but bread and wine: and so makes it nothing for that
sacrifice, for which the Papists do allege it.

As for his testimonies out of the fathers, for proof of Melchisedechs
offering of bread and wine to God in sacrifice, because I purpose especially to
go through his general arguments, I omit of purpose a particular examining of
every place, only contenting my self with this general observation, that
out of the testimonies alleged he can hardly conclude that which he takes
in hand to prove, because the fathers seem rather to allude many times unto
that which he did, than so to allege his doing, as that they think any
necessary argument for proof hereof, is to be gathered out of the same. And
that may well be gathered out of Chrysostom upon this place, who says thus: In
Genesis hom. 3.
For the honor that he showed to the patriarch, see how a sacrament is
insinuated: For he offered to him bread and wine. Mark (to him) that is, to
Abraham, flat against that which they would. And this is most agreeable unto
the history written by Josephus, who by all likelihood knew best in his time
how that story was the^ understood, Ant. li. 1. c. 18
he says that Melchisedech gave great intertainment unto the soldiers of
Abraham, And so Chrysostom in the place alleged says, Abraham brought forth
loaves and wine. And thus does the Chaldee Paraphrase expound it: So that if we
rightly consider, not only what they say, but how they speak it, and upon
what ground, to answer whatsoever he can bring out of the fathers concerning
this point, will not be hard.

Bellarmine) was an express figure of the Eucharist: de Missa. lib. 1. cap 7.
But, the Passover was a kind of offering of a sacrifice to God: Therefore
the Eucharist must so be. Master Bellarmine has forgotten what he should
prove: he must teach Christ to be in his last supper a sacrifice properly so
called: but this argument proves the Eucharist to be a kind of sacrifice.

This argument, to be short, is thus answered: There were two things in the
Passover: The one was, the killing of it, by which was Christ's death
represented unto us, as Iustine Martyr that ancient father teaches, Dialog.
cu^ Tryph. Iudaeo. The other was, the eating of it, by which was figured unto
them that spiritual food of the soul Christ Jesus, who was promised unto
their fathers. And in this respect may it in some sort be called a figure of
the Eucharist, because it represented unto them that thing, that the Eucharist
represents unto us. Therefore, if in the first proposition. Bellarmine means
by celebrating the Passover, the eating of the Passover, I grant it, but
then is his minor or second proposition untrue: For the eating of it was not
the killing of it, and so not a sacrifice. But if by the celebrating of the
Passover, he understand the killing of it, then is his mayor to be denied,
because in the Eucharist is no killing, or shedding of blood. But on the
contrary, a man may thus reason: The celebrating of the Passover was not in
every respect a figure of the Eucharist: For the Passover must have the
sprinkling of blood which might not be sprinkled but by the Priest only: as
appears 2. Chron. 30.16. where that solemn keeping of the Passover, by king
Ezechiah is described: and 2. Chron. 35.11. where it is declared, how zealously
Josiah performed the same service. And in that respect only is it to be
counted a Sacrifice: for that only belonged to the Priests to do, so as no
other but the Priests might do it. All other things might be, and were
performed by others: But the Eucharist they all with full mouth, confess to
be unbloody: and therefore in this thing wherein only the Pascall Lamb may
be accounted a sacrifice, it is no figure of the Eucharist: So the celebrating
of the Passover, even in that point wherein it is a sacrifice, does nothing
prove that sacrifice which the Romish church would teach in the Mass. And see
how unnecessary an argument this is: In the celebrating of the Passover,
there was a bloody sacrifice: therefore in the Eucharist must be a bloody
sacrifice. This consequence the Papists themselves will not grant: and yet it
is as good and necessary as that of theirs. In celebrating of the Paschall
Lamb there was a sacrifice: therefore in the Eucharist there must be a
sacrifice. For this principle that master Bellarmine does set down, That
celebrating of the Passover, was en express figure of the Eucharist: if it
prove the Eucharist to have a sacrifice, it does also prove it to have a
bloody sacrifice: for otherwise the Lamb or Passover was not an express
figure of the Eucharist. If therefore the Papists will deny that it is a
bloody sacrifice, why should we grant it to be a sacrifice, unless they can
allege better reason than this that is taken from celebrating the Passover.
And thus much for the second argument.

Bellarmine brings, he says he never read answer to it: and this it is,
The blood of the old Testament, Exodus 24. Cap. 8.
was the blood of a sacrifice already slain and offered: therefore the blood
of the new Testament is so: It is true, that when Moses said, This is the blood
of the covenant that God has made with you, the beast for sacrifice was
already slain: but that it must needs be so in the blood of the new
testament, there is no necessity, and therefore that argument must be denied.
First, because master Bellarmine makes the especial thing in this covenant to
be, that the blood was shed before the words were spoken: whereas the
principal part in deed is, that the covenant must be established by blood. And
therein Moses directed them to Christ, in whose blood the covenant of grace is
established with Gods people. Which the Apostle to the Hebrews does rightly
consider of, Heb. 9.8.
and therefore looks not to the time wherein the sacrifice was slain, but to
the matter whereby the covenant was established. Secondly, the order which Mo^
ses does use, and the Apostle observes out of him as a very material point,
is of us to be marked. For first, the covenant was made between God and the
people, and then it was ra^^^^ by the blood even so because Christ must needs
make this covenant, and set down the s h^ s last will and Testament, therefore
his blood (...) must of necessity be after the (...) of this his last will:
so that although that blood of the (...) Testament was (...) before the words
were spoken, yet it is not needful it should so be in the new Testament.
Nay, it can not so be, because he must man e this con^^^^ whilst yet he was
^^^ e, and no other could make it for him. Then do he confirm (...) by his
blo^^ shedding, which was afterward upon the cross, whereof that blood of
the old Testament was but a shadow. And thus I trust, just cause appears to
deny his argument. And then that which follows, that Christ therefore must
be sacrificed in his last supper without (...) further labor, falls to the
gr^^^^. As for the five sundry arguments alleged by him in the ^^ th Chapter
of the aforesa^ de book, ^
it is no mar^^^^ though master Be^^ armine make no great account of the same.
For he cannot prove out of them, that Christ in h^ s last supper did offer up
his own body to God, ^ (...) 2 3^
and his blood, in form of breed and w^^^. His arguments are taken out of the
story of Hely the 2. out of the Prouer. 9.1 2 The third, out of Esaias, 19, 21.
The fourth out of Esaias, 66.21 ^^ d Ier. 33.17, 18 the fifth out of Dan. ^, 11,
12, and 12, 11 Read the places who so will, and it shall easily appear, that
they serve not to prove that which Bellarmine would, and therefore I pass them
over thus briefly.

^
But the might argument, the w^^ ght whereof well bear down all before it, is
taken out of Malachy. I have no pleasure in you, ^
says the Lord of hosts neither will I accept an offering at your hand For
from the rising of the sun, unto the going down of the same, my name (...)
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall (...) offered unto my
name, and a pure offering, for my name (...) great among the heathen, says the
Lord of hosts. Which place to be understood of a sacrifice properly so called,
(...) not of spiritual sacrifices, master Bellarmine will prove by sundry
arguments: The first is drawn from the Hebrew word which the Prophet uses
there, which master Bellarmine will not in any wise have to be used but for
those sacrifices that are properly so called. And yet in this very book, a
little before, Cap. ^
he confesses that sacrifice that is called by the same name, to be But as a
part, or as it were the s^^^ ce of another sacrifice. And that answer did then,
as he thought, serve his turn, to stop the mouth of Kemnitius. But, now he
will have it, not only to be a sacrifice, but even a most proper sacrifice.
But by that word, and (...) that place we are taught, that the sacrifices of
Christians shall be the true sacrifices, not consisting only of outward show,
but having that (...) seasoning and true s^^ ceritie, which through Jesus
Christ shall be acceptable unto God. And that singlenes of heart, was signified
by that Mincha which was commanded to be offered by the people of God, with
their daily sacrifices. Therefore the name proves not strongly enough the
sacrifice for which it is brought. His second argument is taken out of that
word Clean sacrifices, wherein he strives much to prove, How (...) talked
(...)
that our spiritual sacrifices of prayers, thanksgiving, yea, of our selves
and all ou^ obedience, cannot be clean: Wherein although he says truly of
our works as they are in themselves considered, yet are they also called
Clean: first, in respect of the fountain of regeneration from whence they
proceed, in regard whereof, although they be not simpl^ e clean, yet in
comparison of the works of them that are secure in their wickedness they are
clean. Secondly, because God accounts them as clean for Christ's sake.
Thirdly, in respect of that whereunto the works of the regenerate do tend:
for though they cannot attain to perfection, yet do they firm for it. And
(...) this sort David confesses, some may be Clean. Psa. ^ 4.3^.
Who shall climb up into the hal of the lord, or who shall stand in his holy
place? He that has innocent hands, and a clean heart. To this Esaias Esaias 1.16
1. Tim. 2.8
exhorts: Be you clean. And of this speaks the Apostle Saint Paul, In
every place lifting up pure hand, or clean hands. And if M. Bellarmine do not
content himself with this cleanness, he will find that even the sacrifice of
the Mass it self, for which he strives so in this place, seeing the virtue
thereof must somewhat depend upon the goodness and devotion of the Priest (as
he says) will not be found very clean, De Missa li. 1. cap. 4
because the sacrificer is many times very unclean. His third reason is
taken out of the words that are in the beginning of the text alleged. Out of
which he will prove that it must be a new sacrifice, and such as was not
before: but our spiritual sacrifices have been always, therefore the Prophet
cannot mean of our spiritual sacrifices. It will never be proved that the
Prophet speaks of such a sacrifice as never was. But the Jews trusted too
much in their external Sacrifices: yea, though they were not such as God
commanded that they should be. But on the contrary, God tells them, that
even among the Gentiles whom they despised, thinking that no good could be
amongst them, I say, among them should be offered, not such polluted and
unclean things, as the Priests were content to take of the Jews to offer to
God, but a Clean offering: even such an offering as was the body of their
shadows, the truth of their figures, and the substance of their ceremonies, in
respect of him that brought the offering: that is, they should serve the Lord
with a sincere and single heart. And this is the clean sacriffce that Malachie
means, which was acceptable always, and always shall be. Fourthly,
Bellarmine imagines, that God by Malachy sets the contempt and dishonouring
of God, done by the Leuiticall Priests against the honor that he shall have
among the Gentiles. Be it so. What then: The Jews (says he) dishonored God
in a visible sacrifice, therefore the Gentiles also must honor him by a
visible sacrifice: otherwise the dis^ onor done by the Jews, is greater than
the honor done by the Gentiles: I deny his consequence: for, they dishonored
God but in a corner of the world, but the Gentiles worshipped him from the
rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same: and herein stands the
force of the comparison, as by the words plainly appears. Fifthly, he
supposes that the Priests of the old law, are compared with the Priests in
the Gospel, but there is no such matter, as the words declare. But to wring
and force words, to see what may be gathered out of them, rather than to
search what their true meaning is, does bring but small credit to their cause,
and weak proof to their doctrine. His last argument to prove this place of
Malachie not to belong to a spiritual sacrifice, is out of the fathers, where,
in my judgment he shows his weakness, more than in his other reasons, or
else a worse humor. For although that Justinius Martyr whom he first
alleges, Col. cum Tryph. Iudaeo.
does in truth affirm, and we deny it not, that Malachie says that the
Eucharist is a sacrifice, yet that he speaks not of a sacrifice properly so
called, Bellarmine must needs confess, except he speak against his own
conscience, if he consider what he says long after in that book: namely,
that Every one that is called by the name of Jesus Christ, are in deed made
Priests to God, as God does testify, saying: In every place clean and
acceptable sacrifices shall be offered. Which sacrifices also what they are,
he afterward testifies, prayers and thanks giuings. What can be more plain?
But this especially is to be remembered, that not Priests only, but every
Christian does by Iustines words, offer up these clean offerings, and
therefore that he speaks of spiritual sacrifices. Irene his second
witness, makes little for his purpose: for even immediately before the words
whereby Bellarmine would prove the Eucharist to be a sacrifice, after the
proper signification of the word, he shows that God has no delight in
sacrifices or burnt offerings, but in Faith, obedience, and righteousness. And
after, that he taught his disciples to offer to God the first fruits out of his
creatures, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32
not that he needed any thing, but that they should neither be unfruitful, nor
unthankful. And so he took bread, and gave thanks, and eat, as is by
Bellarmine alleged. Can any thing be more plain? He first shows that God
regards not those real sacrifices, that I may so term them: then he
shows, that the Eucharist is a sacrifice of thanksgiving. And as in the
words alleged by Bellarmine, it is an offering of the first fruits of his
gifts, Cap. 33.
that gives us our nourishment, and in the next chapter he expounds the
incense (so alleging the words of Malachie, In every place incense shall be
offered up) by that place of the Apocalips, Apoc. 5.8
that the incense was the prayer of the Saints: so we see that prayers and
praises are the sacrifices that he speaks of, and these are spiritual, and
not real sacrifices. And as for Tertullian Tertul.
whom in the 3. place he brings forth: as he has nothing for him in the
place by him alleged, Tert. cont. Marcion. li. 4
so yet he plainly expresses in another place what he understands by that
clean sacrifice that Malachie speaks of, Exam. Con. Trid. 2. part.
namely, Sincere prayer out of a pure conscience. Which place being alleged by
Kemnitius against the council of Trent, Bellar. to shift it off, as boldly as
untruly, he affirms that Tertul. does not expound Malachies place, where he
names the clean sacrifice, but where he names the incense. But the place of
Tertullian plainly shows the untruth of his answer: for Tertullian speaks
thus: In every place a sacrifice shall be offered in my name, and a clean
sacrifice, even sincere prayer out of a pure heart. So that Tertullian did not
so much as dream of any incense there: and it is so placed, that it must
needs expound how he understands that clean sacrifice spoken of by
Malachie. The next comes in Cyprian, who says, That the old sacrifice is
abolished, and the new celebrated: and then (says Bellarmine) he cites this
place of Malachie. Ad Quirin. lib. 1. ca. 16 Esaias 1.11.12 Psa. 50.14.15, 23
It is true: but first he cites Esaias, and the 13. verse of the 50. Psalm, or
as he does reckon it, of the 49. for rejecting of their external sacrifices,
and then out of the same Psalm he teaches, that prayer and praise are the
true sacrifices: and also out of the 4. Psalm, Psalm. 4.6
he speaks of the sacrifice of righteousness. And then follows that of
Malachie. whereby it is most manifest, that Cyprian understands by the
sacrifice mentioned in Malachie, no other than that which out of the Psalms he
learned. And in all these places, Bellarmines evil dealing is notorious: For
he will not so much as see the words that are before his eyes, but only
picketh out that which he thinks serves for the establishing of his error,
and concealeth that which would give light to the truth. And it were too
tedious to answer to every testimony, especially seeing that which has
been said of the places before alleged, does sufficiently testify what was
the judgment of the ancient fathers concerning this place of Malachie now in
question: I will therefore return to his general arguments.

Bellarmine his fifth principal argument, Ioh. 4.21.23
is taken out of saint John, where he shows that the true worshippers shall
worship in spirit and truth: but this worship must needs be (says he) the
offering of sacrifices propely so called: Therefore the true worshippers in the
days of Christ shall offer these sacrifices properly so called. In John Hom. 32
But Chrysostom. upon that place can find no such sacrifices, but expounds this
place by the 12. to the Romans, of our spiritual sacrifices, with whom also
Theoph. seems to agree. In. John Tract. 15.
And S. August. thinks not that this kind of worshipping needs to be
performed in any material temple, but that our selves are Gods temple, yea,
and that his holy temple, and therefore that this worship must be in our
selves, and therefore spiritual. Hitherto have we heard some reasons to prove
in the Eucharist that there is a sacrifice properly so called, gathered partly
of the figures of the old law, of the which I may truly complain, De unit.
Eccl, cap. 19.
as S. August. did of the Donatists: You stay (says he) upon those dark
points, least you should be forced to grant that which is plain: or else
forced out of some other doubtful sentences, whereof also with the same
father, against the same heretics, I may say, Allege something that needs
no interpreter, Cap. 16
that cannot be proved to be spoken of some other thing, and you endeavor to
draw it to your own meaning. And therefore, out of such uncertain allegations
a certain conclusion cannot be gathered. But now let us see what is alleged
out of the very institution it self: for if any thing worth hearing can be
brought out of it, it must needs be forcible. Therefore thus he reasons: Bell.
de missa li: 1 ca. 12.
Christ in his last supper offered himself under the form of bread and wine
to God the father, and commanded that to be done of the Apostles, and their
successors to the end of the world: But this is to offer a sacrifice, properly
and truly so called, and to institute that it should be offered: Therefore the
Eucharist is a sacrifice properly so called. For the mayor in this argument,
whereof all the doubt is, it is a plain fallacy: for he beggeth to have that
confessed that is denied, and to have that granted that is in question. For if
he could prove that Christ did offer himself in his last supper to God the
father, we would easily confess it to be a sacrifice true and proper. So that
on the contrary, I may as well reason thus: Christ commanded nothing to be don,
but that which himself did in his last supper: but himself did not sacrifice:
and therefore he commanded no sacrifice in the last supper. Well, his first
proof of this untrue proposition, is yt which he has said of Melchisedech, the
paschal Lamb, and the blood of the covenant, of which I trust I have spoken
sufficiently, in the judgment of any indifferent man, in my answer to his 3.
first principal arguments. Luke 22.19 20 1 Cor. 11.24
His second reason is this: These words, Is given, is broken, is shed, which
are words of the present time, do signify that he was given, broken, and shed
unto god for a sacrifice. M. Bellar. seems to me to be hopshakled, yt he
cannot well step forward. He has taken upon him to prove out of these words, yt
christ offered his body in his supper to his father for a sacrifice: and how
does he prove it? because the words show that he is given, broken and shed for
a sacrifice to God: is not this a good leap, think you? And yet his
proposition that he should prove, and his reason whereby he does it, are all
one. But if he stand upon these words, Is given, broken, and shed,
therefore it is an act that then was done, and therefore done in the Supper:
what will he say to their own translation, which translateth, Shall be shed,
in Matthew and Mark, and Luke also, and also of the bread, This is my body,
which shall be given for you. It seems when that translation was first set
forth, that piece of scripture was not so taken as it is now: but that those
words of the supper, Math. 26.28 mar. 14.24 luke 22.20 1. cor. 11.24
were taken for a promise of that which Christ performed the next day, as in
truth they were. I but master Bellarmine tells us, that al these readings are
good, because there may be a good reason of either of them. I confess that to
be true: and therefore M. Bellarmins reason is not strong, whose force hangs
upon these words only, which may well be translated otherwise. But by the
way, what if I should thus reason? A representative sacrifice is not a
protiatorie sacrifice: but Christ's sacrifice that in his supper he offered unto
God, was representative, says Bellarm. in this place, therefore not
propitiatory, and much less then is the Mass a propitiatory sacrifice:
Neither do I see to what end Christ should represent to God the sheding of his
blood, which should be afterward upon the cross, although M. Bellar does say
it: because he is loath to tell the true reason (which I have already touched)
why their common Latin translation did not precisely follow the Greek in
translating of these words, shall be given, broken, shed. His third reason out of
the words of the institution. to prove his sacrifice, is as strong as the
second, and is this: Breaking cannot be spoken well of the body, and in this
place (which is broken for you) cannot be true of the bread, for the bread is
not broken for us: therefore it must be understood of Christ's body in form
of bread. In this argument M. Bellarmine rejects their vulgar translation
which sometime he and his fellows do highly extol, for, that says, which
shall be delivered. And so do Chrysostom, Jerome, Primatius, Theophilact, yea,
and Thomas of Aquine also, al of them expounding these very words. Epist. 3
And Cyprian in his second book of Epistles: and so do our English Remists
translate it likewise. Al whose translations do sufficiently prove, that they
espied not any such mystery in that word, is broken, but that they were bold
to deliver the very true sense of it, shall be delivered, to signify that the
body of Christ should suffer the torments upon the cross, which S. Paul did
express by the word of breaking. And in that respect does Thomas of Aquine
(who would feign have the Eucharist to be a sacrifice) say it is a
Representative sacrifice of Christ's passion, 1. Cor. 11. lect. 5.
by which passion he gave his body to death for us. But whereas Tho. and after
him M. Bellarmine would make their Eucharist a representative sacrifice: read
and peruse who so will the words of the institution, it will not be found that
our Savior Christ did offer in his last supper any sacrifice to God, but only
spoke to the Apostles instructing them in the use of the sacrament which then
he instituted. As for that he reasons out of the words of S. Luke because he
seems to speak of the shedding of the cup, not of the blood: Matthew and
Mark Mat. 26.28. Mar. 14.24.
make the matter more plain, and tell us that the blood of Christ is shed.
Does not this wringing and wresting of scriptures, to force them from their
true and natural sense, to serve their turn, manifestly argue that it must
needs be a weak tottering building, that is raised upon so bad foundations?
and that it is but for want of better proof, that they are feign to scrape
together such poor helps? The second argument of M. Bellarmines, to prove a
sacrifice by the institution, is this in effect, Christ's body and blood are
received in the Eucharist, therefore they cannot but be sacrificed. Which
argument for us to deny, it is sufficient, seeing that M. Bellarmine himself
seems to enforce this only against them that confess a real presence in,
with, and under the bread, and yet deny the sacrifice. But whereas Kemnitius
requires in a sacrifice 4. properties, whereof he wants 3. in the Eucharist,
M. Bellar. can find them al. First the persons that should sacrifice are the
priests, who are willed to sacrifice in these words (if ye will trust Bellar.)
Do this. Who would ever have gathered thus, yt had eyes to look upon the words
of the institution? You must Do this: ergo you must sacrifice? Yea, Bellar.
seems in the beginning almost of this chapter, to be half ashamed of this
argument, and blames Calvin and Kemnitius, because they say that with the
papists in that place, and those words, To do, is to sacrifice, and therefore it
needs no farther answer. But for the act of sacrifising: it troubles
Bellarmine to find it out, neither knows he how to distinguish between
that act, I mean the sacrifice which Christ offered says he. and other
actions in the supper. And yet master Bellarmine is sure, that such a thing
there is there, but where to find it he cannot tell. Is this (think you) good
dealing for them that should be good guides unto others, to take upon them to
lead men they know not whether themselves? The words for a sacrament are very
plain, but if you would follow with a bloud-hound, you can never find a
sacrifice out of those words. As for the testimonies that master Bellarmine
alleges out of the fathers, they shall have this answer. The Eucharist is
in sundry respects called a sacrifice, A sacrifice.
of the fathers, not only because therein we offer the sacrifices of prayers,
and thanks giuings, and duties of love, but also, and that especially, because
it is a memorial of the true sacrifice which Christ offered for us upon the
cross: Therefore it is not enough for M. Bellar. to bring them in, saying,
that the Eucharist is a sacrifice, which we deny not, but that it is a
sacrifice properly so called, which the papists affirm, but cannot prove.

7. general argument needs no answer for it is so weak, that every child may
see ye fault of it. For out of those words, Act. 13.2.
As they ministered unto the Lord (speaking of Paul and Barnabas and others)
ministering seems to be, or may be taken for sacrifycing: ergo it is taken
there for sacrifycing, says M. Bellar. Judas seemed to be a true servant of
Christ but was not. Lib. 1. de M^ ssa. ca. 13.
And the very children do know that it is no good argument to say, such a
thing may be, therefore it is so.

Rhem. Test. De missa li. 1 cap. 14
But in the tenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinths, which the
Papists make their strong bulwark, master Bellarmine finds three arguments.
His first argument is this, Every altar which in deed is an altar, is builded
for offering of sacrifices: But the Lords table after a sort is an altar:
therefore it is for offering of sacrifices. We will not strive with master
Bellarmine much for this point: for we will confess that such sacrifices are
offered upon the altar, as master Bellarmine confesses the altar to be. The
Lords table (says he) is a kind of altar, or an altar after a sort: So we
say, that sacrifices after a sort, namely spiritual sacrifices, are offered
thereupon. His second reason out of this place, is a loud lie: For thus he
says: For the Apostle speaks plainly, that we that are faithful, do so
receive the body and blood of the Lord, at the table of the Lord, as the Jews
their sacrifices, or the Gentiles their meats offered to Idols, on their
altars or tables. And because he cannot prove this to be true, you must trust
him of his own word, for he brings no proof at all. Let the indifferent
reader peruse the place, and mark his false dealing with it. The words cited
by him, begin at the 14. verse of that Chapter, and continue unto the 22. the
sum whereof is this, as they that consider the place may see: As by
participating at the Lords table, you are made partakers of Christ, and joined
together, amongst your selves in one body, verse 16, 17: so by participating
at the table of Idols, you are made partakers of them, and joined in fellowship
with the Idolaters. But that which he tells us, is so plain in these words,
cannot be gathered out of them. And this also is a sufficient answer to his
third argument that he wringeth out of these words. Whereby he will force
Saint Paul whether he will or not, to find out an offering in the Eucharist,
because he says, they that eat the offerings, are partakers of the altar. Out
of which place, as he cannot probably conclude any thing to prove a sacrifice
in the eucharist, so he plainly proclaims, that if it should be proved,
that their mass were a sacrifice, yet the priest only is the better for it,
because the priest only eats up all. For, They that eat the offerings, are
partakers of the Altar.

The second sort of proofs which Bellarmine promised, is gathered out of the
fathers. Lib. 1. de missa cap. 6.
And the first argument of that sort, is drawn from the words of sacrifice,
sacrificing, offering, oblation and such like. Chap. 15.
Why the fathers use thus to speak of the Eucharist, I have showed a little
before in the answer to his sixte argument. But now master Bellarmine
proves, that a sacrifice may be both commemoratiue, and represent an other
thing, as did the sacrifices in the Leuiticall law, and also be a true
sacrifice indeed, which is most true: and thereupon concludes, that this
sacrifice representative in the eucharist is also a true sacrifice. But this
his argument has no necessary consequence: for, the Leuiticall sacrifice must
needs be a sacrifice truly so called, that by the death of the beast offered
up, and by the shedding of that blood, the death and blodshedding of Christ,
might be the more lively represented to the faithful, and more constantly
believed of them, which thing being in truth performed, and Christ Jesus the
true facrifice indeed being offered, Heb. 10.26
There remains no more sacrifice for sin

Moreover, in those sacrifices, that they might be known to be sacrifices
instituted and appointed of God, we see how the thing sacrificed, the manner of
sacrificing, and all the circumstances are plainly set down and commanded by
God: And on the contrary, in this sacrifice which they seek to maintain, all
things are obscure: not so much as a probable show of any commandment, or of
any institution of a sacrifice: Therefore the Jewish sacrifice can be no proof
for the sacrifice of the mass. Secondly, he will prove, that in the
eucharist, is not only a representative sacrifice, because the fathers speak
sometimes of oblations and sacrifices in the plural number, and therefore there
are more sacrifices than that one representative: but he takes more pains
then he needs, for we teach that besides the representation of Christ's
sacrifice, we offer in the Eucharist the sacrifices of prayers, praises, and
such like spiritual oblations.

Thirdly, baptism, says he, is a sacrament representing Christ's death, but
is not called of any of the fathers, a sacrifice offered to God: therefore the
only representation of Christ's death and bloudshedding cannot make the
Eucharist be called a sacrifice. For baptism, it represents unto us the
efficacy and virtue of Christ's death, rather than the death it self: So that
there is great difference between these two sacraments. For the sacrament of
the Lords supper represents the sacrifice it self which he upon the cross
did offer, even the tormenting and mangling of his body, and the shedding of
his blood. So that there is much more cause why the Eucharist should be called
a sacrifice, than baptism. Fourthly, M. Bellarmine imagines, that if it were
not indeed a very proper sacrifice, we might in the Eucharist say to God
truly, I offer to thee this gift, accept Lord this sacrifice. And moreover he
charge us that we do wholly abstain from such words, and greatly reprove
them for using of them. And yet in one short prayer used after the receiving of
the communion with us, we pray thus, Accept this our sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving. And after, We offer and present unto thee o Lord our selves, our
souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice to thee.
Which words do not only answer the slander wherewith he unjustly charge
our churches, but also shows that well we may use those words, I offer to
thee this gift, accept Lord this sacrifice, although we take not upon us to
offer Christ really in the Eucharist. As for the hyperbolicall speeches, which
the fathers use sometimes, which is his first reason, we learn thereby rather
with how reverent an affection we should come to these sacraments, than what
we should think the things themselves to be. For how can it else be true
that Bellarmine himself out of the Greek fathers alleges, that they call
it a sacrifice terrible and full of horror, which cannot be properly verified
of the sacrifice propitiatory which they would have it to be, for that must
needs be sweet and comfortable unto us: in it is only grace and mercy, no
horror, no terror.

Lastly, because the fathers acknowledge in this sacrifice of the Eucharist,
that there is that honor performed, which is due to God only, therefore would
master Bellarmine conclude, that it must needs be more than a sacrifice of
representation. And we do easily yield unto him, that it is also called a
sacrifice, of the fathers, yea and of us also, in respect of the spiritual
sacrifices therein offered. And this yet must be noted, that properly to speak
of the Eucharist, it is but a sacrament: But in the respects aforesaid, De
missa li. 1. cap. 16.
it is sometime called, yet improperly a sacrifice. But says master
Bellarmine, the fathers make mention of an altar: therefore they also prove
thereby that the Eucharist is a sacrifice: for there is no Altar, but in
respect of a real sacrifice.

But the first altars were but tables of wood, not altars of stone, such as are
now for the popish sacrifice, in these days commanded: and these altars of
word they carried about from place to place, as occasion served: and therefore,
although the names of altars be found in the most ancient fathers almost that
are, yet popish altars are not thereby proved, neither were there any altars of
stone before the time of Siluester, who lived more than three hundred years
after Christ: For he first commanded that stone altars should be made, as
their friend Gerson writes: And therefore as they call it sometime an altar,
so sometime they call it a Table, Lib. 4. cont. Floratum. De consecrat. did.
1. cap. Nemo
as does Clement, who they say was one of the first bishops of Rome, he twice
within few words mentions the Lords Table. If therefore it be a good
argument thus to reason: The fathers do sometime mention an altar for the
eucharist: therefore they thought it was a sacrifice, for there needs no
altar but for a sacrifice. I am sure this is as good an argument: Sometime they
speak of a table for the eucharist as out of Athanasius, Theodoret, Augustine,
this Clement, and others, is most plain: and therefore they thought it not to
be a sacrifice, for, there is no sacrifice upon a table, but only upon an
altar.

De missa lib. 1. cap. 17.
Yet master Bellarmine roueth again with his uncertain proofs. The fathers
(says he) speak of priests, therefore they will have a sacrifice in the
eucharist. And why may not the fathers understand priests as we do in our
book of making of ministers, and in our book of common prayer, who succeed
in the public ministry in the church the priests of Leui, Leuit. 10.11. Deuteronomy.
17.5. mal. 2.7.
not in sacrificing, for the sacrifices are ended, but in teaching: for that
was also the priests office, and is now the office of them that we sometime
call priests. And yet we, although we use the name, do not allow that popish
sacrifice, which Bellarmine would have. And why then should this be holden for
a good argument: The fathers speak sometimes of priests: Therefore the
eucharist is a real sacrifice, or a sacrifice after the proper signification
of that word. As for that which he has in the eighteenth chapter of that his
first book of the mass, is almost all one with that which he said in the
fifteenth chapter, and therefore it is answered before. But his last proof,
Chap. 19
whereby he will out of the fathers prove a sacrifice, is, as himself says,
unanswerable, unless we do utterly reject the fathers. The fathers desire not
to be credited against the truth. They were men, they might err. Only Gods
word is perfectly true. And therefore, as we do them no wrong, to try and
examine their doctrine by that rule and square that cannot deceive: How the
fathers are to be received.
so if it be not agreeable to that word of truth, we must rather confess all
men to be liars, than swerve one jot from that perfect way. And therefore it
is not absurd, if we leave the fathers, when they go without their guide of
Gods written word, or speak without their warrant of Gods infallible truth.
So that although we are content, to show how the fathers wrested by them,
either must or may be understood, that by that means we may pull from them
that visard of antiquity and consent of fathers, wherewith they cloak and
color their dangerous and deceitful heresies, yet we receive the fathers but
as men, and therefore no masters to give us new laws, but yet men of excellent
gifts in their time, and always worthy of much reverence and honor. But yet
this is not a good argument: The fathers have somctime written this, or have
done this: Therefore it is true, or it is good. But let us view his
unanswerable argument: If the eucharist were not a sacrifice, the fathers would
not have offered the same, for peace, safety, and sundry such things: but they
did: therefore it is a sacrifice. Mark how he proves that they did offer
the eucharist for such things. He first alleges Chrysostom in his homilies
to the people of Antioch, Hom. 79. Hom. 7^.
and then also upon Matthew, most notably belying that father, as though he
spoke thereof the sacrifice in the eucharist, whereas the first whole Homily is
altogether of prayer, and Chrysostom there shows, that they pray in deed for
the whole world, and for sundry persons: but of standing at the altar, not a
word: And therefore master Bellarmine belieth that father. And in the second
place, We pray first for them that are possessed, the second, for the
penitent, etc. Is this good dealing to avouch, that that ancient father says
in those places, that the Eucharist was offered for such things. Other
falsifications of these very places I omit, as not much material.

When I heard his great crack, I imagined this shot would have made a great
breach, but it is like to do no hurt at all. Then, for that which he alleges
out of same Augustine, that the Eucharist was offered by one for freeing a
certain house from evil spirits. De ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8.
It is true that he reports such a thing, and adds, That he prayed as
earnestly as he could, that that vexation might cease. First, it is not saint
Augustine himself that does this, but another: and this fact is not either
commended or allowed to be well done of saint Augustine. But they will answer,
The evil spirits left the house: And therefore the event proves the fact to
be good. Not so: but it is an argument of Gods might and mercy, that can and
will by evil, or the abuse of good means, bring to pass good things.
Secondly, it may justly be doubted, whether saint Augustine did impute this
effect unto that sacrifice that he speaks of, or the earnest prayers that
were made for it. Yea it seems rather that he imputes it unto the sacrifice
of prayer, than any other sacrifice.

Moreover it seems, that as in the days of saint Paul there were that were
baptized over the dead, either to declare their hope of the resurrection, or to
testify their dying unto sin, or for such other considerations: so in these
days of S. Augustine, some, upon such occasions would celebrate the sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, by that assurance and pledge of Gods love, to
stir up and confyrme their faith, that with more earnestness and faith they
might crave Gods help. But if master Bellarmine would have this to be a
catholic doctrine, that has but one or few examples, he will have Vincentius
Lirinensis flat contrary to him. Confess. li. 9. cap. 12.
So that also that is alleged of the oblation for his mother: it can not be
denied, that there were at that time some such abuses creeping into the church
of God, concerning that charitable superstition, that I may so term it, of
prayer for the dead, of the which some had good liking, some liked not. But out
of them it is hard to establish a strange doctrine in Gods church, and such as
Gods word is not acquainted withal. But even by that book of S. Augustine it
is plain, and namely by the next chapter to the place alleged, that S.
Augustine did not once think of any propitiatory sacrifice that was in the
mass. And I would also desire the indifferent Reader to judge how little such
matters savor of the majesty of that spirit, which is seen in the
scriptures. Bellarmines last sort of arguments are drawn from reason: The
first is grounded upon this principle, De missa lib. 1. cap. 20.
there is no religion without an external sacrifice: which is most false, for
God when he sees his people to whom he commanded those external sacrifices, to
repose themselves too much upon them, does not only reject those sacrifices
which himself appointed, but also teaches wherein true religion consists, Isa
1.15, 16. and Mich. 6.8. Yea, mark the whole scriptures and it will appear,
that faith and obedience are the especial things that god requires of us, and
that the sacrifices directed thereto. His second argument taken from reason is
this: The Jews had such sacrifices: therefore we must have them. Chap. 21.
If this argument be denied, he can never prove it. For the Jews had those
ceremonies and rudiments of the world, because they were in their nonage,
Galat. 4.3.
and Christ was not yet come, and so the revelation of Christ, was not then so
plain as now it is: therefore they needed those things, but we do not. And
moreover, if these sacrifices were so necessary as they affirm them to be, as
that there is no religion without them, and of necessity we must have them,
then were the Apostles too blame, who giving direction to the Gentiles what
were necessary for them, Acts 15.19.20.
never warned the^ of this external sacrifice. For seeing there was not any
such thing plainly set down in the word of God, it was needful that it
should have been signified to them, if any such thing had bin thought
necessary. But Bellarm. thus proves his argument: God has not abolished al
things in his law, as he has not taken away the commandments: therefore he
has not abolished the ceremonial law.

I would master Bellarmine would have taken some pains to show what part of
the ceremonial law is continued. But he tells us the sacraments are not
taken away, they are but changed: so the sacrifices must be but changed, not
taken away. When he shows what commission he has to tell God what he must
do, we will regard his words, but until that be showed, he must give us
leave, to acknowledge all these things in Christ to be performed, especially
seeing the word tells us not of any commandment to change it, or when,
how, or into what it should be changed. But I am loath to confute his gross
assertions, and reasonlesse reasons, whereby he seeks to keep us still in
bondage to external things. One or two arguments mo he has, the one grounded
upon such differences as themselves have devised, between a sacrament and a
sacrifice, the other is the general consent of the church throughout the
world: the first is somewhat touched in the fifteenth chapter, the other is the
thing that is in question, whether the true church have acknowledged it to be a
sacrifice, truly so called, and properly.

Now to conclude, seeing in the institution of this sacrament, there is not any
sacrifice prescribed as the words do teach us, neither can it be proved by the
scriptures, neither can we find any such doctrine universally received of the
fathers in the purer age of the church: Lastly, seeing the arguments that are
brought for defense of it, are so hard and obscure, so forced and wrested, as
they are both from the scriptures and the fathers: let us rest upon this
foundation, Heb. 9.28. Heb. 10.12
that Christ was once offered, to take away the sins of many: Once, I say,
and not often, and that being done, He sits for ever at the right hand of
God. So that either they must deny him to have a natural body, but so deified,
that it may be in many places at one time, as Nestorius the heretic taught: or
that he sits not on Gods right hand, against that which in our creed we
acknowledge: or that he has two bodies, the one in glory and majesty, with
God in heaven, the other shrouded under a little cake, the one visible in
heaven, the other invisible in the earth, or else they must confess, that he
cannot be changed into that little piece of bread, that he may so be offered up
to God his father, for a sacrifice in the Eucharist.

Of true and Christian Repentance, and of the Popish sacrament of Penance.
CHAP. 17.
THE PROTESTANTS
WE willingly confess and carefully teach repentance, that consists of the
mortification of the flesh, and the quickening of the spirit, of dying, to, or
from sin, and living to righteousness, of putting off the old man, the body
of sin, and putting on the new man, which after God is created in holiness
and righteousness, to be most necessary for every christian man and woman,
always, and earnestly to follow and practice. And whilst we must walk here
in this wicked world, where we meet with many stumbling blocks, whereat we
stumble, and many pits into the which we fall. It is impossible we should go on
forward to the end of our iorny, unless by true repentance proceeding from a
lively faith, and a true sense and feeling of Gods wrath against sin, and a
hearty detestation of our own unthankfulness, to our good and gracious god, we
be raised up again to walk in his ways, and to live in his true fear. So
that we find it to be true that Tertull. says, We are borne only to
repentance. We stand always so much in need thereof through sin.

THE PAPISTS
But the Papists not content with this plain and pure doctrine, to purchase
estimation and gain to the Popish priesthood, have devised a sacrament of
penance, whose parts are contrition Contrition
(which we make one part of true repentance) Confession, Confession.
not to God, but in the ears of the priest, of al thy sins, which has not
any warrant at all in the word, and satisfaction, Satisfaction.
which is nothing else but a blasphemous wrong, unto that satisfaction that is
made unto God by Christ his death. Of the which three parts of Popish penance,
Confession must be made unto the priest, and Satisfaction must by the Priest be
enjoined after Confession or shrift. By which means: they did bring into
miserable bondage, them, whose faults they knew, and that they might by masses
and i^ entals and such other devises of man, help them to satisfy for their
sins, they got no small gain. And from these two fountains pride and
greedines did spring this their sacrament of popish penance.

Of arguments whereby they defend this their sacrament of penance they have no
great store, and those they aledge, have no great strength. Their especial,
and in a manner only place that they aledge out of the scripture, is, wherein
it is said, Ioh. 20.22, 23
that Christ did breathe upon his disciples, and said to them, Receive the holy
ghost, whose sins you remit, they are remitted to them, whose-soeuer sins you
retain, they are retained. For upon this place does the council of Trent
especially rely for this their doctrine, (...) ^ 4. ca. 5.
as do also their other writers. Belike this place is very pregnant and plain
for their purpose, or else their cause is built upon a weak foundation. Let us
therefore view the strength of this place, for proof thereof for the which it
is brought. This text m^ st pro^^^ th^^ p^^^^^ is a sacrament properly so
called, for to this and it is alleged by Bellarmine. But how it is proved, De
(...) te^^^
let the indifferent Reader judge. And first, if we consider the expositions of
the ancient Fathers of the purer times, we shall see that they never gathered
out of these words such a sacrament. Read and search who will the commentaries
and expositions of the most ancient Fathers, Cyril, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Theophilact, and others, they shall not find that any of them have out of this
place taught the sacrament of penance. The words themselves teach us, that God
has given unto his church authority and power to preach forgiveness of sins,
to them that are of a contrite and broken heart, and the danger of sin to the
impenitent, as Peter Lombard himself one of the first establishers of this
Popish sacrament confesses, saying, that God has given to the Priests power
To bind and loose, that is, Lib. 4. did. 18 Non a^ tem.
to show that they are bound or losed. Which is agreeable to that that S. Luke
of our savior Christ says, Luc. 24.47.
that repentance and remission of sins, should be preached in his name among
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. As for any particular reckoning up of
sins, which they call Confession auricular or forift in the ear of the Priest,
without which secret Confession, says Andradius. Orthod. e^plic. lib. 8. page
658.
This divine sacrament could not long have been kept: or as for Satisfaction
that should be wrought for our sins by us or our means, these things can not
be gathered out of the words alleged. Nay, if that authority committed to
the ministry whereof saint Matthew and S. John speak, be to be expounded by the
words of saint Luke, Mat^. 16.19. Ioh. 20.23.
as I have showed that Peter Lombard does, Popish shrift and satisfaction are
quite overthrown thereby, seeing that this losing is the preaching of the
forgiveness of sins in the name of Christ, that is, not for any Satisfaction
that we can make, but in respect of that Satisfaction that Christ has
wrought. It is therefore a wonder to see how boldly and confidently out of this
Text they will avouch, that out of these words are plainly proved the acts
of the absolved, Bellar. de poenitent. lib. 1. ca. 10.
that is Confession, and Satisfaction, which must needs be in him that is
loosed to be from his sins. Is this to preach forgiveness in the name of
Christ? Secondly, I find not in the primitive church any such doctrine of that
their sacrament of penance, as now is taught. Indeed they required
Confession, but especially to God, as throughout the ancient fathers we may
see, and namely in Tertullian his book of repentance, which is by the Papists
violently drawn in to be a witness for them, but can say nothing that will
do them good in this cause.

And although the fathers do also sometime allow of Confession to man, and
that privately: yet did they never teach such necessity thereof, as that
without it sins might not be forgiven, or that the mortal sins (for those
only must be reckoned in Christ) cannot be forgiven, unless the Priest have
them declared unto him. Mark the writings of the Fathers, how far unlike
they are to the books of our Popish Clergy, and Romish writers in our days.
Tertullian, Anibrose, Augustine, and others, have made whole books of this
title De paenitentia, of penance, or repentance. Chrysostom also has made of
that matter eleven Homilies: yet out of these ancient fathers this Popish
doctrine of the sacrament of Penance cannot be proved, but that the teachers
thereof, are forced here and there to get some pieces of sentences to make some
show of proof. And this very shadow of proof is good enough to deceive the
ignorant and such as delight in darkness, as the likeness of men made of
stone or other stuff, set upon the tops of castles and holds, make the
enemy in the night afraid, for they think they are all men in deed, which in
the day when they may be viewed, do easily show what they are, namely stocks
or stones. If Saint Ambrose had known any such Sacrament, might not he,
writing two books of that matter, I mean of repentance, especially against
the Nouatians who denied unto such as offended after baptism, any hope of
pardon, although they repented, might not he (I say) have had from that
sacrament of the church, if the church had then known any such sacrament, a
strong and unanswerable argument against Nouatus or his followers, for denying
a Sacrament of the church? yes verily. But he used no such argument, because
there was not then any such Sacrament. Nay, the matter was not agreed upon many
hundredth years after Saint Ambrose his time. For, as it appears by Gratian,
de poen. did. 1. c. quamuis.
who lived about the year one thousand one hundred and fifty, the matter was
not then agreed upon, but there were many and diverse opinions, whether
confession and satisfaction were necessary for this Sacrament, some affirming,
others denying it, and Gratian says that on both opinions there were wise and
godly men, and therefore he leaves it indifferent. Which could not have
been, if that their Sacrament of penance, had before been perfected.
Therefore as Andradius does truly gather out of that history of auricular
confession banished out of the Church of Constantinople by Nectarius, Orthod.
expl. li. 8. page 663.
for a villainy committed by him that was appointed to hear confessions, that
therefore they were used of old, (although most falsely he teaches that it
began with the christian church: and as untruely applies it against
Kemnitius, who denies not but secret confession has of old been used, but
not, as in the popish church) so if it were a thing to be forbidden by man, we
may boldly say, it was not orda^ ned by God: but by man it was abolished, as
appears by the ecclesiastical history.

And whereas Andradius says, Socrat li. 5. cap. 19.
that the sacrament of penance began wi^ h the christian church, Socrates in
that place is directly against him, who tells us that it began after
Nouatus his heresy was published, which was about the year of our Lord 220.
For because the Nouatians would not communicate with them that denied their
profession in the persecution raised by Decius, the bishops therefore agreed
amongst themselves, and appointed some one to whom they might acknowledge their
sins. So that here we see against Andradius, that that confession which being
viewed is not like the popish shrifte, is more then 200 hundred years younger
then the Christian church. Moreover, as of al other sacraments, so of this also
the papists teach that it does give grace, and work that grace that it does
signify, Bellar. li. 1. de paenit. cap. 10.
which grace is then when the outward sign is used, powered by God into them
that receive the said sign. In which respect, as I take it, is that gross
absurdity set down by Roffensis, Artic. 10. cont. Lutherum.
That a sinner comes oftentimes with faith, and without grace to the
sacrament, who as soon as he has received the sacrament both he and his faith
by grace are quickened. To say nothing of this popish paradox and far from al
true taste of christian divinity (that a man may have faith and no grace,
whereas in truth faith is Gods gift and that of his especial grace) we see
what virtue the papists do attribute unto this sacrament, as they do call it,
and yet Peter Lombard their own friend, Li. sentent. 4. did. 18. Levit. 13.
(out of the priests office concerning leapers, who did only judge whether they
were clean or foul, but he could not make them leapers or not leapers, does
appoint also those limits unto the priests concerning binding or loosing, or
rather shows, that such is their authority, not that they can make any
sinners, or void of sin, (which lesson he learned out of Hierom) but only to
judge whether they were sinners or not. upon Matthew. 16
By which he learneth, and plainly says even in this cause, that God does not
always follow the judgment of the church: And therefore god does not always
bind or loose, as the church does in her consistory. Is not this flatly to
deny unto this their sacrament, that working virtue and power which the
papists give to it? Or rather is not this to deny it to be a sacrament, seeing
it is denied not only by Saint Hierom, but also by a dear friend of theirs
Peter Lombard, that it has such virtue as they ascribe to their Sacraments?
And here their answer of the unworthiness of him that receives this
Sacrament, whereby he hinders this work of the Sacrament, will not serve.
For we see that the judgment of the church by their opinion does only show
what men are, and according to it does bind or loose, but it does not make
them good or bad. And therefore Chrysostom in an homily of repentance, Hom. 8.
ad populum Antioch.
Trust not (says he) unto thy repentance, for thy repentance is not able to
take away so great sins. Now therefore we see, that nei^^ er the testimony
of the fathers, in their commentaries upon this place, neither the words
themselves, if we look upon their natural meaning, neither yet the practice
of the church, for more then 1100. years, after Christ, can make these words
to prove any sacrament of penance, which the papists so boldly without all
proof thrust upon us. For I pray you, where is the outward sign of this
sacrament? Are these words, I absolve thee, Council. Triden. Sess. 14. cap. 3.
etc? But where are these words commanded? Bellarmine has found them in these
words, Whose sins you remit, are remitted, etc. And how does he prove it?
Because the Lord would never grant unto his Apostles power to forgive sins,
de pa^ nit. li. 1. cap. 10.
but he would have that power exercised by some external sign, for these are
his words. We grant it, and for that cause he has appointed the ministry of
the gospel: but the promises are general, and whether they publicly, or
privately, are to be used to the comfort of the afflicted, we find not in the
scripture any set form set down for absolution: and therefore in the
scriptures they ca^ never find that outward sign which is required in a
sacrament. And therefore it seems that Bellarmine scarcely dares to defend
that which the council of Trent has taught, concerning the form of this
their sacrament. For the council of Trent says, Li. 1. de poen. cap. 16.
that these words are the form of their Sacrament of penance. But master
Bellarmine says, we are not tied to those words, but that these words, I
remit thee thy sins, will also serve the turn. For this matter let them
agree amongst themselves. But they must show us some outward sign appointed
by Christ for this Sacrament, or else we must deny it to be a Sacrament. And
that they have labored to do these many years, and yet they cannot do it.
But M. Bellarmine strives earnestly to prove that place, whose sins so ever
you remit, they are remitted, not to be spoken of baptism. We will ease him of
some labor, we will grant that it is not spoken only of that remission, that
therein is done. Man is like a ruinous house, that must always be repaired by
repentance. Hom. 3. de paenitentia.
We have always need to pray, forgive us our trespasses. Chrysostom pretily
compares sin in man, to an oak tree, which he that will cut it down, must
strike not once, or twice only, but often, yea he must never leave until it
fall. So must we fly always to this remedy, not only once, or twice, but ten
thousands of times, if so often we offend, yea always. The comfort of this
promise therefore, we will in no wise restrain to the time of our baptism
only: but we confess that that forgiveness of sins, which in our baptism
is sealed up unto us, has force and virtue, through our whole life: and
thereby are we assured, that this promise of the forgiveness of our sins, and
remitting of the same is most certain and true, and belongs to our whole
life, and to every sin that we commit.

Now this forgiveness say (the papists) must be applied unto us by the sacrament
of penance. They should prove that: for in matters of religion their credit
is not so good that we dare trust them. And the less we trust them in this
matter, because we are sure that God has given unto us other means to apply
his mercy unto us, namely his word: for applying whereof unto our consciences,
he has appointed his ministry in his church. Yea, he has given his word to
be read and known of every body. Then also has he given us Sacraments, to
confirm us in this word, and to make us more confidently to believe it, and
more faithfully to receive it. These therefore are the means whereby our faith
is nourished, and made more bold and strong, to apply to our humbled hearts
those comfortable promises of Gods good graces, which in the words are offered,
and by baptism, and the supper of the Lord are sealed up in our consciences.
Now, other Sacraments we know not, and namely this of penance. Neither is
there any necessary consequence in this argument: These words are spoken of
remission of sins, after baptism: therefore there must needs be a
Sacrament of penance. And that should be proved. And therefore to grant him
that, which he so strives for, will do him no good. After this one place
that Bellarmine has out of the Scriptures, he comes to the fathers, De
paenit. li. 1. cap. 10.
who because they afforde him no plain proof, he indeuoureth to wring
something from them by indirect means. The proof therefore that he has from
them, as himself professes, is either because that when they reckon up the
true Sacraments, they often make mention of repentance also, or else they
compare it with the sacrament of baptism, showing that it is God that works
in them both. Had it not bin better to yield unto the truth, then thus before
he proves any thing out of the fathers to proclaim the weakness of his
proof? For is not this a weak argument: The fathers in reckoning up the
sacraments do often also make mention of penance: therefore it is a sacrament.
Or this: baptism and repe^ta^ce are many times compared together, but the one
is a sacrament properly so called: therefore also the other must so be? I trust
the weakness of that argument is easy to spy out, seeing the fathers may in
diverse respects speak of the sacraments, other than of their sacramental
nature, or of those things which they seem to match with the sacraments in
speech, not minding to make any mo sacraments, than Christ left unto the
church: therefore so long as his arguments are but conjectures, even by his
own confession, it is but lost labor to bestow any more time thereupon.
Therefore, although we confess that our whole life should be a continual
profiting in the doctrine of repentance, and the practice thereof, yet the
sacrament of penance we justly reject, because neither the scripture nor most
ancient fathers, yield any plain testimony thereof.

Of lawfully calling into the ministry, and against the Sacrament of Order,
as they call it. CHAP. 18
THE PROTESTANTS
THat in the Church of Christ there ought to be a lawful calling unto the
ministry, we so willingly confess, that we take it to be one of the
especial graces of God, toward us who are here in this vale of misery, for
the which we are bound to thank God, day and night. For as their office is to
Gather together the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12.
to work in the ministry, and build up the body of Christ. Yea as
Ambassadors for Christ to entreat the world to be reconciled unto god, 2.
Cor. 5.20.
and therefore it is well called the ministry of reconciliation, verse. 18.
than the which there cannot be any greater benefit whilst we are compassed
about with the burden of this flesh, whose will is stubborn and cannot be
subdued to the will of God, whose wisdom is but folly and blindness, Romans 8.7.
and perceives not the things of the spirit of God: 1. Cor. 2.14.
so the more we are assured that they are appointed of God unto the said
ministry, and to labor in the said office, with so much the more diligence we
will hear them, with the greater reverence we will receive them, and with the
greater readiness, we will obey them. And such as in some measure endeavor to
perform this duty, we reverence as Ambassadors from that great God, Es.
52.7.
Their feet are very beutifull unto us, we account them worthy of double 1.
Tim. 5.17.
honor. The godly will (howsoever the world despise the^) obey them as their
fathers follow them as their guides, hear them as their teachers, and love the^
as helpers of their joys. 2. Cor. 1.24.
knowing that they cannot despise the^, but that they despise also God that
sent the^, and their own salvation for which they are sent.

THE PAPISTS
But the church of Rome not contented to have the fruit and benefit of this
ministry, which Christ gave to his church, Ephesians. 4.11.
do (although without all warrant of Gods word) make a sacrament thereof. Or
rather of this one they make seven sacraments: for all their seven orders have
several ceremonies yea and by their own confession several graces also, which
they do work and so in steed of seven sacraments which themselves speak of,
they reckon up thirteen, namely six beside their sacrament of order, and
seven in it. And whereas the ministry was appointed for preaching and
ministering the sacraments, and they who labored most in the word did best
perform the same, they have turned teaching and preaching, into sacrificing
and listing. Concilium Trident. sess. 23. Can. 1.
So that it is great commendation for one of their priests to lift fair: As
they that could but kill a Ram or a Calfe, were priests good enough for that
rebellious people of Israel, who yet called themselves Gods people. As for
reverence and honor they content not themselves with that regard, that is due
to their ministry and office, no neither yet that the Pope should so much
excel the Emperor, Innoc. de Mayor and obed. c. sol^ t and glos. ibidem.
as the Sun does the Moon, that is 47. times or degrees to be better than
the emperor, as their own canonists teach, but that blasphemous papist. In sua
chimaera fol. 97. 98.
Stanisl. Orichouius did offer unto the council of Trent a book, wherein he
makes every priest better than a king, in authority, degree, place and weight
yea, he says, that the priest is another God of the kings excellency. That the
king is but a creature, but the priest a cre^^^^: and how much God is be^^^ r
tha^ a priest, so much is a priest better tha^ a king: yea so much better is
the priest than a king, as a man is better than a beast. And yet these horrible
blasphemies are allowed of with them.

These gross absurdities being thus even by their own books proclaimed unto
the world, I might say to our Papists, Ad Ceesiphontem.
as S. Hierom did to the Pelagians, To lay forth your opinions, is to confute
you. Your blasphemy is eue^ at the first very manifest: there is no need to
refell that which is of it self blasphemous: Yet for the satisfaction of the
ignorant, it is not amiss to lay open the principal grounds whereupon this
their sacrament is built. It has (say they) all those things which are of
necessity required in a sacrament: namely, the outward sign, the promise of
inward grace, and lastly, the commandment, or Gods institution. The outward
sign they made to be imposition of hands: Bellar. lib. 1 de sacra. Ord. Chap.
2. Ibidem.
for so says Bell. And yet afterward being better advised, considering also
that even some of his own friends, think that laying on of hands is but an
accidental thing unto this sacrament, and that the very necessary matter of
this sacrament, Cap. 9.
is the cup with wine, and the cover thereof with bread, (for then is it said
to them, Receive power to offer a sacrifice, when these things are delivered)
he affirms that not only the giving to the^ of these things, but also the
laying on of hands, is the matter or visible form of this sacrament. Whereby we
learn that themselves are not well resolved as yet, what shall be the
external sign in this sacrament. For in deed that which Christ did when he
ordained ministers, that external sign (I say) they make small account of:
for he Breathing on them said, John 20. Tract. in John. 121
receive ye the holy Ghost. Whereby Christ would teach (as saint Augustine
thinks) that the holy Ghost proceeds from the father and the son also.
And no marvel if they urge not that ceremony: for Christ himself is not
very curious in that point. Mat. 28.19 Mar. 16.15 Mar. 10.6, 7
And as himself did not command that ceremony to be used: so neither did
himself practice it any more but that once, as may appear in sundry places,
where he authoriseth his Apostles to preach without breathing upon them. And
now, for laying on of hands, which many times the Apostles used, we have not
only the testimony of many in the popish church, that think it not to be the
principal outward sign in this sacrament, but think the giving of a chalice
with wine, and the cover of it with bread, to be more essential and
effectual: but also we see that there is no commandment given to the
Apostles for it, and therefore neither do they command it to be used, as a
thing so necessary that it may not be omitted. And whereas we acknowledge this
ceremony to have sundry uses: first in respect of the church, the party
ordained is by that ceremony notified unto the church: secondly, he is
confirmed thereby in his calling, put in mind of his duty, and assured of his
vocation by this common approbation, that hereby the church shows. Thirdly,
thereby the church does testify, as it were before God, their sincere dealing
in their election, and consecrate him to the service of God. Lastly, the Godly
used many times in praying for others, to lay their hands upon them.
Bellarmine in the place above named bestows some pains, to prove, that
prayer and laying on of hands are two distinct things, which is not denied. To
be short, the sum of his argument is this: it was used of the Apostles,
therefore it is so necessary that it cannot be omitted. We answer that that
ceremony had good uses, but yet might be omitted. Because our savior Christ
did neither use it nor command it. And to think that he omitted any
substantial point of religion, or that the Apostles would account as simply
necessary any thing not used or prescribed by Christ, is to absurd. And whereas
they prove the promise of justifying grace to be made by Christ, unto them that
receive this their sacrament of Orders, I wonder that they see not, how yt both
many are justified that never entered into their Orders, and many also that
have had, and have their greasing and scraping, are as wicked men, and so by
likelihood as far from this justifying grace as Turks or Jews. And so it
easily appears, that this second thing required in a sacrament, namely that
it should seal in us the promise of justification, has not so much as any
likelihoode, to be in this their sacrament of Orders. The third thing
necessary in a sacrament is Gods commandment, wherein they confess their
want, and that they have no commandment. But yet because God did give grace
with laying on of the Apostles hands, 1 Timothy 4. Bellar. de ord. sacra. li. 1.
ca. 2.
therefore they take it as commanded of God. If this be a good argument God
gave g od success to it: therefore it is commanded of God, many strange
parts in Sampson, Iehu, and others, will prove to be commanded of God: but
that is most false, as the Papists themselves will confess. God did not only
prosper Phinehas, Numb. 25
in that which he attempted against Zimrie, and Cosby, but commended the fact
also, and graciously rewarded the same, but yet he had no commandment for so
doing. Therefore although God may be said in some sort to like of that to
which he gives good success, yet no man can thereby conclude, that God has
commanded it: But rather on the contrary, we may thus reason. The laying on of
hands was neither practiced by our savior Christ, neither commanded by him or
his Apostles: therefore that ceremony is not of such necessity, but that
ordination may be without it. Yea but Christ is not tied to the sacrament
(says master Bellarmine) and therefore can give the effect of the sacrament
without the sacrament, Cap. 2. li. 1.
he can make Priests without laying on of hands. That he can so do, we
confess, but that he deals so in the institution of sacraments, all the
Papists in the world will never be able to prove: for in them we see that all
things are most plain, the outward sign, the promise, the commandment,
nothing in them hidden, nothing doubtful. But because himself dare not well
rest upon that answer, he concludes that second chapter with another
answer, for he tells us, that it may be that Christ did lay his hands
upon them whom he made ministers. Is this good dealing? Does not this
manifestly bewray the weakness of their cause, when such frivolous
conjectures are the chief strength of their cause? As for the Fathers
whatsoever out of them they do allege, cannot prove that which they take in
hand: namely, that the sacrament of Orders is a sacrament like to Baptism and
the Eucharist. For all men must confess, that these two sacraments, which we
acknowledge to be common to all Christians, are far unlike in that point to
that popish sacrament, which belongs but unto a few.

And even in this consists especially the true use of Baptism, and of the
Eucharist, that they should be genenerall testifications unto the whole church
of Gods graces, and seals of his promises, and pledges of his love and favor,
And therefore the fathers sometime call Ordination a sacrament, yet it
follows not, that they take it to be a sacrament in the proper sense, but in
that sense only as they call many other things Sacraments, which the Popish
Church does not receive as Sacraments. De Sacrat. ord. li: 1. ca ^
But (say they) the Fathers compare Ordination with Baptism. For Bellarmine
makes great reckoning of that argument. The fathers may be so in some respect,
because the sacrament of Baptism cannot be reiterated: no more must he that is
once ordained to the ministry, seek to be ordained again for every action
that he performs in his ministry, but he is once for all appointed
thereto. But what is that to the nature of the sacrament, which must by a
visible sign assure us of invisible graces. So that, athough Ordination be
like to Baptism, after a sort, yet is it not like to Baptism, in that it by a
visible sign does assure us of invisible graces: but only, because it is not
to be reiterated no more than Baptism is. And thus we see the weakness of
this argument: Ordination is in some point like to Baptism: therefore it is a
sacrament in such sort as Baptism is. Thus then, I trust it appears how
weakly they prove Ordination to be a sacrament, who have neither scriptures,
Matt. 28.19
nor fathers for the same. But if they could prove that Ordination which
Christ used to be a sacrament, what is that to Popish Ordination? Christ sent
the Apostles to preach, Go teach all nations: but by their ordination the
popish priests Receive power to offer a sacrifice. The Apostles executed their
commission which Christ gave them, as appears in the Acts and their Epistles.
And the popish priests on the other side think there is no service any thing
so pleasing to God, as the offering of sacrifices. We see then, that as
Ordination, even as Christ and his Apostles used it, is not a sacrament
properly so called: so popish Ordination is nothing but a mere profanation of
Christ's order, and a wilful breach of his commandment, and therefore most
unworthy of the name of a Sacrament.

Of Matrimony, that it is not a Sacrament, and that it is lawful for all.
CHAP. 19
THE PROTESTANTS
MArriage we confess to be in it self an estate, holy and honorable, and
for all sorts of us most necessary, considering that men and women of all
callings and conditions, are subject to noysom and filthy lusts, we dare not
therefore forbid it to any sort of men or women, lest we should seem to reject
that remedy that God provided against sin, or to refuse the helper that he
made for us, or to lay a stumbling block before men or women whereat they
might fall.

THE PAPISTS
THe Papists not content with that account of matrimoni^ that the Scriptures
do make, will needs have it to be one of the five Sacraments, which they
have added to the two that were instituted by Christ: And yet straitway, as if
they had forgotten themselves, they do think it to be too base an estate,
too vnpure and unclean for any man for to live in, that is called to minister
before the Lord. And And therefore their priests must not be married in any
wise.

That matrimony is not a sacrament, speaking of a sacrament properly, as when
we call baptism or the supper of the Lord sacraments, it is most plain:
First, because the things that are required in a sacrament, are not to be
found in it, namely, an outward sign, a promise of justifying grace, Gods
institution or commandment. As for the commandment, some would wring it out
of these words, Matthew. 19.6.
That which God has joined together, let no man put asunder. But that is only
a prohibition, that man shall not loose that knot which God has knit, there is
no sacrament commanded. And master Bellarmine spying that fault, dares not
commend their endeavor therein, but takes another course. For he thinks his
friends troubled themselves more than they needed, to be too curious, in
searching where it is commanded to be made a sacrament. But if Gods
commandment, or the institution of the sacrament be necessarily required in a
sacrament (as Master Bellarmine has often showed) the Papists (by his leave)
shall either show, De sacram. matrimon. lib. 1. cap. 2.
when, and how, it was instituted to be a sacrament, or else there is no cause
that we should trust them, although they al had sworn, that it is one. For in
truth this their doctrine is so doubtful and uncertain, that themselves know
not what to say of it. For, some think that it has always bin a sacrament,
even from the beginning of the world: De sacram. matrimon. lib. 1. cap. 5
Sess. 24. can. 2.
but Bellarmine will not in any wise agree to that. And the council of Trent is
flat of that mind, that it is a sacrament instituted by Christ, and therefore
not of the old law. If then it be true, that matrimony was not a sacrament
until Christ made it one, it is needful that they should prove, that Christ
has made it a sacrament, before we can receive it for one. And this reason is
very strong against master Bellarmine, who reasons against them that think
that matrimony was a sacrament of the old law, because, It is not read (says
he) that there was any institution of marriage in all the old testament: Ioh.
5.32.
he means after man's fall. Therefore, if they prove no institution of it,
they prove no Sacrament. Now for the second point. For to prove it to be an
outward sign they bring those words of Saint Paul, This is a great sacrament
(for so the old translation has) but the word signifies also a mystery or
secret. But we will not contend of the word. Will they imagine that this word
can prove matrimony to be a sacrament? We see that Christ and his Apostles
are more careful of the true use of the Sacraments, than of their names, as
may appear by those two Sacraments which we acknowledge, which are not so
much as named sacraments. Secondly, to prove it to be a sacrament, it is not
enough to show that it is a sign of a holy thing, but that it was instituted
to be such a sign. And that can they never do in this. Sacr. mat. li. 1.
cap. 5.
For it was instituted in paradise, where it was no such sign as themselves
confess, as is showed, yea Bellarmine denies that there is in matrimony any
outward sign by the institution of it. So that although it represent unto us
(to our unspeakable comfort) the union and conjunction, between Christ and
his church, yet that it was not instituted to that end, and that it is not an
outward sign by the institution of it, it is most plain. But how will they
prove the third thing, namely the promise of salvation to be in this their
sacrament? For sooth because it represents unto us the spiritual love of
Christ to his church, and her obedience to him again. That is also performed
in every body of man or woman, if we mark the union between the members and
the head. In every vine tree, yea in every plant, if we consider the coherence
between the branches and the tree. Yea many such things there are that have as
much in the^ belonging to a sacrament as matrimony has. And yet howsoever they
may be unto us, if we consider of the^ as we may do, I never heard or read that
ever they were accounted sacraments in the proper sense. And why? because God
never appointed them to that end. for in the sacraments Christ's institution is
the especial thing, how little account so ever M. Bellar. make of it. The 2.
argument whereby I prove matrimony not to be a sacrament is, because that many
of the scholemen, who are the especial friends to those popish sacraments,
doubt whether matrimony gives grace, which the popish church does attribute
to all sacraments. For as Canus reports: De locis Theol. li. 8. cap. 5.
the Ma. of sentences, Thomas of Aquine, Scot, Bonauenture, Rich. de S.
victore, Paludanus, Durand and others do not define, whether it give grace or
not, but leave it to every man's own opinion. As for the matter or form of
this sacrament (to use Canus his words) these schoolmen do show themselves so
unconstant and wavering, so uncertain and doubtful, that he should but
prove himself a fool, that in such difference and disagreement, would set
down any thing for certain or true. And for that cause the Council of
Florence (says he) decreed nothing of the matter, form, or minister of this
sacrament, because it saw, that the Divines in the schools had concluded
nothing of them. Seeing therefore themselves within so few years doubted, yea
and are not yet fully resolved, whether that sacrament give grace, without the
which it cannot be a sacrament in the Popish church: they give us just cause
to suspect, nay flatly to affirm, that it was not a sacrament instituted by
Christ. For if it had, before this time doubtless themselves at the least
would have resolved of such principal points thereof. And if Christ did not
institute it a sacrament, then also we may deny it at all to be a sacrament:
For neither men nor angels may institute any sacraments (as Bellarmine has
truly noted. De sacram. Matrim. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Neither are they yet agreed, whether every marriage is this their sacrament.
For Canus in the place before alleged, thinks not any matrimony to be this
sacrament, but that only that is solemnized by the Priest. But Bellarmine with
all the skill he has opposes himself against him, De sacram. Matrim. lib. 1.
cap. 7
yea, it is high time he should so do. For he plainly confesses, that if
that opinion of Canus be true, then they shall never out of the scriptures or
councels be able to prove the sacrament of matrimony.

Then we see it stands him upon to do what he can: For, either must the
marriages not solemnized by the Priests, be this sacrament (and so every man
and woman is a minister in this sacrament) which his own friends will in no
wise grant unto him: or else matrimony is not a sacrament. And then they have
deceived the world some hundreds of years. Thirdly, matrimony can not be a
sacrament, because the promise of grace is common unto all sorts of men and
women. And therefore the sacraments and signs also of those graces should
belong unto all sorts. But in the Popish church matrimony is denied to some
sorts, as to their clergy: Therefore, by their own doctrine it can not be a
Sacrament, especially such a Sacrament as baptism and the eucharist, for they
are common to all sorts: Marriage lawful for all men.
but matrimony (they say) must not so be. And this is the second point of their
doctrine which must be examined. For it seems to me very strange, that they,
who have now so magnified this estate of life, that it must be no less than a
holy sacrament, do so suddenly debase the same, that they think it not pure
enough for their shorn and anointed creatures. But I look that they should
come against me with an answer out of master Bellarmine, De sacram. matrim.
ca. 5
that their Priests in deed are forbidden to marry, but not in that respect
that it is a sacrament, but because of those things that follow marriage, and
are impediments and lets to them in their calling. And yet neither all the
consequents of marriage are denied to their clergy: For master Bellarmine
tells us there, that if a man and wife being married together will promise
continency, they may well enough take their orders, and are truly both
married folks and priests. So that not cares or troubles that are incident
unto married folks oftentimes, are any thing to be respected in this case:
For clergy men may have all these, but the especial duty of marriage they
may not perform. Whereby the Papists to defend the credit of this their
sacrament, do rob the Clergy of that thing which is the especial
representation of the conjunction of Christ and of his church, whilst they
would make these believe, that the performaunce of the duty between man and
wife, is a thing not to be suffered in Clergy men.

The very ground of this assertion of master Bellarmines, is that he thinks
not the copulation of married folk to be of the substance of Matrimony. And
this he proves by some testimonies out of the fathers in that fifth Chapter.
But yet himself will not, that this his saying should be so understood, as
if that he said, that the use of marriage is not any way of the substance of
marriage. Chap. 6
For afterward he says, that this their sacrament may have two respects.
As it is made, and as it is continued. As it made, that is, (if I be not
deceived) as the mutual consent of parties joins them together by their
promises, the consent expressed by such words, is the matter and form of
their sacrament. And thus must we understand that common rule in their law,
that consent makes marriages. And thus do the fathers understand that which
they say concerning the substance of marriage to consist in the mutual
consent: partly, because after such consent given, the parties are not free to
change the choice which they have made: Deu. 22, 23 24
And partly because that even by Gods law, if parties after such consent
given, should carnally know another, it was death for them so to do: which
could not be, but because this their consent is after a sort the marriage it
self. This, if it represent any thing to us, does but represent that joining
of Christ with us by spiritual love, Chap. 5
as Bellarmine himself confesses. But that is not any special benefit, or
singular: For he loves all his creatures, and wept for the destruction of his
enemies: And one man may be so joined with another. But it is a special grace,
that marriage represents unto us: to us (I say) that after a peculiar manner
belong to him. Namely, how we are made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones, how our bodies are the members of Christ's body, how in deed he is,
as in name he is called, God with us. This is represented unto us, but by that
copulation that is between man and wife, whereby, as before by consent they
were of one mind, so now by it they are one body. For by copulation the wife
is made one body with her husband. And this do I take to be confessed by
master Bellarmine himself, when he tells us that in the second respect by
Matrimony, is meant that which continues. And then must the bodies of them
that are married needs be the matter of this sacrament, even their copulation
and dwelling together. And therefore he allows well of the judgment of Peter
Soto, that thinks even this use of Matrimony to be the matter, not only
about which this Sacrament is occupied, but of which it is made or consists.
If then it be the matter of their Sacrament, which they deny to their
Clergy, it is not true that master Bellarmine said, that they deny not
their Clergy men to marry, as marriage is a sacrament. For they deny that to
them which is the substance of their sacrament.

This may also appear by the definition of matrimony, which we may find in
the fathers. Strom. 2. li. De Monog.
Marriage (says Clemens of Alexandria) is the first lawful joining together
of man and woman, for the procreation of children. And Tertullian is
inquisitiue what is marriage before God, and finds it to be when God joins
together two into one flesh. Then if we will speak properly of marriage, it is
the joining together, not of minds, or hearts only, but of bodies also. Yea,
li. 1. chap. 5 De Sacram. matrim.
and it is confessed by master Bellarmine, that such marriages as have not
copulation, are but a maimed and imperfect Sacrament, and that Priests may so
be married. And how his fellows will take this at his hands, I cannot tell:
that they who count themselves most perfect, should not be admitted but to
that imperfect Sacrament, whereas the common sort, and known sinners, might
be partakers of the perfect Sacrament. But let them order those matters
amongst themselves. But saint Basil perchance would admit them to the use of
marriage, since master Bellar. does permit them to marry, De vera Virginitate.
so that they abstain from the use of it. For (says he) since the reason of
the mind directing, has manifestly joined their hearts in respect of some
necessity, worthily does the unity of bodies, to which they are knit, follow
those hearts so united: wherein this learned father seems to me to be of that
mind, that there is no cause, but that whosoever may in heart be joined unto
another as to his wife, may also in body be joined with her. And so if it be
lawful for them to marry, and to continue married, Cap. 5.
as Bellarmine confesses, it is also lawful for them to have the use of
marriage, as saint Basil here says. But what is the reason why they stand
so much in this matter? Are they not men? have they not infirmities? Can they
who this day find themselves to be void of such assaults, as are the fruits
of wanton lusts, promise to themselves that they shall be so to morrow
likewise, and so to continue also? Let no man deceive himself in that foolish
imagination: no body can assure themselves of any such thing, it is a rare
gift of God. All men cannot receive this thing, Mat. 19.11 1. Cor. 7, 7 17 De
monac. li. 2. cap. 31
but they to whom it is given. If it be a gift of God, as Bellar. confesses,
it is too much presumption for us to be so bold to promise it, as though it
were within our own reach. If it be care, it is too much wickedness, and too
great occasion of offense, for the church of Rome to require it, so as they do
of all their clergy. Yea, but they teach this as a doctrine that needs must
be believed, De Cler. li. 1 cap. 21
and with a full consent, and namely Bellarmine, That they have the gift of
continency that will. And again, That there is no man that cannot live
continently, if himself will. Of this doctrine of free will. I shall God
willing speak more largely hereafter. But now for this bold and gross
affirmation, I am verily persuaded, that it never could have come from any man,
unless either his mind were blinded with ignorance, that he saw not the
truth of his own estate, or his heart were either possessed with such a
senselessness that it could feel no sin, or else so bent to resist the
truth, that he would not yield to it, although he knew it. For what can be
found in the scriptures more common, than the falls of the godly, the faults
of Gods servants, their complaints, their sighs, yea, their tears, because of
their sins? Shall we say, they sinned willingly, or that they walked not
carefully in their ways? S. Paul then will prove us to be liars, who for his
part does testify, To will is present with me, Romans 7.18 19
but I find no way to perform that which is good. For I do not the good
thing which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I. We see,
saint Paul would feign not have done evil, but yet he did it. Shall we say,
we are stronger than he was? Then are we fools, and know nothing of our
own weakness. For this cause Paul wills the younger widows, not to vow
chastity, or strive for it, 1. Tim. 5.14
but to marry, and do such duties. Yea, and if the scriptures should not
teach us this, let us but look into our selves, and considering indifferently,
and without partiality, how subject we are to sin, we must confess, that if
the Apostle had cause to sigh, we may justly tremble ^^ d quake for fear. If
he complain and mourn, we may in bitterness and anguish of soul cry out:
for his weakness shall be found strength, if it be compared with our
readiness to fast. And yet I confess, that God will give grace to them that
ask it, and let them that seek find, so that they ask and seek in such sort
as they ought to do, and such things as are necessary for them, to walk in
their calling. But to ask, that we should not stand in need of that help and
remedy against sin, that God has provided, or that we should live a more
angellicall life, than he has appointed us to do, is to tempt God in asking
without our warrant, and therefore without faith, and to despise that measure
of grace that God has vouchedsafe to bestow upon us. The treasure is great
that we who are Gods ministers do carry, although in earthen vessels, that
the power might be of God, 2. Cor. 4.7
and not of us. It is enough for us if the Lord keep us so (...) his great
goodness from falling, that we be not dashed in pieces, and be a reproach to
this excellent word of life. So that we honor him, and glorify his name, in
what estate of life so ever it be, whether single life, or marriage, it makes
no matter. Gods will be done, and Gods name be praised for it. Well then we see
beggars must be no choosers, but look what he has appointed us to have, let
us be heartily thankful for it, and crave Gods good spirit to direct us in
that way.

Seeing then it appears, I trust, that neither to live unmarried without
burning in lust, is in our power, neither yet it is needful that any should
strive for that, unless he see that God has given him that gift, let us yet
further consider, what it is that they so much mislike in marriage. Cens. col.
dial. 3 Ad Himer.
They say, that it does open a door unto wantonness, and puts fire to all
lusts: And as Pope Sericius says: for such to marry is nothing else, but to
live in the flesh, yea, in pollution, and that they cannot please God. Censur.
col. dial. 3.
Yea, blasphemously do the Jesuits of Colen call it the life of Sardanapalus
for a Priest to marry. But more like to the saying of a plain Atheist, is
that saying of that man of Colen, that a man were better to have a hundred
harlots, one after another, than one wife. And our country man Doctor Smith,
in his book of vows and single life, D. Smith Objection 8
is not ashamed to affirm, that it is a less sin for one that has made a
vow, to take to himself a harlot, then to marry, we hear his impudency: let
us hear what reason he has for him. If he commit whoredom (says he)
having vowed chastity, he is at his liberty when he will to reform his life,
and to change it into a chaste life. What man can do in such case as I have
said before. But if they be married, can they not also abstain from the use
of marriage upon just causes? Has not the Apostle given plain order, what
shall be done in that case? Does the Apostle give commandment, yea or
counsel either, 1 Cor. 7.5.
that men and women should vow, that they may be the more free to serve God?
No, but the contrary rather. For although he Suppose that it is good for the
present necessity, that a man should continue a single life, 1 Cor. 7.26
whilst afflictions and great dangers did oppress those first days of
Christ his church, and they had no safety to themselves, so that care for
their wives and children, might withdraw them from their holy obedience and
patient profession: 1. Cor. 7.2
yet notwithstanding he would to avoid fornication, that every man should
have his wife, and every woman her own husband* mark every man, every
woman, none excepted. And again: But if they cannot abstain, let them marry:
for it is better to marry than to burn. Does the Apostle open the door unto
wantonness in permitting marriage to all, excepting none? Yea, and that men
should not be too rash in making their vows in this case, he wills that
such as are married, defraude not one another, no not to give themselves to
fasting and prayer, but only for a time, and so to come together again, least
Satan should tempt them for their incontinencie.

And for single life it is commended by the Apostle no further, then whilst a
man stands firm in his own heart that he has no need, but has power over
his own will. And it is worth the marking, how Smith here, and also all the
Papists almost in this point, do so directly oppose themselves unto the
Apostles doctrine, as if they had sworn to give him the lie in his throat. For
whereas he says of all, of all (I say) and not of lay men only, It is
better to marry than to burn, this doting doctor Smith says, and so do his
fellows: it is better for a priest, not to burn only, but even to commit
whoredom, than to marry. It is better to have a hundred harlots, (says
another) than only one lawful wife. Lawful (I say) because that howsoever
some filthy men, condemn in some, that holy institution, yet Gods word does
not only suffer and also commend it, but even command it to all that cannot
live without it, but that they must burn in lust. And Ciprian does plainly
permit it unto them whom we call Nuns, saying, that If they will not, Epist.
li. 1. ep. 11.
or cannot continue (in virginity) it is better that they should marry, than
that by their wantonness they should fall into the fire. Which words, because
they are very flat against the popish doctrine of vows, the papists do
strive to find some plaster for that wound. de Monach. li. 2. cap. 34.
And amongst others, Bellarmine (liking nothing of that which Hosius, and
others have said before him of this place, of Ciprian) imagines that he has
hit the nail upon the head. His answer is, that yet whilst they are free, and
have made no vow, if they see they cannot continue, Ciprian faith, it is best
for them to marry. But that master Bellarmine has as far missed the cushion,
as others before him have done: and that his answer is most untrue, I prove,
first by the question which was moved unto Ciprian. For Pomponius to whom he
writes, did ask of Ciprian, what he should think of some women, who had
professed virginity, and yet were found in bed with men. So that if he answer
directly to Pomponius his question he shows what should be done, with such as
had already vowed, and not of such as were to make the vow. Secondly, in the
very words next before, it does most plainly appear, that he makes two
sorts of such as have made the vow, the one sort he would have to continue,
namely such as through faith have yielded themselves to Christ: the other of
them that will not, or cannot. Thirdly, that which follows, that to excuse
themselves they would offer to be tried by women, whether they were virgins,
(for unto that their excuse Ciprian makes answer) is so strong an argument,
as master Bellarmine, and all his friends, will never be able to answer, to
prove that those words of Ciprians are not meant, neither can be understood, of
such as stood in doubt, whether they would vow or not, as master Bellarmine
affirms, but of such as after their vow, neither would, nor could persevere
in their purpose. For if that only had been their doubt, whether they could
continue virgins, that matter the women could not judge of. If whether they
were virgins, it is directly against master Bellarmines answer to this place.
It is not therefore to give occasion of wantonness, to teach marriage to be
lawful for all men, as without shame they affirm, as by the holy Apostle and
that learned father appears, but they that condemn it, do let loose the
raines unto all uncleanness, as says Saint Bernard, Super cant, sermon. 66.
and they that forbid marriage unto some sorts, do sow the bad seed of ungodly
life, and wanton lusts, the fruit whereof has defiled the whole world. But
what? Is it forbidden by God himself? They know not well how to answer to
this question. For the Master of Sentences, for ought that I see, has said
nothing of that matter. And he is their very oracle, who, if he hold his peace,
they know not what to think of the matter. But John Mayor, Clichtouaeus and
some others, do affirm that this single life is commanded by God himself.
But Thomas, whom for the most part master Bellarmine is devoted unto, and
sundry others do plainly say, that God has given no law concerning single
life. De clerici^. li. 1. cap. 28.
And that master Bellarmine does not only allow, but proves it so to be, with
whom we are also willing to join. For it is most true that there is not one
such commandment in all the scripture, neither yet is it necessary that
priests should live a single life, or unmarried, both which things master
Bellarmine has in that place. If God then have not commanded it, neither the
thing is necessary, let master Bellarmine bring what else he can to prove it, he
shall not much trouble us about his unnecessary precepts. But the Apostle
(says he) has commanded it. A bishop must be continent. De cler. li. 1. cap.
19. Tit. 1.8.
Although continent and chaste is in truth all one thing, yet master Bellarmine
will not think it sufficient that a bishop should be chaste because he knows
that Saint Augustine and other of the fathers affirm that there is chastity in
marriage, but he will doubtless spy some greater virtue in continency then in
chastity, and therefore he will have a bishop not chaste only, but also
continent. But if we must seek for a difference between these two words, I
take this to be it, that continency is of shorter continuance, that is to say,
but an abstinence for a time, and chastity is a virtue that indureth. And the
examples brought by master Bellarmine himself approve this difference. But
Chrysostom and Theophilact, do take continency to be an abstinence not from
lusts only, but from al vice, so that as Theophilact says, he must rule his
tongue, his hands, and his eyes. Hierom upon these words says plainly,
that the Apostle never speaks of continency or incontinencie, but in respect
of wanton lusts, but yet he takes continency, to be such a virtue, as may be
in married folk. And therefore the Apostle (says he) having spoken of a
bishop, that he may have one wife, least he should seem to permit
incontinencie, to them adds this: and with Hierom agrees Primasius. So that
they make continent, and chaste, all one. 1. Cor. 7.3.4.5.
For although married folk must perform the duties of marriage one to another,
yet so, as they pass not the bounds of chastity or continency. This reason
then is not good. Priests must by Saint Paul's rule be continent, therefore
they must have no wives. But on the contrary. Saint Paul in that very place,
where he requires in a bishop continency, does permit at the least, that he
should be the husband of one wife, therefore in marriage there may be
continency. Tit. 1.6.
As for that which he alleges out of Councels, popes, fathers and reason,
because they prove not that which he has undertaken to prove, Chap. 19.
it is not worth an answer. For the title of that Chapter is, That single life
by the Apostolic law is very well tied to the holy orders. And when he
has snatched at one poor word, and finds no great help in it, he
seeks to prove by Councels, popes, fathers and reason, that single life has
been commended of some, commanded of others. But that the Apostles commanded
it, he proves not, and that he took in hand. But on the contrary, the
Canons that are called the Apostles, have this Canon, Can. 6,
Let not a bishop or Priest put away his wife, under pretense of religion. If
he do it, let him be excommunicated, if he stand in it, let him be
rejected. But what says master Bellarmine to this? He answers out of one
Humbert a Cardinal, that to put away his wife, de cler. li. ^. cap. 2^.
is to have no care of his wife. But if we mark the fiftieth Canon of the
Apostles wherein there is a prouiso, that none should abstain from marriage
because he thinks it to be evil, it will easily appear, that the sixth
Canon was made, to overthwart the foolish opinion of them, that condemned
marriage as a thing more unclean, then that it should be fit for priests or
bishops. And thus much to prove, that marriage of priests is not evil of it
self, or unlawful in respect of any commandment in Gods word. Now that it is
also lawful, I am persuaded by these reasons. First, because of the
uncertainty of the contrary doctrine: for some say, that sole life is
commanded by God, others deny it as you have heard. Again there are, and
those papists too, that say the law of abstaining from marriage, Fab. Tract. 4.
in Luth. de mat. clear.
for the clergy was first made by pope Siricius, who lived almost four hundred
years after Christ, although John Faber report that Calixtus forbad it
somewhat before. But Bellarmine and others think in no wise that it may be
suffered, that this their doctrine should be thought so far short of the
times of Christ, and his Apostles.

Some hold it a necessary law, Bellarm. li. 1. de clericis, cap. 18.
others but convenient. And such diversity of doctrine in these and such like
points is, if not an invincible, yet a very probable proof that their
doctrine has no sure ground in Gods word, no great consent of antiquity, and
that is the cause that there is no certain doctrine of it amongst themselves,
and such is their agreement also concerning that other point, whether matrimony
be a sacrament or not. Secondly, the weakness of their proof, does even
proclaim unto the world, the weakness of their cause. For the most and best
learned of them do confess that God has not commanded it. And the proofs
that they bring out of the Apostle for it, as it seems, have so little weight
in them, that Bellarmine is ashamed to allege them. As for that small hold
that he could get out of the Apostles words, Tit. 1.8.
That a bishop should be continent, how little it can help his cause, you have
heard before. Seeing therefore that either they bring nothing worth hearing out
of Gods word, or apply unto the clergy only, that which the Apostle speaks to
all men and weomen indifferently, (such is all that they allege out of the 7.
Chapter of S. Paul's first epistle to the Corinthes) we are the less bound to
believe, whatsoever they out of the fathers shall teach us concerning this
matter. Who themselves do charge us to examine by the scriptures their
writings, and not to believe any thing that they shall teach, unless they
teach such things as are agreeable unto Gods word. Yea, since their arguments
are so weak, that even Panormitane and other papists whom John Faber in some
respects spares to name, because they saw no necessary consequence in them
(although they lived in days of greater darckenes than we do (God be praised
for our light) endeavored to obtain, that marriage might be lawful for the
clergy. as Faber reports: yea and pope Pius the second, Cont. Luth. Tract. 4.
was so little moved by those arguments, that he had wont to say, that there
was great cause that priests should be forbidden to marry, Pla^. in the life of
Pius. 2.
but greater, that marriage should be permitted unto them: and the Ambassadors
of catholic princes were earnest suitors, in the names of their princes to
the council of Trent, that marriage might be free for the clergy Since these
arguments (I say) were not able to persuade these men so devoted to their
doctrines, as it is known they were, how much more may we reject this their
law, as hurtful to Gods church, and injurious to our wise Lawmakers, and
suspect it not to rest upon good ground. Thirdly, the most blasphemous
commendation that they give unto this estate of life, and the efficacy and
virtue, that impudently and untruly they do ascribe unto the same, makes me
think it is but a bird of their own clecking, and that therein they seek
rather their own praise than Gods glory. Because thereby they teach men to
look for remission of sins, and make it a thing meritorious: and so they
rob Christ of his honor, and take from him his office, to attribute the same
to the observation of their ungodly law. And unto this reason which is taken
from the evil fruit of their wicked doctrine, I might also add the sower grape
of ungodly life that followed the same. Which made not Papists only, but even
the Pope himself to wish the abolishing of that cruel law, and the remoouing
of that dangerous stumbling block, as before you have heard of Pius, the
second pope of that name. Now besides these wants that we find in the
contrary doctrine which may induce us to see the vnlikelihoode of the same, we
have also the first institution wherein it was said to all without exception,
Genes. 1.28.
Increase and multiply. Then also we have that general advise and counsel
wherein the apostle advises all men and women, that it is better to marry than
to burn: 1. Cor. 7.9.
which advise the apostle gives in respect of that common experience wherein
we find it to be true that every man can not attain to the gift of chastity
in single life. Thirdly, we have also particular direction for bishops by
name, so permitting marriage unto them, 1. Tim. 3.2 Tit. 1.6.
that no man can doubt thereof, unless he wilfully wink for fear he should
see the light of the truth. Fourthly, we have the practice of the priests in
the old law, who were married, although they had the daily sacrifice to offer
morning and evening. Almost all the apostles, and many bishops of the Primitive
church also, if they will trust Vicelius their own friend, were married men.
Therefore we may conclude, that for the clergy, as for other it is lawful,
that every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband* Whereupon it
also follows, that not only the Montanists, Maniches, Eucratians.
Martionists, or such like, who did wholly condemn marriage, or at the least
much mislike the same, but also the papists who do account it too impure for
their clergy men, are amongst the number of them of whom the spirit speaks
evidently, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.
that in the latter days some shall depart from the faith and shall give heed
to the spirit (...) error, and doctrines of devils, who have their consciences
burned with a hot iron, forbidding to marry. For although others may
perchance in that point be worse, yet that proves not that they cannot be
evil. And although the fathers do expound this place, of those heretics
that were before or in their time, yet is that no bar to us, but that we may
in like manner confute thereby all them, who do in any sort condemn matrimony.
But they say they condemn not matrimony, neither force men to single life.
Whether they have drawn men to their vows or not, Bellarm. de cler. li. 1.
cap. 20.
let the world judge. But it is but a shift to say, they deny not marriage.
They deny it to that whole estate, in so much as in Queen Mary's time, we have
seen the clergy forced, either to leave their function and ministry, or to
forsake their wives. So that although they say not to any man or woman
particularly, thou shall in no wise marry, yet they deny it to that estate of
life, which needs must be in the world, as not holy enough for them, wherein
if they were well examined, they would be found to conspire with those ancient
heretics.

Of Anoiling or extreme Unction, that it is not a Sacrament. CHAP. 20
THE PROTESTANTS
WE willingly confess, that the Apostles of our Savior Christ, Mar. 6.13
Anointed many that were sick with oil: and healed them. And that saint
James confesses, Iam. 5.14.
that if any be sick, they should send for the Elders; who should pray for
him, and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord. By the which visible
sign God did testify to men of that gift of healing that he endued his church
withal, until by such miracles he had confirmed the gospel, and assured men's
consciences of the power of his word. But that it was instituted for a
sacrament we cannot acknowledge. And much less can we yield unto that popish
anoiling that it can be called a Sacrament properly, or yet be tolerated in
Christ his church, it is so contrary to the Apostles practice.

THE PAPISTS
FOr without any warrant of the word, they consecrate their oil, which the
apostles did not, for any thing we can read. Secondly, the church of Rome does
appoint what parts shall be anointed, as the eyes, ears, nose, lips,
hands, feet, and the reins of the back. But yet they are not agreed, that
all these are of the essence of anoiling. Devnct. c. 10
And indeed Bellar. in respect of honesty, supposes that women should not be
anointed on their reins. But Laurence Vaus, In his catechism.
would have men anointed in the back and women on the belly, so far has he
forgotten all honesty. But thapostls were not curious in these matters. Thirdly
popish anoiling must not be used but when all hope of life is past: the apostls
used oil when they hoped to heal men of their infirmities. Bellarm. de
unction lib. 1. cap. 2.
The apostles used oil for all diseases, Popish anoiling was but for some.

Other differences also might be found, but these few are sufficient to show,
that the church of Rome has added to the word of God, and practice of the
Apostles in this point: and therefore, if that were granted unto them, which
they can not prove, namely, that that which the Apostles did, was a sacrament:
yet can it in no wise follow, that the Popish anoyling can be a Sacrament,
unto the which they have added so many, yea, and some of them so unseemly
ceremonies. And yet the council of Trent is not ashamed to affirm, that the
church of Rome does observe none other thing as belonging unto the substance
of this sacrament, Sess. 14. ca. 3 de sacram. vnct.
than that which saint James has prescribed? Where did saint James appoint
that the oil should be consecrated: for, that it should be consecrated, De
vnct. lib. 1. cap. 7.
it is as master Bellarmine does term it, of the essence of the matter of this
sacrament, and not accidentary.

Master Bellarmines shift that he has for to answer this demand, is too
hold and shameless, and does more lay open the badnesse of their cause. For
he says, that it is enough for them, if saint James do not forbid it. And
is that your touchstone (M. Bellarmine) whereby you will try your doctrines?
What will you say then to that Law that God has established for ever. Deuteronomy.
12.32. and 4.2.
Whatsoever I command you to do, do it. Thou shall put nothing thereto, nor
take aught therefrom. Which, as it is true in all matters of religion, so
especially in the Sacraments, we must take heed, lest in adding any thing to
them, we change thereby the use of them. In this thing, if in any, de Coron.
Mil.
is that true that Tertullian has said, It is forbidden that is not frankely
permitted. And that also that in an other place he has, de Monog.
The Scripture forbids whatsoever it notes not. Secondly, master Bellarmine
thinks it to be a thing belonging unto the substance of the Sacrament, that
the parts wherein the five senses are, should be anointed, that is, the
eyes, the ears, the nose, the lips and the hands. Then let the council of
Trent show this commanded by saint James, but that can never be performed: so
that we see that bold affirmation of the council of Trent, was rather, to
blind the eyes of men, under a show of good words, seeking thereby to make the
world believe, that they add no material point unto that which saint James
commands: and that is most false, as has been showed, and might also
further be proved. For, where is that form commanded by Saint James, that is
prescribed by the council of Trent. By this holy ointment, etc. Sess. 14. ca.
1. de sacr. vnct.
He had no mind of any such matter. Besides this their adding to that which
saint James has willed to be done, (which is but a small matter with the
church of Rome, for all their religion wherein we differ from them, is nothing
else but additions to Gods word) their own diversity of opinions concerning
this their sacrament, does show it to be a devise of their own: for they
know not what to say for the institution of it. They have not so much as any
show or color that it was instituted by Christ, or before his death, but only
that place of saint Mark, Mar. 6.13.
where it is said, that the Apostles anointed many that had infirmities, and
healed them. And therefore Thomas Walden, Alfonsus, and others, do seek for
the institution of the sacrament out of that place.

But master Bellarmine seeing what danger may come to their sacrament, De sacr.
vnct cap. 2.
if they should seem to make that the ground of their sacrament, because
sundry of the ancient fathers seem to make that unction that saint James
speaks of, to be none other, but that which saint Mark mentioned: he
seeks to provide a plaster for that sore. And he will not in any sort have
those words to be the ground or institution of the Sacrament. And for that
cause he proves by many reasons, that they are not all one. For he sees
that it can not be denied, and therefore himself grants, that that unction
which the Apostles in that sixth chapter are said to use, was only or
especially for bodily diseases, and therefore that the sacrament cannot be
proved out of it: for the sacraments as there he also confesses, are
belonging principally to the soul. Therefore he will in no wise like of them
that allege this place of saint Mark for this their sacrament, although they
be many, yea, and those great pillars of Popery, and no small fools I
warrant you: But such as Eckius, Decree 10. De Sacram. vnct. sess. 14. cap. 1.
the Scottish man Nicoll Burn, the provincial Council called Senonense, yea,
and the Council of Trent, although it set it down somewhat fearefullie, (for
it says it was insinuated by our Lord Christ in Saint Mark) all these with
others (I say) establish their sacrament of Unction, and ground it upon that
place: yet Bellarmine (as I have said) will not in any wise yield unto it. And
for my part I think he says truly, when he says it is not grounded upon
that place.

And as truly also if he should affirm, that it has no warrant out of that
place of saint James. For that place of saint Mark, and that other of saint
James, speak both of one sort of anointing, as Beda, Theophilact. and
Occumenius do testify. But saint Marks words can not prove the sacrament of
Unction, De Vnct. cap. 2.
as master Bellarmine does not confess only, but he takes much pains to
prove it also by four or five arguments: therefore that place of saint James
proves not their sacrament of annoyling. And then is it destitute of all
proof by Gods word, and so must be accounted but a foolish toy (as now it
is used) of man's brain. Neither are they agreed upon that other high point,
what parts must be anointed of necessity, whether all those seven parts before
mentioned, or else only those five first, which are the instruments of the
senses.

Bell. de Vnct. Cap 10.
Some think that there is not necessity that any one part should be
anointed rather than other: And others think, that the anointing of every of
these seven places is so necessary, that it is not a perfect sacrament if any
be omitted. But master Bellarmine out of Thomas Aquinas tells us, that only
the five first are of the essence of the sacrament.

Now in this diversity of opinions, I know not whose part Laurence Vaus will
take: but he resolves us of one great doubt. If a man want eyes, ears, nose,
mouth, or hands, what the Priest should then do. He must oynt the part next
to the place where these members should be. So it seems he allows of the
first opinion. But are these such matters, as should busy men's minds so as
they do? No, no, it is the subtlety of Satan, to occupy men's heads about
such trifles, that in the mean time he may by false teachers, steal from the
hearts of the people the truth of all christian Religion.

They teach also that this their sacrament of annoyling or unction, may be
often received. In the life of Pius 2.
And yet how long they have been of that mind, I know not, nor find men^
ioned. But if we will believe Platina, Pope Pius the second seemed not to be
resolved of that point, nor so persuaded. For he at the point of death
disputed with a learned man the Bishop of Ferrara earnestly, whether he might
again be annoyled, seeing he had once before been annoyled. By all which
diversities of judgments in the most material points of this their
Sacrament, they give us just cause to doubt of their Sacrament it self, that
it is not of God. And by the way, I cannot but wonder with what faces they can
object to us our diversities in opinions, seeing that they in such material
points of Religion, and in their doctrines that concern the very substance of
their sacraments, are so very far from being of one judgment.

And thus briefly we see, how the Papists differ from the scriptures, whereupon
themselves endeavor (but al in vain) to ground the institution of their
Sacrament, and also disagree amongst themselves about the same. De Sacram.
vnct. sess. 14. can. 1.
And yet with great boldness they curse all them, that say that this their
Sacrament is not truly, and properly a Sacrament instituted by Christ, for so
does the Council of Trent. Wherein I know not whether they have somewhat
wounded themselves, Cap 1.
both because they say themselves but a little before, that it is insinuated by
Christ, which is less than instituted. And also it is tanquam vere and proprie
Sacramentum, as it were (which is a doubtful speech) truly and properly a
Sacrament. De sacram. Vnct. cap. 2.
But let us see how master Bellarmine proves this to be a Sacrament out of
that place of saint James. He can find, as he supposes, the outward sign.
The outward sign
True it is there is an outward sign, but it is not that which is required in
annoyling now: for now it must needs be consecrated, but then it was not.
The Apostles did use it especially against the diseases of the body, but this
Oil is in the Popish church, used especially for a remedy against the
sickenesses of the soul. Therefore, I grant it was in those days a sign of
health of body, whilst God left with his church that gift of healing, but it
was never a sign of spiritual grace, which is it that now they do affirm.

As for the health of the body, they so little regard that it should be used
to that end, that they must not in any wise annoyle them, but such as they
have no hope that they may escape. Whereas the Apostle saint James would have
it done to that end, that God forgiving them their sins, which are many
times the cause of sickness, they might be Healed, as says saint Bede upon
this place. As for the promise which is a second thing that must be in a
sacrament, The promise of grace.
master Bellarmine makes no doubt but that he can prove it, because it is
said, The Lord shall raise him up, and if he have sinned, they shall be forgiven
him. The meaning of the apostle in this place is very plain, that whereas in
the days of the primitive church, there were many miracles wrought by the
apostles and others, they did not those things, by any power which they had in
them selves, but by the prayer of faith the sick were healed. And if their
sins were the cause of their sickness (as they are many times, although not
always, John. 9.3
as by saint John's gospel it appears) he promises that God, to the end
that they may not doubt but that they shall be healed, will take away their
sins, and forgive their offenses, which otherwise might be a let or
hinderance. And that this condition is to be understood in this promise, it is
plain by these words, And if you have committed sins: For the apostle
nothing doubted but that they had sins, For if we say we have no sin, 1
John. 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. But he might justly
doubt whether sickness was always laid upon men, for, and in respect of
their sins. Therefore to doubt whether they might have sin or not,
belongs unto them that know not the corruption of man's nature, which we
cannot think of the apostle saint James. But to know that God does not
always send afflictions in respect of sin: he had learned by that which
our Savior Christ himself said unto his Disciples of the blind man, Neither
has this man sinned, neither his parents, John. 9.33
but that the works of God may be manifest. And for this cause saint James
says, If he committed sins, they shall be forgiven him, that is, if his
sins have been the cause of his sickness, his sins shall be forgiven
him, that his sickness may cease. So then the promise of forgiveness of
sins, which should especially serve to make this oyling a sacrament, is but
conditional, whereas in the true sacraments in deed, the promise of
forgiveness of sins is most certain, otherwise we should not have in the
use of them any true comfort.

Thus then, seeing sickness sometime comes of sin, sometime of other causes,
the apostle says, if it come of sin, not only the man over whom the elders
make their faithful prayer, and whom they so oynt with this visible oil, shall
be raised up, but also his sins, the cause of his sickness shall be taken
away. But that not forgiveness of sins was especially regarded in this
ceremony, but bodily health, the fathers before named do prove, and master
Bellarmine cannot deny, but that sundry of the Papists do affirm, whilst
they teach that the Apostles in the 6. of saint Mark his Gospel, did practice
the self same thing that saint James commands. The institution of this
Sacrament.
But for the institution of this sacrament, master Bellarmine can bring no
proof at all, but only in respect of this promise of saint James, which if it
be not of spiritual grace, as I trust I have proved that it is not, then is
there no institution of this sacrament to be found. Then we see that all this
whole building, hangs upon a weak foundation, to be grounded upon one only
authority, and that so little to the purpose unless it be racked besides the
meaning: and that out of that Epistle, which although it be in our churches
received and read, yet we know that the authority thereof has bin doubted of:
and therefore the less force has it to prove any thing, that is not taught in
any other place. And especially for their annoyling that is now used in the
Popish church, which is far unlike that which the apostles used, there is in
that place no proof at all. And as master Bellarmine has the better lyking to
expound this place of saint James, of another oynting than the apostles used,
mark eth sixth chapter, Cap. 2
because, as he says Luther, Calvin, and Kemnitius, do take both places
for one anointing: even so do I, and that with much better reason mislike the
Popish anoyling, because it comes so near unto that practice of the
heretics of whom Jeremy speaks, li. 1. cap. 18.
That they redeem their dead at the end of their race or travel, pouring
oil and water upon their heads. And whereas master Bellarmine would prove out
of Epiphanius, that this ointment was used when they were dead. And therefore
therein they differ from the Papists, yet saint Augustine in his book of
heresies, says, Cap. 16.
they did it when they were dying. So that master Bellarmine must not think so
to face out the matter, as if those heretics were nothing like them. And
whereas they used water also with their Oil, although they differ therein from
the church of Rome, yet the difference is nothing so great by many degrees,
between the Papists and those heretics, as is between the apostles and the
papists for this point, as may appear by that which before has been said.
De sacra. vnct. li. 2. cap. 4.
But after this great scarcity of proof out of the scriptures, he comes at
length to the authority of man. And he will prove what men will say in his
behalf, where God keeps silence. And the first that he brings in is
Innocentius that lived at the least four hundred years after Christ. What,
was it no Sacrament for four hundred years, and now upon a sudden is it
become a sacrament? how does he prove it to be a sacrament? He brings no
reason, he has no proof, no, neither yet does he so much as say it is a
sacrament properly so called, but that it is Genus Sacramenti, A kind of
Sacrament. What then, if we grant to master Bellarmine that which Pope
Innocentius says? If it be a kind of Sacrament, as he says, is it,
therefore a sacrament truly and properly as master Bellarmine says? I deny
that argument, and master Bellarmine will not prove it. And yet to help his
bad cause, he lowdly and lewdly belyeth Innocentius his words, in that he
affirms that Innocentius says expresselie and plainly, that this oynting
is that sacrament explaned by saint James. But Innocentius has no such words,
no neither yet any thing like. But M. Bellarmine, to deceive them that can not
look into the fathers, does many times falsify them to make his cause to
seem better.

And now what cause has this second Achylles of the Catholics (for Eckius
did bestow that name first upon himself, as you may see in his Enchiridion in
the title of the church in the margent) what cause I say, has this
challenging champion thus to brag against Kemnitius, that he durst not so much
as name this Innocentius. When his testimony is examined, the crack is great,
but he does not hit the mark that master Bellarmine would have him to leauell
at. As for Kemnitius if he have but his due praise, we must needs confess,
that by his learning and travel, he has more beaten down the walls of that
popish Babylon, than that all the papists if they join together hand in hand,
shall be able with all their skill and cunning to raise it up again. Of
Innocentius the third, because he came so late he is not worth the answering:
for he lived about 1200. years after Christ in time of ignorance and much
superstition. As for the Councels which he alleges, the first is the Nicene
council translated into latin out of the Arabic tongue. But since that canon
is not amongst those canons, which we have in the tomes of the councels, and
in those coppies that hitherto have been counted the true councels, we need
not much regard those far fetched authorities. His second authority is out
of the council of Cabilon, and some other particular councels, and although he
commend their antiquity, yet the first of them was almost 800. years after
Christ. And those which I have examined, make not for his purpose. For they
prove not, that this anointing is a sacrament properly so called. Now for the
fathers, master Bellarmine needs no adversary, he confesses his want of
proof out of them: For he deuideth the fathers into two sorts. The one he
confesses do not plainly say that it is a sacrament. Why then does he
produce them? He has taken in hand to prove that anoyling, as it is used in
the popish church, is a true and proper sacrament. If they will not prove this,
they may hold their tongues. For to this end only are they to be alleged. An
other sort there are, who speak it plainly, as he tells us. But they are of
no credit, neither are once named among the ancient fathers. The eldest of them
is about 800. years after Christ. And for his examples of some few men what
they have done, it is no proof to us, that we ought so to do. They might have
their reasons that might well induce them to it. They might also do therein,
as in many things many have done of a blind zeal, and foolish devotion. How
or in what sort they have done that which they did, I will not take upon me to
judge: as for their doings they ought not to be an example to any man, so that
we should be bound to follow them. But he will prove by reason, that it must
needs be a sacrament: Bellarm. de sac. vnct. li. 1. cap. 5.
For since God has by a sacrament helped us, in the entrance into the church,
and also in our continuance in the same, we may not imagine that his
providence shall fail us at our going out of the church: these are master
Bellarmine his words. I might briefly answer, that we are not to teach God
what we think convenient that he should do, but to see what he has done, and
to content our selves therewith, and to frame our selves to perform the same.
But if God fail in his providence, if their anoyling be not a sacrament, then
must we imagine that God had no due regard of the fathers of the old world, or
of the patriarchs, or of the godly under the law. For until Christ's time,
master Bellarmine will confess they had not this Sacrament. Yea the Apostles
and all other the Godly and constant Martirs in Christ's church, had not that
sacrament. Neither yet did they make complaint for want of the same, but
comfortably and patiently endured all torments with great joy, although they
had not this anoyling, nor any hope to have it, no neither once thought of it.
Lastly, our Savior Christ to prepare us against death tells us, that
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life: and to
cause us not to fear it, he says, that he is the resurrection and the life.
Many notable lessons did our Savior Christ give to his disciples, before he
left the world to go to his father, which are recorded by Saint John from the
twelfth to the seventeenth chapters. And although he use all arguments to
comfort them, yet he never once thought of this anoyling, which yet then if he
had purposed to leave unto his church any such Sacrament, it had been good
time to have delivered them for their comfort. To be short, whatsoever he
commanded us to use for the strengthening of our faith, with boldness we may,
and with comfort and readiness we ought to do: But it is far from either
true or sound comfort, in the agony of death, or a sufficient weapon, to
withstand the assaults of Satan, and conflicts of conscience, to have standing
by thee some Idol pastor, whose greatest good, that he either can or will do
unto thee, is to grease some parts of thy body. Let the world esteem of these
things as they will. But this is certain that it is only true obedience that
has the promise of blessing. And without the commandment there can be no
obedience, either in our duties toward God, or our conversation amongst men.
For obedience is nothing else, but an earnest applying of our selves to do that
which is pleasing unto God, and which he has commanded. It is also far from
the majesty of Gods spirit, to deliver to us such trifling toys, thereby to
comfort the afflicted conscience. And thus I trust it appears, that this
their sacrament of anoyling, is but a devise of their own brain, having
neither institution from Christ, neither any commandment from his apostles,
or example in the scriptures, especially as it is now used in the church of
Rome, either for the matter whereof it must consist, or the manner how it must
be done, or the end unto which they especially have regard in that ceremony.

I had thought here to have ended both this treatise of the sacraments and this
chapter, but before I go any farther, I would have the christian reader to
mark the evil dealing of the popish church, who with their tongues and pens
proclaim as loud as they can, that our doctrine is not catholic, it is new,
is lately devised. And yet we appeal to the scriptures, and have testimony for
us also, the consent of the fathers of the purer times. And on the contrary the
church of Rome cries still, they are the catholic church, they have the
catholic religion, yea all that is with them is catholic. But if by the
rules of catholic which Vincentius Lyrinensis gives, Commonitorio adversus
haereses.
(with whose authority they seek often to stop our mouths) we examine their
doctrines: we shall find them as far from the catholic religion, as the
priests and rulers amongst the Jews were from the truth. For whereas he
accounts no doctrine catholic, but that which has been taught at all
times, in all places, and by all men, or at the least by the most, and the best
learned, and godliest men, we might by this rule reject many of their
doctrines, which they deliver to us as catholic and necessary, so that
without believing them there is no salvation. For shortness sake, let us look
into this that last I handled. They will have it a catholic doctrine to teach
that anoyling is a true and proper Sacrament, yea, and the council of Trent
curses them that say the contrary. And yet master Bellarmine, who says as
much in effect as they all can say in this point, how catholickely does he
prove it? He with much ado wresteth for it one place out of Saint James, and
has not one mo in all the Scripture for him. Then leapeth he more then four
hundredth years after Christ, and picketh out one pope Innocent, who says it
is a kind of Sacrament. If he had proved it to be a Sacrament properly so
called, yet had he been but one witness in four hundred years. Then about
1200. years after Christ, he has gotten another witness, and he is a pope also,
Innocent the third. Then he tells us of the 69. canon of the council of
Nice, which had in all but twenty canons. Al above twenty were fetched out of
Arabia, but are neither mentioned in the Nicene council set forth by
themselves, Li. 1. cap. 6.
neither yet of Ruffinus in his ecclesiastical history, where he sets down
the canons of that council, who although he make 22. in number, Yet is the
matter no other than is set down in the 1. book of the councils in those 20.
chapters. Besides there are many other strong reasons, and pregnant
presumptions to prove those 50. canons (for they have 70.) to be falsely added
to ye council, and therefore they deserve no credit. He also alleges some
particular councels, which he commends for their antiquity, and yet the
ancientest of them, is about 800. years after Christ. And about that time also
are the most ancient fathers, that seem to say any thing for him. Then if thou
know the sun to shine at noone day, thou may also know that this is not
a catholic doctrine, neither can be so accounted. It has not been taught at
all times, not in all places, not by all or the most of the learned. No, it has
had scarce one sufficient witness in 1200. years. But for the substance of
religion which we teach, if we have not a universal consent of the scriptures,
and also the testimony of the fathers of the church, in her most pure times, we
crave no credit, we ask no hearing. Therefore that which we teach is the only
catholic faith, because it has the universal consent of the purer times:
that which for the most part they teach, is but new, not warranted by the word,
not known or not taught amongst the godly fathers, at the least for 400. or
500. years. Which I thought good upon this occasion thus offered, to note unto
the christian reader, that I might pull away from the faces of those
counterfeites, the visard of catholic, universality, antiquity, and consent,
that their religion may appear indeed as it is, new, not old, particular not
catholic, false not true: because it is the devise of man, whose wisdom is
folly, whose words are lies: and not the will of God, which is the infallible
rule, and of whose word not one title shall perish. And thus I trust it
appears, that they who brag most, of the name of catholic church, are the
greatest enemies to true catholic religion, teaching that which is nothing
less then catholic.

Of original sin, what it is: And whether Concupiscence be sin, or not.
CHAP. 21
THE PROTESTANTS
THat all mankind which is conceived of unclean seed, is also infected with
original sin, no man denies: but the question is, what this original sin
is, which we confess to be in us. Original sin.
We therefore say, It is a general corruption of our whole nature, which
corruption as an inheritance we receive from Adam. In our mind is ignorance,
where was light and knowledge. In our heart is unaptness, and unreadiness to
any thing that is good, in stead of an earnest forwardnes, to serve God
sincerely: whereby it comes to pass, that by concupiscence and lust we are
enticed to sin. Which concupiscence, because the Apostle to the Romans does
often call ^ in, we also say it is sin, not only because it proceeds from
sin, and also proceeds from it: but also because it is a thing in it self
contrary to Gods Law.

THE PAPISTS
BUT the Papists, although they can not deny, but that we all have original
sin: yet would they have the force thereof as little known as may be. And
therefore some of them have taught, that it is nothing else but the imputation
of Adams sin unto us, and not any corruption in our selves, as Ambrose
Catharinus, Andrad. Orthod. expli. l^ b. 3. de axiom. 3. Cens. Colon. dialog. 2.
and Pighius, two notable papists. And others find fault, that we do so amplify
the corruption of the nature of man by original sin, as though nothing that is
good could come from it, As for concupiscence, they will not grant that it is
sin in the regenerat. And yet the Apostle S. Paul being a man regenerate,
confesses it to be sin in himself very often, as may appear. Romans 7.


The reasons which move us, thus to lay open and amplify our own corrupt
nature, and to confess the power and force of original sin in us are these.
Partly our own woeful experience, whereby if we have any true feeling of our
frail estate, or know any thing of our unwillingness to that which is good,
and our ready inclination to that which is evil: we must needs confess that
the law of our flesh, Romans 7.23.
is always rebellious to the law of the spirit which is in us: And that the
wisdom of the flesh is such a froward enemy to God, Romans 8.7.
as is not subject to the law of God neither indeed can be. Partly also the
manifold and manifest testimonies out of Gods word, which do plainly prove,
that this original sin has so corrupted our whole nature, that it can bring
forth nothing that is good or godly. Genesis 6.5.
Such is that All the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are only
evil always. And that also. Genesis 8.21.
The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Whereby we must needs
confess and acknowledge it to be true, that we are not sufficient of our
selves, to think any thing as of our selves, 2. Cor. 3.5.
in those things that belong unto true godliness. And why? Because that by one
man sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12.18.
and by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation. In this
respect the Apostle calls such as are not regenerate, Enemies to God, the
children of wrath by nature, vessels of dishonor, and by such like names
whereby he shows plainly, what we should judge, or how we should esteem of
the strength and force of original sin, in them that are not regenerate.
Namely, that no good at all can come from them in thought, word or deed. Which
doctrine the Church of Rome will in no wise hear of. But of that I must speak
in another place. But even we that have received the first fruits of the
spirit, and whom God has delivered from the condemnation of that common
corruption: we, I say, do find, that if sin reign not over us, yet it
dwells in us. Whereby we are many times forced, Romans 7.1^
To do that evil thing that we would not, and to leave undone, That good
that we would do. We feel that there is, 2^
A law in our members, rebelling against the Law of our mind, and leading us
captive to the Law of sin, which is in our members. Insomuch as we are
forced, not only to cry out with the Prophet David, Psalm. 19.12
Who can understand his faults? Cleanse me from secret faults: but also
continually to pray as Christ wills us, Forgive us our trespasses. Heb. 12.1.
For sin hangs so fast on us, that even When we would do good, Romans 7.2^.
then evil is present with us. And therefore well may our spirit strive, that
the flesh prevail not, and the new man wax every day stronger against the
old man: yet, so long as we carry about with us, this body subject to
corruption, Satan will not leave buffeting us, sin will not cease to assault
us. But, as a froward and cruel enemy, even then when it is almost quite
subdued, and at the last cast, yet will it stir, even then, I say, will it
strive to hurt us. And this our deadly enemy was bred and borne with us, we
carry him always about us. So long as we live we cannot shake him off. Which
made the Apostle saint Paul so weary of this wicked world, that he desired to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Philip. 1.23.
And no marvel. For, what can a spiritual minded man see here, that may make
him desire to live in this flesh? In his mind there is such ignorance of
heavenly things, as that although he be continually taught, yet he needs
continually to pray, O teach me thy Statutes, Psalm. 119.12
and to ask that the eyes of his understanding may be lightened, by the spirit
of wisdom and revelation, Ep. 1.17, 18, Philip. 1.9
by the knowledge of Christ, more and more in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding. For, the perfection of knowledge that here we can attain
unto, Coloss. 1.9.
is every day to learn, and when we know most concerning heavenly things, yet
our knowledge is imperfect. Yea, that which we know not, is much more than
that we do know.

Then if he consider of his own heart, he shall find the affections thereof
so rebellious against the spirit, so running headlong unto worldly and wicked
lusts, that it will force him for to pray, Psalm. 86.11
Knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name. Psalm. 5.8.
Lead me in the way of thy righteousness, make thy way plain before my
face. Yea, he will be driven to confess, that no man can come unto Christ to
serve him, Ioh. 6.44.
Unless the Father draw him. So that even in respect of those excellent
things that man does seem to have, he may truly say, Romans 7.18.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good thing. For
his mind is darkened that it can not know, his heart is clogged that it will
not obey sincerely, and readily as it ought Gods holy will.

Thus then it appears, not only, that all that are borne of unclean seed,
are conceived and borne in original sin, Romans 7.24. Romans 8.23
but also, that the same does make great trouble even to the godly, yea, it
makes them to sigh for their deliverance from this their body, which by reason
of sin, is so subject to death.

Concupiscence is s^ n
And now, for this concupiscence, by means whereof we are thus enticed unto
sin, and also hindered from sincere obedience, the church of Rome will in no
wise yield that it shall be sin in the regenerate, unless it also draw
consent of reason to yield unto it: for this they all teach. And yet saint
Paul in the Epistle to the Romans often calls it sin, as M. Bellarmine
himself confesses, De amiss. gratiae lib. 5. cap. 10.
yea, and that in the regenerate. But it is so called (says he) improperly,
not because it is sin, but because it is the cause of sin, and comes also
of sin. But how does he prove that out of any thing that saint Paul has
said in those places? First, because saint Paul says, Let not sin reign in
this your mortal body. Rom, 6.12.
Out of which words Master Bellarmine reasons thus: The Apostle says, that
this sin is in the body, not in the mind, but sin properly so called can
not be in the body: therefore the Apostle calls not concupiscence sin,
because it is so properly. I may answer with Saint Augustine, that the flesh
never lusts without the soul: De perfect. iustitiae.
and also out of Saint Ambrose upon this place, that the body is here taken
for the whole man, body and soul: Neither is there any that does restrain
this word Body unto that part of man that is a distinct part from the soul,
amongst all the ancient Writers that I have seen. And then Master
Bellarmines argument has no force, because Saint Paul's words may have this
sense, Let not sin reign either in your body or soul: and that sin may be
in the soul, sin (I say) properly so called, I trust Master Bellarmine will
not deny. But the words themselves do most plainly show, that he speaks in
this place of that part of man, wherein sin properly so called may be: for he
speaks of that part of man, wherein reigning sin may be, otherwise his
exhortation were needless: but reigning sin, is sin properly so called, as
all do confess, therefore sin properly so called, may be in this mortal
body, whereof here the Apostle saint Paul speaks. And therefore Master
Bellarmine triumphs too hastily, when as he concludes, that Saint Paul
plainly signifies he calls concupiscence sin, but not properly, but
improperly. But I may more justly conclude against Master Bellarmine. The
Apostle speaks there of sin properly so called. And he speak h of
concupiscence: therefore concupiscence is sin properly so called. The minor is
confessed here by master Bellarmine, in that he does allege it to prove his
purpose of concupiscence. The mayor also is proved out of master Bellarmine.
For, the principal thing that he does allege to teach us, that Concupiscence
is no sin: that it is not in that same part wherein sin can be, but in the
flesh only, where can be no sin. But if it be found once to be in that
part of man wherein sin may be, he will not then deny, but is also sin.
Therefore thus I reason, the apostle speaks there of that sin that is in
that part of the body, De amiss. great. l. 5. c. 13
wherein sin is, that is properly so called, as before I have proved:
therefore he speaks of sin properly so called. The other place alleged by
master Bellarmine to prove that saint Paul calls not concupiscence sin in
the proper signification, Romans 7.18.
is this, There dwells not in me, that is, in my flesh, any good. Therefore
concupiscence is in the flesh. How unnecessary a consequence this argument
has, the very children may perceive. And also this word flesh, every one
that is acquainted but with the principles of divinity knows to be spoken of
whatsoever is not regenerate in man, even the very mind of man. But of this I
have spoken sufficiently in the answer to the former place. Master Bellarmine
also uses some other reasons to prove that the apostles calls concupiscence
sin improperly but they are not worth speaking of. As this is one. Sin is
many times called improperly, therefore here it is not called sin properly.
A kind of reasoning which master Bellarmine immediately afterward reproves
in Luther, and yet himself uses it. Another reason whereby I prove
concupiscence to be sin in the proper signification, Romans 7.23. De Amiss.
gratiae li. 5. cap. 6.
is because It rebelleth against the law of the mind. For master Bellarmine
himself confesses that to be understood of concupiscence. As also by The law
of the mind, Ibid. cap. 10
he understands The rule of a good action, which must needs be the law of
God. Thus therefore I reason, whatsoever affection or lust rebelleth against
the law of the mind, is in truth sin: but concupiscence is lust that
rebelleth against the law of the mind, therefore concupiscence is in truth
sin. The mayor may be proved out of saint John, 1. John. 3.4.
who defines sin to be a Breach of law, or lawlesnesse. But yet master
Bellarmine will not confess that whatsoever rebelleth against the law is sin
properly, and namely concupiscence, De Amiss. great. li. 5. cap 14.
because it rebelleth only as a thing stirring up, and causing to transgress,
as I said of the devil (says he.) I am glad that concupiscence which the
papists will in no wise to be sin of it self, has deserved no better of her
own friends and patrons, then to be matched in the same yoke with the devil,
who is a liar and the father thereof. John. 8.44.
But master Bellarmine cannot shift off this argument under this color. We
inquire what concupiscence is, he tells us what it works, we would know
the nature of it, he tells us, the effect of it. There are therefore in
concupiscence two things to be considered: the one is, what it brings forth
in us, of the which we say with saint James, Iam. 1.15.
When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin. The other, what it is in it
self, or in it own nature. To that we answer out of the apostle in many
places, that it is sin, as before it has bin showed: yea and in this very
respect, that it has in it a repugnancy against the law of the mind, and
follows not the direction of the law of God. For even as it is crooked, that
is, not even to the strait rule: so is it sin, that is, not agreeable to the
most infallible rule of Gods law, which I take to be master Bellarmines
meaning, expounding the nature of the word (...) which saint John uses, De
Amiss. great. li. 5. cap. 14 1. 1. John. 3.4
he says It is a departing from the law. If then concupiscence be examined,
even before it be consented unto, by Gods Law do we not find that it is a
motion disagreeing from Gods Law? No man can deny it. For look upon the lust
that moves to uncleanness, to stealth, to cruelty, although the heart
consent not, yet in that very lust, is that, that disagreeth from Gods Law.
So that this is not true that master Bellarmine says, that concupiscence
rebelleth against the law only, as it stirs up or causes to sin:
seeing in it self it has that nature that swarueth from the law.

S. August. also proves my mayor in that definition that he gives of sin,
Cont. Faust. li. 22. cap. 27.
saying, that Sin is that which is said, done, or lusted against the eternal
law. And that that is a definition of sin, properly so called, master
Bellarmine cannot deny. Now for my minor proposition, which is this, That
concupiscence rebelleth against the law of the mind, master Bellarmine
himself confesses it in plain words, De Amiss. gratiae. lib. 5 cap. 10. and
14
but yet so, as that he seems to me to counterfeit Iuglers, when they would
play a trick of leger-demaine. For their greatest skill is Deceptio visus, the
deceiving of our sight, whereby they seem to do that they do not, or with a
little cleanly conueyance, to beguile the simple. For although he confess,
that these lusts rebel against the law, De Amiss. gratiae. li. 5. cap. 10.
yet says he, they rebel against the law as it shows the end, not as it
commands the means. But who can imagine that ever saint Paul speaking of
this point of Divinity, which is most necessary to be understood of every
one, even from the highest, to the lowest, would speak or write so subtly or
obscurely? And who told him these lusts strive not against the law, as it
commands the means, that is to say, as it commands to resist, and not to
yield to them? Doubtless that lust, which rebelleth against this
commandment, Thou shall not lust, will never yield when it is resisted: for
every thing naturally seeks the preservation of it self. But the resisting
of lust is the destruction of it, therefore it will not yield to it. And as
reason teaches this, so saint Paul by experience found it to be true, when
he said, Sin took occasion by the commandment, Romans 7.23.
and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. So that this concupiscence, is
by resisting, made more stubburne, and is so far from yielding, that it
fights more fiercely against the law. And hereof is that combat and battle,
which the godly have between the flesh and the spirit. The wicked are not
acquainted with it, because they willingly yield to their lusts. But the
godly, because they resist the same, Do see another law in their members,
rebelling against the law of their mind. Romans 7.23


Thus we see that this distinction whereby master Bellarmine strives against
truth, is neither according to the meaning of the Apostle, nor has any color
of truth. But here by the way I must note, how grossly, and how absurdly
master Bellarmine in the place next before alleged affirms, that he is not
a sinner, that attaineth not to the end of the commandment. His reason is,
because it lies not in his power: no more tha^ he is too blame, that being
commanded to subdue the enemies, can not do it. But master Bellarmine should
consider where is the cause of this want in us, and through whose fault it is
that we can not obey this commandment, thou shall not lust. If it be in
man, as in truth it is, because he fell from that estate of innocence
wherein he was created, then is there no reason, but that sin should be
imputed unto us, for not performing that commandment, thou shall not lust.
And by this also it appears, that master Bellarmine his similitude is nothing
like, because that the subduing of the enemy was not in their power. But not
to lust wickedly was in man's power once, which because through his own fault
he lost, the not fulfilling of that commandment, may justly be laid to his
charge for sin. Thirdly, I thus prove concupiscence to be sin: Not to love
the Lord our God, with all our heart, Luke. 10.27
with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our thought, is sin.
But to lust, is to fail in this love. August. de perfect. iustitiae. cont.
celest.
For if the heart consent not, yet at the least the thought by this
concupiscence is hindered from this perfection of love, therefore concupiscence
is sin. Again, De August. gratiae li. 4. Cap. 2. Li. 2. Did. 3^
Original sin, is sin properly so called, as master Bellarmine
confesses: But Concupiscence is original sin, as the master of Sentences
affirms, therefore concupiscence is sin, properly so called. Again,
whatsoever makes us hated of God is sin. Andrad. Orthod. Explic. lib. 3. But
concupiscence makes us hated of God, Bellar. de Amiss. gratiae, lib. 5. cap.
13: therefore concupiscence is sin. And thus much briefly, to prove
concupiscence not only to be called, but indeed to be sin. But what need I
stand so much hereupon? If the church of Rome meant that the light of the truth
should shine unto men, she would never cast these mists before their eyes, thus
to contend about terms and words. For themselves do ascribe unto
concupiscence, both the nature, and the effects of sin, when they say it De
Amiss. gratiae. li. 5. cap. 13 ^.
is vice, it is truly evil, Can 14.
it is unlawful, condemned, and hated of God, and that Andrad. says, sin only
can work. For all this M. Bellarmine affirms of concupiscence, Cap. 13.
Orthod. explic. li. 3.
and many such like things, which whether they may be affirmed of any thing but
sin, let master Bellarmine and his favorites well consider. But I for my
part do think, I may truly conclude, and boldly affirm, seeing the Apostle
so often calls it sin, without any expounding of himself to speak
vnproperty, seeing it rebelleth against the law of the mind, and makes such
a want in the love of God, that in this and such like respects, concupiscence
is sin properly so called, whatsoever the Council of Trent decree to the
contrary. Sess. 5. can. 5


Of the works of Infidels, or such as are not regenerate. CHAP. 22.
THE PROTESTANTS
WE the^ being thus infected with the filth of original sin, and by our
concupiscence, which can not whilst here we live be rooted out of us, being
intised to sin, and hindered in all good: what can come from them, Ephe. 4.18
that have their cogitations darkened, through the ignorance that is in the^, but
that they walk after the lusts of the flesh, Ephe. 2.1.3
in fulfilling the will of the flesh. And so are in deed no better than dead in
sins and trespasses, 5
by their own nature the children of wrath. 4
So that from such no good can proceed, in thought, word, or deed, and in such
no good can be, until God of his abundant mercy, 1. Pet. 1.3
have begotten them again unto a lively hope of immortal seed, ^ 23
by the word of God, having by his holy spirit renewed the light of their
mind, and reformed the frowardness of their heart. Until then (I say) what
excellent virtues so ever they seem to have, yet is there nothing in the^
acceptable to God, because they have not that fountain of regeneration, from
whence only can spring that which god accepts for good. Neither have they
faith, without which nothing can please God. Heb. 11.6.


THE PAPISTS
But the papists, Andrad. orthod. explic. li. 3.
as they will in no wise that concupiscence is of it self sin, no not in the
unregenerate, but only in respect that it is destitute of original
righteousness: so do they seek by all means, to cloak and cover the
corruption and sinfulness, of our wretched nature. Hereof comes it that they
shame not to teach, that the works of infidels and godless persons, Andrad.
ibidem
such as we account Turks, or Jews, may be without spot of sin, and
worthy of notable praise. As though a filthy spring could send forth
pleasant waters, Iam. 3.11 Math. 7.18
or an evil tree could bear good fruit, John. 15.4.
or a branch that is not of the vine tree, could have a kindly grape. All
which the scriptures deny. Do men gather grapes of thorns, Mat. 7.16
or figs of thistles? Luke. 6.45.
No doubtless. For, An evil man out of the treasure of his heart, brings
forth evil. It is then most certain, that where the spirit of regeneration
is not to sanctify the heart, (as in the infidels it is not) we can look for
no works, but such as proceed from that bitter root of sin, which must
needs be evil and unsavory before God.

It may justly be wondered at, why they, who take upon them the name of holy
catholic church, and such as account themselves the members thereof, do so
stiffly and stubbornely, maintain so bad a cause, and defend, yea commend the
actions of such godless men. For not only the particular writers among them,
excuse from sin the actions of Infidels, Sess. 6. can. 57.
but also the council of Trent does hold them all accursed that dare say they
are truly sin. But their fear is, least if the nature of man be set forth in
her own colors, and duly considered of, the doctrine of merit by works
will seem more absurd. But if the works of graceless and godless men, may
be thought to be void of sin: how much the rather may we think, that the
works of the faithful may be so perfect, that they may merit at Gods hands?
And in truth no man can deny, but that there is no comparison, between the
works of the godly and the ungodly. Therefore that they may prepare a way for
their doctrine of merits, they would first make us believe, that even in the
wicked there may be good works. And least men should condemn the corruption
of this our nature, being not renewed by the spirit of God, as it justly
deserves, and so sincerely confess, that we have in us no good, but that it
comes wholly from God: the council of Trent does not any thing mislike those
opinions, that commend the works even of infidels, yea attributing some merit
unto them, as do some of the scholemen, but only accurseth them that account
them to be sin. Sleiden. comment. li. 23. An. 1552.
And a Franciscan friar, reading upon the second chapter of the epistle to the
Romans, did most blasphemouslie teach, in the hearing of many of them that
were at the council, and in the time of the council, that They who had no
knowledge of Christ, and yet lived honestly were saved. Which his unchristian
doctrine, was so far from being condemned by that Antichristian council,
that the divines that were sent from the protestants to that council, made
their complaint to the emperors Ambassadors that he was heard with great
liking. And indeed the council did not accurse that doctrine, or him that
taught it. No, the council did not determine, but as Andradius tells us,
Orthodoxarum explicat. li. 3.
has left it free for every man to think as they will of the works of them
that are not regenerate: this only that council will not permit us to think,
that they are sin, because they are not of faith. That therefore that the
scripture teaches us, we may not once think of, but all other absurd
opinions of men are very tolerable. Is not this strange dealing, that the
spirit of truth only must not speak, and the lying spirits of foolish men, may
say what they will? But let us see what reasons they allege to induce them
to this persuasion. I will say nothing of that which master Bellarmine,
(nothing like a grave divine, which should with all diligence and prayer search
out, and with all humility submit himself to the truth, but rather like a
foolish and wrangling sophister, whose care were only to contend, to make good
that which he says) most impudently affirms, enquiring, what knowledge of
moral virtues men may have by the powers of nature, and Gods general help. De
gram. and libero a^ bit. li. 5. cap. 1.
Of two opinions he prefers one, and why? So much the more gladly (says he)
we do embrace and defend it, how much the more our adversaries mislike it. I
see now it is no great marvel, though these pretended catholics, do
manifestly and wilfully gainsaie and withstand many things, most consonant to
the infallible word of God. For I perceive, that if we like of it, it is cause
good enough for them to mislike of it. Only this will I say, that because this
persuasion is foolish, and dangerous: Iam. 2.1.
Saint James gives a good caveat to all that are of such an humor, My
brethren have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, in respect of
persons. But, to like or mislike, in respect of the man, is to have it in
respect of persons. But he having thus professed that general reason whereby
he is settled in his persuasion comes afterward in the same book to other
particular reasons. His first reason is this. Cap. 9.
God is said many times to reward the works of the Infidels, but God will
not reward that which is sin, The first argument to prove that all the
infidels works are not sin.
therefore not all the works of Infidels are sin. If I should examine the
particular proofs that he brings of his first proposition, the weakness
thereof will soon appear. For he must prove that the works of infidels are
rewarded of God. For proof whereof his first example is of the midwiues, Exodus
1.21.17.
that came to the women of Israel in their travel in Aegipt, of whom the
Scripture gives testimony that they feared God, has in that very place, and
before also. Why then does he reckon them amongst infidels. Then also the
reward which he says was promised to them, the best learned in the Hebrew
tongue, apply not to the Midwiues, but to the Israelites of the increase of
their families. Ezech. 27.18, 19.
The second example is out of Ezechiel where God promises to give
Nabuchad-nezar and his army as their wages, Aegipt for their service which they
did against Tire. Which service against Tire, if master Bellarm. can commend
in Nabuchad-nezar as a good work, wherein he had only regard unto his own
cruel and proud affection, he will hardly find any evil. His third and
last place out of Daniel, Daniel. 4.24.
wherein Daniel gives council to Nabuchad-nezar to redeem his sins by being
good to the poor, it is not very pertinent to the purpose, and I shall (God
willing) have more fit place afterward to speak of it. Although therefore it
does easily appear that his mayor is not proved by him, yet I will confess,
that God is said to reward such men, in respect that he gives good success
to them, and prospers them, to set forth by them his own glory: Alluding
unto the wages that servants have for their work. Who although they be not
always of the best, yet good reason they should have their wages for their
work. The minor is, that God will not reward sin. I grant in that respect
that it is sin he will not. But in every action, there are to be considered
many things.

First, the deed, as in this that Nabuchad-nezar did fight against Tirus:
Secondly, the manner how, and with what affection: with a cruel and proud
mind, and not with such compassion and pity as we ought to have in
correcting of others: Thirdly, the end is to be regarded, as, whether he did
especially respect Gods glory, or rather, as indeed he did, to subdue them
unto his own dominion.

Now therefore true it is that God rewards not sin. And yet he many
times rewards and commends that action, which himself turns to his
glory, and the executing of his good will, which yet in him that does it, in
respect of his evil affection, and wrong end that he looked unto, in doing of
it, is sin. But the sin it self, he is so far from rewarding, that he
utterly condemns it, and him that delights therein., Bellarmines second
argument is, that Infidels do or can do good works: therefore, not all their
works are sin. That they do or can do good works, mark how he proves.
If ye salute your brethren only, what singular thing do you? Does not also
the Ethnickes likewise? Be ye therefore perfect, etc. Maath. 5.47.
Now Master Bellarmine must reason thus. The heathen can salute one another,
therefore they can do a good work. As strong a reason, as if I should say,
Matt. 26.49.
Judas saluted his Master: therefore he did a good work. Again, the Gentiles
that have not the law, Romans 2.14.
do by nature the things of the law. Therefore they do a good work, and so
not al they do is sin. These bald proofs, do show that master Bellarmine
has but a barren matter in hand. For by doing the law, he means not that
which the Apostle calls fulfilling of the law, Romans 23.8.
for the Gentiles not regenerate cannot do that. But that they do that which
the law commands after some sort, but not in such manner as is commanded.
And therefore he says they do the work of the law. But that work of the
law, because they do it not, with such a mind, and to such an end as they
ought, therefore it is sin in them. And that the apostle himself in that
place shows. For his endeavor is to prove, them to be vnexcuseable by reason
of their sin, although they had not the law written delivered to them,
because they had by nature the substance which he calls the work of the law,
written in their hearts: yea, and framed very often their external actions
according to the same and yet performed not that holy obedience that they
should. Now who will grant such an argument? The Gentiles do the external law:
therefore there is not sin in all their actions. For to make our actions void
of sin, it is not sufficient that we keep the external law, but they must
be good works well done. Sermon. 5. in cap. 2. ad Romans
Neither does Chrysostom when he says, the Gentiles without the law did all
the things of the law, mean all the circumstances of the law which master
Bellarmine falsely gathers, but only all those things that externally the
law has commanded, as may appear by his own words a little before, who
says, The greek shall be set before thee, appearing to be a doer of those
things that are in the law. Mark, he says not doing, but appearing or seeming
to do. Because he does that concerning the law that appears to the eye, and
is external. But with a sanctified affection, or to a holy end, he that is not
sanctified cannot do it. out of the fathers.
it is nothing to this question. For when we say, that the Infidels have not
in them any thing that is good: our meaning is, that there is in them no work
so perfect, but that it has sin in it. And that this is true, saint Hierome
(who seems to speak for him most effectually) does manifestly prove. In
eccl. ca. 7.
Works (says he) because they are done by the body, are never without fault.
Which if it be true in all works, then can it not be but true in the works of
them, which themselves are most faulty, such as are the Infidels. from reason
master Bellarmine has in that place two reasons. The first is this. If works
done without faith or Gods special help, be sin, they are sin, either
because they are not done to the right end, which is Gods glory: or because
they proceed from a sinful man: or because those moral works are not of
proportion with the strength of nature: or lastly, because these works that
are good are too hard, both in respect of the rebellion of the flesh, and the
tyranny of Satan. But in none of these respects they are sin: therefore they
are not sin. Which his argument briefly thus I answer. That his minor
proposition is utterly false, and directly against that which the Apostle saint
Paul writes in the Epistle to the Romans, of the Gentiles, showing how God
gave them up, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God. Romans
1.21.
Wherein the Apostle shows how wickedly the Gentiles abuse that their
knowledge, whereby they should be moved to glorify God. And in that he denies
that they can be accounted sinful, because they proceed from sinful man.
What does he else, but give the lie to our Savior Christ himself, who has
plainly said, Matthew. 7.19.
that an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit And all the sophistry that
master Bellarmine has, can not salve this sore. For it is impossible to gather
grapes of thistles: for that he speaks of the proportion, between the work
and the strength of nature, it would be too long here to examine. Lastly,
whereas he accounts the tyranny of Satan, and subjection to their own
lusts, not to be sufficient to make their work sinful: let him see how he
can answer, not S. Paul only, who says, that such are servants to sin, but
also our savior Christ, who tells the Jews, Romans 6.17.
that unless the Son made them free, they could not be free. Then I pray
you, what good works, Ioh. 8.36.
wholly void of sin can such work as serve so bad a M. as is sin? His second
argument taken from reason, is of the absurdity he imagines to be in our
doctrine. Himself reasoning most absurdly, thus.

If the Infidels in doing their good works, do sin, it is better for them
not to do those works, than to do them: but so to say is most absurd. That to
say it is better not to do those external good works than to do them, we
will with master Bellarmine willingly confess. But how does he prove his
mayor, namely, that it is better to leave them undone, than to do them?
Because in doing them (says he) they sin, in not doing them, they sin
not. De amiss. great. li. 1. ca. 2
I see Master Bellarmine has forgotten that which in an other place he
tells us, that a man sins as well in not doing that he should, as in
doing that he should not. And therefore Master Bellarmine says falsely,
that in not doing such works as occasion is offered, they should not sin. I
might therefore conclude with that golden sentence alleged out of saint
Augustine by the master of sentences, Lib. 2. did. 41
The whole life of Infidels is sin, and there is nothing good, without the
chief good. Where is want of knowledge of the eternal truth, even in the
best manners, is but counterfeit virtue: but that I think it very necessary to
show how violently master Bellarmine seeks to wrest from the true sense, that
evident testimony of our Savior Christ, Luc. 6.43. and matthew. 7.18
That an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit: which, because it is
applied to sundry purposes, as himself confesses, it is plain, that it is a
general sentence, both in the one place and the other, applied as occasion
serves. And for the meaning of it, to the end it should not seem to prove
that, for the which it is alleged in this question, Master Bellarmine has
three answers to that place. De gratia and lib a^ b^ t. lib. 5 cap. 10.
First, that as a good tree does not always bring forth good fruit, so an
evil tree does not always bring forth evil fruit: but commonly, or, for the
most part, so it is. Which answer of his, does flatly deny that which Christ
affirms, Christ says, An evil tree can not bring forth good fruit: yes,
says Master Bellarmine (by your leave) but it may sometime. Every tree is
known by the fruit (says Christ:) not so, (says master Bellarmine) for
sometimes the fruit may be good, although the tree be evil. Is not this a
saucy mate, so impudently and openly to control the Author of all truth? His
second answer, if we will trust his own report, is a plain solution of the
argument. And it is this, that this evil tree is the evil will of man. De actis
cum fol. Manich. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Which answer he would feign father upon saint Augustine, but in the place
alleged there is no such matter. I remember that S. Augustine in another place
does say, De gratia Christi ca. 18
that this evil tree, is a man of an evil will, but not the evil will it
self. Well, thus master Bellarmine grants this place to be true, that an
evil tree, that is, lust, or a man that works according to lust, cannot
bring forth good fruit. But first master Bellarmine has falsified S.
Augustine, as I have said: Secondly, he expounds this place otherwise than
saint Jerome and Theoph. do: for they understand it even as we do, that an
evil man, whilst he is evil, can not bring forth good fruit, but being
converted he may. Yea the words themselves are very plain, that our Savior
Christ meant it not of the evil will that is in man, but of the man himself: in
that he adds, Luc. 6.45.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good, and an
evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil. Yet
then this place alleged proves substantially, that Infidelles or heathen men
whilst they continue so, can not do any works that shall be perfectly good or
void of sin. His third and last answer to this place is this. The evil
tree (says he) is an evil man, and the good fruit is a meritorious work. And
after this meaning he thus answers the place. An evil man cannot do a
meritorious work. Is not this a notable abusing of Gods word, after his own
pleasure to wrest and wring it? what one word induces him to dream here of
meritorious works? Nay the words confute him mightily: for it is said, An evil
tree brings forth evil fruit. Evil, Matthew. 7.17.
I say, not only, not meritorious. And the tree is known by the fruit. The
fruit then must be bad that must show a bad tree. And therefore this answer of
M. Bellar. is, as are the rest too foolish. De gra. Christi cap. 18. 19 Cont.
I^ lianum Pelag. li. 4. cap. 3.
But S. Augustine expounds it so, if you will trust M. Bellar. but examine the
places by him alleged, and there is no such thing in them. So small a matter
it is for M. Bellar. to abuse his readers at his pleasure, by falsifying the
fathers. And now the latter of these places which he falsely has alleged, for
the confirmation of his untrue assertion, I truly apply to the confuting of
this their ungodly doctrine, using only the words of S. Augustine. If a heathen
man who lives not by faith, does cloth the naked, deliver the distressed,
cure the wounded, bestow his riches upon honest friendship, will not by
torments be brought to bear false witness, I dema^d of thee (says S.
Augustine to Julian the Pelagian) whether he do these good works well or evil?
For if they being good, yet he does them evil, thou can not deny, but that
he sins that does any thing evil. But because thou will not say that he
sins in doing this, thou will doubtless say, that both he does good things,
and he does them well. Now mark S. Augustines conclusion upon these words, If
it be so, an evil tree may bring forth good fruits, which thing the truth it
self says it cannot be, Thus much out of S. Augustine, not only to show how
falsely he is alleged for proof of M. Bellarm. senceles assertion, but also
to let it be seen, how he iumpeth with us in this doctrine that the Godless
cannot do the work, that shall be without sin. Therefore to conclude this
question as Saint Augustine did to the Pelagians, so do I say to our
adversaries. Aug ibidem.
How can it be that you should not seem, either to be merry or mad in these
disputations, who praise the fruit of barren trees? Whose fruits are either
none, or if they be evil, they are not to be praised.

Of Baptism, whether it do extinguish and kill in us original sin, or not.
CHAP. 23
THE PROTESTANTS
We confess, that in Baptism is sealed up and assured unto us, the covenant
that God made with us, for the forgiveness of our sins. Whereby we are also
taught, that if we be Gods children, we be ingrafted into Christ, and planted
in him, to the mortification of the old man, Ephesians. 4.22
the whole body of sin, that having put on the new man, 24
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, we may
increase more and more in all spiritual graces, striving always to attain to
that perfection, which in this life we cannot have, though we feign would
obtain the same.

THE PAPISTS
But our adversaries will have sin in Baptism, Council. Trid. Sess. 5.
not pardoned only, but abolished also, and taken away, so as nothing that is
indeed sin, remains in them that are baptized: Contrary to our own
experience, whereby we find that we have need continually to say, Forgive us
our trespasses: contrary to the manifest words of Saint John, who tells us,
1. Ioh. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us.
And contrary to the confessions of David, Daniel, Psalm. 32.1.2 Psa. 130.3. and
psa. 143.2. Dan. 9.
and all the godly, who acknowledge their own misery, by reason of sin, and
rest only upon Gods mercy.

Although I have spoken before of Baptism, Chap. 11.
yet must I here, as occasion is offered, teach, that after baptism, sin is
not altogether killed, no not in the faithful. So that as before in the last
chapters, I have showed the corruption of our nature to be such, as that in our
selves we find nothing but occasion of death: So now we may see, what remedy
God of his mercy has provided for the same: namely, that seeing we have in
this life continually, the law of the flesh rebelling against the law of the
spirit, and leading us captives to the law of sin, Romans 7.23.
which is in our members: we should have our especial comfort, in that
blessedness which the apostle saint Paul says is described by the prophet
David, Romans 4.6.
even the imputation of righteousness. Psalm. 32.1.2
Because the prophet says. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
sin. So that the imputation of righteousness which our adversaries cannot
well like of, is taught us by Paul, and confirmed by David. Which imputation of
righteousness we stand in need of, because that even the godly whilst here
they live, do find themselves to be far from that perfection which they
should have, and would wish For (as says saint Bernard) although their be no
doubt, In trans. 5. Malac. ser.
but that sin is crucified with Christ, yet was it suffered, though not to
reign, yet to dwell in the apostle himself whilst he lived. And therefore
the same saint Bernard in another place truly says, O only happy man in deed
is he, to whom the Lord imputes not sin. For in whom there is no sin, Super
cant. sermon. 23. Romans 3.23.
there is none. For all have sinned, and stand in need of the glory of God.
And by and by after he says. Not to sin is only Gods righteousness but
man's rightiousnesse, is Gods mercy. And in this respect he reckons Malachy
in the sermon before alleged a happy man, because by death he was freed from
this peril of sinning: Genesis 39.12. 2 kin. 2, 13.
Alluding to the cloak of Helia^ and Putiphars wife. Helias (says he) has
left his cloak, he needs not to fear. He cannot now be touched, much less
holden of the adultres, meaning of fleshly or sinful lusts. S. Aug. also upon
the 32. Psalm. seems to be of that mind: So that we must needs acknowledge the
complaint which the apostle has made to be just and true, Romans 11.1^
that God has shut up al in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. And
therefore although in baptism the forgiveness of sin is sealed up unto us,
yet that bitter root, is not utterly pulled out, but still even the godly
sigh and groan, because they sin and transgress. Bellar. de. sacram. bapt.
li. 1. cap. 13.
But let us see how they prove that after baptism there remains no sin.
The scriptures say our sins are washed, cleansed, taken away, blotted out,
therefore they are not only not imputed, but also utterly abolished. Wittingly
and wilfully they endeavor to deceive the ignorant, and would make them
believe, that we acknowledge no other benefit, but only that our sins are
not imputed unto us. But we (as is before showed) are by baptism assured, not
only of the forgiveness of sins, but also of the sanctification of the
spirit, knowing that He that is dead in sin, Romans 6.2.
must not live therein. We say therefore that a man is not justified only, but
sanctified also. What then? must this sanctification be done at that instant as
we are baptized? 2. Cor. 3.18
The church of Rome teaches us so. But saint Paul says, We all behold as in
a mirror, the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed unto the
same Image, from glory to glory. Mark, that he says this change is not all
at once, 2 Cor. 4.16. sermon. in coena domini.
but that it increases from glory to glory. Again, the inward man is renewed
daily. Which thing saint Bernard most notably confesses. In the fall of the
first man we are all fallen: And that upon a heap of stones, and in the mire:
So that we are not defiled only, but wounded also and sore bruised. We may
quickly be washed, but we must have much a do, before we can be healed. And
afterward confessing this washing to be in baptism, yet he complains that
the beastly motions are not tamed, neither that the itch of that sore may yet
be abidden. By the which motions and itch he means yt very thing, which in
his sermon at ye death of Malac. before alleged, he calls sin. But now
let us examine the particular proofs of this argument. Psalm. 50
David says, Blot out mine iniquity, wash me thoroughly. Therefore all sin
is taken away in Baptism. David had received the Sacrament of Circumcision
long before he prayed thus, which was to them in stead of our Baptism. And
now having sinned long after, he makes this prayer, that God would either
pardon his sin, or work in him the subduing of the same, or both. But this
proves not, that sin is utterly subdued in baptism: and that he should
prove. Micah. 7.18.
Again, the Prophet Micah says, that God takes away iniquity. We grant
it, that he takes away iniquity by forgiving us our sins, and also by
killing sin in us by little and little, and so subduing it in the mean time,
that it utterly prevail not against us. But this proves not that sin is
already altogether vanquished. Again, John the Baptist said, Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. John 1.29.
This also, to our singular great comfort we confess and acknowledge, that he
takes away both the condemnation or curse, and also the guiltiness or
corruption of our sin: And therefore he is truly said to take away the
sin of the world. Master Bellarmine should prove, that this is perfectly
done in baptism, so that no sin after baptism remains, but this proves
no such matter. No not one of all these places make any mention of baptism.
Only they testify, that either sin is, or the godly would have it abolished,
which we also confess and desire. But how, or when it is taken away, there is
not any mention in the places alleged. Let us then come to the last proof of
this argument. The apostle speaking of Christ's love to the church his spouse,
says: He gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it,
Ephe. 5.25 26, 27
by the washing of water in the word: that he might make it unto himself a
grorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, etc. Now if I should expound this
place, Ezec. 47.
by the 47. Chapter of Ezechiel, unto the which the apostle may very well
seem to allude, I know this exposition would be thought new, and singular.
But yet as this exposition has nothing in it against the rule of faith, so by
saint Ieroms interpretation of that place of Ezechiel, it seems to be
warranted. For by the waters mentioned in that place, he understands that
which our savior Christ taught, as also both he and Primasius do expound
this place of the apostle, As water (say they) washes the body, Ierom and
Primasius upon Ephesians. 5.
so teaching does cleanse the soul. And so the apostle does seem to expound
himself, when he shows that this washing is in the word. And thus this
place serves no more for his purpose then the rest. For none of them prove
that baptism takes away all sin. But admit that saint Paul speaks in
that place of baptism, yet this place will not serve to prove that they would
have it. For then the apostle teaches us, how the church of Christ, I say,
that complete and whole body of Christ is sanctified, namely by himself in
the word, whereof baptism is the sacrament. So that therein appears how, or
rather by what means, the body of Christ, his wife and spouse shall be
without spot and wrinkle, but not in what manner, or in what compass of time,
every particular member of this body shall be freed from sin, which is in
controversy amongst us. But to end this first argument. As this doctrine of
the Romish Church sauoureth of Pelagianisme: so master Bellarmine and his
fellows borrow weapons of the Pelagians to fight withal. For saint Augustine
does note this place amongst those which the Pelagians did allege to prove
that man may be without sin. De perfect. just. cont. Celest.
But more plainly writing to Boniface, he writes thus. Lib. 4. cap, 1
The Pelagians do say that men by baptism are perfectly renewed, and bring for
proof the witness of the Apostle to the Ephesians. 5. Not one ape is then liker
another, than are the Pelagians and Papists, both in their doctrine, and in
their proof of it. But of all such testimonies I may say with saint August.
Some of them exhort them that do run, De perfect. just. cont. Celest.
that they run as they should, some other show to what end they should
run. And thus much for his first argument. His second argument is this. Arg.
2. of M. Bellarmine.
The Scriptures say, that our spots, defilings, or pollutions, and our
iniquities are taken away, therefore in baptism all sin is taken away. For
by these words is signified (says he) the very corruption of sin. His
argument is not good. For we confess his antecedent, namely, that these things
are taken away, as before has been showed. But it follows not thereupon,
that by baptism all sin is taken away: we acknowledge also that Christ is
made unto us Sanctification: but in deed this holiness we say is not in this
life perfected. 1. Cor. 1.30
Begun it is in Gods children, which walk not after the flesh, Romans 8.1
but after the spirit. But do what we can, we had need always to pray as our
Savior Christ taught his apostles, Forgive us our trespasses, as saint
Augustine does often teach us, De perfect. Just. Celest. De Amiss. gratiae. li.
5 cap. 8
and namely in the end of his book of the perfection of Justice: which place I
the rather note, because most untruly master Bellarmine writes, that saint
Augustine in that place says, That the unwilling motions of concupiscence, are
so far from being sin, that a man need not for the forgiveness of them
say, Forgive us our trespasses: But saint Augustine affirms the contrary. For
having alleged that place of S. John, 1. John 1.8
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us:
then he adds, that if any will say, that the apostle speaks there of
concupiscence, and that concupiscence if it be not consented unto, is not
sin, He puts a subtle difference, which I would have our adversaries to
mark, that they may know that S. Aug. counts that but a subtle shift. And
then he shows that we do sometimes, somewhat consent to the lusts of that
sin, because otherwise we needed not to say, Forgive us our trespasses. So
that we see saint Augustine makes that a reason to prove, that concupiscence
often prevails, because we have need so to pray. And thus we see how clean
contrary to all show of truth, master Bellarmine falsifieth saint Augustine.
Which I would wish the simple to consider of: For many times either himself is
so deceived, or else he seeks to deceive his Reader. But to return to his
argument, this we say, that even here in this life, Gods children begin to have
a mislike of sin, and a love of godliness, yea, and also by the assistance of
Gods good spirit increase therein. But this shall not be perfected in us, until
we be delivered from this body of death, Romans 7 Upon John tract. 41
and that made the apostle to cry out as he did. And therefore saint Augustine
says, that none in this life can be without sin, yet sin is diminished in
the life of them that do profit, but consumed it is in the life of the perfect:
meaning after this life, when corruption has put on incorruption, who then
would allow of this reason. The very filth and corruption of sin, is taken
away, therefore it must needs be taken away here by baptism. Whereas on the
contrary, we are called children of God, because at the first, not in faith
only, but in life also we are beginners and weak, and must grow stronger and
stronger in both. Bellarmine very unskillfully does match together things not
of like nature. For as Circumcision is the cutting off the foreskinne, so is
baptism the washing of the body. But this is nothing to the effect of the
Sacrament, to tell us what the external thing does of it self. Out of that
that has been said it is not hard to answer his 4. 6. 7. 8, and 9. arguments,
if we remember that God begins in us holiness here, which shall be perfected
else where. But in the mean time, for his Christ's sake, he accepts our
imperfect holiness for perfect, and forgiueth, even the many and great sins
of his children. As for his fifth argument, Bella. De iustificat, li. 2. cap. 7.
Romans 5.19
which in another place he says that it seems unanswerable, even in that
respect that he trusts so much in the strength of it, I would not omit.

And it is this, As by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, many are made just. But says he, by Adams disobedience we
were made indeed sinners, and not only by imputation: Therefore by Christ we
are not by imputation only made righteous, but also indeed. What if I should
answer master Bellarmine, that this word As, does not signify the likeness
in the manner of justifying us, but in the act it self. Namely, that many were
partakers of Adams sin, and many were made righteous by Christ. For this word
As, does not always import an agreement or likeness in every point. Among many
examples that may be alleged, this one may serve for all. Ioh. 20.21.
As my father sent me, so send I you. But God sent him from heaven, to take
upon him a nature that he had not, with fulness of al power and graces: the
apostles were not so sent. So that we see that master Bellarmine can not
soundly reason because of this word As, that this contrariety between the
first and the second Adam, must hold in every point. But what need we to stand
upon so narrow a point? Because the argument pleases him so well, I will yield
to it, and confess it to be most true. And yet shall it nothing help master
Bellarmine his cause. But in truth the sum of the doctrine that is taught in
that place as Saint Augustine does gather, De peceat. met. and remiss. li. c. 3
cap. 28.
it is this, That as al in Adam die in whom al sinned, so they that are
quickened, are quickened by Christ, in whom they are all justified. But if he
will needs that this making of us righteous whereof the apostle speaks,
should be by our sanctification, I have showed that it cannot here be perfect.
But whenever that shall be perfected in us, we must ascribe the glory
thereof unto Christ. For, what have we that we have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7.
And that is the meaning of these words here, That by him many are made
righteous. But because that there is also another way whereby we are made
righteous, namely, in that our sins are not imputed unto us, and that Christ's
merit is accounted to us as ours: and that our adversaries will in no wise hear
us speak of that: they shall yet hear how Saint Barnard writes, even
alluding unto the words from whence this unanswerable argument in drawn. What
(says he) could man the servant of sin, Epist. 190.
and bond-slaue of Satan do, to recover righteousness lost? Another
righteousness was assigned unto him, because he lacked his own. And then
alluding to these words of S. Paul. Why should not righteousness come from
another, seeing guiltines came from another? It is one that makes us sinners,
and another that justifies from sin. The one in his seed, the other in his
blood. Is there sin in the seed of the sinner, and is not righteousness in
Christ's blood? And that we may know how he accompteth himself made righteous
by Christ, he adds If the fault conveyed to me is mine, why should not the
righteousness given to me be mine? And verily that is safer for me that is given
me, then that is bred in me. Many things he has in that place to this end,
whereby it appears that he knew his own righteousness would not serve his
turn, and therefore that he reposed his trust in Christ his righteousness
imputed to him, which he calls another righteousness.

I might also let you see how substantially Fisher sometime bishop of Rochester
proves this. Christ, says he, did say to some, Thy sins are forgiven thee,
therefore no sin remains. But his own friends are ashamed of such
arguments. For we confess as our creed teaches us forgiveness of sins.
But he should prove that we are also so sanctified, that whilst here we live
we be without sin. And that his argument cannot do. Thus then we see, that
although we have in baptism the promise of remission of all our sins sealed
up unto us: yet we cannot say, Prou. 20.9.
I have made mine heart clean, I am clean from sin.

That we have not of our selves free will or power to deliver our selves from
sin. CHAP. 24.
THE PROTESTANTS
Our nature then being thus corrupted, and our sin hanging so fast on, Heb.
12.1.
as before I have taught in the three last chapters: we must needs confess
that when we would do good, Romans 7.21.
evil is present with us. The light of our understanding is so darkened, that
not only A natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: 1. Cor.
2.14.
but even the best men, have great need continually with the Prophet David to
pray: Psalm. 119.12.34.
O Lord teach me thy statutes, Give me understanding. As for our affections,
they are so froward, that they will not be subdued to the spirit of God, but
do rather follow, the flattering follies of enticing sin. Christ's yoke we
account too sore, his burden too heavy, so that if we will come to Christ to
serve and obey him we cannot unless the father draw us. Ioh. 6.44. Luc. 18.17.
And if with the prodigal son, we would but think to return to our father
again, ^. Cor. 3.5.
yet we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing (that is good) as
of our selves. So that we must pray, Psalm. 80. Psa. 139.24. Psalm. 175. Psalm.
67.28.
not only, that God will Turn us, but also that he will lead us in the way
for ever. And stay our steps in the path, that our feet slide not, and
confirm (even unto the end) that which he has begun in us: acknowledging the
beginning of all good, the continuance and ending in the same, to be from him
only, Psalm. 119.36.
who only can Incline our heart unto his testimonies, Psalm. 51.15.
and open our lips, that our mouth may show forth his praise, Psa. 119.133
Phil. 2.13.
and direst our steps in his word. For it is God that works in us both the
will and the deed, of his good pleasure. Which will to do good, when he of
his great mercy has wrought in us, by his spirit of regeneration, we
confess to be good but a free will it cannot be. Because that although To will
be present ^ ith me, yet I find no means (...) perform that which is good.
Free therefore, that is to fry able to perform the good that it wo^^ d, it is
not, but willing it may be, ^ nd ready to obey sincerely.

THE PAPISTS
But the Church of Rome will not hear of it, that Adam by his transgression
robbed both himself and us, of this free will to good, they will not have it
quite lost or extinguished. It needs, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. can. 5.
say they, but to be stirred up, Ibidem. ca. 5.
and helped, and then we may convert our selves to justify our selves, Andra.
Orth. expl. li. 4.
and have in our own liberty some part of our salvation. Yea this corrupt
estate of man even before his regeneration, Andra. Orth. expli. li. 4.
they compare to a man who is so hindered by fetters that he cannot go but
could go well enough if he were not fettered: Even so man having these
bonds loosed wherein he was tied, has as free a will to do good, as ever had
Adam before he fell (for as I have said it needs but to be stirred up and
helped. Andra. ibid.
) Yea they are not ashamed to affirm, that partly free will and partly grace,
are the efficient cause of applying the mind to goodness, dividing and parting
that work, which God only does challenge to himself, between God and man.
If then we will believe them, man's free will is not lost. No, he has by nature
strength to do well, and freedom of will to please God: were it not that the
corruption of nature, were as it were fetters, to hinder him in his holy
obedience S. Paul belike said not truly when he said we were dead in sin. Ephesians.
2.5.
We were but asleep, say they. And what need we be born again, Ioh. 3.3.
as Christ teaches us we must be. It is a needelesse matter say they. It will
serve the turn if our old, even our own will be but stirred up and helped.
So that that renewing whereunto the Apostle so much exhorts us, is more then
needs. Yea our wills being so stirred up and helped, if we give credit to
that they teach, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 6, Bellar. de gra. li. arbit. li.
3 cap. 3. John. 6.44.
are frankely and freely moved to good. What should we then care for that
drawing without which no man can c^ me to Christ? ^
And yet God says he must take away our (...) hearts, he must give us a h^^^
of flesh, a soft heart that may receive his graces ^^ e a new (...), and a new
spirit for that old will not serve the turn.

^
Master Bellarmines first argument whereby he will p^^^ e that man has free
well, is (...) in effect. We (...) not of (...) but of well, so that we may
choose whether we will (...) or not, therefore we have free w^ ll. It is fal^^
that he says we (...) not of necessity but of well. For although that were
(...) Adam, in respect of his sin that it was simply voluntary, for I speak
not of Gods eternal decree: yet by reason of that corruption that we h^^^ from
him, Romans ^.23.
and cleaneth unto us, We are so led capt^^ e unto the law of ^^^^ e, and have
in us such a fountain of (...), ^
that we may truly say w^ th the apostle, we are carnal and fold under
sin. And the s necessity of f^^^ ing is in us, by reason of that frowardnes
of our will. Which although it be so reformed in the regenerate, that they have
a will to do well: yet because the old man will dwell with us, even so long as
we carry this mortal body: and the new man w^ ll never be wholly put on, until
the old man be put off: there will ever be in us a rep^^^ ing against good, and
rea^^^^ s to evil. So that although it be true in some respect, that we sin
of will, because we are very reader and willing thereto, yet is our will drawn
with the cords or chains of just and concupiscence that it cannot but sin.
And therefore Saint Paul does very aptly call concupiscence A law in the
members, because of the necessity of obeying it.

And therefore on the contrary I may t^^^ (...). Romans ^.1^.
The godly are led captive unto the law of (...): therefore they c^^ not chu^^
whether they will sin or (...): but because of (...) corruption they (...)
sin.

H^ s second argument is th^^. ^
If there be o^^ free will (...) made, then (...) ^^^ e^ no point for reward or
punishment. First, for the punishment of the worked, we do confess ^ o^^ that
they have free will to do evil, and also justly de^^^^ e the punishment that
is law upon the^. Thus far then (...) agree. And also for the other part
which concei^ eth the godly, (...) as true, that if you take away free will,
you take away the reward that the work might merit or deserve. But we plead
Gods promise, not o^^ deserving, his mercy not our (...), ^ s shall be showed by
Gods grace hereafter. For we know, that as here we have (...) good thing in
us, but that we have received it of has (...) grant: so hereafter we shall
have no glory, 1 Pet. ^ ^.
but of he^ only ^^^ cy, Who has kept us by his power unto salvation through
faith. And therefore, although we ^ e ^^^ full, and so can not deserve the
reward that we look for, yet God is faithful, who h^^ h pro^^ sed: and
therefore it is a right^^^ s thing with him to give us rest with him. Thus then
may I reason. The reward of our good works is not given in any respect of our
free will: therefore if free will be taken away, yet that reward is not taken
away.

His third argument. If it were not for fire will, Arg (...)
all should be good, or all should be bad: yea, and that all a^^ ke good or
evil. Which argument is answered by experience it self, and therefore needs
no long confutation. For themselves will confess, that i^ the Infidels there
is not free will, but a servile will. And yet amongst there some were better,
some worse. Yea some among them came so near being good, Job. 3. 3^.
that some Papists thought they might be saved. And yet free will they could
not have, because the Son has not made them free.

ca. 17 De corrept. and great. cap. 2
His fourth argument. Take away free will, and in vain are exhortations,
rebukings, praises, dispraises, commandments, councils, admonitions etc. Which
argument S. August. answers for us: They are, that men may know what they
should do. And as he writes of the Law, that it is necessary to be given,
although it cannot be kept: so we may answer of these things that master
Bellarmine speaks of. De perfect. iustit. contra Celest.
His words are these: Why should not this perfection be commanded unto men,
although no man in this life attain unto it? For a man shall never run well,
that knows not which way to run. And how should that be known, if by no
precepts it should be showed? Thus then I reason. Saint Augustine says, that
precepts must be given although they cannot be kept: therefore although man
have not free will to perform that is commanded, yet commandments are
necessary. In Cantic. sermon. 50.
And Saint Bernard says, God does by that means humble us. As for other uses
of admonitions, I will not now speak of them: for I trust this is sufficient
for answer to the argument. Which also is an answer unto his fifth argument
which is this. ca. 18
In the scripturs many things are forbidden and commanded, and without free
will that were in vain: which is all one with the fourth argument. De gratia
and lib. Arbit. c. 2
But because master Bellarmine does prove this argument, and that very
strongly (as himself says) because saint Augustine uses that very reason to
prove free will, I must needs speak a word of that place. Seeing therefore
saint Augustine has said in the place alleged in the former argument, that
precepts are needful though they can not be kept: And now he says, if there
be not free will, precepts are in vain. It seems that there were some
amongst them, to whom he writes, that thought that Gods grace did so work
in men, that they should do nothing at all themselves (for he complains of
some, Cap. 2.
that when grace was defended, though free will was denied.) Therefore he
teaches them, that although we be made partakers of grace, yet we are not
without: nay rather we have free will. But what manner of free will? Have we
that free will that has power and strength to do good, and abstain from
evil? No, In Enchirid. cap. 9.
Saint Augustine confesses that to be lost. Man not using well freewill, lost
both himself and that. What then? A will freed from that bondage unto sin
wherein it was. A will that now has a love and liking of that is good, and
not altogether delighting in evil as before it did. And indeed in vain are
exhortations to them that are not so freed from evil, that they have at the
least a plkasure in good things,. Well may exhortations and instructions be to
their confusion, but to their comfort they shall not be. This then is is the
meaning of that place, that God speaks to us in vain in the scriptures, if
we be, but as stocks and stones, not having so much as a delight therein, and
having this willingness, God must also by his grace enable us, or else we cannot
fulfill our will. The sixth argument is like the rest. Arg. 6. ca. 1^.
It has no necessary consequence. God makes promise unto us under condition
that we shall obey him, therefore either we are able to obey, or else it is says
Master Bellarmine, a mockery, and not a promise. Not so Master Bellarmine.
For in such conditional promises, it is not declared what we can do, but what
we ought to do, and what in respect of the excellency of our creation, may
justly be required of us, and what we must do before we can be perfect. And
because Master Bellarmine thinks it so scornful a thing, that God shouln
make promise under such condition cannot be performed of us: I would he would
consider with himself, where is the cause why we cannot perform it. Is it in
good? No, for he requires nothing of us, but that he gave us abilite to do,
if we had kept us in that estate. Is it in our creation? No, we were made
good. Is it in the law? But that is pure, just, and holy. Is it then in our
selves? Yea truly. For in Adam we are all sinners, and by sin robbed of
that power to keep the law, and perform such conditions, as once before we had.

If then the impossibility of keeping the conditions, is by our own fault, God
may justly require of us that debt, which he knows we were able to pay,
when first we became his debtors. We see then, that it is neither a good
argument, to say God promises upon condition, therefore we can perform the
condition: (for the condition does but show, what we ought to do, or what
mark we must aim at, yea, and what we must do in the end) neither absurd
that he should require that of us now, which once we could have performed, and
might still have done, if we had not our selves bin in fault. But thus we
might reason truly. God makes unto us many and great promises if we obey him:
therefore we must strive to obey him, strive (I say) by prayer, by meditating
in Gods law, and by all godly exercises. And God would have us indeed, by
such means to stir up our selves to attain to the promises. And because the
promises belong but to the godly, and not to the wicked, we will easily
confess, that there is in them a willingness to obey. But yet not free will,
because it is hindered by tentations without and within themselves, and by it
own weakness. So that, be they never so willing, yet they can not obey, but
even as they are led by Gods good grace. In psa. 109. enarratione.
It is no great matter (says Augustine) that God made his Son to show the
way, since he has made him the way it self, that thou might go by him
ruling thee, that goes by himself. For in deed we can not walk alone in
those ways, we are as babes that cannot go by themselves.

ca. 20. and 21. Deuteronomy. 30.14.
and need not be answered again. But yet I will touch that place of
Deuteronomie, whereupon he especially rests for the strength of the seventh
argument: and for interpretation whereof he inueieth against master Calvin.
Moses says, or God by Moses: The word is near thee, even in thy mouth, and in
thy heart. By which words master Bellarmine says Moses tells us, that this
word is easy to keep: and therefore, that we have free will. M. Bellarmine
is but too bold in a bad cause, and too ready to speak more than he can
prove. That which he had said before, This commandment is not hid from thee,
Verse 11.
neither far off: he proves in this place, because it is in their mouth and
heart, so that they need not seek far to get it. The Chalde paraphrase can
find no free will in these words. Chris. expounds these words of the
commandment, that it is easy to be had without travel by sea or land,
Chrysostom. in Romans ser. 17.
not once dreaming of the easines of performing or doing it: but most plainly
says Theophilact: Upon the Romans the tenth.
Gods commandment (O thou Jew) is before thy eyes, neither shall thou need
that thou may find and enjoy it, either to clime up in to heaven, or go down
into the deep. It is at hand, and nearer unto thee: Behold, it is even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart: For God by his law has showed thee all things. How
impudently soever therefore master Bellarmine dare affirm, that Moses speaks
there of the easiness of keeping Gods law: yet the circumstance of the text,
and the judgment of the Writers alleged especially of Theophilact, is flat
against him. Romans 10.8.
And to that end does the Apostle saint Paul apply it also to his purpose,
speaking of justification by faith.

ca. 22
The first is out of that talk which God had with Caine, before he killed his
brother Abel. Genesis 4.7.
Also unto thee his desire shall be subject, and thou shall rule over him.

But that this may be an argument for freewill, master Bellarmine and others
contend, that it should be read. The desire of it shall be subject unto thee, and
thou shall bear rule over it. And so they prove that sin shall be subject
unto Cain and he shall bear rule over it: Therefore he had free will. That
many of the fathers do expound these words so, it cannot be denied. But not
what they say is only to be regarded, but how they prove it: yea the Jesuits
that wrote, In dialog. 2
the censure of Colen will be therein my warrant for they having condenmed some
of the ancient fathers to have spoken hardly, because they accounted the
works of infidels, how good soever they seemed, to be but sin, do then fall
to try how their proof will warrant their doctrine. So must I here examine
upon what ground the fathers do thus expound it. And this I need not fear to
do. For themselves give me leave to examine that they say. If then saint
Hillarie have given us a true rule to interpret the scripture, when he says,
Lib. 9. de trinit.
The understanding of that which is spoken, must be looked for of the words
that go before, or of those that follow, Let us see what interpretation is to
be gathered out of the circumstances of that place: that we may with the
Church receive the fathers, but not with the fathers forsake the faith of the
Church, In Commonitor. contra haeres.
as Vincentius Lirinensis warns us. First then, even in respect of the very
Grammar, if the relative in both places must agree with the antecedent, then
this word (It) which is the relative in both places as they would have it, or
rather his or him, as we say, being of the Masculine Gender, which themselves
cannot deny, the word (Sin) which is of the Feminine Gender, cannot be the
antecedent to those Relatiues, although it go next them, which master
Bellarmine unlearnedly affirms. And therefore that translation, and
interpretation of the place, stands not with the rules of Grammar. Secondly,
the circumstances of the place, teach us so much. Cain is angry that his
brothers sacrifice is accepted of, and his not: Therefore when God has
questioned with Cain of his anger, he brings this as an argument to pacify
him, because that Cain being the elder brother, should still have the
prerogative of the elder brother: and Abell should be subject unto him. And
that this is the plain and natural sense of the words, I prove by sundry
reasons. First, because in the former Chapter, God speaking of the subjection
of Eve unto Adam, as they cannot but confess, Cap. 3.16.
uses the self same words there, that are here used. And therefore by all
likelihoode he speaks of the same matter also here, that there he did, how
Abell should be under his elder brother. Confer the words together, you
shall see them agree.

Secondly, how impertinenly had the promise of free will, been made in that
place unto Cain, God having rejected his sacrifice, and knowing his fury
toward his brother, yea not any one circumstance inducing thereunto. But
thirdly their own doctrine does strongly confute them. For if they that are
not regenerate (as Cain) have the power of their will, by their own confession
weakened, and so clogged that they cannot have free will to do good, then this
cannot be verified of sin, how could God say that the lust or desire of
sin should be under him, or that he should have dominion over sin, being a
graceless, and cruel man. Yea, the event did presently declare, that he was
subject to sin, and that sin got the dominion over him. So that I cannot
see how they can be excused, from seeking to make God a liar, that affirm that
God there promised that Cain should subdue sin, the event being so plain
contrary. Which because I know it to be far from those godly fathers, I will
rather think, that they did but allude unto that place, then expound the
words. And thus I trust it is plain, that neither the rules of Grammar, nor
the circumstances of the place, neither yet their own doctrine of free will,
can well stand with that interpretation that they do bring. As for his second
authority which is out of Ecclesiasticus, the book it self, not being
canonical, Eccle. 15.14, 15, 16.
a necessary argument cannot be gathered out of the same.

And that man at the first had free will it can not be denied, and of that
especially the place mentioned does entreat. De great. and liber. arbit. lib.
5. cap. 23
Now certain other arguments out of the scripture there are alleged,
whereunto I will briefly make answer. The first out of Deuteronomie, where
Moses having showed them, how he has delivered to them Gods word (in obeying
whereof is life, Deuteronomy. 30, 19.
and in contempt of it death:) he then adds, Therefore choose life, that
thou and thy seed may live. Wherein Moses does nothing else, but earnestly
stir up the people, to endeavor to the uttermost of their power to serve God:
Not showing what they can effectually apply themselves unto, by the power of
their will, but what they should do in respect of their duty toward God,
or care of their own good. As for that of Iosue, Iosue. 24.15.
Choose you this day whom you will serve, When Iosue, who had good experience
of the frailty of the people, and their readiness to serve other gods, had
set before them the great mercies of God, in their mighty deliverance and
preservation from many perils, the more strongly to tie them unto God, he
puts them to this choice, not because he would have suffered them to have
worshipped strange gods, if themselves would, (for that had been contrary to
the duty, that God required of him being a magistrate) but to this end, that
themselves having made choice to serve God, might by this their own voluntary
submitting themselves to God, be urged to serve him more sincerely, as by the
22. verse appears. And this choice also is rather what external profession
they would be of, which is a matter in our own power, rather then of the
inward affection, which is the thing in controversy between the Papists and
us. For this we deny, and they should prove, that we are able by our free
will to do things that are truly good, and to eschew the things that are
evil. And that this choice that they were put to, was what external
profession they would be of, the words themselves declare. Choose (says he)
whether ye will serve the Gods which your fathers served, or the gods of the
Amorites, I and my house will serve the Lord. As if a man would say now,
choose whether you will profess the Gospel or Popery. His testimony out of
Ecclesiasticus, Eccle. 31.10
Who might offend and has not offended? or do evil, and has not done evil?
I marvel be so much commends, thinking it unanswerable. Whereas, if it
prove any thing, it is but that which we never denied, namely that the wicked
have a free will to evil. Now that which he alleges out of saint Paul, is
too absurd: Nevertheless he that purposes firmly in his heart that he has
no need, but has power over his own will, etc. What are these words to free
will. The power yt here he speaks of, is if he perform his purpose without
inconvenience to his daughter, as may appear not only by Primasius, and
Hierom, of this place, Primasius. Hieronimus. Tho. Aquin.
but also by his own friend Thomas of Aquine, who shows that then he has
power of his own will, when he knows his daughter, has a purpose to
continue a virgin. So that in effect, this is his argument. His daughter does
not hinder his will for keeping her a virgin: therefore he has free will in
himself to do good, or eschew evil. Of the strength of which argument, let
master Bellarmines own friends consider. His last place out of the
scriptures is very like this. As every man wishes in his own heart, 2. Cor.
9.7.
etc. He speaks of the contribution to the Saints. You must (says saint
Paul) give willingly. Therefore says master Bellarmine, you have free will.
We confess that the regenerate have a willingness to do good, and eschew
evil, and this the apostle would have in them. But does this prove that they
have free will? And thus far for their arguments for free will out of the
scriptures. Out of the fathers master Bellar. brings many proofs. And
although there be just cause, to suspect many of them in this question,
because they could not so easily forget that which in the schools of
philosophy they had learned: yet that it may appear that they have not so
general a consent as they brag of, it is not amiss somewhat to look into
and to examine the proofs, Bellar. de great. and lib. arbit. lib. 5. cap. 25.
that out of them they brag. But master Bellarmine would make a man afraid
to hear his crackes. He braggeth always that his armor is of the best
proof that can not be pierced, his arguments such as can not be answered. And
first comes in Ignatius, Epist. de. mag.
whose words are so unanswerable, that master Bellarmine sees no way but to
deny the Author. But let master Bellarmine quiet him self, we will admit
the author. The effect of that he alleges out of the first place, is, that
look what men do choose that they shall have: and after, If a man do wickedly,
he is a man of the devil, so made not by nature, but by the will of his mind.
Then let us see his argument: Look what men do choose, they shall go into
the place of that they choose, whether it be life or death, so says
Ignatius, therefore (says master Bellarmine men have free will. The force of
both his places is this, and the argument that can be gathered out of the
same: men have will: ergo they have free will. And are these his unanswerable
arguments. That which he alleges out of Dionysius Areopagita, although he
make as great bragges of it, as he did of the other: yet it never so much as
mentions free will. De diuinis nominibus li. 4. cap. 4. part. 4.
In deed he says, If a man might not resist sin, he were less to be
blamed: But if he that is good give strength, which as the holy Scriptures
teach, does give things convenient simply to every man, etc. That God gives
convenient strength to them which with humility seek it, but what does this
gift of God prove that we have free will. It rather overthrows it. For if
we have not strength but by his gift, then we have it not in us, or by free
will. As for Clement of Rome, because himself dare not speak much for the
truth of that witness, I let him pass. Then comes in Iustine the
Philosopher and martyr, whose words for free will master Bellarmine takes to
be so plain, that he says master Calvin neither does, nor can feign any
thing, that will carry any show of an answer. What need we to feign, Master
Bellarmine, that have the truth for our warrant. We leave faigning to painters,
poets, and papists, who love always to make a show of that that is not. If we
consider the occasions why the ancient fathers did write in such sort, their
meaning will be pliane enough. And that may appear by Justinius Martyr here
alleged. He says, I grant. Apolog. ad senatum. Apol. ad An.
That if men have not free will to shun evil and do good, they are not to
blame for that they do, and deserve neither reward nor punishment. Thus in
effect he says in the places alleged.

We neither deny the author in this place to be Catholic, nor his words
(in his sense to be true. But because there were some that being deceived with
that which the Stoikes taught, concerning that fatal necessity whereby all
things were done, as though man could not choose but do the evil that he
does, and that he were by this fatal necessity compelled thereto, in respect
of the necessary consequence of causes, and thereby made man to have nothing
to do in the works that himself did, but that he were even forced thereto
without his own will, as stone or wood is laid in the house, only at the
pleasure of the workman, without any disposition in themselves one way or
other: because (I say) that some hereby did deny all will or inclination in
man to good or evil, as not only Simon Magus, and the Manicheis of whom
master Bellarmine speaks, but also the Bardesanistes, Cap. 35. Cap. 6^.
of whom Saint Augustine writes in his Book of herisies, who ascribed all
man's conversation to destiny, and the Priscilianists, who because they make
all their actions to be ruled by the Planets, think that they sin against
their will, and therefore does not Justin only, but other of the godly fathers
speak so plainly as they seem to do in defense of free will. Not because they
think, that man has such ability being once renewed by grace, that he can do
what he will, as the papists teach, but they only impugn these Stoicall
opinions that affirm that man does of necessity evil or good. And that this
is the meaning of Iustine the Martyr by his own words does plainly appear,
because in both the places alleged by master Bellarmine, he sets himself
to reason against the^ that would have men think that all things were wrought
by desteny. Against the which, he on the other side reasons, that if men had
not will or choice in themselves to do things, we should neither deserve
punishment for evil doing, nor have reward for well doing. Thus have I truly
and faithfully delivered unto thee (good reader,) the cause that makes this
and other of the ancient fathers especially before Pelagius to write so
plainly for free will. De fide Or. thod. li 2. cap. 7.
As also may well be gathered out of Damascene. For when as yet there were none
sprung up, that did attribute too much to free will as afterward the Pelagians
did; but there were on the contrary, many that did wholly take al will from man:
no marvel if they did wholly oppose themselves against the danger which they
saw present before their eyes. And therefore they did teach as they did, to
whom also we give our right hands of fellowship and consent in doctrine, Gal.
2.9. What we say of ma^s will.
as James, Cephas, and John, did unto Barnabas and Paul. For we also do teach,
that man though by his fall he lost his freedom of will, to him and his
posterity: yet his will he lost not, but still had it, and has it. Whereby very
readily and willingly he runs unto evil. But having his will renewed by Gods
spirit, it is then good, so much as it is renewed, it loves good, and would
feign do it, Ad Bonif. cont^ a. 2. e^ is it. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 18
and in that sense we also say with saint Augustine, that it is free, that
is, willing and ready: but yet not free, that is, not able to perform that
good which we would, by reason of the infirmity of our new man, the corruption
of our nature, and the manifold intisementes and tentations whereby we are
withdrawn from holy obedience. And now if the first fathers, did not so
plentifully set forth man's weakness, as they did his will or power to do things,
it is no marvel because they neither knew Pelagians nor papists, but them
that erred in the contrary opinion.

And this being well considered of, may serve I trust to answer to whatsoever
they can allege out of the fathers for free will: and may teach us, that they
call it free, not as it is able, but as it is willing, to do good and eschew
evil. De corrept. and gra. cap. 2. De gra. and libero arbitrio lib. 2. cap. 9.
And therefore saint Augustine says, Men are driven, to the end they should
do, not that they should do nothing. And for this cause saint Bernard says,
That a man may not be called, or can indeed be good or evil, unless he be
willing. And saint Ambrose, or whosoever wrote the books of the calling of the
Gentiles, There is no kind of virtue that may be had, either without the gift
of Gods grace, or the consent of our will. But of an infinite number of such
like places, let these few be sufficient, to teach us, that they meant not to
extol the power of man's will, but to lay the fault in man, if he refuse the
graces offered, and to stir up men willingly and readily to receive them, and
steadfastly to keep, and holily to use them. And thus much generally, for the
true understanding of all the testimonies of the fathers that are alleged by
master Bellarmine, not only in his fifth book, Cap. 25, 26, 27, 28.
de gratia and libero arbitrio: but also those other that he has in his sixth
book, where he especially handles the question of free will, Cap. 11.
in things appertaining to godliness. Whereas before he endeavored to prove it
in moral virtues. But because that in the former, he did lay the foundation of
that which in the sixth he teaches, and al belonged to that end. Namely, to the
question of free will, which in this chapter I am to handle, therefore have I
thought good to answer in this one place whatsoever he says tending to that
end. As for his four arguments out of the scriptures, which he brings in the
sixth book, Cap. 10.
the answer to them I trust may be gathered of that is already answered.
Saving only that the first and third require a more special answer. For his
second argument in this sixth book, is al one with the fourth in the fifth
book. And his fourth and last in the sixth, is like the first in the fifth
book. His first argument in the sixth book is taken especially of the word
Cooperarii, Work men together with God, for so the greek word does signify,
not Fellow-helpers, 1. Cor. 3.
as the common latin translation has, as though God could not without us
work. Well let us see his argument. We are workmen together with God, therefore
we have freewil, say they. But we may more justly conclude on the contrary,
therefore we have not freewil as the papists teach, it self able to do good,
or avoid evil. For that is it that is in question. We willingly confess,
that we being regenerate have a willingness to good, and a mislike of evil, but
we say that we cannot perform this our good desire. And therefore seeing we
cannot work, but as workmen together with God, it is most evident and plain,
that our will has not that power that the church of Rome teaches it to have,
to be freely moved to good. And therefore well says S. Augustine, That we will,
God works without us, De gra. and li. arb. t. cap. 17.
but when we will, and so will that we also do, he works together with us.
But without him either working that we may will, or working with us when we
will, we have no power to the good works of godliness. And by this also
appears the answer to the other argument which I said was not before
answered. We are says M. Bellar. helped by God in prayer, or in any good
work, therefore we have free will. If we remember how they teach, that a man
being once helped and stirred up by Gods grace, is afterward freely able to
do good, having his will thus revived, or rather vnfettered, a man would not
think M. Bellar. to be in earnest in such arguments. Suppose you should
undertake to bear a burden far heavier then you could carry, and another much
stronger than you, takes it up, and bears it you also laying your hands to
the same, to help as you can. Will you say you are able to bear it, because
your hand also touched it? Even such is our ability in keeping Gods
commandments. Or as children when they are first taught to go. Their mother
lifts them up that they may put their legs forward, holds up their
coats that they be no hinderance to them, yea helps them to step forward.
There is nothing in the child, but only that it would feign go, but it has
not strength to perform it. Is it now any reason to say, the child is able to
go, because the mother does thus help it. No no, seeing Gods help is such
that he works both to will and to do in us, let us give glory unto him only,
by whom we may do al things, and without whom we can do nothing. Philip.
2.13. Phil. 4.13. John. 15.5.
And we may justly be ashamed of such foolish reasons: God helps us,
therefore we have free will. We may perchance conclude thereupon that we do
somewhat, but how little it is that we do, nay how we do very nothing,
without Gods good grace in the works of Godliness, in all this Chapter is I
hope sufficiently declared.

But now for the conclusion of this Chapter, I would gladly know of them
that so stiflie maintain free will, how they can clear themselves from the
Pelagian heresy, so hated of all the Godly, so often condemned by Councels,
and so mightily confuted by Saint Augustine in many of his books? Orth.
explic. lib. 4.
Andradius answers this matter fully. They confess, says he, our strength
to be so weak (he speaks of them that made the censure of Colen) that
unless it be made strong by Gods grace, we can neither do nor will any
perfect good thing. But the Pelagians will grant thus much: And yet S. August.
calls them heretics, and oftentimes enemies of the grace of Christ, yea new
heretics, enemies to the cross of Christ, such as fought against, forsook,
yea persecuted the grace of Christ. And yet I say they granted as much as the
papists do. First they confess that by grace they were helped that they might
become Gods children. Aug. ad Bon. li. 1. cap. 3.
Yea that they were always helped by Gods grace in every good work. And that
grace helps every bodies good purpose. Cap. 19.
Now let the reader judge wherein the popish Pelagians, Lib. 4. cap. 6.
differ from those old condemned Pelagians. They seem to be birds of one
nest. What does S. Augustine (out of whom I have alleged this confession of
the Pelagians) I say, what does he think of their words? he likes them
wonderful well. In so much, as doubtless, says he, a man would think this were
spoken like a catholic. Ibidem.
How then fell it out that still he was accounted an heretic, and his
favorites? S. Augustine although he could not mislike much of that he said,
yet he could not but condemn their intent and meaning. And therefore when he
had said it was spoken like a catholic, he adds, If they would not think
of merit in this their good purpose, to which merit reward should be given as
of duty, not of grace. Now I pray you to what end does the church of Rome
defend this doctrine of free will? Is it not that the doctrine of merits may
follow? Yes I warrant you. That is it they so earnestly contend for. For
thereby they gain both credit and coin. So that they seem then to agree in
their words, and in their intent. Seeing therefore this doctrine of free will,
does so conspire with the Pelagian heresy, and so dissent from the word of God
as has been showed: let us say with saint Augustine, Thinking we believe,
thinking we speak, thinking we do whatsoever we do: Aug. de bon.
seuerantiae. cap. 13.
but concerning the true way of godliness, and service of God: we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. And therefore we live more safely, when we yield all to
God, and commit not our selves in part to him, and in part to our selves,
Ibidem. ca. 6.
as the same saint Augustine says else where.

That by our works we cannot be justified, and against the doctrine of
merits. CHAP. 25
THE PROTESTANTS
BEcause no righteousness can stand before God, but that which is perfect: and
the rule of perfection is to love the Lord our God with all our heart, Luc.
10.27.
soul, strength and thought, and our neighbor as our self. We therefore must
needs confess, that the works that are done by us, whilst we carry about
this body, which is a heavy burden to the soul, Wisd. 9.15.
are so defiled with concupiscence (which the Papists themselves confess to be
evil and hated of God) that neither we can so freely and zealouly serve God
as we would, neither wholly respect Gods glory therein as we should: But find
our selves too cold and careless in good things: and that we always will
have some respect to our selves in doing the same. And therefore we are
compelled with the prophet David to say, Psalm. 130.2
If thou (O Lord) straightly markest iniquities, (O Lord) who shall stand? We
know, Job 14.18. Job 15.15
that he that found wickedness in his Angels, and no stedfastnes in his
faints, yea in whose sight the heavens are not clean, no more the child but
of a day old, he (I say) will easily find out, Job 14.4.
that none can make clean that that is conceived of unclean seed, Job 15.14.
neither can he be just that is borne of a woman, according to the course of
nature. But we confess with the prophet Esaias, Esa. 64.6.
we have al bin as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
cloutes. Yea, and if it might be, that we might live here so, 1. Cor. 4.4
that we knew nothing by our selves, and yet we are not thereby justified: how
much less then shall we seek to justify our selves by our works, wherein,
by reason of our corruption, we must needs find and feel manifold wants.
Which imperfection, even in our best works is sufficiently declared, in that,
neither the sacrifices of the Jews, neither yet the prayers or spiritual
sacrifices of the Christians, can of themselves be acceptable unto God, but
only through Jesus Christ our Lord: whose mediation they should not need, if of
themselves they were perfect. But he must season them, he must sanctify them,
he must offer the^, that they may be acceptable unto God.

THE PAPISTS
BUT the Papists trusting too much in their own power to do good, and not
considering truly, what manner of work that is, which may justly be called a
good work, to what end, and with what affection it must be done: do teach,
that a man may do such works, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. ca. 32 Cens. Coloniens.
dial. 5.
as that he may merit thereby Justification and eternal life even as a due
reward. And that this is a point of Gods infinite mercy that he promises
eternal life to them that work well. Dialogo 1.
Nay, Cens. Colon. dial. 5.
that by Christ's passion and the holy ghost, there is given to our works a
certain infinitenes, to the end, that partly being helped by such a gift, they
might worthily deserve eternal life: wherein they have in few words many
blasphemies. As that there may seem to be some proportion, between the
reward, and the work, they have devised how the work it self shall have in
it, a certain infiniteness that is, an exceeding excellency. And yet S. Paul
says, Romans 8.18
that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto us. And if all we can suffer here, have no comparison with
that glory, what infinite goodness can we imagine our works may have? And
whereas the Scriptures in this matter of justification do take all the glory
from our works, Romans 3.26, 27.28
and give it unto God: they so part stakes between God and their good works,
that their works being helped but in part (that is, but a little) by grace do
woorthily deserve eternal life. So it seems that they will not be much
beholding to God for their salvation, as the indifferent Reader may soon
perceive. Who if they continue in this their blasphemy, Aug. in Psalm. 31.
praefat.
and brag thus of their merits, they shall without question fall from grace.
And if they will needs seek to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.3,
they can not be partakers of Gods righteousness. And if they will not have it
by faith, without the works of the law, Romans 3.28.
they can never have it. Yet to say our own works cannot save us, Act. and
Monum. Fox lib. c. 1117.
has bin counted heresy.

Now that our adversaries are in this point, so stiff upon so small a ground,
it being so necessary a point of religion, that without true knowledge thereof,
they cannot be saved, I cannot but marvel. For besides that which before I
have said of the imperfection of our works, which is confessed by themselves)
for Andradius confesses that the Jesuits of Colen say, that it cannot be,
Orthod. explic. lib. 5.
that we can love God perfectly and sufficiently in this life) besides that
imperfection I say, which is in any thing that we can do, which cannot answer
for that perfect righteousness, which God justly may require of us: there are
sundry other great reasons to induce us, to detest that doctrine, as a thing
most dangerous for christians to give ear unto. Luc. 17.9.
Our savior Christ when he has by the parable of the servant, taught us that
it is our duty to do that which he commands us, he adds this, So
likewise ye, 10.
when you have done all those things that are commanded you: say we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that was our duty to do. If then it be
our duty to keep Gods commandments, yea and that not once, but that so long
as we live, In luc. li. 8.
we must do it, as Saint Ambrose says: In luc. ca. 17.
and if as Theophilact says, that we are bound to keep all Gods
commandments: I would feign learn of some of our adversaries, how the doing
of that thing which we always ought to do, can satisfy Gods wrath, for
neglect of such duties as we have not done, and such sins as we have
committed contrary to Gods law? for if now I keep the commandment, it is my
duty now and always to do it. Can this then be any recompense to satisfy
God for such times as I have omitted my duty? It cannot be, it has no
likelihoode of truth. Nay, if he work not (says Theophilact) he is worthy
of many stripes, Luc. 17.
and if he work, let him content himself, that he is not beaten. Therefore
let him not seek for reward or honor for it. Therefore seeing every work that
we do is a sacrifice that then must be offered, a duty that then must be
performed, and that also very short I warrant you of that we should perform,
if it were well sifted, how can we say that such a work can merit eternal
life? Or, if that work can but serve that duty that then is required, what
recompense shall we make for all other our sins. For it is a question
amongst themselves whether Christ by his death did take away any sins, but
only original sin. For Ambrose Catharinus an archbishop, In his book de
Incruento sacrif.
and a great man at the Council of Trent, does plainly write, that Christ
died only for original sin. As for actual sins, they must be taken away
by masses and such helps, says he. Now if we had no other hope but such paltry
popish devises, to take away our sins wherein we continually offend, we were
the most miserable of all creatures.

But to return to the words of our savior Christ. Out of them we may reason
thus. If our most perfect obedience be but duty, it is not merit: but it is
but duty: therefore no merit. This whole argument is necessarily to be
gathered out of the words themselves, as you see the forenamed fathers do
testify. Which place also is very strong against their most blasphemous
doctrine of their works of supererrogation. For if all we can do, Against
works of Supererrogation, Cap. 20.
be scarce our own duty, then can it not serve for others, to satisfy for
their sins. And yet is this doctrine defended by them, as by Nichol Burn in
his book, yea, and by master Bellarmine, who is so little ashamed thereof,
that as it were a doctrine that must needs be granted unto him, he
endeavors thereby to prove that we may keep Gods law: A man (says he)
may do more than God commands: De iustificat. lib. 4. cap. 13
therefore much more may he fulfill the law.

Now if you will know the mystery of this great abomination, it is this (as
they tell us.) Whereas some men, say they, have been so godly that they have
done mo good works than they needed, these are as it were the treasure of the
church, which the Pope may at his pleasure bestow. And so he does: for the
pardons and indulgences have their virtue from these works. So that if there
be no such works: then the Pope like a false merchant has deceived the world
for many years, as still he does. For his pardons, Agnus Dei, his grana
benedicta, and such baggage, have no virtue, but from their works of
supererrogation. And here I can but wonder, at the whorish forehead of the
church of Rome in this thing. She can in no wise abide the imputation of
Christ's righteousness for our justification: she may not hear of it. All
Popish Writers write against it. And yet their doctrine of merits, especially
of the works of supererrogation, what is it but the imputation of other men's
merits, as they think to satisfy for us, and for our justification. Shall
Christ's righteousness imputed to us, be absurd to teach? and to teach the
imputation of man's works a sound doctrine? We may see by this, that in the
church of Rome, that doctrine is best that is most gainefull. For the Pope can
gain but little worldly wealth, by preaching the imputation of Christ's
righteousness unto us: But by this doctrine of the works of supererrogation
he gains much. For because it is the treasure of the church, whosoever will
have thereof must pay well for it to the church, that is to the pope. But how
does master Bellarmine prove, that we can do more than we need. Because that
Christ bid one that said he had kept all the commandments, Mat. 19.22
Sell all he had, and give it to the poor. I will not press master Bellarmine
here with the judgment of the fathers, who find this to be a commandment
and therefore not more than need. Confess. li. 13. cap. 19.
And saint Augustine sees it to be a law against covetousness. But who so ever
will consider of the place, may easily see, that our savior Christ did
purpose by this commandment, to let him see his own ignorance of his estate,
and that he knew not his own wants. Not meaning that it should be a
commandment, of that he was not by Gods law bound to perform, but rather a
rule whereby he might try how far he was from keeping the second table of the
commandments, and therefore that he might even condemn himself to be much
shorter, of keeping the first table. As for his proof out of Chrysostom, Hom.
8. de poenitentia.
Many do more than they are commanded, it is true that Chrysostom, says
so, but it is also true yt he speaks of such things, as are not simply of
themselves good works, but indifferent of themselves. But the use or abuse of
them, does make them good works, or evil. His examples that he brings are
of virginity, that it is not commanded (but this master Bellarmine omitteth
of purpose, because it makes against their doctrine of vows:) neither is it
commanded (says he) that men should not possess any thing. Yea, I know
that the Scribes and Pharisees did many things that God never commanded, as
also the Jews in the time of Esaias, Esa. 1.12.
to whom it was said, Who required these things at your hands? And this is
also an answer to that which out of Augustine he alleges. What biddest thou?
De verbis Apost. ser. 18.
That we should not be adultresses? Commaundest thou that? In loving thee, we
do more than thou commaundest. For he also speaks of keeping virginity.
But master Bellarmines antecedent is thus to be understood, that we do mo
good works than God commands, or else his argument is to be denied. For we
see by experience that the Papists do an infinite number of things that God
never commanded. For which as they have no warrant of God, so shall they have
no praise of him. And they may do a thousand such works, and be never a whit
nearer keeping Gods law, but much further off rather. For the more that men
satisfy themselves with their own works, Mat. 15 and 23
the less care they have to keep Gods commandments, as our savior Christ
teaches us. And master Bellarmines antecedent being thus understood (as I
have said,) that we may do more good works than God has commanded, is
false. For in that it is not a good work, if it be besides Gods word, And
this is all that he says in that place for the works of Supererrogation.

Thus we see this rich doctrine has a poor proof. But if there were nothing
to convince the wickedness of that doctrine, but this one thing, that they
will seem to mende that rule of perfection that God has made, and take upon
them to prescribe more perfect rules, than God has set down, it argues in
them too profane sauciness. But thus much by the way of this kind of work.
For my purpose is not to make of it any several discourse, because that if it
be proved, that we cannot justify our selves by our works, De iustif. lib.
5. ca. 5.
it will follow that we can much less help others. Now master Bellarmine
finding this weapon too sharp, this place to strong against their merits would
feign wrest it out of our hands. And first he tells us that saint Ambrose
wills us to know what we are of our selves. We must know the grace, but
not be ignorant of our nature, says saint Ambrose.

It is true, he writes so, and that upon just occasion. For the very beginning
of that sentence is, Peferre not thy self because thou art called a son: and
then follows: thou must confess the grace, and not forget thy nature. As if
he should say, think no wrong that thou art called an unprofitable servant,
seeing thou art called a son. Thou art a son by grace, because God has
chosen thee, but if a man look on thy work, it is not worth praising. But
what is this to answer the argument? Nothing at all. Master Bellarmine
perchance thinks, that if he bring in the fathers as witnesses, they will
speak as he would have them. Yet not Ambrose only, but also Augustine and
Chrysostom, Li. 8. in Luc. de verbis Apost. ser. de humilitate 18. in Oziam
in the places by him cited, and Theophilact upon these words, do teach, that
Christ would not have us proud of our good works, that it is our duty
always to work, and as Ambrose says, We owe him our service, therefore let
us not boast of our work. But as Theophilact says, If any thing be given
us, let us be glad of it, he that gives it owes us nothing. But the servant
owes to his master the keeping of all that he commands. So all this still
strengthens my argument, that all that we can do, it is but our duty, and
therefore no merit. And although in respect of our election we may justly
rejoice that we are Gods dear children: yet when we look upon our selves,
we must needs confess us to be unprofitable and imperfect. Secondly, the
repugnancie between grace and merit, set down by saint Paul, Merit and grace
overthrow one another. Romans 11.6
is a strong argument against justification by works. If it be of grace, it is
no more of works, or else were grace no more grace, or if it be of works, it
is no more grace, or else were work no more work. Wherein we see how plainly
the Apostle opposes the one against the other, that we cannot be said to be
iustistied by grace, if we may attribute any part of our justification to
works. Neither will their common answer serve, that saint Paul speaks of the
first mercy that God shows us, as that we are called to be Christian men or
women, by grace without our works, but that hereby he excludes not the
works that afterward we do, from merit. For seeing our adversaries must
needs confess, that after our first calling, yea, and continually so long as
we live, we must acknowledge, that but by grace we cannot be saved: this
grace which themselves dare not but confess, takes away merit: so that if
grace be free and without works in our first justification, it can never
stand with works in the rest of our life: The mistrust of their works.
For still must this be true, if it be of grace it is not then of works, if
of works then not of grace.

Thirdly, the great mistrust which I see themselves do put in this their
doctrine of justification by works, makes me (who see no cause to like of it)
the more to shun it. For master Bellarmine, no mean man for learning among
them, when he has taken much pains to deceive other with this doctrine,
Bellar. a Lutheran, iustif. li. 5. cap. 7.
yet himself dares not trust it, and therefore sets down a very good
rule, which if Calvin or Luther had written it, it must needs have been
called heretical. Because (says he) of the uncertainty of our own
righteousness, and the danger of vain glory, the safest way is to put our
whole confidence in Gods mercy and goodness. Unto which his good and true
doctrine, we say Amen, and yet I hope we shall not be called heretics. The
safest way to salvation is that we seek: let others pass what perilous places
it shall please them. These and such other considerations do make me muse,
that ever men will forsake God, Ierem. 2.13.
the fountain of living waters, to dig them pits, even broken pits that can
hold no waters, that they will leave the plain and safe way, and choose the
way that has greatest danger, wherein they deal not only foolishly for
themselves, but wickedly also with them that they lead into these blind
ways. And I would have all men to mark this well, that that doctrine, which
upon pain of salvation and damnation they teach men must believe, is
dangerous by their own confession, and the contrary most safe. A great
argument to teach us, that they care not so much for the salvation of men's
souls, as to get of men profit and credit. And therefore they are the less
to be trusted or esteemed in other points in controversy, who deal so
unchristianly in the most necessary article of our religion. For you must
understand there are two ways to eternal life, or rather (to speak with the
Apostle) two kinds of righteousness. The one so hard to hit, that no man or
woman, excepting only Christ Jesus, God and man, could go it, so full of
snares and traps, that none but he could continue in it. This is that
righteousness of the Law, Romans 10.5.
which Moses describes thus. The man that does these things shall live
thereby. And this righteousness did our Savior Christ speak of, to the
expounder of the law that came to him to ask, What shall I do to inherit
eternal life? Luke. 10.25
He sent him to the law. For if we will be saved by works, we must keep the
law. But then must we know, That whosoever keeps the whole law, Iam. 2.10.
and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. Now this vngone, and
unbeaten way, so hard for us to hit, so impossible to keep, the church of Rome
teaches us, that we must keep, and yet never any of her dearest darlings
could get to heaven that way. But the righteousness that is by faith, knows
that Christ descended into the deep, and died for our sins, and ascended
into heaven to justify us, and bring us thither. For if thou confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, Romans 10.9.
and believe in thy heart that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be
saved. But this righteousness pleases not our adversaries, because all the
glory of working is given from themselves. This way they think too base,
because it is not garnished with their works, and strewed with their merits.
And yet This is the way, Es^ ie. 30.21.
walk ye in it. As for that middle way which themselves have devised, which
joins Christ's righteousness and theirs together, as though he only could
not save them: it is no good way, for it makes to wander from the path of Gods
word, and is dangerous by their own confession. Take heed therefore of it,
for it is the way that leads to death and damnation. Of this way I may say as
saint Augustine does of them that seek for worldly happiness by good works.
Aug. in. psalm. 31 praefat. M. Bellar. Argument. for merits, Math. 5.12. De.
iustif. 5, cap. 3.
Although (says he) thou stir thine arms in good works, and thou seem most
skilfully to rule thy boat, yet thou runnest upon the rocks. But now let us
see what arguments master Bellarmine uses to prove this their doctrine of
justification by works. Great is your reward (or wages, or hire) in heaven.
Eternal life (says he) is the wages, therefore doubtless works are the
merits. Master Bellarmine reasons thus. Eternal life is your wages, therefore
your works have deserved it. The weakness of this argument appears at the
first: but yet for ye more clear understanding of this and such other places,
a word or two may be added. That God gives us eternal life for wages we
will not deny, if it be understood aright. Admit therefore that a man hireth
two workmen to work with him: the one of them a sufficient workman, who does
his work: The other can work little or nothing, yet he that hired him bids
him work also, and do his best, and he shall have his wages also. Now the
one of these who is the woorkeman, his hire or wages is due to him for his
work, he has deserved it: the others wages is due also, and he may
challenge it: not because he has ^ a^ ned it by his work, but he that hired
him, has made himself his debtor by his promise. We see then, not every
wages is deserved. We are that evil workman, we can do nothing worthy of
our wages, yet God by promise is indebted unto us. Therefore although our
reward or wages be great, yet is it not deserved of our part. Praefat. in,
Psalm. 31.
Our wages is called grace (says saint August.) If it be grace, it is freely
given. What is the meaning of this, it is freely given? It costs us nothing.
Thou have done no good, and forgiveness of sins is given to thee. It is then
no good argument to say: eternal life is our wages, therefore we have deserved
it. His second argument. God shall reward every man according to his work:
Therefore the works are meritorious. The scriptures we confess use often so
to speak, but not to establish merit, but to shake off security. And to this
end they tell us, that if the work be good, it shall have the reward of a good
work, if it be evil, Romans 2.6.
it shall be punished. And so does Saint Paul, using the self same words,
which are also alleged by master Bellarmine expound himself. verse. 7.
To them which by continuance in well doing, seek glory, and honor, and
immortality: 8.
eternal life: But unto them that are contentious and disobey the truth and
obey unrighteousness: indignation and wrath. Thus then we see that this
according to the work, does not signify according to the merit of the work,
but according to the quality of the work. And these kind of speeches are very
like to that, that God said to Cain, and perchance are grounded upon it. If
thou do well, Genesis 4.7.
shall thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well, sin lies at the
door. And when he tells us, that in this judgment, God shall be the rewarder,
he armeth us against hypocrisy, seeing that he who cannot be corrupted with
bribes, nor deceived with ignorance of the cause, shall examine the work. And
yet for the comfort of the Godly we must also know, that he accepts of their
work, not according to the imperfection of the work it self, but according
to the spirit of regeneration which he has wrought in them that work it. And
so because the fruit comes from a good tree, he accounts the better of it.
Therefore if he crown in us our merits, he crowns nothing but his own
gifts, as says saint Augustine. Thus then we see, Li. 50. Homiliarum. Homil.
14.
there is not any necessity in this argument: God rewards the good work with
glory and immortality, therefore the work has merited that reward. And this
is the answer also to his third argument out of these words of saint
Matthew, Matthew. 25.34
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, etc. For
I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, etc. We confess that God rewards good
works, and that is all that can be proved out of these words. But this
reward is not given in respect of the work, but chiefly in regard of Gods
promise. And the rather also it is accepted, because of that spirit of
regeneration from whence the work comes. But in the place alleged by him
out of the revelation he deals not sincerely. For thus does he cite it:
These are they that came out of great tribulation, Apoc. 7.14.
therefore they are in the presence of the throne of God. 15
But saint John has thus set it down, These are they that came out of great
tribulation, and have washed their long robes, and have made their long robes
white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they in the presence of the
throne of God. Not because they came out of tribulation, but because they did
wash their robes in the blood of the Lamb, That is in the grace of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, as says saint Augustine. Deceitfullie therefore did
master Bellarmine leave out the true cause of their being in the presence of
God, In apoc. Hom. 6.
that he might for fortifying of his error, set down that which was no cause
of their being with God, for the true cause. Seeking rather by Sophistry to
beguile, than with sound learning to teach. His fourth sort of places are such
as speak of the justice of Gods judgment, and out of them he makes this
argument. God in justice rewards good works, therefore good works are
meritorious. Master Bellarmine does, as many evil Captains do that deceive
the Prince, who when they have not men enough of their own, against the muster
will borrow some souldiars of some other, to make out their number: but when
they encounter the enemy, their borrowed souldiars are not there to fight for
them, or to do any service, they were but borrowed to make a show in the
muster. Even so falls it out with master Bellarmine. He makes a show of
many proofs. But of al these which are brought in here, there is not one that
proves directly, that God in justice rewards good works. He proves by them
especially, that Gods judgment is just, which we deny not but say with
Jeremy. O Lord are not thine eyes upon the truth. Ier. 5.3.
And therefore these testimonies are to that effect that were the testimonies
alleged in his second argument, ^. Thessalonians. 1.4.5.6.
and are there answered. The effect of that he says in the two first places is
this. It is a token of Gods righteous judgment, ^ Tim. 4.7.^.
that he deals well with the Godly. To this end also is that out of saint
Paul to Timothy. I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course: I
have kept the faith. Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness,
which the Lord that righteous judge shall give me at that day. We never denied
either God to be a righteous judge, or his judgments to be just. What then
will our adversaries infer? Must he therefore judge according to the worthiness
of our work? Job. 9.3. Psalm. 130.3.
God forbid. For if God would dispute with man, he were not able to answer
one thing for a thousand. And if the Lord should straightly mark our
iniquities, who should be able to abide it? And therefore now there is no way
for us, but to make our humble suit unto God as does David: Psalm. 143.1.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no flesh
living be justified. And yet he is just, yea and so just, that he will not
suffer sin unpunished. But rather then he should not be satisfied for the
same to the uttermost, he gave his son to satisfy for the same, even to make
recompense for us. So that our sin (the punishment whereof our selves could
not bear) is punished to the uttermost in Jesus Christ. And by this
satisfaction which Christ has made for us, we may stand without fear before
Gods judgment seat, and plead not guilty: Because that he in whom God is well
pleased, has paid our debt. And seeing that Christ has once made satisfaction
for our sins, it were against Gods justice to punish us for the same. And thus
we see how Gods justice in judgment, is an unspeakable comfort to our
consciences: assuring us, that God looks not upon us in his judgment as we
are in our selves, but as we are belonging to his son Christ. Neither yet
does he weigh the merit of our works, but how they are made acceptable
through Christ: who has merited by his death and passion eternal life, for all
them that believe in him. He looks not I say what we have done, but what
Christ has done. And it is just he should so do: for he was content to take
him to be our suerty. And this is also for the understanding of the fourth
place alleged by master Bellarmine. Heb. 6.10.
For God is not unrighteous that he should forget your work. In which place
Gods righteousness is taken for his truth and faithfulness in keeping promise,
that he is as good as his word, and will reward every good work that is done
for his sake, but not for the merit of the work, but for his own mercy. That
which is alleged out of Saint James, answers it self, James. 1.12.
if M. Bellarmine had not stopped S. James his breath too sone. Blessed is the
man that indureth tentation: for when he is tried he shall receive the crown
of life, says S. James. But it follows, which the Lord has promised to them
that love him. And of this master Bellarmine says nothing. And yet saint James
says plainly that that which they receive, it is according to promise. And out
of the revelation. Apoc. 2.10.
Be thou faithful unto the death and I will give thee a crown of life. How can
he prove merits out of it? Is this a good argument, I will give thee,
therefore thou have deserved it? Two or three places more he there alleges,
but out of that I have said, it is easy to answer them. His fifth sort of
places are such as promise to good works eternal life. And out of them he
reasons thus. Promise of reward for a work, does make that he that does
the work, may be said to merit his reward. That the reward is due but yet
not deserved, I showed before in the answer to his first argument, and I need
not here to repeat it. His sixth argument, is taken from those places that
speak of our worthiness, and are of two sorts. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. Luc. 20.35.
For two of them, namely that That ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom
of God: and that also, They shall be counted worthy to enjoy that world, and the
resurrection of the dead, do answer themselves. For that may be accounted
worthy, which of it self is not so in truth. As in our works is seen, which
are accounted of, not as they proceed from us: but as they are presented before
God in the name of Christ, and their imperfection covered, with his perfect
obedience. The other two places seem more pertinent to his purpose, but yet
being rightly understood, prove nothing for him. The first is in the book of
wisdom, which book although it is not Canonical, yet because the place
alleged seems like unto the words that he alleges out of the revelation,
they may both receive one answer. Wisdom. 3.5 Apocal. 3.4.
God proves them, and finds them worthy for himself. The other place is,
They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. First that this
worthiness does many times signify an aptnes or fitnes, it cannot be denied.
Who (says Solomon) can judge, 2. Cron. 1.10
this thy great people worthily? Where by worthily he means not as they
deserve (for they were a stubborn and bad people many times) but as is fit or
meet to govern them. And so the Apostle wills us to walk worthy of God,
worthy of our calling, worthy of the gospel, that is, as becomes Gods
children, them that are called, and fit for the professors of the gospel. And
this fitnes is said to be in us in respect of the new man that is begun within
us, not in respect of perfection, that we do or can attain unto. And yet if
we should indeed be worthy, we must be perfect, which here we cannot be. And
in this sense you see his argument has no necessity. Men are worthy of love,
that is fit to loved, therefore they have deserved it: for this fitness is not
of themselves. Secondly, although we be called worthy, in respect of our
election in Christ, or in respect of the fruits of the spirit, which God
commends in us, although they have their wants, that we might not be
discouraged, but go on forwards in the ways of godliness, yet this argument
will not hold. We are worthy of love: therefore our works have deserved this
love, or made us worthy. For our worthiness hangs nothing upon our works,
but that God will vouch us to be so esteemed. But in respect of our works, we
must confess with the prophet David: Psalm. 53.3.
There is none that does good, no not one. And therefore we must plead, even
the best of us, mercy and forgiveness, not merit or worthiness. Super
Cantic. ser. 61.
My merit (says Saint Bernard) is the Lords mercy: neither am I without
merit, so long as he is not without mercy. His seventh argument is grounded
upon those places of scripture, that say that God accepts no persons. But
must he needs therefore respect the worthiness of the work? If there be with
him no difference between Jew and Gentile, bond or free, male or female, must
merits needs be established? I have often said, that God respects us and
our works, but not for our goodness, but for his mercy sake. For this must
needs be true that S. Paul teaches us according to the consent of the
scripturs, that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law.
Romans 3.2^.
Therefore (as says S. August.) let man's merits be silent, which were lost
through Adam, De praedest. Sanct. ca. 1^
and let the grace of God through Jesus Christ reign, as indeed it does
reign. Now for the Fathers, if I should answer to every testimony alleged
out of them, it would be too long: especially considering how largely I have
already handled this question. Only thus much would I admonish the christian
Reader, that when he reads them, he should remember, they be but men. Dial.
3. Impatib.
And if Theodoret said truly of the doctrines of the church, the decrees of the
church are to be proved, and not to be pronounced, in manner of a judgment:
then how much more should we reject whatsoever any men speak without a good
warrant. Then also as they were men, so were many of them great Philosophers,
and might somewhat perchance smell of that infection, and speak more of man's
worthiness, than had bin expedient for christian religion. Aduersus Hermog.
Orat. 21.
In so much as not without great cause did Tertull. call philosophers, The
patriarchs of heretics. And G. Nazian. co^pareth the subtilties of philosophy,
which he says, came unhappily into the church, unto the whips wherewith the
Egyptians did scourge the Israelits. Ser. de Arian.
In which kind of reasoning the tongue fights, the words are spears, the
speech is the sword, and there is no end of contention all the day long, as the
same father says in an other place. And no marvel, for the Philosopher is
gloriae animal, De anima.
even the creature of glory, as Tertull writes. No doubt therefore but they
might be somewhat carried away with her intising words, especially to think well
of that themselves do. Thirdly, as I have said in the former chapter, the
absurdities of the^ that did teach, that God moved man, and wrought in or by
him, as a workman might do in or by a stock or stone, they not having so much
as will thereto, made the fathers to speak more, not only of man's freewil, as
before I taught, but also of the reward of them that work according to the
same. And that this did the rather move the fathers to speak somewhat too
largely upon this matter, unless they be warely red, it may be gathered even
by that place that M. Bella. out of Origin alleges, Lib. 2. in Romans in ca. 2.
first (says he) let heretics be excluded, that say that the nature of souls
is good or bad, and let the^ hear that God will reward them, not according to
their nature, but according to their merits. Now concerning the understanding
of these words, Rom, 2.
I have spoken in the answer unto his second argument. But here it appears
that such heretics did then trouble the church. Last of al, not all the
vehement speeches of the fathers, are to be taken or understood as they sound:
but they must be warely red, and wisely examined by the touchstone of Gods
word. And then it will appear, that the Fathers, either may well be taken, or
justly refused.

And thus having (I trust) in the judgment of the indifferent Reader,
sufficiently confirmed the truth, answered the Scriptures alleged to the
contrary, and showed some causes, why the fathers should in this point be read
with good advise and judgment: it now only remains that I lay open the
absurdity of that shift, wherein they trust much, and which indeed is the
chief strength of their cause. For being pressed with the testimonies out of
scriptures, especially out of saint Paul, which plainly testify that we are
justified by faith, Romans 3.28
without the works of the law: first, they devised this answer, that S. Paul
speaks of the ceremonial laws, that we are justified without them, but not
without doing the works of the law moral, or of the commandments. But this
being so untrue an answer, that master Bellarmine himself is ashamed of it,
De iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 19.
and reasons against it: Master Bellarmine brings another answer, namely,
that the Apostle speaks of the works before faith. So that he would have the
words of the Apostle thus to sound: We are justified by faith without the
works of the law that were done before we believed. And for the credit of this
interpretation he would feign father it upon S. Augustine and S. Jerome, De gr.
and lib. arb. ca. 7. de praedest. sinctor. cap. 7. In praefat. ps. 31 Ier. ad
Ctesiphontem contra Pelagianos.
but most untruly, as he that examineth those places shall easily see, that S.
Augustine and S. Jerome in those places do not so expound those words of
saint Paul, neither give us any rule so to expound them. Neither yet do
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theophilact, or Primasius upon those words either in the
third to the Romans, or second to the Galathians so expound it: Romans 4.4.
Or yet S. Jerome upon the Galathians. And in the Epistle that he writes
against the Pelagians to Ctesiphon, he denies that those words may be
understood of the law ceremonial: but concerning this exposition which master
Bellarmine brings there is no word.

As for the reason that Bellarmine has out of S. Paul to prove this his
exposition: let us consider of it. Unto him that works (says S. Paul) the
wages is not counted by favor, but by debt. Therefore (says M. Bellarmine) he
speaks only of those works that are done by the power of free will without
grace. How little S. Paul dreamed of free will, has in the former chapter
been declared. And that he does not in these words expound, what he meant
before by the works of the law, the text it self proves. For, having said,
that Abraham believed God, and that was counted to him for righteousness:
thereupon the Apostle infers: that if he had been justified by works, his
justification had bin of debt, not of grace. So that he does not here expound
his former words, but begins in this fourth chapter an other argument, by
the example of Abraham, being already justified and a holy man, to prove
justification by faith without works, even by forgiveness of sins or
covering them. And as I have showed master Bellarmines interpretation to stand
upon no good ground, but that the place aledged makes against himself: so
that which we gather out of S. Paul's words to be the most true meaning,
namely, that works neither before nor after our first justification (as they
call it) can merit, the circumstances of the place do prove, and the whole
course of his doctrine. He instructs the Romans and Galath. in this doctrine,
who were already become christians, and already were justified. He does not
only show that the works of the law do not justify, but tells us, that ye
nature of the law is to make us to know sin, Romans 7.7. Romans 4.15.
and to cause wrath, even after we be justified. And S. Paul himself teaches
so much, in that he counted all that was in him to be but loss, yea dung. That
he might win Christ, Philip. 3.8, 9
and be found in him, not having his own righteousness, which is of the law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is
of God through Christ. Mark here how the Apostle saint Paul in these words,
which were written almost thirty years after his conversion, still relieth
upon the righteousness that is by faith: and he calls it Gods
righteousness, and refuses that which comes by works, and that he calls
man's righteousness. Now of this which is said, I trust I may thus reason.
Saint Paul excludes from justification, not only the works that are done
before we believe, but also the works which we afterward do: therefore master
Bellarmines interpretation is not true. If then works cannot justify (as
hitherto I have taught) we may say with saint Augustine, Woe be even to the
commendable life of man, Confess. lib. 9. ca. 13.
if thou Lord setting mercy aside examine it. For, Enarrat. psalm. 109.
as he says in an other place, Whatsoever God has promised, he has
promised to them that are unworthy, that it should not be promised as wages for
good works: but grace according to the name of it should be freely given.
Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
O therefore that all men (that with Saint Augustine I may wish that godly
wish) would know themselves, and they that rejoice, Ad Ctesiphontem contra
Pelagianos.
would rejoice in the Lord. For this only perfection is left to men, that they
know themselves to be imperfect: as truly and godlily saint Hierome writes.

Of justification by Faith: and what Faith is. CHAP. 26
THE PROTESTANTS
ANd this Justification, which by our works we can not deserve, yet by faith
we do obtain. Not because our faith can of it self work any such effect.
What faith is.
But it being a lively and certain persuasion of our heart and conscience,
that God for Christ Jesus his sake, forgiueth us al our sins, and in him
accounts us holy and righteous, does thus justify us, not as that that
works our justification, but as that which apprehends and takes hold of
that righteousness, that Christ has wrought for us. And so by faith he being
made ours, is unto us wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.30.
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. And being thus
justified by faith, Romans 5.1
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

THE PAPISTS
BUT our adversaries, because they like not that Christ should be the only
salve for our sores, neither will they have faith to be the hand that
applies this sovereign medicine to our maladies. But they are content to
confess that it does justify, yea, Bellar. de iustif. li. 1. ca. 15. Con.
Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 6. Orth. explica. li. 6.
and that faith does somewhat merit our justification: because it does prepare
and dispose the heart to justification: or as Andradradius says, because it
goes before to open, as it were the door to hope and charity, and is the
beginning and foundation of justification: but that it justifies as the
isntrumental cause, that makes us to rest and settle our selves for our
justification only upon Christ, without any regard to the merit and work of
Faith, they will not grant.

A great cause of the difference between us and the papists in this question,
is that we agree not in the signification of the word, what it is to be
justified. This therefore is the question, whether we that are not only by
nature sinners, but also even after our regeneration, have that Law in our
members rebelling, against the law of the mind, Romans 7.27 Bellar. de Amiss.
great. li. 5. ca. 13.
which saint Paul calls sin, and the papists themselves confess to be
evil, damned and hated of God: whether I say we being such sinners shall appear
righteous before God, in having our sins pardoned, covered and not imputed
unto us, and Christ's righteousness accounted ours: or in that goodness or
holiness, or those good works, which Gods grace works in us. We say that
Christ by faith is made ours: Christ I say with all his holiness and
righteousnesses, Ephe. 1.7
By whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to his rich grace. And in this assurance we stand even before Gods
judgment seat without fear, and say with the apostle Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of gods chosen? Romans 8.33.34.
It is God that justifies who shall condemn us. It is Christ that is dead, yea
or rather is risen again. Who is also at the right hand of God, and also
makes request for us. And in this faith and assured persuasion, we have peace
of conscience here, and are in Christ and for his sake accounted righteous
elsewhere, even before him that shall judge the quick and the dead. They teach
us that after baptism sin is so killed within us, Popish justification.
that we are able to do such works as do merit justification and eternal
life. That justification is not by works, but by imputation. Genesis 22.18.
And by this righteousness that is in us, we are made so just and righteous,
that we are so justified before God. To confirm that which we teach, we have
the promise made to. Abraham That in his seed all the nations of the earth
should be blessed. In his seed I say, not in our selves we must all be
blessed. And that Christ is this seed, saint Paul to the Galathians does
affirm. Gal. 3.16.
Secondly the justification of the people of the Jews, which they by their
sacrifices obtained, is a right pattern of our justification. For though the
blood of of the beasts could not make them holy, yet the sacrifice being
offered for them according to the law, Hep. 9.9.
did work so much, that they who before were accounted unclean, and might not
appear before the Lord, now were accounted clean, and might serve before
him. Even so we, though we be not in our selves, yet by this our sacrifice
that has offered him self a sweet smell unto God the father, we are
accounted clean and without sin, Romans 5.2.
and have by him access unto that grace wherein we stand. Thirdly, this
justification is commended unto us by David, Psalm. 32.1.2
Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. And for this cause
he stirs up his soul to praise the Lord: Psalm. 103.3
because says he, He forgiueth al thine iniquities. It is promised by Jeremy,
I will forgive their iniquities, Iere. 31.34
and remember their sins no more. And the Prophet Hose teaches the people to
pray for it, Hose. 14.2
saying thus. Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him,
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. Where this is also by the
way to be marked, that ye prophet here bids us come to God, with such words,
as if he had said, Your works are evil, and cannot help, they cannot merit,
Yet come with good words, be suitors for grace. Fourthly, our savior Christ
does commend unto us this justification which we have by him, and apprehend by
faith. Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, John 3.16
but have everlasting life. Of whom the apostles also have learned that we are
justified by faith, that righteousness is imputed unto us, and that we are
accounted righteous. Romans 3.28 Romans 4.3.11
Lastly, we see how ye apostle does exclude works from justifying, than which
there can be no stronger argument against this inherent justification which the
papists contend for, or for the imputation of righteousness by faith in Christ
Jesus, which we according unto the scriptures do preach. And therefore he does
not only exclude works in general from justification, Romans 3.28 Gal. 2.11.
Romans 4.
Justified by faith without the works of the law: But also those works that
Abraham did after his first calling, when now he was regenerate, even then, I
say, attributing justification to faith and not to his works. And likewise for
his own works long after he was regenerate, Phil. 3.9.
he rejects them that he might attain unto righteousness by faith. So
little did he trust unto that inherent righteousness, that he counted it but
dung: and so wholly did he depend on that righteousness that we have by faith in
Christ Jesus. But of this I have spoken in the end of the former chapter. And I
trust this may serve the turn, to show how far we are from that inherent
righteousness and keeping of the law, which our popish Pharisees dream of:
especially if we consider what great perfection the law requires to be in our
works, Master. Bellar. his proof for inherent justice. De iustif. li. 2. cap.
3. Romans 5.19.
and what want through our corruption there is in the same. But master
Bellarmine brings some arguments to prove this inherent righteousness. The
first is out of these words, As by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one many are made just. Of this argument,
because I have spoken at large, toward the latter end of the 23. chapter, I
leave the reader to that place. His second argument is this, Al are justified
freely by his grace, Romans 3.24.25.
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set to be a
reconciliation. In which place by grace master Bellarmine understands that
righteousness that God has given, or infused into us: for so he speaks. But
saint Augustine in that place understands by Grace, De gratia Cristi cont.
pelag. and Celest. cap. 31. Prim. upon this place.
that which is set against works. And Primasius says, By (his grace) because
he paid for us that which he ought us not, that he might save us being freely
redeemed. Thus does Augustine and Primasius take this word Grace, for Gods love
to us, not for any virtue inherent in us, clean contrary to master
Bellarmines mind. And by these and some other places he would feign prove,
that the word of justifying, may sometime signify an inherent righteousness.
And what if we grant that to him? yet thereof it follows not, that that
inherent righteousness does justify us before God, which master Bellarmine
would feign prove. As for that which he says of Abel and Noah, that they were
accounted just: if he will by that commendation that is given to them, exempt
them from all sin, saint Augustine will be directly against him, De peccat.
merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 12. 13.
who speaking of Jobs righteousness, shows, that perfection was not in Job,
neither that it can be any. But in comparison of others he was just. And if
perfection cannot be in any, then shall no man by any inherent righteousness,
answer Gods just judgment. Ber. epist. 34.
For Our greatest perfection is desire to be more perfect, and always to
confess our imperfection. Two or three arguments mo has master Bellarmine
in that place, but because they are not worth answering, of purpose I omit
them, concluding with that golden saying of saint Ambrose: Amb. epist 32 lib. 5.
not the law, but faith makes a man just, because righteousness is not by
the law, but by faith.

That good works are necessary duties for all Christians to perform. CHAP.
27.
THE PROTESTANTS
But although we deny that our good works, ca^ any thing merit our
justification, Ephe. 1.4.
yet we affirm that God has chosen us unto himself before the foundations of
the world were laid: Ephe. 2.19.
so, we are his workma^ship, created in christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them. For the same spirit of God, that
works in us faith, and makes it to take sure hold of Christ, does also make
it as a fruitful plant, to bring forth fruit in great abundance of holy
obedience. Neither can this faith, if it be a true faith, be idle, but it will
work by love. By love, I say, toward God, whereby we will be ready to love
him, careful to serve him, and willing to please him. By love also toward
our neighbor, to the performance of al Christian duties in mercifulness, and
brotherly kindness. For we know that God has given unto us his law, that
though we cannot be saved by it, yet we should walk in the same law with our
whole endeavor.

THE PAPISTS
But our adversaries teach us, not to do good works for Gods sake, Mat. 5.16.
That men seeing our good works may glorify our father which is in heaven: but
for our own sake, namely to purchase heaven thereby, and to satisfy for our
sins. So that this is the difference between us and the^ That good works should
be done, we cry it as loud as they: But we differ sometime in the work it
self: for we say, that is only a good work that is done according to Gods
commandments. Mat. ^ 5.9 And ad. Orthod. expli. lib. 5.
They teach for doctrines the precepts of men, yea, that men may offend God
more sometime in breaking the laws of the church, than Gods law. Which how
blaspemously it is written, let the world judge, We also direct our works to
another end than they do We do good works to glorify God, and because he has
commanded us, that we may so offer unto him a sacrifice of obedience. They
work that they may merit thereby, and so do disgrace the merit of Jesus Christ.

And thus much I thought good to set down concerning this point, to stop the
mouths, and to stay the pens of slanderous papists, who go about to discredit
our true doctrine with the simple and ignorant, as though we spoke against
good works: when as in truth we exhort earnestly all men, to show their faith
by their works, and to walk worthy of their calling. Only this we admonish
all men out of Gods word, that they esteem not as good works, the foolish
fancies of man's device: (for we must give God leave, to teach us what is good,
and what is evil, for he is our lawmakers) then also that they refer unto Gods
glory the good works which they do, and to no other end, and that they do them
in singlenes of heart, to perform their dutiful obedience to God. And these
points being observed, we instantly exhort, yea, and command all men, Gal.
6.9.10.
whilst they have time to do good, and never to be weary of well doing.

Of prayer: to whom, and how we should pray. CHAP. 28.
THE PROTESTANTS
Prayer is a good work, commended and commanded of God, and therefore to be
used, a most ready mean to supply our wants, a most sure stay and comfort in
all our dangers and distresses, and therefore not to be neglected, For how can
we either relieve our necessities better, or in heaviness comfort our selves
more effectually, than if we converse and talk with God? Greg. Nissen. orat.
1. in orat. Dominicam. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
Which thing we do in prayer. And therefore the Apostle wills us to pray
always, or continually even without ceasing: Because we always stand in need
of comfort and help. Yea Christ would have us always to pray and not to wax
faint. Luc. 18.1.
But we must ask all good things of God only, from whom only comes every
good giving, Iam. 1.17.
and every perfect gift. And that in the name of Christ Jesus, and for his
sake. We must also pray in faith if we will be heard, and with understanding
that we may pray in spirit.

THE PAPISTS
OUR adversaries also speak much of prayer: but their prayers have many
faults. For first they pray not to God only, but also to the Saints and
creatures, expressly against Gods law. Then also they number their prayers upon
their beads, as if they would know how much God is become indebted unto
them for their prayers. Thirdly they pray in a tongue unknown to them that do
pray many times, namely in latin. And fourthly out of these arises another
fault in their prayers, that the prayers that are directed to any other than to
God, and are also such, as they that do pray know not what they ask, or
what they pray for, because they pray in latin: therefore they pray not in
faith, and so their prayers are turned into sin, and provoke God to anger.

First we must pray unto God only, in respect of Gods commandment. Thou shall
have no other Gods but me. For thereby God does challenge unto himself, not
only that we should acknowledge him to be God, but also that we should perform
to no other but to him those services and offices that are due unto God,
amongst which invocation or prayer is one. Secondly, that commandment, which
more particularly touches this point, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, is flatly broken
if we do call upon any other. Thirdly, the prophet David does seem to make
it a property belonging to God only, to hear our prayers, Thou that hear
our prayers, to thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 65.2.
And therefore if we will be heard, we must pray to God only. Fourthly, Cont.
Arian. Orat. 2.
Athanasius proves Christ to be God, because he is prayed unto in distress.
Whose argument had not been good, if any other besides God might have been
prayed unto. Fifthly, faith only belongs to this life, so that the Saints
have it not in the life to come, De iustif. li. 2. cap. 4. and 7.
as master Bellarmine himself affirms very truly: but prayer without faith
avails not, and How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?
Therefore the saints after this life cannot pray for us, or at the least their
prayers cannot avail. Sixthly, as it is not an office laid upon the saints to
pray for us, in all the scriptures, so they regard nothing in the life to come,
but only Gods glory, as may appear by the exercise of singing praise to God
only, as in the Apocalips many times is ascribed unto them. So little care
they have of their own private estate, much less of our affairs, but of
those things only, that belong to gods glory. Thus then we see, concerning this
first point in controversy concerning prayer, that we must not pray unto any
creature, but to God only. De beatitud. Sanct. li. 1. cap. 19. Popish
arguments for invocation. Genesis 48.16.
But yet let us see how M. Bellar. will prove that we may pray to the
creatures. Jacob says of Joseph's children, The angel that delivered me from
all evil, bless the children, therefore Jacob prays unto the angel. That
which there he calls the angel is God, as appears not only by the words,
because before he called him God: but also Chrysostom expounding this place,
verse. 15. In Genes. Hom. 66. Job. 5.1.
not once naming the angel, makes him to ask al these things of God. And
that which he alleges out of Job, is of like force. Call now if any will
answer thee, and to which of the saints will thou turn? for many of the
Hebrews understand this of the saints that are alive, as if he had said, what
good man is of thy mind, or will take thy part? Some expound this place of the
angels, but so as they make Eliphaz to ask this question (to whom amongst the
angels Job will turn) scoffingly. As if he had said, if thou should ask of
them it were in vain, they would not answer thee. But howsoever it is, it is
certain, that here is no mention of invocation or prayer unto the angels,
Philippus Presbiter in Job.
but rather as it seems by Phillippus Presbiter upon this place, a taunting
reproof of Job, if he believed not Eliphaz his words. But howsoever it is
expounded, here is no good argument for invocation or prayer unto angels. For
the Godly have often turned themselves unto the angels, but not to pray unto
them. As for that that Moses said, Remember Abraham. Isaac, and Israel thy
servants, Exodus 32.13.
respects not the merits of these fathers, but the promise made to them, as
in that place appears: for it follows, To whom thou swarest by thine own
self, and said to them. I will multiply your seed. Which words do plainly
burden God with his promise made to them. Neither does that which master
Bellarmine alleges out of Theodoret, prove any thing ^ o the contrary. For
he says that Moses used the help or defense of these patriarchs. And why not
rather in respect of Gods promise, which we know he is able and ready to
perform, then of their merits. Theod. quest 67. in Exodus
So that if there were any invocation or prayer to them, as there is not (it is
only a request that God will remember them) and therefore this place belongs
not to the matter now in question, but if there were any prayer unto them, we
see that it cannot be concluded out of this place that Moses would have God to
regard their merits. But master Bellarmine will help the matter with a
testimony out of the Psalms. Lord remember David and al his kindness. Psalm.
131.2.
There says master Bellarmine, Solomon prays in respect of his father
David's merits: but the word upon which his whole argument depends, that here
is translated kindness, may be translated Affliction. And S. Hierom tra^slating
the psalms according to the Hebrew does so translate it. And how can he think
with such uncertain proof, to make good so bad a cause? But I hasten to that
argument, that could never yet be answered, for so master Bellarmine says.
And it is this. We may desire them that are alive to pray for us, therefore we
may pray to the saints that are departed. If master Bellarmine had not liked
so well of this argument, I should not have thought it worth any answer. For
to pray one for another whilst we are alive, is both warranted and commanded
of God: but to pray to them that are gone, we have neither commandment nor
promise. And there is great difference between prayers, which the papists
would make to them that are dead, and such requests as the godly have made,
or we may make to them that are alive to pray for us. But master Bellarmine
will strengthen his argument, by remoouing the causes that may hinder this
invocation, or rather their intercession for us. First if we say they will
not pray for us: he answers, they have greater love than they had, and
therefore they will. But what manner of love they have to us ward, is not
described in the Scriptures: And therefore we cannot of that their love which
is uncertain, gather any certain argument. But sure I am, their love toward
God and our savior Christ is so great, that they will not rob either God of
his glory, or Christ of his office of mediation. And they cannot pray for us
because, as before I have showed even out of master Bellarmine, that they want
faith. And whether they know that we pray or not, it is uncertain. As for the
wrong that is done unto God, if any but he be prayed unto, which master
Bellarmine imagines to be the fourth let why they cannot pray for us: he
answers that if that be any hinderance to Gods glory, Coloss. 2.23.
it also is against Gods glory, that they who are alive, should request other
to pray for them. Which his answer how foolish it is, the very women and
children may easily perceive, how the one has commandment, the other must
go amongst the wil-worshippings: especially if we consider the practice of
invocation in the popish church. For although now to make some fair show of
their doctrine, they will teach us, De beatitud. sanct. li. 1. ca. 17.
that the saints Are not the immediate intercessours unto God for us, but
obtain our requests of God through Christ, as master Bellarmine teaches:
yet it cannot be denied, that men and women have had confidence in the saint it
self, have vowed, and performed their vows unto the same for their
deliverance, have prayed unto the same for help. Act. and Mon. page 1117. 1443.
And these men have not been reproved, no they were thought to have a good
devotion, and to merit thereby: but some have been accused of heresy for not
praying in their travel to the virgin Mary. Yea they have published a
blasphemous thing, called the Psalter of the Virgin, compiled by Bonauenture,
in which whatsoever in the Psalms and some other scripture is spoken of the
Lord, is most wickedly by them applied unto the Virgin Mary, whom they call
lady. Yea to be short, it is almost as full of blasphemies as of words. An
infinite number of their own prayers, might be brought against them out of
their own books to testify against themselves, of that superstitious
confidence which they have had in the creature: and yet would they now persuade
the world, that they never meant they should make intercession to God for us,
but by Christ: but in truth they made them rather gods than mediators. As when
the virgin Mary is willed to command her Son, and to show her to be his
mother: Or when unto her they pray thus: In all our trouble and distress help
us, most holy virgin Mary. And thus have I thought good, briefly to examine
their proofs out of the scripture, and to take away that show of reasons, that
they made out of Gods word. I might have brought their own fellows to
testify against them, that whilst they will seem to allege scriptures,
they do but wrest them. In Enchirid. cap. 15. De Theol. loci. li. 3. cap. 3
For Eckius a stowt Papist does frankely confess, that the invocation of
saints is not expressly commanded or taught, either in the old or new
Testament. But Melchior Canus better learned than he, does say, that neither
plainly, nor yet covertly, it is contained in the Scriptures. And therefore we
see that they do allege Gods word, but to blind men's eyes, as though they
had some warrant out of it, not because they think their arguments p^ ooue
that which they teach. Seeing therefore their doctrine, is so quite void of
all warrant out of Gods word, and that which they do seem to bring, is so
weak and wrested, as may appear: I trust I may conclude with Tertullian that
this commandment, De praescrip. aduersus haer.
ask and ye shall receive, agrees to him that knows of whom to ask, even
of him of whom somewhat was promised, that is, of the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. Now for the second point, which is, Christ our only mediator.
that Christ Jesus is this only mediator between God and man, to offer up our
prayers unto God. Wherein our adversaries do not deny but he is the mediator,
but they had wont to tell us, Eckius in Ench. cap. 15
that he is the only mediator of redemption (and yet they rob him also of that
office, by the Popes pardons, and such baggage) but there may be many mediators
of intercession say they: But master Bellarmine has found out another shift,
namely, that they are but intercessours by Christ (as before I have showed.)
But how does master Bellarmine prove, that the saints make intercession by
Christ for us. He has not so much as one word out of scripture for it,
neither yet out of any ancient father. His only proof is out of saint
Bernard, who lived eleven hundred years and more after Christ. Is this a
doctrine to be received now as catholic, that has so long been buried in
silence, and will not yet perchance be very well liked of. Indeed, that Christ
is our mediator he proves well: but that which he would especially have us
to believe, is left without witness, as I have showed.

De beatitud. sanct. li. 1. ca. 17
Well then, I will take it as a thing granted by master Bellarmine, that Christ
is only our immediate mediator to God, and no saint, no angel, or any other
creature: which thing the scriptures prove plentifully. And I will (by Gods
grace) show also, that they may not be mediators by or to Christ for us. First,
there is no warrant for it in the word, and therefore it must not be received
of us, whose rule for life and religion the word ^^ st be. Secondly, I have
showed, that the saints departed have not faith, and therefore they can not
pray. Thirdly, to join them with Christ in the office of Mediation, does
show that they fear, that either he can not by himself perform that
office which God has laid upon him, and that is blasphemous: Or, that he
will not at our request do it, unless he be entreated by others.

Seeing he has died for my sins, shall I doubt whether he will hear me
if I do pray? If he bid me ask, seek, knock, and promises thou that I
shall have, find, and to open, will he not be as good as his word? Hebr.
2.17
In all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren that he might
be merciful, 18
and a faithful high priest in things concerning God, Ebr. 4.15.
that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he
suffered and was tempted, 16
he is able to succor them that are tempted. Our high priest is touched with
the feeling of our infirmities. Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Let
us, I say, our own selves come unto him in this assurance that he will not
fail to hear and help us. For he calls Come unto me all ye that are weary
and laden, and I will ease you. Matt. 11.28.
Shall we be afraid to draw nigh unto him, that calls us so lovingly? Or
shall we think that we shall need to send mediators to entreat him, that
sends his ambassadors to us to entreat us? Now we are ambassadors for
Christ (says saint Paul) as though God did beseech you through us, 2. Cor.
5.20.
we pray you in Christ's steed, that you be reconciled to God.

Let us therefore say with S. Augustine, or whosoever it was that writ those
books that go in his name, Lib. 2. cap. 1.
Of the visitation of the sick. I speak more safely and sweetly to my Jesus,
than to any of the holy spirits of God. Yea this gross and absurd persuasion
Saint Chrysostom in many places seeks to remove, as they that do read his
works may find. In Matthew Hom. 5.
God (says he) will give to us salvation, not so much at others entreaty, as at
our own. And this he proves by the examples of the woman of Canaan, Mat.
15.23.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Luke 7 Luke 23.4^.43.
the sinful woman and the thief that was put to death with Christ, and at
his own suite obtained paradise. And Chrysostom seems in that place to
yield a good reason why we should sue for our selves. Because it will make us
more careful to amend our lives, to the end we may the better please God.
So that hereby we may gather, that they who teach us that we may have other
advocates or mediators to God, teach us to be careless of our own
conversation how we do live. Whereas if our selves only must of necessity
entreat God for his son Christ's sake, we will be more careful to serve
him, that with greater confidence we may come to entreat him.

This good seed of Inuocating and calling upon God, continued about some two
hundred years in the church until that envious man at the last, whilst Gods
servants were asleep, did sow that evil seed of praying to the creatures.
And although some did like well of it, yet was it misliked also by some of the
godly, as most notably appears in Epiphanius against the heretics called
Collyridiani, Haeres. 79
who offered a bunne or cake to the virgin Mary, or for her sake: and of that
they had their name. And so the Papists do offer their wax candles, yea many
times very precious things unto their saints. But Epiphanius compares such to
a common harlot, that run a whooring from one only God: and says this old
error shall not prevail, to leave him that lives, and to worship the
creature. He will not have her worshipped, neither yet that they should offer
in her name. Bellarmine indeuouring to answer this place, De beatitud. sanct
li. 1. ca. 15
says that Epiphanius reprooueth that heresy, because they would make a god
of her. But the place is marvelous strong against the Popish ceremonies, in
their superstitious services. For Epiphanius gathers of this that they did to
the virgin Mary, that they made her a god, not that they esteemed or called her
a god (for they never denied the one God) but that they did to her that which
the Gentiles do to their gods. And (I pray you) did they any more to the
virgin Mary than our Papists do? Let it be examined. They offered bunnes or
takes in her name: the Papists do offer sundry sorts of things: and, the more,
and the costlier, the Priests think the better of it. At a certain day in the
year some women used to trim some Wagon, and cover it over with a sheet,
and for certain days would set there some bread, and offer it in her name,
being assembled together: The Papists make many as pretty shows as this could
be: for, the worship of their Saints have their days set down for it. The
women also do with those heretics, celebrate those holy mysteries. How many
religious orders the Popish church has to celebrate the mysteries in honor of
their Lady, as they do term her, let the world judge. But our Papists being
compared with those heretics, go as near (I warrant you) to make their
saints gods, as ever did the Collyridians to make a God of the Virgin Mary.
And how does Epiphanius confute this heresy? What Scripture (says he) has
taught us this? which of the Prophets commanded a man, much less a woman to
be adored? If then the Scriptures must teach us, and the Prophets must direct
us in our religion: because this invocation of the creature has no warrant in
the word, we may safely reject it. And that our prayers, whether they be
private or public, Prayers must be in a tongue that we know. Orat. in sulitt.
In Genes. hom. 29. De Orthod. fide li. 3. c. 24
must be in a tongue that we understand, it is by many reasons to be proved.
For if that prayer be as Saint Basil defines it, A requesting of some good
thing of God, powered out to God of the godly: or as Chrysostom says, It is
a talk with God: or as Damascene does write, The ascending of the mind unto
God, or, the craving of things fit to be asked of God: then is it most
necessary, that whether we pray in public, or privately, we should understand
what we say, lest in steed of good we ask that which is evil, and our talk
should not be seemly or agreeable to the majesty of God, with whom we
talk: neither can our mind ascend in prayer, if the understanding of our
words be not as it were a wing to help it up. Therefore Chrysostom exhorts
unto sobriety, especially when we should pray, and would have us in prayer to
gather together the powers of our mind, In Genes. hom. 29.
That our mind may accompany our words to God, for fear least our prayer
turn to our condemnation.

And most plain is that that the Apostle says, If I pray in a strange
tongue, 1. Cor. 14 14
my spirit prays, but mine understanding is without fruit. 1. Cor. 14.26
Thus then I reason: All things ought to be done to edifying, But the prayers
that are made in a strange tongue that the people understand not, are not done
to edifying, therefore they are not such as they ought to be. This whole
argument is saint Paul's. For the first proposition is his very words. The
second is necessary to be gathered out of his words. For if such prayers are
without fruit, as the apostle says they are, Regal. breuiores quaest. 278.
then they do not edifye. For when (says Basil) the words of the prayer are
unknown to them that are present, then the mind of him that prays is
doubtless without fruit, because none is the better for it. For as the same
father in his answer to the next question says of the understanding of
scripture, Quaest. 278.
so may we say of prayer. he compares the understanding of the scriptures unto
the taste of our meat. And says that men hear profitably, when the
understanding of the word is unto their mind, as the taste of the meat is
unto the body. And so may we likewise say, that then we pray with fruit, when
in our mind we understand what we pray for, as well as our mouth tastes our
meat what it is that we eat. Which place of saint Paul troubles master
Bellarmine so, that after that he has seen and vewed many answers scarce any
can please him. De verbo dei lib. 2. cap. 16
But at the length he resolves upon this, that the apostle speaks not of
their common prayers, but of such spiritual songs as themselves made. But that
answer will not serve the turn. For he that commanded that all things that
are done in such meetings, should be done to edifying, would not only that
such spiritual songs should be understood, but also all other their prayers
and exercises. And therefore Chrysostom thinks that they who come not to
edify others, may as well be away. And that this edifying should, Hom. 36. in
1. Cor.
if not only, yet especially be regarded, Let nothing (says Primasius) be
in you, Primas. upon this place.
wherewith you do not edify one another.

And if edifying be especially to be regarded in our Christian assemblies,
then they that edify the greatest number, do either win or confirm most in
the faith, and so do best service to God. And therefore I can not but marvel
at master Bellarmine, that he is so willing to defend the very dregs of
popery, that he will rather speak against all sense, then he will seem to
say nothing. Who would once imagine that which he often affirms, De verbo
dei lib. 2. cap. 16.
that all the people need not understand the prayers? What then do they in
the assembly, if they understand not what is said? All had wont to say
Amen, as master Bellarmine notes out of Justinius Martyr. 1. Cor. 14.16
But saint Paul thinks it absurd that they should say Amen to that they
understand not, therefore all people should understand.

But yet more foolish is that he says, that the people needs not
understand the prayers, because they are made not to the people, but to God,
and it is enough that God understand them. What, is master Bellarmine in
earnest, or but in jest? is he waking, or but in a dream? The prayers are
made to God, it is true, they should be so. But the Popish Church will have us
also to pray in Latin to the Saints, many of which when they were alive,
understood no Latin, whatsoever they now do. Well, we should pray to God.

But master Bellarmine will confess, that in the public prayers, every
member of the Church should have his share, which he cannot have unless his
heart join in consent with the words of the minister. S^ that although God
understand what we would have, y^ t that is not enough, unless we also know
what we sue for unto God. For it is not in this case as it is with worldly
princes, as master Bellarmine most profanely surmiseth. For although he for
whom another makes suite unto the prince, needs not to care whether he
understand or not the words that he that makes request for him does speak:
yet if he make request for himself, it is very needful he should well
understand his own words. Now the prayers of the Church, although they be
pronounced by one man to avoid confusion, yet they are not the prayers of one,
but of the whole Church, and therefore should the whole Church say Amen unto
them. So they did in the time of Iustine the Martyr and long after: Apolog. 2.
showing thereby that they all had interest therein, not only in respect of
the benefit that they looked for: but even in respect of that very sacrifice
of prayer, which the church did offer, wherein they had their part. And this is
one part of the communion of Saints, that we join together in one to praise
God, or pray unto him, as one body, though many members, yea, as one mind in
many bodies. And this they did when The Christians looking up to heaven,
Tertul. in Apolog.
stretching out their hands (for they were harmless) bare headed (for they
were not ashamed) yea and without any to put them in mind to pray (for they
prayed even from their hearts) al praying together, prayed for all. etc. as
Tertullian reports of those times. For these their outward actions, did show
the affection of their mind, and agreement in that they prayed for.

Numbering of prayers.
Now for the numbering of their prayers upon their beads, or otherwise, I doubt
whether it can have any color of excuse. For why do they score them up? Is
it because they will go nothing beyond the number of prayers? or that they may
be sure to pay God all they owe him? To think they can give him all his due,
is too great wickedness. And so to stint themselves in their prayers,
howsoever they find themselves affected to pray, does plainly show that
they know not what it is to pray. For if it be the cry (as one says) of
the heart, and not of the mouth: then is it time to make an end of praying,
when either our heart is satisfied, in having the request that it made,
granted, or else it wax faint, and fall down as Moses his hands did, Exodus
17.
that it cannot lift up it self to God.

And seeing men cannot be always alike minded in prayer, it is but folly to
appoint themselves, always the like measure of prayers. And such prayers are
many times turned into prating and vain babbling. Or do they number ^^ eir
prayers, that they may say to God: Thou art indebted unto us for so many
prayers? It may so be: For such is the foolish imagination of man, when he
once refuses to be directed by Gods word, that there is nothing so absurd,
no toy so childish, but they will account it to be a religious serving of God.
And so in this, by a little lip labor, they seek to buy those paltrie
pardons, of such presumptuous Popes, as will take upon them by making a gain of
men's sins, to tread under foot the most precious blood of Christ. But what
needed so rich a ransom, as Christ his blood, if so vile a price may serve
the turn? If I would I might bring many examples of such pardons, for saying
a certain number of prayers. But it is a filthy sink, that I love not to
rake in

The ground of this blasphemous doctrine, is the blasphemy of all other
blasphemies, the sum whereof was uttered at Trent, in the time of Pope Pius
the fourth, by Paulus Guidellus, in the hearing of many of the fathers. That
the Apostles and their scholars, Popish blasphemy
did lay the foundation of Christian religion, upon their own blood and
merits, as upon a most sure rock, and thereby it came to pass that Christ's
kingdom was enlarged.

What greater injury could they do to the blood of Christ? But this
persuasion being once entered, that the blood of the Saints is so available,
they will hope well, if they can mumble up a number of prayers to please them,
that they shall have pardon of their sins for many years. If the Papists
be ashamed of this doctrine, as justly they may, let them show it condemned
in that their Council. If they allow of it, they are ashame to the name of
Christianity. But, that prayers cannot be meritorious, it follows of that
which before I have said in the five and twenty Chapter. For if no works can
merit, then not prayer.

The last abuse in prayer, is, that as it is many times nothing zealous, or
earnest, so it is not of faith, but without all assured persuasion of Gods
goodness, or readiness to hear us. Yea, many times men speak the words of
prayer, neither considering what they ask, or how greatly they stand in
need to be heard, or to whom they speak, or with what boldness they may come
unto him, in respect of his abundant mercies. But because this is rather the
fault of the men than of the doctrine, I will not meddle with it. But yet I
cannot but marvel at master Bellarmine, De bouis operibus in particulari. lib.
1. ca. 9.
who thinks that a man needs not in prayer to have such faith, as that he
is assured thereby that God will hear him, but only a general persuasion of
his power, will, etc. Against which dangerous doctrine, I will for this time
only say thus much. Our faith the more particular it is, the stronger it is,
and the stronger it is, the better hold shall it take of Gods mercies, and the
more readily obtain at Gods hand: Therefore still weakness of faith is
reproved. James. 1.6.
And saint James wills us to pray in faith without wavering. But this their
general or hystoricall faith, is sufficiently confuted, if we compare it with
that exceeding great, and particular persuasion of Gods goodness, which the
Apostle did feel in the eight to the Romans, where he assures himself that
no body can condemn him, no, neither yet accuse him, Romans 8.
nothing can separate him from Gods love: which his particular faith also
appears in many other places, and did make him pray with assurance. And thus
I have (I trust) proved, that we must pray to God only. I can ask these
things (says Tertullian) of none but of him, In Apolog. ^ Tim. 2.5.
of whom I know I shall speed, for it is only he that gives it. And that
by one only mediator, between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. And we must
pray in humility, and yet faithfully. Because although our prayers are not of
themselves worthy to be heard, yet Christ shall offer them up unto God as a
sweet perfume, Apoc. 8.3.
as saint John in the spirit of prophecy did see.

Against Images in Churches, or any where else for Religions cause. CHAP. 29
THE PROTESTANTS.
ANd as we must have one only God, in whom we must trust, to who^ only we
must pray: so we dare not make unto our selves any Image of God, or of any
creature, to do any kind of worship unto the same. For first God has
commanded us, that we should not have any graven thing, no nor yet the
likeness of any thing in heaven, in the earth, or in the waters to worship it.
Then also man's great weakness makes us afraid to have them. Because more
easily we will worship the thing that we see, the^ that which we see not.
Thirdly, the godly among Gods people did always carefully take heed thereof,
cou^ting it a thing most unlawful. Lastly, the best teachers of truth Christ
and his apostles, did never co^me^d the^ to us but rather the contrary. Which
doubtless they would have done, if they had bin needful.

THE PAPISTS
But the Papists, whom neither Gods commaunment can restrain, neither
experience (that teaches eue^) fools) can admonish, though they may daily see
(if themselves were not like their Idols, having eyes and see not, ears and
hear not) the manifest and manifold superstitions that by them are crept into
their Churches: and although they want all warrant of the word, and have no
example, of the purer times of the primitive church to induce them thereto: yet
do they daily set up those dangerous stumbling blocks in their churches, I
mean^ the Images, before which men do pray, unto which men do bow and kneel
and serve. And that they might the easlier lead men and women to superstition,
they will sometime make them to wag their head, move their eyes, foam at the
mouth or show other such signs, that they are either pleased or angry with
such as come to them.

And if in any article of their religion, then sure in this, in my judgment,
they have a most miserable defense, seeing they cannot commend their Images as
things commended to them of God, or used of the Godly. They can only plead not
guilty. Our Images are not Idols. We worship them not with any unlawful
worship. And so all that they can do, is to excuse themselves from being
Idolaters. No it is more then they can do, considering how God has forbidden
them, and good men have detested them. Are they not careless think you of
their own, or other men's salvation, that will commend that to the people as
good and necessary, whereof when they have spoken the best they can, they
cannot truly say it is not evil? But let us see by what arguments they will
prove that images are not evil, images I say that have any worship done unto
them. For such images as are not in danger to be worshipped, we speak not
against. First they put a difference between an Idol and an image, and say
that an Idol is a false likeness of a thing, an image does truly represent
things unto us. Bellar. lib 2. de Imag. c. 5.
First in matter or substance they will confess that there is no difference
between them. For both are made of gold, silver, wood, stone or such like.
Secondly, in form they agree, for they are like some man or woman. Thirdly,
they are of like might or power either against mise or rats, or dust and
cobwebs, and alike able they are or rather unable to help themselves, or
others. Fourthly, the use of the Idols that the gentiles had, De preparat.
Euang. lib. 3.
and that the papists have is all one. For Eusebius shows that the gentiles
did use their Idols as books, to learn by them God himself and his power,
Contra gent. lib. 1.
and to express and set forth the invisible things of God, by their images?
And Athanasius a little before him affirms the same. For he reports that
such as were the wiser sort of them said, they were as books or letters,
wherein they might read and learn to know God. And are they not used in the
popish church to be lay men's books? Let themselves speak. We desire in this
cause no other witnesses. Why then says Athanasius in the place before
alleged, what is there in the image that does represent God? Is it the
matter? What need was there then that a shape should be given unto it? Or what
need we seek that in few places that is in many? For stone, wood, gold and
such like may easlier else where be found then in churches. Is it the form,
the likeness of men or other creatures? Why then should it not be thought
that men themselves, or other creatures, should more lively represent God
than their image? Is it the cunning or workmanship? Then men that devised this
skill may rather teach us, than the image which they made. Thus we see how
this ancient writer does confute soundly, not only the opinion that Pagans had
of the use of their Idols, but also that popish use of images to be lay men's
books. And seeing in all these points they are so like, as if they were twins
of one birth, why should we doubt but they are al one. But they are not more
like in any thing, than in that definition of an idol which master Bellarmine
himself has set down. De Imag. li. 2 cap. 5. The image of God the father. De
Imag. li. 2 cap. 8.
An Idol (says he) is a false likeness. But the popish images are false
likenesses, therefore they are idols. First the image of God the father to be
made like an aged man, which master Bellarmine likes well of, is but a false
likeness. For graie heirs, and age, are rather a token of weakness, than a
picture fit to set forth Gods majesty: and show him rather to be pitied than
powerful. Yea but God appeared (says M. Bellarm.) to Daniel having The hair
of his head like the pure wool. Daniel. 7.^.
It is true, but he bid not Daniel paint him so. He appeared in that shape to
Daniel only, whom he had endued with a principal spirit, but did not show
himself so unto the people. He appeared unto his servants in sundry shapes not
often in one sort, to show that he must not be made like unto any one of them,
for none of them all can set him forth unto us, as he should be set forth, and
therefore if we will make them they are but lying similitudes. The image of
Christ.
And for the image of Christ, it is but a lying likeness. For his very shape,
or outward form is not by them expressed, but one painteth him after one
sort, another after another sort. But the especial things that we should
receive comfort or instruction by, cannot be painted, his godliness of life,
and his office of being redeemer and mediator. These things which are the
chiefest, the grauer cannot grave, the painter cannot paint. These are lively
described in Gods book. But they that are most given to images, care lest to
learn these things. And seeing the image cannot teach us these things, for
we see nothing in it but a stock or stone, or some other metal made like a
man, which cannot stir or move or help it self, therefore it is a false
likeness. But false also are such images in another respect, namely, because
the eye beholding it, draws the mind from the consideration and meditation
of better things, and hinders more heavenly cogitations. False because they
intise to lies. Ier. 10.14.15. Habac. 2.18.
And therefore well says God by his Prophet Jeremy, Their melting is but
falsehood, they are vanity and the work^ of errors. What profits the Image?
(says God by Habacucke) For the maker thereof has made it an Image, and
teacher of lies. These books then, they are of a false print, and teach not
truly, but as are idols, even so are these images false likenesses. De
consens^ euang. li. 1. cap. 10.
And therefore worthily did S. Augustine find fault with them Who sought for
Christ and his apostles, not in the holy scriptures, but in painted walls. And
this is indeed a dangerous falsehood, under pretense of religion, to draw us
from true religion. And by satisfying the eye with a fair show, to rob the
soul, of the spiritual comfort and instruction. Lastly, they are like in name
also. Which thing although M. Bell. and others would feign deny, yet G. Martin
a great enemy to us even in this cause, Against our english translat. ca. 3.
sect. 15. In Exodus 20.
cannot but grant that the greek word Idolum may signify an image. And
Caietanus also another pillar of popery does make an idol and an image alone,
although M. Bellar. censure him for it. And the Hebrew names are so general, De
imag. li. 2 cap. 7.
as that they may very well serve for image or idol: yea there is in the use of
them small difference. Sometime their names show and tell what they are, as
vanities, lies, abominations, yea dirtie and dungie. Sometime they are called
according to their making graven or molten. Sometime according to the effect
that they work in such as serve them, they are called fleabogs: Cap. 3. sect.
5 Psalm. 106.36.
and where Gregory Martin translateth, they Served graven Idols, the word
signifies vexation. Because idols bring vexation to them that serve them, they
are so called.

But the words as I have said, are very general. And therefore unjustly and
without cause does Gr. Martin find fault with our english translations, for
translating, Ca. 3. sect. 20. Exodus 20.4.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. For the words do so well
bear it, that even their own latin translation, which they allow so well of,
does often translate that very word image as we do, for the most abominable
Idols that are: as the images of the temple of Baal, 2. Kings. 11.1^. Ezec.
7.20. and 16.19. Ezec. 23.14.
the idolatrous images which the Israelites made, the images of the Caldeans.
And that word which with the Hebrews most properly signifies a likeness or
image, does their old translation translate an Idol, De Imag. li. 2. cap. 5.
if this word Simulacrum do signify an Idol, as master Bellarmine says it
does. For Tselamim which in Hebrew signifies likenesses or images, that latin
translation calls Simulacra Idols. 2. Cron. 34.3. Hos. 11.2. and else where.
If the old translatour might indifferently use the words that are of one
signification, why may not our translatours do the like, but they must by and
by be falsifiers and corrupters? And more evidently to prove that the old
translatour did not acknowledge this nice difference: mark the place that we
allege against them out of Habacucke, Habak. 2.18.
and it will appear, that he makes images, and that graven thing which in
this commandment (Thou shall not make to thy self any graven thing) is
forbidden, all one, putting no difference between them. For thus does he
translate that place. What profits the graven thing, For he that made it
has graven it a molten thing, and a false image. Where he plainly calls
that an image, which before he did translate, as the word does in truth
signify, a graven thing. If this be no fault in him, I trust the indifferent
reader, will not think it to be a fault in us. Well then images and idols
agreeing so well as they do, in matter, form, inability, use, definition, and
name, why may they not be birds of one nest? and whelps of one litter, one
of them taken for the other? If we also consider how in other places of
Scripture the idols are described, and compare those descriptions, with that
which we see and know to be in their images, Psalm. 115.4.5.6.
we shall see them to be alike. Their Idols are silver and gold the work of
men's hands. They have mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and
hear not, noses and smell not, hands and touch not, feet and walk not,
neither make they a sound with their throat. Are not the images such? Much
like unto this, is that that the Prophet Esaias says of them, That they must be
borne upon men's shoulders, Esa. 45.7.
they must be carried and set in their place. So do they stand and can not
remove from their place. Though a man cry unto them, yet can they not answer,
nor deliver him out of his tribulation. If this be not true of their images
also, then we will confess they are no idols. And this is a thing well
worthy to be noted, Bellarm. de imag lib. 2. cap. 5.
that whereas the usual names that the scriptures give idols are these, as
master Bellarmine confesses, Elilim, false, or Auanim, lies, or Sheqed, a lie:
neither these, nor any other of the most opprobrious names that are given unto
idols are used in the commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven thing, but such a name as they can not deny, but that it may be truly
applied to their images. The holy ghost thereby preventing this their subtle
shift, when they say that images are not thereby forbidden: for the words as
well forbid images as idols, yea any thing that is graven: yea, and the sense
of the commandment extends to any thing that is made with hands. For that
that man can make, is not fit to be a god. And therefore Moses that man of God
having threatened to the transgressors of Gods law desolation of their land,
and captivity to themselves in a strange land, he adds: Deuteronomy. 4.28.
And there shall ye serve gods the work of men's hands, wood, and stone,
which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. Yea Moses before in that
chapter, expounds unto them this second commandment, and teaches them what
is meant by that graven thing, Verse 15, 16
and how they should understand it. Ye saw not (says he) any likeness in the
day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: lest
peradventure ye might be deceived and should make unto your selves, any graven
likeness, or any image of man or woman, etc. Wherein Moses tells them, that
God appeared not in any form, because he would not have them to make any
image. In which place I use their own translation, because they may see, that
not idols only, but images also are by it condemned. Lastly, the very practice
of Gods people, and the detestation that they always have against images, may
sufficiently persuade us how they understood the commandment. For as
Bellarmine says of the Jews, that after Christ's time they were most
superstitious against images, Lib. 1. de Imaginib. ca. 7
and say that they are forbidden by Gods laws: so he and all his fellows will
never be able to prove, that the godly among them would at any time admit of
images, unless it were some few that were but to beutify the temple, or that
God commanded to be used in the temple, as the beasts that held up the caldron,
or such like, and the cherubes over the arc, which are no proof for popish
images. For popish images had no commandment, but the images in the temple of
Jerusalem had. Again, the images that were in the temple were not prayed unto,
or any way worshipped, as were popish images. Yea, and if Bellarmine will
believe Josephus a Jew, writing of their story, he shall find that the Jews
were very scrupulous and precise in that point, Iosep. anti. cap. 11. Cap. 4.
insomuch as they would not only suffer the emperors image to be placed in
their temple, but his very banners wherein the emperor was painted from the
waste upward, and those that had the egle painted in them, they would not admit
into their city, though no worship to them were demanded or looked for: and al
because they would not break the second commandment. Whether they did herein
well or evil, I do not define. But hereby it appears how they understood this
commandment, which could not have bin, if their forefathers had at any time
before admitted of images, (other than such as God commanded) to be used among
them. This (I trust) may suffice to prove that images, such as the papists set
in their churches, are idols: and that the haui^^ and ^^ rshipping of the
(...) against the second com^^^^^ meant. Now let us see (...) ^^cuse themselves
(...) doing vnla^^ ull (...) They say they do not worship (...) ^ ut ho^ them
as Gods creatures. Of the worship of Images.
I^^ e (...) ^^ ter of the im^^^ e as the wood or stone is gods ^^ ea^^ e, and
therefore good, and so in their kind to be honored. But the image it self is
the work of men's hands, and none of gods creatures, but a dangerous stumbling
block in the way of the simple, and cursed of God. And this very image it
self, De imag. li. 2 cap. 21.
to speak in Bellar. own words, is, to be worshipped not only by accident or
improperly, but of it self and properly, so that the worship has respect
but unto the image considered in it self, not as it represents that whereof
it is an image. We see then the papists will have their images worshipped. And
then for the external worship, as capping, kneeling, bowing, censing and such
like, De imag. li. 1. cap. 12.
M. Bellarmine confesses, they are al one that are done to God, and to their
images. So that he thinks the difference between the worship of God and the
image only to consist in this, that in the worship of God, the mind is in the
highest degree humbled, and abased with an apprehension of God as the chiefest
good. O miserable blindness that possesses the hearts of these blind guides?
how can it be, that the nature of man, being so inclining to Idolatry, as the
common experience of all times teaches us, having his eyes fastened upon an
Image, and having a purpose to worship it, should not strive to do the
greatest worship that he can do to it, and think that all that he can do
is to little? These colors may well serve the simple, or such as are willing
to be deceived, to make their eyes dazell, that they shall not well judge
between truth and falshoode. But I warrant you that whosoever will set
himself devoutly to pray before an Image, as they use to speak, will humble
himself as devoutly as he can before the same. As for that their distinction
of Latria Latria
which is the worship that they will allow God: and Dulia Dulia.
which is that that other images must be content withal: I need not stand to
confute it. For M. Bellarmine confesses that these words are not of their
own nature proper to divine worship, but that the schoolmen have devised this
distinction. Then let the schoolmen play with such toys, and fight with such
bables. But Gods people should be fed with sounder food. But what means this
caveat that M. Bellarmine gives, De Imaginibus li. 2. c. 22
that a man must not say, especially when he preaches unto the people, that
any images are to be worshipped with that worship that belongs to God? If it
be true, why may not the people know so much? Perchance M. Bellarmine doubts
whether that their opinion will prove true, Ibid. cap. 20
that the same honor is due to the Image that is due to him, whom it
represents. And therefore that the image of Christ should be worshipped with
that worship that belongs unto God. Indeed these their rules can never
prove good, because they are not commanded of God. For it is always in such
things true that Tert. says, De Monogamia.
that which the scripture does not set down, it does forbid. He learned it of
Gods own mouth, who answered the superstitious Jews pleasing themselves in
such services as they had devised, Esaias 1.12.
who required these things of your hands? But as they have no warrant for that
they teach, and therefore ought not of christians to be heard: so their
opinions are in themselves so absurd, that but to show them, is enough to make
such as have any care of their own salvation to shun them. But how shall the
afflicted minds, which would give all that they have for a little comfort,
unto whom the fear of death is nothing, in comparison of the terror of sin:
how shall they find comfort in the conflicts of conscience, when feign they
would ask, but they know not of whom: and pray, but they know not how?
for, if their teachers and Doctors, at their best leisure, can not yet resolve
themselves, how they should pray unto their stocks and stones: how shall he
that has to think of death, and to strive against the assaults of sin, and
many fears, know in such a case which way to turn him? And therefore, as
Cyprian says to the christians that sacrificed to idols, O wretched man, De
lapsis.
why bring thou an offering with thee? when thou come to offer or
entreat, why do thou lay on thy sacrifice? Thou thy self come an
offering and a sacrifice unto the altar: thou have there offered thine own
salvation, thy hope. In those wicked fires thou have burned thy faith. Even so
I may say to those miserable men and women that are carried away after such
vanities, that their own imaginations shall punish them, and They shall eat
the fruit of their own way, Prouer. 1.3^. Prouer. 22.8. Esa. 50.11.
and be filled with their own devises. For it is good reason, that he that
sows iniquity should reap affliction, and see by the sparks of the fire
that he has kindled.

What Fasting is: and of the true use of fasting. CHAP. 30.
THE PROTESTANTS
AS prayer is a good work commanded of God, so is Fasting also in the
scriptures commended unto us. But not because it is of it self good, or a
thing wherein God has delight, but as it is a mean to humble us, and make us
more fit, What fasting is.
any way to serve God. And it is an abstinence from all meats and drinks (but
I speak here of such fastes as upon sudden or extraordinary occasions the
godly have used) and not from flesh only, or from certain meats: we must
therefore fast, not thinking thereby to deserve any thing of God, but only to
tame our selves I mean our flesh, which is many times more unruly tha^ is
expedient, and that the spirit thereby may more earnestly come unto God.
Whereby we learn also the fittest times for fasting to be, either when we see
the flesh rebellious, or dangers at hand.

THE PAPISTS
BUT our adversaries like the ravening fowls that Virgil speaks of, who
defile all that they touch: do also with their superstitions pollute this
christian and necessary exercise: partly, in that they have in fasting a
chiefest regard to make choice of some meats, rejecting others: partly also
in that they have their certain days and times, set down for their fasting,
and those many times in the honor of some of their Saints, and do not regard
such particular occasions as may force men to humble themselves before God: but
especially, because they esteem fasting to be such a work, as is
meritorious, and deserves at the hands of GOD, Bellar. de bonis operibus in
part. lib. 2. cap. 11.
So that thereby he is satisfied, and his wrath and indignation against us
appeased.

Fasting there is, public and private: And of both sorts there are diverse
kinds. But I speak not here of the spiritual fast which is the best, and
without the which the other fasting is nothing else but a mockery. Nether yet
do I speak of that civil abstinence, which in some politic respects is
commanded amongst us, and is many times called a fast. But of those fasts
only do I entreat, which are in question between us and that superstitious
church of Rome, that we knowing the true use of fasting may more use it, and
shun that superstitious and popish manner of fast. Sometime the cause of
fasting, is the mortifying of our flesh, by denying the body that whereby it is
puffed up and made wanton and rebellious. Sometime some imminent danger which
we see hanging over our heads or not far of, or some fear of Gods wrath does
move us unto it. And this is for the most part public and not always after
one manner: Judge. 20.26 Hest. 4.16.
for some fasted the whole day from eating or drinking any thing: Some did
fast so three days together as Hester commanded the Jews. Then was there
another kind of fast wherein they did not abstain from all meats and drincks,
but from delicate fare. 2. Sam. 12.17 ^ Cro. 10.12 Dan. 10, 2.3.
So David fasted seven days when his child was sick. So also did the people
when Saul was dead. And Daniel fasted three weeks, all which time he did nether
eat pleasant bread, nether came flesh nor wine in his mouth. But these are for
the most part private fasts, although not always: for we see the people did
fast after Saul was dead, as it seems, publikly seven days. And of the
first cause of fasting, which I have said is the mortifying of our flesh, and
making us more fit to serve God, perchance we have an example in Anna, who
served God with fasting, Luke 2.37.
and prayers night and day.

But of the second cause of fasting, we have in the Scriptures many examples.
Joshua 7. Judges 20. and in many other places, which for shortness I omit.
And doubtless there is a great fault, I must needs confess, in this our
realm in this point, that that viperous generation of popish tyrants and
traitors, seeking so many ways, by poisoning, fire, murdering, and all
villaynous practices to root out the truth, to make havoc of this our
Country, and to shorten the most quiet government and happy days of so
merciful and gracious a prince, of whose most gentle regiment, they have no
just cause to complain, unless it be that of her tender, and evil rewarded
clemency, and gentleness, she suffers such dangerous popish snakes, so
near her bosom, even in all parts of the Realm, so untouched and almost
unregarded, we, I say, seeing with our eyes, and daily hearing with our ears
of these pestilent, and brutish, and most unnatural practices, and manifest
dangers, do not humble our selves before our God in fasting and prayer. Why
do we not follow the infinite examples of the godly, of all ages, and the
good practice of our near neighbors on every side almost, in such present
peril to proclaim a fast, that with the Ninevites we might cry mightily
unto God? Jonah. 3.8.
But as our enemies have forgotten that they are men, and casting off all
humane nature, are become more brutish than beasts in their practices, and
shame not of any thing that they can do, so that they may work wickedly
enough: so we on the other side do not consider, that through our sins we
have deserved all these shakings of Gods rods over us, and threatenings of his
wrath. And that is the cause that we seek not by public fastings and prayer
to make a public conversion unto God, against whom so publicly we have
sinned. God move the hearts of them that are in authority, to rowse up
themselves at the length, to think better of their duty in this point, and
of our common saftie. For surely he that was angry with his own people, Esa.
22.12.13
because When he called to weeping and mourning, and baldness, and girding
with sacke-cloth, They continued in their careless life that before they led,
so that he said, that Iniquity should not be purged, 14
but by their death: how can he but punish, and that severely, so little
regard in us, of his so many and manifest proclamations of his conceived
anger against us.

And thus would I with one breath, if I could, both move our godly Magistrates
as occasions are offered, to make this our realm better acquainted with this
most Christian and godly exercise: and also let our adversaries, see that it is
not fasting that we speak against, but the abuse thereof, that we justly
reprove. Why then, we confess that fasting is good and commendable, it is a
most godly and necessary exercise to be used. But not every abstinence is
true fasting. First we see, the true use of fasting is not in the popish
church: For the godly did join fasting and prayer together, not thinking that
outward humiliation to be of it self a thing that God regarded, but it was
used and practiced that they might be more apt to pray, as we may see in the
examples that the Scripture ministers unto us. And therefore saint Hierome
writing unto Demetrias says, Epist. ad Demetr.
that Fasting is not it self a perfect virtue, but the foundation of other
virtues. And most plainly saint Chrysostom, Hom. 29. in Genes.
Prayers must always go with fasting. And afterward, You see that fasting
stands in need of this help. And in another place, Hom. 10. in Genes.
he seems not to make any great account of their fasting if it be alone. But
the papists do say, that it does appease Gods wrath, and that it meriteth
forgiveness of sins. For this is their common doctrine, and this does master
Bellarmine endeavor to prove. De bonis operibus in part. li. 2. ca. 11.
The children of Israel (says he) fasting with Samuel, appeased God, and got
the victory over their enemies. In deed there is once mention of fasting in
that place. 2. Sam. 7.6.8.9.
But the story says that Samuel promised to pray for them, when that they
wept: for that he means when he says, They drew water, meaning out of
their hearts, they fasted and confessed their sins: and so little they
regarded the merit of their fasting, that they could not satisfy themselves
therewith, but they also desire Samuel to pray, yea, that he would not cease
to cry unto their God for them. Samuel offered a sacrifice, and prayed for the
Israelites. Mark then how deceitfully master Bellarmine has dealt in this
place. The people wept in abundance, confessed their sins, craved Samuel his
prayers to God for them: he offers sacrifice and prays to God to appease
his wrath: and yet master Bellarmine like a subtle sophister, to make men
believe that that is the cause which in deed is not, speaks nothing of all
these means that they used to entreat God, but only of fasting, as though
that only had turned away Gods wrath, and yet we see by the story, they made
least account of it, but especially of praying. Neither is this a good
argument: They did fast and God delivered them: therefore their fasting merited
this their deliverance. His second proof is out of the example of Achab, who
may in deed be a good pattern of popish meriting, 1. Kin. 22.27 29
for he continued wicked still. But he is in this, much like as faithful as
the other: For Ahab rent his clothes, and put on sackcloath, fasted and lay in
sackecloath, and went softly as men use to do in heaviness. So many tokens
of sorrow or fear did Ahab show, and yet master Bellarmine could see nothing
in him but fasting. And in the story of the Ninevites, Jonah. 3.7.8
which is the third example, they put on sackecloath, sat in ashes, fasted,
(but far otherwise than the Papists do, and therefore what is this to their
fast) cried mightily to God, turned from their wickedness, and God saw (not
their fasting only) their works: but master Bellarmine can see nothing in
them but their fasting. In deed in his fourth example which is the story of
Hester there is no mention in the place cited by him, Hester. 4.16
of any thing that was done, but Hester commanded a fast. But shall we imagine
that they did not otherwise humble themselves but only by fasting, nor seek
to entreat God by prayer, as though this fasting could deserve that they
desired? God forbid. For in the ninth Chapter he says, they did not fast
only, but pray also. Hester. 7.3^.
But as before I said, because they did these things and God delivered them,
does it follow that all the works that they did, merited their deliverance.
Master Bellarmine can never prove that argument. Much less then shall he be
able to teach, that fasting alone could merit. And that is it he would prove,
and in deed that he should prove, or else he proves nothing to serve his
purpose. Judith 4.9.10. ^ 12.13 14.15.
They fasted likewise in the story of Judith, but they also prayed earnestly,
put on sackecloath, sprinkled ashes on their heads, afflicted themselves
maruellously, offered burnt offerings continually, and the peoples free gifts,
crying unto the Lord with all their power. Lastly he alleges out of the
Prophet Joel, Joel. 2.12.
Turn to the Lord with fasting, weeping, and mourning. What then will he
conclude of that, that these things merit or deserve Gods wrath to be turned
away? He cannot prove it. We deny not but God looks upon these things, but
not for the merit of them, but for his own mercies: And therefore master
Bellarmine has not yet proved that fasting does merit. And this is the thing
that he should prove. But on the contrary, A true use of fasting.
in our fasting we acknowledge our selves to be unworthy of Gods creatures,
and that by our sins we have deprived our selves of the use of his
benefits, and deserve not even these his ordinary graces, which the very
beasts themselves may freely enjoy. And in this hearty acknowledging of our
own unworthiness, we prostrate our selves before Gods mercy seat, seeking
for mercy, not pleading, but fearing and refusing our merit.

Now, of this popish opinion of merit by fasting, has sprung up another abuse
in fasting, Of popish fasting days.
That the papists have dedicated these their fasting days, not only to the
service of God (for they supposed that they could by such means please him,
whereas it is all one to him, whether we come full or fasting, so that we
come so, as our hearts may be most sit to serve him) but also to the honor
of their Saints, imagining thereby to deserve some favor at their hands. And
for this cause did they devise to fast upon their Saints Euens, and at such
other times, as we see the Popish Church uses, not so much to tame the flesh,
for that fasting we also affirm to be necessary, neither yet in any politic
respect, which belongs not to our question: but even because they foolishly
think that in so doing they worship God and the Saints, and do a thing
acceptable to him. And to this end is also appointed their lent fast, their
wednesdaie and friday fast, saturday fast, embar fast, the fasts of aduent and
cogation week. But that these cannot be accounted times of necessity to be
kept and observed for fasting in respect of any religious observation of the
same, it cannot better be proved, than by that diversity of opinions and
judgment, which M. Bellarmine himself is forced to confess to be in the
ancient fathers. De bonis operibus in part. li. 2.
As they shall understand that read of the book before alleged the
fifteeneth, the seventeenth, eightteenth and nineteenth chapters. As for their
fastes upon saints eues, they come after all the rest. Seeing therefore there
is herein such diversity, it is plain enough, that neither any certainty of
doctrine can here be gathered, neither can they call it a catholic religion,
that is like Jacobs coat of many colors, far from unity of faith. But with
saint Hillary I may say, In ps. 118. A
It is most hard for a man by the doctors of this world, to understand the
meaning of heavenly precepts. And this I could wish, that at al times we would
strive, by this and other good means, to tame our rebellious flesh: and that
we also would prepare our selves unto the holy exercises of our religion,
either by this or any other way that may further therein: but that fasting it
self does make us acceptable to God, we must not think. And out of this
their opinion of the merit of fasting, arises another most absurd doctrine of
binding the conscience to their laws of fasting, Their laws of fasting bind
not the conscience. Li. 2. de bonis operibus in part. ca. 7. Ierem. 5.6.
as the church of Rome teaches with one consent, as M. Bellarmine confesses.
And he will prove it by the example of the Rechabites, who upon the commandment
of Ionadab their father, abstained from drinking of wine. A weak proof. The
Rechabites obeyed the politic law that their father Ionadab gave them:
therefore the church may bind men's consciences with the law of fasting. It is
one thing to bind the conscience, another thing to require external obedience.
The fast and holy day which is commanded to be continued in the story of
Hester is like unto it, Hester. 9.31.
for a day of remembrance of Gods great benefit toward them, but not to
bind the conscience. Such also is the fast mentioned in Zachary, of the
fourth, fifth, seventh and tenth months, which although it might perchance
upon good and godly consideration be taken up, and we debar none, but
exhort all persons to humble themselves unto the Lord: yet how little their
conscience is bound thereto, it partly appears, because God faith in the
former Chapter that they did not fast unto him, and wills them to harken unto
the ministry of prophets, and to execute true judgment, and show mercy and
compassion every man to his brother, and not to oppress: for these are in
deed good works that God regards, in comparison of which he little
esteems those their fastes. Partly also because God will turn their fasting
into feasting, into joy and gladness and prosperous high feasts, as there he
says. Act. 15.29.
And lastly he brings that law that the apostles set down, of not eating the
blood and things strangled. A law I say, made by the direction of Gods
spirit, as there is witnessed for a law: whereof they can find no such
praise. A law that was made according to the necessity of that time, to avoid
division, and for the better uniting and gathering of the church of the Jews
and gentiles, as M. Bellarmine confesses, and therefore such a law, as
lawfully might be made. For in things indifferent, the church may take order
for the quietness or any other way for the benefit of the fame. Whereby they
would establish a law for ever to bind the conscience. A law I say, which
themselves will confess we are not bound unto, but do against that law that
the apostles made. But how could we break that law if it bound the conscience?
Or if it do not bind the conscience, why does M. Bellarmine bring it to prove
that the church may tie or bind the consciences of the faithful, unto their
laws of fasting?

Thus we see that not one of all the places alleged by him out of the
scripture, does prove the necessity of these laws of fasting, which so
straightly they command. Therefore by the weakness of their proof, we may see
the falsenes of their doctrine. Difference of meats.
Now I come unto the last point of their doctrine which we mislike, which is
the difference of meats that they make. Wherein if they do not conspire with
the Ebionites and sundry other heretics that did condemn flesh as a thing
vnpure: yet it seems that they have bin brought up in the school of the
heretics called Apostolici, Sermon. 66. in Cantica.
of whom S. Bernard reports that they would eat no whit-meate, milk and
whatsoever came of it, or whatsoever was engendered. But our adversaries tell us,
that the Ebionites, Tatianites, Maniches, Priscillianists, and such other
heretics, do utterly condemn flesh, as unclean or unlawful, to be eaten at
any time: But themselves think it only at certain times unlawful. Admit it be
so. If they will not go in the rank with the old heretics, let it then be
an heresy, devised (in such sort as now it is) by popish heretics. De
violandis virginibus.
For if heresy be, Whatsoever sauoureth against the truth, although it be even
an old custom, as Tertullian very well defines it, then doubtless this popish
forbidding of certain meats for conscience sake, will be found heresy. For the
truth says, that they who command to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received with giving of thanks, 2. Tim. 4.1.2.3.
depart from the faith, give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of
devils, and that they speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their
consciences burned with an hot iron. But the church of Rome teaches, that
this is a catholic doctrine, a sound religion. And they that teach it are
good catholics. The church of Rome then sauoureth against the truth, as in
many other articles so in this also, and therefore it is heretical. But I
know their answer, that Saint Paul speaks against the E^bionites,
Tatianites, and such heretics as did utterly condemn flesh as an unclean
thing of it self. It is true he does so, but not against them only, but
rather against the popish heresy than against any other. And that for these
reasons. First the circumstance of the time moves me to it. 1. Tim. 4.1.
For he says that these men shall be in the latter time. Now it were absurd
to think, that he that speaks here by the spirit of prophecy of this
false doctrine, should account for the latter times the times of those
heretics, the world enduring so long after as now it has done. And Ebion
that was the first, as I remember, that devised that heresy, lived in the
days of the apostle, and did sow his seed of that heretical doctrine, very
soon after the apostles death. Yea and Tatian also taught the same heresy,
about some seventy years after Saint Paul. If therefore had saint Paul meant
of that heresy especially, he would never have pointed so far, as to have
told us of the latter days, but rather would have said, that it were at
hand. The apostle therefore had respect chiefly to more dangerous heretics
than they were, that could carry the matter more cunningly than wholly to
condemn the creature. His words also are very plain if we mark them well.
For he does not say that they shall condemn or dispraise meats, which God
has made, which was the heresy of those old heretics: But, they shall
command others to abstain from them, to refuse them, not to receive them:
and this is flat the heresy of the papists. And the apostle confuting this
heresy, does not commend the goodness or pureness of the creature, as it
had been needful for him to have done, if he had chiefly meant his words
against them: but he shows the lawful use of the creature, that it is to be
received, and it is not to be refused. Which especially armeth us against the
Romish infection, for to speak as Saint Ambrose does upon these words,
Ambrose upon these words.
When such doctrines are heard, we may know the devil has devised them.

Thirdly, the apostle seems to have regard unto such as should teach the
doctrine unto that end, that some in his days did among the Colossians, to
put some religion in these outward and bodily exercises, exhorting them thus:
Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish with the using, Coloss.
2.21.22
and are after the commandments and doctrines of men. And thefore the apostle
says by and by after, 1. Tim. 4.8.
that Bodily exercise profits little. Amongst which bodily exercises saint
Ambrose counts fasting. And thus in deed do the papists use their fasts,
thinking that a little pinching of their body, should satisfy for their
sins. Against which foolish persuasion it is a sufficient confutation to say
with the apostle, Coloss. 2.16.
Let no man judge you in meats and drink. Let no man think you worse, for
eating, or better for not eating. Romans 14.17. 1. The. 5.22.
For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy ghost. Now I cannot but marvel, seeing the apostle wills
us to abstain from all appearance of evil, what is the reason that our
adversaries will come so near those heretical opinions, which are so condemned
by the godly of al ages, John. 4.24.
and do not rather seek to worship in spirit and truth as our savior Christ
tells us we must do, than to put any holiness in these external
obseruances, which we see so many heretics have delighted in. I would
therefore exhort our adversaries to be more wise in that point: for they get
them an evil name, by having so great a smacke of such corrupt opinions, and
have had luck in the choice of their obseruances, wherein they notwithstanding
repose a great piece of holiness. For those two things wherein they suppose they
commend themselves very much unto the world, which is forbidding of marriage to
some sort of men, and meats at some times to al, and at al times to some men,
do most evidently bewray their superstitious religion. Wherein they are not
only noted before of the apostle, and pointed at to be had teachers, but also
almost al those heretics that condemned flesh as unholy, were also enemies to
marriage, as in part at the least the papists are. And thus whilst they will
seem more holy then others, in not using holily and with thanks giving; Gods
good ordinance and creatures: they come so near those profane and wicked
heretics that have gone before them, that al good men take them to be a branch
out of that root, and water of the same spring. Bellar. de bonis operibus in
part. li. 2. cap. 5.
But what arguments have they to justify this their doctrine? Master
Bellarmine can affoorde us but one, that makes any show of proof, that flesh
is more unlawful to be eaten than other meats, and that but a simple one.
Dan. 10.3.
It is out of Daniel where he says, I have not eaten any pleasant bread,
neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth. Master Bellarmines arguments are like
to fruit that shows fair at the first, but is rotten at the heart. For, what
can he prove out of this? Daniel abstained from flesh, therefore no man that
will chastise his body must eat flesh. First, that that Daniel did, is no law
to us, because it is not commanded unto us. Secondly, he did it but for a time,
namely, for three weeks: what is this to prove that it must be a continual
law for fasting? He did it voluntarily: what warrant can that be to force
other men to it? But to come to the very point. I would ask of our
adversaries, whether they think that Daniel commends unto us his fast, in
that he abstained from flesh only, or that he abstained from all dainty fare?
If because he abstained from al dainty fare (as saint Hierome in plain words
does expound it, then it makes nothing for the forbidding of flesh only.
Iero. in Dan. cap. 1.
But that is it that the Papists so stiffely maintain, and so superstitiously
hold, that they suppose themselves more to break their fast, in eating but one
bit of flesh, be it never so mean, or of little nourishing, or never so little
whitmeate, than if they should eat a sufficient meal of dainty and
nourishing fish. Now if one should ask them whether one bit or less of flesh
does more pamper our body, than a good quanti^ ie of dainty fish, our
adversaries must needs confess, that a sufficient meal of the one,
nourishes more than the small quantity of the other. And yet a crumme of
flesh does break their fast, and a meal of fish does not. So that they make
the unlawfulness to be in the meat it self: which, how near it comes to
the former heresies, let the world judge. If they do answer, that the
commandment of the church does make it unlawful: I reply, that the church
has not power to take away our christian liberty, neither must in things
indifferent set down a constant and continual order, for all times and places.
And also the reason that master Bellarmine gives, why the church forbade
flesh, is, for taming of the flesh, which in this case set down is more
pampered by the fish. De operibus bonis in part. lib. 2. cap. 4.
And therefore the very respect that their church had in giving this
commandment, makes not simply against the use, but against the abuse of it. So
that still the strait forbidding of the use of flesh, with such scourings,
washings, and cleansings of any thing that has come near flesh as they use to
have, seems to come from no other but those ancient heretics. But they will
not be compared to them: Yet they must not take scorn to be yoked with the
Manichees, whose fastings saint Augustine describes, as like the Popish
fasting as one egg can be like an other, not in their diet only, but in their
opinion of it also. For he there shows how the Manichees using in their
fasts, dainty fare, and much spice, and costly drinks, would yet prefer
their fasts before an other that had not touched a piece of resty bacon with
his lips, whose folly he much inueyeth against. And who knows not, De
moribus Manichaeorum li. 2. c. 13
that the fasts of many (even of them whom they call religious men) amongst
the Papists are more nourishing unto the body, than the best feast that many a
poor man gets throughout the whole year. Yea, one draught of their spiced
cups, is much better than his Christmasse dinner? And yet these men, whose
meanest meal should be a poor man's feast, are said to fast. And the other,
whose greatest fare is with scarcity, does not fast. Let our fast then be an
abstinence from any thing that may pamper the flesh, yet not superstitious,
not joined with opinion of merit, not thinking any meat unlawful, but in
Christian sorrow for sins to humble our selves.

Of Purgatory. CHAP. 31
THE PROTESTANTS
AS for Purgatory we know none, neither any purgation for our sin, or any
remedy for the same, 1. John. 1.7.
but only that blood of Christ which cleanses us from all sin. John. 1.29.
Only that Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, by virtue
whereof because we know our sins are satisfied for, and we reconciled unto
God, as here we cannot, so else where we need not make other attonme^t with god
for them. For he that is so purged shall not perish, John. 3.16. John. 5.24.
he shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life, as he
that cannot lie, has told us.

THE PAPISTS
OUR adversaries teach, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. ca. 2.
that because there are sinners which are not in Christ fully purged, Cens.
Colon dialog. 10.
and we may perchance die before we have done due penance, or fully satisfied
for our sins: therefore there is no remedy but to purgatory we must go. For
although we be reconciled to God by Christ, Cens. Colon ibidem.
and received to his favor, yet is not that sufficient to bring us to heaven,
until we, or others for us, have added somewhat to that satisfaction of Christ.
Se. 6. Can. 30
And he that will teach contrary to this, is accounted accursed by the council
of Trent.

The absurdity of this their doctrine, makes me loath almost to meddle with
it: for, what christian ears can hear the blasphemy of the council of Trent
in the place before alleged, The blasphemous saying of the ^ ouncel of Tre^t,
and the Jesuits.
that there are some (they mean of such as shall dwell with God) that are not
fully purged in Christ? And yet the scriptures do only and wholly ascribe unto
Christ, our perfect redemption, whereof his blood is the price, his death is
our ransom. Or, who can but detest the folly of those Jesuits, who are not
ashamed to write, that God receives such to favor, as he will not suffer to
come where he is, until they have satiffied for their punishment? No, they
blush not to affirm, that God is like to a froward man, who although he can be
content by entreaty to forgive, yet will he not forget the offenses that are
committed against him, but will have them punished with temporal punishments,
either here or elsewhere. Which not to be true, among other the thief upon
the cross may teach us. For what satisfaction did he make for his temporal
punishment? None at all: for Christ said to him, Luc. 23.43
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Yea this example proves, that
it is not according unto Gods justice so to deal. For if he being a
malefactor, had no punishment enjoined unto him, but were freely pardoned,
how can we imagine that God will deal more hardly with other? Again, to say
that we must make any satisfaction, is to overthrow that free grace and mercy
of God, and the only merit of Jesus Christ, and so to diminish the benefit
that we have of his gracious goodness, or to charge him with weakness and
impotencie, as though he were not able without our satisfaction for our
sins, to take away the same. And how doubtfully they set down this their
doctrine, their Writings do testify, to bear witness of their own
uncertainty of that which they do teach. For, Allen that most unnatural
country man of ours (but he that sits in heaven, has defeated his
purposes, and laughed him to scorn) concerning this point he thus sets it
down, that Often there remains a due temporal punishment for satisfaction.
And master Bellarmine says, Defense of purgatory chap. 1. De purgat. li. 1.
cap. 7. Censur. Colon. dial. 10.
that all the temporal punishment is not always pardoned with the sin. And
the Jesuits of Colen say, that this comes often to pass. And so they all
teach, that not always, but often it is so. But this is a very doubtful
doctrine for the afflicted conscience that would feign find comfort and
release of sins. But so must it always be, nothing but doubting, nothing but
wavering, so long as we trust to our own satisfactions. No quietness and
security, but only in Christ. But because I have spoken elsewhere of our
satisfactions or works, how little available they are, I mean not to stay
upon this point. But for the example of David, which is alleged both by
Allen, 2. Sa. 12.14.
master Bellarmine, and the rest, whereby they chiefly endeavor to prove,
that punishment may be inflicted, the sin being pardoned, it makes little
for them. For seeing there are in sin two things, as themselves will
confess, the very corruption it self, and the danger or condemnation that
followe^ h it: the condemnation being taken away by forgiveness of sin, yet
the corruption or infection of sin still remains (as before has been
taught in the three and twentieth chapter. The cause of chasticements. Esa.
48.10.
God therefore sometime chasticeth his servants to humble or reform: So he
chasticed the Jews. Sometime to try and prove them whether their hearts be
right or not: so did he prove the Israelites in the wilderness forty
years. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
Sometime to glorify his own name, and for example to others: as in the
story of Job appears. Then they can not reason thus: David was afflicted:
therefore it was to satisfy for his sin. For God we see may send affliction
for many other causes, and not that we might satisfy any thing by temporal
punishment. But master Bellarmine replieth against this answer out of the very
words. For there it is said, 2. Sam. 12.14
Because thou have caused the ennemies of the Lord by this thy deed to
blaspheme, the child that is borne to thee shall surely die. Where he notes
the cause says master Bellarmine, why David should be punished. True, but not
thereby to satisfy for that he had done: But that the enemies of God seeing
the chasticements that God lays upon his children, and how that Gods
judgments begin even at his own house, and with his own dear servants, 1.
Pet. 4.17.
they may the rather look for his heavy wrath, if they turn not to him. And
thus much for the right understanding of the place. But what is this to
purgatory, for David's sin was mortal, and therefore could not be helped by
purgatory, by their own doctrine? De purgat. li. 1. cap. 9.
for M. Bellarmine says, they al agree therein. To what end then do they bring
in David's punishment for a mortal sin, to show how God will take away
venial sins? or how does it follow, David was here punished for his sin,
therefore all men here or else where must be punished. But to handle this
question as briefly as I can, master Bellarmine himself, does handle it
doubtfully, Iren. lib. 5.
and so uncertainly, yea, and as Irene speaks so vnconsequently, and so evil
agreing with it self, that he gives just cause to suspect the truth of it.
Where the place of purgatory is they have not yet agreed, Bellar. de purg. li.
2. c. 6 Cap. 6.
but are of eight sundry minds. And although in the first book of purgatory
master Bellarmine has alleged sundry fathers for proof of it: Cap. 1.
yet in the second book he tells us that they are not agreed of it, who
shall come thither. Some will have all but Christ, neither will exempt from
thence so much as the virgin Marie, others are of another mind. But who must
satisfy for them that are in purgatory? De purg. li. 2. cap. 17.
only he that is just. Why then where shall they find priests to serve the
turn. For they are commonly as bad as who is worst. And the time will scarcely
serve them to reckon up their own, Li. 2. cap. 10 de purgat.
much less shall they be able to satisfy for others sins. Other doubts also
there are which M. Bellarmine speaks of, but cannot certainly resolve. Is
this doctrine to be received as catholic, of so many points whereof even the
greatest Doctors among them do disagree. No certain place, no certain
people, no certain proof of it. What should we do with such an uncertain
religion, especially where so little good comes toward us, and so much of
our goods go from us? For only venial sins they tell us, Venial sins
only taken away in purgatory.
can be taken away by purgatory. But for such small faults, because they do
not (as the Papists would make us bebeleeue) turn us from God, they can tell
us many mo easy remedies, Holy bread, holy water, giving a little alms,
pardons, Pilgrimages, Pater nosters, and Auies. And to be buried in a Monks
Cowle, and boots, it is a sovereign remedy for such things, or else they
lie. But one thing I cannot but muse at, that in this life these venial sins
may so easily be satisfied for, as they all agree: and yet after this life
their torments should be so grievous as they report them to be. For master
Bellarmine bestows a whole Chapter to prove the pains of Purgatory to be
most bitter, De purgat. li. 2. cap. 1^.
and that no torments that are in this life, may be compared with them.

Can a little holy water wash them away here, and must the fire be so sharp
that must burn them away elsewhere? But I think I know now the mystery
of it. The more that men's sins are here mittigated, or the less grievous
that they appear unto their judgment, the less careful will they be to
satisfy for the same here, or rather to avoid them, and will live more
securely. But when upon their deathbed, they shall find any conflict of
conscience, and can find no rest, then must they give much for Masses and
Trentals: then must the bellows of the Priests false and lying tongues, blow
the fire of purgatory, until they have made it so hot, that a great piece of
that which he has left behind him, and should serve for the maintenance of
wife and children, must be bestowed in the slaking of that great heat, and
the quenching of that tormenting, and insatiable fire.

De purgat. lib. ^. cap. 3.
Now for his proofs of purgatory out of the scriptures, they have either so
little weight, or are so obscure, and so wrested from their natural sense, that
the simplest (if without partiality they could weigh them) would find them too
light, to satisfy their consciences to be persuaded of the truth of that
doctrine. The two first, the one of the Machabees, 2. Mac. 12. Tob. 4. 1. Sam.
31.30 2. Sam. 1.12
the other of Tobie, are out of the books that are not Canonical, and
therefore can prove nothing. Thirdly, the inhabitants of Iabes Gilead fasted
when Saul was dead seven days, and David mourned and fasted for Saul and
Jonathan. It may be thought (says master Bellarmine) although they seemed to
do it in token of heaviness, yet that they did it especially to help the
souls departed. So here we must take master Bellarmines, it may be thought,
2. Sam. 12.17
as a proof for purgatory. But how he will prove it, out of David's fasting
and prayer for his child while it was alive, I can not see, and he cannot well
tell us. But whereas master Bellarmine, most falsely, without all warrant
affirms, that this was the cause why the Patriarchs so carefully desired
burial in the land of promise, as Jacob and Joseph did, that they might be
partakers of the prayers there made, Gene. 47.30 Gene. 50.25 In Gene. Hom. 65.
and the sacrifices there offered, Chrysostom tells us it was for another
cause, namely to assure their posterity, that the promised land at the length
should be theirs. And this he confirms by Scripture, Gene. 50.25
even by Joseph his words: Surely God will visit you, and you shall carry my
bones hence. Fourthly, Psalm. 38.1.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy wrath. Where is
purgatory here? Chastise me not in thy wrath, that is, Let me not be in
purgatory. No authority of man, no credit of person can make this a good
proof. His fifth place, We went through fire and water, Psalm. 66.12.
and thou broughtest us into this wealth, shows how God had dealt with his
people here, but what is this to purgatory, which is else where? or what is
this to prove our state that must be hereafter? Sixthly, Esa. 4.4.
The Lord shall wash the filthiness of the daughters of Sion, etc. with the
spirit of burning. Now this burning must needs be in purgatory fire, master
Bellarmine thinks, Iero. in Esa. 4. Math. 3.
otherwise here is no proof for purgatory. But S. Hierom expounds it by
that place of Matthew, Esa. 9.18.
He shall baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire. The seventh, Wickedness
burns as fire: it deuoureth the briers and thorns. What is there no torment
of sin, or for sin here, none else where but that purgatory must needs be
proved out of this? Let the indifferent reader judge of it. The eight place,
Mich. 7.8.9.
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall, I shall rise, when I shall
sit in darkness, the Lord shall be my light, I will bear the wrath of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him. Li. 2. in Mic. 7
Saint Ierom expounds these words to be the words of Jerusalem to Babylon,
that the Babylonians should not rejoice at their captivity. What proof is
this for purgatory? Perchance they were in purgatory in Babylon, that was not
this popish purgatory, which they would pick out of it. Ninthly, he will
prove it by that lake that Zachary speaks of, Wherein is no water. Zach.
9.11.
Where the prophet speaks of their deliverance out of Babylon. But if we will
have it expounded figuratively, S. Hierom understands of that lake wherein
the rich man was, and that was a place out of which he could not come. Lastly,
Malac. 3.3.
the place in Malachie, is to this effect, that he will sanctify the priests,
that they may offer holy offerings. What? And shall they come out of purgatory
to offer sacrifices? If not, he might have spared this place, as also all the
rest. For there is not one that has any show of proof of that, for which they
are brought. Surely, fit for these proofs, were that conclusion which I
remember a preacher in Queen Mary's time made in a funeral sermon. Nec est
qui se abscondat a calore eius, Neither can any man escape purgatory. And was
not this clearkely handled? Psalm. 19.6.
The prophet speaks of the sunn whose heat none can hide themselves from, and
he perchance in a dream or some vision, learned to expound it of purgatory.
But here I must admonish the reader, that in most of these places alleged. M.
Bellarmine brings perchance some one in, or some mo of the fathers so
expounding the same: but therein he plays but the part of Cham, Gene. 9.22.
who hid not, but proclaimed the nakedness of his father. De purg. li. 1. cap.
4.
It had been his part rather, to have buried in silence, those their
senseless and singular interpretations. But now let us see what he brings
out of the new Testament? Whosoever shall speak against the holy Ghost, Mat.
12.32.
it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come: therefore, say they, some men's sins be remitted in the world to come.
Mark. 3.29.
But Saint Mark coming after saint Matthew expounds his words, He shall
never have forgiveness, but is culpable of eternal damnation. A direct answer
to their objection. Secondarily, they object out of saint Paul, ^. Cor. 3.15
Himself shall be safe, yet as it were by the fire. Out of saint August. M.
Bellar. confesses this place to be hard, and in deed is diversely expounded, by
reason of the hardness of it: and therefore, out of an uncertain place, he
cannot gather a certain argument. But of purgatory it cannot be meant,
because he makes this fire a trial of every man's work, De ciuit. dei. li.
22. cap. 26.
as saint Augustine well notes. And though themselves shall be saved, yet is
it as it were by fire. But I trust they will never thrust saint Peter and the
other apostles into purgatory. Yea, they teach that some come not there.
Therefore this fire whereby Every man's work is tried, cannot be purgatory.
Saint Augustine in the place named, thinks it to be tribulation. Saint
Ambrose seems to expound it of the confusion of mind. Ambrose upon this
place. 1. Cor. 15.29
But of purgatory, I have showed it cannot be meant. His third proof is far
fetched, even beyond all compass of reason, What shall they do that are
baptized for dead? that is, (says master Bellarmine) what shall they do that
pray, fast, mourn, and afflict themselves for the dead. So that to pray, fast,
or lament, if we will believe master Bellarmine, is to be baptized. Has he
not wrung hard, think you, to wring such a meaning out of these words? To
point unto his folly, I trust, is sufficient confutation of it. Mat. 5.26.
Fourthly, Thou shall not come out thence, until thou have paid the uttermost
farthing, therefore it must be paid, say they,. First in the words, there is
no such necessity. Joseph knew not Marie, Mat. 1.25.
until she had brought forth her first begotten son, that is, as they will
confess, never. So we say, in that place, thou shall never come out thence.
Secondly, the place is wholly parabolical, and therefore out of such speeches,
infallible arguments cannot be gathered, Thirdly saint Augustine by this prison
means hell, De salut. docu. cap. 64
from whence the sinner shall never come. Now what is this to purgatory? The
fifth place alleged by master Bellarmine, is out of the same chapter, Mat. 5.22.
Whosoever is angry with his brother, etc. Here master Bellarmine gathers
out of S. August. that all these punishments belong to the life to come. Then
also that there are three sorts of sins. De ser. dom. in mont. li. ^
He might also have told us out of S. Augu. that in Gods judgment, anger that
is the least of these sins, deserves hell. But that makes against
purgatory, and therefore he would not see it. And it is most certain, that our
savior Christ there teaches us, that ye commandment, Thou shall not kill, is
sundry ways broken: Neither can out of these words be gathered, that there
must be satisfaction after this life, which Bellar. would prove. Moreover he
reasons out of S. Luke, Make you friends of riches of iniquity, Luke 16.9.
that when you shall want, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.
If by friends in this place we should understand the saints, yet it makes not
for purgatory, as may appear. For in this argument there can be no necessary
consequence. The saints must receive us into heaven: therefore we must go by
purgatory: but the saints cannot neither must they have that honor given to
the^, that they should receive us into the everlasting habitations: Mat. 25.34.
it is Christ that must say Come ye blessed: He must give that inheritance,
that has bought it with his precious blood: or else a man may give it unto the
wicked, that shall never come there, or to such as out live him, neither of
which can be there to receive him. By all which reasons it appears, that in
those words our savior Christ does but allude unto such as whilst they have
ability, do make others their friends. So would he have us whom God has made
his stewards, with well using of our riches to please God, that he also of his
gracious goodness may show mercy to us. Luke 23.42.
Seue^thly, Remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, said the thief
that was put to death with Christ, therefore says master Bellarmine, he
thought that sins might be after this life remitted. So that this is his
meaning, as the papists would persuade us: remember me, that is, let me be
prayed for when I am dead. Verse. 43.
But they do not remember how Christ promised he should not come in purgatory,
but be with him even that day in Paradise. His eight place, He loosed the
sorrows of death (so it is in greek, Act. 2.24.
but M. Bellarmine that he might get an argument out of that place, would
have us read the sorrows of hell.) It is not worth answering, because he
must alter the words, or else he must have one argument fewer than he looked
for. His last place himself misliketh, and thinks it not to prove any thing
for them, and therefore I will not speak of it. Now for their arguments out
of the fathers, he that will but indifferently consider of them shall find
the fathers to be in this point very uncertain. And the question being
amongst us, whether purgatory be a catholic doctrine, we have not to regard
what they in their private and doubtful opinions do set down, but what with
one consent and constantly they teach. Seeing therefore that neither the
fathers with one consent teach it, neither themselves know well what to say
of it, as in many places of master Bellarmine his two books of purgatory may
appear: I will conclude with that golden saying taken out of Gelasius a pope.
We read that Christ raised the dead, Causa. 24. Q. 2. ca. legitur.
but that he absolved such as died in error we do not read. And afterward
speaking of the authority of binding and loosing, given in those words, Math.
16.1^.
Whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, etc. Gelasius thus infers, In earth
says he: for he that is dead being bound, he said not that he should be
absolved, or loosed.

An abridgement of Vincentius Lirinensis: with some observations upon the said
Author. CHAP. 32.
NOw in steed of a conclusion unto this treatise of controversies, I have
thought good to draw into a brief sum that book of Vincentius Lyrinensis
against heresies, which is so much alleged against us. Whom because they so
confidently produce against us in defense of their cause, I take his authority
to be so much the stronger against them, that even by the judgment of their
own witness (for so they reckon him) they may be convinced of newness and
falsehood in their doctrine, and of untruth in challenging to their errors the
name of catholic faith, and to themselves of catholic men or women. But
before I come to the treatise it self, that we may the better understand upon
what occasion he so greatly accounts of the ancient tradition of holy men,
for the interpretation of the scriptures: first we must persuade our selves,
that this learned father could not be ignorant of that way to find out the
true meaning of the scriptures, which the godly fathers a little before his
time had set down, namely by conferring one place with another, and by waying
the circumstances of the place it self. As S. Hillary de trin. li. 1. Ambr. in
Psalm. 118. Sermon. 8. Hierom upon Esaias. 19.1. Basil in reg. breu. quaest. 267.
Chrysostom upon Genesis hom. 12. And saint Augustine in many places have plainly
taught. Neither yet must we imagine, that Vincentius contrary to that which
himself teaches throughout this whole book, would that this his rule should
be accounted the only way to find out the truth of Gods word, and that
which so many before him with such a full consent have taught us should be
rejected. Therefore it is cettaine that his meaning is, to such godly ways as
others before him have used for trial of the truth, to add this also as a rule
that may be profitable, and do much good, if it be used wisely, and truly
considered of. And the rather did he teach us this way, because the Pelagians
so boldly and confidently preferred their new doctrine before the ancient
faith, whereof this author complains fol. 15. And Nestorius condemned all
that were before him as if they knew nothing in comparison of himself, as we
may see fol. 54. For this cause Vincentius teaches us in this his book which
he therefore calls Commonitorium, an admonition or caveat to avoid the new
devises of private men, and to hold fast the ancient faith of the universal
church. And yet although Vincentius Lyrinensis did then see, that that which
was then catholic and ancient it was also true, and therefore that then it
was a good rule to try doctrines by: yet the argument of the Church of Rome is
too too foolish when thus they reason. This religion is old, and has had
approbation of the greatest number for some hundredes of years: therefore it
is good. For Vincentius did look unto that faith that was then ancient and
catholic, many hundred years before many articles of popish religion were
hatched. But the papists think it enough for them, if they can prove their
religion to be now old. Whereas in truth, and according to Vincentius his
rule also, that which was not then old, is not now good. That which was not
then catholic, is now of all good men to be rejected. But let us see what
Vincentius says.

After that he has declared, how that by opportunity of time and place he
was moved to write: he shows that to find out the falshoode of heresies
there are two ways. The one by the authority of Gods word, Gods word
sufficient.
Whose rule is perfect, and of it self suffices for all things abundantly:
Yet because it is diversely expounded (such is the depth thereof) as by example
of sundry heresies does appear: The second way to find out heresies he
makes this: By the tradition and rule of the catholic Church to interpret
that which is set down, in the writings of the Prophets and apostles. But so
as we take heed, that we receive not for Catholic, every thing that is
holden in the Catholic Church: Catholic
but that only that is believed in all places, and so has universality, at
all times, and so has antiquity, of all or almost all the godly and learned,
and so has consent. So that a Catholic Christian must more regard the
soundness of the whole body, than a part thereof that is corrupted.

And where the infection is general, that which has been taught of old, is
to be preferred before the new. But before the ancient error of two or
three, or of one city or cuntry, a man must prefer that which universally,
the universal Church has decreede, if any such be. If not, then he must
consider of the judgments of the sincerest fathers, not of a few of them,
but of all. What they have holden, written, taught, When the fathers a^^ to be
believed.
with one consent, plainly, often, not changing their mind, that he may
boldly believe. So did the godly fathers in Africa, against Donatus, and also
others against that heresy of the Arrians that had infected almost al
christendom, and caused great destruction and cruelty, because there were
brought in superstitions invented by men, in steed of the Heavenly doctrine,
as is proved out of saint Ambrose, and new devises for ancient decrees. Yea so
they withstoode all heresies, whilst in the very antiquity of the church they
defended that only that was also universal, that is to say, Ancient
Universality. Ancient universality.
And the more devout that men were, the more stiffly did they oppose themselves
to new inventions. As for example, Stephen bishop of Rome with his associates,
did set themselves against the new opinion of Agrippinus bishop of Carthage,
yea and against the council of Carthage. For he knew that nothing can in
account be godly, We must follow religion and not lead her.
Unless all things were sealed up to the children as faithfully, as the
fathers received them. And that we must not lead religion, which way we will,
but follow her which way she will go. And that it be seems not christian
modesty or gravity, to deliver to their posterity any thing of their own,
but to preserve that which is received from the fathers. And by occasion of the
Donatistes, who under color of the decrees of the council of Carthage, said
that they baptized again such as were baptized by heretics, he teaches
that some deceivers going about in some other bodies names, to set forth their
own heresy, A lively description of popish teaching.
Do snatch some of the writings of the ancient fathers, such lightly as are
most obscurely written, which for their obscurity, may after a sort agree
with that they teach, to this end that whatsoever they say, they may be
thought, neither first, nor only to say it. Whose fault is double, both in
that they broach heresies, and also open that in the fathers which should be
hidden, as did Cham: whose reward upon him and his posterity should fear
them. But to alter the faith, or corrupt religion, men should be afraid, not
only in respect of ecclesiastical discipline, but also in regard of the
censure of the apostle against such. Gal. 1.6.7. 2. Tim. 4.3. 1. Tim. 5.12.
Romans 16.17. 2. Tim. 3.6, 7. Tit. 1.16. 1. Tim. 3.1. 1. Tim. 6.4, 5. 1. Tim.
5.13. 1. Tim. 1.19. 1. Tim. 2.16, 17. 2. Tim. 3.9. Such a^^ our Seminary
prists, who for their own benefit endanger many, not men only, but even
countries.
And because there came amongst the Galathians such as carried about errors
and set them on sale, whom the Galathians hearing, did loathe the truth,
vomiting the Manna of Apostolic and catholic doctrine, liking well of the
filth of novelties, the apostle denounces that they should not hear either
the apostles or an angel from heaven if he should preach any thing besides
that he had preached Gal. 1.8, 9. And this caveat belongs not to the
Galathians only, no more than the other precepts of godly life, so that it has
not been, is, or shall be lawful, for catholic christians to teach any thing
besides that that they have received. And to hold accursed al those, Take heed
of believing unwritten traditions.
who preach any thing else, than that which is Once received, it always has
been, is, and shall be our duty: So that to preach any thing else is too
much boldness: and to hear any thing else is too much lightness. Although
some frogs, midges, and flies, of a short time, such as the Pelagians cry
against it, seeking to draw us from that, which has been committed unto us
by our fathers: and notable persons are thus many times infected, Why the
learned are heretics.
because God will by them prove whether men love God unfeignedly or not,
Deuteronomie 13.3. But this is a dangerous tentation, and may deceive many, as
by Nestorius, Photinus, and Apollinaris may appear: whose heresies he
describes, as also the catholic doctrine, with some confutation of
Arrianisme, and Manicheisme, and the other forenamed heresies. Against which
danger of being by such men deceived, he would have us to hold this property
of true catholics, How ^^ rre the fathers are to be heard.
with the Church to receive the Doctors, but not with the Doctors to forsake
the faith of the Church.

Then having showed the danger that the great learning of Origin and
Tertullian brought unto the Church when they erred, he repeateth trial, to
be cause of heresies many times, A true catholic.
and then gathers, Him to be a true catholic who loves Gods truth, the
church, the body of Christ, who esteems nothing more than Gods religion,
than the catholic faith, Not the authority of any man, not the love that he
bears him, not his wit, eloquence or philosophy. But despising all these,
steadfast, and settled in faith, does make reckoning, that he must hold and
believe only, whatsoever he knows the catholic church of old believed. He
confirms also that heresies are for the trial of the godly by S. Paul 1.
Cor. 11.19. with a long and lively description, of such as are wavering and
doubtful in faith, maruelling much at their madness, that content not
themselves with the rule of faith, The Papists are possessed with this mad
spirit.
which of old once has been received, but day by day seek new things, and
delight always to put something to, or to change, or to take somewhat from
religion. Not remembering that it is a heavenly doctrine which once to be
revealed suffices, but as if it were an earthly institution, which cannot be
perfected, but by continual mending or rather controlling it. This chopping
and cha^ging in religion, he proves to be dangerous by three other testimonies
of scripture, Prouer. 22.28. Eccl. 8, 17. Eccle. 10.8. but especially insisteth
upon that of Saint Paul 1. Tim. 6.20. O Timothe, keep that which is committed
unto thee, and avoid profane and vain babbling, and opposition of knowledge
falsely so called, And shows what is meant by this word depositum. What is
meant by That which is committed to thee.
That which is committed: that is, that which thou art trusted with, not that
thou deuisedst: that thou have received, not invented: a matter not of thine
own wit, but of an others teaching: not for thy private use, but for to
deliver to all. A thing brought to thee, not brought forth by thee: wherein
thou may be, not the Author, but the keeper: not the teacher, but the
scholar: not the leader, but the follower. This, as pure gold must be kept
pure without corruption. It must be beautified and fitted, but in any wise we
must So teach that we have learned, We must teach no new thing. Growing in
faith but no changing.
that when we speak after a new manner, yet we bring no new matter. Yet we
must grow, and the faster the better. So that it be but growing and not
changing. In the very same doctrine, the same meaning, the same understanding.
Even as children grow in their body, but are the same that they were. But if
any parts or members should be added, or turned into another shape, it were a
monstrous thing. Such and no other must be our growing in religion, to no
other, but to more perfection in the same. which he also makes manifest by
the example of wheat, Which being sown by our fathers in the primitive church,
must be husbanded and dressed by us, but the seed must not be changed. Yea
in these plants of religion, we may, nay we must use all diligence to trim
them and dress them, but to change them, to mangle or maime them, it is great
wickedness. Yea they must still keep their Fullness, sincerity, and property.
He seems to have prophesied of the mischiefs of popery.
For do but once give liberty to this deceit (of cutting or corrupting the
Scriptures) and religion is in danger to be quite overthrown. If some may
be cut off, naught will be left, if some may be mingled, naught will be
pure and sincere. The true church keeps safely her own.
But the Church of Christ is a careful and wary keeper of doctrines left
unto her, she never changes any thing, diminishes it not, adds nothing.
She cutteth not of things necessary. She puts not to things needelesse.
She does not leese her own, she will have nothing that belongs to others.
Yea and in all her Councels the church did nothing else, but set down that in
writing, which before was known only by tradition, and utter by new terms,
The councels taught nothing in faith new. Teachers of news must be avoided.
matters of faith not new. We must also by all means possible shun and avoid
such as bring not the catholic and universal doctrine, which has continued
one and the same from age to age, by one undefiled tradition of the truth, and
shall continue for ever without end.

And this newness of words the Apostle calls profane, because it has in
it nothing holy, nothing religious. These profane novelties therefore we must
avoid: for, to receive them is the manner, not of catholics, but of heretics.
The words thus [ ] included, I was loath to leave out, because the Papists
brag much of them, as though they did mightily convince us to be heretics.
And yet if a man do well consider of them, he may justly doubt whether they be
Vincentius his words, or added since, because they are brought in so
impertiuently to his matter, and nothing in all the book either before or after
that sounds that way. But, admit that they are his words, it is no hard
matter to prove this, in very many of the doctrines of the church of Rome,
because therein they do iumpe and draw in one yoke with the old heretics, of
whom the stories mention, by whom, how, and when they began. But they will
tell us their doctrines were not condemned by any council, which they profess.
And how could they, when they that taught them had gotten the sovereignty over
princes and prelates? Yea, he whom they call the catholic king, as in some
respects they may truly, not because he loves catholic religion. (For in a
man of so excessive greediness intolerable pride, and unnatural cruelty, as
many of his practices and purposes show him to be, what religion can there be?)
but because he scarcely can coment himself with the whole world, this man (I
say) usurps Navarre, and intrudeth himself into the kingdom of Portingal.
And yet so long as he rules them, their parleaments or councels dare not, no,
they can not proclaim him to be an usurper or an intruder into other men's
right, although he is so: neither would our savior Christ have regarded any
thing this defense, that the Scribes and Pharisees and Priests of the Jews
might have used. In what coun^ el was that condemned that we teach? but on the
contrary he tells that by their power and authority, they shut up the
kingdom of heaven before men, and suffer not them that would enter, Math.
23.13. And so did the Church of Rome.
[What heresy has been at any time, but it has been under some certain
name, in some certain place, at some certain time?] And no man does
maintain any heresy, but that he first separateth him self from the consent
of the universality, and antiquity of the catholic church. As he proves by
the examples of Pelagius, Celestius, Arrius, Sabellicus, Nouatianus, Simon
Magus, Priscilianus. Yea, but Heretics do allege Scripture for all in a
manner that they say, and therefore are they the more dangerous. And that
practice did Satan use before against our savior Christ. But how then shall
catholic men know how to judge between truth and falshode in the holy
Scriptures? Interpreting scripture.
even by interpreting the same according to the traditions of the universal
church, and the rules of the catholic doctrine, and the consent that has
been at all times, and in all places amongst the teachers.

And yet not every question must be thus decided, This way is to be used only
in the greatest matters.
but only matters of faith, such as the very foundation of catholic doctrine
rests upon (for so he says after fol. 50.) neither are al heresies thus to
be confuted, and at al times, but only new heresies, even at their first
beginning, And lately sprung up heresies.
Before they have falsified the rules of the ancient faith, and the writings of
the fathers. But old heresies which have had long time to steal away the truth
must be co^uinced if need be, Stealing the truth, such then^^ are the papists,
as their coorupting the fathers proves. When the fathers must be heard.
by the only authority of scripture, or must be shu^ned, as being condemned in
the old councels. As for heresies newly sprung up, they, by the judgments of
the fathers are to be rejected, of those fathers (I say) that continued in the
faith: so that al, or most of them, have set it down, in one and the self same
meaning, plainly, and often, continuing in it, as it were in a council of such
masters, agreeing in one. And such a full consent must not be despised. Then he
makes a recapitulation of that which he has said in these two caueats, and
induces the example of the council of Ephesus, wherein the judgment of the
ancient fathers being examined, Nestorius was found to be against the catholic
old faith, and Cyril to agree with holy antiquity. And to make the matter more
plain, he sets down the names of those holy fathers, by whose uniform
consent and judgment, both the testimonies of Gods law were expounded, and
also the rule of the holy doctrine was established. And so reckons up sundry
of the Greek church, then also of the Latin and west churches: wherein he
makes mention of certain leters written unto some from Foelix and Julius two
bishops of Rome. And, Bellarm. de Roman. pontif. lib. 2. cap. 16. endeavors
by this testimony to prove the Pope to be head of the church. But consider (I
pray you) how neglige^tly he performs it. Vincentius says that the city of
Rome was the head of the world: and we confess whilst the empire flourished
it was so called, as by the stories appears. Now he proves by this that the
pope is head of the church, by a strange Metamorphosis changing the city into
the Pope, and the world into the church, contrary to the Author his words or
meaning.
that not only [The head of the world:] but the sides also might yield their
testimony to that judgment, Cyprian and Ambrose consented thereunto. And
lastly he confirms this by the judgment of Capreolus bishop of Carthage, who
endeavored to overthrow newnes, and to defend antiquity. Which was also
approved by Cyrils testimony, who would have the doctrines of the ancient
faith confirmed, New doctrine condemned.
and that which is new, and superfluously invented, and wickedly published, to
be rejected, and condemned, whereunto the whole council agreed. And though
there were many in that Council, The council of Ephesus ^^ rst devise no new
doctrine,
men of singular great learning, and in such sort gathered together (which
might have imboldned the^ to decree somewhat of their own) yet would they alter
nothing, but took all heed possible, that they delivered nothing to their
posterity, but that they had received of their predecessors, leaving also to
them that example. Ancient faith, the only good faith.
He inueigheth against the pride of Nestorius in defense of antiquity,
alleging that of Xistus bishop of Rome, Let not newness do any thing,
because it is not fit any thing should be added unto antiquity. And that of
Caelestinus, who would not have Newness to trouble antiquity. Whose meaning
is not that antiquity should cease to overthrow newness, but that newness
should cease to molest antiquity. Which thing whosoever will not yield unto,
he must despise the authority of Celestinus, Xistus, Cyril, Capreolus, the
council of Ephesus, who all had learned of God to decree, that not any thing
should be delivered to their posterity, but that only, that sacred
antiquity of the holy fathers, and agreing with it self in Christ did hold:
yea not to yield unto this, is to justify Nestorius by them condemned, and to
despise the whole Church of Christ, The praise of the church to keep the faith
deliu^ red to her, not to invent a new.
and the teachers therein the Apostles and Prophets, but especially the Apostle
saint Paul. The Church of Christ, I say, that never yet departed from a
religious reuerencing and adorning of the faith delivered to her, by saint
Paul, who said, O Timothy, keep that which was committed to thee, avoiding
newness of words, And, Ifanie preach to you any other thing, than that you
have heard, let him be accursed. And if neither the laws of the apostles, nor
decrees of the church are to be broken, according to which heretics are
worthily condemned: it behooves all men, that will be accounted the true
children of their mother the church, to stick even to the death, True children
of holy church.
unto the sacred faith of their holy fathers, and to hate that that is new.

Thus have I set down, I trust, truly and faithfully, the sum of this whole
treatise of Vincentius Lyrmensis, especially whatsouer may be thought pertinent
to the matter for which the Papists so triumphingly allege him. And as I
endeavored to be short, yet so that I omit not any material point by him
touched, so that his meaning may the better appear, I have (as near as I
could) kept his own words: yea, I have set down even his most material
sentences, that his whole mind and intent, may the better be known unto the
Reader. Judge now, I pray thee, Christian Reader, what Catholic and ancient
faith it is that the Church of Rome so much braggeth of. Compare it with this
that Vincentius commends. If they be any thing like, I desire no credit. I
will but give thee a taste hereof, even out of one of their chief points of
their Religion. Cap. 2.
I have showed before even by their own confession, that traditions must
needs be admitted, or else the Church of Rome must needs fail in proof in
many articles of their Religion. Their Religion therefore in such points cannot
be Catholic. It cannot be that which was Committed to Timothy, which was Once
delivered, as Vincentius speaks often: whose growing is without change, whose
perfection is without addition, so that their doctrine of traditions, is a
strong argument to prove that their faith is not Catholic, according to
Vincentius rules. Then also we see how plainly he defines, that old heresies
must not be confuted by such arguments, but only such as are newly sprung up.
And yet the Papists, whose religion is almost nothing, but a sink of such old
and unsavory heresies, cry still to be tried by their universality, and
antiquity, and the judgments of men, flat contrary to Vincentius his rules.
And this trial he will not have to be used but in great questions of faith,
but they make it a proof for their most foolish toys. So that although they
readily call him in, because he names Antiquity, universality and consent,
unto the which they would feign seem to make claim, yet they will (I trust)
from henceforth rather stop his mouth, than suffer him to speak, because
his witness is their overthrow. Let us therefore keep that faithfully, which
is once delivered unto us, which to change, is to mar it: to put to it, or
take from it, is to corrupt it, Let us hold (I say) that faith which is
always old, and always one, knowing that whatsoever we hold besides it, it
is not new only, but even stark naught also:

An exhortation to Christian Magistrates, for to defend this truth. CHAP. 33.
THus hitherto have I stood in defense of christian truth against popish
falsehood, indeuouring according to my simple talent and slender skill, not
only to admonish you of the baggage dross which they bring unto us in steed of
fine gold, what filthy water they would have us to drink for pure wine: but
also in the balance of truth, to try what stuff it is, wherewith they seek
to comend the same unto us. And although the due acknowledging of mine own
manifold wants and weakness, did discourage me a long time to enter into these
lists: yet the readiness that I see in many to take hold of the shadow of
truth, neglecting in the mean time the body of the same: and on the other
side the simplicity of others, to discern between light and darkness, good
and evil: to stay the first, and to help the latter sort, I have thought good
at one view, to set before thine eyes (gentle reader) that truth that we teach,
that thou may know how they have slaundered it: and that falshoode which
they maintain, with some touch of their chief arguments, that thine own
self although ignorant and unlearned, may have some trial of their corrupt
doctrines. Now the especial cause that moved me to take upon me this
enterprise (God is my witness) is that duty that I, and such as I am do owe
to the defense of the truth by word, or writing, or any such means, whereby
we are bound to occupy until our Lord and master come, the talent that he
has committed unto us, to his most gain and glory. Neither can I satisfy my
self, that I have thoroughly performed my duty, when I have set down what is
truth, and what is falsehoode: unless I endeavor also to stir up all
Christian magistrates to the defense thereof, to their uttermost power, in
singleness of heart: whom for that cause God has set in high rooms, and to
whom God has committed that great charge, and at whose hands he shall call
for a strait account for that duty. Psa. 10.11.12
Be wise therefore now, O kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the earth:
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling. Kiss the son least he be
angry. And if you will know how princes may, nay, how princes must serve the
Lord in fear, Saint Augustine teaches it: Epist. 50
In forbidding and punishing with religious severity, those things which are
done against Gods commandment. So that this service of the Lord consists of
two points. First in making of good laws, for the maintenance of the truth,
and abolishing of idolatry. Secondly in punishing such as offend against the
same, with a religious severity. This then is the first thing that is required
in all godly Magistrates, even from the prince that sits upon the throne,
unto the meanest that bears office in the common wealth, but especially of
the^ that have the sovereign authority, that they have a watchful eye, and a
continual care, to consider and find out what things they are, whereby either
the glory of God is most hindered, and his service profaned, or sin is within
their common wealths ^ r several charges occasioned and maintained. Which
when they epsy, they must seek by godly laws, and ordinances, to provide
some speedy remedy for the same. For when I affirm, that princes and
magistrates must make decrees for the truth against idolatry and superstition,
my meaning is not to enter into that question against the papists, whether
civil magistrates may meddle with matters of religion or not (although even
the truth thereof also, by the way may appear) but because I speak to such as
acknowledge and confess this to be their duty and have given notable
testimony of their persuasion therein: my desire and endeavor is to stir them
up, that nether they will be unmindful thereof, but always and earnestly
think of it, neither unwilling thereto, but readily and diligently perform
it. Esa. 44.28.
For this cause God calls princes sometime sheepheards, (so was Cyrus, to
teach them that they ought to be as watchful and painful for the good of their
people, as is the shepherd for the good of his flock: yea they must be
watchemen over their people, and take great heed that through their fault the
people perish not: for if they do, it will also turn to their own
destruction. De pastoribus. cap. 9.
For as saint Augustine says Their negligence shall slay them. Their
negligence, I say, whereby they are slack in performing their duty. They are
also called heads over their people, not only because they should have eyes
always to pry and spy (for the eyes are in the head) what danger may fall
upon the people, and find means to avoid it: but also because they should in
all careful and christian discretion, guide and direct them that are under
them. And because it is true that saint Paul says, Romans 13.4.
He is the minister of God for the wealth of the people, and that he bears
not the sword for naught, but for to take vengeance of them that do evil: It
is most necessary that he provide such laws as may tend to those ends, and
set down such decrees as my bridle disobedient and ungodly persons, that they
who feign would, 1. Tim. 2.2.
may the more quietly live in honesty and godliness. Such is that law or
statute that Asa king of Judah made, when he saw how ready his people were to
fall to Idolatry and superstition, and had taken away the altars of the
strange gods, and broken down their images and high places. 2. Chro. 14.3 4.
He commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to do
according to the law and the commandment. Wherein it seems unto me that their
case and ours is very like, therefore we cannot find a fitter pattern to set
before us for redress of our evils, than by such laws as he made. And seeing
he did this in the beginning of his reign, he teaches Magistrates a good
lesson, that it beseems not princes or others to make any delaie to serve
the Lord, but to take all oportunities to do it. For delay many times brings
coldness, and coldness grows to neglect of duty. And so did Iehosaphat
his son after him. 2. Chron. 17.6.7.
In whose story appears a marvelous diligent care that he had, to take
away all occasion of Idolatry from amongst his people. And also there
appears, 2. Chro. 19.4
how he charged both the civil Magistrates that were under him, and the
Priests also and Levites, and had an eye to them that they slipped it not. Yea,
2. Chro. 29.8 5
and he did not only set Levites and Priests at Jerusalem, for the better
performance of these things, but also Judges city by city, in every strong
city of Judah. For he knew that it was a dangerous thing for Magistrates to
be Non-resident, Nonresidents.
(for there are mo Non-residents, than they that are commonly cried out
against.) And for my part, the mo that there are, the more, I think, is the
land defiled with sin. But Iehosaphat because he would have ye magistrates
alwais ready to attend upon their charge (as I also confess it to be the duty
of ministers to attend upon their charge) he appointed them their cities, and
made a progress through the country, to see these things done. As also it is
a notable good practice for godly Princes in their progresses to inquire of
such defaultes as are in the country where they remain. Yea I know not
whether there be now any other way so good, for reformation of such general
disorders as are amongst us, as that the sovereign authority will use some
way to look into the doings of such as are under her in the church, and common
wealth, and with speed reform the same. I fear it would be found that from
top to toe, there would almost be nothing sound, Es. 1.6.
From the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head nothing whole. For we
are fallen into times wherein almost every man seeks his own, I say his own
will, profit, pleasure, estimation, without any great regard of church or
common wealth. But I would that were the worst. For alas we have too many, and
those great ones, who do notably abuse their greatness and authority, Mi^ h.
2.1.
to the undoing of many other. Their hand is according to their power, as the
Prophet says, to do as much hurt as they can: And their must be obeyed more
carefully than any law. If they be not so shameless that they will say, yet
they think as the ungodly of whom the Prophet David complains, Psalm. 10.3.4.
That they contemn the Lord: that they are so proud that they seek not for
God. They think always there is no God. And again. With our tongue will we
prevail, Psalm. 12.4.
our lips are our own, who is Lord over us. Now although he that sits in
heaven shall laugh (at these their foolish thoughts) and the Lord shall have
them in derision: Psalm. 2.4.
yet must Princes (unless they will neglect their duty) have a great care to
reform or remove such ungodly persons: being well assured that the highest
powers must not only answer for their own negligences, but also for the
oppressions, wrongs, and negligences of such as they place under them: unless
they have a due regard to place in authority such as are worthiest, and also
when they hear of their defaultes they seek speedely to reform the same. So
that Princes have high places, with a heavy charge, their honor is great, but
greater is their burden, as appears by the sixth Chapter of the book of
Wisdom. Which Chapter I would wish all Princes to be well acquainted withal,
that they would make it as it were their looking glass wherein they would use
to look daily. For if these things were well remembered, (as alas it is too
easy a thing for the best of us to forget our duties, and mighty ones, have
not only their soueraignety, which makes them many times too proud, but also
many flatterers to commend in them even that which is evil) but I say if these
things were well remembered, Princes in placing of Magistrates either in church
or common wealth, would not so much be abused by them, who being corrupted by
bribes, or moved by favor, or in some other worldly consideration, are
content to commend such to be fit to govern others, as could never yet guide
themselves well. Princes I say, that have due consideration of their own duty,
and the strait account that they must give if they do it not, and that before
that great and just judge, who will not be corrupted, nor cannot be deceived,
will never commit their people to be governed by such bad guids, neither their
duty to be done by such negligent or unfit deputies. And here would I most
humbly crave of her most gracious Majesty, that as it has pleased God to
advance her grace above all other within her highness dominions, so as she
tendereth the good of her people, the discharge of her duty, the defense of the
church whereof she has her title, and the salvation of her own soul, she
will continually beg of this our good God, by earnest and hearty prayer, not
only that her self may carefully endeavor to serve the Lord: but also that he
will give her the spirit of wisdom to take heed that she advance not any
within her Majesty's dominions to the rule of others, but such as her self
knows, Exodus 18.11.
or by good men is perfectly informed, that they are as indeed they ought to
be, Men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating covetousness. And
that she will not think any fit for government, either in religion or civil
policy, but such as will execute their office, In the fear of the Lord, 1.
Chro. 19.9
faithfully, and with a perfect heart. Then shall she according to the duty
of a Christian Magistrate perform her office faithfully, maintain the truth
zealously, encourage the godly, discourage and daunt the hearts of the wicked,
relieve the oppressed, refourme the oppressors. So shall she bring increase
to the truth, glory to her government, safety to her person, quietness to
her Realm. Esa. 26.11. Pro. 29.14.
For, Salvation shall God set for walls and Bulworkes, And a King that judges
the poor in truth, his throne is established for ever. But on the contrary,
if government be still committed to ungodly men, religion shall dwell in
contempt, wickedness shall abound. Such as God has not encouraged to do
good, although they would feign, yet shall be afraid to serve the Lord.
Prou. 29.1.
For, When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice, but when the
wicked bear rule the people sigh. Take heed I pray O ye Magistrates, that
that reproach may not justly be laid upon us, that was spoken against the
Jews, who were called Gods people before us. Esa. 1.23.
Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves, every one loves
gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the fatherlesee, neither
does the widows cause come before them. For By swearing, and lying, and
killing, Hos. 4.2.
and stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood. But it
is most certain that sin breaks out in every corner in great abundance by
sea, by land: yea and if it be not maintained by some, yet is it too much
spared, and too little punished almost by all men that have authority. If such
disorders may still be permitted, that is, if offenders may still go
unpunished, and they that bear with and wincke at such things may still bear
authority, can we look for any other thing than that God should say unto us,
as he said in his wrath unto his own people, whom he loved as dearly as
us, Arise, depart (out of this land) this is not your rest. Mich. 2.10.
Because it is polluted, it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction.
For God in Leuiticus Leuit. 18.25.
pronounces that a land is so defiled with sin, that it must vomit out her
inhabitants. Have we not then just cause to fear God heavy wrath, seeing that
idolatry, and superstition, blasphemies, murders, whoredoms, robbings and
stealings do so abound in many places of this land, and yet so little
reformation, yea so much forbearing of such had persons, yea of such as are
most notorious offenders, so much speaking and writing for them, so much
pitying them upon their tears, so much repriuing them after their judgment,
that they might have time and means to procure their pardon, as though we
feared nothing more, than that the weeds should be weeded out, least they
should hurt the herbs, or the tares plucked up that they choke not up the
corn. This our well liking of sin, this forbearing of so bad men is it, that
I more fear, and will indeed sooner bring this land to desolation, than all the cruel practices of professed enemies or faithles friends. This I say, if
we repent not, shall make us weak, and our enemies strong, this shall more
hastily bring upon us, and against us the Spaniard, and more strengthen his
hand, than all that he can devise, bear he never so cruel a hatred against us.
So that whosoever or whatsoever they be, that will not now, when by their
authority they may, nay when they ought to procure peace and safety unto the
oppressed, by punishing offenders, shall one day, if with speed they amend it
not, Luc. 19.42. Esa. 48.22.
see that al things that belong to their peace shall be hidden from their eyes.
For there is no peace to the wicked If any man think that I note any
particular persons herein, they are deceived. I rather touch all. For I see
such horrible vices abound almost in every place, and such disobedience
against God and man, and so little punishment especially of such as can procure
the friendship of some great men, although their offenses be great, that I say
with the Prophet, Wickedness says to the wicked man even in my heart, that there
is no fear of God before his eyes. So that almost the continual breach of all
good laws, by them that have any delight to sin, does proclaim it in the
ears of men more shrill then the sound of a trumpet, that many of our
Magistrates are far short of that duty that they should perform. Which as
we feel in these north parts, to be the undoing of many a poor man in
particular, yea almost the ruinating of the country, so I hear the south parts
are not in much better case: But whosoever is boldest to sin, finds many
friends to sue for his pardon. Which if it be true, let us assure our selves,
that our general contempt of religion, and justice, and that after so many
warnings and so plain, given by Gods messengers against this, shall bring upon
us, and our land a general plague. Neither let us flatter our selves in our
own strength, or our allies, or that our enemies are weak or otherwise
occupied. If we provoke the Lord he shall never want whips to whip us withal.
And thus much by way of digression, upon occasion of good Iehosaphats great
care that he had to examine and see, that they bear office under him, did
deal zealously for the truth, and justly and truly, with his people. A godly
care, a good but a rare example. Which point although Iehosaphats example gave
me good occasion to enter into, yet the necessity of these times does the
rather force me to handle the same. Yea this is so necessarily belonging to
the matter that I am in hand withal, that neither godly laws and decrees,
can easily be devised and published, neither being made can at all be
executed, unless this be chiefly regarded. But to return to my matter again.
When Ahaz the king of Judah had polluted the land with idolatries of sundry
sorts, after him comes Ezechiah his son, 2. Chron. 29.
who opened the doors of the temple that Ahaz had shut up, he called for the
Priests and commanded them to sanctify themselves, teaching them their
duty, he gathered the Princes together to the house of the Lord, he
commanded the Priests to offer, and he and the Princes commanded the
Levites to praise the Lord: appointing how, namely, with the words of David:
yea, 2. Chro. 30.^
he also by Posts sent to all Judah and Israel, 2. Chron. 3^.
that they should come to keep the Passover. And Josiah his diligence to
serve the Lord, by commanding to reform such things as were amiss, is
notable in his story. In which example of Josiah it is worthy the marking,
how he gathered together all the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem, and the
people also, and made them go up with him unto the Lords house. And Ezechiah
and he (as in the story of Ezechiah is noted) commanded them to come to
celebrate the Passover. And in Ezechiah his days it is to their eternal
praise set down, that they had not one Recusant, 2. Chro. 31.^
but God gave them one heart to do the commanment of the king. If Princes
might then make laws to bring their people to the church, and constrain them
to be partakers of their rites and service: why may not princes now do the
like? Nay, if it were then the duty of the Rulers amongst Gods people, to be
careful to make such laws, how can our Rulers excuse themselves, if they be
found slack heerin? For (as before I have showed) I seek not by these
examples to show what Princes may do, but what they can not but do, unless
they will run in danger of Gods displeasure. But, 2. Chr. 34.1^
to proceed in the story of Josiah, when Hilkiah the priest had found the
book of the law, it was not reserved with the Priest, as though he only
might meddle with religion, but it was carried by Saphan to the king, 16
and the king commanded Hilkiah the priest with others to go to inquire of the
Lord for him, and for Judah, 20
to turn away Gods wrath. In all which examples mark how godly kings have
had a very watchful regard always, to give comma^dements and make laws, to
take away superstition, or negligence in coming to Gods service, and to
further the true worship of God. To these I might add a cloud of witnesses out
of Ecclesiastical histories, but in a matter so plain I trust I need not
produce the particular examples of Emperors and Kings, as well elsewhere as
in our own land and country this realm of England, who have made sundry
laws, given sundry commandments, unto ecclesiastical persons in matters of
religion, whereby they have declared, that if not their only, yet their
especial care was, that God might be religiously served, not of themselves
only, but of their people also. Now therefore it remains, that our godly
Magistrates make profit of these good examples, not only by learning what
they may, but in knowing what they must do. For as saint Augustine very well
and profitably notes, Epist. ad Bonifacium 50.
the kings that amongst Gods people did not forbid and overthrow whatsoever was
contrary to gods precept, are reproved, and they that did forbid such things,
are praised. Yea, that ancient father there commends to us the examples of
the kings of Niniue, who compelled the whole city for to appease Gods wrath:
Ion. 3. Dan. 6.
And Darius, who commanded the Idol to be broken, and Daniels enemies to be
cast unto the lions: and of Nabuchadnezzar, who by a fearful law prohibited
the blaspheming of the true God. Dan. 3.
Out of all which we may learn, not only what the godly Princes did, but
even how careful they were to do it: so that it does seem to have been
their continual meditation and study, how they might remove such stumbling
blocks as did lie in their peoples ways, whereby they might be hindered from
serving the Lord sincerely. For they knew it to be true, that Saint Augustine
says, that the happiness of kings does not consist in their long reign, De
ciuit. Dei ib. 5. cap. 24
or succession of their children, in vanquishing their enemies, or subduing
their rebellious subjects, but if they govern righteously, if they make their
power serve to the furtherance of Gods service, if they be slow to revenge and
ready to forgive, but so as their revenge be for the necessary ruling and
defending of the common wealth, and if their clemency be not to have sin
unpunished, but the sinner reformed. Continue therefore (O gracious Sovereign)
that godly race which hitherto you have most happily run, for the maintenance
of Gods truth, and never be weary of well doing, but still as need requires,
let precept be after precept, statute upon statute, commandment upon
commandment, law after law, so long as Idolatry and superstition is not
sufficiently abolished, so long as popish heresies are so readily embraced, so
long as so many ignorant men and foolish women, without regard of duty to God
or man, without any show of reason, yea without due care of their own souls,
under pretense of conscience, do against all conscience.

For with what conscience (I pray) may they prefer a foreign power, before
the government of their natural Prince, or make the supremacy of the Pope a
necessary article of faith, which was never taught by Christ, his Apostles or
the primitive Church: nay never thought upon, until the Bishop of Rome came
to his excess of pride of late years? Or by what color of conscience can
they despise Gods word, contemn his Sacramente^, and separate themselves so
wilfully from that body that dares not receive any thing but that they are
sure that Christ has taught? Until such time I say, as such as profess the
name of christianity within your dominions, may in external show be compelled
to come unto Christ, or at the least, not to dare openly to deny him and his
truth, godly Magistrates ought still to make their laws more perfect, that
they may have a remedy for every inconvenience.

And these laws should be so strong, that they might hold as well the
mightiest as the meanest, and not like the spiders cobweb, which can take only
the small, or weak flies, but can do nothing to hold the strong ones. And
that is it that Saint Augustine does mean, when he says, Epist. 50.
that Laws should be made with convenient strength: For, if Popery and
Idolatry be evil in one, it is not tolerable in any. And if some may
without danger of punishment break laws, or have exemptions to transgress
the same, it much emboldeneth other to do the like. And how in policy wise
men can judge it to be convenient I know not, but in christianity I can not
see how it may be tolerable, that in a land, where the light of the Gospel
shines, Popery may be any thing tolerated to any without any punishment: For
it is as evil as the Idolatry, which the godly kings of Judah did so bend
themselves to destroy, and for the destroying whereof they are commended. As for
the exemptions which many of our Recusants have from the penalty of the law,
I doubt not, but hoping of doing good, and of winning by fair means will be
the color for the same. But I do see none more obstinate, or of whom there
is less hope, than such persons as have found such favor. Neither are these
disobedient persons at any time so ready to conform themselves to dutiful
obedience, as when they fear some execution of laws against them. Which
thing, because it is so manifest that none can but see it, it makes many to
think, that such immunities are procured often upon other considerations, than
hope of winning them unto Christ. Yea some sue for them sometimes, that
perchance hope to win something to themselves thereby. But of compelling by
fear, such to come unto God, as for love will not, and of inflicting
punishment, where meekness and lenity prevail not, I am now to entreat:
for this is the second point, wherein Magistrates must serve the Lord. And
although I do not like of extremity or rigor: yet so long as we see
remissness to be hurtful to the church and common wealth, that which saint
Augustine calls a religious severity would be used: that is, magistrates
ought to take that way, not that best pleases their own humor, but that
serves best for reducing offenders to the service of God. If therefore
lenity be abused, and breed licentious liberty, so that they who were evil,
grow worse thereby: then lenity cease to be a christian virtue, and is
nothing else but that foolish pity that marreth the whole city. In these
north countries, we have too good experience hereof. For, meekness some call
it, but I take it to be an excessive want either of care or courage in the
Lords cause, has brought these countries to that pass, that the sins of
the country, as murder, whoredom, thefts, and spoiling do abound more than
ever they did for many years. As for recusants, not men only and women, but
even in sundry places the children also, either may not, or will not come at
the church. And that more is, and to be wondered at, there are that dare
reprove them that will perform that duty. And yet the church of Rome has
not much to brag of this their plentiful harvest, as in many of their books
they do: for it is full of filthy weeds. For even the better sort of them
rest upon I know not what name of conscience, without any reason of their
religion, or ground of their faith. And they being deceived through their
ignorance, do fall into the pit which false teachers, as ignorant almost as
themselves, have made to catch the^ in. And though amongst the^ that do
profess religion, there are too many that do know too little: yet for them to
seem to have a better persuasion in religion than the common sort, who have
scarce so much knowledge as the common sort has to ground their religion upon,
is a great skorne. Yea, many there are whose conscience (as it is thought) will
serve them, some to take their neighbors horse, cow, ox, or sheep by
stealth, some to bear with, and wink at such as do such things, and yet
their conscience will not suffer them to come to the church. Others have
conscience, that will suffer them to live in continual whordome, and to lead a
most filthy life, even almost in the sight of the sun, but to show
themselves dutiful to God and man, it will not suffer them. Seeing therefore
that as in a sore, if the surgeon forbear to search it to the quick, it does
but corrupt and putrify: so in this our malady, nothing has so much increased
the same as too much lenity: there is now no other way to mend that is amiss,
but by some due punishments to beat down the pride of the obstinate, and to
restrain their insolency. I mean not, that life or limme of any should be
touched for religion only (unless perchance the word of God expreslie do
command it) for as mildness has been a precious ornament to her majesty's
person, So I am well assured that it has been as a strong pillar to uphold
her estate. Prou. 20.28.
For mercy and truth preserve the king, and his throne shall be established with
mercy: yet would I have many pitied rather than one: That is, that one or
some few should rather be punished, than whole multitudes by too much
gentleness should be imboldened to follow that which is evil. Neither are the
punishments for religion by our law of such quality as that there is just
cause to complain of the rigor of the same: although the papists that they
may seem to have a great number of martyrs and confessors, with many a loud
lie, cry out against the cruelty that is used amongst us. Restraint of
liberty only, would not in the late time of persecution in Queen Mary's
days, have been thought cruelty, when most sharp and uncomfortable
imprisonments, and in the end cruel death, was thought too little for them
that could not be charged with any thing, but only dissenting in religion from
the Church of Rome. The payment of a little money, would then have been
thought an easy redemption for the liberty of conscience: and these are the
most grievous punishments, that our law in such case has set down. And that
these chasticements should now with some severity be executed, it is high
time: when as so many upon a mere will, or to please some other, will not
stick to revolt from that holy profession, which once they followed. Yea, it
seems unto me a necessary policy, that that penal statute against recusants
should more severely be executed: not only to have the greater treasure in
store, for the necessary defense of the realm: but also to withdraw from
hollow hearted subjects, that wherewith they do either immeasurable enrich and
furnish themselves against that evil day which so long they have looked for, or
in the mean time relieve bad persons to be trumpets of rebellion. For howsoever
those lying spirits blow it abroad, that catholics (for so they falsely term
them) are in most cruel manner persecuted in England for religion: yet it is
most certain, that there are an infinite number of known and stubborn
recusants among us, that feel no smart at all. Which thing also I would wish
that by some means they might be made publicly to confess, thereby to
confute and confound the shameless slanders of their lying masters. And such
as are imprisoned can not justly complain of want of any thing necessary,
unless it be liberty. They are not forced to lie upon the ground, or to sit
vneasilie in the stocks, They are not laden with boltes and fetters, or any
other way cruelly handled, as many good men were in the days of our late
persecution. No, no, we willingly leave those cruel torments to the bloody
papists, to that purple Harlot that sits at Rome: who is even drunken with
the blood of the saints, and has a delight to torment and make havoc of the
people of God. Lib. 2.
To such as Dinothus in his story of the wars of France speaks of: For
he reports that when the papists, that savage generation, had woonne
Aurasia, they spared no sex, no age, no estate, no not sucking babes: they
devised new and those cruel torments (for to kill only cannot suffice that
catholic humor.) And toward women when they were dead, they passed the limits
I will not say of christianity, or of humane modesty, but they showed
themselves more beastly tha^ beasts. And that they might the rather be
incoraged impudently to commit all these excesses, they had a fit watchword for
their purpose which did both show their meaning and with what spirit they were
guided, which was this: I curse god thrice. O catholic watch word! It seems
they were at defiance not with good men only, but with God also. Of like
beastly cruelty also, and shameless despiting of the dead bodies the same
author writes in the very latter end of that his second book: even such as
any man excepting Romish catholics would be ashamed to commit. But the more
shameless in cruelty that they are, the more like them selves. For if we will
believe even their own stories, we shall find that they always made little
accoumpt of that which is precious in Gods sight. Such cruelty. I say,
beseems that popish crew, but we hate and detest the same. We are content if
they be not dangerous to the state, that they live at ease and in liberty
also, so long as it confirms not themselves in their error, nor withdraws
other from the tru^ worship of God. Yea, there are who for religion being
imprisoned, have enriched themselves, and increased their revenues. We only
seek to reform them, not to torment them, and to lay upon them gentle
chasticements to amend them, not cruel punishments to destroy them. But yet,
as I said before of laws, that they would be made for a restraint for all
sorts of men and women, so the punishment would be inflicted upon all in like
sort, that offend in like manner. And although I will not take upon me to
define, whether princes may bear with recusants or not, because they are
enemies to God, namely, such as despise wilfully Gods word, and contemn his
Sacraments: yet I may be bold to affirm, that the magistrates who will suffer
unpunished, the breaking of the first table of the commandments, do show
therein no great zeal to their high Lord and master.

And here would I wish this one point to be considered upon, whether it be not
very convenient and necessary, that whereas God by his law expressly has set
down that Idolaters should be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3 4, 5, 7.
whether (I say) the papists, whose service and ceremonies, are almost nothing
else but Idolatry and superstition, should be judged according to that law,
concerning that point of their religion, wherein they defend and practice the
worshipping of Images, and praying to those that are no Gods. Hereby two
commodities I doubt not would ensue: First that the papists should be known to
be as they are, Idolaters and worshippers of false gods: which sin if the
people did know that they were subject unto, they would never be so deceived by
them. Secondly, thereby many would be afraied to call upon stocks and stones,
as now they do. For to defile the land with their manifest idolatries, why
should not we account it a sin worthy of death, seeing it is a breach of
that commandment, which especially concerns the honor of God. Which how
fervently and sincerely we should maintain, we may among many other notable
presidents, learn of the children of Israel, who with full consent, Josh. 22,
did gather themselves to fight against the tribes of Ruben and Gad, and the
half tribe of Manasseh, because they had thought that an altar (which they
built for a memorial, and witness, that the tribes beyond Jordan, worshipped
the self same God, and professed the same Religion that the other did) they
thought (I say) it had been built, to offer sacrifices upon, and so to
dishonor God. Which thing rather than they would suffer unrevenged, they would
venture their lives. So zealous they were, and we should be, of Gods honor.
For even to that end were we created, and that duty we must as loving and
obedient children, zealously perform to our heavenly father. Yea, seeing they
account us as heretics, in whose doctrine neither they, neither yet their
fathers, could ever, or yet can, prove by the word of God, the least suspicion
of heresy: to the end that themselves may be known what they are, that thus
dare slander the professors of the truth without just cause. Why should not
they whose doctrine and doings being examined by Gods written word, do
plainly prove themselves to be idolaters, why should not they (I say) be called
idolaters, as in truth they are. Well, seeing it is before plainly proved,
that godly princes did make laws, to restrain and reform the sins of the
people yea, and that in matters of Religion, and have as it were watched all
oportunities, to serve the Lord in such sort (and this I take to be that
serving of the time, Romans 12.11.
whereunto the Apostle exhorts, for so many do read it) I trust it cannot be
denied, but that it belongs unto the duty of Christian magistrates to do
the like. And if they may make laws, may they not also punish the breakers of
the same? I have before showed, that it is necessary (if we consider our
estate) that they should. And that it is their part so to do, it cannot be
denied. Romans 13.4.
For He is the minister of God to take vengeance of them that do evil. And
what Nehemiah did herein is worthy to be remembered: whose authority was not
very great, being but as it were a captain, yet did he not only make decrees,
as of other matters, so also concerning the breach of the Sabbath day, Nehe.
10.17
(a sin too common in England, and too lightly accounted of) but also did
execute the same, 20 21
yea, and threatened to lay hands upon them that were cause of it, if they made
that fault again. Yea, did not Asa command them upon pain of death to turn
from their Idols and false gods, ^. Chr. 15.23
making this covenant, nay, taking this oath of all Judah and Benjamin, that
Whosoever will not seek the Lord God of Israel, shall be slain whether he
be small or great, man or woman. Mark, there is in this no respect of kind,
or kindred: yea he suffered not his own grandmother to be regent, neither
thought her worthy to be a governor, Because she had made an Idol in a
grove: and he brake down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the
brook of Kidron. Christian princes and Magistrates should always set such
examples before their eyes, comparing that which they did, and Gods spirit
commends in them, with that which they do, to provoke themselves thereby in
godly zeal to serve the Lord. Now therefore seeing I have endeavored (as God
has enabled me) to stir up all christian magistrates, more watchfully to
regard, and more speedily to redress, than of late especially has been done,
the state of religion, grown I know not by what negligence, almost into
contempt amongst many: I would wish that a chief care should be taken (among
many other, to avoid two very dangerous conceytes, which are as Scylla, and
Caribdis: 1. Tim. 1.19.
at one of the which it is an easy matter for all them to make shipwreck of
faith, Romans 1.18.
that strive not to hold fast a good conscience, but withholde the truth in
unrighteousness. The one is popery, the other is Atheism. Of papists, and
recusants I have said already somewhat. They are too many, and upon every
small occasion of hope of their bloody day, very bold (whereby we may
consider what subjects they are.) They are dangerous snakes to carry in our
bosom. If inquiry should be made how many have been presented, that were
never called before authority, and how many called, that have been sent home
again, as free as before they came to the magistrate, and yet as bad also as
ever they were, I suppose they will be found many. And for them that are
imprisoned, it is many times more for the gain of their keepers, than the
reformation of themselves. So that they are almost in no place, more free to
do, or say what they will, than in their prisons, whereby they corrupt many.
This fault I trust, is not general, but in some places it is so. Well, of them
I will only say thus much, that they are in such sort dealt withal, as
themselves are much confirmed in popish heresies, they that bear good will to
the truth, much discouraged, and hearty and sincere obedience, not to the
gospel only but to her Majesty also is much hindered. Atheists.
As for that godless and graceless sort, who dare say not in their heart
only, but even with their mouths also, not privately, but also in their
meetings and assemblies, to their perpetual shame, that there is no God:
although they be nothing so dangerous, as are the Papists, who deceive under
a color of religion (and therefore more craftily) such as have not a love to
the truth: yet are they of all other creatures most to be detested as being
more unthankful than the beasts themselves, and to be counted more vile than
the dung of the earth, which we tread under our feet: seeing they are so
injurious to that good God, that has made them such excellent creatures, and
do so by their impiety blemish and defile the excellency of their creation.
Psalm. 145.15.
For, if The eyes of all do wait upon God, who gives them meat in due
season. Of all I say, even the beasts, and not men only, then do they after
their manner confess that there is a God that feeds them, Psalm. 147.9.
as he does also, The beasts and young Ravens that cry. And in that all
things keep their course, whereunto God appointed them, it argues that they
yield a soueraignetie to that divine power, that has created and appointed
them to that end. And shall any man endued with reason, nay such as call
themselves Christians, and some of them perchance such as have received of Gods
hand, more abundant graces than many other: shall such I say, as have so many
causes to know and confess him, dare set themselves against him that made
them, and deny his power? Act. 17.28.
In him they live, and move, and have their being, and will they not confess
him? The creation, the preservation, and the administration which he uses
over all things, does prove him to be God. Yea which way can we turn our
eyes, but that we must behold his power? Psalm. 19.1.
The heavens declare the glory of God. And the earth also is full of his
greatness. They that go down into the sea in ships, Psalm. 107.23.24.
and occupy by great waters, They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders
in the deep. In the Scriptures what have we but the goodness of God, the
might of God, the wisdom of God, the justice of God? To show that we cannot
be without him, and from him we cannot hide our selves. Much less shall that
wicked crew stand before him, but that his hand shall find them out. And
although that accursed company will (no doubt) deny the Scriptures, and count
them but as fabulous, yet Gods acts and deeds therein contained, as also the
story of all times does sufficiently testify unto the world, that God is
wise, mighty, good, and just. The very heathen men therefore, found him out
by his works, and could not but confess that there must be a God: although
not seeking to know him by his word, they became vain in their imaginations,
and conceits of this God: But that there is a God, they did all see it. Shall
the Scriptures bear witness, and his works testify of him, yea shall the
very heathens find arguments enough to convince them, and make them confess
him, and shall such as are borne and brought up amongst Christians, be as
blind as beetels in so clear light, and so bring a stain to their
profession, their country, their blood? God forbid that in any christian common
wealth there should be any found so wicked and witless, as once to think
so irreligiously. But to speak it, and that not in secret, but in the hearing
of others, or to defend it as an opinion that they would have to be believed,
is so detestable a sin before God, as if it be suffered will be the utter
ruin of this land. Take away the assured persuasion of God, out of the hearts
of the people, and how shall obedience be performed to Magistrates, honor to
parents, service to masters, or duty to all superiors for the Lords sake?
Let their profane opinion prevail, and neither shall the godly have any
encouragement to serve in fear, neither the wicked any bridle to restrain
them from evil. These corruptions therefore of a common wealth, these enemies
to al honest and Christian life, ought not to be suffered to live amongst men,
much less to enjoy any estimation or credit by christian Magistrates. Neither
can this persuasion once enter into the heart of any, unless they be such, as
because they would live dissolutelie in all lust and pleasure, as the prophet
Amos says, Amos. 6.3. Soph. 1.7. Joel. 2.11.
Do put far away the evil day, eue^ that day of the Lord whereof Sophony
speaks, and of which day the prophet Joel says, The day of the Lord is great
and very terrible, and who can abide it? And therefore that they might sin
without al fear of God, they would feign persuade themselves that there is no
God. Or else such as being drunken in their prosperity, and advanced perchance
far above their worth, do think as did the wicked men of whom Malachy
speaks, Mal. 2.17.
that if there were a God of justice, it could not be so well with them, and
so in their excess of pride they deny God and say who is Lord? And although I
trust that none amongst us, are com to the depth of that impiety: yet because
it is too true, that many will have such profane talk, and delight too much
therein, and that some of them such as seem not little in their own eyes: if
sharp punishments be not inflicted, for such irreligious and wicked speeches,
themselves will more and more be hardened in their evil, and others more
encouraged to like of their ungodliness. Therefore these biles and sores of a
common wealth, are of all christians to be shunned as unworthy to live among
Gods people, and of al godly magistrates, such are to be restrained, not by
laws only, but by the sharpest punishments. And if magistrates would not do
their duty therein (which God forbid) yet let al true christians take heed they
touch no such pitch, Eccle. 13.1. 1. Cor. 15.33. Iud. 52.
least they be defiled with it, nor give ear to such talk, least it corrupt
their good manners. Yea let them put away such spots from their feasts, for
the company is the worse that they are in, what account so ever they make of
themselves. Withal diligence therefore, inquiry would be made for detecting,
and strait order taken for the punishing of such: For as al sins procure Gods
wrath, especially if they be borne withal, and God in his wrath sends his
plagues: so especially such great blasphemies as this, as has with it a
manifest contempt of God and his word, brings for the most part a general
destruction. Prou. 8.15.
If Princes therefore be Gods lieutenantes, and supply his room, as indeed
they do, if by him they bear rule as Solomon affirms, it is their duty to
watch all opportunities, to reform if it may be, or else to root out their
masters enemies, and to employ their whole power in defense of his glory, who
sets them in honor, establishes their authority, subdueth unto them their
subjects, gives peace in their land, when need is if it seem good to him,
vanquisheth their enemies, to be short, without whom they have no power. Let
it never be said, that in a land wherein the gospel is so constantly and
zealously professed, and by so many godly laws established, it shall be
lawful for some seduced, but very selfe-willed folks, such as recusantes are
for the most part, to reject it without all fear of punishment, or for a
profane crew, such are these Atheistes, to blaspheme God without controlement.
If we love the truth, let us with courage set our selves against the enemies
thereof. If we fear God truly, let us also fear to be partakers of their
sins that will not acknowledge him. But private persons that allow, or do
not reprove, Magistrates that do not refourme such sins, are partakers
thereof. Rowze up your selves therefore (O Christian magistrates) be zealous in
his cause, that is so loving to you. Be faithful unto him, that never deceived
any that trusted in him. Beat down sin, maintain the truth, cherish the
godly, against all popish heretics, against all profane Atheistes, that
such as do evil may fear, and know that Magistrates bear not the sword for
naught. Romans 13.4.
Think it to be the best policy to serve the Lord sincerely: For so Moses
teaches the Israelites (but his lesson is not of many politickes well learned)
Keep therefore (says he) and do them, for that is your wisdom: And that it
is no wisdom to be cold or careless in Gods cause, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
for it procures his wrath, for Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Yea and when God will have his judgments sharply executed,
Ierem. 48.10.
Cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood. And as those are
accursed, that do not execute those sharp judgments of God, against his
enemies: so shall not they be free from wrath, that are too remiss in
inflicting of gentler punishments when occasion requires. Serve the Lord
therefore, and he will save you. Defend his cause, and he will defend you. Rest
not upon your own strength or policy: do his will faithfully, and he will not
fail you. So shall you bring safety and quietness to your selves, and Gods
blessing upon your people. Whereas on the contrary if such despisers of God and
his truth, be not in some reasonable sort brideled and reformed, God is by
such want of zeal provoked, the offenders by such remissness are encouraged
in their evil, and many not evil persons are much discouraged, from their
dutiful obedience to God and man. The Lord therefore open the eyes of our
christian Magistrates, and give them wisdom, that they may see and wisely
consider, of these things. The Lord I say, by his holy spirit work in their
hearts so earnest a zeal to Gods truth, that they may, as in duty they
ought, seek sincerely to maintain the same, and to grow not in knowledge
only and outward profession, Psalm. 78.7^.
but in practice also and holy conversation. That as David did feed the
people, according to the simplicity of his heart, and guide them, by the
discretion of his hands: so they may walk every one in their place and
calling, uprightly, and with a sincere heart before the Lord, to guide their
people in the good ways, and to bring them to the wholesome pastures, that they
and we their subjects may with one heart serve Christ our Lord here, and reign
with him elsewhere: to whom with the father and the holyghost be al honor and
glory now and for ever.

FINIS.

