A SVRVEY OF THE POPES SVPREMACIE.

Wherein is a trial of his title, and a proof of his practices: and in it
are examined the chief arguments that M. BELLARMINE has, for defense of the
said supremacy, in his books of the bishop of Rome.

By FRANCIS BVNNY sometime fellow of Magdalene College in Oxford.

Hos. 8. 4. They have set up a king, but not by me, they have made princes but
I knew it not. AT LONDON, Printed by Valentine Simmes for Ralfe Iacson dwelling
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the white Swan. 1595.

To the right Honorable his very good Lord, HENRY Earl of Huntingdon, Baron of
Hastings, lord Hungerford, Buttrois, and Molleignes, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, L. President of the Council at York, and lord Lieutenant
in these North parts under her Majesty FRANCIS BVNNY wishes increase of all
graces here, and everlasting life elsewhere.
COnsidering with my self (right Honorable) how many that have some desire to
wake in right ways and perfect paths, are seduced and misse-led, and that
willingly, having this persuasion once settled in their hearts, that the bishop
of Rome is their head here upon earth, whom they ought to obey: Seeing also on
the other side, not a few, that cloak and color many their trecheries and
treasons, when they suffer as evil doers for their wicked purposes and
practices, as if for their conscience sake they were thus dealt withal; I
thought I could not bestow time better, then if by any means possible, I might
by my pain and travel, light the candle of truth to them that are in
darkness and ignorance, and discover the hypocrisy of the other sort, who
under pretense of conscience, do against all conscience and duty. Both which
parts, my desire has been to perform in this treatise. For if by trial of
the Popes title, and examining his evidence I prove that he makes an unjust
claim, to the supremacy over the whole Church of Christ: and if in view of
his doings, and proof of his practice it may plainly appear, John 10. 1, 10.
that as he like a thief entered into that honor that now he inioyeth, so in
the same he plaieth the thief in deed, and does nothing else but rob and
steal, and kill: I hope then the simple, and so the better sort of the two,
will not so readily as they have done rest upon him, in whom they shall see
neither warrant, power to have his fullness of power, nor any Christian-like
moderation to use the same: And as for the other sort, they will find no cause
for them to crake of their conscience, when it shall appear to the world, that
it is not upon any sure ground, neither stayed upon any good foundation. For
doubtless, if a good conscience do give unto Caesar that that is Caesar's or
belongs to him, Mat. 22. 21
whether obedience, tribute, or any thing else, as Christ commands: If it
make subjects to subject their very souls to the higher powers, as S. Paul
bids, Romans 13. 1.
and frames us to submit our selves to all manner ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, as Saint Peter wills: 1. Pet. 2. 13.
And if these duties of inferiors toward their superiors, must be
performed for conscience sake, as the same Apostle exhorts us, and S. Paul
also, Romans 13. 5. I pray you what conscience can there be in denying their
obedience to their Sovereign, and giving it to another? or in preferring him
whom their selves have made their prince and king, that Romish priest, before
such as God has set over us? doubtless, if in conscience we be bound to
obey God, then can no man have so much as a show of conscience, so to rob
Gods magistrates of that authority that he gives them, as does the church of
Rome. Men sometime will make conscience where none is, as these men do, in
tying themselves to keep other laws then God has given them. And if their
sin were no greater then so, yet should they have no more thanks at Gods
hand, then the Jews had for such will-worshippings, who when they looked to
merit by such works, Esa. 1. 12.
it was said unto them, Who has required these things at your hands? But
seeing the judgment wherein we and our works must be tried, Romans 2. 16.
shall be according to the Gospel: that must be the touch stone, the rule and
the square to prove us, not our good intentions, devotions, or the doctrines
of men whatsoever. Mat^. 23.
The Pharisees made conscience in washing before meat, and many such like
things: but they are reproved of Christ, because they were so careful to keep
those their own traditions, so little regarding Gods commandments; and yet
their clensings might seem to be some imitation of Gods law. But with what
forehead can the church of Rome pretend any conscience in doing that which is
expressly against that honor which God commands to be given to
magistrates, and contrary to the humble duty that good bishops of the purer
age did always perform? It is not therefore conscience carefully settled on
Gods word, that any of them does suffer for: but for their doings that are
expressly against the same. For howsoever the answer to the English Justice (as
also other their words and writings) would seem to justify that Catholic
crew, Answer to the English Justice. cap. 1.
as if they dealt nothing in matters of (...) the evidence that has been
sufficiently and plentifully given, and proved against them, do plainly
declare their unnatural treasons. Yea and that reconciling which themselves
confess to be the principal work of their Priest among us, and whereof the
writer of the forenamed answer, says that it can nothing at all, touch or
trouble the quiet of our Country: yet because it is a uniting (of them that
are reconciled) unto the Pope: (who is not only a special enemy to our most
gracious Sovereign, but also a tirannous tormentour of all such as will not
hold their kingdoms of him, as many Stories do prove) it is therefore a
withdrawing of them, from their duty and obedience toward her Majesty,
whenever the Pope shall so command. Yea one whom themselves trust in great
matters (called Bruise I suppose, Among the letters taken with Car the
Hispauiolised Scot.
for the book I have not by me) writing to the Duke of Parma, and reporting
of the labors of such Seminary Priests as were among them in Scotland,
shows that as they convert the souls of such as they deal withal so even
then in the same instant they do affectionate them to the Catholic King.
What plainer words can there be to show to what end this reconciling tends?
You see Popery and treason must be taught together, they must be as twins,
they must grow together, and go together, foot by soote. Yea now a days it is
not right Popery, unless it bring forth some treachery. What has their
Catholic K. (a gulf that will never be satisfied) to do, with them that are
subjects to the King of Scots? yea I would saine know what Allen himself and
his brother Parsons do mean by these words (until that Day?) For in a letter
of father Will. William Allen his letter.
Allens, which I have to show (written I suppose with his own hand) to father
D. P. Rectour of the English College in Rome, he reports that M. George
Gilbert came into France, by the reverend father Robert (Parsons) and other,
to k^epe himself until that Day. What mean they by that Day? What means
Allen to write it in great letters, as a thing that should be especially
noted, and did perchance good to him and such other viperlike traitors, to
think of it? It was doubtless no other day then that, which they hoped, the
rebellion in England, the troubles in Ireland, the Spanish fleet so long
looked for, and so much spoken of, should have brought unto them. Against such
days of mischief they seek to praepare men before by their reconciling, as
that letter of Bruise before mentioned, and many other unanswerable proofs do
teach us. And therefore seeing that under praetence of reconciling men to God,
they do in deed by all means possible deuote and tie them to serve the Pope,
and that insatiable tirant, who have a long time, by many wicked and Popelike
practices, showed themselves utter enemies to our estate and Prince: what
reason can be yielded, why Princes may not by most severe punishments, prevent
the perilous purposes of such secret conspiratours, and known enemies? May
Popes use policies to get authority, which by no right they can claim, and
to keep it when they have obtained it, (as in this treatise it will appear
they did:) and may not Princes provide for the safety of their persons, the
establishing of their kingdoms, and the maintenance of their ancient and
lawful dominions? May usurpers keep that which wickedly they have gotten, and
may not lawful Kings and Queens defend their true and right inheritance? Or
must they suffer such serpents within their kingdoms, such snakes as it were
in their bosoms. We cannot let such fugitive traitors, as seek the ruin of
their native country, to wish also that such ready means to effect their
desires, might not be hindered. No we cannot hinder their attempting of the
same, by their seditious pamphlets. But we hope that all Christian princes,
that know these their lewd practices, not trusting the songs of those Sirens,
will before it be too late, seek to prevent the means that they use to bring
them to pass. Neither need they who call themselves (though untruly)
Catholics, and maintain the Romish religion within their Dominions, Cap. 4.
fear so to do. For Allen himself (if that be his answer to the English
Justice) dare not say it is a matter yet defined, but disputable only, whether
the Pope may excommunicate or deprive a Prince in case of haeresie or
apostacy, and consequently to absolve his subjects from their oath and
obedience to him. If this be a case yet not ouerruled in the Popes Consistory,
or at the least in any general Council; then even Popish princes need not be
afraid to withstand by all means that they can, such dangerous deceivers as
come in sheep clothing, making show of Religion, but are in deed ravening
wolves, secretly working treason. In so much as they who favor but too well
the Romish Religion, begin now to know and detest these rouing runnagates,
whose counsels are mischievous, whose doings are treacherous. And because the
very ground of this their brag, that they suffer for conscience sake, is this
supremacy of the B. of Rome, and his power over all, not Bishops only, but
Princes also: which they would have to be an article of religion, and so to
touch the conscience, whereas it is in truth, but a matter of Popish pride and
ambition: for this cause have I endeavored in this treatise, to prove that it
has no warrant in the word, or in the writings of the approved and ancient
fathers. Neither can all the Jesuits and Seminary priests in Rome and Rheimes,
be able to show the article of the Popes supremacy, to be a Catholic
doctrine, and therefore it is not to be received by their own rules. And
because it brings not a little light unto the truth, to know by what
practices they are become so great, and to what ends they have bent, or how
they have employed their power which they have gotten by craft and shifts: I
have therefore pointed unto such means as they have used to advance their
seat, and to some of their doings. whereby it does most plainly appear, that
their only care has bin to make themselves great and rich, nothing at al
regarding the glory of God, or ye good of Christ's flock, which they say is
committed to them. And this I have done by ancient or their own histories,
seldom standing upon the credit only of our own writers, unless it be in
report of the acts of the later Popes, which cannot be reported by any but
such as were in, or after their days. But if I had more relied then I do,
upon the reports of Protestant writers, I should have the example of our
adversaries for my defense. This treatise I set forth under the defense of your
honors name, to whom I acknowledge my self especially bound in many respects.
Which to do I am the rather moved, that to that inward witness of a good
conscience, whereby I know your L. is incited with a continual care, and
vigilant eye, to prevent the perilous practices of those busy brokers for that
Catholic king (as they call him) and other enemies to this Common wealth,
might also be added that outward testimony of truth, confirmed by proof
and practice of the purer times, to encourage you with a constant increase in
godly zeal, to discharge still the duty, that God (who has called you to
that honor) has laid upon you, and requires of you, to the service of her
Majesty, and safety of her subjects. Most humbly I crave you to take in good
part this simple token of a sincere affection, and slender pledge of my
unfeigned heart. And thus committing the happy success of this my traueile to
Gods good blessing, to whose direction and defense I also leave your Lordship
in all your doings, I humbly take my leave at my house at Ryton in the
Bishopric of Durham. []

To such as are learned among our adversaries, who seem in singleness of
soul to seek after the truth.
THE Lord is my witness whom I serve in my spirit, and to whose gain I am
desirous to bestow my talent, and whose glory I study to advance, by all such
means as of his mercy he has affoorded me, that I have not written this, or
any other treatise, because I am desirous to contend, for we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God: much less to purchase praise of learning,
wherein unfeignedly I acknowledge my want and weakness: but only for defense
of the truth, which in this country of ours, is quite forsaken of many, by
reason of ignorance in all sorts, which has possessed men through their own
negligence and careless security of their own souls health, and is
cherished and increased, through softness and sufferance of some superiors.
For if such gifts of knowledge or utterance, as God lends us, be they great
or little, be given us to edify and do good unto others: then let us use the
same to his greatest glory and gain, for fear of his heavy displeasure, if
when he call us to a reckoning, we be found not to have occupied to our
masters profit, because he will be angry with such as hide their talent in
their napkin. Matthew. 25. 26.
But if we abuse these his good graces, to darken therewith the light of the
truth, and to increase the mistes of error, how fierce shall be his wrath?
how hard shall be our judgment? For if to be negligent to maintain the
truth, be blame-worthie: how great then is their sin that impugn the same,
and that with those weapons that God has bestowed upon them to defend it
withal? Let us therefore, my wandering brethren from the plain paths, let us
I say remember for what we strive. Is it not for the truth? where may it be
found? In Gods eternal and undoubted word. What is this word? we truly
affirm it with many of the Fathers to be contained in the Scriptures of the
old and new Testament. But of your unwritten verities, you have just cause to
doubt. If therefore there be in you any love to this truth, for the which you
say you strive, any care of Gods glory, any regard of the ignorant who are (the
Lord knows, soon led the wrong way) any due respect to your own souls
health, Philip 3. 16
or any fear of Gods just wrath: let us proceed by one rule, that we may
mind one thing. Follow not I pray you, those false apostles, those crafty
workmen that can transform themselves into Angels of light. 2. Cor. 11. 13.
Deal plainly and truly in Gods cause, yea, let us on both sides weigh the
goodness of the proofs not cauilling about words, the truth of the matter, not
the manner of handling of it. If we speak of antiquity, let it be most
ancient. For that is truest, but by and by came in heresies: so that that only
which was first, can be true, as upon good ground Tertullian affirms. De
praescript.
If we bring the Fathers, let them be of the soundest, and those not maimed
nor mangled. Neither must we rest upon any of their doctrines, but such as have
their warrant in the word, and being taught of them by a general consent, do
justly obtain the name of Catholic. And for sundry points of your religion,
I can never be persuaded, but such among you as have any unfeigned desire to
attain to true godliness, do even within your selves confess and
acknowledge, that many things which are commended to the simple, as holy and
helpful for the saving of their souls, whatsoever show of godliness they may
seem to have, are yet far from the power thereof. For it cannot be, that any
man or woman that makes due account of the price of our redemption, the
ransom for our sins, the precious blood of that lamb without spot Christ
Jesus, 1. Pet. 1. 19.
can ever become so sottish as to think, that observing of days, abstaining
from some meats, buying of bulls, pardons, hallowed grains, and Agnus deis,
offering to Saints, pilgrimages, going barefoote, with haire-cloth next the
skin, crossings, or any such like bodily and trifling exercises or works, may
ever be thought of worth, to make any recompense for our offenses. If without
sheading of blood there could be no remission, Heb. 9. 22. Heb. 9. 12. and 10.
14.
(and that the blood of Christ) by which we are freed for ever, from the
danger of sin, and have eternal redemption, what can these trifling toys
help us therein? yea, what blasphemy is it to match them in this work, with
that inestimable and peerless price? Now therefore as Ambassadors from
Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 20.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, not
only to be reconciled to God (whom you have grievously offended:) but also
that you will deal plainly with Gods people, and soundly and sincerely in
matters of religion: return from whence you have straied so long, and so
far, yield to the truth, give glory to God. Lead them not any longer into the
pit of error, whom Christ has bought with so rich a ransom. Hide not the
truth from them henceforth with those false visardes of antiquity and
universality, which can never be proved to be in the Romish religion. And
seeing your selves, if you have any consciences, must confess that many things
are amiss in that you teach: be content to follow the godly and wise counsel
which Cyprian gives, that we should go back to the head, Ad Pompeium contra
epistolam Stephan.
if any thing be wrong in religion, and so try where the fault is. As if the
water fail, we will begin at the conduit, and so from thence search where it
stops: so we must says he, come to that was taught in the beginning by
Christ and his Apostles. And this he says, is the readiest way to leave
errors, and to find out the truth. Let us then I pray you walk in that way,
let us use that man, to reform religion. But if you have sold your tongues and
pens to serve the Pope, and as much as in you lies to maintain
superstition: you shall find us by Gods grace ready at all times, to answer
whatsoever you shall be able to say. And although I be not worthy to carry the
books of many among us, that are accounted and known to be learned: yet will
I (encouraged by the goodness of the cause) apply my time and study, and
slender ability to that end, knowing those hours to be most happily spent,
that are employed to the glory of God, the benefit of the Church, and the
furtherance of the Gospel. Wherein that you may join with us, I pray God if
it be his good will, to turn your hearts, and open your eyes to see and know
that which now you strive against. As for your secret practices against God and
his people, the Lord for Christ his sake confound them, and bring them to
naught. So be it. (*)

The first part of the Survey of the Popes Supremacy, wherein is a trial of
his Title.
ALthough there is not (in mine opinion) Least necessary to salvation.
any one Article in controversy by knowledge whereof less benefit redoundeth
to the church of Christ, or less comfort to the afflicted conscience of the
sorrowful sinner, than this of the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: yet (if I
be not deceived) there is not any one point more convenient to be handled, Most
necessary in some other respects.
or more necessary to be entreated upon, of such as sincerely love the truth
of God, or hearty obedience unto sovereign magistrates, than is the same.
First, for the justifying of the godly, and more than needful laws of
christian Princes, which they are forced to make, The popes supremacy an
enemy to all princes.
to banish and abandon all foreign power that themselves may sit faster in
that seat, and the more quietly and safely enjoy that sovereignty, wherein
God has placed them, which is much hazarded and endangered by this subtle,
but false persuasion, which wholly possesses the hearts of many, that if they
will be saved, and avoid the danger of damnation, they must steadfastly
believe, that the Bishop of Rome is the universal Bishop, having authority
over all, that he is the head of the church, and the general shepherd of
Christ his flock. For that man of sin, having so bewitched the hearts of his
favorites, that they are once persuaded, that it is good religion so to
believe, and that to defend this his pride, is christian constancy: what
shameless villainies will not they think to be lawful practices? what cruel
murders will not they account to be commendable attempts? what unnatural
devises and drifts will not they esteem most godly and catholic virtues? I
need not stand long in dilating this point. Our native soil has too much and
too lamentable experience of such unkindly slips. Who when they did, and do owe
to their country wherein they were bred and brought up, the sweet fruit of
love to her, and sacred obedience to her laws, bring forth almost nothing
else, but the sour grapes of treasons and treacheries. Which all spring out of
this bad root, that they falsely persuade themselves, that they owe their
chief obedience to the Bishop of Rome, whose commandments if they obey, and
follow his directions, and hearken to his persuasions, then must they suffer no
princes, with qnietnesse to enjoy their ancient and undoubted inheritance, and
rightful crowns, but such as will be tenants at will, to their lawless
master. Which, the more I do think of it, the more (I fear) we have no great
hope as yet to be free from such villainous practices, as may bring danger unto
her Majesty, and ruin to this realm: because I see that stubburne Recusants
(who if they have any conscience in religion, it is very strange, for many of
them show little conscience in any thing else) wilful Papists (I say) are not
in some reasonable manner forced in this point, to show their obedient and
dutiful hearts, but may freely without controlment, profess themselves enemies
to the truth that we acknowledge. For how can there be any certainety to this
estate, that is so pestered with a great number of false hearted subjects,
whose very religion, The religion of Papists.
is to be devoted to him and to the maintenance of his kingdom, that is
grieved at nothing more than at our happiness, neither seeks any thing so
much as our destruction?

To pluck away therefore this visard of Religion, from this their disobedient
and dissolute affection, I think it to be the duty of every good christian,
according to our calling and talents wholly to endeavor our selves. And as this
dutiful affection of christian obedience should effectually move us unto this
attempt, so the very ruin of religion, and the decay of all true devotion
which follows that persuasion, should for^e us to make haste to take this
stumbling block out of the way of the simple, lest at unawares running
thereupon, they should make shipwreck of their faith. For the Bishop of Rome
by this his pretended privilege, The popes supr^macie the decay of true
religion.
does take upon him to make laws to bind the conscience, to add to Gods
word, to dispense against the same, to chop and change religion it self, as
seems good to him, to do and undo at his own pleasure. And do he never so
much hurt in the church of Christ, yet no man must say, Did. 40. cap. 51. Papa.
Sir, why do you so? And thus having gotten by this proud name, his fulness of
power, he has filled all christendom with horrible superstitions. I speak
not here of the profane, or rather blasphemous praises, The Popes flatt^re^s.
which the flatterers of this universal Bishop do give to him, to make the
world, not so much to reverence him as a B. as to honor him rather almost as a
god. Which if it had bin done only by his Canonists, who lived in the days of
darkness, and saw not so much as men now do, yet the fault and folly had bin
very great. But that master Bellarmine, a man doubtless learned, in so clear
light of the truth as now shines, should so far ouershoote himself as he
does in this point, in his Preface to his books of the bishop of Rome:
Praefat. in lib. d^ Romans pontif.
it makes me not a little to wonder at his gross folly, and to detest his
irreligious flattery. But of this more shall be said hereafter if God permit.

Seeing therefore the truth of this doctrine is so necessary, both for the
sincerity of religion, and also for the quietness of common wealths: my
desire and purpose is, if God give good success thereunto, to show and prove
that the Bishop of Rome makes herein an unjust claim, The Popes claim unjust.
and has possessed himself of an untrue Title. To come therefore to the point
in controversy. The Church.
The holy catholic church, the spiritual house of God, the mystical body of
Christ, comprehends two sorts of members. Triumphant.
Some that are triumphing in heaven: Militant.
others that are here traveling upon the earth: some profiting (as saint
Augustine says) in this life, others perfited in an other. The question.
Now the question is, whether this part of the catholic church that is here
wandering in this vale of misery, which is called militant (for here is the
place of striving, elsewhere the place of crowning) must needs have the
Bishop of Rome to be the head thereof? This is it that they untruly, and
without any good warrant do affirm. This is it which justly, and upon good
ground (as I trust it shall appear) we deny. Master Bellarmine labors very
much to prove, that the government of one over all, is the best, Whether
monarchical government be best. M. Bellarmines first argument to prove there
must be one visible head.
indeuouring thereby to prove, that if it be best in civil regiment, it
should also be the best government in the church, as it appears in his Books
of the bishop of Rome. Howsoever the monarchical regiment within every
kingdom or country is liked of: yet that universal rule of one over al has
not bin thought good of at any time, Lib. de pontif. Romans 1. cap. 5. That is
not of necessity be ^ government for the Church that is best for other
kingdoms.
as may appear by those great monarchies so commended unto us in histories. To
whose subjection kingdoms and nations did not subject themselves willingly,
but were subdued to them by might. Neither is it necessary, that that kind of
government, which is thought best for worldly kingdoms, whose Lawmakers are
men, and whose laws are always new to be made, as new inconveniences do arise
in the commonwealth: and to be short, whose glory is here in this world,
should also be most convenient for the church of God, whose kingdom is not
worldly, whose beauty is not outward or external. But to knit up this point
with one argument, thus I reason. That kind of government is fittest for the
church, that brings most profit to them that are governed, but master
Bellarmine confesses, De pontif. Romans li^. 1. cap. 3.
that the mixed government is most profitable, therefore it is fittest.

But because it pleases master Bellarmine so well, that one should bear rule
over the whole church, let him and his fellows submit hemselfe to Christ that
King of kings and Lord of lords, Christ king in his Church. Revel. 19. 16.
Ephesians. 1. 22. Dan. 7. 14. Psalm. 72. 8.
whom God has appointed to be the head of the church, of whose kingdom there
shall be no end, whose dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the river to
the ends of the land: so that no continuance of time, no distance of place,
shall hinder his government; An invisible head of an invisible body. A pastor
in particular churches a particular head.
Or else in particular churches let him behold a visible pastor, over a visible
flock, which is also a kind of Monarchy. But this one head which is Christ,
cannot content the church of Rome, although notwithstanding his absence from us
in the flesh, there is no want either in his will or might, but that he is able
and ready, at all times to direct and defend his flock. ^. S^m. 8. 7, 10.
But as the children of Israel, not contenting themselves with that form of
government whereby God governed them, would needs have a king as other nations
had: even so will the papists have a visible monarche, one ruler of the whole
church, as one King is ruler over a whole Kingdom. And if we tell them that it
is a monster in nature, that the church which is but one, Two heads.
should have two heads, that is to say Christ, whom we all acknowledge to be
the head thereof, and the pope, whom they make their visible and ministerial
head: then they reply, that in that Christ is head of the church, it does no
more hinder the supremacy of the bishop of Rome, then it takes away the
bishop and ministers out of the church. Bellar. lib. 1. de pontif. Romans c. 9.
For so master Bellarmine affirme^, as if bishops and ministers were universal
heads, as the pope would be. And can master Bellarmine see no difference,
between the calling of pastors and teachers, and of the pope? Is he so blind
or bleareied, in beholding the brightness of their glorious Bishop, that he
can see no difference between these two: Pastors appointed of God.
pastors we are sure are ordained of God, even of him that appointed Christ to
be head of the church. The pope not of God.
But that the bishop of Rome is head of the church by Gods word, master
Belarmine himself denies. De pontif. Romans lib. 2. cap. 12.
Secondly the pastor contenteth himself with the ministry of the word and
sacraments, and such ecclesiastical censures as the word affords him. The
Popes pride.
But the bishop of Rome despises all power, abuses all magistrates, yea
almost treads under foot the majesty of the mightiest monarchs. As for the
sword of the word either he thinks it not sharp enough, His contempt of the
sword of Gods word.
or else he is too proud to draw it (for preaching is too base a thing for so
proud a prelate) but with his temporal sword he florisheth lustily. Again,
the pastor has his flock in a little compass, so that he may in some measure
discharge his duty amongst them, he may feed with the bread of life the
hungry souls, he may strengthen the feeble, comfort the weak, seek the
lost, and bring whom the wandering sheep. The Popes charge infinite.
But the bishop of Rome in chalenging authority over all places and persons,
and seeking to be head over all churches, does both meddle with other men's
charges, and lays upon his own shoulders an importable burden. Thus I trust
it appears, that this argument stands still unanswered Christ is the head
of his church, Christ I say whom God the father appointed to that office, and
who is able to undergo this charge, Tertull. de praescientia haeretic.
because he has the holy ghost to be his Housband man, to dress his vine, his
Vicar or leieutenant to look to his charge: the pope therefore, who is neither
appointed to it, nor able to do it, is not. M. Bellar. his second argument.
Now for that which master Bellarmine affirms of the heavenly host, that they
have in heaven another head besides Christ, and therefore that the church upon
earth ought so to have: his proof is more uncertain, and hard to be known,
then that he should seek thereupon to ground any argument. But the church in
the old Testament had one high priest, Argument 3.
therefore says master Bellarmine the church of Christ must have so. For that
church was a figure of Christ's church. Answer.
If master Bellarmine his argument shall go for current, we must also have
but one Temple, for they might not have any more, they might offer but in one
place, and many such things were commanded unto them, unto which it were
absurd to tie christians. Whereby we may see that in all things that church was
not a figure of ours. Then also the leuiticall priest was a figure not of any
ministerial head of Christ's church but of Christ himself as the apostle to
the Hebrews does prove in sondrie chapters. Hebr. 8. 9, 10.
And here master Bellarmine shows rather a desire to maintain his errors,
then to yield to the truth. For without all reason he affirms, that Aaron was
not only a figure of Christ, but of Peter also, and his successors, saving
that to avouch his untruth, he sets down another; namely that the
leuiticall sacrifices, were figurs not of Christ only, but also of that which
they call the sacrifice of the mass, which how untrue it is I have showed
elsewhere. But if it were true, that those sacrifices were figures of both,
must it needs follow, that Aaron also must be the figure of Christ and Peter.
Aaron no figure of Peter.
It has no necessity. And moreover to answer both this and his fifth
argument.

The church was at that time contained within the bonds of Iewry, or at the
least he was but hie priest unto them that were circumcised. As also in Christ
his time the church consisted but of a few persons and therefore it cannot be
necessarily concluded, that if the church then was governed by one, when it was
in a small corner of the world, it should now be so likewise, when it is
scattered in many places, upon the earth. But what if I should deny to
Bellarmine, that this was the government of the church before Christ, The
church not subject to one hie priest. De missa li. 1. c. 2
or that they were not at that time all under one hie priest? For more then
2500. years the church was not governed by one hie priest, which master
Bellarmine himself does not greatly deny in this place, especially limiting
this hie priest unto that time when there was some form of government
established amongst them, after they were come out of Egypt: For until that
time as himself confesses, the heads of their houses were priests. And
although there were many good men at one time as Seth, Enosh, and others, yet
master Bellarmine cannot show, that there was amongst them, a hie priest, but
every one was chief in his own family. But what if it appear that then when
there was a hie priest, yet al Gods people were not bound to be under him? The
widow of Sarepta as appears by her story, 1. Kin. 17.
had a sure faith in God, so that we may say she might well be accounted the
child of God. Naaman also the syrian did belong to the church of God. And no
doubt but God had many people among the Ninevites, who repented at the
preaching of Jonah. Jonah 3.
And yet none of these were commanded to be under the subjection of the hie
priest. Which thing being well coosidered of, we may conclude, that if the
government of one over the whole church, were not thought necessary for any
people, before such time as Moses had delivered such laws to the Israelits
from God, after they were come out of Egypt, neither yet afterward for any but
only for the Jews as by the examples alleged may appear, out of this I say
we may gather, that neither then was the whole church commanded to be under
the government of one, and also that it was not a pattern of government for the
church now, but only a figure of Christ to them, to whom all things almost
were delivered in figures and shadows. Arg. 4. Bellarm.
But master Bellarmines fourth argument has yet less weight then any of the
rest. The church says he is compared to an Army, to Man's body, or a
beutifull woman, to a kingdom, a Ssheepfold, a house, Noah's arc, but no army
without a general, no body without a head, no wife without a husband, no
kingdom without a king, no shipfold without a sheapheard, no house without a
steward, no ship but has a master. We grant all this, Answer.
and as Saint Augustine says of the head so we may say of all these
similitudes for Christ can not be called a head, Praefat. in ps. 139
if there be no body whereof he should be head. And these names are bestowed
upon the church, and belong unto her no otherwise then as we have respect unto
Christ, that is our general, head, husband, king, sheapheard, householder, and
shipmaster. And I cannot but muse at the great ignorance or wilfulness that
master Bellarmine shows in this argument, who knowing the nature of relatiues
to be such as that the one of them depends on the other, so that the one
cannot be without the other: and knowing also that the wife is so called in
respect of her husband, and the husband so called in respect that he has a
wife: yet he shames not to affirm, that the church here upon earth may well be
compared to a wife, not having respect to Christ her husband. It may be his
meaning is, to rake again out of the chenel, that filthy and blasphemous
cannon, De Immunit. m. 6. e Quoniam.
wherein the pope makes claim to be the husbaud of the church, which title
the scriptures ascribe to Christ only. To his fifth argument and his third I
answered together: his sixth argument is this. Bell. arg. 6.
Bishops are well set to have authority over Ministers, Archbishops over
Bishops, therefore also there must be one over all others. Answer.
But this proves not that which fame he would prove, that by Gods word one
must have rule over al. Seventhly (says master Bellarmine) the church must
still increase, Bell. arg. 7.
but it can not increase unless one man be above the rest to take this care,
therefore one must be chief above all other. And cannot the church increase
except one be among the rest to command all others? Answer.
Who commanded Saint Paul to preach as he did in many places? Not Peter. But
they will say he was extraordinarily called. And they that are extraordinarily
called must now by the popes laws be allowed by the pope.

But to let this pass, Ruffin. hist. eccl. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Parthia to Thomas, Aethiopia to Matthew, India to Bartholomew were appointed
to preach in, not at Peter's commandment but by lot. Not Peter, but Thomas
moved thereunto by God sent Thadde unto Edessa. So that we see Master
Bellarmines minor proposition to be very false. For the kingdom of Christ may
well be increased without the Popes supremacy. As then it was, so now I say it
may be, yea and is increased mightily, although the Pope do not only grieve
at it, but also strive against it. Bellar. arg. 8.
Lastly there must be unity in faith (says Master Bellarmine) but that
cannot be, unless all be under one, therefore one must have the rule over all.
Answer.
In deed it cannot be denied, but that one man being of authority in the
church of God, may many times do much good, either to confirm the godly, or
daunt the courage of the contentious. But if this authority be bestowed upon
the ungodly, it does much hurt, and it is then found true that the wiseman
says. Prouer. 29. 2.
When the wicked bear rule the people sigh. Neither can we have a better
example of this, then in the Bishops of Rome that have been these many hundred
of years, who to get the sovereignty above all authority, omit no practices,
shame not of any treacheries, spare not any shedding of blood, but forget all
duty, all nature, all humani^ie, all christianity, so that they may have the
commanding of all the world. And for their unity in faith, Popish unity.
it is a kind of unity, but in hypocrisy not in verity. Against Gods
undoubted word, against Christ and his office, Psalm. 2. 2. Unity without
supremacy.
his merit and satisfaction, even such a unity as David speaks of, against
the Lord and against his anointed. But can there be no unity in faith, but
where there is supremacy in authority? Yes, if we mark the histories we
shall find, that there was never so good consent in sound doctrine, as when
this supremacy was not hatched. A question concerning circumcision, fell among
the christians, in the Apostles time. Act. 15. ^.
The matter was referred unto the Apostles. The Apostles and elders came
together to look to this matter. After much disputation Peter gave his
judgment of gods goodness toward the Gentiles. To that end also Paul and
Barnabas told how wonderfully God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. And
last of all James concluded, according to whose direction the matter was
defined. Now what supremacy was in this counsel. The Papists tell us that
Peter was chief here, but this is but a bold assertion, vow of all proof. For
first the words do not show that Peter called them together but the contrary
rather Which Saint Luke would not have omitted, if Peter by any superior
authority that he had over them, had called them. Neither did Peter speak
first. For before he spoke there was much disputation, neither did he give
definitive sentence in the counsel, but Saint James, as does easily appear to
them that ^ompare the words that he did speak, with the Epistle that they did
write, concerning the matter in controversy. So that if there were then any
chief it was Saint James, and not Saint Peter. The like also I might show out
of some other of the first counsels following. Of which because I shall have
better occasion after to entreat, I trust this may suffice, to show that
without supremacy, unity in faith may be maintained, and therefore that the
minor proposition in this argument is false. And thus have I briefly r^^ne over
the arguments, that are alleged by Master Bellarmine to prove this
sovereign Monarchy, De Rom pontif. lib. 1. cap. 9.
which he says must be in Gods church, rather pointing to them, then
prosecuting any of them. Against all which I wilt oppose one only argument,
which I would desire Master Bellarmine or some friend of his, An argument
against the visible head over the whole church.
at their good leisure to answer. No invisible body, can have a visible head,
for that were a monster in nature. But the universal or catholic church is an
invisible body, for things that are universal are not seen with the eye, but
conceived in the mind and understanding. Therefore the catholic church must
not have a visible head. But all this that Master Bellarmine has hitherto
spoken, of the necessity of having one supreme governor of the whole church,
is rather an inducement, to make men think that they have some reason for this
supremacy in the church, then any strong argument, whereby they think to carry
away the weight of the matter. But the very strength and stay of this their
doctrine is contained in this one syliogisme whatsoever The Papists argument
for the supremacy.
jurisdiction Christ gave to Peter and not to the rest of the Apostles, all
that belongs to the church of Rome: but Christ gave unto Peter jurisdiction,
over the universal church and not to the rest of the Apostles: therefore the
Bishop or church of Rome has jurisdiction over all churches, or over the
universal church. And in this argument is contained, not only all that
Master Bellarmine can say, but all that they all can allege for this matter,
and therefore it is the more diligently to be examined. And to begin with the
minor, wherein is affirmed what jurisdiction or power over others Peter had,
Master Bellarmine does confidently and plainly affirm, De pontif. Romans lib.
1. cap 10. Whether Christ have resigned his place.
That Saint Peter is appointed of Christ himself, in Christ his place, the
head and prince of the church, or these are his very words. What, is Christ
weary of his office? has he given over his interest, has he resigned his
right unto Saint Peter? If he have so done, it is more then Saint Paul knew,
who after that Christ had left the world, yet still he took Christ for the
head of the church, as appears by his epistle to the Ephesians and to the
Colossians. Ephesians. 1. 22 and 4. 15. and 5. 23. Coloss. 1. 18.
Yea Saint Peter himself, seems not to know so much. For when he calls
him the head corner stone, Acts 4. 11.
he means doubtless in the building of Gods spiritual house, which is the
church. And yet master Bellarmine seems to tell us (...) when he tells us
that Saint Peter is head in Christ's place: For Christ must leave his place
before S. Peter can be in his place. ^ad Popes.
A meaner place would very well have contented Saint Peter. As for many of them
who in our fathers days and ours, have bragged that they are Peter's
successors, deserve not to be dog-driuers out of a poor parish church wherein
godly christians are assembled much less to be universal bishops over the
whole world. Neither stands the church of Christ now in need of any such
lieutenant, seeing Christ is much more effectually with his church now, then
he was with the people of the Jews, when he was conversant upon the earth.
For he that promised that he would be with us always, Mat. 28. 25. Ioh 14.
16, 17.
even unto the end of the world, and that he would pray the father, and he
should give us another comforter, which should abide with us for ever, enen the
spirit of truth he I say by the same spirit whom he has made his vicar
general, De praescript. haeretie.
as before I aleaged out of Tertullian, does husband the earth of our hearts to
make them fruitful, and is Christ's vicar in all places, with all persons, to
supply all their wants. So that he which in respect of his bodily presence
could at no time be but in one place, by the piercing power of his spirit, is
at once every where. And therefore is he much more present now in the spirit,
then before in the flesh, because before he could be at once but with a few of
the faithful, whereas now he is withal at one instant. It is therefore
overmuch boldness in master Bellarmine, either to thrust Christ out of his
office, to lay the same upon Peter, or else to imagine that Christ is not
better able by his spirit, then by the pope, to execute the same. His judgment
is also very hard, wherein he pronounces that to say, that saint Peter's
supremacy is not instituted by Christ, it is not a simple error, but a
detestable heresy. This I am sure of, De simply. prel.
that not only some private men as Cyprian have thought all the Apostles, to be
of as great honor and power as was Peter, but ever some councils have thought,
that the B. of Rome, who thinks by succession from Peter, he has as good
right thereto as Peter had, yet had not from Christ any right to the supremacy.
Council. Carth. 6.
For the sixth council of Carthage where Faustinus and others were legates from
the pope, would not yield that souerainty to the bishop of Rome, although his
legates did most earnestly seek it, not only by their diligent endeavor, but
also by aleaging false canons of the Nicen council, thinking thereby to have
deceived them. And although this were a great foil to the church of Rome, yet
their ambitious and aspiring minds would not suffer them to be quiet, but
within a little time after, they attempt the like in the counsel of Chalcedon.
Galced. Council. Act. 16.
Paschasinus and Lucentius being the popes legates, Paschasinus alleged a
decree, as if it had been out of the Nicen council, That the the church of
Rome always had the supremacy, but the council finding, that there was not
there any such decree, did ordain that the bishop of Constantinople, should
have as great, even such like privileges as the bishop of Rome had. Which had
been more wickedlie ordained of them, if Rome by Christ had the supremacy,
then we may imagine so many godly fathers assembled together would have
done. Yea that we may know, that at that time if bishops of Rome, had any
privilege above other bishops, they did not think it was so by Christ's
institution, they set down the reason, why the church of Rome was more
honored then the rest. Even because it was the imperial city as also Ireny
long before them did testify.

And this made the fathers of the council of Chalcedon the Lib. ^. cap. 3.
bolder, to yield to Constantinople (which they called new Rome) such
privileges, because it was now become also an imperial city. Thus we see
these learned writers Ireny and Ciprian, and all the fathers of these two
councels, learned and many did not think, nor would confess, that this
suprem^cie was Christ's institution, and yet master Bellarmines sharp pen
has pricked them all with one dash as guilty not of simple error, but of
pestilent heresy. Now we must needs imagine, that he would never burst out
into these excessive speeches, as if he were ravished, and besides himself
(as in these two points mentioned it may appear) unless his opinion rested
upon a sure ground. Let us therefore examine his proofs, and try the weight
of his reasons.

This most necessary controversy, Barenes of proof for the supremacy.
as the church of Rome esteems it, has not in all the scriptures any good
warrant, even in master Bellarmines own opinion, but in one place. For as
concerning those prerogatives which after he speaks off, they are rather
motives to draw us, or probable conjectures to persuade us, then strong
arguments to prove, or sufficient reasons to convince and force us to
believe. I say they have but one authority of Scripture that they rest upon,
because that place out of the sixteenth of Saint Matthewes gospel, De pontif.
Romans li. 1. cap. 12.
is but a promise as master Bellarmine himself confesses, of that which was
afterward given, when Christ commanded him to feed his sheep, so that one
is not perfect without the other. But let us see what jurisdiction is promised
in the one, and then also what is given in the other unto Peter. Mat. 16. 13.
Our Savior Christ inquiring of his disciples what opinion other men had of
him, they answered, some say that thou art John Baptist, some Elias, some
Ieremias, or one of the Prophets, and asking of them what they thought of him,
Simon Peter answered thou art Christ the son of the living God. And Jesus
answered and said unto him, happy art thou Simon the son of Iona, for flesh
and blood has not opened that unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. And
I say also unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give
unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind
in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose in earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. These are the words that must strengthen and stay
this stately building of the popes supremacy, or else it is like to fall. Out
of which master Bellarmine draws two arguments. First that Saint Peter is
the foundation, secondly that he is the key carier of the church, and
therefore that he must be the supreme head of the church. The first is taken
out of these words, Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my church.
The plain meaning of which words I take to be this. When first I took thee to
be an Apostle, I said thou should be called Cephas which is by
interpretation a stone. John. 1. 42.
Thou shall show thy self so to be indeed, and that I have named thee so
truly, for in this confession that thou have made of me thou shall hereafter
continue so constant that thou shall die in it. And therefore because thou
shall be so constant thou art Peter or Cephas indeed. As for this confession
that thou have made, all my faithful people shall settle and stay themselves
thereupon, in all conflictes of conscience, so that no terror of hell shall
be able to discourage or disamaie them.

But master Bellarmine out of this does gather that the church is built upon
Peter, as upon a foundation. Yet I trust he will not deny, that Christ is such
a foundation, as there is no other, because S. Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 3. 11.
that other foundation can no man lay, the^ that is laid* which is Jesus Christ
Of this foundation God speaks by his prophet Esaias, Esy. 28. 16.
behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a
sure foundation. Then this being granted that Christ is this special
foundation, and the only sure groundwork in this building, I trust it will
be the easier to know, what place belongs to Peter but the later of these two
places by me alleged, Bellarm, makes the Popethis stone, or Peter praefat.
i^ lib. de pontif, Romans
which is only verified of Christ, and of him only meant, most profanely
does master Bellarmine apply to saint Peter, and so to the church of Rome, and
that very particularly: making it thestone tried with persecutions, with
heresies which the pride of the Greek church, with stiffenesse of some
emperors, with schisms, with wicked popes, The corner stone that joins into
one church, the Jews and the Gentiles, The precious stone because she is rich
in ceremonies, and sacraments, in pardons, in councils, in interpretation. of
scriptures and such like: And last of all the sure foundation. But here master
Bellarmine is forced to grant, that Peter is but a secondary foundation and
not the principal foundation, for that Christ only is. This discourse of his,
makes me remember friar Toittis, Acts and Monument.
otherwise called friar Paternoster, who upon a great controversy that arose
in Scotland concerning the lords prayer, whether it might be said unto the
Saints or not, being entreated (as a man belike most sufficient) to deal in
the matter, coming into the pulpit at Saint Andrews where this controversy
was, began in particular to show how every petition might be made unto the
saints, until he came to the fourth petition, wherein he was feign to
confess, that the saints cannot give us our daily bread, and so with shame
bewrayed his own folly, and the feebleness, or rather the falsnes of his
cause. Even so master Bellarmine, robbing Christ of his ornaments that he may
deck therewith, that whorish synagogue, which untruely he callet Peter's seat,
having besides all learning, nay contrary to the sincerity of a christian
divine, most blasphemously, applied unto that Romish seat, that which
belongs unto Christ only, and is one of his most especial and peculiar
marks whereby he is set forth as the promised savior, that he should be the
corner stone, tried, and precious: Yet is he in the end forced to confess,
that the sure foundation cannot be found but in Christ, although he would seem
to apply that title, to that seat also. I would hardly have thought that, a
man so learned as master Bellarmine in these our days, wherein knowledge
abounds, Christ only the stone. Mat. 21 42. Romans 9. 33. Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16,
10. Act. 4 12. 1 pet. 2. 6.
would ever have abused Gods sacred word in such sort. That this is only true
in Christ, our Savior Christ himself, out of the Prophet David teaches. S.
Paul agrees to the same, not only writing to the Ronanes, but also to the
Ephesians, showing how he only can be as a corner stone, gathering and
knitting together the Jews and Gentiles. S. Peter also himself makes Christ
to be this stone. It is not a sufficient excuse for master Bellarmine, that he
acknowledges, that the prophet Esaias speaks especially of Christ, and then to
apply it unto the church of Rome. For seeing the scriptures with so great
consent, do acknowledge Christ to be that tried and and precious corner stone,
Ephesians. 2. 14.
and therefore do call him the corner stone, because he has made of Jew and
Gentile one, breaking down the stop of the partition wall. In whom all the
building coupled together, grows to a holy temple in the Lord, 21.
which is a thing that not one but Christ can perform, let us know, that to
give this title to any other, is to rob Christ of his glory. And yet as though
master Bellarmine had not powered out already blasphemies ynow, he prosecuteth
wickedly, that which absurdly he has begun, Bellarmines blasphemies, Esaias 8.
14. Matt. 21. 44.
adding, that this their Romish church is the stone of offense, and stumbling
block, upon which stone he that falls shall be broken, but on whomsoever it
shall fall, it shall grind him to powder. But howsoever it pleases master
Bellarmine, to brag of the might and majesty of the church of Rome, we see
that the has lost many kingdoms, that sometime served her. And where her
power is greatest, we see that many fall ^ayly from her: and that such as do
so, have no cause to repent it, but that God aideth them with his wonderful
and merciful hand, and prosecuteth them with many blessings.

But to return unto master Bellarmines argument again: Upon this rock I will
build my church. The foundation of a house has two respects: First, it holds
up the whole building, which being coupled together in it, grows to be an
house, as before I have showed out of saint Paul's epistle to the Ephesians,
and thus Christ only is the foundation of his church, as he is also the head,
whereof all the body furnished and knit together with ioints and bands,
increases with the increasing of God. Coloss. 2. 19.
This foundation or head none can be but Christ. Secondly the fonndation is as
it were a direction and rule, for the building of the rest of the house. For it
must be made, according to the length and breadth of the foundation. In which
respect the Apostles are called foundations in the revelation, foundations I
say in this church of God. Apocal. 21. 14. Ephesians. 2. 20.
And so does the apostle say that the church is built upon the fonndation of
the Apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone. How the Apostles are foundations.
And whether they be called foundations in respect of their doctrine as Saint
Ambrose thinks, or because they were first laid in the building, as
Theophilact seems to affirm: Amb. on these words Ephesians. 2. Theoph. Ephesians. 2.
yet are they not such foundations as can hold up this building: but such only
as by their doctrine and faith, must be a pattern and platform, for all other
builders to build by, that they go not out of that rule and square, which is
most fit for Gods house. And thus we confess that Saint Peter is a foundation
as also all the Apostles are. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. (...) 6.
And that which Chrysostom writes upon this place, is in my judgment a
strong argument, against this secondarie foundation, which they say Peter is,
because he will have the building so coupled wit^ the foundation, as that there
shall be nothing between them. But most plainly in his commentaries upon the
epistle to the Corinthians he will have nothing between us and Christ, no
distance between the head and the body. Hom. 8.
As he proves by examples of the head and the body, the branch and the tree,
the building and the foundation. For if the head be from the body, but the
thickness of a sword it dies. If the branch be cut from the tree, never so
little, it withers. If the house be not joined upon the foundation, it
falls. How then can we have any secondary foundation in the church of God,
without the ruin of the whole church.

The Apostles therefore may well be foundations (as I have before said,
either because that they are (as it were) the first stones that are laid, upon
Christ, in this building, or because of their doctrine whereupon our faith is
grounded, but otherwise, we can not admit them all, or any one of them,
whether Peter, or any other, to be a foundation, in this building. So that all the pains that master Bellarmine takes, to prove, that this rock must needs
signify Peter himself, is more than needs: for we will confess, that he and
the rest of the Apostles, are foundations in the church. But if after some more
peculiar sort, he will have him a foundation, neither has he proved it by that
which he urges out these words, upon this rock, neither yet by that
universal consent of the church that he braggeth of. For the fathers do in
sundry sorts expound these words, some by this rock understand Peter as he was
an apostle, and teacher of the word of God. And so may the fathers be
understood that are in this chapter alleged by master Bellarmine. For he can
not reason thus: He is called a foundation, therefore he is a foundation after
some other manner than the other Apostles. Some by this rock understand Christ
whom Peter confessed. So does saint Augustine, In Ioh Tract. 124. and Retract.
lib. 1. cap. 21.
upon this rock which thou have confessed (says he) I will build my church:
now the rock that he confessed was Christ. There are also sundry that by this
rock understand the confession that Peter made, as Hillarie, Ambrose,
Chrysostom and Cyril. But none of these interpretations can please our Romish
rabbis, but that only that makes Peter the foundation in Christ's place, which
can not out of any of these expositions be gathered. S. Augustine, master
Bellarmine says, was deceived, because he knew not the Hebrew tongue: but yet
saint Augustines words teach us, that in his time this place was not by consent
of the godly, so expounded as now the Papists expound it, but only that there
were sundry expositions of sundry men: and that saint Augustine liked this of
his best. How happens it then that master Bellarmine with a great crack
says he has the consent of the whole church? Where is their catholic
doctrine even in this point, that which now the church of Rome teaches, was
not in saint Augustines days catholic. But to to prove this doctrine to be
catholic, he says, De pontif. Romans lib. 1. cap. 10 De locis Theolog. lib. 6.
The Papists belie the Chalcedon council.
The whole Council of Chalcedon wherein were 630. fathers call Peter the Rock
and Bancke of the church so also says Melchior Canus. But both of them by
shameless lies do seek to abuse the simplicity of the ignorant. Paschasinus
or Paschasius he only said so, who was Legate there for Leo, bishop of Rome, and
sought by all means possible, to advance that seat above all others, as may
appear in that place, especially in the sixteenth action of that council, Act.
3. Act. 16.
and yet these men do not shame to say that the whole council said so. As for
that other sense of those words received by Hillary, The papists do shift often
the fathers.
Ambrose, Chrysostom and Ciril, which take Peter's confession to be that rock,
master Bellarmine would shift that off with this answer, that they only speak
of that faith, that Peter as a pastor of the church had, not of the faith
without respect of Peter's person. And yet Hillary says not, De trinit. lib. 6.
upon the rock of this pastors confession, but Upon this rock of confession.
And also not this man's faith, but This faith is the foundation of the Church,
by reason of this faith, the gates of hell can do nothing against it, this
faith has the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Ambros. in Lu^. lib. 6. cap. 9.
Saint Ambrose in the words alleged by master Bellarmine, speaks also of
faith absolutely, without having respect to Peter, as also he does in sundry
other places of that book. Yea he tells us there, that whosoever overcomes
the flesh, is a foundation in the church, and speaking of this rock, he would
that every one should have within himself this rock, which cannot be
understood of this confession as it has respect to Peter. The like also may
be said for Chrysostom and Cirill, but this I trust is sufficient to show the
vanity of his answer, which is so flat against the words of those fathers.
For they speak of that faith, because it has respect unto Christ, and master
Bellarmine would have it imagined that they commend this faith as it comes
from Peter and because it is his. And that master Bellarmine would seem out of
Hillary to confirm, Bellarmine deals subtelly out of ^iillary.
wherein yet he shows no plain dealing. For whereas Hillary says after, by
the confession of his happy faith, he deserved a high place, or rather as the
older copies do read exceeding glory, master Bellarmine does not only out of
this doubtful reading gather the strength of his argument, preferring the new
reading before the old coppie, in that paint disclaiming from antiquity; but
also to better his bad cause, whereas Hillary himself shows in plain
words, that this exceeding glory is this, that he thrice heard these words,
feed my sheep, yet he would make us believe, that it consists in this
that Peter is the head, foundation and key carier. Fie upon popery, that ever
it should so stiflie be maintained, and yet cannot be defended, but by lying
and falsifying.

And thus having answered, the most forcible proofs that master Bellarmine
brings, to prove that the church must be built upon Peter: I would on the
other side wish him to consider how weak a foundation he and his fellows do
build upon. For Peter did not only by evil council, The weakness of Peter to
be a foundation. Matthew. 16. 23.
seek to hinder his master Christ in the work of our redemption, for which
he was bitterly reproved, go behind me Satan, thou art (says Christ) an
offense unto me, because thou understand not the things that are of God,
but the things that are of men, but also afterward deny his master Christ,
Matthew. 26. 74.
and that with cursing and swearing: but having received the spirit of God, and
being enabled as much as ever he was, to the work of the Lord, yet by Peter's
fault, Barnabas and other were brought into dissimulation, so that they walked
not the right way, Gal. 2. 13, 14.
to the truth of the gospel. And therefore he was withstood even to his face
by Paul, because he was worthy to be blamed. So that even then, if there
had been no better or surer foundation, to have builded the church upon then
Peter, the building might well have run to one side. But thanks be unto God
that we have a surer rock. Peter not the foundation.
But what will he and his fellows say, to that most gross absurdity that
follows this their doctrine? For if Peter be the foundation of the church,
what answer will they make to them, that think the time was when the church
was only in the virgin Mary? Upon what foundation was the church then builded?
Yea what foundation of the church was, before Peter was borne or thought of in
the time of the law? Yea what foundation in all the time before the law, when
there was not so much as a high priest among the people. Then was there a
church as all men confess, and therefore it must needs also then have a
foundation, but it could not be Peter. For he had these words spoken unto him
almost 4000. years after the church began. And could it stand and flourish so
many years, builded only upon Christ the sure foundation, and shall we now
think that this foundation begins to shrink, or is less able to uphold
this building, so that it must needs have Saint Peter to help to hold it
up, for fear of falling? God forbid that ever christians should have so
foolish thoughts, and yet these and such like absurdities must follow this
doctrine. But to conclude this point I reason thus. That is now that always
was the foundation.
That only must be the foundation of the church now, which was in the time of
the law and before the law, but then there was no other foundation but Christ,
therefore now there must be no other. I mean no other especial or particular
foundation. My mayor or first proposition is grounded upon Master Bellarmines
words. De Pontif. Romans ^. 1. cap. 9. Rat. 5.
For going about to prove that the monarchy must be in the church, he yields
this reason, because in Christ's time it was governed by one, and if now it be
not so governed, then it is not the same church, or the same city of God.

Now thus I reason for proof of my mayor. If the not having of that outward
form of government can make that it is not the same church, how much more if
any thing be added to the foundation, but says he, the not having of the same
outward government, does make it to be not the same church, therefore much more
if it be altered in the foundation. And to say that the church now in the time
of grace is not all one with that church that was before Christ, or that then
there was any other foundation besides Christ, is nothing else then to deny
Christ to be a corner stone, that joins together both sides of the house,
making of both one. By which the minor of my argument is verified. Thus I trust
to the indifferent reader it may appear, that as this interpretation of these
words upon this rock I will build my church, that is upon Peter, is not
catholic, so the doctrine that follows thereupon is absurd. Let us now
consider what weight there is in his second argument whith he wringeth out of
the word of building. De Pontif. Romans lib. 1. cap. 11. Bellar. his 2. Arg. to
build is to rule.
Wherein he affirms, (and in truth does but affirm, for he can prove nothing
at all) that to build is to rule. Indeed he alleges three fathers which
say Peter was Pastor of the church, or ruled all the church, but is this a good
argument, Peter did rule the whole church, Answer.
therefore to build is to rule? Such a show of proof, may perchance seem
glorious in the eyes of them that have no love to the truth, but they are too
too foolish that will be caught with such baits. That to build is not to rule
I prove thus.

A man builds to have a house, that he may rule, and he cannot rule, but that
first the house must be made. So that indeed building in the house cease,
when ruling begins, when the house is made, then is it ruled. With much like
dexterity he will prove that the foundation does rule the house. In the end if
you will hear him, he will make you believe, that the house rules the
master, not the master the house. But let us grant Master Bellarmine this
which so earnestly he seeks for. Let us yield that to build is to rule,
what is then out of these words to be gathered? Upon this rock I will build,
that is I will rule my church. This we see, Christ is the ruler (and not Peter)
of the church. Then let us go forward, that we may see what help unto this
popish supremacy, the words following do bring: unto thee will I give (says
Christ) the keys of the kingdom of heaven etc. Here Master Bellarmine is
very earnest to prove, that these keys were delivered to Peter: Lib. 1. cap.
1^.
but that we deny not. But it is Master Bellarmines bad hap, many times to
take great pains fortify, where y^ enemy assaulteth him not, and to prove
that which no body denies. That we may join in some issue, we will easily
confess that the keys were delivered to Peter. What then? Were they delivered
to him alone? To whom the keys were given.
No Master Bellarmine himself confesses and that oftentimes, neither can he
deny it if he would, the fathers do so generally affirm it, that this great
authority was committed to all the Apostles. Wherein then do we dissent?
Forsooth Master Bellarmine tells us that the other Apostles had this
authority, Ibidem. The keys by commission.
but as Christ's legates, or by especial commission, but to be under Peter.
Whereas Peter had it as his ordinary jurisdiction. By ordinary jurisdiction.
Now this he should prove, but he leaves it with a bare affirmation, so that
you are not bound to believe him. But we see that which here is promised unto
Peter alone, whether because he alone took upon him to answer Christ's
question, or that Christ therein would signify the unity of the church, as
some of the fathers affirm, or because he was a figure of the church, In Ioh.
Tract. 124.
as Saint Augustine says, that I say which is here promised to him alone is in
Matthewe xviii. promised to all, and that Master Bellarmine himself cannot
deny, Matthew. 18. 18. lib. 1. cap. 12.
although he affirm it to be in all but Peter, a legantine, in him an ordinary
power.

And this promise is performed to all John the xx. in these words receive the
holy ghost, John 20 23. That the promise M^t 16. belongs, to all the Apostles.
whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain,
they are retained. And Theophilact does expound these words of Matthew the
sixteenth (which here I have in hand) by this place of saint John saying, that
in that place of saint Matthew that is promised, that is here given, and that
this power belongs unto all. What can be more plain to prove, that although
Christ spoke unto Peter only in that first place, to thee will I give the
keys, yet they were given to all? Why should we then trust the bare assertions
of master Bellarmine, or any other, that the keys are not in like manner given
to all, when we see, that Gods word makes no difference between them. But
master Bellarmine, because we go about trewly with Theophilact to expound this
promise to thee I will give the keys, by that of John whose sins so ever ye
remit they are remitted, etc. would feign make us believe if we will trust him
of his bare word, that Theophilact and we are deceived, and that Christ in
these words of saint John, does only give power of order, whereas in Matthew he
promises power of Jurisdiction. And the better to persuade us, Power of Order
Jurisdiction
he tells us, that to keep a man's sins, is not a matter of so great power,
as to bind a man's sins. And yet saint Ambrose, whose credit is far above
master Belarmines, does use the words of remitting and loosing, retaining and
binding indifferently the one for the other. And therefore this is but a blind
cavil, to keep the light of the truth under a bushel.

If we prove out of Cyprian, To bind and retain sin is al one ^e poenitentia
lib 1, cap. 2. Bellar. his shifts. De simpl prel.
that all the Apostles were of like honor and power. They were (says he)
alike in their apostleship, and had all one authority over christian people,
but were not alike among themselves. The words of Cyprian have no limitation,
but makes all of like power, and of like honor. But master Bellarmine like
false mates that do wash and clippe the coin, whereby they make it of less
value so does he by such s^eights seek to diminish the force of such
authorities as are brought against him But what reason has he so to expound
Saint Cyprian? Because he says in that Book, that beginning proceeds from
a unity to show, that the church is one. Thus then does he reason. The Church
proceeds from one or from unity: Therefore Peter is above all the Apostles.
Bellar. argument has no necessa^y consequence.
Let other judge of his argument, I see not out of this how he can prove, that
Peter has such superiority over the Apostles, as that he may exercise
jurisdiction over them, which is that the church of Rome must prove, if Peter's
supremacy shall do them good.

Seeing therefore it appears by that which has been spoken, that not Peter
only, but all the apostles in like manner received the keys, Cont. Iouin. li.
^
as Saint Hierome testifies that is power to retain or remit, to bind and
loose, although it were said to Peter, To thee I will give the keys, yet it
is manifest that for his sake only it was not spoken, or the use of the keys,
to him only was not promised, but in and by him, Christ spoke to all, without
giving less power to them or more to him. And thus much concerning this
question to whom the keys were given. Now must we see what these keys are,
What these ke^^ are.
that so we may examine, what that is which they say is given to Peter in this
promise.

Master Bellarmine affirms, De pontif. Romans li. 1. cap. 13. Beliarmines 1.
argument to prove the keis to signify rule over the whole church. Esaias 22. 22.
that they all understand by the keys, the sovereign or chief pnwer over
the whole church. And that it must so be he proves thus. In the Prophet Esaias
is described the deposing of one high priest, and placing of an other by the
delivering of the keys. And the keys of the house of David will I lay upon
his shoulder, and he shall open and none shall shut, Bellarm. falsifieth the
scripture.
and he shall shut, and no man shall open. Sincere dealing would become all
men, especially in Gods cause, which is far from master Bellarmine, as in
many other places, so here also. For Eliachim of whom the promise was made in
this place, 2. Chron. 31. 10.
was not hie priest. Indeed Azariah was high priest in the days of Ezechiah.
Neither yet was there ever any such high priest as Shebnah, whom God
threateneth in that place. Whosoever marketh either the pedigree of priests in
the scriptures, or in Josephus, he shall find it to be most false and
untrue, that here master Bellarmine so boldly affirms.

But this Eliachim was one of the princes whom Ezechiah, sent to Rabsache, 2.
Kings 18. 18.
whom in that place the Septuagint do call the Ruler of the house, as also in
the seven and thirtieth verse of that chapter. And the prophet Esaias in the six
and thirty chapter and two and twentieth verse, they call him the Master of
the household. And indeed the Hebrew words do teach him to be one that was
over the house, as also Saint Hierome yea and their own old translation do
translate those words of Esaias. And Saint Hierome in his commentaries upon that
place calls him master or ouerseer of the house. Antiq. li. 10. ca. 1.
And so Josephus also does witness that he was one of Ezechias especially friends
(as it may also appear in that he sent him to Rabsache) and his lieutenant or
vicegerent, or doer for him, let the indifferent reader now judge, whether this
be good dealing in master Bellarmine, thus to abuse the simplicity of his
reader, and the credulity of his friends, who he hops will not examine that
he writes, whether it have weight or not, but will take all for gold, that he
gives, if it look yelow. Thus against all truth to affirm Eliachim to be hie
priest is too bad. And to offer by such proof as could not but be uncertain
even to himself, to prove so weighty a matter, whereupon so great controversy
in religion hangs, does not only proclaim that all may hear it, the
weakness of his cause, but also that his endeavor is, to keep under the
truth, that it appear not. And thus much to lay open his falsehood in his first
reason: Now let us see the weakness of his second.

To bind and loose (says he) is to command, Bellarm. ^. arg.
and to punish, and to dispense, and to remitte. But Peter could bind and
loose. What now will Master Bellarmine conclude. Therefore (says he) he is
judge and prince of all that are in the church, we will not much stand with him
in his mayor, although it might have been uttered in plainer terms. Answer.
For this authority of binding and loosing is so committed unto the church,
that the power to do it, is tied not to the man but to the ministry, not to
the material church, but to the word. And therefore we cannot simply say that
to bind and loose, is to command or punish, but to command according to the
word, and to punish according to the direction of it. For we must not imagine,
that God must be the executioner of our own decrees, or tied to allow of our
judgments, but that we are the proclaimers of his judgments, and must
pronounce what God in his reueiled word has already set down. And also the
word of dispensing, though it may perchance have a good understanding, as if
thereby we mean the mean the ordering and bestowing of the word, 1. Cor. 4. 1.
in respect whereof, the ministers are called stewards or disposers of the
secrets of God: so must we take heed, that thereby we give not to any man,
saint Peter or any other, liberty to dispense at their pleasure, and to order
as they will the people of God. For as magistrates if they do not govern
according to law, abuse their authority and do degenerate into tyrants: so
ministers of the word, if they swerve from the word, are but seducers. The
mayor I say being rightly understood we do yield unto, and the minor is also
true, that Peter could bind and loose. But master Bellarmines conclusion does
not agree with these propositions neither can it follow, if they be granted.
Daniel 2.
It hangs no better together then Daniels image of sundry mettalles, that
could not long hold together. But this must be master Bellarmines conclusion to
bind and loose, is to commannd, punish, dispense, and remit, in such sort as I
have already showed, but saint Peter could bind and loose, therefore saint
Peter might command, punish, dispense and remit, as has been showed. This
must be master Bellarmines conclusion, but this will not serve master
Bellarmines turn: For every minister should so do, and not Peter only. And
all this is done by the ministry of the word in every pastors several
charge, if the minister be faithful in his office. Seeing his second argument
concludes nothing against us, what does his third and last argument? Bellarm.
3. argument out of the Fathers.
He promises by the fathers to prove, that these keis are a sovereign and
chief authority over the whole church. What, will he bring us a catholic
erposition, received by all or most of the godly learned, at all times, in all
places, agreed upon with one consent? For otherwise it is not catholic. No.
But he tells us of two of the fathers only. And the one of them being
himself a pope, and in such times as that before his days this superiority
over all, had bin sundry ways sought for by the Bishop of Rome: his credit is
in this point not much worth against us.

As for Chrisostom who is the other witness that must prove that by the keys
Christ means this vinuersal jurisdiction: Chrysostom examined. In Mat, hom.
55.
First he reasons in that very place where these words are, against the
Arrians or some such heretics, as made Christ not equal to the father, and
insulteth against them by occasion of this place. The father (says he) gave
unto Peter the revelation of the son. But the son gave unto him partly that
he might sow through the whole earth, this revelation both of the father and
of the son: partly that he being a mortal man, should be endued with
heavenly power, and have the keis of the kingdom of heaven. And it follows
there in Chrisostom, how then is he less, that wrought this in Peter? So then
to prove Christ to be equal unto the father in power, he shows that he
wrought, if not more mightily, yet as powerful in Peter as the father did.

And upon this occasion he thus amplifieth this excellency of Peter, as also he
does a little before in respect of that universal church that Christ committed
to him, which charge the rest also had. For all the apostles were general
Preachers, wheresoever God called them. Ibidem,
And therefore Chrisostom does say of them all, not of Peter only, that they
were the teachers of the world. And in another place that there were two paires
of the apostles that held this headship. In Matt. hom. 38
And yet Peter might better then any of the rest, be called the pastor or head
of the church, that were of the twelve, because the charge of the Jews
wheresoever they were in any place, were committed to him without any
limitation of nation or country wherein they lived. Seeing therefore his
proofs whereby he indeuoureth to prove these keis to signify that universal
and sovereign authority over the whole church, are either so false or faulty
that they are not worth alleging, as are his two reasons taken out of
scripture, or so feeble that they can have no strength, as this out of
Chrysostom: I see no reason why we should yield either to scripturs, so falsely
or foolishly applied, or much less to the sayings of men, so hardly construed.

For as before I have admonished, it is one thing to have an excellency or
superiority among others in some respects of other men's yeldings: another
thing to have jurisdiction, of his own right and interest, over all other. The
first we confess was in Peter, but that will nothing at all help the Pope, or
the jurisdiction of the church of Rome. An argument against this exposition of
the Papists.
Against the interpretation of the popish church thus I reason. If these keis
belong to all them, that have ovtained that grace of God, to be called to the
function of a bishop, (I speak not of the hononr, but of the office) then is
no chief authority signifies thereby, (for where many are equal there is no
man chief) But these keys belong unto all such as Theaphilact does testify,
Theoph, in Mat. 16.
therefore no such chief authority is signified thereby. For my minor
proposition that every bishop or pastor has such authority, or such keis,
besides the testimony of Theophilact, we have most plain proof out of Gods
word. Mat. 16. 18. An argument to prove my minor. John 20, 23.
Whatsoever is promised Matthew the sixteenth chapter in these words, I will
give thee the keis, is performed John the twentieth chapter, in these words,
whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are
retained: but in Saint John, no chief power is given, but such as is general
and common to all the apostles, therefore in Saint Matthew there is not promised
any chief power, but such as is common to them all, De Pontif. Rom, lib. 1.
cap. 12. 13.
and so to all pastors in them. My minor needs no proof for it is confessed
by master Bellarmine. But master Bellarmine denies my mayor, A reply against
Bellarmines answer to the mayor,
and yet has no ground of his denial, but this only, that he takes it not
be all one to bind and to retain sins or sinners, and to loose or remit.
Which subtle difference the fathers did not see. And therefore Theophilact does
not only expound this place of Matthew the sixteenth chapter by that place out
of Saint John the twentieth chapter, making this later to be a perfourmance of
that promise, I will give thee the keys, but also he flattely there opposes
remitting to binding, whereas by master Bellarmines doctrine, if he had been
brought up in his school, he should have set remitting against retaining,
Bellarm. cap. 12 and 13. lib. 1. ^epoenitentia lib. 1. cap. 2.
and not against binding. For (says he) it is a greater matter to bind, then
to retain, to loose then to remit. Saint Ambrose also makes to bind and to
retain, to remitte, and to loose all one. For, whilst the purity of doctrine
in some measure remained, this subtle Sophistirie was unknown in Gods church.
But now for defense of popery, such stuff must serve the turn, when they
have no better. And here I cannot but marvel at master Bellarmine his answer
unto this argument out of the centuries. Cent. 2. lib. 1. ca. 7. col. 526. The
argument out of the Centuries against supremacy.
For they that wrote those books reason thus, if in these words, to thee will
I give the keys etc. there were promised any supremacy, the Apostlles could
not have doubted which of them should have been chief, but they doubted of
this, therefore there was not in those words any such supremacy promised.
Bellarmines answer co it examined.
Master Bellarmine makes no question but that they doubted of it, for there
was among them some contention about that matter, but for the mayor he
answers, that the apostles did not understand plainly that there was any
promise made to Peter, until after that Christ rose again, but then they
suspected some such matter and that made them strive. Is it not great boldness
in master Bellarmine, in so weighty matters, to bring no other warrant but his
foolish fancy? Or to answer such an unanswerable argument, by such silly
shifts? They knew not says master Bellarmine that Christ made such promise
to Peter until after Christ was risen again. But if it had been an article
of such importance as now it is made, why should they not have known it? They
heard what Christ said to Peter, they heard the promise of the keys, and this
is as much as our Romish Rabbines can now bring for their proof. If they
understood it not so, as master Bellarmine here confesses they did not, what
new revelation have our new Romish teachers, to assure this to be the meaning
of those words? But they seem to be whelps of one hair, with those
heretics whom Tertullian reprooueth, De prescription, aduerlus haerer.
Heretics and Papists charge thopostles with ignorance. Artic. 18.
because they said the apostles knew not all things, that if their doctrine
were not agreeable to that which the Apostles taught, they might the less be
condemned. As Bishop Fisher, not knowing better how to excuse their
additions unto the ancient doctrine, Against Luther.
which the church of Rome has brought in, says that later wits know things
better then before they did.

Well, master Bellarmine you see confesses, that the apostles understood not
then, that promise as now the papistles do. When did they reform their
judgment? Where, in what place do they show any signification, that they ever
understood it otherwise? If they neither understood it so before Christ's
resurrection, neither yet gave any signification afterward, by word or
deed, by their writings or examples, that their knowledge was in this point
reformed, how can we say, that they ever took that to be Christ's meaning?
But the first of these is confessed (as before is showed) by Master
Bellarmine, the latter they cannot show. Therefore it may be gathered that
the apostles never understood the words of Christ as the papists do.
Thapostles strove not for supremacy after Christ's resurrection.
And how does he prove that which he boldly affirms, that then they
suspected such a thing? Or that after Christ's resurrection they did strive. It
is mentioned in the story of the gospel, Matthew. 18. 1. Mark. 9. 34. Luke. 9.
46. Luke 22. 24. John. 13. 13. Matthew. 20. 24. Mark. 10. 41.
that twice they did strive who should be chief.

Of both which times the three Evangelists do make report. And Saint John
also in his gospel, seems to point unto the latter strife, when having
washed his Apostles feet, Christ gives them good lessons of humility. But
that after Christ's resurrection they did consende for this, it cannot be
proved. For both these times were before his death. And therefore I cannot but
marvel, that Master Bellarmine will bring such proofelesse stuff to open
light, as though he imagined, that his counterfaite coin, must go for
current. And whereas afterward he alleges out of Origin, Chrysostom and
Hierome, that the apostles did strive amongst themselves, because they
suspected this supremacy of Peter, himself does not in this, give credit to
these fathers.

For if it be true that master Bellarmine said before, that this suspicion
was not until Christ was risen, then how is this true that they affirm that
they suspected thus much, when they did strive first of all. Which was at the
least about a year and a half, before Christ rose again. Neither do these
fathers herein deserve to be believed. Matthew. 17. 12.
For the ground of this their conceit, is that they imagined the paying of
the tribute money to have been before this contention. For they surmise that
because Christ said pay for me and thee, therefore the rest of the apostles,
suspected that Peter should have some superiority over them, and grudged at
it. But this their imagination, as it is far from the thought of the apostles
(for any thing that may be gathered) so is it flatly confuted by the scripture.
For this contention was before the tribute money was demanded, namely, in the
way before they came to Capernaum, as is most plain in the evangelist saint
Marks gospel, the ninth chapter, and three and thirty and four and thirty
verses. And the tribute was not demanded before they were entered into
Capernaum, They contended not because they suspected Peter's supremacy.
and into a house there, Matthew the seventeenth chapter and xxv. verse.
Therefore that suspicion of supremacy was not the cause of their contention,
which master Bellarmine would prove out of these fathers. But perchance
rather that ambitious affection that was in James and John the sons of
Zebedee, Math. 10. 37.
which afterward they showed more plainly, 41
in asking that one might sit at his right hand, and the other on his left
hand, was cause of their strife. And indeed the evangelist concerning this
says, that the other ten disdained at them for it. But the other contention
that was among the apostles is not said to be against Peter, as this is said
to be against James and John. But it seems that every one would be above
other, and no suspicion then, that Peter should be above all.

And whereas they that wrote those Books called the Centuries, allege, that
if there had been in Peter any such Supremacy, Christ would have said to
them when they did strive, contend no more, for I have made Peter chief
amongst you: but (say they) he spoke no such words: Now master Bellarmine
will prove, that Christ told them, that Peter was appointed to be chief.
Luke 22. 26. Bellar, argument to prove Christ to have told Peter he should be
chief.
And how? He that is greatest among you (says Christ) let him be as the
least, and the chief as he that serves. Therefore (says Master Bellarmine)
it is plain, that one is called chief. If he had meant that the truth
should appear, he would, by comparing this place with others where the same
thing or story is reported, have set down the true meaning of the words,
and not take advantage, to pervert the true meaning, and deceive the simple
Reader. For Matthew in his twentieth chapter and twenty six and twenty seven
verses, and Mark in his tenth chapter, and forty three and forty four
verses reporting this story, do plainly teach, that Christ does not speak
of any chiefenesse that was among them, but that they would have, or desired.
For they say not, if any be, but if any would be chief, so reproouing their
ambitious affection, and teaches them rather to endeavor to be humble. In
Math. how, 66
Because, as Chroysostome says, he that seeks Supremacy shameth himself.
And therefore never any I suppose before Master Bellarmine out of these words
of Christ, has gathered this proclaiming of Peter's superiority.

Hitherto we have seen, how little he can prove by the first of his two
places of scripture. Now let us try what weight the other testimony has.
Bellann. depontif. To. li 3. c. 34. John 21.
And this is drawn also out of the words of our savior Christ to Peter, who
when he had thrice asked of him, Bellarm, 2. argument our of scripture answered.
whether he loved Christ, and still he answered, that he did love him, he
wills him to feed his sheep. Now these words (says master Bellarmine)
are spoken to Peter only. Answer.
It is true. But that Lesson is not given to Peter only. For, to all the
apostles it belongs, to feed Christ's sheep, Li, 1, cap. 12.
and therefore are all Pastors and Sheepeheards.

Yea, it is confessed by master Bellarmine in his answer to an authority
alleged out of Cyprian, that all the apostles were like in apostolic power,
and had even the same authority over christian people. If they had the self
same authority over christians that Peter had, which here he confesses, then
to the rest as well as to Peter, De pastorib u^ cap. 13.
was this charge of feeding Christ's sheep committed. And therefore Saint
Augustine will have Christ to be the only good shepherd, and that all other
are good in him, and are equal in this their work, for he makes no
difference. But Christ feeds, they also feed, yea enen when they feed he
feeds, and Christ says that then he feeds in them, because his voice is in
them, and his love is in them.

But what should I stand upon this point? It is more plain, then that master
Bellarmine himself can deny it, although he would blind the eyes of the
simple with this distinction, The charge of feeding belongs to all alike.
that it is principally spoken to Peter, but in some sort to all. What, was
Peter bound to feed more diligently then the rest of the Apostles, Christ's
sheep? None may be negligent in this office. And he that does the work of the
Lord, Ier. 48. 10.
(especially this work) negligently, is accursed by Gods own mouth. We must
all do it to the uttermost of our power. And Saint Paul was not afraid to
say, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
that he labored more abundantly then all the Apostles meaning in the
preaching of the word. So that it seems that this office was not especially
committed to Peter, Theoph. in Ioh. cap. 21.
but that I may say with Theophilact upon these words. Let Bishops and
preachers hear, what is commended unto them.

Feed (says Christ) my sheep, bring with thee thy ministry, if thou wile
set forth thy love to the great sheepehearde. Then also master Bellarmine
will prove out of these words and that easily as he says, De pontifi Romans
lib. 1. cap. 15.
that Peter hereby has the chief power. To rule and to have chief rule not
all one.
But indeed he only proves that to feed is to rule, whereas he promises
to prove with ease, that to feed is to have the chief rule.

But you must hear with him, the brightness of Peter's chair at Rome has so
daseled his eyes, that he cannot epsy so small a miss. But the weight of all
consists in the last point that he handles concevning this place, Lib. 1.
cap 16.
and therefore about it he bestows some more labor. And first he affirms
that he is sure and certain, that even all christians, yea even the Apostles
themselves, are as sheep committed to Peter. For his trifling conjectures of
the difference between lambs and sheep, they are not worth speaking of. But
let us see what force is in his notable reason, for himself so calls it, he
so well likes of it. Bellar his Arg. to prove Peter to be a universal past.
Christ most manifestly (says he) commits to Peter all those sheep, of
which he may say they are mine, but he may say so of all christians, therefore
all christians are Peter's sheep. If master Bellarmine had good store of strong
reasons to prove his assertion, he would never make so much of so blunt a
weapon. For he can never prove his mayor.

Christ said not feed all my sheep, Answer.
for he knew that he could not do, but only feed my sheep. Now this is as
the Logicians do term it an Indestuite proposition. Which has no
limitation, but may be understood as occasion serves, so that to make it more
particular or general, we must have regard to the circumstances of the place.
And is it not very strange, that he which here will make a universal
proposition of that that is not so, Lib. 2. cap. 8.
to force out of it an argument, where in truth there is none, will be as bold
at another time to make of a universal proposition a particular. 2. Tim. 4. 16.
No man says Saint Paul assisted me, all men forsook me, that is says he
none of them that should have helped me with the Emperor. And so he applies
perchance to one or two, that the apostle speaks doubtless of all that
professed religion then at Rome, as though he were even the creator of
Lodgicke, and would have it as his creature, to frame it self, to serve his
turn.

But to come to the point. As he affirms all even the apostles by these
words to be committed to Peter: so I do confidently pronounce, This charge
feed my sheep has a limitation.
that out of these words, and some other circumstances, great reasons may be
gathered, to show Peter's authority in these words to have a limitation. And
first this word my sheep, which master Bellarmine makes the chief strength
of his argument, does make much for that interpretation, which I take to be the
true and natui all sense of the place. When the meaning of our savior Christ,
is to speak of that general charge over all, then he utters it in other
words, Go teach all nations, Matthew. 28. 19^ Mark, 16. 15.
and again going into the whole world, preach the gospel unto every creature.
But here is no such general charge but only feed my sheep. Christ's
peculiar sheep.
What are these sheep that Christ calls my sheep? We know that Christ
after a special meaning, calls the Jews his people and his sheep. He
says he is not sent, Matthew. 15. 24.
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

And as though in comparison of the Jews, he made no account of the gentiles,
he says it is not meet to take the childrens bread, (meaning the salvation
that was sent to the Israelites) and cast it to the dogs. Therefore Christ by
this word my sheep means (as it should seem) the people to whom he
especially was sent, amongst whom he was borne, to whom he preached, Lib. 1.
cap. 16.
(as also Master Bellarmine for that prefers Poters ministry among the
Jews) and amongst whom he died, that is the Jews.

And besides the manner of sending of his Apostles unto their general charge,
(whereof I have already spoken) which is far differing from this, the very
office that we know was laid upon Peter, Gal. 2. 7.
does much confirm this interpretation. For Saint Paul says that the
gospel over the circumcision was committed to him, as the gospel over the
uncircumcision was committed to Peter. We see therefore that Peter had a
peculiar charge and calling, to be the apostle of the Jews. Which is proof
strong enough, to prove that Christ never meant, to commit any such general
charge over all the world unto him, unless we will imagine, that Christ did
first he knew not what, and afterward revoked his former commission. I say
this limitation of Peter, especially, although not only, to one peculiar
people, is as it were a reuocation, of his former universal calling, if any
such had been, or rather because indeed none such was, it is insteede of a
commentary upon these words, feed my sheep, to teach us how to understand
them. Feed my sheep, that is the Jews, whom I have especially committed to
thee, as I also took pains almost wholly and only among them.

Furthermore also when Saint Paul tells us that the gospel over the
uncircumcision, was committed to him, as unto Peter the gospel was committed
over the circumcision, his meaning is to tell us, that Christ has as well
placed him over the Gentiles, as Peter over the Jews. And therefore of
himself he says that he was separated unto the gospel of Jesus Christ, Romans
1. 1. Acts. 13. 2.
because God commanded them, to separate unto him Paul and Barnabas, to the
work whereunto he had called them. And what this work is, Act. 22. 21.
is another place declared, depart for I will send thee, far hence unto the
Gentiles. Which his calling to the Gentiles, Gal. 1. 16.
he also speaks of unto the Galathians, assuring himself that God called
him to that office.

But now for Peter, we must not doubt, but that he also was called of God. For
they are not to be heard, that would make us believe that it was but a
covenant among themselves, that Peter should preach to the Jews; Paul to the
Gentiles, but Paul does assure himself of his calling in that he that was
mighty in Peter, was mighty in him also. Saint Hierom on the Galathians lib.
1. cap. 2. very well writes, One and the selfsame (Christ) committed to me
the gospel of the uncircumcision, (speaking in the person of Paul) who
committed to Peter the gospel of the circumcision. If then Peter was by Christ
called to this apostleshippe, where was it, when, in what words? In all the
Scripture there is not auie one place but this, wherein he is called by Christ
to this ministry over the Jews. And therefore Christ's sheep, are rather
that peculiar people that were (as no man denies) committed to Peter, then the
whole world, whereof in Scripture, they have no probable conjecture. And this
interpretation, I marvel that Master Bellarmine has not sought to confute,
seeing it is about two hundredth and seventy year old. Perchance he thought
it rested upon stronger reason, then he was able to convince or confute, and
therefore he let it alone.

Other arguments are also alleged to disprooue this supremacy of Peter over
all, Arguments against Peter's supremacy.
and to show that these words feed my sheep, cannot give unto him any such
sovereignty. Saint Paul acknowledged no such subjection to him, Gal. 2.
when he does not only pronounce, that he learned nothing of them that seemed
to be chief, but also withstoode Peter in the face because he was worthy to be
reproved.

Out of which words how lightly so ever Master Bellarmine would cast them
off, with this distinction that they were fellows in preaching, but not in
governing (as though the preaching of the word, and the practice or
government according to the same were then separated) yet Saint Ambrose and
Theophilact upon this place do teach, that there was no inequality between
them, and that Paul was nothing inferior to Peter.

And mark how absurdly he would daube up the matter, it is nothing to me
says S. Paul to the Galath. 2. 6. what ones they were once that seemed to be
somewhat. Which he expounds as if he had said, how vile soever they were in
time past, what was that to me? I conferred with them, for now they are great
apostles. If Saint Paul had so meant, he would not have said that they seem
to be somewhat, but that they indeed are somewhat. And thus master Bellarmine,
rather than he will say nothing, will pervert the very sense of scripture: for
these words, no doubt, are expounded, by those that follow in that verse,
they that seemed to be somewhat gave nothing to me.

Saint Paul also without asking leave of Peter. Argument. 2. 1. Cor. 5. 3. 1.
Cor. 7. 25. 1. Cor. 11. etc. 14.
did exercise jurisdiction among the Corinthians, against an incestuous person,
he gives counsel concerning virgins, he did set order among them concerning
prayer and the eucharist. And he called to Miletum the elders of Ephesus to
give them commandment or advise concerning the church there. And yet master
Bellarmine would make us believe, that the jurisdiction was in Peter only,
authority to preach in the rest together with him. Argument. 3. Act. 6. 2.
Bellarmine his reply. Answer.
Again the apostles I say the twelve (not Peter) did call together the
christians to appoint deacons. We must believe (says master Bellarmine) that
Peter devised this or agreed to it. And why must we believe that Peter was
author of that act, seeing there is not one word to warrant it? Why should we
imagine, that rather of him then of another? As for consenting we are sure he
consented, for it was done by a general consent. Peter and John were sent by
the rest to Samaria, Act. 8. 14. Argument. 4.
to instruct them how happened it that they would send him, if he might
command them all? Had the Apostles authority to send him? Then was not he
above them. Had they no authority? Then did they abuse him, which is not to be
thought of so godly men as they were. And howsoever master Bellarmine would
salve the matter, in telling us that sending does not import always a
subjection in him that is sent: Bellarm. reply,
yet if he had been their superior, it is to be thought they would rather have
desired him to take order for them of Samaria, Answer.
then have sent him. But I am sure the pope now would not take in good part,
that his college of Cardinals should send him about any such business.
Neither is that argument brought to prove a subjection in him unto them, but
that he is not their ruler, or that they owe him no subjection. And therefore
Master Bellarmine his answer that sending does not always signify
subjection is nothing.

But I am weary in spending time about his trifling cauils, who though he
cannot soundly refell the arguments that are against their doctrine, yet will
he not confess the truth, and so give glory unto God.

Having thus examined I trust sufficiently, the chiefest things alleged by
Master Bellarmine, concerning these two places of Scripture, which especially
they rest upon: I must also briefly examine his second sort of proofs which
he promised to use, Lib. 1. cap. 10. Bellarmine his second sort of argument
from Peter's prerogative.
and that is grounded upon the prerogatives that are ascribed to Peter. Wherein
I shall be the shorter, because many of them, are rather to make a show of
proof, then worth alleging. The changing of his name from Simon to Peter, De
Romans pontif. lib. 1. cap. 17. 18. etc.
when he was first called, proves not that he was made head of the Church.
For he had that name about three years and a half, John. 1. 42.
before they ascribe unto him this headshippe. Likewise that he is commonly
named first, is a weak proof. For if that should signify his headship, then
should it never have been placed otherwise then first, but Saint Paul who
knew well enough what place he should give to Peter, Galath. 2. 9.
names James before him. He walked on the waters. It is true, but what is out
of that concluded? Is he therefore the head of the church? Not so. Fourthlie
he first of all knew the hie mysteries of our faith say they: if he did, can
that make him head of the church? It cannot. Fiftlie it is said the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. That is the church as the fathers teach
almost with one consent, and therefore that is the catholic exposition. But
that which out of Origin he alleges, because it is contrary to the text,
and testimony of the most of the godly, is justly rejected.

And for that they would prove the supremacy because Christ said to Peter
pay for me and thee, is answered page thirty-sixe. That he praide for Peter
it is not singular, for he prays for all that the father has given him.
John. 17.
If he will confirm his brethen, it is no marvel, because he that had more
experience then others of his own weakness, is fittest to make others seek
for true strength and not to trust to their own, that will deceive them. But
he first of all the Apostles saw Christ, after his resurrection, what then? If
that may give the headship of the church, Mark 16. John 20.
Marie Magdalene should be the head, for she saw Christ first, yea although
Peter and John did run to seek for him, yet he would not appear first
unto Peter, to take away the very strength of this their argument. If Christ
washed the feet of Peter first (if I say, for it may justly be doubted of)
must that give him the supremacy?

The like argument may be gathered out of that that Christ foretells Peter of
his death, Acts the first chapter and thirteenth verse.

And for the twelfth prerogative, where he makes Peter as the good man of the
house, to gather together into one place the company of Disciples, it is
grounded upon a fiction. For, there is not one word, that he gathered them:
But there is somewhat to be gathered against Peter's Supremacy. For, although
he moved them to appoint one in Judas his room, yet he appointed not one,
as the Pope would very readily have challenged that privilege. Not Peter, but
they, appointed two. Verse 23. Verse 24.
They prayed. They also gave them lots not Peter.

If master Bellarmine would reply that these actions yet must be performed by
one, and by likelihoode this one should be Peter, we will not stick to
grant him so much. But if Peter had been supreme head of the church, here
had been good occasion to have named him as direttor in these actions, which
we see is not done.

The thirteenth prerogative Peter first preached after the receiving of the
holieghost. Act. 2.
This makes not him Supreme head.

And herein the Popes can not claim to be Peter's successors. He wrought the
first miracle, Act. 3.
but the text joins John with Peter, which should not have been done, if
it had been any argument for Peter's supremacy, Act. 5.
to have it thought, that he wrought the first miracle.

For the fifteenth prerogative comes the destruction of Ananias and Saphira,
which was by that power that GOD gave, not to Peter only, but to them all,
Mark the sixeteenth chapter, and seventeenth and eighteenth verses: yea, and
also unto Saint Paul although he were not one of the twelve. Act. 16. 18.
For even by the same power Paul cast out of a maid a spirit of divination,
Act. 28. 8.
and healed the father of Publius, that lay sick of a fever and a flixe and
struck Elymas with blindness, healed one borne Iame at Lystra.

The sixteenth prerogative is taken out of the ninth chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, Act. 13. 11. Act. 14. ^. Act. 9. 32.
where Peter's diligence in preaching is commended, in that he traveled,
throughout all quarters. Which the Popes friends for very shame should never
have spoken of. For, if so be that his diligence be an argument of his
supremacy, as they feign would make it, then why is not the Popes supine
negligence in that function, as strong an argument against this Supremacy?

We will admit (although it justly may be doubted of) that which is the ground
of this seventeenth prerogative, Act. 1^.
that Peter first did preach unto the Gentiles. And must that needs prove that
he is therefore head of the church? I am sure that master Bellarmine himself
will confess, that it is no necessary argument. But prayer was made without
ceasing unto God for him.

It is a token that the Church (seeing the persecution that now began
against the godly, and that Peter also a worthy minister of the word, and a
great apostle was in danger) was very careful for his preservation. But this
does not prove him to be the head of the church, Act. 12. 5.
no more then the care that the godly had over Saint Paul, Acts the
seventeenth chapter and tenth verse, in sending him away to Berea, by night,
for his better safety, or letting him down by a window in a basket, 2. Cor.
11. 33.
when he was in great danger in Damascus, does prove Paul to he the head of
the church.

Of the nineteenth I have spoken before, page 10. The twenteenth prerogative,
Paul went to Jerusalem to see Peter. What, Galat. 1. 18.
must he therefore needs be head of the church? Belike then for the three
years wherein he saw him not, Verse 14.
but went (preaching) into Arabia and to Damascus he confessed him not to be
head, but as if he had forgoten himself all this while, he now at the last,
yeldeth him seem reverence. But if he had done it in any such respect, he would
and should at (...), before he had taken his office upon him have had Peter's
alowance. And thus much concerning Peter's privileges or prerogatives which they
allege out of Gods book. Which although many of them are evident arguments of
excellent graces, that God had bestowed upon him, and great mercies which God
showed to him, yet if master Bellarmine or any other, will out of them conclude
Peter's supremacy, the weakness of his argument will be seen of very
children. But yet because before he made Peter's prerogatives his second proof
of this his supremacy, I have thought it necessary to reckon them, (for other
confutation of them needs not) that all may see what weak proofs they do
bring, for this their chief point of doctrine. As for the other eight
prerogatives, they are not worth speaking of: Both because we may justly doubt
of the truth of many of them, as being proved but by fabulous writings: and
also because if they were true, it were not matteriall for the point in
question. And therefore letting them alone as rotten propes which will fall in
pieces of themselves, if any weight be laid upon them, I hasten to his third
proof that he promised. And that is out of the fathers. And herein it is
needles to examine every particular testimony. Lib. 1. cap. 10. How the
fathers ascribe much unto Peter.
Only I will set down in what sense the fathers truly may, and often do,
ascribe unto Saint Peter many excellent titles, that thereby examining the
fathers, and finding them to keep within the bounds of gods word, we may with
reverence receive them. But if they pass those lists, I trust master
Bellarmine and al his friends will bear with us, if we reject the doctrine of
men, as himself in this very book before, refuses the judgment of Origene
and Theophilact, Cap. 12.
and of others in other places. First therefore this word in latin primatus
which we now call Supremacy, but indeed does signify (that I may make such
a word) Firstnesse, is ascribed unto Peter of the fathers in respect of time as
in the place alleged here out of Ciprian, First, in time. De pontit. Romans lib.
1. cap. 25.
neither Peter (says Ciprian) whom the Lord chose first, and upon whom he did
build his church, whereas Paul did afterward reason of circumcision, Cypr ad
Quintinum vel Quintum.
did boast himself, or did take upon him any thing insolently or proudly,
saying he had the primacy, and that new ones, and aftercommers shall rather
obey him. him.

This place is alleged by master Bellarmine often, to prove Peter's supremacy
or jurisdiction over others. But the words are very plain that Cyprian
speaks, of his being first, not in dignity, but in tune, as appears not
only in that he says he was first chosen, but also, by the words of new
ones or aftercommers. But master Bellarmine will say, Job. 1. 39. 40.
that Andrew was chosen before him to be an apostle, and therefore, that
Cyprian was deceived, if so he meant. It may so be. For men may err. But the
question is not now, whether Cyprians judgment herein be true or not, but
upon what occasion, or in what respect Cyprian gives Peter the primacy, which
is most plainly in this place set down to be in respect of time. And so may
other of the fathers in this respect use this word, and give him this title.
And sometime this title of primacy is given unto him in regard of some
excellent things that he was endued withal, First in respect of some
execllent graces.
by reason whereof, his fellows and brethren amongst themselves, and the
fathers after, might give unto him some kind of reverence, in name or
otherwise. But this will do no good for proof of popish supremacy. For they do
hold, that Peter in his own right, and by that jurisdiction which by Gods word
he has, is head of the church, and has the supremacy above all other. We say
that because of his gifts of zeal, knowledge, constancy, or boldness, he was
admitted and allowed to speak and to do, many things, 1. Pet. 5. 1.
but that in his own right, he was but equal with the rest and as he calls
himself a fellow elder, with them that were meaner then apostles.

Therefore to be a chief man, Head men have not always in their own right
jurisdiction over other.
or a head man among them, is not to prove him to have jurisdiction over them.
In all corporations or fellowships, as aldermen in cities, although in regard
of that place, they are alike, none more or less an alderman then another: yet
among them, some are better esteemed of, even of themselves, because of their
learning, wisdom, dexterity in government, credit, power, or wealth, not
because they can in right claim it, but because other do for such things as
they see in them, yield it unto them, not that they have power over them, but
only they are of good account among them.

And thus much to prove, that that is not sufficient, which master Bellarmine
says will serve the turn, to prove that the fathers say that Peter was head,
Lib. 1. cap. 25.
or had primacy over ye church. For neither his estimation in respect of his
gifts, neither if by voluntary subjection they did submit themselves unto him,
it can prove him to have right to rule over them. And this they must prove, or
else they gaiue nothing to their cause, that Peter by the word of God, has
authority over the whole church, and over the apostles. And therefore it makes
no great matter, what men say of Peter's authority, but how truly they ground
their sayings upon Gods word. And thus I trust it appears to the indifferent
reader, that the minor proposition of that argument which I have set down in
the end of my answer unto master Bellarmine ninth chapter of this book, Page
12.
wherein consists the great strength of the popish Monarchy, is not agreeable
unto the truth, or catholic doctrine, howsoever that church of Rome, reioiceth
in that title that is none of hers, thereby deceiving the world, as if all that
she taught were sound and catholic.

The proposition is this that Christ gane jurisdiction unto Peter, over the
universal church. The chiefest profes that either they all have, or that
master Bellarmine can allege, is out of Saint Matthew the xvi. where they
say this jurisdiction is promised, and Saint John xxi. where they say it is
given, which their interpretation as I have showed cannot stand with the text
it self or the interpretations of the sounder fathers. His second reason which
consists of the prerogatives which Saint Peter had, is grounded either upon
fables, that deserve no credit, or upon impertiment matters, that prove nothing
to the purpose, as if I be forced hereafter thereto, I doubt not by Gods grace
with ease to prove. His third and last reason, is of it self sufficient to
show, that themselves have no great hope to prove it to be a catholic
doctrine, that is a doctrine taught and believed of all the godly, Vincent.
Lyrin.
or almost of all, at all times, in all places, for Vincentius Lyrinensis thus
defyneth catholic. But the first author that master Bellarmine alleges,
Bellar. his 3. arg. for the supremacy, is out of the fathers.
is more then two hundredth years after Christ. So that the doctrine that cannot
be proved, to have been believed for two hundredth years, in the purest times
of the church, cannot be called catholic, or be said to have the true
antiquity. And yet there is nothing that sounds so much in the mouths of
our adversaries as Catholic, Catholic, Antiquity, Antiquity, whereas in
truth nothing can be catholic unless it have the true antiquity: And the
true antiquity must begin at God himself. It must spring from him as from the
first fountain. As most notably, and more than once, that ancient and learned
father Tertullian has said, De praescript. aduers. haeretic.
That there is nothing true, but that only which the church received of the
apostles, the apostles from Christ, Christ from God. And this is indeed
ancient truth, and true antiquity.

Now I must also take a view of the mayor proposition which is this, The
consutation of the mayor for popish supremacy set down pa. 11. De Romans pontif.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
whatsoener jurisdiction Christ gave to Peter, and not to the rest of the
apostles, all that belongs to the church of Rome. And master Bellarmine
begins to prove this in his second Book, beginning with Peter's being at
Rome. But whether he were there or not, it makes no great matter. For it is
laid of Paul, and Mark, and others, that they were there also, but that
makes them not supreme heads of the church. But, whereas he confidently
affirms, Whether Peter first preached at Rome.
that many of the fathers teach, that Peter first of all preached to the
Romans, and founded the church there, because perchance he thereupon would
infer, that he was then bishop of Rome: it is not amiss to examine his proof
herein.

First, Iraen. lib 3. c. 3. Iraeny his place examined.
that which he alleges out of Iraeney, that the church of Rome was founded by
Peter and Paul, makes nothing for proof of Peter's first founding the church
there: for Iraeny makes them both alike in that work. Neither by founding the
church can be meant the first beginning of the same, but rather, that they by
their testimony and death, did confirm the godly there, and perfected and
established the church that was already begun by all likelihoode, as after
shall be showed.

And whereas master Bellarmine adds to Iraeny his own gloss, that is to say
(says he) first of Peter, and after of Peter and Paul, as it is affirmed
without proof, so it may go without answer.

That which he recites out of Eusebius for Peter's first preaching Eusebius. li.
2. hist. 14. Eusebius his place examined.
at Rome (though he write First with great letters) is not true. In Musculus
interpretation there are no like words to the^ that are here alleged. And
that out of Arnobius, who says that Rome was converted to Christ, Contra
gentes lib. 2. Arnob. answered.
because it saw the fiery charets that Simon Magus had caused, to be blown
away with the blast of Peter's mouth, may well be understood of the more
plentiful conversion of christians there, not because there were none before.
For I will say nothing of the just causes that may be alleged, to doubt of
this story alleged out of Agisippus of Simon Magus his fiery charetes. And
Epiphanius is wrong dealt withal by master Bellarmine. For whereas he says,
Heref. 27. Epipha. answered.
that Peter and Paul were first apostles and bishops in Rome, he makes him
say, that Peter and Paul were first in Rome, Other of the fathers answered.
thereupon inferring, that first they preached there, which Epiphanius says
not. That which out of Chrysostom he alleges, proves not Peter first to
have preached there, as neither that out of Leo or Theodosius. In psalm. 48.
Sermon 1. de natali Apostolorum.
For Chrysostom says, that he did occupy the kingly city, Leo that he
was appointed to the chief place of the Roman Empire, and Theodosius
speaks of the religion delivered by Peter. But this does not prove, Paul.
Oros. li. hist. 7. c. 6. Turonens. li, 1. Histor, ca. 25.
that it was first delivered by him. Orosins and Gregory of Turon say, that
Peter being there, Christians began, which may be understood of their more
bold profession of Christianity then before. For that there were christians
before Peter came, there are in my judgment strong reasons to prove. Indeed
Theodoret says, Ad Romans cap. 1. Peter preached not first at Rome. Sadol. ad
Romans cap. 16.
that great Peter first preached to them the doctrine of the gospel. Perchance
he meant that he (not first of all) but first of the apostles, did preach the
gospel there. For Sadolet a Cardinal and a Romish catholic, in his
commentaries upon Paul's epistle to the Romans, does think that the gospel
was first preached, and the church at Rome first assembled, by some of the
disciples that fled out of Jury. And he names Priscilla, Aquila, Andronicus
and Iunia. Romans 16. 7.
And in this respect, it seems that Paul gives this commendation unto
Andronicus and Iunia, that they were notable among the apostles, because their
ministry was so necessary for the church there, (for he does not in any
other Epistle speak of them.) But in this epistle Sadolet says that Saint
Paul does give unto them, this great commendation, that they might have the
better credit among the godly at Rome, and the greater reverence, might be
showed toward them, in discussing and ending of these controversies, which
were begun amongst them, and for staying of which Saint Paul does write this
Epistle as Sadolet confesses. And of these Primasius an ancient father says
in like sort, Primas. ad Romans
that Andronicus and Iunia were accounted notable amongst others that were sent
to Rome, by whom they might believe, or by whose example they might have been
confirmed. Now if Peter had been the first that preached there, which master
Bellarmine a papist affirms, but Sadolet a Cardinal very confidentlie
denies, Romans 15. 20.
Saint Paul, who would not build upon another foundation, as he writes
unto the Romans, would not have taken upon him to have decided their
controversies, and to have commended unto them the ministry of others also to
that end, but would either not at all have meddled with them, or have put them
in mind of Peter their Bishop. Romans 15. 15. 1^.
But contrariwise he challenges them for his own flock, and as belonging to
his charge, which wrong he would never have offered to Saint Peter, if he first
had planted the church and his seat there. Neither would the Jews (who in
every place were Peter's especial charge) that were at Rome, when Paul came
thither, be so desirous to be instructed of Paul as they were, Act. 21. 22.
if they had been taught before by Peter, and he had been their Bishop and
had been there at this time (for this Epistle was written long after they say
that he was bishop of Rome) or if they had known their own bishop, to be the
universal bishop or head of all others.

And thus I trust, that notwithstanding all that out of some doubtful
sentences of ancient writers, master Bellarmine has gathered, yet this point
is not so clear for the church of Rome, as they would persuade the world that
it is. But rather the contrary appears most true, that Peter was not the
first that preached at Rome. As for that which master Bellarmine does allege
concerning Saint Marks gospel, Bellar. object.
that it is written at Rome, according to that which Saint Peter preached: if
we grant it, Answer.
it does not prove yet that Peter first of any other preached at Rome. It only
proves that he did preach there which by way of admittance only for the
present we will not much ^and against.

As for that which he says of the ouercomming of Simon Magus by Peter,
Bellar, 2. object.
even this one thing may sufficiently show that it is but fabulous, that Saint
Luke, who took upon him to write the acts and doings of the Apostles,
Answer. The story of Simon Magus his ^iery cl^tetes a fable.
and does very carefully write the miracles that were wrought by them, as he
that marketh may easily perceive: and does also record things done many
years after this was supposed to be done: yet does not so much as make any
mention of this conflice between Saint Peter and Simon Magus, although in the
eight Chapter where he reports some talk between Simon Magus and Peter,
very good occasion had been offered, neither yet Saint Mark Saint Peter's own
disciple, writing at Rome mentions it. And therefore howsoever some of the
ancient writers, being deceived by Egisippus, have thought of this fable: yet I
have I trust good reason and sufficient warrant not to credit the same.

Now whether Peter died at Rome or not, Whether Peter died at Rome. Lib. 2.
cap. 3.
which is the next point that is handled by master Bellarmine, I will not much
gain say it, because I would especially stand upon the most material points,
that belong to the proof of their mayor proposition, which is, that Peter's
prerogatives, belong to the bishop of Rome (if we will believe the papists) by
Christ's institution. And herein I would crave of the indifferent reader, Canus.
lib. 6. loc. Theol. cap. 8.
without partiasity to judge, whether this their doctrine of Peter's being
Bishop of Rome twenty and five years be a catholic doctrine or not. Whether
Peter were bishop of Rome. 25 years.


For master Bellarmine makes a proud but a false brag, that it has the
testimony and consent of all the ancient writers. Lib. 2. cap. 4. Bellar. first
arg.
As for his first reason whereby he will prove him to be bishop there, because
of the dignity or great account that has been always made of the church of
Rome, Page 13. 14. Answer.
it is very weak. For the Church of Rome was accounted off more then others
(as before I showed out of the council of Chalcedon and Ireny) because Rome was
the imperial city. And no doubt also but that greater concourse of learned
men, in that respect was there then else where; which must needs cause that
place, to be in better estimation. So that of this cannot Peter's being
Bishop there be concluded.

Secondly whereas he will prove that he was Bishop of Rome, Bellarm, 2. arg.
because where he was bishop after that he lest Antioche it cannot be showed,
Answer.
this his proof is like the former. For seeing he was an apostle, what
necessity is there, that he must be bishop in some peculiar seat or place?
Where was Paul bishop? It appears by the story of the Scripture, that he was
no where bishop. Arg. 3. Bellarm, out of fathers.
And why then should we of necessity make S. Peter a bi^hop in some chair?
Master Bellarmines third argument, which is the testimony of the fathers, he
imagines will bear all down before it. But first we must consider that the
fathers were content at the first, Why the fathers did not much gainfay Peter's
being bishop of Rome.
to receive this thing as a truth without any great examination of it, because
it was but a matter of story, and so not much material whether, he were
bishop of Rome or not. But if they had been in our days, and seen what
necessary doctrine the church of Rome infers thereupon, that it is a
doctrine that we must believe, or else we cannot be saved, that Peter was
bishop of Rome, and of the whole Church, and then for that the bishop of Rome
is Peter's successor, in that universal bishopric, and that by Christ's
institution, and that this must be believed upon pain of damnation: No doubt
but even those godly fathers who seem most to speak of that chair of Peter,
In Iof. cap. 20. Hom. 85.
would have said as Chrysostom writes of Moses chair, we must not now
(says he) speak of the Priests sitting in Moses chair, but in Christ's
chair, he I say, and the rest would have proclaimed it loud enough, that
they are the true Bishops not that sit in Peter's chair, but in Christ's chair.

But I have sundry strong arguments to induce not my self only, To believe
that Peter was bishop of Rome is no catholic says.
but I trust even others also, to be assuredly persuaded (I will not say that
Peter was not Bishop of Rome) but that it is not a Catholic Religion so to
be leeue.

And first I will constantly affirm, that master Bellarmine and all the
Jesuits that take his part, shall not be able to prove, that the fathers of
the first two hundredth years, that are of good account or credit (for in this
case I except what their Popes and counterfeit fathers have written or taught)
that Peter was Bishop of Rome. Which being proved, it is as clear as the
noone day, that is this not catholic doctrine. Themselves must needs
confess it. Peter's being bishop of Rome, not proved by the word.
Now for proof of it, first that in the Scriptures we have no such things
taught, it is most plain. And Master Bellarmine himself, who would feign
have it believed: yet dares not affirm of this any thing else, then that it
may be that the Lord did openly command, Lib. 2. cap. 12.
that Peter should so place his chair at Rome, that absolutely the bishop of
Rome should succeed him. And there he adds, that howsoever the matter is,
it is not so by the first institution. And as in the scriptures this thing has
no ground, The first fathers knew no such thing. Ignatius knew not Peter's
supremacy.
so the fathers that lived in the days of the apostles, and next after them,
do not acknowledge any such matter. Ignatius who was Saint John's scholar may
be a good witness in this behalf. All whose Epistles if we search and sift, we
shall not find any thing in them, that teaches us this point of popery, but
rather the contrary. And yet he writing unto sundry, and informing them in the
most principal points of religion, and such things as were most necessary for
christians to know, yea, and among other to the Romans themselves, must needs
have informed them of this universal bishop and of Peter's chair, Ign. ad
Trallia, and ad Romans.
if he had known of any such matter: in his second Epistle which is ad
Tiallianos I command not says he as an apostle, and to the Romans I command
not these things as Peter and Paul. In both places he had good occasion to
have urged them with Peter's supremacy, but especially he should have put the
Romans in mind of Peter, if he had been their bishop. And should have said
I do not inioyne you these things as Peter, who was your bishop. But the
greatest matter that he espieth in Peter and Paul, is that they are apostles.
And writing unto the Ephesians, Ign. ad Ephesians.
he moves them to depend upon their bishop, as the Church hangs upon the
Lord, and the Lord upon his father.

How happens that in this reckoning of these goodly couples the Ephesians and
their bishop, the church and Christ, Christ and God, there is not any mention
of Peter or his successor? Doubtless as yet this conceit was not hatched,
which yet more plainly may be seen in that exhortation that he makes to the
Saints in Smirna to honor God as the maker and Lord of all, Igo. ad Simrna.
but their bishop (for that he speaks of their own bishop the whole
epistle shows) as the high priest the Image of God, and the most excellent
thing in the Church. Now I pray yon what account is here of Peter's chair or
of his succession? Not one word. This also in his epistle is to be observed,
that he seems to make more especial account of Paul then of Peter. Ign. ad
Philad.
As writing to the Philadelphians, he says Be ye folowers of Paul and the
other Apostles as they followed Christ, which it is to be thought he would not
have don, if Peter had been in such account then, as since he is said to be.
Now for Justinius Martyr who wrote about the year 147. does never so much as
make mention of Peter being bishop of Rome, although in his second Apology he
makes mention of Simon Magus how he was honored at Rome (but not of his
fiery chariots destroyed by Peter, Justinius apol. ^
as some do, whereof I spoke before.) Seeing therefore, Justinius having so
good an occaston, and writing and dwelling in Rome as by Hierom it appears
speaks not one word of it there, neither yet afterward in the end of the
apology, wherein he shows the sin of christianity, it is likely that Rome
was not then known, to be either Peter's chair, or the bishop thereof to be
universal bishop. Eusebius writes of Denis of Corinth, Eusebius. hist. eo^^ li.
2. cap. 2^.
who flourished about the year one hundred seventy and four, how he did
write unto the Romans, and yet nothing is there of Peter, that he was bishop
there, but only, that Peter and Paul did plant the church there. And in the
same place Eusebius reports of Caius, who (as he says) was made bishop of
Rome after Zephirinus) which Zephirinus died the year of the Lord two hundred
and twenty) that he writing unto Proclus an heretic, put him in mind of the
monuments of the Apostles that he could show. Whereas he might have made a
better brag, to hane served for his purpose, if he could have told them, of
Peter's chair. But as yet there was no such matter known. As for that which
master Bellarmine himself aleageth out of Irenie, it proves nothing for him.
For in saying, that Peter and Paul together did found a church there, Iren. li.
3. ca. 3. De prescriptionbus aduersus heret.
he ascribes nothing to Peter alone. And Tertulian that was about 200. years
after Christ does seem rather to make Clement the first bishop of Rome,
Clement first bishop of Rome.
so little does he dream of Peter's chair, or bishopric there. Neither yet
does Cyprian plainly affirm, that Peter was bishop of Rome. He does sometime
indeed call that church Peter's chair in respect of the doctrine that Peter
taught and published, Peter's chair.
which at that time was believed at Rome, which also perchance he in Rome
confirmed by his death. As also our Savior Christ speaks of Moses chair,
Moses chair, Mat. 23. 2.
and says that the priests did sit in Moses his chair, so long as they taught
the law, that Moses from God delivered to them. But as for Moses he never
came near the place where Jerusalem was built, to establish any chair there.
And thus we see, that in all these ancient fathers, who lived more then two
hundred years after Christ (for Ciprian flourished about two hundred and fifty
years after Christ) there is no plain proof of Peter's being bishop of Rome.
And excepting Ciprians words, (who if he allude unto the words of our savior
Christ as he seems to do, can make no more for the opinion of the church of
Rome, then any of the rest) there is nothing in them all, that has any
likelihood of proof of the thing in controversy. But if any man answer that
it is no good argument thus to reason. Objection.
Such men have not written that Peter was bishop of Rome, therefore he was not
bishop there: Answer
I reply, that if this that out of them has been said, do not substantially
prove, that Peter was not bishop of Rome, (as if the allegations be well
considered of, they are strong presumptions) yet do they inuincibly prove,
that for this space of more then two hundred years, they cannot show of any
authentike author, that has acknowledged Peter to be bishop of Rome. Yea the
first that is aleaged by master Bellarmine is Ireny, who lived after Christ not
much less then two hundred years. And therefore this doctrine, does easily
appear not to be catholic, and the godly fathers which slace have affirmed,
that he was bishop of Rome, either do so call him in respect of the work of a
bishop, which (if he were there) by his care of Gods flock, and constancy in
his truth he did show, or else they teach that which had not bin taught in the
days next unto the apostles times. A second argument that unanswerably
proves this to be no catholic doctrine, is the dissenting of y^ most ancient
authors that they allege, from themselves in this point, wherein they affirm
that Peter was bishop of Rome. For Ireny, who is first alleged of master
Bellarnine, Lib. 3. cap. 1. cont. Ma^cio. 1 ^ here is. 27. Eusebius. li. 2. ca. 25.
Tertulian, whom in the second place he produces, then also Epiphanius and
Dionysius bishop of Corinth out of Eusebius do al with one consent join Peter
and Paul together, I say not Peter only, so that unto the one as well as unto
the other belongs that dignity by their records. And Damasus himself a pope
(I marvel if he would err in this point) says that Peter came to Rome Nero
being emperor, Conell. Tom. 1. ne Petro. Li. 3. cap. (...)
which must be at the least twelve years, after the reckoning that is now
holden for good, in the church of Rome. And Eusebius does aleage out of Origin,
how Peter in the latter end of his life came to Rome, and therefore he is not
like to be Bishop there xxv. years. This doubtfulnesse and inconstancy of
their delivering this doctrine, is an infalible argument that there was not in
those times, any catholic doctrine taught of this matter, but that men might
think thereof, as they saw cause. But now it is no less then heresy to deny
that Peter was Bishop of Rome.

Now if unto this that has bin said, A third reason.
we add the vocation or office of Saint Peter recorded in the holy Scripture,
that he should be the Apostle of the circumcision, Galat. 2. 7.
whereof, that ever he was discharged, all the Jesuits in Rome and Rheimes,
will never be able, out of Gods register book to show. And one the other side,
that the singular care that the Apostle Saint Paul (who willingly would not
build upon another man's foundation) shows himself to have over the Romans,
more then over any other, even as if they were his peculiar charge, (as iu the
first and fifteenth chapters of that epistle appears) I trust there is no man
of indifferent judgment, but will think that we have great reason to stay our
selves, and not rashly upon every show of the newness of fathers, to run
and consent unto such opinions, as have no show of the ancient antiquity, no
agreement among themselves, no color of probability in the word of God, but
the contrary rather. Neither is that any answer to my second argument, Li. 2.
c. 5. Bell. 06.
(which master Bellarmine does say) that the disagreement about the time of
Peter's coming unto Rome, does not prove that he came not at Rome at all.

For my intent is not directly to prove, that Peter came not to Rome as bishop
of Rome, but that this was not a catholic doctrine for two hundred, or almost
three hundred years after Christ, and this disagreement does prove that
substantiallie. So that it must be another answer that must take away the
strength of this argument, or else it stands vnaswered. Neither is that
example that he brings of the uncertainty of the time of Christ's death, fit
to prove the matter in question. For all are agreed that Christ died, Bellar.
ob. 2. Answer.
but that Peter was bishop of Rome is not certain. And therefore the thing it
self being doubted of, the uncertain setting down of the circumstances,
will make it less credited. I am not ignorant that godly learned men, have set
down many more arguments, to prove that Peter was not bishop of Rome, and
that master Bellarmine bestows six or seven chapters to answer the same as
well as he can. But my purpose being to try as well as I can how catholic
their doctrine is, I content my self at this time with these few. For to
strive what might be spoken of this matter, were an infinite labor. But
whilst I endeavor to go forward, I am forced a while to stay, and muse at the
immoderate boldness of master Bellarmine, who upon so weak proof, will make
so certain a conclusion. For purposing to show the bishop of Rome is a
universal bishop, Lib. 2. cap. 12. Bellarm. his triumphing before the victory.
he thus begins. Hitherto we have plainly showed, that the Bishop of Rome
is Peter's successor in the Bishopric of Rome.

Now considering with my self, the weakness of the two posts that must
uphold this building, I though he might have something at the least mistrusted
his own cause. For if Peter were at Rome, and first preached there, does that
prove, that therefore the Bishop of Rome is his successor? But by that means
all they that came afterward in the places where he preached shall be all his
successors, and not only the pope.

The second ground of this considerate conclusion, is, that he imagines that
Peter was Bishop of Rome, and so died. But the vanity of his arguments I have
discovered before (I trust) sufficiently. Page 56. and^.
Therefore this bold assertion I will requite with this Sillogisme, and so
proceed.

If it be not certain that Peter was Bishop of Rome, then must this succession
of the Bishop of Rome to Peter, Argument to the bishop of Rome his succession
to Peter to be uncertain.
needs be uncertain.

But it is uncertain as I have showed by better reason then master Bellarmine
has showed, that Peter was bishop there:

Therefore I conclude, this succession also, must needs be uncertain.

But before I begin to examine Bellarmines evidence, whereby he will prove the
pope to have supremacy over all the church, the Reader must be put in mind
of that which before I have said, whereby the very ground of this supremacy is
shaken (if I be not deceived) namely it is with good reasons (I trust) denied,
that Peter had that supremacy over the whole church. And if he had it not, how
can the bishop of Rome have it from him? Again, we must consider how this
hangs together. If Peter had that universal charge, and was bishop of Rome
also, that therefore they that do succeed him in the bishopric of Rome,
must in like manner that universal charge.

But let us hear M. Bellarmines reasons. But the four first I of purpose
omit, because they are either directed against Nilus his opinion, Li. 2. de
Romans Pontif. cap. 12.
who granted (as master Bellarmine says of him) that Peter had this
universal charge over the whole church, but denies it to the bishop of Rome,
and therefore those arguments touch us little, or else they are answered before
in this treatise. But he having proved (after his manner) against Nilus, that
seeing Peter had this supremacy, he must needs have a successor in the
same. At the length he comes to prove that the B. of Rome is this his
successor, reasoning thus: either the bishop of Antioch, or of Rome, must be
Peter's successor in the supremacy over the whole church. But the bishop of
Antioch can not challenge it: therefore Rome must succeed in this universal
bishopric. That Antioch cannot have it he shows, because Peter resigned that
bishopric before he died. I will not here examine or call forth your witnesses,
in what place ye find, that Peter gave over to the bishop of Antioch which you
say he had. But I will ask a question of you, by what right he could resign
it over, and leave the charge that God committed unto him, and so forsake the
flock whereof you are made ouerseer. You must either hold your peace, Marcel.
epist. ad Antioch.
or else tell us some tale of a bastard Epistle of pope Marcellus, which
commanded him so to do.

And is it enough that Marcellus, A rotte a prop of supermacie.
who lived about three hundred years after this thing was done, should say
that Christ commanded him to do it, and produce no witness, allege no
proof, set down no circumstances? Thus we see that this supremacy does
stand but upon a tottering foundation. It may also be doubted, whether if he
had a universal charge over the whole church, he might take upon him a
particular charge, either at Rome, or Antioch. For our Savior Christ gives
direction to his Apostles, whose charge was universal, Go into the whole
world, Mark^ 16. 15.
preach the Gospel unto every creature. For although it is written of some of
the Apostles, that they were bishops in certain places, yet that is no answer
to this objection, because they were not universal bishops, and therefore must
needs have their seat somewhere, I say in some particular charge. A
universal bishop must not be a sitter, but ^ther a runner.
For he that is an universal Bishop, and has allotted unto him a seat or
chair, is improperly called universal. It were more expedient for him in
respect thereof, to be running, yea, or rather flying then to be sitting. But
to answer master Bellarmines argument. His Mayor proposition is gathered of a
false supposition. Whether it be needful that Peter have a successor.
For if it be not granted, that Peter must needs have one to succeed him in
this universal charge, then you see that there is no necessity, that his
seat wherein he must be succeeded, is either at Rome or Antioch.

But we deny first, that Peter himself had this universal charge. And in
this respect, we think it a very needless matter, for us to beat our
heads about his successor in the same, But I pray you, what means this,
that master Bellarmine taking in hand to write of the controversies of these
times, and to impugn and withstand them, that in these days do speak
against his Popes supremacy, Bellarm. would match with an (...) adversary.
does so suddenly turn his back upon them, and encounter with Nilus, who is
much more friendly to him in this matter chen we can be? Lib. 2. cap. 12.
For whereas he has promised to prove, that the Bishop of Rome does
succeed Peter in the universal Bishopric by Gods law, and by reason of
succession: his arguments only intend and prove thus much: Peter had this
universal charge, and therefore another must have it also. And that Peter had
it, he says Nilus does grant it. But that is it that we deny, and master
Bellarmines store will not affoorde him one argnment against us directly,
except he have any confidence in the two last, the fifth, and the sixth.

And for the sixth, as also his other arguments that may any thing touch us,
Page 5. etc.
they are answered almost in the beginning of this Treatise. Let us then see
what strength this argument has, that so much of the weight of the cause must
rest upon. Saint Paul says the church is one body, but he head can not say
to the feet, 1. Cor. 12. 2^. Bellarmines argument to prou^ that Peter must
have a successo^.
I have no need of you: therefore the Church must have another head upon earth
besides Christ. If the argument be hard favored and misshapen, and ill tied
together, and agree like strings al out of tune, blame him that make it so. For
master Bellarmine does so reason. These are his words. The church is one body,
Li. 2. (...) 12 ^^g. 5
and has her kind of head here upon earth besides Christ, as appears out
of 1. Corinthians and the twelfth chapter. In which place, after that the
Apostle Saint Paul has said, that the church is one body, he adds: The
head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you. Which his reason, if it be
drawn into a form of argument, must (as I think) be formed into such a
monstrous shape as you have seen.

But to omit the shape of his argument, let us see what substance there is in
it. And if it be examined, it has as little found matter, Answer.
as good making. For, out of these words of Saint Paul (the head can not say
to the feet, I have no need of you) he thus infers, but Christ may say,
that he stands in need of none of us: therefore by this head here Christ
can not be meant. Is not this very clarkely handled of master Bellarmine, to
apply that unto Christ our head in the church which S. Paul speaks of the
head of a natural body, whereof he has borrowed a similitude, to teach how
necessary the members of Christ his mystical body, are one to an other, so
that none may without wronging himself despise another? which collection of M.
Bellarmine is most plainly against the text it self, and the judgment of all
good expositours: Nay, I suppose I need except no expositor but master
Bellarmine himself. And yet we have in that very place an other argument of
his. For a man may see that he was sore pained in travail of this argument.
For, seeeing no way how to deliver it well, he was feign to heap up much
stuff in few lines, (for all this matter is contained in little more then eight
short lines) to make a show as though he had much to say, when as that which he
said is far worse then just nothing. Well, let us view his argument. Arg. of
bellarm, the 2.
One head besides Christ there must be, but there is no other then Peter:
therefore Peter must be the head. We flatly deny that we need any head but
Christ, as before I have proned. Lastly, page 6. 12, 13. bellarm. his 3. and
last argum.
Peter dying, the church must not want a head: therefore Peter must have a
successor. But this argument supposes that Peter is the head of the universal
church, which they cannot prove, and until they can prove it, we will
content our selves with Christ our head.

Thus we see how master Bellarmines fifth argument, as a plenteous spring
sends forth three streams, but there is no clear water in any of them, but
bad couers of a bad mess. And what is all this to the bishop of Rome, if Peter
must have a successor? For, as we deny Peter's supremacy, so may we doubt
whether he might be a bishop, being not an apostle only, as were the rest, but
an apostle of the Jews, wheresoever they were, we doubt of his resignation of
the bishopric of Antioch, if he were at any time bishop there, we doubt of
his being bishop of Rome: and lastly, whether this succession must needs
belong to the bishops of Rome if Peter had it: for it might be personal in
Peter. And master Bellarmine, who in other questions is plentiful of his
reasons, and will make some reasonable show of proof in this greatest matter,
bellarm. barren of reasons.
and which it especially behooves him to prove, is so barren, that he has
almost nothing to say, no reason to allege, although by his promise he made us
look for great matters. And yet when all is done, he must either have us to
grant him the thing that is in question, which we cannot do, or else he can
say nothing to it.

But there are many strong reasons that move us to deny that Peter had any
such universal authority over all Christ's flock, Peter had not charge over
the whole church.
or that any man, the bishop of Rome, or any other should have such supremacy.
First the greatness of the change, which is Chap. 13. 14, 15, 16.
as appears in Saint John's gospel, a fatherly affection, and tender care to
comfort his disciples, being pensive because of his departure, and yet never
uses this argument, or gives them this commandment, that Peter should be
their head, and they should obey him. Although good opportunity was offered to
have spoken of it, John 16. 7.
if it had been so when Christ told them that it was expedient that he should
depart. He does not then tell them that Peter must be in his place, and supply
his room, or that one should have general charge of his church. But on the
contrary he appoints his vicar and vicegerent even John 14. 16.
Who can be in all places at once, The spirit is Christ's vicar.
in every particular church, yea in every particular member of the church, to
comfort, instruce, direct, defend, and to do to and for the godly, whatsoever
is needful or expedient for them. Thirdly the apostles after Christ
ascension, and Saint Luke that writes the acts of the apostles make no mention
of such a supremacy in Peter, unless we could borow master Bellarmines
spectacles, by which he can spy that one pope is contained in these words,
Ephesians. 4 4. De pontif. Romans li. 1. cap. 9. Verse 11.
one body, and one spirit, as he does also find out the supremacy plainly
set down in these words, he gave some to be apostles: and yet more plainly if
we may believe him in the epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
he has ordained in the church first apostles, then prophets. Now let them
that can pick that sovereign Supremacy out of those words say so.

But for my part I confess my sight is so dim, that I can not see so far
into that mill stone. These and such like reasons, being compared with their
proofs out of scripture which make nothing for them unless they be sore
wrested, from their natural and true meaning, do even proclaim it to the
world, that this doctrine of the popes supremacy, is nothing else but a devise
of man's brain, a fruit of his pride. And thus to think I am the ealelier
persuaded, when I see how master Bellarmine toileth himself, to set down the
state of the question For although in the beginning almost of this twelfth
chapter he promised to prove that the bishop of Rome, is by the law of God,
Bellarm, not so good as his word
successor unto Peter in the supremacy of the universal church, yet
afterward he confesses that the church of Rome has not this succession by
Christ's first institution of this succession, and that perchance (for so he
speaks to testify how loath he is to confess the truth plainly, though he
cannot deny it) perchance he says it cannot be proved by the law of God,
that the bishop of Rome, as he is bishop of Rome is Peter's successor. And yet
although it cannot be proved to be decreed by Gods law, it is says he a
thing that belongs to the catholic faith. For (says he) to be of the
faith, and to be by Gods law, is not all one, for it is not by Gods law that
Paul should have a cloak (he might have said as much also for Tobias dog) yet
this must be believed. I would not have thought that Paul's cloak had been such
a necessary relic, but I remember that Balthazar Cossa, who was pope John
the three and twentieth of that name, Stella Jacob. Bergom.
gained well by Peter's cloak when time was, for by casting it upon his own
shoulders, he made himself pope.

But can master Bellarmine find no better stuff to persuade us to believe the
popes supremacy? They make it a matter of damnation not to believe the
supremacy of the pope. And is it of as great necessity to believe that Paul
had a cloak? If master Bellarmine be so persuaded, I lament his folly. If he
think otherwise, why does he bring it to prove that to believe the
supremacy of the bishop of Rome, is a point of the catholic faith, although
by Gods law this supremacy cannot be proved? And as they stagger in setting
down by what authority right or law they claim this sovereignty: so they
have no great proof for their manner of this their dignite, whether it be
personal or not. By Christ's first institution master Bellarmine tells us it
was personal.

If Christ made it personal who could change that estate and make it
successionall? master Bellmine answers, that it was personal, general, or
public, so that it belonged to him and his successors. Whether that can be
called personal, that is to say belonging to the person only which belongs
also to his successors let the indifferent Reader judge. But how is this
proved that Christ gave this prerogative to him and his? Li. 1. cap. 12.
Master Bellarmine says so often times, especially in the twelfth chapter of
his first book, but his proof is little else then his affirmation.

Again, he says, that this succession is made both personal and local, by
Peter's dying bishop of Rome. But as already I have proved, that doctrine of
Peter's being at Rome bishop is not so certain, that christians may build
their faith thereupon: So that we see there building is altogether upon the
sand, their proof weak, their reasons obscure, and their places nothing
pregnant for that they are brought. And I marvel that now it should be
counted heresy, not to believe the Romish bishop to be by Gods law supreme
head of the whole church, Tom. 2. Luth. fol. 45.
seeing that in the year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred and twenty
Albert by the goodness of God, cardinal priest of the holy church of Rome, of
the title of Saint Chrysogon, A cardinal counts the Popes supremacy but a
toy.
Arbhbishop of the holy churches of Magdeburge and Mentz, primat of Germany and
prince elector, governor of Halberstade, and marquis of Brandenburge (for
these litles he gives himself) in an epistle written to Luther, shows
himself griued and displeased, that some divines of good accoumpt, did so
earnestly contend for their frivolous opinions and trifling questions, namely
of the power of the bishop of Rome, whether it be by Gods law, or by man's
law? And of free will, and many other such toys, not much concerning a
christian man.

This cardinal you see thinks it not worth contending for. And I am verily
persuaded many more will be of his mind, unless they see better matter then
master Bellarmine can bring, to prove it to be by Gods law. But although
he have no store of Scripture for him yet has he great hope in councilles
and fathers. And I assured my self that the councilles, if he will trust
them, will most plainly decide this question, whether that superiority that the
church of Rome challenges over all other churches, be by Gods law or man's law,
as hereafter it shall (if God will) appear. Now therefore to examine master
Bellarmines next proof which is out of the counsels. Lib. 1. cap 13.
And the first counsel that he alleges, is the Nicen counsel, not that which
themselves have delivered to us as authentical and true, in the tomes of
counsels set forth by themselves: but to serve this turn, we must have a new
addition, and a strange interpretation not that which agrees best with the
words, Bellar. arg. out of the Nicen counsel Canon. 6.
and is thought most true of them that lived near unto the days of that
counsel. First therefore we must add (says master Bellarmine) to the
beginning of the sixth canon, the church of Rome always had the supremacy. And
why must those words be added? Paschasinus forsooth a bishop in the counsel
of Chalcedon did so cite that canon. Action. 16, The bishop of Rome a forgerer.
He did so, but he was legate for Leo then bishop of Rome that did allege it,
and by Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople he was disproued, who read not only
the copy of the canon, by a also the approbation of the same counsel, and
canon, by a counsel holden at Constantinople, of 150. bishops, Nectarius being
bishop there.

But one found out a greek copy of that counsellong since and in that says
master Bellarmine those words are. If the coppies that we have, have thus
long been thought true and good, I see no reason why for some one greek
copy, which might very well be falsified by some favorite of the church of
Rome, we should discredit that which has so long been received: especially
seeing the counsel of Chalcedon, the matter on both sides being discussed and
heard, did give unto the church of Constantinople as great privileges as the
church of Rome had. Which they would not have done, but that they saw
Paschasinus his allegation, for his master the bishop of Rome (for he was one
of his legates) to be forged. Nay if that Rome had gotten this prerogative by
Gods law, as now the papists teach, Canon. 6.
without wickedness they could not have done it.

Then these words of that canon of the Nicen council ( Because the bishop of
Rome has such like custom) must also have a new interpretation, For whereas
Ruffinus, who lived, if not in, yet very near the days of the Nicene
council, does plainly expound, Hist. li. 1. cap. 6.
how in those days they took the sense and meaning of those words, namely,
that the Bishop of Rome should have cure of the churches that belonged to the
suburbs thereof: Master Bellarmine that comes many hundreds of years after,
will in no wise like of that exposition, because he imagines it to be too
narrow a compass for the proud pope. Other manner of Popes in those days then
now we have.
But he must remember, that when these limittes were appointed unto him, the
Bishops, not of Rome only, but of other places also, were other manner of men,
than now they are for the most part. And it seems that these limittes were
laid upon them, rather as a burden, the^ sought and sued for as an honor.

And that the godly and learned men, who sought especially the good of the
church, did cause this division of those places to be made, for the better
keeping of unity in the church, appointing unto every one of these primates or
patriarchs, such to be in some respect under their charge, as they saw were
(for such considerations as were best known unto them) most likely to show
themselves willing to be ruled by them. Yea. and the less compass or circuit
of jurisdiction might perchance be appointed to the Bishop of Rome, because
that through great recourse of people of all places unto that City, being the
imperial City, he was so troubled with many matters of al men's, that he
might not so well intend and look to a great charge of his own.

And I know not why master Bellarmine should so alter as he does the word
parilis into talis, but to gain as much credit as he can to his
interpretation. For, parlis consuetudo which are the words used by the
Council, Bellar. changes the words of the canon.
is an equal custom, and has respect to that which is said of the Bishop of
Alexandria. So that this is the meaning of those words, that Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis, should be under the Bishop of Alexandria, because the Bishop of
Rome has such like custom, or a custom equal to that. But the exposition
that master Bellarmine would have to stand for good, is, that the bishop of
Rome had such a custom to appoint the Bishop of Alexandria those limittes,
which interpretation how forced it is, how it cannot aptly be gathered out of
the words of the council, I refer it to the indifferent Reader to consider.
And because this word parilis equal custom, will not stand with Master
Bellarmines sense, he truneth it away, and in steed thereof would use a word
more indifferent for him. And so (good Reader) thou may see how Master
Bellarmine most absurdly rejects the plain and old interpretation of this
canon which Ruffinus affords us, and would have us believe a new gloss of his
own, that must quite alter the sense, and add much to the words of the text
it self. And yet when antiquity serves their turn: none cry out for
Antiquity more than they. They go about to discredit our doctrine, because it
is new only, and yet theirs we see here, is both new and naught, and yet are
not they ashamed to brag, that all that they teach is catholic.

The second Council alleged by Master Bellarmine, Council. Constan. Histor.
li. 5. ca. 9. Bellarm. a falfifi^^ of antiquity.
is the Council of Constantinople, of which he says out of Theodoret, that
they came together in that place by the commandment of the Popes letters sent
to them by the Emperor. The more I read Master Bellarmine, the more I find
and mislike his evil dealing, who handles Gods cause nothing sincerely, but
walks in the same (as in this his argument may easily appear) with a
deceitful heart. For first to make the matter seem more plain on his side
then in deed it is, he says, that they came to Constantinople at the
commandment of the Popes letters: but Theodoret speaks nothing of any
commandment, but upon the Popes letter. The like also is in the letters
themselves that are set down in the Council. For it seems that Damasus,
whether it were upon desire he had to christian unity, and agreement in
religion, or else because he saw the emperor Theodosius bent to have a
council, and he was perchance desirous to seem to have some saying in that
matter, or for any other consideration whatsoever, wrote unto the Emperor
about a Council. But if the Pope might have called a Council, he would then
have directed his commandments unto the Bishops to assemble, not to the
emperor, what these letters were it is not known. If they were to require and
entreat the emperor to call a Council, it makes nothing for proof of
master Bellarmines argument, or the popes power. If it were to command the
emperor to send his letters to them, or to cause them to be summoned, it were
in deed somewhat like unto the saucy and unmannerly writings of these proud
prelates of our time, but then neither the Pope burst so to command, neither
the emperor did owe, or would perform any such service or duty to him. But
the report of the Council it self (as it is delivered unto us by themselves,_
does sufficiently declared that all was done in that council, Council, tom. ^.
The emperor had all the commanding in that council.
at the commandment of the emperor. First, he commanded that the Bishops
should come out of every bishopric to Constantinople, as he that gathered the
councils together teaches out of Theodoret. Hist. li. 5. ca. 6.
The emperor desired them to have a care of that they had in hand. And out of
Socrates he shows, that the emperor called also the Macedonian heretics,
because he had good hope that they also might be united, to the Church.

Moreover out of Theodoret, that the emperor consulted with Nectarius, what
course were best for quietness in the church, they came to the emperor to
take some good order in these matters, he questioned with the heretics,
concerning the the trial of the matters in question: he took order that both
parts should set down their mind in writing, he took that they had
written, prayed earnestly to God to direct him to choose the truth, tore the
writings of the heretics, allowed or received only that docrine that taught
the equality of the persons. He also allowed the Nouatians their churches in
the city, because they were in this point constant. And out of Sozomen, that
the emperor made a law, that heretics should neither have churches,
neither be permitted to preach of the faith (a good law to be earnestly
thought upon and practiced in these our days) nor ordain bishops or others.
All these things being set down in the Books of Councils, by them delivered
unto us, who can think that Master Bellarmine, who alleges this Council
for strength of his cause (and that falsely also) wherein all things are so
direct against him, would see the truth, if it were never so plain before him.
The third council is that which was assembled at Ephesus, and that also M.
Bellar. (belike by some wonderful attractiue virtue) will draw to his side.

The third Council (says he) as Euagrius does witness, says that it
deposes Nestorius, by the commandment of Caelestine bishop of Rome. How now
master Bellarmine, have you quite fallen out with truth, and made a league with
falsehood? Yet more falshoode in Bellar.
have you purposed still to abuse your reader, by most shameless affirming
that which is not true? The counsel said, we, by the necessity as well of the
canons, as also of the epistle of the most holy father, our fellow minister
Celestine bishop of Rome compelled etc. Where is this that master Bellarmine
affirms? Celestine bishop of Rome wrote perchance to show his detestation of
the heresy of Nestorius, and they willing to do him that honor, that they
would seem much to esteem of his zeal in faith, that being so far distant
in place, he would be united as it were to them in their judgment against
Nestorius, they show that they were moved much by his letters, and encouraged
to proceed against Nestorius. But here is no word of any commandment that he
gave them, but rather the contrary. For they call him their fellow minister,
and so acknowledge not him to be a commander over them. Yea and in a mandate
to Philip priest, vicar or vicegerent to Celestine then bishop of Rome, and
others sent to Constantinople, they tell the popes vicar plainly, and his
fellows thus: We will your holiness to understand, that if you despise any of
these things, neither this holy synod will ratify it, neither shall you be
permitted to be pertaker of our communion. Yea and before, that council
directs even the popes legate and the rest, that if the emperor sent for
them, they must in any wise be obedient to his commandment, and must not
refuse to go, (which doctrine were heresy in our days) but they should not
agree with John of Antioch and the rest, but upon such conditions as (not the
pope) the council did set them down, upon the pain aforesaid.

And that this Council was assembled by the Emperors, is in many places
declared: as out of Euagrius that it was at the appointment of Theodosius the
younger, and after by the commandment of the most religious Emperors. The
like is also testified, in the superscription of the former mandate, that I
have spoken of.

And it is also worth noting that the council writing to the Emperors, for
the credit of their council, does not urge that the pope is head there (but
indeed they crave that Cirill and Memnon, not Cirill only whom they say the
pope Celestine deputed for him be restored to them again that their council be
not without a head) but they say that Celestine Archbishop of Rome, Page 588.
does sit joined with them there, he does assidere sit I say with them, not
praesidet, he rules not, he coutroleth not the council, and so it is also
said of Aphrica and Illyricum that they assident sit with the council. And out
of this that has been spoken as also by such other things as in that
council are recorded, we may gather what truth is in that also, that master
Bellarmine alleges of an Epistle sent by the council to Celestine,
reserving the cause of John of Antioch as more doubtful to be decided by the
bishop of Rome. But as I find not any such Epistle in that council, so this
is plainly written, in the report that the council makes of their doings to
the Emperors, that they excommunicated John (of Antioch) the president of the
Apostatas council, Page 588.
and them that were with him: and deprived them of all priestly ministry, and
revoked all their unlawful doings. If this be to refer his cause to the
pope, let the world judge.

Then he comes to the council of Chalcedon, The fourth Council alleged by
Bellarmine.
and that makes for him too, if we will trust him; but in examining it, we shall
find it much like the rest, directly against the supremacy of the bishop of
Rome. Act. 1.
For first in the beginning of that council it is declared that it is gathered
by the decree of the most godly and faithful Emperors Valentinian and Martian
who also professes that he desired to be there to confirm the faith, Page 740.
wherein were judges appointed to moderate their doings and sayings, and to
conclude their articles, not the pope, or his legates, (for they as it
appears in this council, were at the commandment of these judges, as well
as others, but lay men, officers under the Emperor. It will be hard then for
master Bellarmine, in respect of some few excellent names that may be given
to Leo bishop of Rome, whereof also it may be he was worthy in respect of some
good parts that were in him, it will I say be hard, by such names, to prove
his supremacy by this council, which has almost done what it can, in
prejudice of any such prerogative that he might claim. The council of
Chalcedon against the supremacy.
For if it belong not to him to call councils, neither to rule in them when
they are called, he has but little supremacy over others. And we see in this
council both these things are done by others, and not by him.

But what does Master Bellarmine find in this council for the popes
supremacy? Bellarm, his reasons out of this council. Lib. 1. cap. 12.
That in that, the pope Leo is called the bishop of the universal church. This
tale he has told but a little before, (perchance that makes him more
perfect in it) saying that three letters are sent from the East church to Leo
bishop of Rome, and in them all he is called the pope of the universal church,
there are indeed four such letters even together, to the bishop of Rome, and
the council of Chalcedon, and in none of them is he called the pope of the
universal church, but only the universal archbishop or patriarch.

But there is a great difference between a universal bishop, and a bishop of
the universal church. Act. 3. page 858.
But such misses are small faults, with master Bellarmine. Indeed Paschasinus
the popes own legate does call him pope of the universal church, Act. 16.
who did also seek afterward, by falsifyiug the coppies of the council of
Nice to procure the supremacy unto his master, and therefore we must not
ground our faith upon his words. But for that name of universal bishop which
is often given to the bishop of Rome, Universal bishop not only the popes name.
it is not yet a name peculiar to him, as a great friend of theirs, Annal. An.
187.
and at this day in great account among them, does tell them, namely Caesar
Baronius in his history. For out of him they may learn that Eleutherius a pope
himself, in a decretall epistle of his, written to the bishops of France,
calls them universal bishops, Epist. ad Philad.
as Ignatius calls the bishop of Philadelphia, the bishop of the common
church, and so Gregory Nazianzen speaks of Athanasius bishop of Alexandria.
Which Baronius seems thus to understand, that they ought to have a care (as
indeed every man should have) of the good of the whole church. And these names
of head of the church, To whom these names belong.
universal bishop, and such like, were doubtless at the first granted to
such as were most worthy men in the church, in respect of their learning and
skill that they had, or their travel and diligence that they used, to benefit
the universal Church. And by this means, was it more commonly given to the
bishops of Rome then to others, because they, in regard of the place or city
wherein they were, had more occasions of doing good offered unto them, and more
opportunities, by reason of his neerenesse to the Emperor, to solicit such
matters.

And in this sort is it given for a reward of well deserving, and to
encourage them that were able, How these names are now used.
to do their uttermost endeavor, to benefit the church. But now it is a name
tied to one chair, in which for the most part do sit of the unworthiest men
that are in the church. So that if a man consider how little good they do in
the church, and how much hurt, we shall think that a ring of gold will better
become a sowes snowt, then they beseem that honorable title, or it them. And
as for that which the council does write unto Leo, saying, that he is
appointed of our Savior to keep his vine, they speak it not in respect of
his being bishop of Rome, but in consideration of his excellent gifts of
learning and other good graces, wherewith God has endued him. And that this is
their meaning it does plainly appear, by those things that afterward in
that council they did. For if they had meant by those words, Act. 16.
that he, as bishop of Rome, had supremacy over the whole church, then would
they not have given unto the bishop of Constantinople, equal privileges with
Rome, and so have taken from Rome, that which Christ gave (as they pretend) to
the bishop thereof. Thus to be short, in this one council, we see this
supremacy had three notable checkes. It was called by the Emperors, and
moderated by lay Judges, and the bishop of Constantinople made equal to him of
Rome.

The fifth council that is here alleged, The fifth council alleged by
Bellarm.
is the fifth Constantinople council. But this can bring little credit to
their cause, seeing it may justly be doubted, whether ever there were any such
or not. For besides that mistrust which the very title of that council, which
is in the second tomb of Councils does work in them that read it, Council.
tom. 2.
because it cannot be set down when, or in what popes days it was celebrated,
but that it was about the time of Agapetus, Siluerius, and Vigilius: I say
besides the uncertainty of it that there appears, Anno. 552.
Functius one skillful in histories has noted, that this is not once spoken of
in the Constantinople histories. And therefore it is not likely that any such
council, was kept there. Neither yet can the rest of the councels alleged by
master Bellarmine stand him in any steed. For we will not deny, but after
that once the pope had gotten into that proud chair, almost all did yield unto
him honor and reverence, some for fear, Later councels are not in this cause
indifferent.
some for flattery, until they had made him little inferior to God himslfe.
And therefore we justly reject the councels that were gathered since his power
was so great, and his pride so intolerable, that by some means or other he
would be honored as himself thought good. And therefore the second council
of Nice which was about the year seven hundred eighty nine, the lateran about
the year one thousand two hundred and fifteen. That of Lions about the year
one thousand two hundred seventy and four, and that of Florence about the
year one thousand four hundred thirty nine, are no fit witnesses against us,
who do not deny but that the Pope sometime by fair means, sometime by foul,
sometime by flattery, sometime by threatening, sometime by force, sometime by
craft, and always by evil dealing, has gotten to be in sort as ye see,
supreme head of the Church.

But we say that he is not so by the word of God, which he claims to be, and
master Bellarmine promised to prove, but he cannot do it. Neither was he
accounted in the purer times of the Church, to have that supremacy by Gods
word, as before I have spoken. Page 14.
Neither would they in any wise permit such power unto him, although he sought
it earnestly, and shamefullie in the council of Chalcedon. Act. 16.
After the councels master Bellarmin will bring in popes to bear witness on
his side. Popes are suspected witnesses.
But honester men then many of them were, are not to be heard in their own
cause. Yea and although many of them were good men, and were profitable members
in Christ's church, yet because they were men, they might have such infirmities
as do follow the nature of man, and might (especially not seeing the
inconvenience and ruin of the church, which the pride of that seat has
brought forth) ascribe more unto their own seat, then either in truth they
could claim, or in christian humility they could take upon them.

And for the first popes, which all they that write of this matter reckon up in
great numbers, I trust we shall not hereafter be troubled with their names,
because master Bellarmine has given them a reasonable good discharge. Lib. 2.
cap. 14.
For he confesses that in their writings there are some errors, neither dare
he affirm that they may not be doubted of: and as for the rest of them,
because we have seen even almost from the beginning of any credit that they
had, some sparks of their pride, now and then to glitter and burst forth in
their importunate seeking, or too ready accepting of that that belonged not to
them: as in equity we are not bound, so neither in discretion should we, when
the cause concerns not us, but Gods truth, hear what they can say for
themselves, against the same. Neither are their writings for the most part any
such, as that by them we may judge thoroughly what they did think. What manner
of writings of popes are alleged against us.
For epistles or letters (such are those writings altogether almost which are
alleged against us) are upon sundry particular occasions written, whereby the
writers might happily be forced to say more for the credit of that seat, then
themselves would have said, if that occasion had not been offered. But this I
am sure of, they for the most part speak far otherwise, and more plainly in
that point, then do the other ancient writers of their time, and that makes
me think that they did speak for themselves, and were somewhat pricked
forward, with a purpose to advance their seat. Bellarm. proof out of Greek
fathers. Lib. 2. cap. 15. Inscript. Epist. ad Romans Ignatius answered.
Therefore letting them pass as partial in this cause, let us come to this
next proof, which is out of the greek fathers.

And first comes in Ignatius who writes to the church that rules (for I
will admit the worst that Master Bellarmine or any other can allege ont of
this place) in the Roman region. But will Master Bellarmines logic conclude
that therefore the church of Rome has supremacy over the whole church? He must
first bring the universal church within the place of the Roman region before
that can be Out of Ireny he has these words. Lib. 3. cap. 3.
For unto this church for the more mighty principality (speaking of the church
of Rome) it is necessary that the whole church do come, Ireny examined.
that is the faithful from al places, in which always of them that are from
all places, is kept that tradition which is from the Apostles.

The words as you may see are somewhat hard, by reason that he who translated
Ireny out of greek, did here, as in many other places translate him very
darkely. But I have englished them word for word. His meaning is, that they
that come from other places of the world, be it never so far off, yet do not
alter the tradition that the apostles left unto them, and yet many must needs
come thither, because that in respect that Rome is the Imperial city, the
church also has the more mighty principality, and so in deciding of causes
has the more reverence and authority. And thus does he prove that to be true,
that in the beginning of that chapter he said, that it is an easy matter for
him (that will) to see the tradition of the apostles manifested through the
whole world, because that from whence soever they do come, yet still they keep
one tradition.

By this argument does Ireny confute the heretics, because the tradition of
the apostles being kept in all places (not only in the church of Rome although
because it was best known, or most famous, he brings that for example) yet no
such doctrine as the heretics speak of, is taught among them. But now
master Bellarmines unseasonable collection out of this place, is very far
from Irenies meaning. That it is necessary (says he) that all churches should
hang of the church of Rome. He proves first by that which goes before,
because principality is given to this church: secondly of that which follows,
because hitherto al in that church have kept the faith that is in being united,
Bellarm. arg. out of Ireny examined.
and cleaning to that church, as the head and mother. These are master
Bellarmines words. But first he says wrong of Ireny that he should endeavor to
prove such necessity in coming to the church of Rome, especial taking, as
here he does for a bounden duty. For it is master Bellarmines meaning to make
the church of Rome, the only church that must hear all great matters, decide
all doubtful questions, and command all other churches. But Ireny his meaning
is, that all other men had occasion, to seek rather of that church then of any
other for help and direction, because that in respect of the greatness of the
city, the church there was in some greater account, as before I have showed,
but he never said that all were bound to submit themselves to that church,
Dog. 83.
as master Bellarmine and his partakers, would have him be thought to speak.
Secondly he must speak more plainly what he means by this, that
principality is given to the church of Rome. Principality in Ireny how to be
understood.
For if he mean that men yield great reverence to the church of Rome, we
yield that in the primitive church they did so, and that justly, because the
true faith was there sincerely kept, but this principality will not please
master Bellarmine, or prove his intent. And if Ireny had meant that this
principality had been given by Christ, a man of mean understanding will
easily think that he would have spoken it in more plain terms.

But what need I to use many words? the place it self is plain. For the more
mighty principality (says Ireny,) if he had thought of the supremacy of the
bishop of Rome, he would have said most mighty principality. For more mighty
principality does but make him better then others in some respect, not above
all others which he claims to be. So that to prove his intent he must have
better proof. For this will not warrant that sovereign authority of the
bishop of Rome. Thirdly, that which master Bellarmine would tell us out of
this place, that all churches must be united and cleave to this church of Rome,
as their head and mother, has at all no ground of Irenies words. And thus we
see how he does rack and rent the words out of their plain sense, to serve
for his purpose, which being well weied of, make rather against them, and their
supremacy. Epiphanius is his third witness, Here Is. 68. Epiphanius examined.
who reports that Vrsarius and Valens two Arrian bishops being converted, did
go to Julius bishop of Rome, to give an account of their error and fault. But
if that prove the supremacy of the bishop of Rome, then must Athanasius also
have that supremacy as well as he, for it follows immediately after, that they
used the self same proofs that they repented of their error unto Athanasius.
So that the intent and cause of their going to pope Julius, or pope Athanasius
(for he is there so called) was not to acknowledge his supremacy, but as it was
known that they had erred, so would they have it well known that they revoked
their heresy. Neither did they crave pardon of their offense, Athan. Apolog. 2.
of Julius bishop of Rome (which out of Athanasius he endeavored to prove)
because he had authority over all persons, but because they knew their offense
to have been against the whole church, they were desirous that the bishop of
Rome for his part, as a principal member of the church but not a head above
all, should not impute that fault unto them. And this is the part of every
christian man or woman, having made a general fault, whereby many godly are
offeuded, to make also a public satisfaction for the same. And cannot this be
done to pope Julius, but we must make him head of the church? Athanasius also
his letter to pope Felix is alleged, Athanas. epist. to Felix pope. Bellarm.
argu. out of Athan. examined.
wherein Athanasius being much distressed of the Arrians, and wrongfully dealt
withal, and not having any hope that the greek Church could help him, the
Emperor himself being an Arrian, the rather to move the bishop of Rome to
pity his case says thus. For this cause God has placed you and your
predecessors Apostolic prelates, in the tower of height, and has charged
you to have care of all churches, that you should help us. That God by means
of Constantine and other good Emperors, advanced high the Bishop of Rome we
deny not. And we also know, that those good bishops did much good with that
their authority to the church of God, and were a great relief to the
oppressed, a comfort to the troubled, and a good stay for religion. We yield
moreover that a care over the whole church a belongs not to the bishop of
Rome only, Annal. Ann. 187.
but to every christian, as Baronius a papist tells us. And as Saint Paul
says of himself, although he were not an universal Bishop, or pope over all
the church, yt that he had a care over all the Churches. 2. Cor. 11. 28.
Which care as it should be in all, yet it should be greatest in them, whom
God has beautified with greatest graces of power, wisdom, knowledge, credit
or any other thing, whereby they may do good to others. So that the effect of
Athanasius his words unto Felix is, that as God has enabled him, so also he
should apply his greatness to do him good.

We do not yet see the Bishop of Rome to have jurisdiction over the whole
church, but that the greatness that he has, he should use it to the comfort
of the godly. But indeed the Bishop of Rome in steed of the care that he
should have, does exercise the power that he has.

And the excercising of his power began somewhat soon in that chair. And
therefore the fathers in the sixth council of Carthage as it seems, were moved
in the canons of the Nicen council to alter one word. For having agreed in the
ninth canon or chapter of that council of Carthage to hear the Nicen decrees
read, when they come to the sixth chapter, where the Nicen council has, that
the bishop of Alexandria should hane power over the churches of Lybia, Egypt,
and Pentapolis, as the bishop of Rome has within his liberty, Care for power.
in steed of the word power, they read care? Which no doubt those godly
fathers did, because they saw how immoderately, and by what bad shifts, they
did then seek to bring under their subjection all others. And therefore by
this means they would teach them to whom they did grant such honorable
places, that they were called rather to a burden, then to an honor, to look
unto their charge, rather then to over ^ooke them. So then this care that the
bishop of Rome should have over all churches we wish also that he would have.
And yet we do not hereby make him, the bishop of the universal church. De
sententia Dionys. Alex. episc.
And for the third place out of Athanatius, it has less weight then any of
the rest. For because some accused the bishop of Alexandria to the bishop of
Rome, therefore he concludes that the bishop of Rome is chief justice above
all, and may take upon him to judge all matters: but accusations are for the
most private. Accusations prove no jurisdiction.
And who can hinder but that any may make complaint to a man that has nothing
to do in the matter? And many such complaints will be made, to such as will be
willing to hear all matters, as were many of the B. of Rome, Epist. 52.
Bellarm. argum. out of Basil.
to increase their own power. That which is aleaged out of Basil, is a request
that Basil did purpose to make to the bishop of Rome, like unto that which
Athanasius made to Felix, and therefore one answer does serve them both. But
in that epistle Basil calls Athanasius the Top of all christians, which name
they would feign should be peculiar to their pope. Carmine de vita sua.
Nazianzen examined.
That out of Gregory Nazianzene was not worth blotting of so much paper, For
he says the City of Rome bears sway over the whole world, what is that to
the church of Rome?

And that that is alleged out of Chrysostom in the first place is not much
material, because Chrysostom makes that request to the B. of the west church,
and not to Innocentius alone. Yea, and not Chrysostom only in the same his
epistle, but Socrates also in his history testifies, that Chrysostom appealed
from his adversaries (not to the pope which he would doubtless have done, if
he had taken his authority to have been such, as now the church of Rome
would have it imagined) but to the general council. And not he only appealed
to a council, but the multitude also were ready to make a tumult for him, and
said it was meet the matter should be heard (not by the pope) but in a
general council. Epist. 2. ad Innocent.
Secondly out of Chrysostom he alleges these words, we always thank you,
for that you have declared unto us your fatherly good will. What will the
charitable affection of the pope, prove him to be head of the whole church? If
it will not, this will do no good, his third place is this, Ibidem.
I entreat your watchfullnesse, that although they have filled all with
tumults: yet if they will have their desease healed, they be neither afflicted,
neither put out of men's company.

Must the bishop of Rome be the supreme head, or else this request be in
vain? He being, as it is always confessed, of great authority, (although not
so great as they imagine) might either by entreating, or by authority win
many to be of his mind, and so hinder the excommunication of Chrysostomes
adversaries. So that none of these arguments can conclude for the popes
supremacy as we see. And yet they wring whatsoever is said or done to the
church of Rome, Why the East churches sought to the West.
as if it were a strong proof for supremacy. Whereas the godly of the east
church being thus distressed, were in policy forced (and not for religious
causes) to seek for help of the West church, and of the bishop of Rome for
their own quietness. And this does appear most plainly, in an epistle that
Basil writes unto the bishop of the west church for their help, Epist. 61.
and especially by the advice that he gives to Athanasius to that end,
wherein he shows that there is no way for their safety, but to cause the
bishops of the West church to take good part with them. And then if they
chance to seek for this at the popes hand, Epist. 48.
by and by without all doubt he must be head of the church. It makes me weary
even but to read their arguments. They do so force their authorities that
they bring, and so unnaturally apply them, Epist. 10. Cyril exan. ^.
that it is tediousness to think of it. Such is that also that follows out
of Ciril. For Ciril did think that if Nestorius would not revoke his heresies
within the time limited by Celestine bishop of Rome, all men ought to shun
his company, as a person excommunicat and deposed. Epist. 18.
And writing to Celestinnus, he does desire to know of him, whether he think
good, that men should yet communicate which Nestorius, or they should shun his
company. And what if Ciril saw that in Celestine, that he thought him worthy
to be especially regarded in these matters, does it thereupon follow, that he
would have him to have soeuraigne jurisdiction over the whole church? Or if he
think him meet to deal in his own matter, must he needs give him power over
all men, in all causes? Master Bellarmine must make new logic, before he can
prove such bad conclusions.

But then to mend the matter, he brings in an authority that is not to be
found in the Author that he does aleage for it. But we must take it upon the
credit of Thomas of Aquine. They show that they want proof, when they would
feign call again the things that are not to help their cause. As for Thomas
we know welenough his good will to the church of Rome. For he would not only
ra^e out of the earth these sentences of Ciril, Locorum Theol. li. 6. cap. 5.
but also as Canus reports of him, he speaks of one Maximius that says
much for the authority of the bishop of Rome. Yea and he finds much out of
the council of Chalcedon. Cap. 6.


In which council the Bishop of Rome, had his authority (that he sought for)
much abridged. Yet I say Thomas has found out even in that council good
stuff, to confirm the authority of the bishop of Rome, Li. 5. ep. 14. ad
Nais.
that ueuer came to our hands. And no meruel: for Melchior Canus tells us,
that Gregory complains that in his days they were blotted out by heretics.
And I pray you, how then did Thomas of Aquine come by them, Forged writings.
who was after Gregory almost seven hundred years? Thus you may see how they
seek by forged writings that which by authorities of credit, they can not
maintain. Well then let fained Ciril go, and let us see what Theodoret says.
He as others before him had done craves the Popes help against Dioscorus.
Epist. ad Leonem papam.
And Leo the pope did for him what he could, we deny not. But yet before the
council of Chalcedon would restore Theodoret to his place again, Act. 8.
he was forced by the whole council, to show his detestation of Nestorius,
Eutiches, and all heretics although the pope had received him to communion
before.

And here before I go any further this one note I think necessary to be
added, concerning many of the former testimonies. Mark what writings the
church of Rome alleges for her supremacy.
That because they are drawn from the private Epistles of men distressed,
seeking for help, and therefore they might well be forced to write with as
great humility as they could devise to write, for to obtain succor: it is no
reason that these their forced petitions, and private requests, should be
accounted as rules for catholic religion. Lib. 3. cap. 8. Sozomen examined.
Then comes in Sozomen in which he mistaketh both the place (alleging the
seventh chapter for the eighth an error easily committed) and the matter. For
although Julius bishop of Rome, did think well of the dignity of his seat, yea
and in respect of his mightiness that he was now grown unto, partly by the
goodness of former Emperors, but chiefly through the dissentions of the east
or greek churches, he was in duty also bound more then others to have a great
care over all churches: yet that his supremacy was not then acknowledged that
very Chapter shall sufficiently testify. For there it is reported, how that
the bishops of the east churches (to whom Julius had written somewhat sharply,
in the behalf of Athanasius and others that fled to him) did make answer to
Julius, with a letter full of tauntes and threatenings, and showed that their
churches were as great and as many as his: finding fault also with Julius for
receiving such to his communion, and such other things. So that we see that
they did not account the Bishop of Rome as supreme head of the church: neither
does Sozomen say that Julius his seat came to that dignity by Christ's
institution, or by Gods law, which Bellarmine took in hand to prove, but has
not brought one testimony of the fathers that can perform that promise. The
church of Rome pleads possession, not by right.
They plead as the Lawyers say in possessorio, they say they have it by
possession, so many have come to the church of Rome for help, when they were
distressed.

In thus many cases popes have intermedled in other bishops charges. So they
tell us what they have done. But the question is how justly, by what right, law
or authority, they have done many of the things that they have done. We would
have them plead de petitorio. Let them prove their right. For it is true that
long since the pride of this seat did begin, abusing Gods good liberality,
and the favor of godly princes toward them, still increasing in that
ambitious humor, until they had set themselves above all. Which authority
when they had once gotten, they did show themselves insatiable and cruel,
despising all authority, and making their will to be in steed of law, as shall
God willing in the proof of their practice, which is the second part of this
treatise, be declared. But it does not follow, they have done this, Council.
tom. 2.
therefore they have done well in so doing. That which is alleged out of
Acutius that Simplician the pope had care over all churches is much to the
commendation of Simplician, that he had so due regard of his duty, but this
proves him not to have authority over all because he had, or at the least
should have care over all. Liberatus in br^uiatio.
But I muse what master Bellarmine means to tell us a tale out of Liberatus,
of a namelesse bishop of Patara. What matter is it to us, or what strength can
it bring to his cause, to know what he or other men, not known in the church
of God, for their learning, judgment, zeal, or such other virtues as are
necessary for them that should be witnesses in matters of religion, do think
or say? Much such proof might be had out of the legend of lies. But that will
never prove their doctrince to be catholic.

Lastly the words of Iustitian in that he calls the pope John the second,
Epist. ad Ioh. Codice primo titulo.
head of all holy churches may well be admitted, as in former times that name
head was often used, yea, and is still of us. A man of good dexterity or
countenance is called a head man among others although he has not authority
over them. But such a head as now the pope is become, that will control all
bishops, yea depose emperors, dispense with Gods word, make new laws in the
church, and have his saying in all matters, Justinian himself could not have
liked. And it must be marked, that we deny not, but a bishop of Rome (as also
another man) may welbe called head of the church, if they be indewed with such
gifts as are to the benefit of the whole church. But we deny, both that the
name is or ought to be peculiar to the church of Rome, How we deny the pope to
be head of the church.
or the bishop thereof only: and also that the authority which by that and such
like names he challenges unto him is tolerable in him or in any other. For
indeed our contention is, whether the bishop of Rome have supremacy over the
whole church or not. Now excellent names were given unto men in times past,
Tom. 2 page 162. Page 263
as the name of pope, Baronius a great papist of our time, confesses was
common to all bishops. Russin. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 28.
The like he also writes of the name of universal bishop. And Athanasius was
called Pontifex maximus. The greatest bishop, and yet not he, but Liberius was
then bishop of Rome. And for this name head (as I have showed) it is nothing
strange in all societies, to have a head man, and yet he not to have
jurisdiction over them. By all which it appears, how weak an argument may
be drawn from these names which may be common to so many, to prove the
supremacy which the bishop of Rome challenges to himself only.

Now master Bellarmine having wrung what he can (which is not much) out of
the fathers of the greek church, comes to the latin writers, to try what
gleanings he can get among them. Whom I doubt not but we shall find speaking
very reverently of the church of Rome, Bellar. arg. out of latin writers.
as in truth it well deserved, because that the bishop of Rome (although he
began very soon to encroche somewhat upon other men's right, and to enlarge his
power) yet he used his greatness and authority for a long time, to the
maintenance of true religion the comfort of the distressed, and to withstand
by himself, and other the bishops of the West church, the heresies that
troubled especially the East churches. In all which things we know that by their
place, for that they were bishops of the Imperial city, and the authority that
they were come unto, by favor of the Emperors, they were as it were
ringleaders unto others: so that although they were moved sometimes to these
good things, by a desire that they had to be meddling in all matters, which was
one of the ways whereby they came to their greatness: yet in that they did good
unto the church, the godly did both commend them, and also bear with them,
although sometime they were too forward, and stepped too far before others. But
when they would have had this authority confirmed to them in councils, and
established as a law of the church, then did the ancient fathers, wisely
withstand their unlawful desires, as the vi. councils of Carthage, Why and
how although the latin fathers did reverence the bishop of Rome.
and the council of Chalcedon do plainly prove. So that the godly learned
fathers of those times, partly to encourage them in their well doing, did give
them due commendation when they deserved it, and partly for quietness sake and
the peace of the church, did wincke at many of their inordinate proceedings,
and unorderly attempts, so long as they were but their private actions; yet
would not the jurisdiction of the universal church. And these things being
well remembered, I may I trust be shorter in answering to the particular places.
And first for the place out of Cyprian, Lib 2. cap. 16. De Unit Eccl. alias
simp. prelat.
which master Bellarmine prosecuteth in many words as he is forced to do,
that he may get out of him but a show of an argument. It is answered in few
words. For indeed master Bellarmine groundeth upon a false principle, which I
dare not say that he could not but see his error, but it is marvel if he can
be ignorant of it.

The words wherein he especially trusts are these. Cyprian examined.
This comes to pass (that heresies grow in the church) whilst there is no
returning to the beginning of the truth, neither is the head sought for,
neither is the doctrine of our heavenly master kept. Now by this word head he
understands the head of the church whom he makes Peter.

Whereas it is most certain that Cyprian does mean nothing else here, then in
another place where he endeavors to persuade after the same manner and by that
very argument, where by the head he means that which the apostles taught. For
says he if we return to the head and beginning of the tradition of the
apostles, man's error cease. And there he teaches us by a similitude how we
should come to the head, by the similitude I say of a conduct, wherein if the
water fail we go to the head of it, that is, to the fountain, and so from
thence examine the want of the water: so says he, must Gods priests go to
the beginning when there is any question of Religion. And that he means that
head in this place, the very words by him alleged do prove, because the
former words put us in mind of returning to the original or beginning of the
truth, and the words that follow, lead us to the heavenly doctrine. Well
then, the head in this place does signify the spring and fountain, from which
our doctrine must begin, and so master Bellarmines argument is quite
overthrown. And having proved that he builds his reason upon a false ground,
I trust I need not bestow any more labor to prosecute him in his wandering
words.

Optatus is the second who speaks nothing to help this desperate cause.
Contrr Parmenion. li. 2.
For although he commend unto us that one chair in respect of the unity of
doctrine (for all the priests now says Chrysostom must sit, Hom. 85. in Job.
20.
not upon Moses chair, but upon Christ's chair) yet in the words alleged by
master Bellarmine he adds, and we have proved that that is ours by Peter.
Optatus a bishop in Affrike (not of Rome) sits in Peter's chair. Therefore
Peter's chair and the popes chair are not all one, unless their doctrine be
one. It is not tied to Rome, or to that church. But alluding to that place of
Moses his chair which our Savior Christ speaks of, because the Scribes and
Pharisees taught that which Moses did teach. Matthew. 23. 2.
Optatus also says that he does sit in Peter's chair, because he taught that
which Peter did confess and teach. Optatus against Peter's chair at Rome only.
Yea, and he proves by this argument against the Donatists (who taught, that
they only were the church) that the church is also where he taught, because
even there is Peter's chair: so that if Optatus your own witness speak
truly, then you have maruellously abused the world for many years, in making
them believe that S. Peter's chair is at Rome only. But Saint Ambrose seems
somewhat plainer then the rest, Amb. in epist. 1. Timoth. 3.
in that first place alleged by master Bellarmine.

The church is called Gods house, whereof Damasus is a ruler this day. But yet
the words do not import any such thing, as may prove the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome. For, we will not deny that the Bishop of Rome is a ruler in
the church, but, that he is the only ruler we can not grant. But Saint Ambrose
expounding those words of Paul wherein he teaches Timothy how to behave
himself in Gods house, Ambrose answered.
takes occasion to show, both what is Gods house, namely, the church, and who
they are that are rulers in Gods house, namely, the bishops or pastors to whom
the ministry is committed. And to make this plain by an example, he sets
before us the house of God at Rome, which is the church there, and the ruler of
Gods house there, who is Damasus their bishop. If any man ask how it comes
to pass that he rather names Damasus then any other bishop? Sundry reasons of
it may be yielded. First Ambrose himself was a bishop in Italy (for Milaine is
in Italy) under the popes wings, and therefore the bishop of Rome was the most
famous bishop and better known to his people then any of the other
patriarchs, and therefore fittest for an example.

Secondly there had been a very great schism or strife about the popedom,
Platina in the life of Damasus.
one Vrsicinus standing for it against Damasus, so that many of both sides were
slain in the very church in striving for it. But Damasus in the end obtaining
the popedom Saint Ambrose to testify his own perswation, and to assure
others that Damasus and not Vrsicmus was bishop of Rome, although he stood for
it, does take occasion here to name him.

Thirdly, Platina.
Damasus being pope was accused of whoredom whereof having cleared himself,
it is not unlikely but that S. Ambrose did the rather take this occasion to
pull al suspicion out of other men's minds, by giving this testimony of him.
Another cause also may be added, that as it seems he was as learned as any
bishop of Rome before him. For which S. Ambrose himself a being a learned man,
might then rather delight in naming him.

The rest of the places out of S. Ambrose have no weight at all. Orat. in
Satyrum
Satyrus did ask the bishop, whether he agreed with the Catholic bishops,
that is with the Church of Rome. He means by catholic bishops, such as held
the catholic faith, that then was maintained at Rome. If it be a good
argument to say Rome is a catholic church, therefore it must govern all the
churches in the world: then will this also be a good argument, Hippo was a
catholic church, so was Millaine, so are also the churches that we have
allowed in England by authority, therefore they were, and ours are heads over
all others. And that master Bellarmine will not allow. But he asks why the
bishops are not catholics that agree not with the church of Rome, if it be
not because Rome is the head of the catholic church? I marvel much that
master Bellarmine whose words go for oracles with many, will show himself so
ignorant of that he alleges. For if he had read but the words that
immediately do follow, Bellarmines ignorance or falsehood.
the reason is, there rendered why he asked that question, namely because the
church there was in a schism. For one Lucifer had separated himself from their
communion. Lo here M. Bellarm. he dreameth not of any headship of that church,
but asks this question whether he held the faith that then was preached at
Rome. Athanasius.
And Athanasius in his creed speaks in this sense of a catholic faith. Yea
the name of catholic was also as it were a note of their profession. That
whereas the Donatists gloried, that they only had the true church, the
catholics on the contrary would be known by their name, that in any place of
the world, they might be of the true church. Yea there were Emperors that made
a law, The name of Catholic.
that whosoever believed the one godhead in trinity and equal majesty of the
father, the son, and the holy ghost should be called Christians, and
Catholics, Lib. 7. cap. 4.
as their law does testify. Yea Sozomen reports of a law made by the
Emperor that all should believe the law delivered by Peter the head of the
apostles (but how he may be called head of the apostles I have showed before)
and that now Damasus bishop of Rome, and Peter of Alexandria do hold and
that they only that worship the trinity with like honor, should be called
the catholic church. And does master Bellarmine to make his bad proof seem
better, ask how they may be called catholics, that agree with the church of
Rome, unless it be in this respect, that they take it to be the head of the
catholic church? here are catholics we see and yet not bound to believe that
head.

After he alleges two other places of like force. De Sacram, li. 3. cap. 1.
The effect of them is, that he would follow the pattern of the church of
Rome. So would I also if I had lived in those days, when they sincerely held
the faith committed to them by Gods word. And he doubtless, if he saw the
superstition, and Idolatry, and treasons, that under color of religion, are
hatched there in our days, he would think even the cotton ruins of Rome, to
be over good, to be a cage for so badde birds. But to follow their example,
is not to yield unto them power over us.

To go forward, out of saint Jerome he reasons thus: Saint Jerome for pope
Damasus answered: Epist, ad Alg. de Monogam.
the Synodicall consultations of the East and West, therefore they that sought
for answer from the seat of Rome in their matters acknowledged the
superiority thereof. If I should tell Master Bellarmine again, that Master
Calvin in his time, and Master Beza in his time, have answered more matters
and questions that came from sundry of the reformed Churches, and some
particular men, then many of the popes of that time, yet I am sure he will never
confess them to be universal Bishops, for that. No more need we grant to
him, that the Pope is a universal Bishop, Ad Damas. ep. de nomine hypostas.
because many questions were moved to him. Again, Saint Hierome confesses
himself to be Damasus his sheep, and that he is of communion with him. Alas,
what childish proofs are these? May not Hierome confess himself to depend
upon Damasus, but that he must thereby tie all others likewise to be subject
unto him? It is a shame for men so to deceive the world, and to hasten even
their own damnation by abusing the simple in such sort. They cry it out in
every corner, that there is no salvation to be hoped for, unless they do
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be head of their Church: and yet are they
not able to yield so much as one good reason out of the Scriptures or ancient
writers of the purer age for proof of their doctrine. It must be believed as
an article of faith, and yet they could show no ground, no warrant for it.

Out of saint Augustine is alleged, that in the Church of Rome, Epist. 162.
the principality of Peter's chair has always flourished. Augustine and
Optatus as they were in one time, so were they of one mind. And as before out
of Optatus I showed, and that by Christ's testimony, that the Apostles chair
is his doctrine, so here does it signify. And saint Augustine his meaning is,
that Rome has especially kept the Apostles doctrine or faith, the which in
Saint Augustines days, might truly be verified. Again, out of Saint
Augustine epist. 92. he desires pope Innocent to help them against the
Pelagians, which maruellously troubled. Palestine and Affrike.

Now out of this will he conclude the popes Supremacy. But saint Augustine
himself denies that he had any such meaning, in that he was one of that sixth
council of Carthage that so stiffely denied supremacy unto the pope, seeking
it so earnestly, and by very false practices. And the Bishop of Rome, was then
of great ability to do good, as also any other may be, and yet not have
jurisdiction over them that seek for that good at his hands. I would have them
to bring some plain proof, and not so to stand upon strange conjectures.
Epist. 157.
Again, Sozimus bishop of Rome willed hini to go to a council at Cesarea, and
he therefore said that he must needs go. If Sozimus did command, and
Augustine would not stand upon his right in such a matter, where perchance his
going might be profitable to Gods church, yet that would not make Sozimus head
of the church. No, at that time they did not gather any such hard conclusions.
For although they would not refuse to do good, even being more imperiously
commanded then reason would, yet supremacy (as I have showed) they would not
acknowledge in the Bishop of Rome, but rather were content to be at great
charges to convince the popes falshoode.

In the last two places saint Augustine commends the bishop of Rome, Ad
Bonis, l. 1. c. 1.
in that being so high as he was, yet he would be friendly to them that were
humble or low, and then confesses every Bishop to be high, yet him to be
higher. A man may be friend to them that are lower then he is: and one Bishop
may be higher than others, and yet not have jurisdiction over them. Prosper de
ingr.
Higher, I say in gifts, credit, place or many other ways.

In England we see differences of bishoprics, Prosper examined.
where yet the one has not jurisdiction over the other. Now for Prosper, it
were hard if his poetical amplifications should be able to carry away the
weight of so great a cause. But for his words if he say that Rome is Peter's
seat in respect of the doctrine that there was taught and maintained, as before
Optatus and Augustine (of whom he was a great follower) have done, we yield
unto him. Otherwise I leave the godly Reader to the arguments before alleged,
to consider what he should think concerning this point, whether Peter was
Bishop there or not. And where he says that Rome is made unto the world the
head of pastoral honor, we yield unto that also, that at that time there
was no church, that either more sincerely did keep that which the apostles
taught, or had more credit and authority amongst other churches then Rome had,
in respect that she was able and willing to do good unto many other.

But where he says that what by arms she could not, by religion she has
subdued: is not simply true. For there are many that never were nor will be
(by likely hood) subdued to Romish religion. But in some respect we also
confess that to be so, in that religion subdueth the heart, and wins the
affection of men to be subject, whereas that outward force can only prevail
against the outward man. De persecution^ Wandalica.
Now for Victor Vticensis who calls the church of Rome head of all other
churches, I have often showed that it may truly so be called in respect of the
authority which by many occasions it had gotten, not in respect of any
inrisdiction that Christ gave unto it, more then to other. The next is
Vyncentius Lirinensis, Vincent. Lyrinens. in commonit.
who alluding unto the name, or indeed rather giving unto Rome that name, that
was commonly given unto it, says that the head of the world gave testimony
unto it (meaning the council of Ephesus.) You see says master Bellarmine that
the bishop of Rome is called head of the world. Vincent wrung to a wrong sense.
Nay you see how our popes catholics incroch more and more, for that
insatiable gulf of the church, of Rome, which will never have honor and
authority enough. Who ever before master Bellarmine has called the pope the
head of the world? He has wont to be but head of the church. But I fear that
if his kingdom continue a while Acharonta mouebit, he will keep a stir in
hell also. But Vincensius gives no such name to Julius bishop of Rome. He
would not be so injurious to the civil authority he had learned better then
so, to give to Caesar that that belongs to Caeser, and to God that that is
Gods, although the church of Rome might quite blotte out of their books that
lesson, for any regard that they have to keep it.

As for Vincentius, his meaning is plain enough to them that will see the
truth. For having spoken of sundry places from whence learned men came to that
council of Ephesus, first out of the East, then also out of the West churches,
he names Julius bishop of the city of Rome, which city he calls the head
of the world, as immediately after he calls Carthage one of the South, and
Millaine one of the North, the sides of the world.

But if he had made so very great account of the church of Rome, as in these
days men would have us to do, he would have had perchance some more regard in
placing that church in some other order, then to make it almost the last that
he mentions.

Out of Cassiodor a senator and a great officer in Rome master Bellarmine
alleges somewhat. Lib. 11. Epist. 2. ad Ioh. papam.
You (says he to John Bishop of Rome) sit as watchmen over christian people,
as you are called father you love all.

I see nothing here that can help master Bellarmine or his cause. For who
ever did think otherwise, then that the Bishop of Rome, was a watchman over
christian people? Or who will say that the Pope has not or at the least
should have a fatherly affection toward all? If he commend his cure, how
proves that his power?
Well it follows. It is our part to look to somewhat, you look to all.

Cassiodor living under the popes nose, is content either by this praising of
him to teach him what care he indeed should have, not only to do good to the
people of Rome where he was Bishop, but also as occasions should be offered to
help others also. Or else it may be that he gives him greater praise then he
deserves.

But what is this for the popes supremacy? Must not the building needs fall
that stands upon such weak propes? Much like is that which follows that
the seat which is pope John's peculiar place, is given generally to the whole
world, that is as I take it to do good to all. If a Roman magistrate to the
bishop of Rome do extol more then in truth he may, the power of that city,
or else tell how far their benefits do extend, must this be so strained and
wrung to prove supremacy?

The last testimony alleged by master Bellarmine does Valentinianus Theodos.
in praeamb. Council. Chalcedonens.
so little help his cause, that if he had done wisely he should never have
spoken of it. For by that Epistle and others that are set before that council
of Chalcedon it may easily appear, that Leo Bishop of Rome did then bestirre
him using the discention of the East church as a mean to increase his own
authority. For it is most plain and cannot be denied, that afterward in
that council, Leo earnestly seeks supremacy.
by his legates, he sought the supremacy very earnestly and in sundry of his
Epistles disanulleth that the council did against it. And in these Epistles he
makes moan to many to procure Theodosius the Emperor to stand his friend.

An^ in this Epistle here cited by master Bellarmine, Valentinian shows how
Leo came unto him, told him of the division of the East church, and great
troubles there. For indeed Flauianus a catholic bishop was deposed by
Dioscorus, and so cruelly handled, that he died thereof within three days.

Well Valentinian makes petition to Theodosius, That (the bishop of Rome) may
have place and power, to judge of the faith and of the priests. Which request
made by Valentinian, in the letter which Valentinian confesses that Leo
requested him to write, so iumping with that which afterward Leo in the
council practiced, may much persuade us to think, that he solicited
Valentinian the Emperor, either plainly or covertly, to move this in his
behalf. Well then this being but a request made that it may so be, that cannot
prove that it was so, but contrary.

And what reason does Valentinian the Emperor an especial friend to the
bishop of Rome, use to commend his suite. Antiquity gave him principality of
priesthood over all. Wherein I first note that not Christ, but ancient custom,
is pretended to have privileged him.

And here again mark how this agrees with that which was afterward in the
council of Chalcedon objected by Paschasnus, Supremacy claimed by custom not
by gods law.
legate for Leo this bishop of Rome. The church of Rome (says Paschasinus)
always had the supremacy. Act. 16.
But this his allegation was proved false.

But the allegations of Valentinian the popes solicitour in this cause, and of
Poschasimus the popes legate being so like, it makes me the bolder to
conjecture, that they were both forged in one shop, because they have both one
stamp.

Thus have I taken a view of all such testimonies as are alleged by master
Bellarmine out of them, that lived within 600. years of Christ, for to
establish the pride of that Romish seat. I have of purpose omitted iii. or
iiii. by him alleged, because they wrote after the time that Phocas that
murdering traitor, (who killed Mauritius his Lord and master for his Empire,
having first killed before his face his wife and five of his children,) had
granted unto Boniface bishop of Rome third of that name, to be supreme head
over the whole church. Wherein although I have endeavored to be short, yet I
trust it plainly enough appears to them that will not shut their eyes against
the truth, that although the church of Rome had indeed in regard of her
constancy in the truth, and power which she grew unto by many occasions,
being in the imperial city, great authority amongst all other churches: and
although learned men were by their distressed estates forced many times in
their private seats, to yield to that church more interest to meddle in their
matters, then of right it had: yet it cannot appear by any thing that they
bring out of any approved record, within the compass of those years, that the
church of Rome was either by Gods law, appointed the head over others, which
is indeed the point that they should prove, or that by common consent of the
godly it was so catholickly received. And yet if this latter could have more
apparent proof, then ever Rome or Rhemes can afforde in this cause, they
should gain nothing, but that good men have either ordained or tolerated such
a state. Which howsoever it might seem tolerable, when many good men possessed
that place: yet that the church, should be subject to such as now for the most
part sit in that seat, no christian heart can well endure it. But now this
labor being taken in hand, to try the popes title unto the supremacy, or how
he pleads, or what claim he can make: I must needs give warning to the
christian reader, to mark how that as master Bellarmine has said little, or
rather nothing at all, to prove this authority of the bishop of to be grounded
upon Gods law: so be has not brought one council within the said six hundred
years or any thing sufficiently material out of the fathers of that time to
prove that by man's law he was decreed so to be, but only sometimes perchance
by particular men used, as if he had authority over all. And shall this be
accounted a catholic doctrine, that neither God nor man, for six hundred
years after Christ, commanded to be believed? If there come no better
evidence then master Bellarmine can bring, without all doubt the pope will be
found, to be but an intruder into other men's right, a usurper of other men's
jurisdiction.

But master Bellarmine will help his former want, with a new supply. Li. 1.
cap. 17. Object. of Bellar.
He affirms very boldly, as he does often in other matters, that we know
neither the time wherein, neither the author by whom, this supremacy had
beginning. Yet it may be that we shall guess shrewdly at it. Answer.
But first we must understand that the root of this supremacy that is the
pride and ambition of heart that was in many of the popes, was lying long in
the ground before it did sprowt and plainly show it self, and when it grew
that it might be seen, yet was it not perfected in a long time after. But it
did plainly show it self in the time of Phocas of whom I spoke before. For he
with much ado ordained, Plat. in Bonif. 3.
that the bishop of Rome should be called and counted the head of all churches,
as many of the popes friends tell us, and among other Platina. A very fit
patron, for so proud a prelat. And after that the pope had gotten by the
emperors decree, this glorious title, yet he could not presently get quiet
possession of the same, but the bishop of Constantinople did still strive for
that name. Omph. annot. in Bonif. 3.
Until at the length, they were both content to wink, and the one to suffer
the other to be be called universal bishop. So that both of them had that
name, and were so called. And now the bishop of Rome having obtaiued thus much
in the west church, that he in all councils and meetings was chief, and that
they should submit themselves to him. Before it was long he had taken so good
root and begane to grow so mighty, that he durst alter and change, give to
and take from men at his pleasure, and to turn all things vpside down, yea
and in the end, to cheek the greatest monarchs. But of these matters I shall
if God will have better occasion to entreat in the second part of this
treatise. Now I will only say that they were comme to such power as Platina
writes of Boniface the eight, Plat. in Bonif.
that they would rather put fear into the hearts of emperors, kings, princes,
nations, and people then religion. And thus when they had been in increasing
and growing in strength, for the space of at the least eight hundred years, at
length in the council of Florence we find this their sovereign and supreme
power confirmed in these words. Council. Florent.
We define that the holy apostolic seat, and bispp of Rome has the supremacy
in the whole world. So that although we cannot perfectly say, when this poison
of pride began in the church of Rome, yet you see we can perfectly enough tell
when it began to show it self, and when it was made an ecclesiastical
drecrees. Neither is that of any weight which master Bellarmine alleges out
of Gregory to the contrary, Lib. 7. epist. 63.
that the church of Constantinople is under the church of Rome. For he cannot
mean thereby the church of Rome should have supreme authority over it and
all other churches, seeing that no man more then Gregory inueieth against the
name of universal bishop, but his meaning is only this, that the church of
Constantinople is not of so good account or authority in meetings or
assemblies as that of Rome. Which being applied to our question proves
nothing. For to prove that the church of Rome may sit, or go, or write his
name, before the bishop of Constantinople, is not to prove him to have
jurisdiction over him. That which out of Justinian he alleges, Page 98.
is answered before, as that also that he brings out of the epistle of
Valentinian to Theodosius, saving that master Bellarmine incrocheth somewhat,
and takes more then is given him. Page 112.
For where Valentinian says that Antiquity has given that to Rome, master
Bellarmine sees that will not serve his turn, to prove it to have been from
Christ, from whom only they can claim it, if by the law of God they will
have it, and therefore he says not as Valentinian does that it has been of
old time, Bellarmine adds to Valentinians words, or changes them.
but always. And so wresteth his words quite out of tune. And it is but a
foolish shift whereby they seek to pervert the truth and by these forced
gloses, to corrupt the words of almost all stories, when they denied Phocas
first to have given supremacy to the pope, Bellar. lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c.
17
he did (if you will trust master Bellarmine) but declare it and did not give
it. Platina says that the pope obtained this of Phocas to be called and
counted head, In Bonif. 3.
and so does Sigebert: Cron. Eusebius.
and Eusebius says that by the consent of Phocas it was so instituted. And
Beneuenutus Imolensis a story commended by pope Pius the second, by his adding
to the same, the lives of four emperors, says that Phocas first obtained that
Rome should be head of all churches. If he First obtained this title to Rome,
if he did institute it, if the pope obtained this of Phocas, then let the
indifferent reader judge, how untruely master Bellarmine says that Phocas did
but declare this thing, and that it was before. Yea what needed this any
declaration of of the emperor, if the church had received it as a catholic
doctrine. Or if it be not a catholic doctrine, what means master Bellarmine,
to make so false braggs as he sometimes does, of the consent of fathers in this
doctrine. And thus I trust I have laid open the vanity of the proof, and the
weakness of the argument, whereby they endeavor to strengthen and establish,
the tyranous sovereignty of the church of Rome. For if Peter had no such
jurisdiction over others, he could not give it to any other. If his being
bishop of Rome, have not any such ground, but that it may justly be doubted of,
and strong presumptions to the contrary: then is not the popes succession of
Peter, so certain, as they would have it thought. Yea and if Peter were bishop
of Rome and if he had such sovereignty: how do they prove that it is
bequeathed to them, to what person, how in what words, at what time, in what
place, before what witnesses? Al which things how weakly they prove, hitherto
I have declared. And yet to go further, admit, that Peter had such
jurisdiction, which cannot be proved, but I admit I say that he had it,
admit also that he could, and did, leave the same to the bishop of Rome, which
we also justly deny: must it therefore cleave so fast to that chair in Rome,
If jurisdiction were had, yet it might be lost.
that it can not for any cause be altered? Must it be so hereditarie to his
successors, if they had been his successors that are bishops of Rome, that
they could not forfet it for any terspasse, that it may not be taken from them,
for any offense? God forbid that we should be so foolish, as to tie God to
any place or people, to any sect or succession in such sort, as that howsoever
men do abuse his graces, or their own callings, yet still they must have the
place that once they have gotten, and they must serve him in that place,
whether he will or not, as though they had it by everlasting patent. Exodus 28.
1.
Did not God choose to be his hie priest Aaron, and his sons by name Nadab,
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar to serve in the priests office? No man can deny it.
And yet Nadab and Abihu for offering only with strange fire (many greater
offenses then that, Leuit. 10. 1. Priests for their sins punished.
are committed in the church of Rome) were burnt with fire from heaven, to show
that God is not so in bondage to them whom he has placed in such rooms,
that he must have their service whether he will or not. Yea, and did the
priesthood continue always in Aarons line, until the very time that the
Leuiticall priesthood was utterly abolished? No verily. For Herod set up
priests at his pleasure, when he came to be made king of Iewry, so that then
the line of Aaron was utterly extinct, concerning the priesthood, and they
that afterward were priests were not of the same. Where then is the choice
that God made of Aarons posterity to serve him? And what greater promise can
the church of Rome find made unto Peter (I say not to them, for they had none
made) then was made unto Phinehas, even a covenant of the priests office for
ever? ^um. 25. 13.
And yet we see this was not only altered now, when the priesthood was quite
gone from Aarons posterity, but also even long before, when the priesthood
was given unto Eli that was the son of Ithamar, and taken from the posterity
of Phinehas, so that, not so much as his son succeeded him.

And concerning Eli the priest, 1. (...). 2. 30.
the priest, the Lord had said, that he and his house should have walked before
God for ever, (meaning in the priests office.) But when God saw how Eli did
wincke at the great disorders of his sons, whereby Gods service was hindered,
31
then he let Eli to understand, that he would cut off his authority, and
stir himself up a faithful Priest, that should do according to his heart,
and according to his mind.

And this was performed when Abiathar was put out of the 35
priesthood by Solomon, and Zadoc was made Priest in his steed. 2. Kings 2.
27, 35
And of this Zadoc it is said by God himself, by that messenger or man of God
that was sent to Eli. I will build him (meaning Zadoc) a sure house, 1. Sam.
2. 35.
and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever. And yet (as is before
declared) the priesthood was taken from his line also, so that there were
diverse hie priests that were not of his house. If now God in his just
judgment might, and in his upright and faultlesse justice did, take from them,
that which they might as assuredly have claimed to themselves and their
posterity, as ever Peter might claim such sovereign jurisdiction, to him and
his successors, so that they have their light put out, and their candlestick
removed: how much less may they claim any perpetuity to rule over Gods
people, that can pretend almost no color of title for the same? God left Silo.
What, is Rome any better then Silo? It pleased God there to dwell many
yeeares, he made it as it were his tent among men, 1. Sam. 4. Psalm. 78. 60.
Ier. 7. 12.
God calls it his place, where he set his name at the beginning. And yet was
it in the end made a byword among the people, that God when he will threaten
his grievous wrath, 14
says he will do as he did to Silo.

And again, Ierem. 26. 6.
I will make this house like Silo, and will make this city a curse to all the
nations of the earth: because he forsook the habitation of Silo, Psalm. 78. 60.
the tabernacle where he dwelt among men. Let them that would so feign tie us
to that Romish chair, show that ever God sat so in it, or said so much of it,
as he has spoken of Silo, and when they have so done, yet can they have no
greater interest in God than Silo had, Ierem. 7. 12.
from which God departed, for the wickedness of the people of Israel. And
shall we think that he will rest in that polluted nest, or dwell in that
unclean den, where Gods name is most horribly blasphemed, with superstitions
and idolatries above measure? If he have forsaken Israel, can he delight in
Italy.

If he have left Jerusalem, will he tarry at Rome? For even Jerusalem that
holy city: Jerusalem for sin forsaken, and the temple.
nay, the Temple there, which was the glory of that people, and the wonder of
the world, which had so many promises of Gods favor, so many tokens of Gods
good liking of it, (for the Lord had chosen Zion, and loved to dwell therein,
saying, This my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein) Psalm one hundred thirty two, the thirteen and fourteen verses,
even that Temple (I say) which God himself commanded to be made, and chose
for his ownne house, was not only destroyed by the Babylonians, and afterward
being built again) by the Romans, so that not one stone was left upon an
other, but also God left the place it self, and cast off that people, for
being a people unto him, as the Apostle Saint Paul to the Romans in the
eleventh chapter tells us, and experience proclaims it. Yea, where is the
promise concerning the flesh that was made unto Abraham, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed? Genesis the seventeenth chapter and seventh verse.
What is become of that peculiar people of God, the Lords own inheritance, the
people that he chose to set his name among them, the vine that he brought out
of Egypt? Were they not many times for their sins, a pray unto their enemies,
a reproach among the people? Has not the wild bore out of the wood so devoured
the same, that not so much as one root of it is known to grow there? In so
much as the prophet Esaias in their names makes a just and true complaint
saying, The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while, for
our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary: We have been as they over
whom thou never barest rule, and upon whom thy name was not called, Esaias the
sixty three chapter and eighteen and nineteen verses. What then, is the
promise of God of none effect? Will not God be as good as his word? Yes
doubtless, he can not lie, he will not deceive us. But all such promises have
a secret condition of serving God to be understood.

And if we on our part (I will not say perform the condition, for we can not
do it) but if we will strive and endeavor earnestly to fulfill it, no doubt
but he will assist us with his good grace, and embrace us, with his endless
and infinite mercies. But if we hearken only to that he promises, and regard
not that which he requires, we deceive our selves with a vain expectation of
that that belongs not to us. A similitude.
God deals with us as a good master deals with his servant. First he
hireth him to be his servant, and whatsoever promises of good turns he
afterward makes unto him, they depend upon that first covenant, if he serve
him diligently. If then a master promise to his servant, to do him some great
pleasure, may that servant neglect his duty, loiter and linger about his
work, leave his business undone, despise his masters commandment and yet
say within himself, my master owes me a good turn? He may not, there is no
reason to move him to it. If then the church of Rome claim such promises and
privileges to belong to them, as they pretend they have, yet they might long
since, by the abusing of their authority, and other good graces and gifts of
God, have forfeited, and lost the same. As we have to see most plainly in the
example of the Leuits who were of Aarons time, to whom it did belong by right
of inheritance as it were, and succession to be priests unto God. Leuiticall
priests for sin disgraded. Ezech. 44. 12.
And yet when they sinned against the Lord, and had no regard to keep covenant
with him, of them he says I have lift up my hand against them, and they shall
bear their iniquity, and they shall not come near unto me, to do the office
of the priest unto me, neither shall they come near unto any of my holy
things, in the most holy place, but they shall bear their shame, and their
abominations which they have committed. The like deprivation from their charge,
and disgrading them of their priesthood, Hos. 4. 6.
we read of in Hosea the prophet: Because thou have refused knowledge, I will
also refuse thee that thou shall be no priest to me, and seeing thou have
forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.

May he cast off his priests, whom himself appointed to be his priests, who
had that office by succession, and therefore we cannot doubt of their calling?
The popes calling is many times by wicked means.
And yet must he be tied to them that by briberie, violence and many vile
practices, as poysenings, couenantes with the Devil, and such other lewd
means, do possess that seat, and therefore have noe show of lawful
calling, and when they are in it, do nothing less then set forth Gods
truth, maintain his glory. or think of Gods law? No no, he is now as free
as ever he was, to choose him such servants, as are according to his own heart
he is no more bound to dwell still at Rome, then he was not to remove from
Jerusalem. The one place is already destroyed with a perpetual destruction:
For the other unless it amend, there is reserved a more heavy judgment. And
upon this point I have stayed somewhat the longer, not only for their sakes
that imagine the pope cannot err or be removed, but to admonish even us also,
that profess the gospel that unless we repent, we shall all perish
likewise. Luke 13. 3.
We are the figtree, for which the dresser of the vineyard, Luke 13. 6. 7. An
admonition^ to the professors of the gospel.
entreats that yet this fourth year we may be spared (for we have been
three long years, yea three times twelve years unfruitful. Our owner looked
for figes but we yield none, for grapes, Esaias 5.
but we bear none, but sower ones.) Now is the time wherein much digging, and
dunging, is bestowed upon us. If we continue still fruitfesse, as we have
been, there is no hope of mercy, but without sparing we must be cut down.
and so shall be cast into the vuquenchable fire. And this is in truth a more
christian and necessary collection, and more agreeable to Gods justice and to
the whole course of scripture, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. 2, Thessa. 1. 5, 6, 7
which promises good things, to them that walk in the fear of God, and
threatens Gods wrath, to them that are disobedient, and delight in sin:
Praes^t. in lib. pontif. Romans
then that which master Bellarmine gathers, out of the sins and schisms of
the popes. For hereby will he prove, that the church of Rome is the true
church, because they have had very many most grievous schisms, even among the
popes themselves (now where is the unity that so much they brag of?)

And because there have been many wicked popes, amongst whom himself names
Steven the sixth Leo the fifth Christopher the first, Bad Popes are as pearls
to beautify the church of Rome.
Sergius the third, John the twelfth, with others not a few as his own words
are. And yet notwithstanding that they have had many vices (as he says) the
glory of that seat is increased, and amplified thereby greatly. Indeed such
pearls, do best become such swines snowts. But what makes master Bellarmine
to like the better of the Romish church, and the rather to be induced to
imagine, that it is a true church, because even the heads thereof, have been
so bad companions, and so abounding in all wickedness?

Forsooth because if the bishop of Rome had not been of Gods appointment
(says he) and that church the true church, it could not have stood and
continued so long, being so full fraught with so many sins. But that is it
that is in question whether the church of Rome be the true church or not. We
deny it, we find not in it the ancient faith, the doctrine of the apostles,
the sincere word. We see not there, the pure administration of Gods holy
Sacraments. They teach us outward hypocrisy for true holiness, foolish toys,
for spiritual worshipping.

These and such like things do strongly persuade us, that God has done to
Rome as he has done to Silo and to Jerusalem long since, and will he prove it
to be the true church because the bishops are evil? Now if the name and
outward show of a church, have so blinded the eyes of master Bellarmine, that
he will, that it must needs be as it is called, that is to say, the catholic
church, The name of the church is often where the church is not.
I would have him look to Jerusalem, how in the time of Christ, when the
church was in them that followed Christ, yet the name and outward glory of the
church, remained with the priests, and that company, which were the greatest
enemies to Christ and his church.

As therefore we see not in the church of Rome when we try their doctrines, any
probability that they are the true church of Christ: so we set this down as
the infallible course of his judgments, with whom it is counted a righteous
thing, to set himself against such as delight in sin, that he that spared
not the angels that left their first estate, neither delighted in his own
people whom he had brought out of Egypt when they sinned against him, Jude. 5.
6.
will have no pleasure in the church of Rome any longer, then she has
pleasure in his law, Revel. 2. 5, 16. Revel. 3. 16.
but will remove their candlestick, fight against them with the sword of his
mouth, and spew them out, when they reject his truth.

Thus then we see that God left the priests, whom he had appointed, the people,
whom he had brought out of Egypt, and taken to be his peculiar inheritance,
the place, that he had chosen, the temple, that he commanded to be made,
because of their sins.

Let these things make us with indifferent judgment, and without partiality
to try, whether God be also departed from that church of Rome or not. For
there is no doubt, but if any people whatsoever, sins as they did, they may
also be punished as they were: But that church of Rome has sinned, in as
abundant measure, as ever did Jerusalem, as themselves and their own stories
do show, therefore why should they flatter themselves imagining that God will
not deal with her, as he has dealt with others.

And here we may consider how untrue that popish position is, that the church
of Rome, or the Bishop of Rome can not err. Can he sin? They confess
that he can not. Yea, and their own sins do record such sins of theirs,
as ascend up before the Lord, and cry unto God for vengeance. No doubt then but
such may err, and fall into heresies also. For it is truly said of Saint
Augustine, that men by their sins do fall into heresies, and heresies are
the very punishment for sin. For he that is the just judge, must needs pour
forth his wrath, Romans 1. 18.
upon such as detain the truth in unrighteousness, and upon such as know God
by his works, but will not glorify, Verse 21. 23.
him as God, and therefore in their excess of folly do turn the glory of
the incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible man, yea and of
things most base and vile, for man to worship.

Thus then we see how sin deserves, that God in his wrath should strike
with blindness, such as do delight therein. For when the love of the truth is
not received, God sends unto such as refuse the truth, strong illusions,
that they should believe lies, Thessalo. 2. 10. 11. And if you would have
example thereof, none is better then Salamon, who was for wisdom the wonder
of the world, and yet when he gave himself to sin with women, he was by that
means drawn to idolatry: In so much as Nehemiah, 1. Kinb. 12. 4.
fearing lest for the like offense, the like judgment of God, should fall upon
the people of his time, Nehem, 13. 26
warns them by the example of Solomon to take heed. Did not (says he)
Solomon king of Israel sin by those things? And Satan knew well enough, that
this was the readiest way, to draw men to idolatry, (which is deed
detestable heresy) by moving them to carnal and filthy adultery.

Therefore also he prevails against Gods people by that wicked practice. Number.
25. 1.
Shall we then think, that the church of Rome, (whose sins are greater then
were the sins of Sodom and Gomorah) cannot be left unto it self, and
plunged in error? Or that the pope cannot err, whose wicked doings are as
excessive as his power is great? Master Bellarmine in his book of the bishop
of Rome, takes great pain to prove that the pope cannot err. But every
body may see by his doubtful setting it down, that he cannot well tell what
to affirm of it. For he will not consent with such Romish catholics as teach
that the pope may err, and also teach heresy, if he define any thing out of
a council. De pontif. Ro^ li. 4. cap. 2.
And he dare not agree with Pighius, but rejects his opinion, who although
that the pope cannot be an heretic, or teach heresy openly though he alone
define of any thing.

But master Bellarmine will walk in a middle path which is this: that whether,
the Pope may be an heretic or not, he cannot set down any heresy, to be
believed of the whole church, wherein this conditional manner of speaking, (if
or whether he be an heretic or not) does show his doubtfulnesse in this
question. But because he is perchance in the next chapters especially in the
fifth chapter of a more resolute opinion, I urge not this point any further. But
this is his flat resolution, Li. 4. de Romans pontif. cap. 3
that when the pope teaches the whole church he cannot err by any means, in
the thing belonging to faith. No neither yet in precepts of manners, cap. 5
which are prescribed to the whole church, and which are of things necessary
to salvation, or for such things as are of themselves good or evil. Further
also he affirms that it is proueable, and may godlily be believed (for I set
down his words) that he can not only not err, as he is pope, but also as
he is a particular man, he cannot he an heretic, in believing any thing
obstinatly against the faith. Whereby it appears plainly that master
Bellarmine holds, that the pope can neither err at all, in faith or precept
of manners, as he teaches the whole church: neither can he be an obstinat
heretic as he is but a private man, not considering him as pope.

Against which doctrine I briefly oppose 2. or 3. arguments.

The first is that which immediately before I touched. He may sin they deny
it not: That the pope may err. Arg. 1.
therefore he may also fall into heresy. Which thus I prove.

The selfsame spirit which is the spirit of truth, The spirit that teaches
truth does also sanctify.
is also the spirit of sanctification, as powerful to work the one effect as
the other. And he that prayed not for Peter alone but for all the apostles that
their faith should not fail, although the words Satan desired to sift you are
directed to Peter (as to one perchance bolder then the rest, and proud of the
promises that were made) to keep him under, as Theoph. writes even he I say
prays also for all unto his father, Theo. in Luc. 22. Ioh. 17. 17. Ioh. 14.
16, 17. Psalm. 25. 9. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
That he would sanctify them with his truth. The same father also, from whom
must come the spirit of truth, will as David assures us, guide the humble in
his way, which thing the same prophet often prays for) because of our selves,
we are not sufficient so much as to think a good thought but our sufficiency
is of God. And why does Gods spirit lighten our hearts, and instruct our
consciences, if not to the end that we should be fruitful in holiness and
righteousness. Yea the holy ghost does not work in us any knowledge, according
to that promise the church of Rome so much claims, but that therewith also it
reformeth us, it does not give faith, but that withal it does purify us. Yea
it frames unto obedience all such, as it traineth to understanding. And
therefore it is said that faith does purify our hearts.

By this knowledge, We all beh^lde as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, Act.
15. 9. 2. Cor. 3. 18.
with open face, and are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as
it were by the spirit of the Lord. And so new minds make new men, and
lightened hearts, will bring forth godly life. For it is a hard matter that he
that believes well, (...) (evil as Saint Augustine) does testify. August. de
tempore sermon. 237.
Yea and a little before in the same sermon Same Augustine teaches, that faith
in latin being called fides, consists of two sillables, the first signifies
doing, the other saying. so that if a man say he believes, do (says this holy
father) as thou say, and that is faith. Whereby he shows that there is no
true faith but it is exercised in doing the works of the spirit. I^ then the
same spirit give knowledge or faith, and godliness of life, and true faith
(...) from good (...) if it be, it is but a dead faith) and godly conversation,
is as necessary for every Christian, as true religion. I marvel that master
Bellarmine or any other shame not to tell us, that the bishops of Rome cannot
err from the right path of knowledge, (as if they were wholly lead by Gods
spirit) whereas many of them have wholly wandered out of the ways of godly
life, as men nothing guided, but quite forsaken of that holy Ghost. And
therefore this I suppose may serve for my first argument.

Such as are not lead by Gods spirit to live godly are not taught by the same:
but many of the Bishops of Rome are not lead by Gods spirit to live godly,
therefore many of them are not taught by the same, and by consequent they may
err. For they have no color of not erring, but that only that they claim,
the direction of that spirit, that was never promised to such profane
prelates, nor cannot lodge in such sinkes of sin. My second argument is this.

Pope Adrian the sixth did teach, Arg 2. to prove the pope may err.
that the pope may be an heretic, and teach heresy. And this doctrine was
defendet by him and others, De pontif. Romans li 4. cap. 2.
as master Bellarmine himself confesses, so that he would have it to be
believed of all. And no man can deny, but that it is a question of faith,
especially in the Church of Rome, whether the pope may err or not. Thus then
I reason. Adrian the sixth Pope of that name, did either say that which was
false, or that which was true. If he said false, then he being a pope was
deceived in judgment, in a matter of faith, and such a matter as he would
should be received universally, as a catholic doctrine, and so the pope
has erred. If he say true, then is it also euicted by his testimony, that
the pope may err. For he affirms it so. So that whether he lie or speak
the truth, it is sufficient to prove that which I endeavor to prove. For if
he lie himself erreth, if he say true other may err.

The third argument shall be of the examples of such as did err: Arg. 3. To
prove that the pope may err.
I say of such bishops of Rome, as have been by their own stories,
Marcellinus. Damasus in pontificali.
noted for heretics. I will not speak any thing of pope Marcellinus, who
sacrificed to Idols, as also stories do testify, because it is said that he
repented him thereof. But yet we may learn out of him, that if a pope may fall
to such frailety as to commit so gross Idolatry, which is a greater sin then
to fall into many of the heresies, that are condemned (by that name) of the
fathers, he may also err in judgment.

Liberius a pope, Liberius. Hieron, in cron.
did not only consent to the condemnation of Athanasius, that great learned and
catholic father, as many ancient histories do report, and our adversaries
deny not, but also did communicate with two notable Atrian heretics, which was
a great offense to the godly, and an encouraging of those heretics. But
master Bellarmine answers that neither he taught any heresy, Lib. 4. de
Pontif. Romans cap. 9.
or was an heretic. The question is, whether the pope may er or not. Now our
adversaries draw us from the question, The papists answer not directly to the
question whether the pope may err.
not answering whether Liberius did err or not, but they tell us that he was
no heretic, and that he taught no heresy. And admit he did neither of these
two, I mean that he neither became an heretic, neither yet taught heresy:
yet he may err. Yea Liberius did foully err, in that external action, whereby
our adversaries confess that he consented to the banishment of Athanasius,
Bellar. de Romans Pontif, li. 4. ca. 9.
and in communicating with those two Arrians Valence Visacius, and by help of
Arrians get again to be bishop of Rome, deposing Felix. For to er is to wander
or go out of the right way, whether it be for ignorance or fear, or through
any other affection, he that steppeth aside does err. And because this gives
great light, to all that is to be said of this question: it shall not be amiss
somewhat more thoroughly to consider of the same. First you see that whereas
their doctrine is briefly delivered that the pope cannot err: they will have it
thus to be vnderstooed, the pope cannot be an heretic, that is, he cannot
continue obstinatly in heresy, nor he cannot teach heresy, when he gives
general precepts that should belong to the whole church. For that is the
meaning both of Melchior Canus, in his Theological places, Lib. 6. cap. 8.
and of master Bellarmine in this place before alleged. The intent also of
their doctrine, is to commend unto us that their Italian head, as a fit head,
for to guide the universal church, and able to be ahead to the whole body.

Now therefore let us see how well their doctrine, and their meaning agree
together. For the head of the church should be such, as should in nothing, no
not for a time lead the body of the church awry. But the church may be led
into many foolish opinions, strange conceits, The difference between error
and heresy. De ciuit. dei Li. 18. cap. 51.
and dangerous doctrines even by such as cannot be called heretics. For an
heretic is he (as Saint Augustine tells us) that being of any evil and
corrupt opinion in the church, and being reproved, or monished to amend,
resists stubbornly, and will not reform his contagious and perilous
doctrines, but defends the same, and is drawn to devise or follow such
opinions, for his own profit, especially for his own glory, and to advance
himself.

Now who sees not, that a man in place of credit and authority, as the
bishop of Rome has been (by such bad means as he has used these many years,
may wonderfully indamage and endanger the church of God, before any body will or
dare reprove him, for any opinions that he will hold? And when he is found
fault withal (as he must be before they can count him an heretic) how many
subtle shifts can evil men have, to continue a long time in their wicked
opinions, without reuoking the same, or reforming themselves, and yet to avoid
the danger of being accounted stubborn or obstinate. The Pelagians against
whom saint Augustine writes many books did turn many ways their lewd
opinions, Contra 2 Epist. Pelag. l. 4. 5. 6.
changed often (in some show of words) their positions, and did add (as by
reason they were forced, and by arguments compelled) some such words unto
their errors, as that thereby they might avoid the note of contumacy, and
deceive the more under a show of truth, as may appear by saint Augustine, who
confesses plainly, that if their meaning were not known to be evil, their
words could well enough have been borne withal. Admit then that a bishop of
Rome, being of such absolute authority as now they are, could as cunningly as
did the Pelagians, cover and cloak an heresy. Might not he be an heretic
many years, before he would be driven to recant? And might not he then by such
means, bring irreparable hurt to the church of God?

Thus we see, that as by this doctrine that the pope cannot err, they go
about to assure us, that the head which they have set over the church, cannot
deceive us, if we will be lead by him: so their interpretation of that their
position, argues in them great doubtfulnes, and yt they dare not defend their
own fayings, unless they may expound their words after this manner, that the
pope cannot err, that is he cannot obstinately or stubbornly teach (as a
doctrine to be received of the whole church) any heresy. And I pray you what
safety can the godly find in following such a head, A similitude.
as when he has guided them into many errors, yet he will not stubbornly
stand in defense of them? Such may well be compared to soldiers, that by the
rash leading of an unskillful captain are brought into the hands of their
enemies, and when the captain sees his folly, he would feign mend it if he
could, and is sorry for that he has done.

But what helps this his late repentance, the distressed soldiers? nothing
at all. Even so that the bishop of Rome cannot continue in his error (if it
were true that he had some such privilege) it might be good for himself: But
such a head is for others very dangerous, because y^ not all they who are
seduced by such men's instruction or example, are also reduced by their
recantation or amendment, as appears by multitudes of examples. And so we see
that this their interpretation stands not with either their common received
doctrine, or with their intent and meaning which is to promise safety from
error, unto them that receive that head. Whereas in truth their meaning is to
tell us that the pope may be of a wrong judgment, but if he be much urged he
cannot be obstinate, he will not stand to it. And whereas they defend, Bellar.
de Romans Pontif. li. 4. c. 3.
that the pope cannot teach heresy as a doctrine publicly to be received, in
some respect I think it to be most true. Popes no teachers.
For seldom or never are there any popes, that can teach either truth or
heresy. They cannot preach, they cannot with wholesome doctrine feed their
flock, they cannot divide the food of life, and break the bread of the word,
unto Gods household servants. For want of knowledge, they cannot of themselves
do much either in defense of truth, or to maintain error. But this
exposition will not please them. They have another meaning. For when they tell
us, that the pope cannot be an heretic, when he teaches the whole church,
their meaning is plain enough, that in particular judgments they may err,
but not in their general decrees, or preachings or instructions. Which they
are forced to say, for the avoiding of such inconveniences, as might grow by
defending the doing of many of their popes. But if popes may be charged with
heresy, how can we think but that in their talk, Popes doings or sayings may
be hurtful to many.
in their sermons (if they did preach,) and upon all such occasions as were
offered unto them, they would by four means or other, commend that which they
liked of, and condemn the contrary? And their very words when they speak of
matters of faith, are indeed instructions to all: and their examples also, are
public instructions to y^ whole church. Neither must we imagine that those
(holy fathers forsooth) had one religion in secret, and an other that they
would publish. Therefore if we prove that they did err, I trust also it will
follow, that this error was a stumbling block to the church, and that they
may err when they give lessons to all the church.

Lastly let us consider the foundation whereupon they raise this building. Luke
22. 31. 32.
Because Christ said unto Peter, Simon Simon. behold Satan has desired to
sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fail.
To whom was this said? To Peter, although not to him alone, as before out of
Theophilact I have showed. But Peter immediately after erred, Peter after this
prayer erred. Matthew. 26, 74.
so as that he thrice denied his master, as Saint Luke in the same chapter
shows, yea and that as Saint Matthew reports, with cursing and swearing.
Whereby it most plainly appears, that Christ did not pray that Peter or the
rest of the apostles, should be free from all infirmities, and should as it
were put of the nature of man, but that finally he or they, should not fall
from the faith. But I cannot but marvel here at master Bellarmine, that he
cannot see that Peter's faith at this time failed. De Romans pontif. li. 4. cap. 3.
For even handling these words, and this fact of Peter's, we know not says he,
that Peter's faith ever failed. He feared at the question which the damsel
asked of him, Whether Peter's faith failed.
he denied his master, and that with cursing and swearing. Did he this for
fear? No doubt he did it for fear. What was the cause of so great fear?
Matthew. 14. 31.
Was it not weakness and want of faith? Had he little faith, when he feared
drowning, in so much as Christ reproving him said, O thou of little faith why
did thou doubt? And can master Bellarmine find no want of faith, in his so
excessive fear, that he forswore his master? Peter therefore notwithstanding
Christ's prayer both could and did err. And shall we think the pope to be more
holy, of a more sanctified nature, of a sounder judgment, then Peter was? They
will not so say themselves, therefore they also may err. But for master
Bellarmines subtle distinction, Lib. 4. cap. 3.
between perseverance and not failing, making not failing and not falling all
one, but perseverance to be such, as that a man may fall, and yet by rising
again, is said still to persevere: I confess it is more subtle, then sound.
For perseuering and continuing is all one, and continuance has no ceasing or
intermission.

And further I must put the godly reader in remembrance, that if this were
granted to Peter, that the pope does claim, that he could not err: yet must
he prove himself to be Peter's successor, and that the privilege is also
successiue, to that seat, before he ca^ by these words prove his infallible
judgment. And what they can do for these points, I have showed before their
great weakness, Many popes have erred. Honorius.
if it be but weakness, in so great light and sunshine of truth, not to see y^
right way. I omit of purpose many popes to whom ^rrour is imputed by some
ancient histories. I come to Honorius of whom it is written by many histories
that he was a Monothelite, whose heresy was, that Christ God and man had but
one will.

And to omit all the ancient Records, Lib. 6. cap. 8.
that may be aleadged to prove him so to be, I rest specially upon Melchior
Canus his confession in his theological places, and one proof urged by him
amongst many others. For he does not only acknowledge Honorius to be an
heretic, but also tells us, how Adrian the second, in the first action of
the eighth general council, confesses that Honorius was by the Greek church
condemned as a heretic, and that Agathe bishop of Rome, consented unto the
same his condemnation. In which argument although master Bellarmine Lib. 4.
cap. 11.
dessent utterly from Melchior Canus, yet he is not any thing able to take
away the weight of that reason, but that Honorius although a pope, must be
pronounced, and holden for an heretic, even by the detree of a general
council.

What should I speak of the error that was most apparent in those seditious
popes Steven the sixth, The error of Steven and other Popes.
and Sergius the third, against Formosus another pope, now long dead. And
against the doings and decrees of pope Theodore, and John the tenth. Steven
revoked whatsoever Formosus had done up a council called belike for that
purpose, John the tenth afterward makes good the doings of Formosus,
disamulling that that Steven did, yea, their ^^ntention was so great, that they
commanded such as had taken orders of one, that they should (as if these first
orders were nothing worth) take orders of another.

These things are reported by all histories, and therefore are also confessed
of themselves, that are our adversaries. If pope Formosus did not err, then
Steven that d^^lt so hardly with him, and so disannulled his doings and
decrees, did err. If Steven did right, then John who afterward undid all
that he had done, did wrong. Yea they disannulled the very orders that the
popes that were their adversaries had given. Which thing master Bellarmine in
his fourth Book and twelfth chapter confesses to be a matter of faith.
Therefore here the pope erred in faith. No (says he) this is only a matter
of fact, it is not decreed by any of them. Let us mark out question, that is,
whether the Pope may err or not.

Master Bellarmine says, these Popes did wrong, but they decreed nothing of
disanulling those orders, which men book of their predecessors, and therefore
erred not in judgment. Sigebert says, that Steven decreed, Sigebere, chron.
that Formosus his ordinations were or should be voyne. Plat. in John 10.
Platina says, that John the tenth judged amiss, because he judged that
they must take orders again, that did take orders of Formosus. So Jacob
Bergomensis and Stella, agree with Platina. These therefore condemn Steven the
sixth to err (...) judgment, and so do manifestly (...)* that the pope did
err, and confute master Bellarmine his answer to this objection. John the
two and (...) pope of that name did not believe only, but even teach, that the
souls should not see God before the latter day, as master Bellarmine himself
confesses. But it was (says he) no heresy in him so to teach, Lib. 4. cap.
14. What is heres^^ in the church of Rome.
because there was not then any decree or destinction of the church for that
point: If it true master Bellarm^^ (...) heresy (...) not defined it? A thing
defined in the scriptures, set down in Gods word, and plainly taught in Gods
book, may (I perceive) by the doctrine of the church of Rome, be gainsaide
without danger of heresy, so long as man has not approved the same.

The lessons (I perceive) that God teaches us, must not be counted the
doctrines of the church, until the bishop of Rome, or some council have set
down some order therein. Well howsoever the wise masters of Rome will define
what shall be heresy, yet I trust they will grant that he erred in
judgment, because he taught then, that which not only the scriptures gainesay,
but even the papists themselves will confess to be erroneous.

But what should I stand in particular examples? Canus. lib. 6. c 8. Arg. 4.
that the pope may err.
If it be true that both Melchior Canus and Bellarmine confess, especially
Canus, that both the seventh and the eight sinodes did condemn as an heretic
Honorius the pope, does it not appear manifestly thereby, that they made no
doubt, whether a pope might err or not? It is not a question amongst them,
they hear of his doctrine, they condemn it as erroneous. Neither did Formosus
his friends use any such argument, to hinder Steven his cruel dealings against
Formosus, or Steuens friends to mitigate the rage of John the tenth against
Steven, they said not thus, Formosus was a pope, and Steven was a pope, they
cannot err. No it is a doctrine of later growth, and of a newer stamp.

Master Bellarmine answers that those two councels that are before
mentioned, Lib. 4. cap. 11. Lib. 4. cap. 6. Bellar, answer again ^his own
doctrine.
did think that the pope as a private man might err. Wherein although he
consent not with himself, who thinks that he cannot err as before I said:
yet would he thereby if he could, take away the strength of the argument. But
he labors all in vain, for how does it appear that the councels thought of
any such matter. There is no show, no likelihoode of it. Bellar. charge the
fathers with unjust dealing.
No words to induce him so to think. As for that which he says of Honorius
his letters, that they condemned him of heresy because of that which they
found in his letters. I marvel master Bellarmine has so soon forgotten
himself as to allege it. Seeing himself in the beginning of the eleventh
chapter, does first doubt of the credit of those letters, and secondly he
denies that any error is in the same contained. Does master Bellarmine
think the fathers of those councels, to have been so simple, that they could
not judge of Honorius his writings, whether they were heretical or not, as well
as himself? Or will he imagine that they were so rash, that they would
condemn him without cause? If he in his epistles had no error, as master
Bellarmine affirms almost in the beginning of his eleventh chapter, why does
he here affirm, that for his epistles, and the heresies which therein he
maintained, he was condemned of those councels? If he were an heretic as by
very many testimonies it does appear, why does master Bellarmine seek so to
free him from that fault, and to take from him that stain? Even because he
would (as well as he can) defend that most untrue doctrine of the church of
Rome, that the pope cannot err. Arg. 5. that the pope may err. Si papa. did.
40.
And yet their own law supposes that the pope may err, and confesses that
for heresy he may be reproved. But in this, as almost in every point wherein
they dissent from us, they show how little they are in deed, according to their
name, that they would feign be called by. For they call themselves
catholics, as if the doctrine that they teach, or believe were catholic,
that is vniuers^allie received. The difference in opinion amongst papiss.
Bellar. de Romans pontif. lib. 4. ca. 2.
And yet in this controversy they are not agreed how to defend it, or what to
say of it. Gerson of Paris, Almain Alphonsus all of them papists, and pope
Adrian the sixth himself, are of one mind, Albert Pighius an other papist of an
other.

Bellarmine and his masters make a third sect. And yet these men reprove us
for difference in opinion, brag of their own unity, and must needs be
thought to have a catholic faith. But to conclude seeing the gifts of the
spirit whether of sanctification or of truth, are given unto men according to
measure, The conclusion of this point whether the pope may err, John, 3. 34.
and not in fulness (for to Christ only God gives the spirit not by measure,
and therefore he speaks (without error) Gods words: seeing that pope Adrian
the sixth, has assured us that popes may err, and we have it plainly recorded
in their own histories, and confessed by many of themselves, that they have
erred: lastly seeing they have been, even by councils condemned of heresy, and
their own law provides and takes order for popes that do err, and the
Church of Rome is not yet resolved, how to defend the cantrarie: we may I trust
having so good warant, even from their own friends, without any note of heresy
affirm, that popes may err. Yea what is there in them but error? They wander
out of the ways of truth and of godliness. So that in that accursed company,
we may see that to be most true, that where there is a boundance of sin,
there God justly may, and often times in his judgments does, cast such into
the deepth of error, that they who had no desire to live according to the
light, that did shine unto them, in serving the Lord in true holiness, should
be cast into the dungeon of ignorance, as unworthy to enjoy that light which
they so unthankfully refused, of that grace which they so wickedly abused. The
matter then being thus, that neither Peter had any such jurisdiction over the
whole church, as is claimed by the church of Rome: neither if he had it, he
could, or (for any evidence that yet is showed) he did bequeathe it to the
Romish church, and lastly seeing that church if any such privilege, had been
lawfully to her deuolued, has committed such things, as would have forfeted a
better right, then ever she had in that universal authority: it does (I
trust) appear to the indifferent Reader, that their claim is unjust, their
title false, and that they have no color of interest from Christ, whose ouely
possession that is, that they would have. But it is no new thing in the church
of Rome, to bring in false evidence to prove a forged claim. Council.
Carthaginens. 6.
They did so in the council of Carthage when by untrue copies of the council of
Nice they sought the sovereignty over all other churches. For Alipius a bishop
in that council affirms twice that they could not find in the decrees of the
Nicen council any such thing as they aleaged, Cap. 4
for the authority of the Bishop of Rome. Nouatus also another bishop says,
we read no such thing in the Nicen council. Cap. 6
The fathers therefore of that council did decree, that messengers should be
sent to Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch as Alipius had inoued them to
get the true copies. Cap. 4 Epist. council. (...). ad Bonif.
For they having read many books of the council of Nice, yet could never read
in any latin, or yet in any Greek copies that they had, that which the bishop
of Rome his legate did allege. To try the truth therefore, they sent and
sought, that they might get the true copies of that Nicen council from those
places, making no doubt, but if those copies did agree which came from thence,
they must be most true, as they all acknowledge writing to pope Boniface. When
the copies came, they could find no such thing. Is it not then very plain
that the Bishop of Rome his legate used false writings, for proof of a bad
cause?

But master Bellarmine tells us that Saint Augustine and all they of they
council mistook the matter, De Romans Pontif. Lib. 2 cap. 25.
being deceived by ignorance, because they knew not what the council of Sardis
did set down concerning that point. The question is whether the council of
Nice did give superiority over all other to the bishop of Rome, as his legates
did affirm? And it is most plain that it did not. And therefore that which is
in the council of Sardis, (which if we shall believe the book of councils,
set forth by Peter Crab a friar and a papist, was at the least forty years
after the council of Nice) it makes nothing to justify them, The council of
Sardis cannot be alleged for the Nicen.
and excuse their falsehoode, that for the decrees of the Nicen council, do
allege that which was ordained in that council of Sardis.

And of that council of Sardis, it may truly be said, as in the Lateran
council, or at the least in the Tripartit work added unto it, Lib. 3. cap. 10.
complaint is made, that now adays it is hard to find either old or new
councils, insomuch as the author does there marvel, that the church of Rome
has been so negligent in that point, as not to take order for the better
keeping of them.

Augustine writes of that council of Sardis that is was an Arrian council,
Contra Cresco, lib. 3. cap. 34.
holden against Athanasius. The time also when it was kept is very uncertain.
Yea almost all the circumstances argue great doubtfulnes of that council. They
that write the story of that council, do write thereof so diversely, both for
the number of bishops assembled there, and also concerning the Arrians being
there, which some affirm, some deny, that thereby we may learn how little
credit is to be given to it, for to ground any uncertain or doubtful doctrine
upon, y^ it might have credit. But that which master Bell. does afterward say,
is yet more absurd. For having affirmed that he is indeed persuaded, that these
canons (which the church of Rome alleges for her supremacy.) are not in the
Nicen couecil, but only in that of Sardis, yet he thinks that Zozimus and
Boniface two bishops of Rome, did therefore name them the decrees of the Nicen
council, because they were both written together in a book at Rome, Whether
that book at Rome may by likelihoode be truer than the books of the Greek
church.
the ignorance whereof did much trouble the fathers as he says. Can master
Bellarmine suppose that those fathers, whose earnest endeavor was at that time
to keep the decrees of the council of Nicen, were ignorant what was to be
accounted of that council, or what articles belonged to the same? Or is it
likely that the copies of the council of Nice should be more perfect at Rome
so many hundreds of miles distant from Nice, then at Constantinople which is
hard by it, or at Antioch or Alexandria not so far distant from it? Or does he
think it reason, that one Romish and another unknown copy, written perchance
with that council of Nice, by some that sought thereby to increase the
dignity of the church of Rome, of set purpose to bring it to that credit, that
it should be accounted as parcel of the council of Nice: can he I say think it
reason that those two copies should correct and control, so many of better
credit by a great deal, then they are. No, these are but shifts to blind men's
eyes, and indeed but bables for fools to play withal. Master Bellarmine does
also labor in this place very earnestly to prove that the council had many
decrees more then those that are in the first tome of councils set forth by
Peter Crab, or spoken of by Ruff^nus. To what end is all this? Forsooth to
excuse his holy fathers, that they should not be thought to give counters for
gold, or lead for silver. But how can he excuse them, Conc. Nicen. c. 6.
for that they added to the beginning of the sixth canon, that the church of Rome
has always had the supremacy, in which false trick Paschasinus Legate unto
the Bishop of Rome, Act. 16.
was taken in the council of Chalcedon? For it is not the translation out of
Greek of Dionyse an Abbat, almost three hundred years after that council was
kept, that Alan Cope speaks of, and master Bellarmine before has aleaged for
his defense, Li. 2. cap. 13.
that can have credit against so many authentical copyes, so diligently sought
and sent for, so carefully examined by so many hundreds of learned men, and so
faithfully delivered for discussing even of this controversy: for Paschasinus
having alleged in that council of Chalcedon for his master the Bishop of
Rome the words before mentioned, The popes legate taken with falsifying.
was by those copies disprooued. And whereas master Bellarmine does set down
this as the intent of the Bishop of Rome in the Council of Carthage, Li. 2.
cap. 25.
that he meant to show, that not only all men might appeal to him, but also
that it were expedient for the church, that so they should do. Mark how
directly the council of Carthage does oppose it self against the Pope
therein, in their epistle which has this title, The Epistle of the Affrican
Council to pope Celestine bishop of the city of Rome. Conc. Afric. cap. 5
For, whereas master Bellarmine did confess that the causes of inferior
ministers might be heard at home, but Bishops must be heard at Rome: this
council in this epistle says directly contrary, No appeals to the pope.
using it as an argument from the less to the greater: If (say they) the
causes of inferior clarks by the council of Nice are provided for, how much
more is it ordered then, that bishops if they be excommunicate in their
province, shall not of your Holiness be hastily, or rashly, or against order
thought to be restored to the communion? Thy will him to banish from him, such
as seek such wicked refuges, because (say they) the Nicene decrees have
plainly committed, not inferior clerks only, but also the Bishops to their
metropolitanes. They assure themselves, that no province shall want the grace
of Gods spirit, to order these things. And that every man may, if he mislike
of the judgment of them that have heard his cause, appeal to a council
either provincial, or general (no words of appealing to the pope.) Unless a
man will imagine (say they) that God will grant his spirit of trial of
matters to every one, and deny it to all assembled in a Council. And further,
they allege that the truth of matters examined far from home, can hardly
be found out, by reason that witnesses can not well be carried so far. For,
as for the legates a latere that should come from the popes side, for
examination of such matters, they utterly mislike, as a thing not to be found
in any of the synods of the fathers.

Thus we see, that in as plain terms as they can devise, this Council does
oppose themselves to that which the Bishop of Rome did seek to obtain. And
thus it appears, how untruly the church of Rome has dealt very long since,
to exalt her self above others, and to maintain her own pride. And how she
has in the times of those learned fathers, been bridled in their councils.
Wherein they have set down laws, to mitigate and keep under their immoderate
affections, how soever they would sometimes write or speak of them, or to them
that were bishops of Rome for the peace of the church, and the reverence of the
persons being men often times endued with very good gifts, and such as by their
acquaintance and credit, being in the imperial city, did help many that were
distressed.

Now therefore let us yield that honor to him only whom God has sealed, John
6. 27. ephesians. 1 22. matthew. 17. 5. 1. pet. 2. 25.
that he be acknowledged the head of his church, the law maker to his people,
the sheapheard to his flock. Let us receive no other vicar to snpply his
room, Ioh. 14. 16, 17.
but that spirit of truth which God our gracious father shall give, and which
shall abide with us for ever. But as for them, that without any good warrant of
Gods word, or sufficient calling from God, claim to be as kings, and love to
live as lords over Gods heritage, detest them as the proud offspring of Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, 1. Pet. 5 3. 1. Sam. 2. Number. 16. 2.
or rather as the wicked sons of Ely that did as themselves would: yea as men
that are enemies to Gods laws, usurpers of Christ's office, despisers of all
authority, abusers of all majesty, and therefore most perilous plagnes to
christian princes. And thus much to examine how just a title the pope has, or
how just a claim he may make, to be supreme head of the Church.

The second part of the Survey of the Popes Supremacy, which is, a proof of
his Practices.
NOw that it plainly appears in the first part of this Treatise, to them that
do not wincke with their eyes against the truth, that this Supremacy that
the Bishop of Rome most prowdely abuses, has not any ground in the word of
God, as is seen, partly by the weakness of their own arguments, and partly
because the fathers being assembled together in their general councils, some
of them more then four hundred and fifty years after Christ have taught us
the contrary: it is necessary for the better understanding of this matter, yea
for the more detestation of their unjust authority, that something be said of
the second part of this Treatise, which is a proof or examination of the popes
practices. But herein I must consider of two points. First, how, and by what
means, they got unto that high estate wherein now they are. Secondly, after
what manner they have used themselves in the same. In few words how they have
ruled. And because the church of Rome was not suddenly, or in one instant
advanced to this place of excessive pride and insatiable ambition, wherein she
now challenges rule and dominion, over all that profess christianity: it will
not be amiss, but a thing very pertinent to this my purpose, to see by what
steps the pope has come to such height, and by what practices, he has
attained to such honor. Whereas therefore the godly fathers of the primitive
church, did many times stand in need of the help or counsel, Helping the
distressed churches in their need.
or comfort, of the good Bishops of Rome, that were in their times, and as
occasions fell out, were forced sometimes to flee to them for succor, who also
found relief at their hands very often: the ages succeeding, did interpret
this charitable affection, and performance of christian duty in these godly
Bishops of Rome, to be not so much tokens of the love toward all, as of their
power over all. And yet a man may be as good as he will to them, over whom he
has no power at al. Although therefore we neither can nor will deny, that
which the Author of the Apology for the English Seminaries does so confidently
pronounce, that the famous fathers called for aid, comfort, and counsel in
their distresses of the bishop of Rome: yet justly we may, and for the true^hs
sake, we must affirm, that this seeking for these causes to the bishop of Rome
does not prove him to have authority over all, but only that at such times,
he had better means to help the distressed then they that sought unto him,
had to relieve themselves. But many times the godly are forced to fly for aid
(as these men did whom the Apology names) as Cypr. Atha. Chrysostom. Aug. Basil,
Ierom, Miletius and Theod. to men worse the^ themselves as Jacob to Laban, from
the wrath of Esau, and David to the Philistines, to avoid Sa^^s rage, and
Joseph with Christ, to escape the bloody hands of Herod, went into Egypt. Genesis
28. 1. Sam. 21. 10. Matthew. 2. 14.
But if any man desire more particularly to be informed, in ye special causes
that moved these godly men, to make suit to the B. of Rome, let him read that
learned answer, that Bilson has made unto the said apology, and he is too
wilful, if he be not satisfied for this point. Now some B. of Rome, though
otherwise good men, were pufe up with some proud conceit of their authority,
when they saw such famous and godly men, were driven to seek for their help,
as it may appear by their own words, if they be their words, which go abroad
in their name, for their Epistles and decrees. As Damasus in his fourth
epistle, writing unto prosper the B. of the first seat in Numidia, Council. Tom.
1.
and other bishops, commends the^, that in all matters that may be doubtful,
they refer themselves to him, Ad Hemerium Terracon. epum. Council. Tom. 1.
as to the head, to give them answer. And it is no great marvel though
Damasus would write or speak much for the dignity of his place, for coming
to the which he did strive, even to the death of a great number of christians.
Decret. Innocen. Tom. 1. Council.
Siricius then comes next after him, who takes upon him to threaten to
pronounce sentence against such, as will do otherwise then he would have them.
And Innocentius writing to the bishops of macedony, finds himself grieved,
and thinks that that church of Rome, to which he tells them they should
have regard, as to their head, is wronged because they did not at the first,
yield to his judgment. The like might be said of many other of them. Whereby
appears, that they who at the first were entreated by some godly men, by such
means as God had given them to help them in their need, at the length took
upon them to command others, to stand to their orders and decrees. Insomuch as
they also gave out their decrees, which they would bind al to observe as
partly appears in Siricius and Innocentius, and partly also in others, it
will be more plain. Epist. ad Hefich, Tom. Council. ^.
It sauoureth of too great an arroga^^y, that Zosimus another pope threatens
severity, if any despise the apostolic authority. So did Leo, so did pope a
afterward. What should I seek to speak of every one, their own decrees and
decrxtals, do sufficently bear witness that within a short time they were
become so imperious over others, that they would not leave men (far better
and more holy then themselves, and better able to direct those bishops of Rome,
then the B. were to advise them) such I say they would not leave to their own
liberty in any thing, but for every thing, even the least matters that were,
they must follow the direction of that church of Rome, and must have a decree
for it. Which bondage greater then that of Egypt, Their bu^ (...) of men's (...)
^^ences.
how miserable a slavery it was, let the world judge, when a man might justly
doubt of every thing that he did, and have some scruple of conscience in all
things. For by this means it came to pass, (that the number of their
ordinances being almost infinite) men should always be in danger to break
some of them. Which was then a means to get them authority, and afterward
occasion of great gain.

And thus we see two steps laid, to help them up to this their desired
honor. The one is a voluntary submitting to them for aid, The two first steps
to the popes supremacy.
council, and comfort. The second, a forcible subiecting of others to them, by
decrees, and commandments. But yet they could not get so high by far as they
did look, or at the least so far as now they have climed. For as in more
then 300. years whilst they were in persecution, they had no such proud
hearts for any thing that we can read in any credible authors:) so for almost
300. years more, they did but feed themselves in their own honor, and got
what credit and authority they could by their own devises and policies.
Howbeit they could not get any universal or general consent of other bishops,
to give them that authority.

But contrary wise not only some councils as that which is called Mileuitanum
and that sixth of Carthage, Conncils against supremacy.
and that other of Chalcedon, did stiffely withstand him therein, but also the
bishop or patriarch of Constantinople, who in ye council of Chalcedon, was made
of equal authority with the bishop of Rome, did earnestly strive to get the
supremacy, Constantinople strove for it.
over Rome and all others. And by all likelihood he had prevailed, if Mauritius
the the Emperor, (who as some stories report took part with the patriarch of
Constantinople) had not been cut of cruelly, by Phocas that did succeed him
in the empire. So that hereby the pride of the bishops of Rome was somewhat
hindered, and this authority which now he claims was almost taken from him.
And he that soon after, did write himself universal bishop, or rather bishop
of the universal church, and head of the church, had almost been subject to
the patriarch of Constantinople. So that in good time did the popes think,
that that unnatural and savage blood sheader Phocas, did cut his masters
throat: seeing that by Phocas his means, Ph^^as his decre (...)
they got that supremacy decreed on their side, that the bishops of Rome should
be called and counted, supreme heads of the church. So now this proud decree of
this cruel Emperor, The (...) step unto the popes supremacy.
is the third step unto their intolerable pride. The bishop of Rome having
thus gotten, some sure footing in this proud chair, controlleth bishops,
calls councils which before the Emperor had wont to do, and in all oath
such things, does show his authority, in his writings and letters, for the
most part calling himself the head of the universal church, still creeping thus
higher and higher, yet not openly but covertly and by little and little: until
at the length he got him a fourth step. The fourth step. He depriueth the
Emperor of having any thing to do in the popes election.
For having as much authority as he could yet over bishops, and that by the
Emperors decree, he sought to pull his neck out of the collar, wherein the
Emperor did hold him. For he thought it was a burden to be in such subjection
to the Emperor, that unless he would confirm the election, he could not be
pope.

Therefore whereas Constantine the fourth Emperor of that name, being moved
(as the stories report) by the godliness of Benedict the second, bishop of
Rome so called, did ordain that he that was chosen pope, by the clergy,
people and army of Romans, without any confirmation of the emperor or his
lieutenant, should be accounted pope: whereas before it might not be without
the emperors leave, who had, as also the kings of France especially, a choosing
voice in the electing of the pope, if we will believe a story written by a
Friar, Ioh Rioche compend. Hist,
a fast friend to the church of Rome, called Rioche who wrote in our times:
afterward the Emperors would have resumed their own right again, perchance
because that after Benedict they found none such, but some successors of his,
that behaved themselves too arrogantly and insolently, against their Lord and
master, but they could by no means get it into their hands to keep it,
though Leo the viii. and some other yielded unto him. For the succeeding popes
many of them did still incroche more and more, debarring the Emperor of his
right in their election, until about 400. years after that the bishops of
Rome had gotten this from the Emperor, Alexander the 2. pope not willing to
strive against his master, Benno a Card. of the life and acts of Hildebrand.
did publicly protest in the pulpit, that he would not be pope unless the
Emperor would confirm him, whereof he said he would write unto the Emperor.
When Hildebrand who was after pope and called Gregory the seventh heard this,
hardly being able to hold his hands, whilst mass was in doing immediately
mass being ended, before the pope could put of his massing garments, he takes
him into a secret place, and buffeteth him well fauouredly, and took such
order, that within a while Alexander the second died, and made room for
Hildebrand to sit in his chair. And this reward did pope Gregory the seventh,
bestow upon his predecessor Alexander the second, because he would restore to
the emperor, that which wrongfully they kept from him, and perform unto him
some piece of duty. And yet they thought they were not high enough, neither yet
that this their authority was sure enough unto them. And therefore they thought
good to devise some means how this authority which already they had might be
confirmed to them, minding yet to mount higher, as God willing shall after be
declared.

But to make sure that they had done, The proof of the supremacy out of gods
wo^d weak and suspected.
sometimes they would seem to have this authority from Christ. But their
proof is nothing plain, and although they allege some words of Christ for
proof, yet, the apostles did never make any mention of any supremacy, the
fathers of the first times, did never commend it unto us, in the councils they
seem rather to fetch their authority from the ordinance of man, then from Gods
word. For what means it else, that the legates to the B. of Rome, both in the
council of Carthage and Chalcedon, do so earnestly urge the decrees of the
Nicen council, if that which now they bring out of Gods book, had been
known to be sufficient proof of the supremacy? What needed they so
notoriously to falsify the council? What needed the fathers to take such
pains, and to be at such cost, as to send for true copies of that council, to
Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioche, to try whether the fathers in that
council of Nice, had given such power to the bishop of Rome, if in these words,
To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Christ had promised,
or in these, feed my sheep. Christ had given, such fulness of power over all
others, to the bishop of Rome? Seeing therefore that proof seemed not strong
enough in those times, the grant which they had from Phocas, did them no great
good, to show what right they had to that supremacy, (although thereby they
got possession thereof:) For if by his gift they claimed, then they confessed
this their authority to be from man, Phocas his decree they thought a reason
scarce homest enough.
and that from too wickes and bloody a murdering man, to do any great good in
Christ his church, or for setting down of any order whereby all should be
ruled. Then also it might have been called in question, whether he by his
authority, could subject all men for ever, to that church of Rome or not. To
make their title therefore as good as they could, they devised another help.

They fained this gift to be from Constantine, The donation Constantine.
the first emperor that publicly allowed of christian profession. And they
make him to give, not only his palace of Lateran, and many other
temporallties, to the bishop of Rome, as master Bellarmine would have it
thought, but they bring him in speaking these words, Ce pontif. Romans Lib. 4.
cap. 17. and lib. 5. cap. 9.
We decreeing do ordain that he (the bishop of Rome) shall have the
supremacy as well over the four principal seats of Antioch, Alexandria,
Constantinople, and Jerusalem, as also over, all churches in the whole earth.
And that the pope for the time being, of that holy church of Rome, shall be
hier, and Prince of all princes in the world. Is this only to give
temporalties? But the falsehood of the donation of Constantine, does shine more
bright then the noone day, although the papists make great account of the same.
Yea Melchior Canus altogether a papist, yet he did either see more, or dealt
plaiulier, in this matter then did master Bellarmine. For although he be loath
to deny it, or to diminish the credit of it, yet he brings more reasons
against it, then he with all his fellows can be able to answer. So that we
need not seek for arguments out of Laurentius Valla, or others to confute it.
For even he has given it a more deadly wound, then can be healed again. He
confesses that the lawyers take it to be but a fained matter, and therefore call
it chafe, for it is indeed so called in their own distinctions. He
acknowledges that Eusebius, Ruffinus, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomenus,
Eutropius, Victor, and other authors of credit, who most diligently wrote all
that Constantine did, have not only made no mention of that donation, but also
do affirm that he so divided his empire among his three sons, as that the
one of them had Italy. And that Ammianus Marcellinus in his fifteenth book
writes, that Constantius (Constantines son) had the rule of the city (of
Rome) and made Leontius his liuetenant there. And lastly, that all Histories
record, that many Emperors after that time ruled in Italy, yea and in Rome.
What can be more plain? Their own Lawyeares confess it to be fained, no good
story records it but ye contrary. Rome after this gift, was the imperial
city and seat. Therefore either Constantine gave no such thing from him and
his heirs, or his gift was nothing worth. Melch^ or Canus also doubts of the
very foundation of this fable, Ibidem.
which is the leprosy whereof they feign that Constantine was healed, plainly
affirming, that in any good author he reads no such thing. But not he only
doubts hereof, but long before him, it has been spied by Anthonius B. of
Florence in his history, Pant. 1. Tit. 8. c. 1. L. 3. of catholic concord.
by Volateran writing of Constantine, and by the cardinal Nicolas Cusam a fast
friend and faithful to that Romish church, that this donation was not in the
old coppies of Grecians decrees. And therefore when it was added, themselves
accounted it but chafe and no good corn. And these and such reasons made Pius
the second pope of that name, to marvel in a certain dialogue, written by him
being a Cardinal, that the Lawyers were so mad, as to make any question of
that matter, which never was.

And that we may see, Themselves agree not to what pope it was given.
how all things in this donation of Constantine are but fained, whereas the
donation makes Siluester the Pope to whom this gift was given, yet in another
place, Cause. 12. q. 1. ca. faturam.
the same thing is said to be given unto Melchiades, that was bishop before
Siluester. And he is made to speak, as though it had been done before his
time also. And yet this Melchiades was pope, about two or three years, before
Constantine was Emperor, Cron. Eusebius.
and died long before he gave peace and quietness to Christians, as in the
Cronicle of Eusebius, who lined in those days, it may appear. What needs
this point of their doctrine any adversary. Themselves do fully confute one
another, And the proverb is in this found true, when thieves fall out, true men
come by their goods. For these decrees if they be well considered, it is not
hard to spy falsehood in them both. And therefore we may take heed how we
trust them, seeing that in these two we see plainly, how the one is contrary
to the other, and both contrary to the truth. There are also some
impossibilities in the said donation, which do sufficiently prove it, to be
but a fraudulent deed. Impossibilities in the donation.
For the occasion of this gift is there set down. Namely that Constantine
being baptized is healed of his leprosy, and thereupon gives these things to
Siluester, of whom he was baptized. And yet besides many other ancient
histories of good credit, Saint Hierom does plainly write, that he was baptized
at the latter end of his life, and that not of Siluester bishop of Rome, for
he was dead and also Mark that succeeded him, but of Eusebius bishop of
Nicomedia, some six or seven years after Siluester was dead. How then could
these things be given to Siluester at the baptism of Constantine, Siluester
being dead so long before? Or how at his baptism in Rome, when he was
baptized in Nicomedia, the chief city of Bithinia, many hundred miles distant
from Rome? But it is strange that they are so impudent, as to name
Constantinople at this time for one of the principal seats of bishops, as in
this donation they do, which was called not by that name before Constantine in
the tenth year of his reign did build it, but while Siluester and Mark his
successor lived it was called Bizance.

And about twenty or thirty years after the death of Constantine, was there a
council at Constantinople, Conci. Constant. 1. cap. 2.
wherein yt sea of Constantinople obtained to be next in account to Rome which
before yt time was no patriarchal church. And it is plain by stories that at
Constantinople, there was either no church at all, or else very secret, until
about the latter end of Constantines time. For that very year that he was
baptized many of Constantinople were baptized in so much as Nicephorus makes
mention of above twelve thousand men besides women and children, Niceph. li. 7.
c. 34.
that were baptized there at once. And Constantine himself does much rejoice,
Theod. li. 1. ca. 16
in a letter that he writes to Eusebius, that in that city which himself did
build, and did bear his name, a very great mumber were become christians, and
for that cause he takes care, that they might have churches built for them.
So that as yet we see they had not their churches much less can we imagine,
that then they had any Bishops, that would look for so high a place among
others. And therefore even hereby appears the falsehood and folly of this
forged donation.

There are also in the same donation some things that savor of the pride that
afterward appears in the bishop of Rome, but was not then in them. For that
donation falsely attributed to Constantine, does give unto the bishop of Rome,
greater principality of power, then this kingly or roial majesty had, and an
Imperial authority.

Now how manifestly false this is, we may very easily mark, if we do
consider either the style, that the Bishops of Rome that then were, did use,
when they wrote unto their brethren, or their manner of behauionr, when they
came amongst them, or the authority which the Nicen council, that was in the
time of Constantine gave unto them, but equal with the patriarchs of
Alexandria and Antioch, and every one of them to look to their own charge
(among whom if there were any inequality, the privileges of the bishop of
Rome, had not so large a compass by far, as the other patriarchs) or the
sovereignty which Constantine the emperor did still keep and exerccise, in,
and over, not Rome only, but the whole church, not in civil matters only, but
in calling of councils, commanding the bishops, comforting the godly, reproving
the heretics, and in directing how and after what manner, they would debate and
determine matters in the council. To be short, if we remember how some of the
councils, of which I have often spoken already, did stiffly deny to the bishop
of Rome, for less superiority then by this grant they might challenge, it
will easily appear, that they knew not then of any such privileges, that
Constantine had granted unto that seat. For if then any such superiority or
supremacy had been due unto them, the fatheres of those times, who often
stood in need of their help, would never so flatly have withstoode their
endeavors. And themselves also would have been as ready by themselves or
their legates, to have pleaded the donation of Constantine, if then it had been
thought upon, as they were to coin new canons of the Nicen council. They pride
therefore that in this grant appears, does proclaim to the world, that it
sauoureth not of that christian modesty, that was for the most part in the
bishops of those times, but it is some bastard of a later breed. And of that
spirit of ambition, does that also savor, that is said that the pope should be
prince of al priests, and above al churches in the world. But this is confuted
in that which before has vin spoken. For long after this the bishop of Rome,
yea and that by unlawful means sometime, did seek for that pre-eminence, but
it would not be granted unto them: how beit one thing in this donation I
cannot but remember you of, because it shows in my judgment, that this
forgery was committed but of late years in comparison, even after that they
had brought the emperors under their subjection, and did bear all the sway in
the city of Rome. And that is this, that they bring in the emperor yelding
the imperial city into the popes hands, and that as though it were not fit
or seemly, that the earthly emperor should dwell there, where the heavenly
emperor (says he) has placed the head of christian religion. Can there be
any greater disgrace to worldly princes, then to make them unworthy to be
neighbors to that proud priest of Rome? Can they lift up themselves by any
means hier in pride against man, then so to advance and esteem of
themselves, above the greatest monarchs in the world? Did Constantine use to
speak or write so? Did he think himself unworthy to be near them? They
that are but indifferently acquainted with the stories of Constantine, do know
that he loved full well, to be not only near to bishops, but even among them
also. But they that forged this fable, would have the world to think, that
either they are more holy, then ever were the leuiticall priests: or else that
that good emperor his scepter, sword, and crown, were more unholy and
profane, then those ensigns of government that belonged to the kings over the
Jews. And what else do all those imperial ornaments, crowns, scepters,
miter, collar, clock, cote, banners, and such like signify, which there they
say are given to them, but that this forgerie was committed, after that the
proud popes did so ouercrow the emperors, that they became but as it were
their servants? For it was far from Constantines mind to make him self their
servant as afterward the emperors were. And the popes that then were had
other matters to do, and other thoughts possessed their hearts, then that they
could be carried away, to such vain devises. They were scarsly out of one
persecution, being freed from it by Constantine but that they fell into another
that troubled the church maruelously, namely the Arrian heresy, against which
the good bishops, did then oppose themselves with might and maine. And as these
things do savor of the pride of latter times, so some things also savor of
superstition, more then as yet was crept into the church. For Constantine, in
this his donation which they impudently ascribe unto him, does give for the
maintenance of lights in the church of saint Peter and Paul, his possessions in
the east, west, north and south, and by name he reckons up many countries,
where he had given his possessions, for the maintenance of those lights. But
in deed it appears that he did bestow his revenues upon more necessary things
as in the building of churches, whereunto christians might resort to serve
God, and in calling the Nicen council, for the determining of some questions in
religion. As for lights if then they used any yet such large devotion in such
toies and trifles is a plain fruit of latter days of ignorance.

Thus there is almost no kind of thing granted unto them The imitation of the
emperors court for officers
in that dotation, but is a good argument to convince their falshoode. The
apish imitation of the emperors court, for officers and attendants, that is
there granted, does also show that it was not devised in the days of the
humble popes: and the proud cardinals, who are these their stately officers
were not yet found.

Many other exceptions might be made to that pretended donation, and many more
reasons might have been brought against it, but this that is said, had been
more then enough, in so plain a matter, had it not been that many of the
popish writers, have pleased themselves so well in their forged folly.

Hitherto we have seen how the popes have made of the voluntary suites that
the godly made to the bishops of Rome, being forced thereto by some
extremities, necessary subjection, and out of their requests, they gather a
profession of obedience. Then also how they got the decree of Phocas one their
side. And lastly, how they got the right of confirming the bishops of Rome,
out of the emperors hands, pretending for these and all other their fullness
of power, sometimes the words of our Savior Christ. But to supply the want of
help which there they find (for in truth they make not for that excessive
pride of the Bishop of Rome) they pretend (although without any color of
truth) a gift of these and other their privileges, from Constantine the great.

But now let us look further into their practices. Did they now content
themselves, when they had the commanding of all bishops, and had gotten this
name, that is unfit for any man to be called, Head of the universal
Churches? Could they content themselves with this excessive honor? No. They
must yet go one step higher. For hitherto the Bishops of Rome were subject
to the Emperors, as may very well be proved by their own epistles. Gregory,
who did so bitterly inueigh against the proud name of universal bishop, that
John patriarch of Constantinople took upon him, him self being a bishop of
Rome, gives many evident testimonies of this subjection, which the popes did
acknowledge to the emperors. Lib, 2. epist. 100,
As most notably in an Epistle to Mauritius the emperor, he calls the
emperor his lord very often, yea he abaseth himself as unworthy to speak to
his lord, he being but dust and a very worm. He acknowledges himself subject
to the emperors commanndement, that he owes him duty and obedience, his
unworthy suppliant and servant. I omit many other that were before him.

And out of an infinite number of testimonies that he does afforde, I have
taken but one, and yet that such a one as does sufficiently prove what
reckoning the bishops of Rome, at that time made of the emperors. And yet now
we see some pride began to show it self in the church. For even now was that
a great strife for the name of universal Bishop. And that yet even then did
this learned father and Bishop of Rome acknowledge himself to be an
underling to the Emperors, yea, and after that Phocas had given the Bishop of
Rome that privilege to be head of the Church, almost a hundredth years, Tom.
council. 2. council. 6. Act. 4.
Agatho a Bishop of Rome does write two godly Letters unto Constantine the
fourth, Heraclius and Tyberius Emperors, wherein very often he calls them
his Lords, Epist. 2.
professes his obedience, excuses their not sending some from the Council to
them, as they had commanded, yea, and themselves to be unto the Emperors
seely or simple servants. But in the end this seemed a grievous yoke and a
heavy burden. The sift step to supremacy, the debasing of princes.
They said within themselves we will not have this Emperor to rule over us, we
are they that ought to speak, who is Lord over us. But this because it was a
very hard attempt, it must needs be long in working. As in deed it was, many
hundred years.

The first that I remember, that did disgrace in any respect the Emperor,
Platina in constable.
was pope Constantine who was not ashamed to suffer Justinian the Emperor to
kiss his feet, which after grew to be the greatest office of courtesy that
the pope would show to the greatest monarchs, to admit them to that base
intertainment, which also continues to this day. In Constantin.
Of him writes Onuphrius in his annotations upon Platina. Constantine first of
any bishop of Rome, durst withstand Philippicus the greek Emperor to his face
openly.

Perchance because Justinian that was Emperor next before Philippicus, had
kissed his feet, it made him the bolder with his successor. The pretense that
Constantine took hold upon to withstand the emperor was this. Philippicus
upon good warrant out of Gods word, The controversy concerning images.
did forbid images, and command them to be abolished, in which the idolatrous
bishop Constantine did withstand him. Afterward Leo the third being Emperor,
and maintaining that good cause against images, Gregory the second that was
successor unto Constantine, took greater matters in hand against the
emperor. For he took from Leo whatsoever belonging to the empire, the
Longobards had left in all Italy An. 729. I report these stories out of
Onuphrius, a great friend to the pope, and Romish church. He also in the same
place speaking of another pope Gregory the third who was next after the second
tells how he sought for aid of the French, against those Longobards. For
indeed he rejecting his natural prince, to whom in duty he was bound, the
Emperor, did seek as already he had gotten to be above al bishops, so in the
end, to be above al princes and potentates in the earth. Whereof Gregory the
third in this place lays a good foundation, in rejecting an old master, for
a new friend. Yea he does excommunicat Leo the Emperor, and deprive him to his
empire, as Platina reports. Thus we see how the pope has by little and
little, In Greg. 3.
gotten to master the Emperor himself. For as in these popes, the beginning
hereof was laid, so afterward it grew more and more until at the length the
emperors were but their vassals and at their commandment. But how they used
this their immoderat power must be afterward declared, if God will. Now as this
insatiable ambition, must needs be odious unto, and hated of that mightiest
monarch, Revel. 19. 16. Math. 28. 18.
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to whom al power in heaven and earth is
given (for if he could not abide that his apostles should so much as reason
among themselves Mark. 9. 33. 35.
who should be chief, how much less can he abide that they should despise
his lieutenants, Their practices to keep them great still.
to advance themselus?) so did they assure themselves, that it would be envied
at, and spited of men. And here therefore they want not their practices, to
keep them in this highest estate, to control and command even whom they will,
at their pleasures.

First because none should be so bold as to speak any thing Epitom. Eron.
against their pride, it was made by pope Pius the second perjury or against
the oath of a bishop, Pcriury to speak truth of the pope
to speak and thing against the pope be it never so true. It may be also that
his meaning was to make the pope to be esteemed as near of kin to God
himself Presat. in Expos. Simbol. Apostol.
as might be. For the expounder of the creed in Ciprians works says the like
of God, that it is dangerous to speak the truth of him. But his meaning is
that our weakness and wants will not let us so speak of him as we should: And
the popes fear is, that if we speak truth of him we must speak otherwise
then he would have us, or were for his honesty. Now bishops having their
tongues and pens thus bridled, who durst venture to find any fault? If for
them to speak the truth be perjury what should it be thought in others? And
thus because he saw, that to have the truth of popes doings known, it would be
a burning shame, he full wisely lays this block in that way, and thus makes
up that gappe.

And after comes in to serve their turn that fullness of authority, Power of
the keys.
and power of the keys, which they would so seem to have from Christ as that
none but they should rule that stern, none but they, should have that
jurisdiction. So that if they curse none can bless, if they excommunicate,
none may absolve, if they bind, no man may loose.

Wherein they challenge so great privilege, that they can work thereby
against the law of God, the law of nature, the law of nations. Releasing
subjects of their duty of obedience.
They can (if you will that they will tell you) release the subjects, from the
bond of obedience, which they owe to their magistrates, and the children, they
can cause to rebel against their parents.

A perilons practice is this for all princes estates, thus to lead the people
on the blind side, as to make them believe, that to rebel is to obey and to
dishonor their superiors, is an acceptable sacrifice to God.

By these their powerful keys, Immunities of the clergy.
they also open the door of immunities and privileges of the clergy, whereby
they are exempt from all corrections and punishments, unless forsooth it
please his holiness, to deliver them to the secular power, to make them his
hangmen.

But of their own authority they may not touch him, because they are (say
they) the Lords anointed. By which means they grew to great sawcines, and
the state was not a little endangered thereby in many places.

They had also another practice to maintain their pride, Shrift.
and hold them in their high seat: That is auricular confession, or that which
we call shrift. For under color of being ghostly fathers, the Popes subtle
and sworn friends, had access to princes, had conference with their
counselors, had knowledge of their secrets, had opportunity to practice with
their false and faithless subjects, and they might, and did take al
occasions, by terrifying the consciences of princes, in respect of their
sins, which they made known to them, as if there were no hope of mercy at
the hands of God, if first they were not reconciled to the Holy Father the
Pope, and the holy mother the Church of Rome.

And thus were they every way distressed, their consciences being entangled,
and their estates endangered. But one of their most subtle shifts was the
taking away of knowledge from the people. Whereby they became as men, that
walked in the dark, Ignorance.
in an unknown way. They never knew whether they did right or wrong. They
knew not their own duty. They were taught to believe as the church believed.

Now although they heard much of the church of Rome, yet for the most part
they were not acquainted with it. So that the church that must be their
direction, What it is in the Romish language to believe the church.
must be their parson or vicar or perchance their bishop. Who if he would lead
them out of the way, they must needs go wrong. Because their light of
knowledge, was quite put out.

The Scriptures were either quite taken from them, The scriptures either quite
taken away, or corrupted.
and men's dreams and devises delivered, to the lay people insteede of them: or
else they were so corrupted, with foolish gloses, and so mingled, with men's
traditions, that the true sense and meaning of them was still under a bushel,
so that it gave no light at all to them.

Now they not knowing their duty, which God had commanded them to perform to
magistrates, how easily might they be drawn aside from the same? Yea they
through ignorance, not being able to put a difference between truth and
falsehoode, how readily might they be moved to think it to be true that they
do say unto them, who were only reputed and taken for holy Church, that the
Pope is Christ's Vicar: that he is so much more excellent then any worldly
potentate, as the soul is better then the body: that there is no less
difference between the glory of the Emperor and the pope, then is between
the brightness of the Sun and of the Moon. The pope being like the Sun,
and the Emperor compared to the. Moon which has her light from the Sun.

These and other such like blasphemies against the majesty, whom God has
placed upon earth, were accounted good doctrine, and strong proofs through
want of knowledge. And this very effect that ignorance did work, whereby the
very brokers for the church of Rome, did see themselves and their masters
esteemed half as Gods, and their messages received more readily, and more
constantly kept, and more willingly obeyed, then gods word by a great deal,
made them to proclaim so loud, and so stiffly to maintain, that ignorance is
the mother of devotion.

And why should they not, Ignorance say they mother of devotion.
when they see that princes are ready, by reason of their ignorance in Gods
truth, to be led and guided by such blind guides, even to the hazarding of
their kingdoms? And the people thereby are withdrawn from al duty, so that they
may lead both prince and people, as Elisha led the Syrians even into their
enemies hands. ^. Kings 6, 19.


And as this ignorance has been a great cause that the pope has mightily
prevailed, and advanced his seat far higher than became one of his coat,
and yet his pride was never spied of many: Ignorance at this day cause of much
evil.
even so at this day for want of knowledge the people are most easily drawn,
to worship even the very name of Holy Father, and to suck the breasts of the
holy mother the Romish church. Whose doctrines, if they could examine, whose
spirits if they could try, whose horrible blasphemies against Gods truth,
and unnatural cruelties against Gods saints, if they could with indifferent
judgment consider of, if (I say) the Lord in mercy would vouchsafe them that
knowledge, they would even hate the name of a Romish catholic, and fear to be
of that company and crew, that so plainly, and stubburnely rejects Gods
commandment, despises Gods magistrates, deceives Gods people, and leads
them in the ways of death and damnation: There are also some other means and
practices, whereby the popes draw the people into great admiration of them.
Pardons and agnus deis.
Namely, their pardons and indulgences, their agnus Dei, and such other trash
and trumpery, whereby they persuade the simple ones, that they can effectually
and really pardon their sins, which is Gods office only, take away their
iniquities, deliver them from damnation, and shield them from all evil. And
who would not give all that he has, if he might attain to these benefits?
who would not sell the whole earth to win heaven? Who would not loose his
life, to save his soul? But the sunshine of knowledge would easily drive
away all such mists. And they who in their blindness do esteem that man of
sin that sits at Rome, to be more then half a god, and see nothing but
greatness in him, Mark 8. 24.
as the blind man of Bethsaida, who before he saw perfectly saw men walking
like trees, (so great they seemed in his eyes*) yet when God shall take away
that veil of blindness, and heal that infirmity in them, they shall then
see, the bishop of Rome as he is indeed, to be an enemy to God and man, a
subuerter of estates, a foe to princes, a snare to subjects, and a very
corrupter of true christianity and godliness.

And thus much of the shifts and sleights that the Bishop of Rome used to come
to his greatness, by little and little, growing to that that now we see.
Sometime using flattery, falsehood and forgery, yea, and afterward bringing the
emperor under by plain force and fear: always taking advantages and
oportunities, when emperors were either otherwise employed in affairs, or
hated for their life, or some way so distressed, that they could not withstand
him and his partakers, then would he most earnestly pursue and persecute them,
until he had his will, which I trust will appear plainly in the discourse
that now I am to enter into, which is as it were a trial and search of the
doings of the bishop of Rome and of his behavior, after that he began to be
so mighty.

Now to take a good and sufficient survey of the popes Supremacy, it is not
enough to try his Title, to see his evidence, and consider of his proof,
neither yet to acquaint our selves with his shifts and practices, whereby he
has gotten himself into that very high seat and fulness of power, Declarat.
contra Nauar. and Con^^.
(as Sixtus Quintus speaks) which they would seeeme to claim by right, and
wherein now they play more than rex, of which two points I have spoken before:
but it is also (in my judgment) very necessary, that we look somewhat into
his doings, and examine how he has ruled and reigned, what good he has done
to the church, what profit he has brought to the christian commonwealth. When
God did see the continual rebellion of his people, that they would by no
means be reclaimed from sin, and how little good it had wrought in them,
that they had been very lately in a grievous captivity: he then by his
prophet Zachary chapter 11. verse. 16. threatens unto them this great and
grievous plague, that he will raise up a sheepeheard in the land, which shall
not look for the thing that is lost, nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal
that that is hurt, nor feed that that stands up, but he shall eat the flesh
of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces. And that there were such
sheepeheardes amongst the people of Israel, and that woe and destruction
belonges to them, God by his prophet Ezechiel chapter 34. verses 2, 3, 4. does
testify, pronouncing woe to the shepherds that feed themselves, eat the fat,
A potterne of the holy father of Rome.
cloth themselves with the wool, kill them that are fed, but feed them not,
they strengthen not the weak, they heal not the sick, bind not up the
broken, bring not again that which was driven away, seek not the lost, but
rule them with cruelty and rigor: I never read or think of this description
of an evil shepherd, but I see (me thinks) therein a right pattern of popish
government. Neither do I at any time earnestly enter into scanning of that
regiment, that is under that most holy father, but I remember how the holy
ghost painteth out these proud, cruel and idol shepeheards. The one seems
to be so right a pattern of the other, as if they were all one thing, and no
difference at all between them: or as if the Spirit of God did both foresee
and foreshew the most holy father, in that glass of the most unholy shepherd.
But that it may the better appear that he that would be accounted the herd of
Christ's flock, does but seek for to satisfy his own pride, profit and
pleasure, not having any due regard, either to Gods glory, or the good of them
whom he calls his sheep: let us consider, how violently and impotently, his
immoderat affection does carry him, to say and do as himself likes best, both
against God and man, and how insolently he bears sway in Christ his church.
And first to begin with his names and titles, Lib. 2. cap. 31.
out of the which M. Bellarmine will prove, that the Bishop of Rome is Peter's
successor, in the whole or universal church. For that he took in hand to
prove, But I on the contrary by those names shall (by Gods grace) plainly
prove, (...). 2. cap. 12.
that he robs Christ of his ornaments, and takes from him his titles that
belong to him only. And first he calls himself head of the universal
church, which name so properly belongs unto Christ, that we cannot give it to
any other, without great wrong, both to the head and the body of the church. To
the head, in that the office which God the father laid upon Christ, in
appointing him over all things the head to the church, Ephesians. 1.
should be bestowed upon a sinful man: to the body which is Christ's church,
because by that means it should have but an idle head, every way unable to
perform the duties of a head. I deny not but the church of Rome, for 4 or 5
hundred years after Christ, might justly be called the head of the church, that
is a ring leader to other churches in respect of religion which remained more
sincere there then elsewhere for many years, neither was that church so
troubled with heresies as were others. I confess also that some of the bishops of
Rome, for their forwardness, learning, and pains, employed to the benefit of
the church, might worthily be called in some sense heads of the church, as in
the first part of this treatise I have showed. Then will some man say, what is
then the fault which you charge the bishop of Rome withal, in calling himself
the head of the universal church? First that he makes that name proper to him
and his seat, which many times more justly belonged unto others, who for their
learning and travel, for the church of God, deserved much better of Gods church
then any pope of them al.

Further also that it is not, that signification of the name head, that will
satisfy the popes ambitious humor, thereby to be counted a man, only able or
fit to guide and direct others, but he will so be a head, that he must
command, forbid, bind, loose, retain, remit, dispense, deny, do, and undo,
as his unbridled affection, should carry him. Which sovereign power over the
church or any part of the church, we cannot find that God gave unto any man,
either Peter, or Paul, yea or to Christ himself as man only (for he was
taught of his father what to do, and what to say) much less then would his
vicar of Rome, if he had but one spark of christian humility, claim such
absolute power, over the whole earth. Seeing therefore by this name head, he
chalengeth greater power then either any good man would have in Gods church
(for the godly can be content to speak of God as God teaches them, and to do
as he would have them) or is fit for any man to have, as his unruly doings do
sufficiently declare: we justly deny, that ever any bishop of Rome, was of the
godly called the head of the church, in that sense that it is now used, as
their doings do plainly teach us. As for the name Papa or pope it was a common
name to all bishops as is confessed by Baronius, yea and granted also in this
place by master Bellarmine himself. And it signifies as much as father or
grandfather, so that it seems, that it was first given unto bishops by godly
christians, who did honor and reverence them for their calling. And why may
not this name, be aptly given to any diligent bishop or pastor, in the
church of god? Lib. 2. cap. 31.
No master Bellarmine will have this name after a more particular manner to be
given to the bishop of Rome, then to any other. Match. 23. 9.
Then we must learn of Christ not to call any man our father upon earth. For
there is but one, our father which is in heaven. And therefore if he will
otherwise be our father then man may be our father, let him seek for other
children, for to such a father we owe no obedience.

The name of universal bishop, Universal bish. Action. 3.
was given in the council of Chalcedon to the bishop of Rome, master
Bellarmine tells us. We deny it not. But without a favorable and good
understanding, that title may be very odious. For even Gregory himself a
bishop of Rome, and no man more vehemently, inueieth against that proud title
in many plaids. His places are so commonly alleged that I need not come to
any particular. Bellar ans. to that we object out of the odious name of
vninersal bishop.
But Bellarmine going about to deliver this title, from all suspicion of
antichristian ambition, tells us that this name universal bishop may be
taken in two sorts. One way that a universal bishop should signify an only
bishop, Universal bishop an only bishop.
that is such a one as would have none to be bishop but himfelfe only. And
such a universal bishop says master Bellarmine Saint Gregory condemns. And
does he not otherwise condemn John of Constantinople his pride, but because he
would have no bishop but himself? No master Bellarmine the stories are more
plain, A reply against that answer.
then that such shifts may go for current. The controversy was, whether the
bishop of Constantinople should be as now the bishop of Rome is in his own
account, a bishop above al bishops.

Read all the histories and it will easily appear, his endeavor was only to
have the commanding of other bishops. Neither could he be called universal, if
he were the only bishop but rather the singular bishop. But master Bellarmine
brings two or three testimonies out of Gregory wherein he complains that
John patriarch of Constantinople would be bishop alone. Gregory's meaning is
plain enough, that he says he would only be bishop, because he only would
have the commanding of all, that others should indeed be his suffraganes, and
at his commandment which reason of Gregory against that title of universal
bishop, if it be well marked, gives I think a wound incurable to the church of
Rome. A sovereign authority in one to command all (says he) is to take away
all bishops but that one only, but such sovereign authority over bishops the
pope does challenge in this name of universal bishop, as experience teaches:
therefore he makes him self the only bishop. And this is the thing that
Gregory so mislyketh in John bishop of Constantinople, therefore I cannot see
how it can be tolerable in him of Rome. But one may be called a universal
bishop (says he) in another sense, as he has a care of the whole church, and
so the Pope may be called a universal Bishop. But herein master Bellarmine
gives very little authority to the bishop of Rome. Tom 2. anno 187
For this general care belongs not only to every Bishop, but also to every
Christian as Caesar Paronius does plainly confess, De bonis operib. in part.
li. 2. c. 24.
of whom master Bellarmine does write, that he is a singular good man, and
without all doubt most learned. And therefore I trust he will by him be
persuaded, to let this name of universal bishop be a name that may belong to
mo then to him of Rome, and so not to make it his peculiar title. A fourth name
of his, Most holy,
is that he is called most holy. And here master Bellarmine does maruelously
insult over master Luther for insinuating that the names of most high, and most
holy, had not been hard of in the days of Gregory. Master Luther said not
so, master Bellarmine only feared that he meant some such matter, and therefore
quareleth with him and tells him that he lies. Conc. Chale. action 3.
object. Answer.
Well, Leo the pope is called most holy in three several titles, that three
Graecians wrote to him. It is true master Bellarmine, and in the same action in
a great number of places besides, the bishops yelding their consent, do call him
most holy. He is there also called holy, and why would not that name holy,
which is there also given to him, The title of Most holy given to sundry.
as well content the bishop of Rome now, as to be called most holy? Or why
should that be a peculiare name to him alone, that was given in that place as
well to others as to him? For Anatolius the patriarch of Constantinople, is
often called most holy. Yea and the council writes unto Dioscorus patriarch of
Alexandria, whom they deprived of his dignity, because he was a manitainer of
Futiches that notable heretic, yet I say, the conncill writing unto him, do
call him also most holy. And whosoever marketh that council, shall see no
titles more common, then most holy, most blessed or happy, mow beloved of God,
and such like. Neither were these things given unto them as names to continue
to them and their seat, but only such titles, as they thought well bestowed
upon such persons, as they used them to. As Leo bishop of Rome, who although he
were not without his infirmiries, yet sure he was a man of great gifts. And
they in abundance of affection toward him, called him most holy. Must it
therefore be a name hereditary to that sinful and shameless brood that since
has sprung up in that place? It were absurd to think, that coniurers,
inchaunters, poyseners, adulterers, and such ruffians and rakehelles, should be
called by right of their seat most holy. And yet now nothing more common then
this title. His favorites must not speak of him, but with this term of most
holy. Look all his bulls and writings, and you shall see, that he that is
most unholy before God and men, yet by a lying style must be called most holy.
Yea to doubt whether it be a fit name for his holiness forsooth or not, is a
sin more to be punished then the breach of Gods law if it be true that
Gentiletus writing against the council of Trent reports of a bishop that was
put out of his bishopric, Li. 5. Nullitate 11
because in that council he misliked that the pope should be called most holy,
and God in the scriptures is called but holy. And indeed he might justly
mislike it, if he duly considered that in God he could not see any thing like
unto sin, in the pope almost no spark of goodness in these latter ages.
And, this I take to be the reason why master Bellarmine, does not place among
the fifteen names that he has found out for the pope, this name most holy,
because in respect of his unholiness, he thinks it pity to bestow that name
upon him. And therefore he should the rather have borne with master Luther, if
he did marvel that the popes flatterers, would so profane that holy title,
in bestowing it upon so unholy men, as for the most part they have all been,
which these many hundred of years have sit in that seat. Or at the least he
would not have given the lie to master Luther, for signifying that Saint
Gregory would have misliked the abuse of that name in these days. As for the
name of Christ's vicar, Christ's vicor.
which is also one of his common title, we would not much stick to bestow it
upon him our selves, Christ has many vicars.
if he would content himself with that place wherein he is, or else should be
(if he were as he ought to be) the vicar of Christ. For every pastor is in his
own charge, Christ's vicar, 2. Cor. 5. ^0.
and must in Christ's steed be a messenger from God, and pray the people to be
reconciled to God. But this is too small a benefice for this proud prelate, too
little a compass for his ambitious mind. He will be vicar general. All the
world must be his diocese, all people are his flock. But we cannot yield him
that title, we cannot displace him whom Christ has assigned to that Rome,
even whilst he was upon earth, and promised to send in his place, The spirit
Christ vicat general. Ioh. 14. 16, 17.
even the spirit of truth, that ever abiding comforter. His eyes see our wants,
his ears hear all our cries, yea our sighs, and groans, are not hidden from
him. He is worthy to be Christ's vicar general, because he is with the church
in all places, yea if it be in prisons and dungeons. But this vicar of Rome,
as he can not be every where if he would, so in such places he will not be if
he could. His predecessors indeed, that never sought so proud titles, suffered
much for Christ's sake.

But now the case is altered. Father.
All men must suffer his wrongs and violence. His name of father how it can be
bestowed upon him I cannot see, unless it be for getting of bastards and so
their own stories will report unto us, that many of them have been fathers as
John. 12. Alexander the sixth, and many other. But seeing spiritual fathers,
James 1. 18. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
must beget children to God by the word of truth, and by the seed not mortal,
but by the immortal seed of the word of God which seed they love not to
sow (for a preaching pope in our days is as a black swan) they cannot
therefore get spiritual children unto God, and therefore as I said before I
cannot see, that they can be spiritual fathers. If they be called fathers in
respect of their age, and so it be used as a name of reuernce, we envy then
not that name in such sort, so that they take it not from other, to make it
proper to them. And these are the names which are commonly given in our days to
the B. of Rome. As for the rest of his titles because we hear them not
attributed to popes now, I omit. Saving that I must put you in remembrance of
one blasphemous name, which although it be not a name by which he is commonly
called, yet it is given to him as his due, and master Bellarmine because he
would not have him to leese it, does tell us it is his name. He is therefore
called the bridegroom of the church. The bridgroome of the church. Vbi
peticulum, de electione in sexto.
Which name master Bellarmine says was given to him by a general council
holden at Lions it was Anno. 1215. more then twelve hundredth years after
Christ.

But as it seems, it was never worthy to be reckoned among the councils. For
we have it not in the tomes of councils. Yea and the pope Boniface the eight
does challenge to himself that proud name, Cap. Quoniam de Immunit. m, 6.
we not minding to neglect our justice, and the justice of our spouse or wife
the church (says he) what shall this holy church which is likened to a body,
because it can have but one head, to a house, because it can have but one
foundation, to an army, because it can have but one captain or general, to a
turtle dove, because it can have but one mate, to a kingdoem, because it can
have but one king, to a sheepfold, because it can have but one shepherd, to a
wife, because it can have but one husband, shall she I say now forsake the
husband of her youth, or at the least keep him and another too? Who ever heard
that an honest woman could at one time have two husbands? or an honest husband
have together two wives since Christ his time? ^ Cor. 11. 2.
Or how can the holy church, that chaste virgin, who is coupled to Christ, be
the wife of that vicar of Rome? God is a ielous God, Christ is a ielous
husband, his wife must love none but him. She therefore can have no other
husband. Saint Bernard tells pope Eugenius, that the church is his masters
wife. Epist. 237.
It is for him enough to be the friend of the bridegroom, he must not call his
masters bestebloued, his own prince, but a prince. Yea (says he) thou must
challenge in her nothing to be thine.

But master Bellarmine tells us, Bellar. answ. to that place of Bernard.
that saint Bernard did let Eugenius to understand, that he is not the true and
chief husband of the church. We confess it, neither he is, nor any man
excepting Christ can be the churches true husband. The reply against his
answer.
And this is also as true, that the church because she is chaste, can have but
Christ her one only husband. Ioh. 3. 29. August. in Ioh. Tract. 13.
And this is it, that John the baptist means when he says, that he that has
the bride, is the bridegroom. I have her not (says he) what am I then? The
friend of the bridegroom. Thus does S. Augustine bring John the Baptist
acknowledging that he has no right in the bridegoomes wife, but is only a
friend to the bridegroom. As also he makes the bridegroom him only, that is
lord over the whole earth. And he makes his argument strong against Donatus,
because the church has but one husband, which is Christ, therefore Donatus is
not that husband, nor can be. But if master Bellarmines distinction might serve
that Christ is chief and yet there may be an other under him, Donatus might as
well have claimed to be that husband then, that the pope does claim now to be.
But it was not then known, that one honest woman, might have two husbands.
Chrysostom asso and Theophilact and all the ancient fathers make Christ the
only husband, yea and Chrysostom thinks, Hom. 28.
that he needs favorably to interpret that, that John calls himself the
friend of the bridegroom, showing that he meant not thereby to make himself
equal to Christ, but only to express the greatness of his joy. For a friend
reioiceth more then a servant. What would he have said then to these saucy
mates, who think too base a thing for them to be but friends to the
bridegroom, but the bridegroom and they must have all one wife? I cannot
therefore marvel much at their flattering lawyers, that will make the pope and
Christ to have but one consistory or seat of judgment. Panorm. in l. licet de
electione extra ex hostiensi.
Mark I pray you the vicar before his parson, the pope before Christ. The pope
and Christ, make but one consistory. But this I take to be somewhat tolerable.
The pope and Christ have one wife, make one consistory.
If they both have but one wife, they may sit in one seat. But I muse that
master Bellarmine with great silence, does pass over one of the names, that ye
pope is now best known by, and is more ancient, then many of the names that he
speaks of. Servant of Gods servants.
the servant of Gods servants. Which name they learned of Gregory the first to
give themselves. It may be that master Bellarmine, was ashamed his master
should come so near in name to wicked Ham first called servant of servants,
Genesis 9. 25.
or that he sees all their doings so directly contrary to yt name, that he
thinks it not a name due to them, or fit for them. For what mockery is it, to
write themselves servants of Gods servants, perchance sometime in the self
same letters, wherein they will command, control, correct, condemn the
mightiest monarchs under heaven, Gregory would thereby have taught them
modesty, humility, meeknes, and such other christian virtues, yea, and also a
painful diligence for the good of the church, as if in all things they should
carefully seek, not their own profit or preferment, but Gods glory, and the
benefit of Gods people (for servants work not for themselves but for their
master.) They keeping still the name, by that outward profession of lowliness
and industry, seek to cast a mist before the eyes of the ignorant, that they
shall not see them, when they show themselves in truth so proud and
presumptuous again all men, so lither and loytering in their pastoral
function as if they were enemies to mankind, and had no care at al of their
own duty.

But now let us see to what end M. Why these names are given to the Pope.
Bellarmine does entitle the B. of Rome to those names of Head, Pope,
universal Bishop, Christ's vicar, Father and Bridegroom, even to this end,
that he may prove him to have the charge of the whole church. I on the other
side show, that these are not his titles, they are not his ornaments, they
belong to Christ most of them, and only to him, if the be understood in
peculiar sort, as master Bellarmine would have them. They may be given, after
some sort, to all pastors. But the B. of Rome cannot abide to be but like
others, he must be sigular and fellowlesse, or else nothing can content him.
Therefore I out of these names which he so chalengeth to himself, do prove
his pride and presumption above men, thus to extol himself so excessiuely
above others, yea, and blasphenues against Christ, thus to wring from him, his
office and privileges, and to make the world to believe, they are his own. And
this is one of the effects that followed of this fullness of power which by
little and little (as before I showed) the Pope aspired and attained unto. And
ever as he grew in power, so did he in pride also, until he could not tell how
to call himself, or what name he should give himself, that his greatness
thereby might sufficiently be expressed: yet all these proud titles could not
satisfy or content the proud humor of many of these Popes, but that they
grew to farther impiety and greater, if greater may be. For, as in these names
they made the whole church to be (not Christ's) but as it were their own
inheritance, and their own house, with which, and wherein they thought they
might do as themselves would, and they incroched also exceedingly upon Christ
his right: so at the length, they came to that contempt of God and godliness,
that their parasites would give unto them, The Pope god.
and they could be content to take the honor that was due to God only. They
will not so much as leave to God his name, but even that is bestowed upon the
pope. To believe (says one) that our lord god the pope, Extrauag. Job. 22.
could not do this thing, is to be counted heresy. And another says, When the
pope dissolueth a marriage it must be thought to be Gods doing only, because
the pope being chosen according to the cannons, is god upon earth. And another,
Innocentius the third, The Pope here upon earth supplieth the room, not of
pure man, but of a true God. And lest it should be thought, that the Canonists
did give more honor unto the pope herein, then he was content to take upon
him: Did. 96. ^. Satic.
pope Nicholas himself, does claim for him and his seat, great immunitie
and freedom, because the good emperor Constantine (says he) did call the
pope god. And yet this holy father plays but the crafty mate, for that
Constantine did speak of al bishops (alluding to that, I have said, Psalm. 82,
1, 6.
ye are gods: And God stands in the assembly of gods, and judges among
gods, the prophet speaking there of Princes and Judges) that does he apply
to himself alone. Whosoever reads that which is alleged out of an Epistle
of Gregory unto Mauritius the Emperor, Cause. 11. q. 1. cap. Sacerdotibus.
shall find this false dealing of Pope Nicholas to make himself a god after
some other sort, then Constantine there calls al bishops gods. The Jews were
superstitious, so as they durst not name that name of God Jehovah, for fear of
offending that great god: The popes are saucy, that make no scruple at all to
take to themselves that name, of the which we ought not to speak or think,
but with great reverence. Whether now are the honester, the Jews, or the
Pope. The Jews were too scrupulous. But the Popes yet, that have cast off all
reverence of the majesty of God, are far more blame worthy. And this very
name (as I suppose) that they called themselves gods, did so imbolden some of
them, to set so little by God. As for example, Pope Julius. not the second,
that was the lusty warrior, but the third, that filthy beast, if Stories do
speaks truly of him. He loves porke very well, and when by the commandment
of his physician, Act Romans pontif. Ioh. ^a.
porke was not served at his table, being angry for it, one answered that the
physician said it was not wholesome for him. Popes saucy with God.
I will have it says he in despite of God. At another time missing a peacock
which he had commanded to be kept cold against night, he burst into
extremity of choler, whereupon a cardinal moving him to be quiet, What said
he was God angry for an aple, in so much as he cast our first parents out of
paradise for that matter, and may not I being his vicar, be angry for my
peacock? The irreligious heart, of this profane pope, could never have burst
out, iuto such blasphemies against God, but that in his excess of pride he
esteemed himself as God, or else in affection even besotted with atheism, he
said as did the wicked in the prophet David. Psalm. 53. 1.
There is no God. And so he proved that to be most true, Psalm. 49. 20.
that the same prophet says in another place, man being in honor has no
understanding, he is like to the beasts that perish. And thus we see how the
bishop of Rome, being drunken, with too well liking of himself in his
authority and high estate, did not only exalt himself by his names above al
men, but made himself equal even with the most high. But least the bishop of
Rome, should seem to be but God in name, and not in deed, as a shadow without
a body, and title without authority, (as were Paul the third his archbishops
that he sent to the council of Trent, Cono. Trident. li, 2. (...). 1. number. 3.
whom he was feign to maintain with his poor alms, that he bestowed upon
them:) he therefore shows his prerogative, and tells what power and might
he has, that he may prove himself, to be like to her, that said in her
heart, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, Esa. 14. 14.
and I will be like the most Highest.

If I would endeavor to set down all that might be said of the pride of the
bishop of Rome or at the least of his impudent affection of his claw-backs, it
were harder to find an outgate then an entrance, this field is so large to
wander in. For what is it that the Pope can not do? Yea what can God himself
do more then he? If we will trust flattering Lawyeares, in their approved
and allowed books, he is Christ's vitar general over heaven, earth, and hell,
over angels good and bad, yea they tell us, that the pope can do whatsoever
God can do, except sin. It seems that they mean God can sin, but the
pope is so clad with holiness, and compassed about with righteous dealing as
with a garment, that he can in no wise sin, such a stain cannot be in his
flesh, such a clog cannot hang at his back. O proud blasphemy! Can that man
of sin (for Saint Paul doubtless speaks of him) justly so called, 2.
Thessal, 2. 3.
because he is a stumbling block to others, and a cause of sin to many
thousands, and himself also often a servant or rather a sincke of sin, can
he (I say) be without sin? Yea they tell us that he may, Did. 40. cap. Non
nor.
and that by the authority of pope Symmacus, who does testify that Saint
Peter did bequeath the everlasting gift of Merits, together with the in
heritance of innocence to his posterity. In so much as if they have not merits
enough, yet that suffices that Saint Peter has done. He adds the reason,
because he (I think he means Saint Peter) either does advance them that are
worthy, or does lighten such as are advanced. Now if the pope himself will
say, that he in respect of his chair, has a succession of innocence, it is
no great marvel if his flatterers will say he cannot sin.

But if all the popes and their parasites, would cry it out never so loud, yet
so long as their own stories are remaining they shall be proved liers. Where
are now these censurers and severe forbidders of Gods writings? Why use they
not their authority to repress such blasphemies? The Romish church, Ind.
expurgat.
can take upon them to prohibit the writings of godly men, yea if there be but
a note in the margent of the fathers, word for word out of the fathers, whereby
the reader may perchance be directed more readily, to see the judgment of
that father in some point in controversy, although it change not the meaning
of that place yet our severe censurers still command that it be left out. But
these horrible blasphemies, whereof al men may justly be a shamed, are not once
misliked of, sound not out of time, but are melodius music in the ears of
such holy fathers. Can we hope for any good from them, that call light
darkness, and darkness light, evil good, and good evil? I fear such bad
trees, can bring forth no good fruit. But to come to some particular points.

Let us see what this petty God, does take upon him, and how he plaieth the God
indeed? For as I have said the bare name of God (although it be far too much,
that it should be given him by others, or acknowledged of himself) will not
please him, but he must also do as God does. And first whereas Christ is our
only lawmaker and master, as Christ himself tells us, and therefore Saint
James also exhorts us that we be not many masters: Matthew. 23. 8. Iam. 3. 1.
yet this Romish Rabby will be our master also, not contenting himself, The
pope teaches us of his own.
to deliver that which he received from God, as did Christ and his apostles,
(whose footsteps he should not be ashamed to follow) but he will teach us his
own lessons, and deliver us his own doctrines. And although he pretend the
direction of Gods spirit, objection.
yet even hereby it appears, that this is but a lying pretense and color,
wherewith they would cloak all their heresies and superstitions. Answer. Ioh.
16. 13. What the spirit teaches.
For the spirit shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear,
that shall he speak. And this reason our Savior Christ yields why the
spirit shall lead us into all truth, because he shall teach nothing of his
own, but that which he shall hear. Therefore all new doctrines, even
whatsoever has been added in substance of doctrine, unto that which Christ
and his apostles left us, sauoureth of another spirit, and not of that spirit
of God, which shall teach or suggest nothing, but that which he has heard.
What a master then, is that great master, not in Israel, but in Italy, that
brings in huge heaps of doctrine, which themselves confess only to rest
upon men's traditions, which they call traditions of the church, and have no
good warrant, or sure ground in the word of God? Does he not take upon him
Gods office? Does he not make himself herein equal with God? It is most
plain, it cannot be denied. But the infatiable ambition of those holy fathers,
will not suffer them to content themselves with that excess of pride, in that
they take upon them as God, to make laws, The pope controleth gods word. Heb
13. 4. 1. Cor. 7. 2. 9.
and give rules to Gods church, unless they also control and correct as
seems good to them, those laws which God has set down, and those
ordinances which he has established in making that sin which he calls
honorable, and forbidding that which he has commanded, as appears in their
forbidding certain persons to marry.

And on the contrary whereas Christ reproved Peter for drawing his sword, even
in defense of his master, Mat. 26. 52. 53.
yet Peter's successor, and Christ's vicar, as he terms himself, commends
it as a most acceptable sacrifice to God, Killing of princes meritorious in the
popes court.
and meritorius of the remission of sins, if in the defense of the pope, or
revenge of his enemies (and they are all his enemies that will not be his
slaves) they fight againgst christian princes, yea and rebel, against their
natural and sovereign magistrates. Of the which because I shall God willing
have better occasion to speak after, I only would have you now to remember
that furious fellow Julius the second, Interdictum regni franciae p, 67.
of whom it is written that he gave forgiveness of sins to any that would kill
a Frenchman. And it seems that some cause of his deadly hatred against the
French was this. Julius this jolly pope was sworn when he was chosen pope as
many stories testify, that he should call a general council within two years.

But he not regarding either oath or duty, was so far from calling of a
council, that as much as he could he hindered the same. And thereupon nine
Cardinals leaving him, came to Millan, and appointed a council to be kept at
Pysa, whither the Emperor and French king did send their Ambassadors. Now
when otherwise he could not hinder the council, he purposed, as a friend of
his tells us, Rioche Compe^* temporum in Iulio. 2.
to rule it by wars, so that he made the council to go to Millaine for
fear. A great fight being upon Easter day between the French and this
worthy warrior: the French men gave his a great overthrow.

Whereupon he stirred up against them, all that he could, the Venetians, 1.
Pet. 3. 11.
Heluetians, Italians, Spaniards. So well did he seek for peace and ensue it,
as Saint Peter commands him, whose successor he calls himself.

So much did he regard that promise, that our Savior Christ himself, Mat. 5.
9.
(whose Vicar he would seem to be) did make. Blessed are the peace makers for
they shall be called Gods children. And so lightly did he set by that
commandment that Christ has given against our affectionat and unlawful
reuenges. Resist not evil: Mat. 5. (...).
but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also. So that this pope does promise the reward of remission of sins, for
doing that, which Gods law does flattely forbid, and the law of nature does
utterly condemn. Is not this to take upon him against God himself? Is not
this to command when he forbids, and to forbid when he commands? Again,
God has given us a plain and flat commandment, Deuter. 12. 32
that we should do nothing but that which he bids. We must not so much as
turn to the left hand of our corrupt affections, or superstitious services,
which our selves condemn, or to the right hand, of our good intentions and
devotions wherein we please our natural man very well. His word only must be
our rule and square. Does not then the bishop of Rome control this and such
like commandments of God, when he says in express words: ye shall have
other rules of religion, other articles of faith, otherwise to worship God, by
traditions of the apostles, and of the church, unwritten verities, Doctrines
beside the word.
decrees, decretalles, briefes and bulls, councils and precepts of the church?
Is not this to transgress Gods commandment by our own traditions, and to
make it of none authority? Matthew. 15. 3, 6. 9
Is not this to teach as doctrines, men's precepts? Yea, is not this to say with
those lawless lords, we are they that ought to speak, Psalm. 12. 4.
who is Lord over us? Thirdly, in that the pope may (as he and his favorites
falsely affirm) allow of the scriptures, whether they shall be authentical
or not. Does he not thereby take upon him to be above God, whose word is not
authentical unless the pope allow of it. If you doubt whether the Bishop of
Rome be so shameless or not, as so to say, consider first what Siluester
Prierias a friar, and master of the popes palace writes in his articles or
foundations that he sets Luth. tom. 1.
down against Luther. Whosoever (says he) rests not upon the doctrine of
the church and bishop of Rome, as upon an iufallible rule of faith, from whence
even the holy scripture does draw strength and authority, is an heretic,
like unto which is that also of Eckius, Loc. com. de eccl.
without the authority of the church, the very scriptures are not authentical.
And let not their doctrine only be examined, wherein they teach, that the pope
is virtually the church, as does that friar Prierias in the place before
alleged in his second foundation, but also (yea and that especially) the
practice of that church, so to refer al things to the pope in such things, that
he according to that fullness of knowledge, which is in that sacred casket of
his holy breast, which pope Paul the second did first boast of, Did. 40. c. si
p^p.
must judge of all things, so that as he says, so it must be, and there must
no reason be asked of his doing. Whereby it appears that the Pope being the
church, and as we see, having the full authority to do what he will in the
church of Rome, they tell us that the scripture has no authority or strength
but from him? And I pray you then who is greater? he that makes the word
authentical, or he that has his word approved? Is not he that does approve
it? so God must be under the pope, that holy God, under a vile sinful man.
Fourthly, the pope will take upon him to dispense with, or rather against the
word of God, and to allow that which God manifestly condemns, and is expressly
against gods holy law. For proof whereof, I need not allege the false
testimony of his flattering lawyers, that give him that power to dispense
against the apostle, and so against gods word: but we may see his practice,
which does sufficiently testify, that he thinks he may dispense, with the
wicked and unnatural uncovering of the shame of them, that are near of kin,
And he has done contrary to this flat commandment given by God against
marying with uncle or aunt. Leuit. 20. 20.
In which case he did dispense in the marriage of his catholic son Philip
King of Spain, who, as in his unrighteous ambition he has no measure, so in
his unnatural just, he has (as it seems) no shame: but to his Lord he shall
stand or fall, before whom it shall be tried one day, whether the popes bull
can stand between God and him, for breach of Gods law. Yea, pope Martine the
fifth (as is alleged in a book called Brutum fulmen, out of Anthony of
Florence and others) did dispense with one, to marry his own sister, whereas
God says, thou shall not uncover the shame of thy sister. But what can not
the pope do? He can make wrong right, say they: Leuit. 18. 9.
And we know, that he can make that which is right wrong. For he can (as
they tell us) do all things above right, against right, and without right.
Yea, he is lord of lords, and has the authority of the King of kings, over
his subjects. But what will you more?

To doubt of the popes power it is no less then sacrilege. As also it is
alleged out of Thomas of Aquine against the errors of the grecians question
66. That to say that the pope has not supremacy over the whole church, is like
the error of them, that say the holighost proceeds not from the son. But
such are heretics against the godhead as it cannot be denied, Yo' doubt of
the popes supremacy is heresy against God.
and therefore doubtless by the judgment of Thomas of Aquine, they that do
but doubt of the popes supremacy are heretics against the godhead.

And is this that Thomas of Aquine, that glorious Saint and clarke, whose only
sentence weighs more, then all the protestants wits and words in the
world, In his inuectiue answer to the English Justice.
as says in a spiteful pamphlet our weeping cardinal of England, who can
never be merry, until be see the ruin and desolation of his natural contry.

In which respect I pray God heartily, that he may nightly water his bed with
tears, and moysten always his bread with weeping rather then he should see,
or his eyes behold, the destruction of this land, which he and such other
tigers whelps so greedely gape for. And I doubt not, but our good God, which
has hitherto very often, not mercifully only, but miraculouslie also and
mightily preserved and vpholden, the only proppe and stay of this our
flourshing land, will still plead her cause against all her foes, our sins
deserve great plagues.
and preserve her soul the soul of his turtle Dove against all their secret
and malicious practices. I confesle indeed, that our sins which abound daily
more and more, do justly deserve, that this precious jewel, should be taken
from us. And it is only Gods mercy, that has preserved us these many years,
even his free and great mercy. But if we could turn to the Lord unfeignedly,
we need neither fear the suites or tears, nor traitorous devises, of such
hipocrites, neither yet the might or malice of all those conspirators. But if
the Lord should as in justice he may give us over to be a prey unto their
teeth, yet the truth of our cause is grounded still upon Gods word. And the
Israelites were Gods people still, although when they rebelled against the
Lord, he did sometimes deliver them to be punished, even of his own enemies,
and wicked ones.

And I beseech the Lord make us more patiently to bear his deserved wrath if
it shall please him to lay it upon us, then we have used thankfully his
undeserved grace and favor, which hitherto he has showed unto us, and
continued amongst us. And thus much by occation of that undue commendation,
that Allen gives unto Thomas of Aquin. But him and such like I leave to their
own fancies. And to the godly I say only with Saint James, my brethren have
not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, James 2. 1.
in respect of persons. Let our cares be attentive to mark, and our hearts
ready bent to receive that which in due examination we find to be well spoken,
without beholding of the person, or regarding any thing more, then the word
that is taught. And thus have I briefly showed, how this unjust authority
which the pope chalengeth and into the which most craftily he crept, is in
part most lewdly, by him abused, not only in that he claims to have a proud
name over his brethren, and the whole church, but also that he dare match
himself with God, and directly to oppose himself against his will.

But as in many things much, so in nothing more does the bishop of Rome darken
Gods glory, or thrust himself into Gods place, then, in that he being
himself a sinful man, yea a servant to sin, even set and sold to do
wickedly, dares yet take upon him to forgive sin: The pope forgiueth sins.
And that not as one that would preach and proclaim, unto the penitent sinners
Gods grace and mercy, but as one that commends unto the people his own power
to pardon and forgive men their offenses. Wherein he first offends, God
only can pardon sins.
in that he takes more upon him, then belongs to him, or to any man. For,
seeing our sinful act, whether it be against God or man, is therefore
imputed to us as siune, and is indeed sin, because it is a breach of Gods
Law; it is very absurd to imagine that any man can dispense with us for this
sin, 1. John 3. 4.
but only that good God, against whose law we have transgressed. And for this
cause the godly when their sin was unto them a heavy burden, have made their
suite and moan unto God, because he only can heal that sore, and help that
sickness, as that one example of David in steed of many, may prove unto us,
Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me O Lord according to thy great mercy, and
according to the multitude of thy compassions, Tibi soli peceaui.
put away mine iniquities. And although his sins were exceeding great (as
after he confesses) yet because none could pardon them but God only, therefore
even to him he comes, against whom he had offended, to him, Job. 14. 4.
he confesses his fault, of him, he seeks for release, to him, he sueth for
pardon. For of all men it is true that Job says who can make that clean, that
is conceived of unclean seed? there is not one. And therefore God proclaims
by his prophet Esaias. I, Esa. 43. 25.
even I, am he that puts away thine iniquities, for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. And first we bow the knees of our heart, to our good
God, yielding unto him immortal thanks and praise, who deals thus
gratioufly with us unworthy and sinful wretches, as that he does not only
freely forgive us, for Christ his sake, all our sins, and blot out all our
offenses, and put away all our transgressions, with an assured purpose, never
to call them to remembrance, or to charge us with them in his just judgment:
but also for the better quieting, The ministry of ^econciliation.
of our fearful and troubled consciences, has given power and commandment
to his ministers, by proclaiming to the penitent this his free pardon
ministerially to heal the soul wounded with sin, to bind up the broken and
contrite heart, and to raise by form the pit of despair, them whom the clog of
conscience accused of sin had pressed down. This, even this, we acknowledge
to be an inestimable benefit, and a great favor, that God shows to us vile
wretches, that that mercy which he has sealed up for us in heaven, he has
caused to be made known here on earth, by the ministry of the gospel. And this
is all the power that is given to man, to proclaim unto us that pardon, Esa.
1. 18.
that God only gives. To tell us, that if our sins were as crimson, they
(being for Christ his sake pardoned) shall be as white as snow, and if they were
like scarlet, they shall be as wool. But either to think or say, that any man
can give any pardon, is too absurd. I cannot therefore but marvel at the church
of Rome, and the bishops thereof, tha they shame not, as it were to thrust
themselves into Gods place, and to take upon them to do, that, which none can
do but God only. They appo^^t their I^^ylies, and proclaim pardon of all
their sins, to suth as come to Rome, in the time of that solemn feast. In like
manner to such as devoutly say so many prayers before such an image, or go in
pilgrimage to such a place. They send abroad into all places, their pardons and
indulgences, making of them plain marchandies. So that men or women, may for a
little money, buie a pardon for their greatest sins, as they imagine. Is not
this an easy way for rich men to get to heaven? Popery a doctrine of
licentiosnesse.
Is not this the very fountain of all licentious living, to teach that men for
money, may make their peace with God, and satisfy for their sins? And yet the
church of Rome, that shameless harlot, dare charge our doctrine of
justification by faith (taught first by Christ himself, Ioh. 3. 1^. Romans 3. 28.
afterward by his apostles especially Saint Paul in plain words) to be a
doctrine of liberty. What shall we then say of this wicked doctine, or rather
of this blasphemous marchandies, whereby leave to sin, is sold as commonly
for money, as old boots and shoes are sold in London streets, for beesoms or
broom? The first I suppose that opened this shop of these popish wares was
Boniface the eight, Plat. in Bonif. 8.
who gave full pardon of all sins, mark not of some sins, but of all, to
them that visited the place, where the apostles were. And after the world was
filled with such trash, pardons were promised to them that would fight against
the Turk, yea pardons for them that would fight against the popes enemies. But
my meaning is not to stand upon these points in particular, but rather to point
unto them. Yet I can not omit how that Clement the sixth pope of that name, did
persuade himself so well of his power and authority in this behalf, Sleid.
li. 21.
that he gave commandment and charge unto the Angels, that if any died
coming to Rome to the Jubilee, which he had appointed to be kept every fifteth
year, whereas Boniface had appointed it to be kept but every hundred year,
Plat. in Clem. 6
the Angels I say, should carry the souls of such straight way to heaven. What
durst not these men presume to do, that durst like Gods take upon them, to
command even the Angels, to be at their beck? Well, against these their
blasphemies which have no warrant no color in the word, I only ask of them,
who can forgive sin but God only? Mark 2. 7. 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19.
Let them prove it by scripture, let them point unto him out of Gods word. If
man could do it, what need so precious a price, so great a ransom, as not
gold nor silver, but the blood of that unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus.

An other great abuse there is in this there wicked doctrine. They promise
their indulgesnce general to all that die in the defense Another abuse. The
general promise of pardon.
of christians against the Turk. Yea they often sell their pardons to any that
will buie them, as Bale out of Crantzius reports, Act. Romans pontif. Mart. 5.
that some did in Saxony, in the time of pope Martine the first. What excuse
can they make, or what pretense can they use, to make this have any show of
lawfulness? God in the scripture still criieth turn unto me, Pardon to the
penitent,
and promises forgiveness to the penitent, he threatens the ungodly, that
they shall have no peace. Esaias 48. 22.
But not one testimony, not one example cannot be alleged, to prove that any
man or woman receive forgiveness of sins, unless they first be sorry for the
same, which commonly cannot be in sudden death in the wars, and the pardoners
rather require money then amending for the same. Luke 7. Luke 19. 8.
The sinful woman had pardon for her sins, but she hated them. Zache likewise,
but he was become a new man. Matthew. 16. 75.
Peter's denying of Christ was forgiven him, but by weeping he testified his
sorrow for the same. The like may be said of many other, whom I for shortness
omit.

Wickedly therefore does the Pope give his pardon of sins, not seeing sorrow
for sins, or purpose of amendment in them, that buy or enjoy those their
pardons. So Alexander the fifth did wickedly abuse the words of Christ, Plaeina.
being at point of death: my peace I give to you, my peace I leave with you, as
though he could give that peace.

But if he have beeue so saucy with God, how shall he behave himself think
you toward men? For that is another point which is neeessarie to be
considered. Whereby it will appear that as by subtilty he entered, so with much
pride and more then barbarous cruelty he has reigned. I told you before, how
that when he had first by the emperors means got the bishops under him, he
never rested until he had not only thrust the emeperour from having any thing
to do in this election: but also brought them under his yoke, that they could
not be confirmed in the empire but by him. Now what followed of this must be
declared. First he did strive earnestly, to keep all that he had gotten, and
if any emperor having indeed in him any noble heart, would seek to recover
his ancient liberty in some part, and to free himself, from that Romish
Egypt, and slavish servitude, wherein that proud Pharo (unmindful of Gods
graces to him, or his duty to others) did seek to detain him: then would
the proud pope, viis and modis, by all means that possible he could devise, so
persecute and afflict such, as if he were set up of God, to be a pledge to all
christian princes, and (as were the Cananits unto the Israelites) pricks in
their eyes, Number. 33. 55.
and continual thorns, and whips in their sides. And this may evidently
appear out of innumerable examples. The church of Rauenna did not upon Phoeas
his decree, submit it self to the church of Rome, or acknowledge it to be her
head. The patriarch thereof thought himself to vne as great at Rauenna, as the
pope was at Rome.

But Theodorus although he willingly would have kept that Funct. Cronol an 686.
ancient privilege, yet for fear submited himself to Donus then bishop of
Rome, about the year of the Lord six hundred seventy and seven. The popes
contention with his brethren.
But Felix being after patriarch of Rauenna, and desirous to stand in his
ancient privileges, mouen the people to the same. So that by all means they
sought to shake off the bishop of Rome his heavy yoke. Leo then bishop of Rome
stirred up Justinian the second Emperor of that name, by slaughter, siege
spoil, and such violent means, to subject that patriarch to his seat. And
Felix who sought to recover his liberties, had his eyes thrust out with a hot
burning Iron, as out of Sabelicus and Nauclerus it is reported. But the pope is
not more earnest, to maintain his supremacy over bishops (although this hea^
was too too fervent, that the patriarch, for this popes pride should have his
eyes burnt out) then he was to hold fast, and to increase daily, that
authority which by most impdent and ungodly means he had gotten, not only
over all princes and kings, but even over the Emperor himself, the greatest
monarch that is in all christendom.

The emperor had wont in the primitive churches, to have a great saying in the
chosing of bishops, especially such as were bishops of Rome, as all histories
make mention, and is more evident, The Emperors debarred for having any thing
to do in the election of the Pope.
then that it needs proof, and more plain, then that it may be doubted of.
But when the popes came to their over great authority, they began somewhat
more boldly, to take upon them to occupy that room without leave of the
Emperor.

Adrian the first therefore being B. of Rome, and he thinking himself much
beholding to Charles the great, for defending him and his church, from the
violence of enemies, did in a council holden at Rome by the emperor and the
pope, Sigeb. Cronic. ^nno 773.
make this universal decree, that the emperor should have right to choose the
pope, and to order the apostolic seat, and to have the dignity or
pre-eminence of principality. I would all our English papists, and specially
the fugitive traitors, that would for this cause make the happy and quiet
government, which England has under our most gracious princess, a long time
comfortably inioyed, (because we give unto her majesty the title of sumacie)
seem odiuos to others, A pope acknowledges the emperor to have supremacy.
and unlawful to our selves, I would I say they would mark, what pope Adrian
and the universal council (for so does Sigebert there call it) do yield to
Charles the great, then emperor, that he should have the principality and
supremacy. And further it is there decreed, that the archbishop and bishop
through every province, shall be invested by him, and that no man shall be once
so bold as to consecrate him, whom the king does not commend and institute and
that upon pain of excommunication. And if he reform not himself, his goods
to be forfeited, and himself to be banished.

A necessary Law doubtless for our days, both in respect of the law it
self, and also in regard of the punishment which is to be laid upon
offenders* And the more to be accounted of, because it is de^ised by such, as
I hope they will not say can err or cannot say they seek their blood. Well,
notwithstanding this decree set down by council, as you have hard, Steven the
fourth bishop of Rome, and next but one to this Adrian the first (who by a
conucil confirmed to the emperor this authority) Did. 63. C. Quia sanct. Romans
does not only debar the emperor, for meddling in election of the pope, but
also accurseth all them, that by the emperors consent do obtain any church.
And for the louder proclaming of his pride, most lewdly he compares his
unjust and rash desanulling of that just decree, made by Adrian and the
council, Pope Steven the fourth abuses scripture.
with Ezechias his godly abolishing of the high places, the serpent, and such
other things as were idolatrously abused by the Israelltes. He alone I say
without a council, reuoketh that which the council had commanded. Pope
Paschalis the first succeeding this Steven, had not the consent of the
emperor, and therefore sent his ambassadors unto the emperor Lodouike, to
excuse the matter, and to make him believe, that he was forced by the clergy
and people to take the popedom on him. The emperorbeing of a very mild nature,
yet willing to retain that privilege willed them not afterward to inform the
emperors authority, but to keep in their election the decrees of their
elders. Now the emperor being forced for the repression of some that rebelled
against him, to send Lotharius his son into Italy there to remain: Paschalis
the pope invested the said Lotharius in the empire. But he being gone to his
father into France for greater aid, some of his most trusty friends, were in
the mean time killed even in the palace of Lateran, Rioche Compe^, temporum.
their eyes first put out, only because they were fast and faithful to
Lotharius. The pope was commonly supposed to be guilty, or at the least to be
acquainted, with this outrageous dealing of the Romans. And although by other
he denied the fact, yet did he acquit them that had done that deed, and
pronounced them that were slain, to have been guilty of treason. But
howsoever it was, the emperor seeing belike the popes wholly bent, to deprive
him utterly of any consent in the election of the pope, does himself yield it
into their hands, making it lawful for the popes to take that place upon them,
being chosen by the clargie and people of Rome, Did. 63. C Ego Ludouicus.
without the emperors consent not long after him comes Nicholas the first,
who seeing the emperor so easily to be chrust from his right, which was even by
the bishop of Rome, The emperor put from their councils by the pope. Did. 96.
C. Vbina^.
in a council given to him in electing of the pope, thought he would incroach
somewhat further, and does wholly debar him, of having any thing, to do, or
being at or in their council, unless it be when matters of faith be in
handling. Did. 28. C. Consulendum.
And further he did decree (to cut his power yet shorter) that no lay man
whatsoever, Did. 28. C. consu^end ^m ^l^^gie not to be judged by lay men.
Funct. An. 885.
should so much as judge of Priests, or enquire how they live. And although
Nicholas the first, durst not as yet go plainly to work, but rather by
crafty means sought to diminish the Emperors power, yet within less than
thirty years after it was decreed, by Adrian the third, that the Emperors
consent should not he regarded, in electing the Bishop of Rome, but the voices
or election of the Clergy, and people therein should be free.

Now by this exemption which the Romans had from the Emperor, that he had
nothing to do in their elections: as they were without fear of his
displeasure, so were they without care of doing in their elections as they
ought, and by that means preferred many unworthy of that place. Wherefore pope
Leo the eight, Did. 63. in Synodo. The emperors tight restored.
in a Synod holden at Rome did decree, that Otho then Emperor, and his
successors after him, should elect, not the pope only, but also the chief
officers of Rome, or bishops, and that only with his consent these must be
counted lawful. And if any shall go about to infringe this decree, he is
excommunicate. If he continue therein, he shall be perpetually banished, or
have extreme punishment. How long this decree was kept which was now by two
Councils at Rome, and by two popes, Adrian the first decreed, and this Leo the
eight confirmed, it is not certain. The Romish shif^ to debar the emperor for
maintaining his right in the elections.
But I am sure that not long after, it was accounted simonie, for any man to
take any bishopric, or benefice, being instituted thereto by any lay man.
And this was especially labored by Hildebrand, as soon as ever he came to
have any thing to do for the popes, that the Emperor or lay men, should have
nothing to do, in the election of the pope. And because already two Councils
had given to the Emperors that authority, they that followed would not
altogether and directly, control the decree of the Councils, but more craftily
they so handle the matter, that by a very general decree, forbidding all lay
men to meddle with elections, or to inttest the clergy, or rather threatening
the clergy, that will receive any ecclesiastical promotion at the hands of
any lay man, they imagine that they annihilate that, which more particularly,
gives to the Emperor that power. And indeed most busy to bring this about,
was Hildebrand, (that firebrand of much mischief) who being pope, (for that
is he that was called Gregory the seventh) it was almost the greatest sin
that a pope could commit, to seek to have his election confirmed by the
Emperor.

But before the time of this Gregory the seventh his papacy, as Pantalcon
reports, Panta. ex blondo.
Clement the second, went also about to debar the people of Rome, for having
any thing to do in electing the Pope. And thus the bishops of Rome, ever
repining and grudging, that the emperor (whose power they feared) might be a
bridle unto them, or rather a deserved scourge for their ungodly life, or any
other lay man, should have any thing to do in their election, at the length
did bring to pass, that neither clergy nor people, Election by Cardinals.
nor emperor should choose the pope: but only such of the clergy as were
called Cardinals. And the first that ever was chosen pope by the Cardinals, was
Gelasius the second. For we read not of any so elected before him. Paschalis
the second (who was next after him) was, Plat in Pasch. 2.
as Platina writes of him, despised of the people, chosen of the clergy,
Plat. in Gelas. 2.
praised of the Cardinals. But of this he says, that he was chosen by
general consent of the Cardinals, and so does Rioche a friar, an
historiographer of our time. Well now the bishop of Rome has shaken off his
yoke, he is now lawless and peerlesse, he plaieth now the part of an untaught
and unruly jade, that having cast his rider, strikes at him with his heels.
For, freeing himself from the emperors government, he goes about to bring
the emperor to be in servitude under him. And therefore first, The emperor
confirmed by the Pope. Plat. in Innoc. 3.
he goes about to confirm the emperors election, as it were not sufficient
without his approbation, as Innocent the third confirmed the election of Otho.
Wherein yet by the way, y^ practice of these prelates is to be noted. A popelike
policy.
For they would commonly intend themselves to meddle, when by reason of some
division, they hoped their taking part would be acceptable. As in this case. For
there was a division about choosing the emperor, some inclining to Frederick,
some to Otho. Acts Romans pontif.
But afterward they came to that boldness that we read that godless wretch
John 22. or 21. as some reckon did excommunicat Jews of Bauaria emperor,
because he took upon him the empire, without the approbation of his holiness:
which was decreed by Clement that was next before him, as Bale out of Marius
alleges. For, although the electours by their election, might give him power
to be King of the Romans, yet could he not now have the name of an Emperor,
but by the pope. And thus we see how upon a sudden, he that but a little
before, could not be pope, but by the approbation of the emperor, is now so
great, as that the emperor can not be emperor, but by his leave. Now having
gotten thus high, his ambition yet had no end, his pride had no measure, his
rage had no bridle. For, as he had now either fraudulently, or violently, or
rather both ways obtained thus much, that he must confirm the emperor before
he might have that title: so did he also take upon him (O intolerable
presumption) soon after, The popes control emperors. Brut, ^ulmen ex Nau^l.
Es^c. 28. ^
to control him even this highest majesty in this world, if he did but write
his name before the pope, as Adrian the fourth did Fred* the second.

Thus we see the pope has set himself in Gods seat, as Tyrus says of her
self, His throne is placed in the clouds, and his nest made very high. Now
what means have they used to clime up into the same? For you must understand,
that impotent affections have driven them forward, so impudently to seek for
this honor. Which if it do not appear, in that which has already bin said:
yet in that that follows, I trust it will be as clear as the noone day. For
many ungodly and unlawful practice they have used, (but what do I give them
such terms, as do nothing express their doings?) Many vile means to get the
papacy
Many detestable and deuilish devises they have had, to intrude themselves into
that seat, and to setle themselves in that throne. Yea I may (I suppose)
boldly affirm, that a man shall not read in any histories, or find in any
records, of any state or sort of men, be they never so profane, that have used
more vile and vilanous ways to obtain their desire, then the popes have done
to mount into that chair. It should not be so I confess, but yet it is so:
The greater is their sin, the more is their shame. No man shall take unto him
any honor and especially so great honor, but he that is called of God as was
Aron. And whosoever does not enter in by the door into the sheepfold, Hebr. 5.
4. None should without calling take any place. Ioh. 10. 1, 10.
but climeth up another way, is but a thief and a robber. And the thief
comes not but to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. God by his prophet
Jeremy does often complain of such prophets, as would run, when they were
not sent, Ier. 14. 13. Ier. 23. 21. Ier. 29. 8.
and would prophecy, although the Lord spoke not to them. And therefore that
which they said unto the people, was but lies, a false vision, and the
deceitfulnes of their own heart. But the true prophets never came but when God
sent them. And therefore they do commonly publish and proclaim their
commission in these words, The word of the Lord came to me, which is more
common in the sermons of the prophets, then that I need to point unto the
particular places. Our Savior Christ, Ioh. 6. 38. Ioh. 1. 19
when he came, was sent of the Father. And for that cause, the Jews sent
priests and Levites to John the Baptist, to know what he was, what calling he
had in the church, and by what authority he did that which he did. And as
Christ himself was sent of the Father, so he sends his Apostles, As my
Father sent me, Ioh. 20. 21.
so send I you. As for Paul who was then a persecuter, when the other Apostles
were sent to preach, yet when Christ purposed to have his service in the
ministry, he called him, and that not strangely only, saying to him from
heaven, Act. 9. 4. 1. Cor. 15. 10.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? but effectually also, insomuch as he
afterward labored more abundantly than they all. Whereby it is plain, that
God would never have the ministry of any in his church, but that he called
them lawfully thereunto. Neither is it enough for a man to know that his
calling is good, I mean his office or function which he takes in hand,
unless he have within him the testimony of his own conscience to assure
him, that he is called to that function, not only by the outward calling
lawfully, but also by the inward calling of the spirit effectually. And this is
the meaning of those Canonists, (who otherwise are shameless in flattering the
pope) who dare thus affirm, Bald. In 6. l. Impetrata C. Sententiam rescindi
non posse. Number. ^
as does Bald. The pope (says he) being chosen according to the canons, is a
God upon earth, but not being chosen canonically, is a devil, not having the
keis of the kingdom of heaven, but of hell. And as Felinus says, ^elin. in l.
4. de iureiuran. extra in principio. Did. 79 C. Si quis pecunia. Plat. in
Nico^.
he is not apostolical, but apostaticall: which words Felinus has borrowed
out of Gratian his decrees, and Gratian out of pope Nicholas the second. For
pope Nicholas having deposed pope Benedict the tenth, who as he alleges came
in by symony, called a council at Laterane, and does there ordain, that he
shall be accounted apostaticall, and not apostolical, who by money, favor of
men, tumult of the people, or of the soldiers, or by any other way then by the
agreeing, and canonical election, of the cardinals, is made pope. We see then
what manner of election there should be. What manner of elections they have,
and after what sort they come to be popes it is now to be declared, which shall
be performed God willing out of ancient histories: that the world may see, not
what Luther or Calvin, or any of us in these our days, do say of their
wicked practices, but what has been spoken and written of them, that by
violence and intrusion, have entered into that seat.

Platina himself (no Lutheran) tells us that when Damasus was chosen pope,
Plat. in Damaso.
there was a great schism in the church: for one Vrsicinius, Li. 4. oist. c.
29 li. 6. cap. 23.
or as Socrates calls him Vrsinus or as Sozomen in his ecclesiastical
history calls him Vrsatius being at that time in election, got himself to
be made pope, by the means of his friends.

And whilst neither of them would give place to the other, but both desired
that place, they fell first to words, and after words to blows, in such sort,
that even in the church many were slain on both sides (some say to the number
of one hundred thirty seven. And as there was no regard of the place (for
this inocent blod was shed in the church) so neither spared they the very women
or any sex. Hieron. in cron.
The disorder was so notorious, as that Maximinus at that time governor of the
city, did for the same put to death many both of the laity, and of the
clargie also.

How shall we find here the agreeing or consenting election that before I
have spoken of, Socrat. hist. eccl. li. 4. ca. 62.
where we see such not dissenting in words only, but also such disorder in
blows, yea blood, by striving to get into that glorious chair? Not long after
Boniface the first being chosen by some to be pope, Plat. in Bonif. 1. Sigeb.
Crou.
another sort did choose in another church of Rome, another pope, one Eulalius.
And so little agreement there was in that election, nay so great dissension and
so much discord afterward, that Honorius the emperor for fear of greater
inconvenience, was forced to turn them both out of the city. ^as^ie. tempor.
Afterward when Symachus was by some chosen pope, other did choose one
Laurence: Plat. in Sy^. Bergom.
the contention was very great, and made a very great division between the
senators of Rome, and the people also.

Theodoricus then being King of the east Goths, and at this time ruler in
Italy, A king makes a pope.
placed Symachus pope. But within four years after, this Laurence seeking to
displace Symachus, and to be pope as before he would have been, Theodorick
sent one Peter a bishop to to displace them both, and to sit in that chair
himself. Simachus found means that both Laurence and Peter, were condemned to
be banished. Whereupon there was amongst them a great slaughter, wherein
neither virgins nor priests were spared as the stories report. Yea some
report, namely Rioch a papist, Rioche.
a friar, and a late writer, that this sedition and murder continued three
years, between him that was, and that other that would have been pope.
Neither was Boniface the second chosen pope by a consonant consent, Plat. in
Bonif. ^.
but great contention there was for eight and twenty days, fascic. tempor.
or as some write for eight and thirty days: until at length by the death of
Dioscorus (who was chosen by a contrary faction) the strife was ended.

Sergius the first was also chosen very hardly, as writes Bergomates,
Bergomates fascicul. tempor.
and as an other story says, in his election, there was great dissension. For
some would have Paschalis, other would choose Theodore. But the governor of the
city and of the soldiers, A pope made by the governor.
to pretient further mischief, did appoint Sergius to be pope. Constantine the
second of that name, was by force put into that seat, Bergomates Stella.
by the help of Desiderius king of Lombardy, and others: who bringing to Rome
an army made him pope, being a mere lay man, A lay man made pope.
and not having taken any orders before. But perchance they will readily
except against him, because that Platina and others account him not in the
number of popes.

It is true that Platina does not reckon him amongst the Popes, although he
was in that place more than a year. But it seemed that they did not call in
question his manner of choosing (for that had been a thing grown very common
before, not to have consent of them that used to choose them) but as Platina
reports, is was objected unto him, that he not having taken order, Plat. in
Steph. 3.
was content to take upon him to be pope, when he answered that the people
forced him thereto, the council seemed to pity him. But when the next day he
defended himself, by the examples of Sergius who was made archbishop of
Rauenna, and Stephan bishop of Naples, being mere lay men, then they were
angry at him, and proceeded against him. Because therefore we see not any
mislike that they had of him, but only that he was not within orders: I see
not but that he may well enough be reckoned among them, that by violence
possessed that seat, Bargom. fascic. tempor.
and therefore not lawfully. What should I speak of Eugenius the second, that
in a schism was made pope? Or of Martin the second, (whom Oniforus calls
Marius) who by evil means came to be pope, and as Platina seems to report,
by moving sedition against John the ninth. Blat. in M. 2.
Whether he were suspected of the death of the said John or not I know not.
Abbas Vrsp.
But the Abbat of vrsperg reports that the pope had poison given him and also
a blow with a beetle or mall, whereof he died.

Now whether these be the evil means whereof the histories speak, by which
pope Martin came to be pope I cannot affirm. But many popes have used as had
means as afterward (God willing) shall appear. Not long after pope
Christopher, Platina Bergomat. Rioche.
thought it was too long before he could get into that proud set. For fear
therefore lest he might go quite without it, if he quickly got it not, he
traitorously moved sedition against pope Leo the fifth, that made great account
of him, and took the said Leo when he had been pope but forty days, and so
got into the place, as Rioche affirms by contention, and evil means. But
now these Romish rabbis I would have to open me one riddle. Platina having
set down this history learneth by this experience that it is most true,
Platina in Leo. 5.
that dignities are rather dignified or commended by men, then men by them. As
the Censorship (says he) of Rome at the first as a mean office, was nothing
set by, but when the chief men of the city, took that office upon them, then
the greatest citizens thought themselves almost unhappy, if in their life they
inioied not that office. What Platina means by this I cannot tell, unless he
thinks the bishop of Rome at the first, was not in such estimation or account
as afterwads he grew to. But that so it was I have before declared. For from
mean beginning he is now grown to be a captions controler of the greatest
princes. And this (as it seems) Platina thinks to be the reason, why the
bishopric of Rome (which was perchance in the beginning not worth suing for)
was afterward by so great contention and fighting sought for. And so men have
dignified that seat, and not that seat the men. And the place has gotten
authority by the bishops, not the bishops by the place. Which in my judgment
does somewhat overthwart that fullness of power, and that continual spring of
spiritual graces, which they would make us believe, flows from that chair
and that power which they say it has from Christ himself.

Next after Christopher comes Sergius the third. Rioche. fascic. tempor.
He displaced Christopher by the help of Lotharuis the king and sat in his
place and cast him into prison. Now how himself was made pope, Platina can
tell you, who says that he persecuted Formosus his faction, Platina in Serg.
by whom he was before hindered, from being pope (for he thought he waited to
long for so good a place.) And thereupon Platina comparing the popes then, with
the first that were, finds them nothing like. For in times past, they refused
that place being offered unto them. But now says he, they seek it by
briberie, and ambition, and evil means. They gave themselves to prayer, and
to teach. These not regarding Gods service give themselves to tyranous
cruelty, that after they may the more freely fulfill their lusts, when no man
dare control the^. Thus says Platina of them. Not long after comes John the
eleventh a worthy prelate for such a place. He was bastard son to pope
Laudo, how holy his ellection was, Bale ex Petro Premonstratens.
how canonically he was chosen is worth the hearing. Theodora a shameless
harlot, that ruled all Rome, was greatly in love with this John, as soon as
she saw him. And she having for a time inioyed his company and liking well
of the same, first made him bishop of Bondnia, after archbishop of Raue^^a, and
lastly bishop of Rome, and was not this think you a canonical election. But
whether this harlot Theodore did violently place this pope (which especially
belongs to my matter in hand) or that she by favor obtained consent of the
electours, it is not certain. But by lawful means, it is certain he came not
to it. There was also another pope John after him, thrust into that rowme, who
although he be not numbered among the popes, yet because he was bastard son to
pope Sergius the third, he is worth speaking of, in respect of the good
stock he came of. Therefore Theodora that famous harlot, had a daughter married
to Guy Marquis of Thuscia, her name was Marozia. Who following the good
conditions of her mother, by pope Sergius had a bastard, whom she and her
husband (having dispatched pope John the eleventh by stopping his mouth with a
pillow) made pope, and he was called John the twelfth. Thus did Marozia kill
her mothers paramour, that she might make her husbands bastard son (by pope
Sergius) pope in his room. And thus we see how this seat, wherein they will
make us believe, that none can sit but most holy fathers, is become a den for
most profane and godless ruffians and rakehels.

John the twelfth by the their own account, Rioche fasci, t^m, ^ergom.
was also intruded into that place, by means of his father, who was thought to
be Albert, or Albericke king of Italy. But howsoever he came to it, he when
he was in it, was such a ruffianly companion, and so vicious, as that it is
written, that even from his youth he was stark naught, and was not ashamed
openly to keep harlots. So youthful he was, that in him began that by-worde,
As merry as pope John. He came of a good race. For Marozia (of whom before I
spoke) was his grandmother, Act. Roman, pontif.
And as his entrance was not good, so yet his going out was too bad: for some
say the devil killed him even in his adultery, being in bed with an other
man's wife: Fasciul. temp. Bergom. Rioche.
some affirm it was the woman's husband, but that he was killed even in his
filthiness, all agree. And was not this a holy Father? Neither did Boniface
the seventh get into this seat the right way, but malis artibus, by evil
means, as all stories almost speak.

And of the popes that were about this time does the story Plat. fascicul.
temp.
called Fasciculus temporum give this note, That in these days the bishops of
Rome were slain, Platina. fascicul temp. Popes murdered, but not mar^ired.
as well as in the primitive Church, but yet they are not Martyrs, as were the
other. Their deaths were like, but the cause unlike. And of this pope Boniface
the seventh many stories report, A pope, a thief.
that he committed theft, and sacrilege, stealing from Saint Peter's Church,
all the Treasure and Jewels, and sold them at Constantinople, to make money
thereof, wherewith he procured some friendship at his return, with more
safety to sit in that proud seat.

Among these also, Rioche.
may Gregory the fifth be reckoned, who for favor of the Emperor was made
pope, or as Platina says, by the othoritie of Otho the Emperor, and as
Fasciculus temporum says, at his request, Bergomates says the Emperor did
will and command him to take it upon him. Benedict the ninth entered unjustly,
fascicul. temp.
and fearing that he could not keep the papacy, he sold it to John the
Archdeacon. But of him I must speak after Siluester the third was intruded
either by Symonie or ambition, Rioche.
or for hatred of Benedict the ninth.

Benedict the tenth entered by force and briberie. B^rgom.
As for Gregory the tenth, how canonicallie he was chosen, it may be seen by
the old verses that were made of his election, whereby it appears that the
discord of the brethren, made him (who was an Archdeacon before) father of
fathers. For the place (I meana the popedom) was now so much desired, and so
ambitiouslie sought for, that the Cardinals many times, would for a long time
be divided, and could not agree about the choosing of the holy father.

As immediately after the death of Innocent the fourth, Rioche,
and also after the death of Clement the fourth, they dissented almost two full
years at either time, before they could agree of one. And this latter time
doubtless they had stayed longer, but that for shame they were forced to
choose one, because Philip the French king, and Charles were they present.

So likewise, before Nicholas, the 3. could he chosen, the cardinals were
divided 6. Rioche.
months, and he being dead, the 2. families of ye Vrsins and Annibals, did for
5. mo^ths space make such a breach among them, as that they could not agree of
any. And before Celestine the fifth could be chosen pope, the cardinals
disagreed two years and three months, or, as other say, two years and six
months. Bergomate^ fascicul. tempor.
And when he was chosen Bergomates says, it was in scorn and disdain of
Nicholas that was next before him. And indeed his simplicity is said to be
such, by all yt write of him, that themselves could not be ignorant, that he was
not likely, to be the fittest for that place. After the death of Benedict the
eleventh the cardinals were more then a whole year before they could choose
an other. fascicu. tempor. Rioche. Elections in worldly respects.
For they did not seek to choose the fittest, but some desired to have an
Italian, yt would be friendly to Boniface his friends. Other would have one
that should be friendly to the French King. Thus we see how in their election,
they maintained a faction. And at the last by favor of the French king, and at
his request, Rioche.
was Clement the fifth. Next after Clement the fifth comes John the two and
twentieth. The cardinals having been divided two years and three months,
when they could not agree of any, they gave power to him, to name him that
should be pope. But he contrary to their expectation, did name or choose
himself, and so was made pope. How canonically he was chosen let the Reader
judge. Because others would not, Bergomates Stella.
he set himself in that seat. And so did John the three and twentieth: for
lying at Bononia, more like a lord then a legate, and having with him a great
army, he threatened the cardinals to be even with them, unless they chose such
a one as he liked of. They naming sundry, he would like of none. Then they
desired him to tell them whom he would have. Bring me, says he, Peter's
cloak, and I will give it to him that shall be pope. They did so. He cast it
upon his own shoulders and said, I am pope. I omit to speak of the great
schism and contention that was for the papacy, that began between Clement
the seventh and Urban the sixth, fascicul. tempor.
which continued 39. years, Fasciculus temporum says 40. which also was
occasion of great bloodshed among christians. Wherein christendom was so
divided, that the most godly and learned did not know which was that pope,
whom they might acknowledge for the head of the church. In what a distressed
case was the church at that time, when it imagined, it must needs have a pope
for a head, and could not tell where to have him: De authorie. council li. 2.
cap. 19. The church some time headless.
for a doubtful pope is no pope says master Bellarmine. As also before I have
showed that many times there was no pope for many months, yea sometimes for
some years, because the cardinals could not agree among themselves. Yea after
Nicholas the first there was no pope as some say for eight years and almost
eight months: Platina. Jacob. Bergom.
how then did the church for want of a head.

Thus have I briefly run over many of them, whom in ancient histories I find
by fighting or force, or other hard means to have intruded themselves, or else
by contention and strife to have been placed by other in the popedom. And not
one that so climeth up by the window, can be said lawfully to be chosen to the
same.

But as these by force, so by falshoode other came to the same. Platina.
Vigilius was made pope at the earnest suite of Theodora the empress, with
this promise, that when he was made pope, he would revoke Anthemius, making
him again the patriarch of Constantinople, and displace Menas a godly bishop.
Now Anthemiu was an Eutychian, and so did defend, that there was in Christ but
one nature. True it is, that he being made pope would not perform that
promise, wherein he did well. But if he had not by such subtle shifts sought
to be pope he had done better. But it seems, howsoever he afterward
constantly refused to do that evil (perchance being put in mind of his
offense by Siluerius) yet he had a very ambitious mind, and sought long
before to have been pope, Epist. Silver. Tom. council. 2. in principio. Bergom.
Platina.
as appears by a letter that Siluerius the pope his next predecessor wrote
unto him. Wherein he charge him, that contrary to the Canons he sought to be
successor unto Boniface.

Martine also the second, a proud pope and ambitious, by moving trouble to
John his predecessor, and getting him cast in prison, thought (perchance) the
sooner to get into that place. But howsoever it was, it is written of him, that
by evil and indirect means he came to that place, and by craft or deceit (as
Bale writes.)

As for Honorius the second, Platina tells us how he came to that seat.

For Leo Breake-bread, a great man in Rome ( Calixtus the second being dead)
gave charge unto the Cardinals, Platina. Act. Rom pontif.
not to be too hasty to choose a pope, but that they should tarry three days,
to consider more deliberately of the matter, and to peruse the Canons. He
endeavored in the mean time to procure the place to one Lambert bishop of
Ostia. The Cardinals perceiving his subtlety, did choose one whom they called
Celestine. The people were very desirous to have a Saxon the cardinal of S.
Steven, and also the said Break-bread, seemed willing to have the same, the
rather to get the people to be favorable to him whom he would have, seeing
the Cardinals had chosen one, against their mind. And by this subtlety of
Breake-bread was Honorius made pope. Friar Rioche says, perchance Honorius
was not consenting to this canuasing to make him pope. Whether he were or not
it makes no great matter. I look not now, what the parties are, but whether
the election were lawful, the choice free, and with willing consent, and how
he entered. But Platina himself misliketh the election.

I had almost forgotten Boniface the eight, Platina. Bergom, Rioche.
a man as well worthy to be remembered, for his subtle dealing, to get Rome
for him to sit in the popes seat, as any other. For he caused a man secretly to
hide himself in the chamber of ( elestine the fifth, who was a very seellie
simple man, who in the night time, should, as if he were an Angel sent from
God to instruct him, admonish pope Celestine, if he would be saved, to give
over the papacy. Celestine not mistrusting any falshoode, but thinking it was
a voice from God himself, gave over the papacy. Urban the sixth likewise was
thus chosen, Jacob. Bergom.
and The people required an Italian pope. The Cardinals to please the people,
promised to do what they could, and asking advise of one Bartholomew bishop of
Bar, he gave counsel that they should choose one for the present, to pacify
them, that they might have the name. And then going to another place, they
should choose another, that should be pope in deed. Whereupon they chose him to
be pope in name. Which when they had done he kept it in deed. And therefore
Stella and others, ^uic. l. 20. in fine
call him crafty. But in craft Paul the third was not inferior to any, who
(as is reported by Francis Guicciardine a papist too in his history of Italy)
that the Cardinals might be the more willing to choose him to be pope, in hope
that he would soon be dead, did by art iucrease the opinion of weakness,
which by reason of his age, (for he was lxvii. years old) they had conceived
of him. But for all his feigned weakness, he lived pope more then xv. years.
A longer time then commonly the popes of these latter times are suffered to
live.

An other kind of cunning also there is, Popes chosen by symony and briberie.
when by bribery and gifts they will buy, that which their desert can never
procure unto them. And this symonicall subtlety, was sometime their ladder,
whereby they must climb up into that chair, which is set higher, then they
otherwise would be able to get into. Platina writes that Formosus g^t to be
pope by bribery rather then virtue. Platina.
But what speak I of Formosus, Bergomates and Stella, writing upon Romanus
that was pope soon after Formosus, do show the practice of popes of those
times to get the popedom. Bergom. Stella.
For of Romanus they say, that he came not to it by ambition, and briberie, as
did many of the popes of those days. I have spoken before of Boniface the
seventh, who stole the treasure, and most precious jewels out of S. Peter's
church, that he might be the better able to bride, as all stories report. As
for Benedict the ninth if he sold the popedom, Gregory the sixth bought it.
In deed Platina and other do say, that he sold it, or gave it over, let the
indifferent reader judge whether is more likely that he did. Sigeb. Cron.
But Sigebert does psaiulie say, that this Benedict was a Symoniacke, or got
the popedom by simonie. And in Eusebius his Chronicle it is written, Eusebius.
cron.
that Theophylact (belike that was Benedicts name) did sell the Papacy to John
a Priest. And this bargaining and badde dealing made plenty of Popes at this
good time. For some write, that Henry the Emperor deposed at this time five
Popes, and made a sixth.

And that the world may see how good choice they made. It is written that one
of them ( Sigebert says Benedict, but Fasciculus temporu^ says Gregory the
sixth) was so unlearned, that he was feign to get one chosen to say Mass, and
play the Pope in the church, Fascic. tempot.
while himself might play the pope abroad. Now I pray you which of these popes
was the head of the church: the praying pope, or the playing pope.

The church that has so bad heads must needs be sick of the headache, Esaias
19. 14.
and troubled with a frenzy, or gidi^es, as indeed the Romish church is. For
it would not otherwise so manifestly oppose it self against Christ, as it
does. By what means Clement the third came to be pope I cannot tell. But
Richard the first king of England, Act. and Mon. Anno 1190. Mat. Paris.
made a great complaint of the pope, and his court for their symonie. And
Matthew of Paris reports, how he emptied the bags, and lightened the cariages
of John the bishop of Norwich, who sought to him to be dispensed withal for a
vow (as it seems) that he had made, to go to the holy land. But of that
kind of symonie, that author complains bitterly, in many places, against
many popes. I might also speak of the evil entrance of Julius the second, who
by his great power which men feared, Guic. hist. Ital. N. 6.
and his bribes that he gave, and promises of bishoprics and such other
promotions which he made, got to be pope, although otherwise a man for sturdie
and surly nature loved of none, misliked of all. But let us see what other
means they have, when violence, craft, and simonie, will not serve. They have
an Italian fig, to hasten them that are popes to give place to them that
would be.

It is reported by the writers of histories, Platina^ Rioche.
that Damasus the second sent such a hasty messenger, to call away Clement the
second, his predecessor. For he thought he tarried too long, and yet he stayed
in that seat scarce nine months. A little before Clement, was John the
ninteenth sommoned in such sort, when he had been pope little more then three
months. bale act. Romans pontif.
But for Clement Benno the cardinal writes that he was rather poisoned by
Brazutus that godless wretch and that Heldebrand that firebrand of much
mischief, ben. de vita and gestis Hildeb.
procured to do many such feats. For within thirteen years, he poisoned six
popes, Clement the second Damasus the second, Leo the ninth, Victor the second,
Steven the tenth, and Nicolas the second. So that if any but Gregory were
chosen this Gerard Brazutus was ready straight way to give him a drink that
did them little good. So that poisoning seems at that time, to be but a
popelike practice, De pontif. Romans ^. 5. cap. 13.
if we will believe Cardinal Benno. But master Bellarmine endeavors as much
as he can, to impair the credit of that history. And to that end he gathers
all that he can find out of other histories, bellar. object. against benno.
either in disprayse of Henry the fourth the emperor, against whom pope
Gregory the seventh did undutifully and unchristianly oppose himself. And also
picketh out all the praises of Gregory the seventh, to make him seem another
manner of man, then Benno reports him to be. Answer.
But Benno lived in the time of Gregory and therefore he could be an
eye-witnes of many things. He was a cardinal and therefore by likelihood,
howsoever he misliked of the doings of the man, yet he would not untruely
report any thing, that might be a stain to that church. But if he had written
any thing falsely, it is not to be thought, but that some or other
historiographer of those times, would have proved that cardinal Benno had but
slaundered, and would have written against him. Which master Bellarmine has
not showed there. And therefore that which he has said does only prove, that
the emperor had his faults, and that the writers of those times, would rather
lay the cause of Gregory's immoderate pride and tyranny upon the wicked doings
of the emperor, then upon the proud and unruly affections of the pope. Pope
Alexander the sixth a sea and sincke of sin, and as it were nothing but a
mass of wickedness, was belike very skillful in this trick. Guic. hist.
Ital. li. 1.
And yet I never heard that ever he poisoned any popes, but one only, and that
was himself. He came to be pope as other in those days, by indirect and evil
means. For he bought with money, and obtained, by promising the promotions that
he was possessed of unto others their voices, and so was made pope. Though he
was of so bad disposition, as that Ferdinand king of Naples (though he were
never seem to weep, at the death of any of his children) when he heard that he
was chosen pope, wept, and with tears said to his wife, that he would be a
great enemy not to Italy only, but eue^ to al christendom. And thus does
Guicciardine and Italian describe him that there was in that man no sincerity,
A popelike man.
shame, truth, faith, religion: but insaciableauarice, immoderate ambition,
more then barbarous cruelty, a most earnest desire to advance by any means
his children that were not few, and some of them as bad as their father. Is not
this think you a popelike prelate? Did not the cardinals that sold their
voices, to make him pope, find out a holy father to sit in that chair? And
such are, O ye papists, such are too too many of the heads of your church of
Rome, of later years. But to return. For I have a little disgressed to show
his canonical entrance, and his popelike virtues. If he entered not by
poysening, yet he did practice it very much. And he had a son Valentine a
bastard as he had many (six children in all Platina speaks of) who was
first made cardinal by his father, Guic. hist. Ita, l. 6
yet afterward he turned his cote, and became a duke. His father and he
minding to sup in a garden (where the son also purposed to poison Adrian a
cardinal, that ought the garden) this Valentine sent thither bottels of
poisoned wine, with charge that none should drink thereof, before himself
came. But the pope his father being dry, called for wine. And because none was
brought from the popes pallice, Valentines servant, gives to the p^pe of that
wine, thinking his master had forbidden that any should drink thereof, because
it was some principal wine. As the pope was drinking, his son Valentine
comes in, his father gives to him of the same wine. The father died of the
same. We may note in him Gods just judgment. For the pope and his son did
use to poison many, A pope a poisoner poisoned by his son.
not so much for revenge, or in respect of their safety, to dispatch so their
enemies (although even that is but a cowardly vilanie) but to get their goods,
although they never wronged them. As the rich cardinal of Saint Angelo. Yea
even their dearest friends, if they were rich they would serve so, as they did
the cardinals of Capua, and Mantua. But that kind of death that they had
brought many unto, the pope himself then tasted of, and the son very hardly
escaped, but his being sick at that time was a marvelous overthrow of his
estate. Yea we see how they that were conspirers together, to poison many, did
now show their skill, one upon another. The son poisoning the father, for he
sent the poisoned bottels. The father and son poison one another.
And the father poisoning the son, for he gave him poison to drink. And so
where some other by poisoning their predecessors made room for themselves:
Alexander the sixth, by poisoning himself made room for another. And if they
think none of these practices sure enough, then will they fall down and
worship him, who when he had showed Christ all the kingdoms of the world,
Matthew. 4. 8, 9.
and the glory thereof, he said to him, (though they are not his to give) all
these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Platina.
Platina himself (who is loath to speak the woorst by Popes, unless the truth
thereof be so plain, that it cannot well be denied) reports of Siluester
the second, that he gave himself to the devil, upon condition the devil
would make him Pope. Must it not needs be a good head of the Church, that is
of the devils own choosing?

Cardinal Benno writes the like also of John the ninteenth, Ben. de gest. Hill.
who came next after Siuester, and of Benedict the 9, who as he says, was by
the devil choked in a wood. But I of purpose let pass many of these examples.
For I have been much longer then I had purposed, in these practices of the
popes, to get into this chair. If I should come to the election of popes in
these our times is it not as easy to see, as the sun at noon day, that there
is almost none chosen to that seat, but by favor, briberie, suite, or to
please and pleasure some princes, or in respect of some faction? Is not this
the special care that they have in their elections, who is fittest to
maintain their own pride, and most likely to serve their own turn? Are all
their popes chosen now canonically, without respect of any thing, but to choose
the fittest? If the greatest friends that the Romish church has, were so
shameless that they would say so, yet their own heart within them, would tell
them that they lie. Well then, if to be thrust into that place by others, or
to intrude themselves, if to get it by fighting and brawling, by poisoning and
killing, by bitter contention and strife, by craft and falsehood, by briberie
and gifts, by murdering and mischief: To be short, if to climb into it by
help of the devil, and by such horrible wickedness, as Christian ears
cannot well endure to hear, be to enter in at the door, and to be chosen
canonically, then we will confess that mame of the popes have entered well.
But if this be to come as a thief, and a murderer, then what means the
church of Rome, so to ^^ag of their succession, which even by their own laws
(set down a little before) has so often, and so notoriously been
interrupted? What mean these factours and brokers for Simon Magus, that briber
and sorcerer, to vauat themselves, to be successuors to Simon Peter? These are
such heads, as the church of Rome can afford us. These are they, that we must
call most holy fathers. These, even these are they that cannot err, if you
will trust the church of Rome. And yet in all that they do, there is nothing
but erring, out of the right way. They are like men, that pretending to shoot
at a mark, turn their back of it, and shoot the clean contrary way. And
as they are content to use any means be it never so unlawful, to get into
that seat, so when they are gotten once into it, they are become lawless and
shameless, as by some examples shall be showed. Honorius the third, did very
sawcely oppose himself against the emperor Frederick the second (as also did
some other of his fellows) and did excommunicate him and deprived him of his
imperial dignity. Plat. in Honor. 3. Act. Romans pont. in Honor. 3.
And Bale tells us that the cause why the pope dealt so hardly with him, was
for that he defended his own right in Apulia and Cicily. And out of Marius he
reports, that the pope did maintain and cherish, certain of the emperors
rebels and seditious subjects so that the emperor, could not punish them as
they deserved. The names of those traiters were Matthew and Thomas, who kept
from him forceably some of his castles and possessions, Abbas Vrsperg. in
freder. 2.
whom when the emperor had subdued they fled to the pope: who entertained
those traiters against their lord and master. Whereof because (as he had great
cause) he complained it seems that hereupon he did excommunicate him. But
Gregory the ninth that came next after him, was far more cruel then he against
the emperor, continuing the sentence of excommunication against him, which
Honorius had pronounced, Plat. in Greg. 9
upon pretense that al his commandment, he did not go to the holy land.
Neither could any reasonable excuse serve to mitigate the mad mood of that
Luciferian pope against the emperor. For by the emperors letters, the
contents whereof are to be seen in Abbas Vrspergensis, and in Matthew of Paris,
it appears that the emperor was sick, in so much as having undertaken the
journey, by reason of his sickness, he was forced to return again. But it is
plain enough to them that mark the sequel, that the pope did but pick a
quarrel against the emperor, that he might invade his possessions. The
emperor seeing this saucie pope, so cruely and couetously bent against him,
consulted with some of the Romans (with such I say as were of principal
account among them) how he might bind the people of Rome, to acknowledge
themselves to be his subjects, which he brought to pas. Then the pope sent
forth against the emperor, another thundercracke of excommunication. For which
his insolent fact, the pope by the people was forced to flee out of Rome. And
durst not return in two years. Now the emperor to please the pope went to
the holy land as they call it. But the pope does now show himself to have had
no other meaning, in sending him to fight for the holy land, 2. Sam. 1^.
then David had, when he commanded Ioab to place Vriah in the strength of the
enemies battle, and that he and his people should flee, leaving Vriah to be
slain of the enemy. So the pope commanded the emperor (the saucy servant
his lord and master) to fight against ye Turk. But to what end? Had he any
true zeal against Gods enemies? Had he a sincere heart, and unfeigned
affection, to increase the kingdom of Christ, no no. It seems he much more
desired the destruction of the emperor and intruding himself into his
dominions, then the recovering of the holy land. For the emperor being at
Acon, having passed according to the popes pleasure, into that land to fight
against the Turk: the pope by all means possible did stay his soldiers, and
such as were to pass over to aid the emperor, and fight in that quarrel, not
suffering them to go. And now the emperor being where the pope would have
him, he (the pope I mean) bestows huge masses of money, in hiring of soldiers
to invade the emperors dominion, stirring up the traitors before mentioned
Matthew and Thomas against him, and so subdueth to himself that which belonged
to the emperor. What a godles and shameless part was this, by excommunications
to force the emperor, under pretense of holy war, to leave his dominions,
and then most wrongfully to invade the same? And when the emperor being there,
had made an honorable peace between the Christians and the Sultan, having
gotten restitution of certain things, that the Sultan had won, he of his good
nature wrote unto the pope, to certify him of these news, which he thought,
would have bin joyful to al christians. But that proud priest, as he had
before contemptuously refused to hear, or admit into his presence the
emperors ambassadors, The pope a shameless liar.
so did he now reject his letters, and cast them from him. he also caused it
to be published abroad that the emperor was dead, thinking thereby the rather
to discourage the emperors faithful subjects, and to make them yield unto
him. And to the end that this lying report should not be crossed, A murderer.
Act. Romans pontif. in Greg. 9.
the pope caused the messengers that brought the letters to be killed. Thus we
see how Gods vicar beyond all shame, and without all show of reason does
wholly oppose himself against Gods ordinance, namely the emperor. These
things are largely set down by Abbas Vrsp. before named, but especially by
Matthew of Paris, who in a letter written to Richard earl of Cornwall by
Frederick the emperor of the report of all the popes dealing with the said
emperor, Matthew Paris. Hen. 3. fol. 676. The causes of the popes hatred
againsit the emperor fol. 673.
shows the principal cause of all this malice that the pope had against him,
was, because he refused to permit the pope to set down order concerning
Lumbrardy: for the pope desired to have that matter compromitted to him simply,
without any exception or reservation of any right to himself. Which if the
emperor would have yielded unto, and so have lost Lumbardy, as there the
emperor does testify, he might have won the Popes favor. For he promised
him faithfully (if the faith of a Pope be any thing worth) that he would not
only do nothing against him, but he would also give unto him toward he
maintenance of his wars, the tenth of all christendom. The pope also would
feign have bestowed a niece of his upon the emperors son Henry, Paris. 1107.
which because the emperor would not hearken unto (for his nobles took scorn
that the pope should make that offer) for this and the other cause before
alleged, the pope misliking the emperor, did pick all quarrels against him
and did thrice excommunicate him, In Greg. 9.
and as John Bale out of this Mat. Paris allegeth, did promise eternal life to
al them that would fight against the emperor. As if so cursed a creature had
it to bestow at his pleasure: or as if rebellion against Gods ordinance might
look for so good and great a recompense.

I might enter into a large and wide field of the notorious o^stinacie and
unlawful dealing which sundry of the popes have used against their lords and
emperors. But I have staid somewhat long in this example, because it appears
by the stories, that as their dealing against him was lewd and cruel, so the
cause was their own private matters, which carried them with an vndrideled
affection to do whatsoever they could mischieuously devise, if they had power
to put it in execution, not regarding what impiety they committed against God,
or what wrong against man, or what disgrace the brought to themselves, an their
place, so they might work their will. The vexation against the emperor Henry
the fourth.
What should I here speak of the great troubles that Gregory the 7, Victor
the 3, Urban the 3, and Paschal the 2 wrought against Henry the 4 the emperor
excommunicating him, discharging his subjects of their obedience they ought to
him, yea stirring up unnaturally his own natural son against him? How rude
and savage cruelty was that which Gregory the seventh that unmannerly fellow,
showed unto the emperor at the town called Canusium, Greg. 7. his barbarous
pride.
when he made the emperor, that was willing to submit himself (being by
extremity forced thereto) to wait at his gates, three days continually in the
extremity of a sharp winter, Sleid. de mon. l. ^ Rioche cempend. histor.
barefoote and bare legged, without meat or drink, and would not admit that
great monarch to his speech. The fourth day, with much ado, by the entreaty of
a gentlewoman (who could do somewhat with the pope) and at the suite of some
others, his holiness forsooth was content he should be admitted unto his
presence. And though this ye emperor his submissio^ was such, as was thought
too lowly and abject by the nobles of Italy, insomuch as they purposed to
depose Henry the fourth from the empire, Sleid. de mon. l. ^
as bringing a stain to the same, by his over humble yielding unto the popes
excessive pride: yet could it not satisfy the pope. For he notwithstanding all
that the emperor had done, purposed to bestow the empire upon Rafe ^. of
Sweueland. And therefore sent to him the crown emperial with this verse written
about it: The Rock to Peter this crown gave,
And Peter bids that Rafe it have.


This Henry that was most villainously abused, by that proud beast and his
successors, is he of whom Paulus Langius brings the testimony of Otho
Frisingensis, that he was the first emperor of Rome that he could find
(although he marked diligently in reading) that ever was excommunicated, or
deprived of his kingdom by the bishop of Rome. ^geb. Cron. anno 1088.
For, as Sigebertus says, this only new doctrine, I will not call it hereste
(says he) was not yet bred, that the priests should teach the people, that
unto wicked kings they owe no subjection. Yea, though they have sworn
fidelity to them, yet they owe them no fidelity, neither that they are not to
bet called perjured, that stand against the king, but whosoever obeys the
king, is to be accounted an excommunicate person: but he that is against himlis
absolved from all fault and perjury. If Sigebert had lived in our times, what
would he have said, when he should see this new heresy, not only stiffely
and stubbornly, yet slenderly and very unlearnedly maintained for catholic
doctrine, The answer to english justice cap. 4.
by that unnatural traitor Allen and his fellows, and a new practice also
agreeable thereunto put in bre and highly commended, to poison, shoot, or by
any means to kill, such as the popes will say are heretics (as all are that
will not stoop under his yoke.) Well, about 500. years since, it was new heresy
(for it is very near so long since Sigebert did write.) And therefore it is
not that poor proof of Tho^ of Aquine, a man that lived in the days of
corruption, or of Francis of Toledo, some seditious papist of our time, or of
that late Council of Lateran, not much above 300. years since, that can make
it a Catholic doctrine. But to end this story of Henry the fourth, Paschalis
who was not long after Gregory, did not only prosecute the matter with all
extremity, against he said Emperor whilst he was alive, as did Gregory
before him: Malice against the emperor being dead. ^rant. li. 5. c. 24. Abbas
Vriperg. (...). 1106.
but even after he was dead, they who for good will, and that common duty that
we owe to them that are departed, did bury him, could never have peace or
favor of pope Paschalis the second, until they had taken up his body, and
cast it into the fields. Is not this popelike charity? Is not this devilish
envy, a most sure demonstration that they are not led by the spirit of God?
But to be short, this one thing I dare affirm, and I proclaim it to the
shame of all them that love popery: that if you search all stories, and peruse
all Chronicles, and call to remembrance all things that you have read, heard,
or seen, you shall never find any that profess the name of Christ, be they
never so rude or savage, not any Turk, Jew or infidel, will attempt things so
unnatural, so contrary to the law of God, so far beyond the compass of
humanity, as papists do and will do, yea and many of the popes themselves have
don, and thought they might do. Our late days give us so many examples, to
prove this to be true, that we need not look unto these former stories. You
see how vnereuerently they have dealt with these most honorable princes. And
did not pope Alexander the third as intollerably hehaue himself as any man
could do, when he making the Emperor lie down at his feet, did tread upon
the neck of the Lords anointed, which was worse then to cut off the lap or a
piece of his garment, 1. Sam. 24. 6.
(for doing whereof, David accused himself to have done wrong.) But this pope,
I say, funct. cro. 116^.
treading upon the neck, of Frederick the first of that name emperor, did
most profanely and blasphemously abuse these words of the Psalm, Psalm. 91. 13.
Thou shall walk upon the lion and aspe, the young lion and the dragon, shall
thou tread under foot. Thereby proclaiming that he he neither had any fear of
God, or reverence of the supreme majesty in earth. I omit of purpose to speak
of Gelasius the second, Gelasius. Calixt. 2. against Hen. 5.
and Calixtus the second, against Henry the fifth, the unnatural son of
Henry the fourth. Nether do I rehearse the ungodly dealings of these and some
other against many kings and princes. Yea I pass over also with silence, that
villainous treason that Alexander the third wrought and practiced, Act. Romans
pontif. Alex. 3.
with the Turk, against this Frederick the first which had been the final
destruction of the emperor, if the Turk had not been more merciful, The
pope a traitor to the emperor.
then the pope was faithful. For the pope desiring the death of the emperor,
moved the Turk to dispatch him, as he loved his own quietness: and withal
sent him a lively counterfeit or picture of the emperor, whereby he might know
him if he came into his hands, by which also the emperor being taken of the
Turks, was known when he came before the great Turk. For he brought forth
the said picture which ye pope had sent him, thereby proving him to be
Frederick, and withal he showed the popes letter, moving him to destroy the
emperor, and thereby did it appear to all that heard thereof, that the pope was
a traitor to Gods cause, and the emperors person. But I am weary of raking in
these channels. And this which is already said, is I trust, sufficient to point
unto the vnreuerent dishonest, and unchristian proceedings which these godles
and profane ugly monsters used, after y^ once they came to their height of
honor: abusing the color and pretense of religion and holiness, to hide their
violent and bilanous practices: And makng that severe censure and sharp
chasticement, Excommunication abused.
(which is only to be used in Gods causes, and that upon the greatest
occasions,) as a very fools babble, wherewith they strike every one, that does
not follow their unbridled wilfulness. But their intolerable and impotent
pride, does yet more appear, if we consider their doings nearer home. For you
see how after they had gotten that authority which long they sought, even as
a man that aims at his mark, so did they practice and devise what they
could, against the sovereign majesty upon earth, as if all their care were
bent, to bring him lower as indeed they did, spoiling him by little and little
of his dominions, and so lessening his power, and at the last despising his
authority, and wringing it out of his hands as has been showed. And as he
could not abide any to be his better or superior so far of, The popes dealings
against the regiment in Rome.
so likewise he could not suffer any to have any government exempt from him,
near him in the city of Rome, and therefore were they also sundry times
repining and striving against those magistrates which in Rome had the government
of the city. For having brought the emperor to hold of him (for the emperor,
say the Canonists now, holds his empier of the pope, and therefore he is
bound to swear homage and fealty to the pope, as the vassal is vou^d to his
lord) having I say so subjected the greatest, he takes scorn that any should
sit under his nose, and not be under him. And therefore pope Leo the third
sending certain presents unto Charles the great, Rob. Ba^nes. in Leo 3. The
popes seek to subject the city to them.
made unto him suite and obtained it, that the people of Rome should be sworn
to be subject unto him.

And so from that time, which was about the year 796. until the time of
Innocent the second about the year 1139 they continued in subjection to the
bishop of Rome, being governed at his appointment 343 years. Ioh. Stella in
In. 2.
But being wary belike of his Tyranicall government, they made unto themselves
a praetor and senators to rule them, concerning their civil government, as in
times past they had wont to have. For indeed this Innocent was a wonderful
proud pope, of whom it is written in a book called Burtum Fulmen, brutum fulmen
ex cron. Hi^s. A proud pope.
and alleged out of two histories, that in the Lateran church at Rome, he
painted Lotharius the emperor prostrate at his feet, and his vassal or
servant receiving of him the imperial crown. And by this picture, were verses
written, wherein the emperor is made his servant, and it is said that the pope
gives him the crown as though he could not have it but by his gift. His pride
being so immoderate against the emperor, it is not like he could keep any
measure with such as were inferiors, and so did they shake of his intolerable
yoke.

Now the pope not knowing presently how for to amend himself or to hinder
their purpose, yet thought he would so bridle them, C 17. q. 4. cap. ^ quis
suadente. Laying violent hands upon a clergy man.
as that his clergy should be free from their rule. He gathers therefore a
council in Lateran, where he caused it to be decreed, that whosoever should lay
violent hands upon a clergieman (though he be but a psalmist says gloss
there, whom the Did. 23 calls a singer cap. Psalmista. and the Did. 21.
cap. Cleros makes next the dog driuer and doorekeeper) should so be accursed,
that (unless it were in time of death) he might not be absolved of any, but
the pope only. For this cause also Onuphrius writes that the people of Rome
were excommunicated, In Innocent. 2.
and put for ever from choosing the popes, and by that means, that the election
of the pope came to the cardinals. But Platina as I have before noted says,
that Gelasius the second was chosen by the cardinals, who was before this
Inocent. Well, Lucius the second pope of that name, although he had great cause
to have though of other matters (for at that time there was a marvelous great
plague, Stella.
whereof of his predecessor Celestine the second died, as also himself was
taken away by it) yet his proud stomach, not being able to bear the
government that then was in Rome, ^unct an. 11143. cronolog.
by a praetor and senators, sought to alter it. The praetor or Alderman mayor
whose name was Jordan told the pope, that all the ^egalities belonging to the
city as well without as within the walls belonged to him being praetor by
reason of his office, and that ye pope had hitherto occupied the same by means
of Charles the great. But he demanded his own right, willing the pope to
content himself, as his ancetours had done, with first ^ruites, tithes and
offerings.

But his holiness, being as unwilling to learn a good lesson, of Jorden the
praetor or Alderman of Rome, as were the Pharisees to be taught of him, whom
Christ made to see, (Thou art say they altogether borne in sin, Ioh. 9. 14.
and teach thou us?) Devised more mischief against the Romans then did the
Pharisees against that man, that durst teach them, for they did but cast him out
of their synagogue, that is they did perchance excommunicate him. But this holy
pope, who should be to others, an example of patience and forgiving our
enemies, had this devise, Rob. Barnes. The popes cruel and godlesle purpose.
that watching a time when they were all gathered together in council, the
Praetor, Senators, and all the chief of the city, the pope gathered his
soldiers, and set upon the capitol, (the place where they were assembled)
thinking either to have destroyed them all, or else to have driven them out of
the city.

But the Romans hearing of this pope-like enterprise, Lucius the second stoned
to death.
armed themselves upon a sudden, and running to the capitol, did so pelt with
stones the pope himself, that within a few days after he died. Whether of the
plague as before out of Stella I aleaged, or of these bates it makes no great
matter. For they were rid as it seems of a furious fool, and saved the lives
of their chief men, and for a time retained their liberty. This does Robert
Barnes report out of Naucler. Sum. Anton. and Jacob. Colum. Now this question
between the Romans and the bishop of Rome continued in doubtful case as
appears by friar Rioch and others for a season, namely whilst Eugenius the
third, Anaslasius the fourth, and Adrian the fourth lived, the Romans seeking
to have their liberties of choosing their magistrates, confirmed unto them by
the popes, the popes on the other side repining against that which the Romans
did. Yet in the time of Alexander the third they came to this agreement that
the magistrates chosen by the Romans, should not meddle with their office,
until they had been sworn to be faithful to the church of Rome and the
pope. And thus this controversy, that was between the city of Rome, Rioche.
compend. his^o^ar. Plat. in Alex. 3. Plat. Stella.
and the pope, for fifty years, was agreed. But Lucius the third being
perchance proud then Alexander his predecessor (whose pride yet was
intolerable) not content to suffer so much as the name of Consuls in Rome went
above to abolish the same, and had gotten to him some of the Romans. But the
citizens rose against him, expelled him out of the city and put out the eyes
of certain, that favored his attempt.

Thus we see, how the bishops of Rome, to the end that their authority might
the more smoothly proceed without controlment, did seek to take these rubs
out of their way. Hitherto we have in part seen, in what sort the bishops of
Rome being come to their hieght have deal with their betters, and how roughly
they have handled them. But perchance their friends will excuse them, because
that by doing as they have done, they have defended (will they say) the rights
and privileges of the church of Rome. But how will they excuse the slavish
servitude, whereunto they brought the greatest princes? Revel. 19. 10. an^ 21.
Saint John offered to fall down before the Angel, but the angel would not
suffer him to worship him, I am (says he) thy fellow servant, worship God. But
these vile wretches, will suffer kings and emperors to kiss their feet.
Constantine the pope was the first that ever accepted of this honor done to
him by Justinian the emperor. Plat. in Constan. 1. papa.
And then Stephan the second, whose feet Pipin the french king did kiss. But
afterward this grew to be so ordinary a matter, that the kissing of an old
fools foul feet, is the greatest honor that can be done to the greatest
prince at Rome.

And Pope Steven having gotten into his hands the exarchie of Rauenna, plat.
in Steph. 2. and Zachar.
whereby he became great in Italy, and al by the means of the said Pipin, whom
he also rewarded by making him king of France, Abbas Vrsperg. in Pipino. an.
754.
thrusting Childrick the true lawful king into a monastery, and intruding
Pipin in his room, he now in triumphing manner is carried upon men's shoulders.
And he is the first that I knew of any of the popes, that thought the earth too
good, to bear so wicked a lump as himself was. For I trust he thought it
not too base to touch his sacred feet. Well, the reason of his doings is not
for us to search, but he was first carried of men's shoulders. Epit. histor.
Neither will I here inquire of the cause of deposing the right king of
France, whether it were just or not, although no cause could make it a just
fact in him, that had nothing to do with it. Only this will I say, that where
master Bellar. would make the insufficiency of the French kings, Lib. 2. de
pont. Romans cap. 17.
to be the cause why either Zachary, or Steven that was next after him, did
depose the French king from his rightful crown, yet Platina whose words I
rather believe then master Bellarmine, Plat. in Zachar.
confesses that Pipin being greedy of a kingdom, sent his ambassadors to
the pope, that he would by his authority, confirm unto him the kingdom of
France. Whereunto the pope agreed, in respect of such former good turns, as
he had received of that house. And so by the popes authority the kingdom of
France is adjudged to Pipin the year of our Lord seven hundred fifty and
three. Thus much Platina. Whereby it appears that the ambition of Pipin, and
wrong dealing of the bishop of Rome, was a cause that Childerick was deposed.
But to return to my matter again, we see what pope it was, The pope carried on
men's shoulders.
that was first so proud, that he could not let his own legs carry him. But
it was set down afterward for a law, unto which the emperor must be also
obedient if he will not be rebellious to the decrees of the church. And it is
decreed that the emperor himself, if he be by, must help to carry that
loytring lubber. For thus I read it cited out of their own book of
ceremonies. The emperor must carry him.
Although the emperor, or any other be he never so great a personage, be by,
he shall carry upon his shoulders a little while, Cer. l. sect. 2. fol. 35. a.
Fol. 26. b.
the chair and the pope. And again it is decreed in the same place, that the
most noble lay man shall carry the end or train of the pluuiall that the pope
wears, be it the emperor or any king. What a slavery is this, that he by
his ungodly and wicked ordinances, does tie princes unto, as though they were
his very staves. Why should he look that emperors should be his hacknie
horses, to cadge him up and down? Or what reason has he, what warrant out of
the scripture? What example in Gods book, or of any good man so to disg^ace
and deface the anointed of the Lord, whom he as well as others, should seek by
all means to honor and reverence?

Yet let us see what more reverence these proud prelates can suffer to be done
unto them. Princes lead his horse.
Pipin the new made Frence king, did teach the pope a very evil use. For he
slattering the pope, that he might make him more friendly to him, in assuring
him of his kingdom, meeting him three miles from his lodging, plat. in Steph.
2.
alighteth from his horse, and leads the popes horse all the way, not leaving
him until he had brought the pope to his lodging.

It is also recorded that another time the king of England on the one side, and
the French king on the other performed him that service. Bale in Ale. 3. ex Rob
Mont. cion. Sigeb. an. 1164. Sacrar. Carem. l. 1. sect. 5. and sect. 2. fol. 35.
But what need I seek for the particular examples? This is also a book case,
It is already ordered. That the emperor shall lead his horse, and kings
shall go before him, as performing their service to this earthly God, or God
on earth. But yet we have not seen his fulness in pride. Holding the stirtop
to the pope. Emperors hold the popes stirrep Rob. Barns. Ioh. Bale.
For the emperor if he be by when the pope alighteth, must hold his stirop. So
did Frederick Barbarossa the emperor unto the pope Adrian the fourth, although
he had no great thanks for his labor. The emperor held the wrong stirrup.
For he chanced to hold the the wrong stirop, the pope was so offended
thereat, that when the bishop of Bamberg, in the name of the emperor, had by a
pithy oration signified his joy for the popes presence, The pope is very angry
for it.
the pope replied that he heard indeed words of gladness, but he could not by
deeds perceive any such thing. And his reason was because the emperor held
not his right stirrup. The emperor although angry, yet smiling answered, that
he used not to hold any bodies stirrup, and that made him the less skillful.
For he was the first, whose stirrup he held. And for that time they parted,
neither of them being well pleased. But the next day the emperor made amends
for his former offense. holding the right stirrup. And the same emperor
Frederick, did afterward also hold the stirrup to pope Alexander the third, (a
cruel and shameless enemy to the said emperor) as appears by a letter
which master Fox in his Acts and Monuments aleadgeth out of Roger Houeden and
William of Gisborough.

In which Letter it does most plainly appear, not only that the Emperor
did hold his stirrup, for the pope confesses so much in writing unto the
Archebishoppe of York and to the Bishop of Durham, and would have them to
rejoice for the good success of the church (for the church is much increased
when the popes stirrup is holden by such) but also he (...) cause they said to
Moses and Aaron, that they took too much on them, seeing all the people were
holy: how great then shall their judgment be, that abuse all, even the
mightiest Monarchees, at their pleasure? Do thou see (O Peter) thy
successor, and thou O saving Christ, behold thy vicar? Mark well how far
the pride of the servant of thy servants, is gone up, Vrsperg.
says an Abbat long since, and therefore I trust no Lutheran, no Caluenist, no
Hugonot, but a flat papist, and yet speaks this in detestation of the pride
of popes, and namely of pope Boniface the eight, who the second day of his
Jubilee, apparelled like an Emperor, The pride of Bonif. 8.
with a sword carried before him, cried aloude, August. Beneveu. in Alberto.
Behold two swords, as the same Abbat reports. Who when Albert Duke of
Austria, came to him to be confirmed in the Empire, whereunto he was chosen,
took the Crown and set it upon his own head, and tying the sword to his
own side, Act. Roman. pontif. Rioche. Beneuenut. ibid.
said, I am the Emperor. Or as Friar Rioche a friend to popes writes, I
only am Emperor, who boastingly would call him self key-carryer of heaven.
And therefore he is worthily called a famous pope, and a magnificall tyrant
of priests.

Now if we search and try from whence he has any warrant for this his
Luciferian behavior against God and man, what can he answer? He has no
commandment, nor any proof or approbation of it in Gods word, no example of
the godly. obedience to princes.
Christ and his Apostles showed all dutiful obedience to magistrates, and
exhorted also others to do the like. Caesar must have his due, whether in
obedience or tribute, or fear, or honor, or any thing else, if we will obey
the commandment of Christ and his Apostles, or follow their example, or
believe their saying, when he tells us that the Apostles should not have
such dominion, Matthew. 22. 21. matthew. 17. 27. Matthew. 20, 25, 26
or exercise such authority, as the Lords of the Gentiles did exercise over
them. He commends love, Ioh. 13. 34, 35. matthew. 5. 9. math. 11. 29. Popes
seek pre-eminence.
and pronounces the ^eacemakers blessed, and would have us to learn of him to
be meek and lowly in heart. But the pope finding nothing in all these that
serves or fitteth his humor, takes his pattern of Diotrephes, who loved to
have the pre-eminence. 3 Ioh 9. matthew. 23. 6, 7.
Or of the Scribes and Pharisees, who loved the chief place in feasts, and to
have the chief seat in the assemblies, and greetings in the market, and to be
called of men Rabbi, Rabbi. Yea, Christ and his Apostles took great pains in
preaching, spared not for labor, feared not for danger, preaching in season
and out of season, suffered all things, endured all things, seeking Gods glory
and not their own. Popes no preachers.
Whereas on the contrary, the popes cannot, or will not use to preach. They
have enough to do to devise how they may subdue Emperors, bring under their
yoke the necks of Kings, set up their chair of pestilence, above all the
thrones in the earth. This is their care, their study, their whole endeour.
Plat. in Paschal. ^ Stella.
And therefore Paschalis the second, although he would not be pope, unless the
people would first give some rare testimony of his divine election, for they
must cite three times Saint Peter has chosen to be pope Rainer, for that was
his name before, an excellent good man, O fond hypocrite, yet when he had taken
it upon him, it was done with many ceremonies, to make him seem more glorious.
For having gotten this double conquest, Popelike attire.
first in that he got to be pope, secondly that he made the people give such a
testimony of him that he was so worthy a man, he thus addresseth himself to
his triumph.

First he puts on him a crimson robe, Plat. in Pasch. 2.
an ornament upon his head, and so waited on by the people and clergy, upon a
white horse he rides to the south gate of the palace of Laterane, and
entering into the palace, he puts about him a girdle, at which were
hanging seven keys, Plat. in Paul. 2.
and seven seals, and holds his scepter in his hand. But Paul the
secondthought not this bravery sufficient to set forth his glory, Costlines
of attire.
and therefore he much increased the costlines of these ornaments, especially
for the miter which he wore upon his head, buying the most precious stones
that he could hear of to adorn and deck the same. And least his withered
face, should not be somewhat suitable, he would also as some report (for so
Platina tells us) paint it. Paul the second did paint his fa^^.
And he also says, that he had a great delight to show himself to
strangers, and would keep them many times in the City, that they might
behold and wonder at him. And indeed they had just cause to wonder at him,
that he who by his calling should have been an example of modesty, a light
to shine unto other, and salt to season them that were unsavory and by his
age, should have been past those toys, and childish vain conceits, should so
far forget himself, that he would not only deck his body with more precious
attire then was seemly for him, who should have been to other a pattern of
all christian humility: but also paint his face more like a wanton Iesabell
than a sober bishop.

And thus I trust it appears, how insolently and stately the bishops of Rome
have behaved themselves, having by very unjust means gotten to that greatness
wherein they are. I might by infinite examples have showed this to be true. For
all stories are full of their insolent doings. But my endeavor is only to show,
that as they claim by an unjust title, so they do in many respects abuse their
greatness. Which hitherto I have proved, because so saw^ily they match
themselves with God, spurn against the highest authority, and magnify
themselves in all their behavior. The stories also do point out unto us their
incredible avarice, and more then greedy covetousness, which is so insatiable
that no sums of money can satisfy, no kingdoms can stanch the same. It is a
world to consider, what large and ample dominions they have gotten into their
hands, what lands and territories. Whereinto they having intruded themselves,
by setting princes together by the ears, or such other subtle practices: and
yet would seem sometime to hold the same by the gift of Constantine, sometime
from Charles the great, sometime from his son Jews. But from whom they should
claim to hold their possessions. they are not yet fully resolved as it
seems. But how great soever their possessions are, or how they hold them, I
am not purposed to examine. My purpose is rather to show how little contented
they are with all that they have, and how still they have new devises, and
other practices, to get money into their coffers. Barns. Bale. ^inctius.
Henry the second (or as some reckon) the third, had built a church in Bamberg,
and was desirous to have it made a bishops sea: he requested the pope to do so
much at his request. Now this pope rested wholly of the good will of the
emperor Henry. And yet would he not at his request do so much, The popes
avarice makes him unthankful.
but that also he would benefit himself: and so was content to do it upon
covenant, that that church should give him yearly a hundred marks, and a
white horse with his

But what should we enter into any particulars in this point? What bishop could
get his alowance or confirmation to any bishopric, Confyrmation to
bishoprikes.
without great sums of money? Then the archbishops have their palles not
without infinite charges. Archb. palles.
Wonderful sums of money, Vacations.
have in the time of vacation of bishoprics, and other spiritual promotions,
been carried to Rome, from Germany, France, this our country and other
places, as the manifold complaints and greeuances do manifestly declare. And
besides these sums which they got by ecclesiastical livings, they had many
other ways to pick men's purses. Purgatory was a gainful devise, Purgatory.
the fire thereof, did much good to the popes kitchen. Pardons.
Pardons were good to no use, but to make them rich that gave them, or carried
them. Especially those pardons which Leo the the tenth sent abroad. They which
carried them made the world believe, Bale in Leone ^^ ex christ. mas.
that whosoever would give ten shillings for a pardon, should for the same
deliver what soul soever he would out of purgatory. Holy wars or against
the Tur^
Under pretense also of fighting against the Turk, and recovering the holy
land, they gathered great sums. Licenses, etc.
What should I speak of licenses, qualifications, dispensations, and such like
means to get money? If I should but out of our English histories, paint out
the greedy worm of that church of Rome, you would think it were a gulf
insatiable both the horsleaches daughters in one that always cries give,
give, and can never have enough. It is a bitter and grievous complaint that
Frederick the second emperor of that name, makes against the church of Rome,
showing how the fire of her avarice is so kindled, Mat. Par. fol. 469.
that the goods of the clargie not being able to suffice, they fear not to
disinherit, and make to pay tribute to them, emperors, kings, and princes.
Whose words he says are sweet as honey, and as soft as oil, but they are
insatiable bloudsuckers. He does put our countrymen in rememberance of that
which Innocent the third a pope had done, swalowing after the Romish fashion,
with an untoward gaping, whatsoever was fattest. And with many such words, he
sets forth the miserable estate of England, which was (says he) the prince
of all provinces. He speaks of the time of king John, as himself shows, of
the which days also did the nobles of England complain bitterly, because he
did subject himself to the pope, and so brought their land into a miserable
slavery. Mat. par. fo. 373.
And as it were, speaking unto the pope, they charge him, that he bears with
king John, to the end that all things might be swallowed up of the gulf of
the Romish avarice. Neither is the pope Honorius the third ashamed to confess
this fault, paris 438. Romea greedy gulf by a popes confession.
by his Otho. For in his letters he confesses, that there can be no dispatch
in the court of Rome, without great expenses and gifts, and acknowledges that
this is an old stain to that church. And for to take away this slander, he
and his cardinals had devised a good way (as he thought) which is, that he
might have in every cathedral church two prebends, and such like of abbeis.
Gift of ecclesiastical preferments.
And this is an other way that the pope has to enrich himself by. And very
often did the bishops of Rome, seek by such means to provide for their
friends, or such as would buy their letters. So did Innocent the fourth write
to the abbat of S. Albans, for a kinsman of his, for a benefice in Lincoln
diocese, paris. 1085.
belonging to the gift of that church of saint Albans, called Wengraue, and for
the next besides it that should fall. Yea he did sometime write for children.
Whereupon there grew a great contention, between the bishop of Lincoln Robert
Grosted, A pope a seller of benefices. Paris. 1206.
and the pope Innocent the fourth, whom Alexander the fourth his next
successor called the seller of benefices. Pope Innocent was so offended with
this Bishop of Lincoln, for withstanding his lewd and wicked covetousness,
that when he heard that the Bishop of Lincoln was dead, Paris. 1178. The popes
spite against the bish. of Lincoln being dead.
he purposed presently to write to the king of England, not to suffer him to
be buried in the church, but to be cast out, thereby to disgrace him as much as
he possibly could. Besides these, they have yet other ways to get money. They
send in their ambassadors or legates, Ben^uolences.
which when they are once well settled within the land, they send to bishops,
abbates, or such as they knew to be of wealth, for so much money as they
thought good to get. But the least gain came not to the church of Rome, by
that unjust decree of Innocent the fourth, The goods of the clearkes^ n^etstate
the popes share paris. 959.
whereby it was provided, that the goods of clerks that died intestate, should
go to the bishop of Rome. But it were too tedious a matter to come particularly
to every point, of the popes greedines. It was a thing generally misliked and
spoken against: yea this their miserable greediness, as Mat. of Paris
witnesses, was the chief cause why the Greek church departed from the Latin
church. paris. 622. The popes covetousness cause of division between the cast
and west churches.
For, an archbishop of the Greek church coming to pope Gregory the ninth to
be confirmed in his archbishopricke by him, could not obtain his desire,
unless he would promise much money. He seeing that, detesting their
greediness departed, and told this to sundry of the nobility. There were
other also that reported as evil or worse of that they had seen and known at
Rome, and so they would have no more to do with the west church.

In like manner did the same pope behave himself in hearing the matter
between Walter elect archbishop of Canterbury on the one side, and the king
and sundry bishops on the other side. And although it were objected against the
archbishop by the king and the bishops, that in sundry respects he was unfit,
paris. 468.
namely, that he had defloured a Nun, and gotten children by her, and the
king was very earnestly bent against him, the pope also confessed that he was
unlearned, yet could not the king and the bishops get the pope to be favorable
in that good cause, paris. 474. Bribeue.
until such time as the kings ambassadors, fearing lest the pope would make
him archbishop of Canterbury, that was altogether unworthy of such a place,
promised to the pope the tenth of all moueables through England. Whereupon the
pope being so well hired, was content, not to place a wicked man in the sea of
Canterbury. page 48^.
And the pope, to show that it was the reward that made him, and that he looked
for perfourmance thereof, he sent into England to demand the same, and it was
granted according to the promise that was made unto him.

These and such other corruptions and extortions of the Bishops of Rome, made
them so odious to the king of England and his nobles, popes pollute the places
where they remain, paris. 1068.
that they thought be defiled and polluted the place where he dwelt. And
therefore when pope Innocentius the fourth, requested the king, that he would
permit him to lie at Burdeaur in Gascoigne, which then belonged to the king of
England, he and his Nobles thought that it was too near to England, and that
corruptions would come thence into England. And Robert Grosted B. of Lincoln
durst boldly say to the pope and in his hearing, O money, money, how much can
thou do especially in the court of Rome, Paril. pa. 1027.
which as it is said in another place, page 686.
is always gaping, always greedy. But indeed great sums have him gathered
out of this realm, which have gone to the pope, Tag. 299.
insomuch that king John did affirm to the pope Innocent the third, almost
threatening him for some evil dealing, and tells him that he has more
commodity out of the Realm of England, The pope had much out of England.
then out of all countries on this side the Alps. And therefore Innocent the
third had wont to say of England, England the pops garden of delight
It is in truth our garden of delight (says he) a well that can never be
drawn dry, and where there is great abundance, there of much, much may be
gotten. Indeed he and his fellows had gotten out of this garden, many sweet
poses, and were much refreshed with the water, that they drew out of this well.

But where is that pastoral care, that these Bishops should have had over
Christ's flock, or which they at the least pretended to have, in their Bulls
and writings? Where is their rejoicing at the zeal and godliness of the
people? As is their study, so is their joy. Their study is how to get and
win temporal possessions, they rejoice when they have gotten the same.

I have hitherto proved this especially by our own stories, because they
should most move us to consider, what bondage and slavery we have been
brought unto, and give us warning to take heed, how we subject our selves to
them, who under pretense of holiness, do not only devour widows houses,
but even infinite treasures, yea and princes kingdoms also. Other kingdoms
were not free from these pollings, as may appear by the stories of France,
and other places. For what place is there, (...) an. 1364.
whither the paws and claws, of that covetous Woolfe have not reached.
Charles the fourth, keeping a diet at Mentz, where were the electours, and
other Princes of Germany, thither also came the Popes Legate, in the name of
Innocentius the sixth, begging some contribution. The Emperor having heard
what the Legate demanded, answered, that the pope got much money out of
Germany, but he sought not to reform any thing that was amiss in the
clergy.

And not long after, Gregory the eleventh demanded a tenth of all the
clergy men through the empire, Pataleipom. Visp.
but the bishops electours, would not yield to the pilling of their clergy,
in such sort. fol 321.
But yet as the Abbat of Ursperg sings them as it were a song, and wills
them to rejoice, because that money which so well they love, comes so fast
unto them, and they have store of that which so much they thirsted: even so by
their prolling, and pilling in every corner, they get into their hands
infinite treasure. Christ and his v^car compared.
Now if we look upon our Savior Christ, and compare him and his Vicar of
Rome together, we shall easily find they are no more like then light and
darkness. Christ has not whereon to lay his head, he had nothing. They have
all things, 1 Luc. 9. 5^.
even the world at will. He took great pains to preach the Gospel, 2
They live in all ease and pleasure, and never preach the most of them. 3
He traveled on foot from place to place, from the one side of Iewrie to the
other, The pope if he go but to S. Peter's church, must be borne upon the
shoulders of the greatest potentates. 4
Christ had in his train but a few fishers, or men despised, Their palaces
and trains exceed in pomp and pride, Luc. 12. 14.
the courts of princes. He being requested, would not meddle with dividing of
land between two brethren, 5
The pope intrudeth himself, yea and chalengeth it to be his right, to have to
do in temporal dominions, to throw down, to set up, to place and displace,
not in small inheritances only, but in the greatest Monarchies. As is seen
in the Empire it self, which he translated from the Grecians, to the French,
and again from the French to the Germans, and would now if possibly he
could bestow the same upon the Spaniard, taking it from the Germans, (as it
seems) by such aids as he yields unto him, in his most ambitious and
tyrannical attempts.

To be short, 6
our Savior Christ himself did perform all duty, and honor, unto princes,
by whose example, and of whom, Saint Peter learned that lesson also, which he
faithfully taught and delivered to other: Submit your selves to all manner
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2. 1^.
whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior or chief, or unto
governors.

And again, in the same chapter, Honor the King. But what does Christ's bad
vicar, Verse. 17.
and Peter's proud succesior? He seeks by all means that he can, to increase
his own glory and riches, and that with the stain and reproach, with the
decay and impouerishing of the mightiest monarchs, as has already been
sufficiently (I trust) declared, and might be proved by a thousand mo
testimonies. But if you will behold a true pattern of the affections, fox Act.
and Mon. ex 2. hist. manuscrip.
that these holy fathers bear to the emperors and kings, set before your eyes
pope Celestine the third sitting in his chair of estate, making Henry the sixth
the emperor cast himself down at his feet. And he (whose hands perchance
were too holy to perform so base an office) taking the crown between his
feet, (O scorn of all scorns) did with his feet, crown both the emperor,
and his wife the empress. And when he had so done, with his feet he cast
from his head the crown again. For it is meat and drink to them (not to do
the will of God as it was to Christ to do the will of him that sent him) but
so to play with princes, John. 4. 34.
to bring them into contempt, and to let the world see, how scornefully they
can use them.

Let such as love the truth, and have desire to save their own souls,
thinking earnestly of these matters. If the doings of the bishops of Rome for
many hundred years, be not plain contrary to that which our savior Christ
and his apostles did and taught, I crave no credit. But if they be, let no man,
no woman be so simple, in a matter of so great importance, as by show of good
words (in which yet there is no truth, no sincerity, nothing but hypocrisy)
to be carried away and devoted unto a church, in name holy, but indeed most
profane, in name a mother, but in truth a froward stepmother: or to a pope
insatiable in covetousness, proud and ambitions, and to all countries and
princes pernicious and pestilent. Now as their arrogancy (since they came to
such excessive greatness) was intolerable, their greediness insatiable, so
their mischievous malice has been unmeasurable. This appears most plainly,
not only in their dealings with others, The malice of popes one toward another.
but also in their had doings one of them against another. Who can without
wonder or detestation, hear of the cruel parts that were committed by Steven
the sixth against the dead body of pope Formosus? For he was not content to
revoke his acts, and disanul his decrees, (although he preferred him to be a
bishop) but like a cruel and unthankful churl, Rioche.
he caused his dead body to be taken up out of the grave (O holy charity)
and that in his presence, he drew it about the city, put on it popelike
aparrel, set it in Peter's chair, then he caused to be taken from him his
popelike garment, and put upon him lay man's clothes, he cut off two of his
singers Vrspergensis says three, and his head, and cast them into Tyber, and
commanded the rest of his body to be buried in the lay men's burial.

All stories almost with full consent, do declare and detest this beastly
cruelty. Stella.
The cause that he pretended was, that he was perjured (I would have thought a
pope might not have made so foul a fault, and yet because pope Steven who
cannot err, has charged him with it, I must believe it.) So there is one
perjured as is proved by substanciall witness, and an other accounted even
barbarous almost of all histories. Yea the stories that are most addicted unto
popery and superstition, do much complain of the division which this wrought
in the church, and of the crooked dealing of these cankered karles. For
Theodore the second, that came next (but one) after this Steven, although he
was pope but twenty days, yet was loath not to make one in this skirmish, (for
he had no virtue in him says the story) he approved against all that
Formosus had done, and so set himself against Steven his faction. Then came
John the tenth, who yet took great part with Formosus. And when many of the
Romans were displeased thereat, he left Rome, and went to Rauenna, where he
called a council, and there did not only revive as it were Formosus his
decrees, disanulling, yea casting into the fire, that which Steven had done
against Formosus, sunct. anno 900.
but he also concluded in the council, that Steven judged amiss. Now you Romish
catholics whether may a pope err or not? Steven did in a council revoke
Formosus his acts. Pope John says it was wrongfully done, so that by his
judgment, both Steven and his council, did err in judgment. Yea and John
futher ordained, that they who took orders of Steven should again take orders.

Not long after came Sergius the third who took up the dead and mangled body
of Formosus and did execution thereupon, Jacob. Bergom.
as if Formolus had been alive and commanded the headless corpse, as not
worthy of burial, to be cast into the river. And lastly, he made the orders
that he gave to be of none effect. Justly therefore did Jacob. Stella in Be. 4.
Bergemensis complain and out of him John Stella of Venice. Such was the evil
hap of that age, that all virtue through men's slothfulness, was decayed as
well in the head as in the members. But why was Sergius so mortal an enemy to
Formosus? The cause of Sergius his enemy against Formosus.
Formosus when he was pope could not well abide him, and therefore he according
to his popish charity dealt thus with his dead body. And dare these men tell
us of division among some members of our churches, when we see in their own
stories their heads, so putting and butting one of them against another with
the horns of the beast? Jacob. Bergom.
John the twelfth a wicked wretch every way, confessed to be by all stories,
and that even from his youth he was defiled with all naughtiness (to let pass
his other popelike qualities too bad to speak of) because the cardinals
complained of him to the emperor, and desire his help, he took some of
them, and cut off one of their noses, the others had, with the which it was
supposed he wrote letters against the pope, he put out some of their eyes,
sunct. an 962.
cut out other of their tongues, their members and fingers. Pope Boniface the
twelfth a man qualified much like his fellows, Platina.
stole after he was pope all the principal jewels out of Saint Peter's church,
and left Rome for a time until he had sold at Constantinople all that he had
filched away, A pope a chief.
and then returning hoped by money (whereof he had now good store) to pacify
the citizens that were displeased with him (for he was for his wickedness hated
of them.) s^nctius.
But there was one John a cardinal of good account that hindered him therein,
some say that this John was chosen pope in his room. Wherefore him he took
and put out his eyes. Now where is the unity and good agreement, that our
Romish catholics now a days do bear us in hand, has bin always in the
church of Rome? If by unity they mean christian charity their savage
cruelty cries out their shame. If they mean consent in doctrine, Papi^^s
discent^ doctrine.
their infinite and diverse opinions, whether the virgin Marie were void of
original sin, which matter was a great while, full hotly handled. Again
what it is that is meant by these words (this is my body) what this word ( This)
has relation unto. Thirdly, what is that, wherein is that which may be seen
in the bread, as color and fashion, or to speak as they do, what subject
has those accidents? These and many other sach points might be rehearsed,
wherein perchance they will never agree hereafter, as yet they have never
done. Well, what malice they have showed one toward another we have seen.
How they have done toward other it may partly appear in that which I have
said before in their proud and earnest pursuing of princes, unto whom they
would never be reconciled unless the princes would let them have their will.
The cruel malice of John.
John the fifteenth or (if pope Joan be not reckoned) the fourteenth was taken
of some noble men of Rome, and kept in prison eleven months. At the length by
the help of Otho the emperor being delivered, and the chief of them being
sharply punished by Otho, Peter the praetor or chief man of the city, who was
in the conspiracy, the emperor delivered to the pope, perchance to try how
ready he would be according to the commandment of Christ, to love his
enemies and them that hate him. Bale Act. pontif. Romans
But pope John (although the emperor had sharply punished many by death, other
by confiscation of all their goods, others by banishment, and so might somewhat
have mittigated the raging fury of the pope) yet I say pope John, delivers
the prisoner to the tormentor, with charge to shave his beard (for to disgrace
him) to pull off his garments, to hang him by the hear of the head, for a
whole day together then was he set upon an ass, his face being turned to the
hinder parts, and his hands tied under the tail of the ass, and so led up and
down the city, Platina.
well scorged with whips, almost until he was dead, funct.
and so banished into Germany. There was one Gregory a pope whom Henry the
fifth emperor had made pope. But Calixtus the second when he came to be pope,
and the emperor and he were agreed, pursues this Gregory not content to
depose him only, Rioche in Hen. 5.
(for a reasonable revenge cannot satisfy their mischiuous malice) but let him
upon a Camel (that this fine sight might the better be seen) turning his face
to the tail, which was to him for a bridle as the author says, and so carried
him in triumph to Rome. But to show his proud and insolent dealings against
princes, and his malicious persecuting and pursuing of them. What need we to
produce examples of foreign countries, or former times? We have amongst us, in
our days, better proof thereof, then either we desire, or they can deny.

Is it not too proud and insolent a part, for either Pius the fifth, Popes
dealings with Princes now.
or Sixtus the since, to call our sovereign Queen and most gracious prince
Elizabeth, whom God has mercifully placed amongst us, and over us, and
mightily and maruelously defended, from innumerable popish practices: and Henry
king of Navarre, and now also the French king, heretics, schismatics, and I
know not by what names of reproach, he not proving, no nor daring to offer any
reasonable trial, or lawful way to prove the same? Why is he afraid to have
religion tried by a free general council? Why does he hinder it by all means
that he can? Popes religion not catholic
The question is whether his religion, that (I say) which he commends to
christians, and commands to be only, (and that upon pain of death)
believed is true or not. We deny it, we have unanswerable arguments for us.
The religion that he would have us to content our selves withal, is not
catholic, that is, it is not preached or taught at all times, in all places,
with full consent, as he and his friends must confess, when it is examined. It
has not any sufficient warrant out of Gods book, which only should be the
ground of our relgion. Nay, it is so contrary to Gods written words, that it
is impossible that that which God in the scripture teaches us, and that which
the popish church requires of us, should both be true. As for Gods word we
know it cannot lie. And therefore we have great cause to say, that that which is
contrary to it, cannot be true. Again, the church of Rome (as they al
confess) proves many points of their religion by traditions only, that is
to say, by the doctrines of men only. These things we allege. Admit that it
were not evidently true that we say. Is it not good reason yet that we should
be heard, how we can prove that we allege? Were it not fit that before
indifferent judges the matter should be tried? For why should the pope, that is
a principal party in this controversy, or his legates that are his sworn
adherents and servants, take upon them to be judges in their own cause? We
accuse them of Idolatry, superstition, many heresies, manifest breach of Gods
law, despising of Gods word, yea of plain apostacy from the true faith.
Shall we ever imagine, that they will pronounce sentence against themselves?
And confess themseules guilty of these great crimes? No no, as we are not so
foolish as once to hope, that they who with tooth and nail, seek to maintain
their own pride, will so subject themselves to Christ's yoke, so we are not so
mad as to think them to be fit judges, to pronounce whether the truth be on
our side or theirs. For we know, that they will not speak for us, because
they will never speak against themselves.

Let them then permit this question that is amongst us to be tried by a free
council. Let the matters in controversy be debated, let the reasons on both
sides be heard, and wayghed: let indifferent judges be appointed, such as
sincerly sighing, in singlenes of heart, seek to know the truth, and serve the
Lord. The^ will it appear who teach the true religion. But this can never be
tried by such ouer-ruled conuenticles as that of Trent, wherein indeed the
protestants were admitted to speak. But they might say but placet, we are
content with that you have done. They might not set down their reasons against
Romish errorn, they might not be heard to dispute. But that was before
concluded in some private meeting of a few popish divines, and allowed at Rome for
catholic doctrine, and thence sent to the council to have approbatian of them
that durst not deny it, to that they might say Amen. Yea, and what they could
have said, the council would not greatly have regarded as it seems. For
Clement the seventh, when the emperor Charles the fifth, and the French king
were earnest with the said Clement, to have a free general conncil permitted,
Gentil. examined.
wherein matters might maturely be discussed on both sides, Council. Trident.
li. 1.
he answered, that was a perilous matter and prejudicial, that the
protestants should be suffered to dispute of those things, that had been
before concluded by councils. As though God by his word, were not sufficient to
give laws to his church, or that he should be tied to the judgments of men.
Not that we think the ancient lawful councils to be against us: but because
that under the name of general Councils, they bring in their later wicked and
ungodly conuenticles, of the times wherein corruption grew more and more in the
Church, which Councils have concluded many things, that were never heard of in
the purer age: we would therefore let them understand, How councils must be
rejected.
that as many of their councils are worthily rejected, so even the best are
not to be bleeued, but as they consent with Gods undoubted and infallible
word. And that this was the bondage of that Council of Trent, which our
adversaries would so feign have so much accounted of, it appears by Sleydon
in his history. Brocard who was one in that council, writing upon the
Apocalipse, Gentillet and Calvin, against that council. How the^ dare those
arrogant popes, whose doctrine can not abide the touch, whose decrees do shun
the light, condemn princes for heretics, or enemies to the catholic faith,
and yet will not permit their faith and religion, to be laid to the rule and
square of the catholic doctrine? Dialog. 3.
Theodoret says truly. The decrees of the church must be tried and proved, not
pronounced as an over ruled case, or as a sentence of a Judge. And shall we
then receive as an Oracle from God, that which is delivered unto us after this
manner, the church of Rome, or the bishop of Rome has said it? God forbid. We
will try the spirits whether they be of God. 1. John 4. 1. 1. These. 5. 21.
We seek to try all their doctrines, that we may hold fast that which is
good. This then, I say, is an evident argument of arrogant insolency, in Pius
5. and Sixtus, 5. that so wickedlie they dare presume, as to give such
slanderous names, to princes that profess so undoubted a truth, as then they
both did, and yet our most gracious Sovereign does. But to deprive them of
their kingdoms, to release their subjects from their bond of obedience, to
dispose of their dominions, according to their pleasures, as they would do if
they could, is as intolerable pride, as their predecessors before did ever us
to other. And so maliciously to prosecute this their conceived mischief, as
they have done these many years, which open tumult, with secret
conspiracies, with poisoning of some principal Princes, Popish practices.
with murdering of other by other means, with prepairing the hearts of
doubtful subjects, against the time of invasion to take their part, (for all
these things are common to the pope, and his white son the king of Spain,
(they are their continual meditations) does not this sufficiently prove
their cruel malice? So that their proud practices, and cruel purposes (which
are two of the fruits, of the supremacy of the popes that I have spoken of)
are plain enough, even in our days, we may see with our eyes the proof of
the same, by (almost) daily examples. But their greedy minds, and covetous
affections, do not appear to us so plainly, as unto our fathers, unto whom
they were an intolerable burden, as I have showed before. And although we
nothing doubt, but the fat morsels, which they understand their predecessors
have plucked from this land, do make the popes that have been in our days,
more eager to get such like again: yet God having delivered us from the
ravening paws and jaws of that Romish Lion (the Lord make us truly
thankful, and in life fruitful, for this his inestimable mercy) we feel
not the grief of his exactions. But this I trust, suffices to decalre, that
the power which the pope unlawfully has gotten, he unreasonably abuses,
making it a wicked and ungodly mean to crow over princes, to fill his
coffers, and to execute his reuenges. And now that the pope was come to that,
that he might do even what he would, to satisfy his proud, greedy and
cruel lusts, he thought it good for him to dwell and continue always, in that
lawless estate. And therefore did he, not only strive by all the power and
policy that he had, and with all his endeavor to maintain the same, for the
time present, but also did provide some means to maintain it as he hoped for
ever. And to perform this they have had no small help by privileges,
Privileges and immunities.
and grauntes from princes, who at the first when bishops of Rome, and others
also, did apply themselves in some measure to perform their duty, were
willing to the better encouraging of them, to go on forwards in well doings,
and that those worldly things, should not be to them any let or hinderance in
their callings, that were a burden unto other, they were willing I say to
exempt them from such services and duties, as they required of other to be don
unto them. And because that at the first when Christianity began to increase
and grow mighty, no doubt many that were secret enemies, Cause of many of the
immunities.
and yet durst not (when the Emperors had by law established the christian
profession) accuse any man for their religion, would then lay other faults to
their charges, and object other crimes to bring the Gospel into contempt, as
appears by Tertullian, Justin the Martyr, and others that they did, when
religion was yet professed in corners. Now it is not unlikely, but that godly
princes to exempt them from such flaunders and reproaches, would commit the
hearing of those accusations unto such as were of best credit among
themselves, that when their enemy did see that their accusations were not like
to be favored, unless they were sufficiently proved, they might be
discouraged, from defaming them with unjust reports. But howsoever these
immunities were granted unto them at the first, or on what consideration, I
will not precisely set down. But afterward I am sure they took them as their
own right, and that they did always belong unto them. And therefore when as
the Emperor would have taken upon him to have judged of some causes of
clergy men, Did. 96. cap. ^imperator.
pope John shows that he must not so do, and tells him boldly, but
falsely, that the almighty God will have the clearkes and priests of Christian
religion, to be ordered, examined, and received when they return from error,
not by public laws, or powers of this world, but of bishops and priests.
Christian emperors (says he) must submit their executions to prelates, and not
prefer them. Whereupon the gloss does gather, that the clergy was never
under the secular power, and therefore that all the constitutions that are made,
that clearks should not be judged by any but by bishops, are but declarations,
^ist. ^6. C. Nun^uam.
of that their former right. And in the same distinction the very next
chapter, that pope John is not ashamed to affirm, that Christian princes were
wont to be obedient to bishops, and to how down their necks to them. And
afterward there is in Gratian a whole treatise to this purpose, Cause. 11. ^.
1. c. Nemo.
to prove that (as is their alleged out of Caius the Pope) no man must presume
so much as to accuse, before a secular judge, a bishop or any clearke. I need
not allege to this end many testimonies. These are as plain as need to be. He
that would see mo testimonies to this effect, let him look the first question
of the eleueuh cause in Gratian, he shall see it affirmed with full mouth. But
how untruly in a word may be declared.

And first how false that is which he affirms, Shameless li^^
that princes have always submitted themselves unto priests, there is no
color of truth in it, if we examine the shameless lie, either by the
scriptures, or by the examples of the emperors and kings in the primitive
church. Magistrates command priests. Aa^on.
For Moses was the civil magistrate, and Aaron was the priest. Did Moses
submit himself to Aaron? No, did he not rather on the contrary reprove him,
as at other times, so especially concerning the golden calfe, Exodus 32. 21.
which he caused to be made? And did not Aaron in token of his submission to
Moses, call him his Lord? And why did God deliver the law. and the order for
all the sacrifices and ceremonies, and all the services that were commanded,
rather by Moses to Aaron, and the people, Moses being the civil magistrate,
then by the ministry of Aaron, who was appointed to be the priest? Did not
God hereby testify, ^^od. 28.
that he would have the civil magistrate to have a special regard, unto the
things that belong to Gods service. Apiathar.
Was not Abiathar the high priest at the commandment of Solomon, when at the
commandment of Solomon the king, 2. Kings 2. 26, 27.
he was put from the office of the high priest, and the king made Zadocke high
priest in his room. But out of many examples let these suffice, Verse 35.
for the time before Christ. S. Paul when he says, Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, teaches us, that we must
not look that they should submit them selves unto us, but how sincerely we
should obey them. And what is meant by the higher powers saint Peter tells
us, that the king is chief, 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14.
then other governors under him. And these are the superior powers which
saint Paul means of, as if need were might he proved by all antiquity. If
we look upon the bishops that were in the time of Constantine, and a good
while after, their stories will teach us, that they as humbly as they could
submitted themselves to Emperors and princes, called them Lords, entreated
them with all submission. Yea, and Leo the third pope of that name, Plat. in
Leone 3.
eight hundred years after Christ, his life and conversation were inquired
upon, by Charles the great the emperor. All which things do plainly prove, that
it is most false that Gratian out of many of them does affirm, that the
Emperors Christian, did always submit themselves unto the bishops.

And the selfsame examples also do plainly declare, that the clergy may not
be accused only before civil magistrates, but punished also by them according
to the quality of their offense. Neither did our savior Christ (whose
immunities and exemptions I suppose they will confess, were as great as any
may claim) when he was standing before Pilate to be judge, plead that they
might not meddle with him, neither yet Saint Paul, when he stood before
Festus, Act. 25. 11.
who if there had been any such privilege belonging unto clergy men, would
at the least have claimed it, that others might have by their examples alleged
the like.

But saint Paul in appealing unto Caesar, does give us a strong argument to
prove, Princes may judge the clergy.
that princes may middle with such as they call clergy men. But of the matter
it self there is no just cause of doubt. Neither can it be proved, that such
immunities and exemptions are grounded upon any testimony of Scripture, but
rather are most contrary to that subjection, to magistrates, that they
command, and God requires. But by those privileges there came to the civil
estate dubble damage. The hurt of those exemptions.
First because thereby evil subjects were maruelously imboldned to do
whatsoever the bishop of Rome, that very baine of true christian obedience,
would set them to do, for enlarging his liberties. As among as infinite mumber
of examples, that one of Thomas Becket that archtraitor of England, (and yet
forsooth a Romish saint and martyr) does sufficiently declare. For how
traitorously he sought to in fringe the ancient liberties, Paris. page 135.
of his and our native country (to the maintenence whereof he was also sworn)
yea how leudly he stood in defense of the liberties that they claim unto
clergy men, and that in an dishonest cause (for Philip Brocke, a canon of
Bedford being accused and tried of m^rder, gave evil words to the judges, and
the archbishop would not suffer him to be punished by the civil magistrate) how
stiffly he set himself against the king, to the mislike of most of the bishops
in the land, In vita Hen. 3.
Matthew of Paris (though otherwise a wellwiller of his) does plainly set down.
Yea what safety may kings have to their persons, or what quietness in their
dominions if they who are called clergy men, may within any princes dominions,
execute against them, the popes rash and unjust decrees, without punishment of
them that bear the sword? If unquiet heads, and rebellious persons, may
devise and practice what they think good, to follow their own lust, and get
unto themselves the raines of liberty, and when these things shall any way
break out, they may not be examined by princes or magistrates, or accused
before such authority? In this respect therefore, that by such immunities bad
men were much imboldned, either to perform the popes commandments, or their
own desires: princes had the less ability and opportunity to shake off that
yoke of more than Egyptiacal bondage which the pope laid upon them. For, if
they once endeavored to attempt any such thing, they had within their realm
(even such as should by christian duty, and very natural affection be their
strength and aid) them that under pretense of obedience to the vicar of Rome
would make faint the hearts of the princes friends, and mightily strengthen the
hands of his worst sort of subjects. And no marvel though in the days of
deep darkness or ignorance, this leprousie did so infect and spread, for we,
among whom the light of Gods truth does shine in some reasonable manner in
many places, Jesuits and priests peril^ous.
and in great abundance in some, yet cannot be rid of that scabbe. For though
God in his tender mercy toward us, has banished out of this land, that proud
authority of the pope, and given unto us, as an inestimable treasure, the true
liberty of conscience, and ministry of the word: yet because our princes and
magistrates are far short of that zeal that was commended in godly kings,
and should be in christian magistrates, and we our selves even the whole body
of the subjects, do not walk according to our calling, or work according to
our profession, but detain the truth in unrighteousness: Romans 1. 18.
even for our sins I say doubtless it comes to pass, that there are so many
Cananites in our land, waiting still, as occasion may serve, to be pricks in
our eyes, Numb. 33. 55.
and thorns to prick us in our sides, so that though their power will not
serve yet to cast us out of the land: yet they can find means enough to grieve
us in the land. It is our sin also that brings in among us, these that
creep not into widows houses only, but into the houses of men, especially
women that are simple and ignorant, and laden with sin, many of them
withdrawing them from the true knowledge of God, and duty toward their
magistrates, I mean the Jesuits and seminary priests, a kind of people as
necessary and commodious to live among good subjects, or in any quiet
commonwealth, as the frogs, lice, f^ies and grasshoppers of Egypt were, H^od
8. ^^xod. 10. Jesuits and Priest^ the locust. Reuil. 9. 3.
or as caterpillars are for fruit, corn or grass. They seem to be the very
locusts, that came out of the dark smoke that issued out of the botomlesse
pit, whose sting is secret like the scorpions, teaching rebellion to princes,
under color of obedience to the pope. They are nimble, and want no courage,
like horses prepared to the battle. 7
They are crowned with the honorable name of Jesuits, and have faces like men
in external profession of obedience and truth. 8
They seem like unto women (that is) not like to do hurt, but yet obstinate
and stiff they are, in that they take in hand, and cruel and mighty to do
much ^urt, 9
among them that receive them. They are armed with the habergeon, of authority
from Rome. They are lifted up with the wings of proud conceit of their own
knowledge, whereby they make a noise, as though they could bear down all
before them. 10.
Lastly they have a king set over them, for the kings that are over other
subjects are not good enough to rule this crowned company. The pope is their
king, him they serve, to him they yield their obedience. And their travel is to
make other also to become his subjects. Whose five months, that is the time
of whose contiunance among us, is not yet expired, because our sins (as I
have said, and must say again and again) our sins prolong the time of our
chasticement. The multitude of clergy men and women.
The second inconvenience that these immunities (granted the clergy men) did
bring unto civil estates, was the i^finit swarms of subjects that were
accounted of that number. For besides their clerks, regular and irregular,
which grew to marvelous great multitudes, they had their lesser orders which
had also their part in these privileges. Which being so many in number as they
were, the commonwealth did not only find a want of such, as should help to
bear the burdens, that were to be laid upon the same: but also they by their
multitude, were able to make a great party, to attempt any thing that they
would take in hand. And by the large possessions which many of these had, they
could draw many folowers to be on their side. And this I take to be the reason
that Boniface the eight (as Marcilius Patiuinus writes) was so desirousto
enlarge and increase the number of his clergy, that he would have all such as
had married a maid, and contented themselves but with one wife, Part. 2. 6. ^.
should be of his clergy. Now their exemptions streching to all the clergy, I
pray you what subjects should be left unto the king, for him to command and
rule for his own safety, and the guard of his common wealth? It was therefore
a great post and pillar of popery, to bring these immunities to the clergy,
and a mean to maintain it the better. Both because it imboldned themselves to
do much mischief, and also it drew many to be of their societies. And so as
it was a double damage to the civil estate. So was it a double prop to uphold
the kingdom of the pope, and therefore dangerous more ways then one. Well,
thus far we are now come in this proof of popish practices, that we see
their sub^^ shifts to bring themselves to this high estate. It is not unknown
to us how wickedly they have abused their authoriti^e, in pride intolerable,
couecousnesse insa^iable, and malice unmeasurable. And lastly their government
being so very deuilish and detested almost of al, yet how and by what means
they have maintained the same. That is to say, I have opened their subtle
shifts, whereby they became so great, and secondly their practices and
proceedings in this their greatness, thirdly their cunning and compasses to
keep themselves great, the means, which for the most part they have used to
get into this nest, which they have built so high and to ^eepe themselves in
the same.

My meaning is not so lay open their wickedness of life, so long as it is but
their private fault, Romans 14. 4.
let them stand or ^all to their own Lord, he against whom they offend, shall
call them to account. But that only that belongs to the question of the
popes supremacy, which now I have taken in hand to survey, and to the abuse
either in getting, or in using of it, that only did I purpose to entreat of.
And hereunto am I forced by double necessity. First, because it is one part of
the popi^h practices. But especially to stop the mouths of them whose sight
is so quick toward others, as that they can epsy a small mote in their eye.
In our church they can find no ministry, no succession, no sacraments, all is
wrong, they see nothing but faults.

The great beam that troubles their own eye, they cannot see. But as men
sightlesse and senseless, they imagine all is well with them, all is
catholic. Catholic church, catholic faith, catholic religion, catholic
doctrine. And yet, if the matter be well examined neither their church, neither
yet their faith, have any show of catholic in them. As (I trust) it is evident
to see, in this Survey of the Popes Supremacy, that their doctrine is not
catholic, their doings are not christian like. Let us examine whether that
which they teach us concerning this point, have been taught likewise of all the
godly learned, or at the least of the most of them, Whether the doctrine of
supremacy be catholic.
at all times in all places, constantly, and of set purpose, not by the way (as
we term it) in handling some other matter, often, and plainly. For these are
the properties that Viucentius Lyrinensis an old father, requires in that
doctrine, that is catholic and true. That Peter was otherwise a foundation in
the building of the church of Christ, then were other of the Apostles, it is
not a catholic doctrine. That Christ gave to Peter only the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, it is not by these rules a catholic faith. That the
feeding of Christ's sheep in the whole world, or the government of the whole
church, was committed to Peter only, or especially, is most catholikely taught:
so that not one of all these points of their religion, which are indeed the
groundwork, whereupon they raise this their stately building of the popes
supremacy, can be called catholic (as is before showed.) But if they could
prove these things to be catholic, as they will never be able to do, yet
have they not obtained their purpose. For, how is this conveyed to the bishop
of Rome, if it were in Peter. It is not catholikely believed, that he was
bishop of Rome: neither yet that he conveyed his estate or interest over the
whole church (if any such had been in him) to the bishop of Rome. Or if all
this could be proved, yet remains one point that were able to overthrow all.
For it is not received as a catholic doctrine, that the Bishop of Rome cannot
err, or that for sin and error, the privileges which the church of Rome
claims, if they had any such, could not be forfeited, as well in them as in
other churches.

In all which points, if I have nor sufficiently proved, that the church of
Rome teaches false doctrine and repugnant to the Scriptures (wherein I submit
my self to the judgment of the indifferent Reader:) yet (I trust) that the
adversaries them selves must needs confess, that these cannot be proved, to
be catholic doctrines. But on the contrary a man may easily see, if he mark
the story of times, that these things which are the only pillars to uphold
this popish kingdom, were never thought upon in the Apostles times, or the ages
next to them, that is to say, in the purer times of the primitive church. But
when heresies began to trouble the church, and men began to separat them selves
from the unity of faith, more boldly, and more openly then at the first they
did. And it pleased God to continue in some reasonable sort, sincerity and
truth of religion in the church of Rome: Peter's chair.
then began that seat to be called Peter's chair (not because Peter sat
there) but because that notable confession that Peter made, and the faith that
he preached, was there established, and soundly kept and maintained, (as before
I have showed out of Opta^us and others) that Peter's chair signifies his
doctrine. And as after the sun is once set, darkness grows still more and
more, so that the further from sun set until it be ready to rise again, the
greater is the darkness: even so the farther men were from those purer times,
the further did they wander, from the ways of truth, and the grosser was the
ignorance that they were in. So as that which at the first was not once thought
upon, yet was it at the last affirmed of some very constantly and boldly. But
if they cannot prove it to be a doctrine generally received at all times even
in the days of the apostles, and so by continual succession constantly taught
in the ages next following, and so delivered us: they do but too much abuse the
simple, to tell them that is catholic and ancient that is but the dream or
late devise of some later teachers. Now I call them whatsoever antiquity they
seem to have, that swerve any thing from that, which the ancient of days
has taught, or Christ who is our true antiquity, has delivered. It behooves
therefore al christians to take heed of such, as under pretense of being popish
catholics, Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph.
and under or color of this glorious name (which belongs neither to them,
neither yet to their religion) creep into corners, deceive the ignorant, seek
to make many of their profession, Beware of sen^narie priests.
by having only in their mouths this word catholic faith, catholic
religion, catholic church, whereas in truth, as it seems, that they being
neither thought worthy of preferment at home, neither yet finding that they
looked for abroad, even as the cormorants gather where the carkas is, to get
their prey: so these seek their meat and maintenance by seducing such simple
and silly souls. Neither do I affirm, that all are moved by these causes,
either to leave their native country, either to return to sow amongst her
majesty's subjects, this seed of seduction and sedition, but they that do
trouble this Realm, are for the most part such, and moved by such reasons. But
as they can not prove by an catholic grounds their title to the supremacy to
be good: so their practice is too bad, and far from that christian modesty
and meekness, which should be in Gods children. For if saint Peter said
truly, that such as himself was, should not as Lords (bear rule) over the
Lords here^age, 1. P^^ 5. 3.
but be as examples to the flock: then how can the pope claim that
sovereign authority over all kings, 1. Pet. 2. 13.
and whom saint Peter calls chief. If none can enter into any calling,
especially to have the charge over the flock of Christ, unless he be called
thereunto, as it is confessed by all men: what reason can the bishops of Rome
pretend, why either they should without any warrant, nay contrary to the
word, so exalt themselves above all other, or so unlawfully, or rather by so
vile practices and shifts, as by violence and strife, by buing and selling, by
falsehood and craft, by poisoning and murders, by sorcerie and the devils help,
get to be popes? Or being placed in that proud place, how comes it to pass
that with so great boldness, without fear, without shame, they profane the
majesty of God, and despise, yea tread under foot the excellency of man, be
he never so high. Is this the fruit of their catholic doctrine? Do such lewd
dealings become Christ's vicar, or Peter's successor? But to conclude, seeing
the popes title unto the supremacy has no show of truth: Conclusion.
and seeing his exercise of the same, is almost nothing else but a blaspheming
of God, and a defacing of all authority ordained by God: Exhortation to
ch^istian princes.
raise and rouse up your selves after your long sluggishnes (O ye christian
princes and magistrates) shake off from your necks this yoke of bondage,
wherein you serve that Italian priest. Join your powers and strength together.
Gather and call a free Council in deed, where the pope as a party may plead
his cause, not sit as judge. Force him to content himself with that place
which the word of God will a^foord him. If any more be given unto him, or any
other, yet let not the godly potentats give unto any as they have done such
reins of liberty, but that they may know that authority to be but from man,
and that their power is not full or absolute, but only limited: and that if
they abuse the same, they may and shall answer for their boldness, according
to the quality of their offense. So shall you deliver christendom from a
heavy bondage, your own realms from a most dangerous enemy, and the church
of God from a most manifest Antichrist. So shall you use your authority to the
comfort of the godly, as you should do, Tim. 17.
and as in duty you are bound to Gods glory, and establishing of the Kingdom
of Christ. Now unto the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only
wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

