BAPTISMALL REGENERATION of Elect Infants, Professed by the Church of England,
according to the Scriptures, the Primitive Church, the present Reformed
Churches, and many particular Divines apart.

By COR: BVRGES, Dr of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chapl^ines in
Ordinary.

TIT. 3.5. According to his mercy be s^ued us, by the Laver of regeneration,
and renew^^g of the Holy Ghost. Aug. vt citatur a P. Lom^. 4. Sen. Did. 4 A.
Sacramenta in s^^is electis efficient quod figura^t. AT OXFORD, Printed by I.
L. for Henry Curteyn. Ann. Dom. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, FRANCIS, Lord RVSSELL Baron of Thornhaugh, Earl of
Bedford, and Lieu-Tenant of Devonshire.
MY LORD.
IT is a practice too common in this scribbling age, under pretense of respect,
t^ send worthless ^^empty Pamphlets abroad in Gr^a^ Men's Liveries. Which comes
to pass, partly because children of the brain, how deformed soever, are held
so precious by the Parents, that they think themselves not sufficiently
graced, unless they procure some Noble person to be the Godfather; and partly
because such slimy Comets, although they make a great blaze, cannot move
themselves, without the help of the Moon, or of some greater Star to whirle
them about the World, with more ease, and hope. This has brought much
dishonor to many an Honorable Mecaenas; it being like a rich Sumpter Cloth
upon a Colliers sack. Hence, wise men grow afraid and unwilling to read their
Names in Print; and the best deserving Authors are forced to the irksome pains
of a nauseous Apology, when they do (with praise) perform a Duty,

For my part, I dare not put my self into the rank of best Deseruers; nor, to
boast any thing of my present performance. Howbeit, thus much I will take upon
me to affirm, that mine aim (next unto common benefit) is Your service; and,
that the Subject which I here present, is not unworthy of either the best man's
labor, Est autem ea Quaestio cum difficilis and plena controversiae tum digna
quae tractetur, and explicetur diligenter, Whitak de sacram. controv. de Bapt
quaest. 4. cap 5.
or the Choycest Patron.

The following Treatise endeavors to lay open and make good the efficacy of
Sacred baptism, in respect of Regeneration; in which the greatest ought more
to rejoice then in the greatest prerogatives on Earth. This is that which (if
they belong to the Covenant) makes them members of Christ, children of God, and
heirs of that kingdom which is above.

The whole, for manner of prosecution, is Polemical: De Baptismo and mysterio
sanctae fidei, vnusquisque Archiepiscopus suos suffraganeos diligenter
studioseque admoneat, quatenus per studium sacrae lectionis imbuti, and de
mysterio sanctae fidei, and de Sacramento baptismatis, vnu quesque illoru^, in
eropria parochia perfect studioseque presbyteras, and vniuersum populum
docere, and instruere non n^gligat Council. Arelat. cap. 3. sub Car. Mag. A^
813. tom. 3 Con^il. Par. 1. Sect. 2. page 188. edit. Biniana, 1618.
yet useful, and such for substance, as the Fathers in the Council of
Orleance, under CHARLES THE GREAT, thought fit to commend to the care of all
Ministers of every degree, as being necessary to be diligently and fully
explicated unto the people. Therefore, I hope, I shall not be censured by
judicious men to trouble the world with an impertinent discourse, which might,
in that regard, disparage your Lordships Name, that it humbly craves leave to
bear.

And to say truth, to whom else should it repair, either to do its first
homage, or to get under Covert-Baron, but to your Honor, heretofore the Heir,
now the Master of that Ancient, Noble, and much honored FAMILY, to which I
was, and ever will be a faithful and humble servant; not, in expectation, but
only in thankful acknowledgment of what I have already received, and of what
other my fellow-seruants do, in your Honorable service, still enjoy.

It cannot be unknown to such as know Me, how much I stand obliged to your
Noble Predecessors, the late Earl and Countess of Bedford now with God. Nor
can any man be so ignorant as not to see cause why this public Testimony of
my continued gratitude due to that HOUSE, should, by all Rights, be laid at
your Feet, in whom all the perfections and Excellencies of true Nobility do so
eminently meet, to make you highly honored in the Eyes and Hearts of all that
are able to value true Desert, as being one that not only holds up the Honor,
but adds to the Glory of all your famous Progenitors, who have derived to You
that Illustrious Dignity you now possess.

The Good Lord who has brought you hitherto, be with You, your Noble Lady, and
your numerous, amiable, and much promising Progeny, in all things, always. He
grant you length of days, increase of all true Honor, the riches of Grace,
and the Crown of Glory. So prays still

Your Lordships most devoted Servant in Christ Jesus COR: BVRGES.

To the Readers
I Will not tediously preface touching either the occasion of this Treatise,
which we may find in the first Chapter; or any particular else that may be
passed over without prejudice to You, or Me. I have only these things whereof to
advertize you, before ye enter on the book it self.

1 I am certainly informed that some, having intelligence of my purpose of
pubishing this work, (which is tbe sum of sundry Lectures delivered in mine
own S. Magnus London.
Charge) spare not to give out that this is not the same which I preached. I
cannot but wonder at their confidence and uncharitableness, forasmuch as I am
sure that, at the time of making such their proclamation, they neither saw one
line of my book, nor knew what it contains. Only in general, some of them
have heard it by Judicious and eminent Divines, to be pronounced Orthodox:
which it seems, does not a little trouble them, because they have divulged the
contrary, of my Sermons. Howeuer they, by this, make it appear before hand,
that they are resolved not to permit this tract to go without a scratcht face,
so soon as their nails can come at it. I am therefore constrained for defense
thereof to avouch, that I can (if need require) make it good by above 500
Witnesses, that I have been so punctual in setting down, in this book, the
maine position which I first delivered that I have put it into the very same
terms formerly used, without the least variation. I willingly confess, that
in the prosecution of the point, I have here added some things by way of
further illustration; and some also, for more ample confirmation; and pressed
some objections further then the streights of time would then admit. And if for
this I be to blame, let wise men judge.

2 Whereas most of the objections porduced and answered in this treatise, have
been first urged upon me in private conference, or sent me in writing by
sundry friends, whose worth I reverence, and whose love I much affect,
notwithstanding their dissent from me in this particular; I must crave leave to
profess and protest before him that knows all things, that my aim is not so
much as in my secret thoughts, to despise or disparage any of them hereby: but
only to set down their arguments, that thereby occasion might be taken, more
thoroughly to discuss this subject. It is true that I have sometimes made use
of the same phrases first used by my friends to me: yet I desire them to take
notice that I have only weighed their arguments impartially in the balance of
reason and truth, without the least glaunce upon any of their persons. And if I
could have been ascertained that none but they would ever have lighted on the
same objections, I could as willingly have suppressed them; as J do the names
of the obiectors. But because what friends do octiect in love, others may also
press to the prejudice of this truth, I have made bold to make those arguments
thus public, that their mouths may be stopped, who else might happen to urge
the same with violence and passion enough, and think them unanswerable, if
there should no answers be sent out to meet them. For their sakes therefore
have J thus presumed on my friends (whom I earnestly desire still to hold dear
unto me,) hoping they will not bethink it to the public good, nor hold
themselves disparaged hereby, but rather rejoice that they have been a means
of a more exquisite debate of this point, whereby the truth may be better known.

3 I have a request to all that shall vouchsafe to make use of this book, that
they will be at the pains to read over the whole, or forbear to censure it by
any piece thereof, that they may happen to cast their eye upon. For, in a point
of controversy, wherein method requires only explication in one part,
confirmation in another; refutation in another; and often references from one
part of the discourse unto other places thereof, for avoiding of confusion and
tedious repetitions: it is impossible to receive full satisfaction by reading
any one piece only, how satisfactorie soever it may prove when it is considered
altogether, and when the rest is perused and weighed as well as that branch on
which hasty and forward censurers do sometimes pass a sharp and heavy
sentence. If you pervse the first part of this book only, without the residue,
ye may perhaps object diverse things, and remain unsatisfied because ye go
not on to the latter part wherein all such objections together with answers to
them, do present themselves in their proper ranks. On the contrary, if we
look only on the latter part to see how the maine objections be answered, ye
may sometimes happily stick (through your own fault) at some of the answers,
because I take sundry things for granted which ye may doubt of till ye have
read the former part, wherein the same things are proved at large, and to
which, in my answers the rules of Method often compel me to refer you.
Farewell.

A Table of the several Chapters of this Book.
CAP. I. The Introduction declaring the Occasion and Necessity of this
Treatise. p. 1. CAP. II. The State of the Position. page 11 CAP. III. The
Agreement of this point to the Public doctrine of our church. p. 22 CAP. IV.
The point proved by Authority of Scripture. page 70 CAP. V. The judgment of the
Fathers of the Primitive Church in this point. page 117 CAP. VI. The Agreement
of it to the confessions of Reformed Churches. page 138 CAP. VII. The Judgment
of Foreign Divines in this point. p. 157. particularly of Calvine, Chameir, M.
Bucer, ^. Martyr, Musculus, Fran: Iunius, Zanchius, Danaeus, Gerhardus Vossius.
CAP. VIII. The Judgment of some Divines of special note in our own Church. p.
185 Bishop Jewel, Doctor Whitaker, Dr Francis White now L. Bishop of Norwitch.
D Davenant now L. Bishop of Salisbury, D. Fulk. and D. Featly. CAP. IX. Six
Objections against the maine Position answered. page 231 CAP. X. Six other
Objections against the same Position answered. p. 296
The principal Authors quoted in this Treatise as giving testimony to the
maine assertion handled herein.
Fathers
Cyprianus. Gregorius Nazien: Athanasius. Basilius Mag: Chrysostomus.
Hieronymus. Ambrosius. Augustinus.
Confessions of Churches.
Heluetica. Scoticana. Belgica. Gallicana and Genevensis. Argentinensis.
Augustana. Saxonica. Wirtembergica. Palatini.
Foreign Divines.
Ioannes Calvinus. Petrus Martyr. Hieron: Zanchius. Wolfgangus Musculus. Fran.
Iunius. Aug: Marloratus. Mart. Bucerus. David Pareus. Lamb. Daneus. Daniel
Chameir. Ger. Vossius.
English Divines.
Bishop Jewel. Dr Whitaker. Dr Fulke. Dr Dauenant. B. of Sarum. Dr White. B. of
Norwitch. Dr Featly. Dr Ames. Mr Richard Hooker. Mr Thomas Rogers. Mr Thomas
Tailor, D. of Divinity. Mr. Aynsworth.
BAPTISMALL REGENERATION ORDINARILY COMmunicated to Elect Infants.
CHAP. 1. The introduction, declaring the occasion and necessity of this
treatise.
THere is no Ordinance set up by Christ in his Church, more useful and
comfortable unto a Christian, throughout the whole course of his Militant
condition, then sacred Baptism, the Laver of regeneration and of the renewing
of the Holy Ghost. Nor is there any fountain which the Arch-enimy of mankind,
Tit. 3.5.
has more endeavored to trouble, and corrupt with multiplicity of poisonous
errors, then that which is set open to all the inhabitants of spiritual
Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. Zach. 13.1.


For proof hereof, I shall not need to thrust any man's head so much as Within
the door of that Augaean stable of Popish absurdities. we have too many
instances else where. Some advance Baptism too high: Others depresse it as
much too low. There are, that hold it so absolutely necessary, as that none can
be saved without it. On the contrary, there are, that in scorn call it
Elementish water. Others, that think it a thing indifferent; and deny it to
infantes, notwithstanding that to them belongs the kingdom of God: Mar. 10 14.
Others that make it a bare sign, and badge to distinguish the members of the
visible Church from the rest of the World, some, in terms, yield it to be
somewhat more; yet deny to it all present efficacy in, and upon infants,
ordinarily, in the act of administration. Some grant an efficacy, but such as
is equally communicated to all infantes that are outwardly baptized. Some admit
the efficacy of it unto remission of sin in Infants elect: but, any present
work of the spirit, unto Regeneration in them, they either flatly deny, or
refuse to acknowledge. Against all these errors, and particularly against the
last, the Church of England has justly opposed her self, in her Public
Doctrine, for the defense whereof have I taken upon me this difficult province.
The occasion this.

In the course of my ministry, in mine own cure, I was lately In Hilary Term.
1627.
cast upon this point: viz: That all elect infants, do, ordinarily, in
Baptism receive the spirit of Christ, to seize upon them for Christ, and to be
in them as the root and first principle of regeneration, and future newness
of life Vid. Hooker. lib. 5. Sect. 60.
This I speak (as then I expressed my self,) with reference only unto such
Infants as dye not in infancy, but l^ue to years of discretion, and then come
to be effectually called, and actually converted by the ordinary means of the
word applied by the same spirit unto them, when and how he pleases. As for
the rest of the elect who dye infants, I will not deny a further work,
sometimes in, sometimes before baptism, to fit them for heaven.

For this, am I peremptorily censured and condemned by many, as guilty not only
of Arminianisme, but even of direct Popery, and of teaching a Doctrine of
devils. To make good what they have done, they lay to my charge sundry
passages, as branches of my position, which, not only in stating the question,
but also in the prosecution of it, I often and often disclaimed as errors, in
express terms. This they know well enough; and it has bin made manifest to
some of their faces by others also. Howbeit, they owing me a spite for some
thing else, (as by the effect appears) take no notice of their wilful
mistakes. That which they have once reported, they are resolved to maintain;
therefore they cease not to pursue me with clamors, slanders, and revilings
without end or measure. No protestations of mine own, either public or
private, no Apologies made by my friends, are able to shelter me from their
virulent darts which daily fly in my face where ever I become.

This alone were cause sufficient of publishing this Treatise, that I may purge
my self of these odious crimes so unjustly imputed. He that being a Minister
is not careful to uphold his necessary reputation among the people of God, as
well as to keep a good conscience toward God, is both cruel to himself,
Nobis enim necessari est vita nostra, aliis fama nostra. Aug. De Bono Viduit.

Mihi sufficit conscientia mea, vobis necessaria est fama mea Jdem. ad Frat. tu
Erem.


and injurious to his Master. His Ministry must needs be of less esteem, if
not despised outright, who shall suffer himself to be proclaimed guilty of
Error, and Heresy; and sees his Good Name hanged up in chains by the giddy
multitude, even before his own doors, and he not endeavor, in a meet and
temperate manner, to declare himself innocent, when he is well able to plead,
not guilty, to the indictment.

If any man shall say; It is a man's honor to pass by offenses, and therefore
it had been far better to have endured a while, with patience, the tongues
of intemperate men, then thus to have spread the cause before the whole world:
this course being likely more to exasperate, rather then to satisfy or
mollify such as have appeared in opposition against me. To such a person mine
answer is this. If the wrong had not trenched so much upon the credit of my
Ministry (which ought to be as dear unto me, as any man's is to him;) or if I
had been handled thus in private only, by private men, I could willingly have
borne all that reproach and infamy that is laid upon me, without complaining;
but, not without bewailing, with a bleeding heart, the strange pride and
insolency of such spirits as dare thus wilfully to traduce any Minister of
Christ.

That which has embarked me in this public action is of more importance
then the maintaining of mine own innocence against the murmur of private
persons: yea there are many weighty causes concurring to put upon me a
necessity of doing something in this kind. If any shall take occasion hence to
be more exasperated, it shall be only his own fault: for I hope I shall so
manage this work, that it shall evidently appear to all Godly, Judicious,
temperate men, that I no where give any cause of offense unto any peaceable
Christian; but endeavor only, in a modest and humble manner, to clear and
maintain a Truth, and to give all satisfaction that I may, unto such as love
Truth better then Victory.

Briefly, the Causes chiefly enducing me to send these Papers unto the Press,
are these Three.

1 The just Defense of the public doctrine of our Church, which has been by
some, upon this occasion, publicly opposed so far as they durst. For, how
freely sundry Ministers do cry down this Position (and that publicly too)
notwithstanding that this truth is so clearly consonant to the Leiturgy and
Public Catechism of the Church in which we live, is too well known.
Through my sides therefore have they gored and wounded our common Mother, who
suffers in the cause, much more then my self, or then any Particular either
does, or can.

2 I find that sundry sober and well affected Christians are often puzzled, and
at a loss in this particular, for want of information; yea in danger to be
drawn unawares into Schism; 2. Sam. 15.11.
not unlike those 200 men that followed Absolon, in the simplicity of their
hearts, not knowing any thing of his conspiracy. For their sakes therefore it
is very requisite that this point should be thoroughly searched into, and made
public. This is not a quarrel about Goats hair; Scomma.
nor so poor a business as should deserve (in a Pulpit) to be compared to
the action of a Famous General that levies a strong Army, draws them out into
the field, sets them in order or battle, and raises a great expectation of
some honorable exploit, which in conclusion proves to be no other then the
breaking of an Egge-shell That Great Athanasius was of another opinion, when he
placed this very question (how one may know whether be received the spirit in
Baptism?) amongst those which he terms (...) Questions necessary and vseful^
for all Christians to be acquainted with. In titulo Iabri Quaest ad Antio h.
Princ. tom 2.


3 Nor was there ever such need of opening this truth unto the people, as now:
because, never, since the heresies of the Sacramentarians and Anabaptists were
hissed out of the Church of Christ, were men so violent against it, and so
impatient of contradiction. They cry out, What use, what use of such a
Doctrine? Whether does it tend? Me thinks they should be able to answer
themselves, without help. Is it nothing unto a Christian, in time of a violent
temptation, when he has lost all sight of his Savior, to be assured that
even in his Baptism he received the Holy Ghost as an anointing that shall
abide with him for ever? Is the consolation of God a small matter unto a
Christian Parent, that in obedience to Christ, and in faith in his promises,
has presented his child to the sacred Laver Quam enim suaue piis animis, non
verbo tantum, sed oculari etiam spectaculo certiores fieri tantum se gratiae
apud Patrem caelestem obtinere, vt posteritas sua illi curae sit? Hic enim
videre est vt providentissimi erga nos patris familias personam suscipit, qui
ne post mort^m quidem nostram, solicitudinem nostri deponit quin liberis
nostris consulat ac prospiciat. Calvin. Instit. l 4. cap. 16. Sect. vlt.
, where the Holy Ghost has seized upon him for Christ, so as, whether himself
live or die, he may conceive good hope that Christ has taken the charge of his
child, and will provide all things needful for it, and give it both grace and
glory? What a comfort (says a learned writer M. T. Tailor.
upon Tit. 3.5. making it one Use of this very Doctrine) is it for a father to
see his child washed with the blood of Jesus Christ? Cleansed from sin? Set
into the visible Church, yea, into the Body of Christ, in the right use of this
Sacrament? Wherein a Parent ought more to rejoice, then if he could make it
heir of the world.

All these considered, I appeal to any Understanding Man, whether I have not
cause to publish my Labors upon this subject, out of duty that I owe to the
Church of Christ; and whether (considering how little is done in this kind) it
were not worth the best search, and greatest labor of the most able Divines in
the kingdom, I am sure D. Whitaker was of this mind. Tract. de Sacram.
controu: de Bapt: quaest. 4. c. 5. in principio. Where speaking of the efficacy
of Baptism in Infants: he has these words. Est autem ea quaestio cum
difficilis and plena controversiae, tum digna quae tractetur, and explicetur
diligenter. This is a question that is both difficult and full of controversy,
and such also as is worthy to be handled and carefully opened.
to clear this point to the full, for the edification and comfort of pious and
peaceable Christians.

What I have performed herein, I humbly offer to be freely censured by the
more Judicious who, truly and indeed, are both able and willing to maintain
the public Doctrine of this Church already established. I will not take upon
me to tie all men, or any man, to my private opinions. I know that the Learned
may without blame, dissent from each other in many things, so long as they
obtrude them not upon others, nor trouble the peace of the Church thereabout.
Howbeit if this, of mine, be a private opinion, I renounce it, and crave pardon
of the whole Church of God for troubling the world with such a toy. But, if it
appear, to impartial Judges able to weigh it in the balance of the
Sanctuary, to be a truth, and such a truth as the whole Church of England is as
much engaged in, as my self; I trust that then, it shall find acceptance with
all sober men; and, by Gods blessing, prove profitable to all, that in humility
and love, desire and endeavor to embrace the truth. As for others, I shall
pass them by with pity, and prayer that they may at length come again to
themselves.

CAP. 2. The State of the Position.
NOt to trouble the Reader with any discourse touching the Name, or Definition
of Baptism; nor yet with the efficacy of Baptism touching Remission of sin,
which I willingly admit: let us now fall upon the state of the Position
touching the efficacy of this Ordinance, upon the Elect, unto Regeneration. I
shall have occasion to declare my self in the other particulars, as I pass
along.

There is no term in our Position needing explication unless Two, the Spirit,
and Regeneration. By Spirit, I mean not only grace wrought by the Spirit; but
the Holy Ghost dwelling in every true Christian and working Grace. Howbeit I
consider this Holy Ghost, not essentially, not personally as the third Person
in Trinity; but, operatiuely as the Spirit of Christ communicated from him to
all his members, to unite them unto himself, and to be in them the first
principle, and as it were the soul of spiritual life. It is the Spirit
himself, and not his Graces that first knits us to Christ. 1. Cor. 12.13
Graces are effects of the union, not the bond it self. Nor can some of those
things which are attributed to the Spirit dwelling in a Christian, possibly be
applied to any created Gift or grace infused, but only to the Holy Ghost
himself: as for example, our Saviors speaking of that Comforter which he
would, after his departure, send to his Disciples to dwell in them, says that,
when he is come he will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment, Ioh* 16.8. which must needs be the act of a person, not of a created
inanimate gift, and in ver. 13. whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak, and he will show you things to come, He shall glorify me, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you, etc. In breife no place of
Scripture can be produced, wherein (...). The HOLY GHOST is put only for grace
wrought or bestowed, and not for the Author of it. I am not ignorant that some
modern writers do hold otherwise: but saving their judgments, I cannot but
follow the Fathers, and soundest schoolmen, who soundly maintain this truth.
I will not trouble the reader with heaps of Authors Of this see more in Zanth.
de Not. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 6. Quaest. 2. and 3. As also in my learned and much
honored friend Mr. I. Downham. Christ-warf: part. 4. lib. 1. cap. 3. Choquet
Lillan. De Gra. Sanctific. Tom, 1. lib. 1. disp. 1. ca. 4.
. I only pray the learned to consider well, whether the admitting of this
exposition of such texts of Holy writ as mention the dwelling of the Holy Ghost
in a Christian, viz. that by the HOLY GHOST is meant only Grace wrought or
working, does not (unawares) give some countenance to the heresy of the
Pneumatomachists. Sure I am S. Augustine Cont. Sermon. Arrianorum, cap. 20. and
cap. 29.

Cont. maxim. lib. 1. and lib. 2. cap 11. and lib. 3. cap. 21. and alibi passim.


was wont to prove the Godhead of the holy Ghost by this very argument, that
we are said to be his Temples; and he, to dwell in us.

That other of regeneration, I take to be all one with spiritual life, taken
in the largest sense; which life, according to the Scriptures, I distinguish
into Initiall and Actual. For as in the natural, sometimes the soul which is
usually called the form by which, and sometimes the (...) esse the being it
self of such or such a creature animated by his soul, is put for life; as
that learned Zanchius well observes De Not. Dei. lib. 2 cap. 5. quest. 1.
: so is it in the Spiritual life whereof we are now to treat. And upon this
foundation it is that we rightly build our present distinction, which has
clear footting also in the sacred Volumes of Eternal Truth.

1 Initiall (which we may also term Seminall or Potentiall life, I call that
which consists in participatio^ of the spirit of Christ, as the form of this
spiritual life: the spirit being the first principle of Regeneration, by whom
the first seed and foundation thereof is laid in a Christian. And this is life
as it were in the root, like unto the first principles of reason laid up in
the soul rational, before it have actually enabled the body to move, and act
rationally. And of this, says acute Iunius De Paedobapt. the^: 7.
, our Savior spoke in John. 3. more clearly to our purpose is that of the
Apostle, Rom: 8.10. The spirit is life, because of righteousness. where the
spirit which is the cause of life, is put for life it self: and by the spirit
is meant; not the reasonable soul, but the Holy Ghost; if Calvin, (and before
him Chrysostom and Ambrose, and after him Peter Martyr) hit right in the
exposition of it Gal. in loc. Vocabulo spiritus ne animam nostram intelligas,
sed regenerationis spiritum quem vitam appellat Paulus.
, whereof for my part (after serious pensitation, of all that any have said to
carry it to another sense) I make no question.

2 Actual, I call that, which consists properly in the very spiritual being
it self actually produced in a Christian, by the spirit bringing him forth a
new man in Christ, in the ordinary course of Regeneration of such as live to
years, whereby he is enabled actually to believe repent, etc. Romans 6.11.
Likewise ye, reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin: but alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So Galath. 2.20. and elsewhere.

The several members of this distinction, I further illustrated, thus.

The former of these is as the transplantation of a tree into a new soil; the
later, as drawing the fatness of the soil into the tree; causing it to shoot
up, spring, blossom, and bear fruit. The former, says Iunius, ibid. Hac
regenerantur infantes electi, cum Christo inseruntur, and huius obsignatio sit
iis dum baptizantur.
is as the transplanting of a man out of the first Adam, into the second; the
later, as his drawing virtue from him, and living thereby. The former is as the
stretching of Elisha upon the dead child, the first time, whereby the flesh of
the child waxed warm, but as yet it moved not 2. King. 4.34.
; the later is as his stretching himself upon it the second time, which caused
it to neese seven times and to open his eyes Ver. 35.
. The former of these is like unto the first incubation or resting of the
spirit upon the face of the waters, while the earth was yet without form, and
void, Gen: 1.2. the later, as the production of each particular creature,
afterward in his kind, time, and order, appointed of God, when it pleased him
to speak the word. The Spirit rested upon the waters from the beginning; yet
the creatures were not presently produced by the spirit: they came forth in
their due time, and place, when God gave his Fiat and not before.

This Distinction laid as a ground, will of it self bear us out in this
conclusion.

There may be even in order of time a communicating of the spirit of grace, as
a principle of future newness of life, before any ordinary actual infusion of
actual or habitual graces, whereby a man, on his part, actually makes
declaration thereof, by a thorough change of his heart and life, as a new man
in Christ. This being granted, I add further, touching the ordinary means of
manifest conferring on us and confirming to us the Spirit of grace, a second
Conclusion, which is this.

The first ordinary and certain means whereby we, that descend of Christian
Parents, have any initiall Regeneration begun in us, and do ordinarily,
receive and come to be ascertained of the spirit of Christ, for this end, that
he may produce in us future actual spiritual life, is the first ordinance of
Christ that we partake of: to wit Baptism. This is our first certain and
manifest initiation into Christ, ( Romans 6.) and receiving of the Holy Ghost, in
the ordinary way of divine dispensation; by means (Act: 2.38,) and our
ingrafting into the body of Christ. 1. Cor. 12.13. So also says the 27 Article
of our Church. This Article. is urged and opened in the next cap.
This is the Block at which so many have stumbled. This is the Arminianisme,
Popery, and Doctrine of Devils, that I am charged with* This therefore is the
Point I am now to Labor in, after I shall have stated it somewhat more
distinctly and fully: for the effecting whereof, I must first more punctually
set down.

1 How far, all that are not Papists, Lutherans or Arminians do agree with
me herein. 2 what be the differences between me and some others, that though
they hold neither with Papist, nor Arminian do yet dissent from me.
The things on all hands agreed upon are these.

1 That some Infantes may and do receive the spirit to unite them unto Christ,
before Baptism. The question here is only of the first certain reception of
it, by external ordinary means applied. 2 That by Baptism is understood the
whole Ordinance, consisting of the inward grace as well as of the outward sign
3 That there is as much efficacy in Baptism unto Remission of sin, as unto
Regeneration; although we are now to treat only of the latter. 4 That the
spirit is not given to all, but to the Elect only. 5 That the outward element
has not in it any physical force, either by virtue of the consecration,
institution, or administration, to confer the spirit to any at all: but the
spirit is communicated immediately from Christ himself, when the Sacrament is
administered, if then it be at all conferred. 6 That God both may and does even
in Baptism, bestow the spirit upon some infants that live and come to years,
as well as upon other some that dye in infancy.
The differences then, are only two; which will be most breefely discerned in
these 2 Quaere's.

1 whether the communication of the spirit unto infants, from Christ himself,
for their first apparent engrafting into his body, and to be in them as the
first seed and principle of Regeneration, in the ordinary course of
regenerating such, as after Baptism, do live to years of discretion, be
ordinarily, in the baptism of the Elect? 2 whether the former, being granted,
it does also follow, that All the Elect do ordinarily, receive the spirit in
baptism; so that such as receive him before, or after, and not in Baptism,
are to be held to receive the spirit in an extraordinary, and not in the
ordinary course of divine dispensation thereof?
I hold the Affirmative in both these Questions* and determine them thus: viz:
It It most agreeable to the Jnstitution of Christ, that All Elect Infants that
are baptized, The maine point fully stated.
(unless in some extraordinary cases) do, ordinarily, receive, from Christ,
the Spirit in Baptism, for their first solemn initiation into Christ, and for
their future actual renovation, in Gods good time, if they live to years of
discretion, and enjoy the other ordinary means of Grace appointed of God to
this end.

This Position I am now to make good to be agreeable to the Doctrine.

1 Of the Church of England: by which it appears to be no private fancy. 2 Of
the Holy Scriptures, upon which this Doctrine of our Church is founded. 3 Of
the Ancient Fathers of best note in the truly Primitive church. 4 Of the
Reformed churches beyond the Sea; and particularly of Geneva. 5 Of the most
famous and eminent Divines both at home and abroad; and particularly of
calvine, and Dr Whitaker, beside sundry others.
Lastly, I will add Answers to all the Objections, that ever I could hear of,
against this Assertion.

CAP. 3. This agrees to the Public Doctrine of our Church.
BEfore I go further, I must advertise the Reader of one thing constantly to
be observed throughout this Treatise; and it is this. Wheresoever I shall for
brevities sake, only say thus much, that the Elect do receive the spirit in
Baptism; my purpose is to have it understood with all those conditions and
limitations before expressed, in the stating of the Point. So that it must
always be thus interpreted. viz: That it is most agreeable to the Jnstitution
of Christ, that All Elect Jnfants that are baptized (unless in some
extraordinary cases) do, ordinarily, receive, from Christ, the Spirit, in
Baptism, for their first solemn initiation into Christ; and for their future
actual renovation, in Gods good time, if they live to years of discretion,
and enjoy the other ordinary means of Grace appointed of God to this end. This
premized, I may more securely go on with my work. Nor shall any man that
finds oftentimes, in that which follows, a more compendious expression of
this Position, have cause to complain, that I deal ambiguously and
sophistically; because my resolution is to be always tried by this Conclusion
so largely delivered, and so bounded as in the former Chapter you may behold it.

The first part of my task is, to make it good, that this assertion is
agreeable to the public, and established Doctrine of the Church of England.
And this I propound in the first place; not as if I meant to tie any man's faith
to believe the point, merely because the Church of England says it. For She
will not assume so much Authority over any man's faith; having declared her
self expressly in the 21 Article of her Doctrine, that even General Counsels
(which represent the whole Church of Christ on earth) in things ordained by
them as necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it
may be declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture. I urge not then the
Doctrine of our Church to prove the point by it; as some have given out: but
only to show the agreement that it has with our Public Doctrine, that no man
might proclaim it to be a piece either of Popery, or Arminianisme; nor yet a
private conceit of mine own dissonant from the Churches of Christ: but that it
is a branch of that truth to which all the Ministers of our Church either have
subscribed, or ought so to do; and so, are as deeply engaged in the defense of
it, as my self whom some of them (either ignorant or careless of what they
subscribed to) do now so much oppose.

That this accords to the Doctrine of our Church, may appear in one or two
plain Syllogismes; the first whereof shall be this.

Syllogis. 1.
Mayor. That which the Church in the Public Leiturgie thereof, exhorts, and
requires us to pray for, when any Infant presumed to be truly and indeed
within the covenant of Grace, is brought to baptism; and, that which it also
teaches us to pronounce concerning that and every such infant, so soon as he
is baptized, must needs be granted to be agreeable to the Public Doctrine
of our Church touching all elect Infants that are baptized, ordinarily. Minor.
But the Public Leiturgie of our Church exhorts and requires us, at the
baptizing of every infant presumed to have interest in the Covenant of Grace,
as being within Gods Election That our Leiturgy has an eye to the covenant of
Grace; and presumes of any particular infant, that unto him the kingdom of
Heaven does indeed belong; and therevpo^ pronounces the child, after baptism
is administered, to be regenerate, may appear most evidently by this: viz: That
it leads us to that which our Savior spoke in the Gospel touching those
infants that were brought unto him, and blessed by him upon this ground, that
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Not that all children have right to the
kingdom; for Esau had none. Romans 9. Yet because men cannot see Gods secret
decree, they are not to make doubt of any particular, but knowing that some
infants are elected, and have right to the Kingdom, upon this ground they know
for certain that this Child is regenerate by the Spirit, if he be elected, and
if to him do belong the Kingdom of God. And therefore our Church in charity
pronounces so much of every Child considered individually and apart, because
in charity she presumes that unto that very particular belongs the Kingdom
of God. For upon this ground is the following exhortation and assurance built,
which upon this consideration, says Doubt ye not therefore but earnestly
believe that he will likewise favorably receive these present Jnf^nts, that
he will embrace them with the arms of his mercy, that he will give unto them
the blessing of eternal life, and make them partakers of his everlasting
kingdom.
, to pray for the Spirit of Regeneration to be given unto him: and, so soon
as he is baptized, to conclude him to be regenerated with the Holy Spirit; and
accordingly to give thanks for this, in Prayer, unto God. Conclus: Therefore
it is agreeable to the Public and established doctrine of the Church of
England, that all elect Jnfants do, ordinarily, receive the spirit of Christ,
in Baptism, in such manner and sense as is before expressed.
The Mayor Proposition cannot be doubted of* unless we shall say that, the
Doctrine and Leiturgie of our Church are contrary to one another: which no man,
well in his wits, will affirm, and yet subscribe to both.

The Minor, or, as some term it, the Assumption, is the only Proposition,
then, that must be proved. I pray you therefore, with patience, see it done, in
the several branches of it. There are in it these two particulars.

1 The Church, in her Leiturgie requires us to pray for the spirit of Christ
to be communicated to every particular infant brought to baptism, presuming of
the particular that he is within the election of Grace. 2 She concludes him to
be regenerate so soon as he is baptized: that is, to have received the Spirit
of regeneration, as the first principle thereof.
1. For the former, let the Leiturgie it self be produced, wherein the Church
enioyneth.

1 The Minister alone thus to bespeake the Congregation, when any children are
presented at the Font; I beseech you to call upon God the Father through our
Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous mercy, he will grant to these
children that thing which by nature they cannot have, that they may be baptized
with water and the HOLY GHOST. The Church enioyneth further. 2 Both Minister
and People, to pray; We beseech thee for thine infinite mercies, that thou will mercifully look upon these children; sanctify them and wash them with
the HOLY GHOST. Again, in the second Prayer; We call upon thee for these
infants, that they coming to thy Holy Baptism, may receive remission of their
sins by SPIRITVALL regeneration: Yet again, in the Third Prayer; Give THY
HOLY SPIRIT to these infants, that they may be borne again, and be made
heirs of everlasting salvation.
The purpose of the Church, then, is to teach us, that we should expect the
Spirit of Christ to be communicated in Baptism, to elect infants: or else it
must be concluded that the Church meant to mock us, by putting us to pray for
that which she does not believe we shall receive.

If any shall say; the Church teaches us to pray, indeed, for the Regeneration
of a child, when he is baptized; but not for his present regeneration? I
answer: yes, for his present Regeneration; not actual, ordinarily, such as
that he after attaines unto, in his effectual calling by the Word; yet
Initiall, and Potentiall, (as was before distinguished:) as shall appear in
the proof of the second branch of the Assumption, which is this: viz:

2 The Church concludes, in her Leiturgie, that the child is initially
regenerate, in his Baptism. For 1 It pronounces him to be regenerate;
enioyning the Minister thus to speak unto the people: seeing now, D. B. that
these children be regenerate, and grafted into the Body of Christ's
congregation, let us give thanks unto God for these benefits, etc. And least
any should shift this off by saying they are Sacramentally regenerated, but not
spiritually by any actual reception of the spirit at that time; the Solemn
Thanksgiving following is added to cut the throat of this shiftlesse gloss.
Let us examine it in the next place. 2 It teaches us all thus to join in
Thanksgiving unto God: We yield thee hearty thanks; most merciful Father,
that it has pleased thee to regenerate this infant (how? and with what?) with
thy HOLY SPIRIT, to receive him for thine own child by Adoption. what words
can more fully manifest the Churches intention to teach us that all infants
truly belonging to the covenant of grace, do ordinarily receive the spirit in
Baptism: not as a thing which none of them had before but as that of which
there was no certainty unto us, nor confirmation unto them before, in the
ordinary course of divine Dispensation of the Spirit, by means?


If the matter be not yet clear enough to such as shut their eyes against it.
Let them further attend to what the Church requires us that are Ministers to
pronounce touching a child baptized, rightly, in private: In the form of
Private Baptism.
I certify you that in this case, all is well done, and according to due order,
concerning the baptizing of this child, who being borne in Original sin, and
in the wrath of God, is now, by the Lauer of Regeneration in baptism, received
into the number of the CHILDREN OF GOD, AND HEIRS OF EVERLASTING LIFE: for our
Lord does not deny his grace and mercy unto such infants, but most lovingly
calls them to him, as the Holy Gospel does witness unto our comfort, on this
wise; At a certain time they brought Children to Christ, etc. Pick any other
sense then I have done out of the Leiturgy, especially when it shall be further
cleared by the Doctrine of the Church; and eris mihi magnus Apollo.

But some will be readdy to stop me here with sundry Objections, which must be
answered, 3 Objections.
before my way will be clear to go forward.

The Church perhaps teaches us thus to pray, and judge of infants baptized;
but does not well in so doing; and that if this be the meaning of our Book of
common prayer, we ought not to join in such a prayer?

To this I answer, that it is indeed very true that some have been so bold as
to put the ly upon that which the Minister pronounces touching regeneration of
the infant baptized; saying, in plain terms, That is a ly. But saving their
foul mouths, I trust this shall appear even out of the Scriptures
themselves, in our next chapter, to be the truth; and that Gods own infallible
truth will bear us out in it. I may not here prevent my self. Howbeit,
something (to stay the stomachs of such as quarrel our Church for this point;
or me, for misinterpreting our Church:) let me allege out of a good Author
(whom both they and I do reverence) and show his judgment in the point. Mr
Tho. Tailor.
The person I mean, is, the learned and industrious author of the English
Comentarie upon S. Paul's Epistle to Titus. He in writing upon the 3 cap. and
ver. 5. of that Epistle, is so expressly engaged in this point, that all the
wit of man cannot fetch him off, without tergiuersation: which is the judgment
of all men that ever I yet met with, who have thoroughly read and considered
both the place and ALL THAT EITHER GOES BEFORE OR FOLLOWS AFTER in that
Author, to that purpose. Nor am I afraid to refer my self to be judged by
the whole World, whether I have abused him or not: promising that if it appear
to able and impartial judges, that in what I have alleged out of him, I have
wronged him, I will ask him forgiveness upon my knees; as public as ever I
made the fault^

That Author having treated of the efficacy of Baptism, and proved that in men
of years, faith is required to receive the grace offered therein, descends to
a Question, which in the margent of Page 642. he thus gives the Sum of; How
baptism is effectual to infants. His words in explication hereof are these.

Quest. But howsoever in men of years faith is required unto Baptism, yet we
are most to respect it as administered unto children, in whom we cannot expect
faith, and therefore unto them either faith is not requisite, or by the former
answer their Baptism is unprofitable. Answ. This well is deep, and we want
wherewith to draw certainty of resolution: but will assay in some propositions
to deliver summarily that which may be extracted out of the SCRIPTVRES and
EXPOSITORS, Mark Mr Tailor could find, Scriptures and, Expositors too, for
thi^ Position that he here delivers.
as MOST Probable for the unfolding of this difficulty. To which purpose let us
first DISTINGVISH of INFANTS; of whom some be elected, and some belong not to
the election of grace. These latter receive only the outward element, and are
not inwardly washed: THE FORMER receive, in the right use of the Sacrament, the
INWARD GRACE: not that hereby we tithe Majesty of God to any time or means,
whose spirit blows when and where he lists; on some before baptism, who
are sanctified from the womb; on some after: but because the LORD DELIGHTS TO
PRESENT HIMSELF GRACIOUS IN HIS OWN ORDINANCE; we may conceive that in the
right use of this Sacrament, HE ORDINARILY ACCOMPANIES IT WITH HIS GRACE:
HERE, according to his PROMISE, we may expect it, and HERE we MAY and OUGHT
send out the prayer of FAITH for it. These are his words. Do they need any
interpreter? Do they require any labor to draw them home to my present point,
viz. that it is most agreeable to the institution of Christ, that all elect
infants do, ORDINARILY, receive the spirit in baptism: especially considering
that this Author in the end of the 639 page, had laid out this for a Doctrine
raised out of Tit. 3 5. that, God in baptism not only offers and signifies,
but truly exhibiteth grace, whereby our sins are washed and we renewed by
the HOLY GHOST; and in explication of this Doctrine, he clearly delivers
his mind (in the words before quoted) how far forth this Doctrine concerns
INFANTS, and how far forth it may be granted as true even of them also. I am
afraid I shall abuse the Judicious Readers Patience to stay him so long, as to
show how all that I collect out of this Author (who lately professed unto me,
viva voce, that he will stand to what soever he has written, which makes me
the bolder with him;) comes full up to my purpose. Howbeit because I am
published to the world for a corrupter of this man's writings in this
particular; and, by that, is my sincerity judged in the allegation of all
others that I make use of in this Treatise, I must entreat the intelligent
reader, for a little while to Imagine himself to be some puny that knows not
how to construe plain English; and to be contented to learn of me that, which
a boy of 14 years old would deserve to be whipped for, if he could not
understand without teaching.

It is said I have corrupted my Author. In what? in falsifying his words; or
wresting the sense? The sense. How so? He never meant that elect infants DO
receive the inward grace, but only that they May do it? No? does he not say
that God ordinarily accompanies it with his grace? and is not this all one
with this specch; GOD DOES ordinarily accompany it with his grace? His meaning
is mistake^: he does not say it is done; But, WE MAY CONCEIVE it is done? Good:
But upon what ground are we to conceive so? Is it not this* BECAUSE THE LORD
DELIGHTS TO PRESENT HIMSELF GRACIOUS IN HIS OWN ORDINANCE? or is it this BY
VIRTVE OF HIS PROMISE We may expect it? or is it this, HERE WE MAY AND OUGHT
SEND OVT THE Prayer of FAITH for it? Or is it because this Author has searched
both SCRIPTVRES and EXPOSITORS, and finds this most agreeable to them? Now
when a man tells me that, because this is MOST agreeable to Scriptures and
expositors; because the Lord delights to present himself gracious in his own
Ordinance; because this is according to his promise; and because here J may and
ought send out the Prayer of FAITH for it; that therefore J may conceive that
God ordinarily accompanies it with his graces: do I abuse him to say, that he
is of my mind, that it is most agreeable to the institution of Christ,
ordinarily, to do this.

Oh, but he adds; in the right use of this Sacrament, etc: which perhaps in
his sense; implies as much as a receiving by faith? Nay; he himself
confesses in the very place alleged, that in infants we cannot expect faith.
Therefore he can mean no other by the right use of this Sacrament, then a
Reverend administration of it according to the Institution of our Lord, both
for matter and manne^, unto one within the Covenant.

But, he says not this of ALL elect Infants? In common construction his speech
must be equivalent to an Universal. For, when he distinguishes of infants,
whereof, he says, some are elect, and some belong not to the Election of
Grace: does he not give us a general distribution? Be there, in his judgment,
some infants that are neither elect, nor not-elect? Again, when he speaks
of such as are not elect; and says, these latter receive only the outward
element; does he not mean, in any man's apprehension, ALL these receive only
the outward element? Then, by the rule of opposition, when he comes to speak to
the other member of his Distinction; and to say, the Former (viz: the Elect)
receive, in the right use of the Sacrament the INWARD GRACE; can any reasonable
Creature of the slendrest capacity beyond a child, take him to mean less then
ALL the Elect?

Yes, you will say, they may, and ought to take him to mean less; for
himself says expressly, not that hereby we tie the Majesty of God to any
time or means, whose spirit blows when and where he lists; on SOME,
BEFORE; on SOME, AFTER? Well. And what follows hence, but only this; that
howeuer God has set down this to be the ordinary course which he ties Us
unto; yet it is not to be denied, but that he can, and sometimes does,
extraordinarily, bestow his spirit, at other times? Now this makes nothing
against me: for I never said that All ABSOLVTLY; but, All, ORDINARILY, do
receive the Spirit, in Baptism. And so much this Author must yield me out of
his own words. For he that says that the Elect do receive the inward Grace;
and that God, ordinarily, does accompany the Sacrament with his Grace; although
he put a correction of his words, for the explication of himself, that he
speaks not this as laying an absolute tie upon God; he can be no otherwise
understood then thus: viz. that in some extraordinary and special cases, it
may be, and is otherwise. To what end else should he add the word, ORDINARY.
It is true that God is not absolutely tied to times, and means: and, what ever
he does, he does it most freely: but yet when God has set up a standing
Ordinance in his Church, and made such a promise of the presence and bestowing
of his grace, as may give his people ground to expect it; and has bound them
to send out the Prayer of FAITH for it; he that shall say that God has not
tied and engaged himself ORDINARILY to give the Grace promised; or, that to
believe this, is, to tie God, where he has not tied himself; speaks not like
a Divine, but makes God a Lier.

But the Author has expressed himself, that it is but sometimes, and in some
special cases, wherein the Elect receive the Spirit, in Baptism? Then he
contradicts himself, when he says, that God, ORDINARILY, accompanies it with
his Grace? I took not upon me to quote what he speaks either in private or
public; but what he has written upon Tit. 3.5. where he says, this is done
ORDINARILY.

Well, but when all is done, this Author does not positiuely determine the
point, but only speak what, in charity, may probably be coniectured: for he
says, We want wherewith to draw certainty of resolution? It is true, He
says so indeed: but what then are those collections out of the SCRIPTVRES, and
EXPOSITORS, he after talks of? They are but probable conjectures, you will
say. True: yet he says, that, what he here delivers, is MOST PROBABLE. I
look for no more: for what could he say more, that is not divinely inspired
with an infallible spirit, which no man takes this Author to be. Yet he says
enough afterward, to make the last words a plain contradiction to the first,
if he would be taken in this sense; viz: that he speaks only coniecturally;
and professes, that, if any should ask him, whether any elect infant do
receive the spirit in Baptism? he would answer, that he cannot tell. For
mark, he that says, first, that this is not certain whether elect infants
receive the inward grace, in Baptism, or not; yet afterward says, that they
do receive it; that, by virtue of HIS PROMISE, we may expect it; and, here we
MAY, and OUGHT send out the PRAYER of FAITH for it; what does he but contradict
himself? Will not a PROMISE, (where, the promise is to be found, lies upon
the Author to show; if any man doubt thereof;) will not the Prayer of Faith,
which we OUGHT to put up to God, make this thing certain? Again, if the
thing be yet uncertain, why does he collect such a certain use of comfort
from this very discourse of his? For afterward, making use of the point, he
says ( page 647.) What a comfort is it for a Father to see his child washed
with the blood of Jesus Christ? cleansed from sin? Set into the visible
Church; YEA, INTO THE BODY OF CHRIST, in the right use of the Sacrament,
wherein a Parent ought more to rejoice, then if he could make it heir of the
world. And do I yet mistake this Author? Or rather, are not they Incendiaries
Who have bruited it abroad; endeavoring to set him and me at odds, if it were
possible? Yea, do they not by such reports (as daily fly up and down) of the
contrariety of his judgment to this point, do what in them lies to endamage
him more then either he ( I hope) will deserve; or then those Boutifeu's will
be able ever to recompense again unto him; if notice should be taken
thereof, by some, that watch for our halting, and make a man a transgressor for
a word?

Thus have I cleared both my Author, and quitted my self of the unjust
imputation of doing him wrong. His judgment, thus according with mine, will, I
hope, somewhat allay their heat and fury, who, for this point, accuse both me
of Arminianisme; and our Church, of Popery.

Our Leiturgie is to be understood to speak thus, in the judgment of charity
only; and not as binding us to believe infants to be so regenerated indeed?

Ans: It is true, our Church does indeed teach us to hope well of every infant
that she admits to baptism; and, in charity, to believe it is indeed
regenerated; because, for ought any man knows touching any particular infant,
it is elected; yet binds us not absolutely to believe it, de fide, of all
infants collectiuely taken, because it is certain, that all are not elected.
But the judgment of charity must have a certain foundation to build upon; else
it is not the judgment of charity, but foolish and sinful credulity void of
all judgment. For, unless such a thing be true indeed of some infants, yea,
ordinarily, of all that belong to Gods election, I am not bound to believe it
of every one, in the ordinary course of divine dispensation; nay I am bound,
not to believe it, no, not so much as in charity. For charity believes nothing
but things possible, and probable; yea, more probable then the contrary; and
things sometimes certainly true of some particulars of the same kind.

No charity could bind me to believe Peter to be a reasonable creature, if it
were not certain to me that some men, that all men were such. I am not tied to
believe this Professor to be an honest man, no not by the bonds of charity, if
it were certain to me that no Professor is an honest man. I were not bound,
in the judgment of charity to believe that any of those straggling Athenian
Hearers that in such multitudes, flockt about me, while I preached this point,
more then at other times, did come for any other end then either to bear some
new thing, merely out of curiosity; or to catch and carp, to wrest my words, to
run away with wilful mistakes, to censure and judge, to hope to see me foiled
and shamed, because forsooth I delivered that which they have heretofore rashly
and unsoundly taught, or unprofitably learned; and because I will not conceal
a truth which might convince them of error, etc. unless it were either
certainly known unto me, or upon certain ground to be presumed, that some,
yea that many are better affected, and more humbly and devoutly minded.

There must be a certainty in the Thesis; else no judgment of charity binds a
man to believe any thing in the Hypothesis. Nor is it charity, but folly, that
I should believe Peter receives the spirit, in Baptism; if he that bids me
believe it of him, will not warrant me to believe it as a thing certain of any
at all. And it were a very uncharitable speech to say, that our Church meant to
stretch my charity to believe impossibilities or improbabilities, or that which
is never, yea; not (ordinarily) certainly done. Therefore when the Church
(when it teaches me to believe, in charity, that this, and that, and the other
infant receive the spirit for initiall regeneration, in Baptism) teaches and
requires me, (upon this ground, that, for ought I know of those particulars
they are elected,) to believe her meaning to be this, that there are some, yea,
that all elect infants, do ordinarily, receive the spirit of regeneration, in
Baptism, from the hand of Christ, truly and indeed

3 Lastly, it is objected, The Leiturgy of our Church is not the Public
Doctrine of our

Answ. I grant that the Leiturgie is not formally the Doctrine of our Church;
no more then the superstructure is formally the foundation. Howbeit the
Leiturgy is founded upon the Doctrine, and the Doctrine upon the Scriptures, as
shall anon appear. If the Church teach me such a prayer, it is because it
presupposes the Doctrine to allow it; else the prayer were without Ground. The
prayers of the Church are not intended principally for doctrinall instruction,
but yet they take this for granted that the doctrine is correspondent, and
warranteth such prayers; else were they but blind devotions. Notwithstanding to
put the matter out of all doubt, and to drive the nail to the head, let me in
the next place show what is the formal Doctrine of our Church in this point.
And here, I must give you the substance and force of my proof in another
Sylogisme.

Syllogis. 2.
Mayor: That which the Public Catechism contained in our book of Common
prayer, and which the Articles of Religion concluded in 1562. teach, is to be
acknowledged for the Doctrine of our Church. Minor. But both our Catechism,
and those Articles do teach thus much: Conclus: Therefore this Position is
agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church.
There will be no Question of the Mayor, by any understanding man, therefore
the Minor only requires proof. This is proved by the parts, thus.

1 For the Catechism. The Answer to the Second Question teaches every child
to profess this: viz. that in Baptism he was made a member of Christ, the
child of God, and an inheriter of the Kingdom of heaven. But no man can be
made such, without the spirit of Christ to initiate him into Christ; for by one
spirit are we all baptized into one body. 1. Cor. 12, 13. yea, it cannot be
that infants should be truly members of the Church of Christ, unless they were
endowed with the Spirit, says Peter Martyr Ecclesiae parts vere esse non
possunt, nisi spiritu Christi ornati, Loc. Com. clas. 4. cap* 8. Sect. 15.
. Therefore every elect infant receives in his Baptism, ordinarily, the spirit
to initiate him, according to the Doctrine of our Catechism.

2 Touching the Articles of Religion, I allege only the 27 Art* which is this.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are distinguished from others that be not Christened; but it is
also a sign of regeneration, or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they
that receive, baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church; the promises of
the forgiveness of sin; and of our adoption to be the sons of God, BY THE
HOLY CHOST, etc.

In which words we are to observe three things especially.

1 what Baptism does, outWardly: It does visibly sign and seal regeneration,
and is not only a bare sign of profession, etc. 2 What inwardly. Tbey that
receive it rightly are grafted into the Church* the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and of adoption to be the sonnnes of God by THE HOLY
GHOST. 3 who they are that are partakers of this inward grace, they that
receive it rightly: and this the Article delivers indefinitely, which in common
construction of Logic, must be understood as excluding none, in the ordinary
course. An indefinit Proposition, in a matter necessary is equivalent to an
Universal.
So then we are now come home to the very head of the point: viz: that All
elect infants by the Doctrine of our Church, are, ordinarily partakers of the
spirit in baptism; for they that receive it rightly, all that so receive it,
are partakers of the Spirit.

But soft and fair; the article says not, all elect Infants, but they that
receive it rightly?

Answ. The Article, in those words, speaks the same thing for substance, that
I now contend for, as may appear by showing what it means by receiving
rightly.

To receive Baptism rightly imports two things: viz. 1 That Baptism be for
matter, and form the same that Christ appointed; namely, that the Baptized
party be dipped in or sprinkled with water, in the name of the Father and of
the son and Holy Chost, with all due reverence for the manner also. 2 That
the Person to be baptized be sufficiently qualified to give him right to
baptism: viz. that he be within the covenant of Grace; at least so far forth
as the Church can judge of him. Else he does but usurp the Ordinance: for what
has he to do with the seal of the Covenant, if he be not comprised in the
Covenant? Now then to qualify an infant, it is sufficient that he be within the
Covenant. If he be borne of Christian parents, he is so far forth to be held
within the covenant, that the Church ought to admit him to baptism, if he be
presented to it. But yet we say not that he is, instantly or at all, partaker
of the inward grace of baptism, unless he be truly in the covenant of Grace,
and under election: Howbeit, supposing him to be such an one, we say, that this
is enough to make him capable of the Spirit, and to receive the Sacrament of
Baptism rightly. For, more then this is not required at his hands, by the
consent of all judicious Divines that understand what they say, or whereof they
affirm. And it is a blind conceit of Anabaptists to say, that no infants are
capable of the inward Grace of baptism, unless they have actual faith and
do actually believe.


But least any should take offense, if I bring not proof of what I say; I will
produce a few, of many, Divines that plainly affirm that it is not required
of infants that they have actual faith to make them capable of the inward
grace of Baptism, and that, notwithstanding they want that faith, they may and
do partake of the inward grace, by the spirit. For this purpose I propound
unto you.

1 Peter Martyr, Jn Jnfants, says he, who by reason of their tender years
cannot believe, the holy Ghost supplies the room of faith* And the effusion of
the Holy Ghost is promised in Baptism, as the Apostle expressly writes to
Titus: who saved us by the Lauer of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed abroad on us abundantly Infantibus autem qui adhuc per
aetatem credere non possunt, spiritus sanctus in eorum cordibus fidei vices
gerit. Effusio quoque spiritus sancti promittitur in baptismo, v^ in epist: ad
Titum diserte scribitur, qui saluos nosfecit, etc. Loc. Com. class. 4.^ 8.
sect. 2.
.

2 Zanchius, upon those words in Ephesians. 5.26. washing it with water through the
word, thus writes, On the behalf of the receiver, if he be of years* faith
is required: but this faith is not here expressed, because the Apostle speaks
of baptism wherein infants, although destitute of actual faith are grafted
into the body of the Church Ex part accipientis, si advltus sit, requiritur
fides, etc. Sed hec fides hoc in loco non exprimitur, quia de baptismo quo
etiam parvuli, licet actuali fide destituti in corpus Ecclesiae inseruntur,
verba facit Apostolus dicendo mu^dans eam lavacro aquae. in Ephesians. 5. Externa
media sunt verbum and aqua per ministrum Christi administrata: medium autem
^fficax ex part tu^s qui mundatur est fides, vt in advito, vel saltem spiritus
fidei vt in pueris, spiritus enim ipse applicat sa^guinem Christi infantibus.
ibid.
. And least any should take him to mean only an outward admission, he
afterward adds; The external means are the word, and water administered by
the Minister of Christ; the effectual means on his part that is cleansed, is
faith, in one of years; at least the spirit of faith, as in infants: for to
them the spirit applies, the blood of Christ.

3 That renowned Frenchman Daniel Chameir, wi lingly yields that elect infants
may be in some sense termed Faithful: but how? not actual believers, but only
potentiall: because no man believes (actually) but he that is capable of
discourse Quomodo inquam fideles? actu ne an potentia. nam si actu, negatur:
quia nemo credit nisi compos rationis, etc. lib. 5. cap. 10. parag. 28.
.

4 Doctor Ames, being to prove against the Anabaptists the lawfulness of
baptizing Infants, of 5 Arguments, he reserues this to the last place, as if he
set most by it: In the very beginning of regeneration, whereof Baptism is the
seal, a man is merely passive: and hence it is that of a man that is to be
either circumcised or baptized, no external act is required, as in other
Sacraments there is; but only a capacity passive to receive. Infants therefore
are as capable of this Sacrament, in respect even of the CHIEF USE thereof, as
men of years themselves. Quia in ipso initio regenerationis cuius sigillum est
baptismus, homo se habet mere possiue vnde etiam hominis vel circumcidendi vel
baptiz^ndi nulla actio externa requiritur, vt in aliis sacramentis; sed tantum
receptio passiu^. Infantes igitur sunt aeque capaces huius sacramenti, respectu
praecipui eius vsus atque adulti. Medull. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 40. These. 13.
And indeed it is absurd to say that the grace of that Sacrament cannot be
attained by infants without faith actual in them, when as it is clear that
one part of the inward Grace thereof is the Spirit, the worker of Faith. Now,
no man well in his wits will say that no person can first receive the spirit
but by the hand of actual faith: for how should he have faith, without the
spirit to work it in him Spiritus autem communicari dicitur fidelibus, non
quia fides antecedit omnem spiritus operationem, vt quidam imperiti colligunt;
nam ipsamet prima regeneratio, and conversio aperte tribuitur spiritui sancto a
Christo. Ioh. 3.5.6.8. genitus ex spiritu. Sed quia soli credentes, postquam
iam crediderunt, operationem illam accipiunt spiritus sancti, qua obsignantur
tanquam arrha haereditatis futurae. Ephesians. 1.13.14. and 4.30 Gal. 3.14. The
spirit is said to be communicated to the faithful, not because faith goes
before all operation of the spirit, as some ignorant men do collect: for the
very first regeneration and conversion is plainly attributed, by Christ, unto
the Holy Ghost. John 3.5.6.8. Except a man be begotten of the spirit etc. but
therefore the spirit is said to be communicated to them, because only
believers after they have believed do receive that work of the spirit whereby
they are sealed, as with the earnest of the inheritance to come. D. Ames.
Medull. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 28. de adopt. These. 23.
? He must therefore first be partaker of the Spirit of faith to beget faith in
him: which spirit, then, he may receive in Baptism, without actual faith to
take him in. These new lingles in Divinity, against the current of all
judicious Divines, are most intolerable, and good for nothing, that I know,
but to breed quarrels, to work distractions, to increase doubts, to make all
things uncertain, and to bring in Atheism I never yet saw that Divine of note
in the Church, that ever durst to say and stand to it, that any infants, though
dying in infancy, were of necessity actually to believe, or else they could not
be united unto Christ so as to be saved: nor yet, that no man can, ordinarily,
have the spirit of Christ in baptism or at any other time, till by faith he
lay hold upon him and so receive him into his heart. But this by the way.

5 That Reverend Bishop, Dr Davenant, in his elaborate and solid Lectures upon
St Paul's Epist. to the Collossians, answering that Objection so much bawled by
the Anabaptists (one of the most ignorant Sects in Amsterdame) viz: that
Baptism has mortification etc. annexed to it, whereof infants are not capable
because destitute of knowledge, and faith to apprehend it; and therefore not to
be baptized? Thus says, If they speak of actual faith, and of the actual
study and profession of mortification and vivification, thos^ Scriptures which
require these in persons to be baptized, are to be restrained to those of
years. Touching Infants, because they are sinners, not actual, by any proper
act of their own, but by an hereditary habit; it suffices them to have faith,
not actually exercising it self, but included in the habitual principle of
Grace: and, that the Spirit of Christ can work this habitual principle of
grace in them, and uses so to do, none but a cracked brain will deny Si
l^quantur de fide actuali, de actuali studio and professione mortificationis
and vivificationis, illa scripturae loca quae ^aec requirunt ni baptizatis, ad
adultos esse restringenda dicimus. Ad infantes autem quod attinet, quia
peccatores sunt non proprio actu, sed haereditario habitu, sufficit quod
pecca^i mortificationem and fidem habeant non proprio actu ^ese exerentem, sed
in habituali principio gratiae i^clusam: spiritum autem Christi principium hoc
habituale gratiae in illis efficere posse and solere nemo sanus negaverit.
.

6 The Author of the Comment: on Tit: answering an objection which some might
make against that resolution of the Question touching the ordinary reception of
the inward Grace in baptism; viz: that infants want faith? He says; that they
want indeed actual faith which presupposes hearing, understanding, etc. He
further says with Musculus that children may be called faithful, although
they have no faith, and with Zanchius, that it is probable that elect infants
have the spirit of faith* and, in such as live to years, he adds that the
spirit works in the^ the seeds or inclinations of faith, which in due time
shall fructify unto eternal life.

Now, we have witnesses enough, and sufficient, to prove, that to receive
baptism rightly so as to partake of the spirit in it, faith is not required.
And I think every man will acknowledge that all these Authors were far enough
off from Popery and Arminianisme, that thus witness for me. And will men yet
lay both these to my charge?

If this be Arminianisme, or Popery, to say that, all right receavers do,
ordinarily, receive the spirit, in Baptism: so long as I restrain it only to
right receauers, and declare, that by right receauers I mean only those that
belong truly and indeed to the election of Grace: I must be content to bear
this brand; as many do the name of Puritan, without desert.

Both the Leiturgie, Catechism, and Article speak generally, excluding none:
therefore, if you be, in sober sadness, resolved to stick so close to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, you must hold this, not of the Elect only,
but of all infants whatsoever?

Answ: It is very true that our Church excludes none from participation of the
inward Grace in the Sacrament; but, knowing for certain that all the Elect do
partake of it, and not knowing at all that this or that particular infant is
not elected, suffers not any of her children to speak or judge of any
particular infant that he does not receive the inward grace; no more then she
permits him to say that such a particular is not elected. For, who has known
the mind of the Lord Romans 12.34.
? And who art thou that iudgest another man's servant Romans 14.4.
? Howbeit our Church knows very well, and presumes that all her children know
also, that, in respect of Election, known only to God, They are not all Israel
that are of Israel Romans 9.6.
: and that of those many that be called but a few be chosen Math. 20.16
. But who those few be, she will not determine, yet thus much she does
determine, that any particular infant rightly baptized is to be taken and held,
in the judgment of charity, for a member of the true invisible elected
sanctified Church of Christ, and that he is regenerated indeed* in the sense
aforesaid. And so do I. Notwithstanding, mistake not Her, or me. It is one
thing to speak of all infants distributiuely, singling them out individually
one by one, and passing judgment of each particular apart; and another thing to
speak of them collectiuely, and in the lump, without restraining our speech to
any particular. To say, that we cannot judge of any particular son of Adam,
not discovered by God himself to be rejected, that he is rejected of God; does
not prove that no son of Adam is rejected; when we speak of all mankind in
the general Mass or Lump: for then, what need of a Hell, for cast awaies?
Thus, that learned Bishop; By the judgment of charity, the Faithful judge every
professed member of the visible Church, when they speak of the particular
persons, to be a member of the invisible, elected, called, justified,
sanctified; howbeit they know in general, that many are in the church, which
be not of it, and that many be called, but few are chosen Dr John Downham on
Psalm. 15. ver. 1. page 19.
. The like phrase we have in the form of Burial, wherein when we bury any
particular person whatsoever, we are taught to say, and pray, that we with
this our Brother, etc. may have our perfect consummation and bliss, etc. and
yet no man will say that all men that dye do go to heaven: for even in that
very prayer we are taught to restrain this only to the elect: Almighty God,
with whom do live the Spirits of them that depart hence in the Lord, and in
whom the Souls of them that be elected, after they be delivered from the
burden of the flesh be in joy and felicity.

So then, neither our Leiturgie (in the Public Form of Baptism) nor
Catechism, nor Article do intend to bind me or any man else to believe that
every man without exception does indeed partake of the inward Grace of
Baptism, although it bind me and every man to conclude no other, when we
pitch our speech upon any particular. Nor is this my Gloss alone; but that
Judicious Hooker says also, that all receive not the grace of the Sacrament
that receive the Sacrament of his Grace Lib. 5. Sect. 57.
. So Mr Tho: Rogers in his so often printed Commentary on the Articles of
Religion. For in Article 25, he makes this one of the Propositions coutched in
that Article; All which receive the Sacraments, receive not there with all the
things signified by the Sacraments Propos. 11. He that shall hold otherwise
does in effect bring in opus operatum again For although he will say that
grace is given by virtue of the institution: yet he also says that, by virtue
of the institution every infant outwardly baptized, is partaker of the inward
grace? why so because baptized, forsooth. Now no Pp. will say that baptism
could confer grace, if it were not by virtue of divine institution: for there
are none of the^ so absurd as to say that the outward signs of themselves
naturally, without respect to the institution, do confer grace. This opinion
therefore, for substance, is the very same with that of the Papists; only they
have put on other clothes upon it. It is as much ^lv^sh as the other, only it
has gotten on a Lambs skin. Therefore Dr Whita^^r disclaimes it, in his
Treatise de Sacram. in genere, quaest: 4, cap 1. Non enim ex opere operato, ne
parvulis quidem gratiam conferri a Sacramentis affirmamus, vt necesse sit
habere gratiam omnes qui Sacramenta percipiunt.
. And before, in explication of the third Proposition, he says; In some the
Sacraments do effectually work in process of time by the help of Gods word
read or preached which ingendreth faith. Such is the estate principally of
infants elected unto life and salvation, and increasing in years. And upon
Art: 28. Prop. 4. The life spiritual is PECVLIAR to Gods elect. Mr Hooker
delivers as much, for having said that infants receive the divine virtue of the
Holy Ghost, in baptism, which gives to the powers of the soul their first
disposition toward future newness of life; afterward adds, Predestination
brings not to life, without the grace of external vocation, wherein our
Baptism is implied. For as we are not naturally men without birth, so neither
are we Christian men in the eye of the Church of God, but by new birth, nor
according to the ordinary manifest course of divine dispensation newborn, but
by that Baptism which both declares and makes us Christians. In which
respect we justly hold it to be the door of our actual entrance into Gods
house, the first apparent beginning of life, a seal perhaps to the Grace of
ELECTION before received, but to our sanctification here a step that has not
any before it Lib. 5. Sect. 60 page 316.
. Some it may be, will cavil at the word, PERHAPS: and say, that he makes it
but a Perhaps, that men receive baptism as a seal of Election. But before
they do so, let them duly weigh the place, and they shall find that he makes
no PERHAPS of this, that such as partake of the Grace of Baptism are elected:
but only of this, that they do, perhaps, receive Baptism as a seal of grace
of election before bestowed on them. For he is dealing with T.C. about
Baptism. T.C. affirms, that Baptism is only the seal of Grace before
received. Mr Hooker answers by distinguishing of Grace, into Grace of Election
and grace of Sanctification; admitting his words (with a perhaps) to be true,
in the former sense; but not in the latter, ordinarily Deus in Baptismo vt
significat remissionem peccatorum and salutem, ita re operatur: and veritas cum
signo coniuncta est in electis. Whitak: de Sacram. in gen: quaest. 4. cap. 2.
respons* a^ 7. tessim.
. And does not that Reverend Prelate, D. Francis White Now L. Bishop of Carlisle.
, in answer to the calumny of the Jesuit Fisher say as much? For, first, he
makes good the efficacy of Baptism, out of Scriptures, Fathers, our own
Church, and Foreign Divines, and particularly out of Calvine: Then, he adds,
not without approbation of it* (why else should he speak it? And what use
would it be of, against Fisher?) The same Author, with others of his part,
maintain the former Doctrine concerning the efficacy of the Sacrament of
Baptism, and they differ only from Lutherans and Pontificians: first, in that
they restrain the grace of sanctification only to the Elect. Secondly, in that
they deny external baptism to be always effectual at the very instant time
when it is administered Answ. to Fisher, Page 176.
If any shall p^esse me with the Rubric, before Confi^mation: my answer is,
That Rubric has reference to Confirmation; giving us to understand that if an
infant die without Confirmation it is certain by scripture that he is as
undoubtedly saved, as if he had been Confirmed. 2 That Rubric speaks of the
state of infants dying before they come to years, as the old Rubric of the
first book says expressly, which does not concern our present Position which
has reference only to such infants, as live to years of discretion, showing
what, ordinarily, is conferred on them in Baptism; and not, what they receive,
that live not so long, bur die in infancy. In these I doubt not but that the
spirit of God does work more effectually.
.

To make an end, our own Catechism teaches as much in express terms. What
need we further witness? That, teaches me to believe in God the Holy Ghost,
who has sanctified me and all the elect people of God. The elect; all the
elect; only the elect if my learned friend Doctor Iacksons word may be taken
for the exposition: for he would have the Reader to observe a difference
between the extent of the sufficiency (for so I take him) of christ's death, and
the efficacy of Christ's Spirit. Although, says he, in that place we are taught
to believe in the Holy Ghost; yet this we are taught with this caveat, that he
does sanctify all the elect people of God, not all mankind Treat. of Gods
Essence and Attrib. Sect. 2. cap. 15. page 171.
. Now, compare our Leiturgie, Article, and Catechism all together. The
Leiturgie teaches me to believe of this and every particular infant
considered single and apart that he is indeed regenerate with the Holy Spirit.
The Article says, that they (that all they) that receive baptism rightly are
grafted etc? by the Holy Ghost. The Catechism shows how this is to be
limited, and extended, saying; that the Holy Ghost sanctifies me and all the
elect people of God, Therefore by the doctrine of our Church, all the elect and
only the elect This restraint is clear in the Scripture (see Gal. 4.6.) And we
must expound the doctrine of our church by that Rule. See the next Chapter.
do certainly and indeed, ordinarily receive the Spirit, in Baptism. Yea our
very Leiturgie is clear in this point, as I have before showed, in that it
presumes the child to be one to whom belongs the kingdom of God; upon which
ground we are taught not to doubt but steadfastly to believe that he will
favorably receive the present infant; that he will embrace him with the arms
of his mercy, that he will give unto him the blessing of eternal life, and
make him partaker of his everlasting kingdom. Again in the end of the prayer
which is appointed to be used immediately before the act of baptism in the name
of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, we pray that the
children may receive the fulness of Gods Grace and ever remain in the number of
his faithful and ELECT children: which shows plainly that the Church
supposes that all such as do indeed receive the Spirit in their baptism, be
of the number of Gods Elect. And so Bucer expounded it of old, as shall
hereafter appear in due place See Cap. 6.
, when we come to show the judgment of foreign Divines in this point.

Nor is this to be put off with that new coined distinction of election to
Grace and not to Glory. For the Leiturgie speaks only of Election to glory,
inasmuch as it had assured us before, that God will give unto the infant
baptized, the blessing of eternal life, and make him partaker of his
everlasting kingdom and so concluds this prayer, that the infants may be
inheritors of his everlasting kingdom through Christ our lord. And why should
any presume to obtrude upon the Church such a distinction which has not the
least show of any footing in the word of God? For how ever I deny not but that
the scripture sometime speaks of a temporary election of some persons unto
some particular offices and services in the Church of God; yet it never speaks
of election unto the grace of sanctification, but as it is a beginning of glory
which certainly follows sanctification and is undoubtedly conferred on all
that are sanctified: so as no man is elected to the one but he is elected unto
the other also. For such grace is but glory begun, 2. Co^: 3.18. And when S.
Paul, Act: 20.32. commends the Ephesians to God, that is able to give them an
inheritance among all that are sanctified he most evidently shows that, as
none partake take of the inheritance but such as are sanctified; so none that
are sanctified can miss of the inheritance. The like might be demonstrated out
of Rom: 8.29* 30. where the Apostle shows that all predestination to
effectual calling and justification ends in glorification, as S. Augustine
does most soundly and unanswerable collect from this very text.

Yea this is so clear a truth that Bellarmine himself could not but confess
and maintain it against all opposers, De praedest. Sanct. cap. 17. vide locum.
although he could not but know it to be contray to the doctrine of many of
his own side, who were the first authors of the distinction of election, into
election to grace, and election to glory, which is still maintained by the
later Jesuits, Cornelius a Lapide, Com in Ephesians. 1.4.5.
and others, from whom the Arminians have made bold to borrow it, as they do
sundry other wares of that society. But Bellarmine is peremptory that whosoever
is under the decree of Gods election, how perverse and cross soever he be to
the means of his conversion, and perseverance in grace Respondeo potest ille
libere gratiam repudiare, sed certum est non repudia turum, quia deus vocabit
illum, sic vt videt congruum illi esse vt vocantem non respuat. Hoc enim modo
gratia dei vera a nullo duro cord respuitur, quoniam ad hoc datur vt cor
emolliat. Haec Bell. de Gra. and lib. Arb. lib. 2. cap. 15. resp. ad 2. object.
, and in respect of the liberty of his will may be yielded to be such an one as
may possibly refuse grace, yet it is certain that he will not refuse it,
because God will call him, in such manner as may best agree to his disposition
to the end that he might not reject God calling him. For by this means it
comes to pass that the true grace of God is refused of no hard heart, because
grace is given to this very purpose that it might mollify the heart. And all
this he speaks to show that Gods decree cannot fail; but that all who are
elected freely to true grace are as freely elected to glory, and do as
certainly obtain the one, as they do the other.

But yet some may here object one thing more, and that is this. The Church
teaches to believe all the elect to be regenerate actually, and not only,
initially, as you say? Why may not any man expound it in that sense, as well as
in yours; the terms are general, Seeing this child is regenerate, etc.

Answ. If by Actual regeneration be meant an actual change of the heart by
the infusion and operation of particular habits of grace, the best expositors
of the Doctrine of our Church run otherwise, and the very doctrine of the
Church does it self declare the contrary, in the ordinary course of such as
liu^ t^ years. For expositors; take M. Rogers, in the place before cited,
where, he is allowed to deliver this to be the sense of the Church In some the
sacraments do effectually work in process of time by the help of Gods word
read or preached which engendereth faith, such is the estate principally of
infants elected unto life and salvation, and increasing in years. in Art. 25.
prop. 3.
And this book has been printed with public allowance many times Yea this
book came abroad with iniunction from the Arch-B shop that th^n was that th^^e
should be one of them b^ught for every Par^sh in the Pr^uin^e of C^ ^^^b^ry.
And (...) it now be on^e worth nothing.
. If the Church will not be tried by him, then mark what Mr Hooker has to
this purpose. Baptism is a sacrament which God has instituted in his Church
to the end that they which receive the same might thereby ^e incorporated into
Christ, and so through his most precious merit obtain as well that saving
grace of imputation which takes away all former guiltiness, as also that
infused Divine virtue of the Holy Ghost which gives to the powers of the soul
their first disposition toward FVTVRE NEWNESS OF LIFE ibid. ^op. sect. 60.
.

But you will say, the (...), the words of our book are plain? True: so is
HOC EST CORPUS MEVM, for you know what: yet you and I know these words must be
expounded according to the true sense of them explained by other Scriptures
which make plainly against both Trans-substantiation, and Consubstantiation. So
then, the words of our book in the Leiturgy must admit of what sense our
Doctrine elsewhere does set upon it. Now, our Doctrine is it self clear
against certain actual regeneration in Baptism of infants living to years.
For, in Act. 17. touching Predestination, it is said; they which be endued with
so excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his
spirit, working in DVE SEASON they through grace obey the calling, they be
justified freely, they be made the sons of God by Adoption, etc. So much of
what Our Church holds herein.

CAP. 4. The point proved by authority of Scripture.
MY next work is to make good the point in hand, by Divine and infallible
Testimony of Holy Writ. And this is that foundation only, which I build upon,
for proof of the Position. If any shall convince me to have failed in this, I
will for ever abandon this opinion, (although it should be with peril of
life,) what ever all the men and Churches in the world should profess, and
bind me to believe to the contrary Nemo mihi dicat, O Quid dixit Donatus, aut
quid dixit Parmenianus, aut Pontius, aut quilibet illorum. Quia nec cat^olicis
Episcopis consentiendum est, sicubi forte falluntur, vt contra canonica Dei
scripturas aliquid sentiant Aug. de Unit. Eccl, cap. 10.

Si enim ratio contra diuinarum scripturarum authoritatem redditur, quamlibet
acuta sit, fallit verisimilitudine, nam vera esse non potest. Idem. epist. 7.
ad Marcellin.


.

That I may more methodically proceed, and dispatch more speedily that which I
have to alledg out of the Scriptures, I must necessarily bind my self to the
laws of Argumentation, wrapping up the force of my Arguments in some plain
Syllogismes (as as I have done in the former chapter,) and confirming the
several propositions that need proof, by express scriptures, expounded by
such learned expositors, as mine adversaries pretend most respect unto. By this
course I shall be sure not to abuse my Readers, if they be able to judge of
reason When they see it.

My first argument shall be drawn from Nature of Baptism in respect of the
several Parts of it which the scripture continually ioynes together, when it
speaks of that Sacrament; and I frame it thus.

Mayor. That which the Scriptures attribute to Baptism, as the chief part and
as it were the soul of that ordinance, is ordinarily communicated to all the
elect, when they partake of Baptism.

Minor But the Scriptures do attribute the confirming of the Holy Ghost, to
that ordinance, as a principal part of it.

Conclus. Therefore it is consonant to the Scriptures that all elect infants
baptized, do, ordinarily receive the spirit in Baptism.

The Mayor Proposition, me thinks should not be doubted of by any; unless by
Sacramentarians: for, will any man of understanding deny unto the elect that
which the scriptures do every where attribute as the chief part, and as it
were the soul and life of that ordinance of baptism? If any man shall do so,
he must grant that elect infants do receive but a piece of baptism; the
shell, without the Kernel; the body, without the soul. And if this be true,
to what end are they baptized? If they be not, even in infancy, capable of the
principal part of baptism, why are they admitted to it? How shall we answer
the Anabaptists who plead from hence, against the baptizing of infants, that
they are not capable of the inward grace? If that be true Which Dr Ames
affirms, that they be as capable of baptism, in respect of the chief use
thereof, as persons of years; who shall deny them the inward grace? Do we not
know that in Gods account, the sacrament of circumcision was not accounted
circumcision, when it was only outward in-the flesh, and not inward also in the
heart? For, he is not a Jew which is one outwardly; neither is that
circumcision, which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew which is one
inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. Romans 2. Circumcision We know,
was a seal of the righteousness which is by faith 6. Rom 4.11.
. Now I demand, whether any sound divine did ever affirm that only the outward
ceremony of circumcision of the flesh, was unto the elect the proper and only
seal of the righteousness which is by faith? Sure I am, the Scripture every
where teaches that the spirit is the seal of God set upon the saithfull 2.
Cor. 1 22. Ephesians. 1.13.4.30.
. If then Circumcision were accounted uncircumcision, where it was not
accompanied with the inward grace; what shall we say other of baptism, where
the spirit is not communicated? Therefore also in baptism of the elect (for
whose sakes only, this and all other ordinances of Christ were set up in the
Church) there must be, ordinar^ly, not only the outward element of water
sprinkled on the child, but the inward grace also: else it must necessarily
follow that either in the baptizing of elect infants, but hal^e baptism is
ordinarily conferred, which in Gods account is no better then no baptism; or,
Baptism is not to infants what the scriptures affirm it to be to men of
years. And if this last be true, in the ordinary course of divine
dispensation; I will maintain, that infants are not to be baptized. If those
infants which may be saved without baptism receive no more then the outward
sign when they are baptized, why are they baptized? Can the outward sign save
them; or make them more certain or more capable of salvation then they were
before, so long as they remain void of faith? Were it not as good to defer
their baptism till they be of years; as to offer them to baptism in infancy
which does them no more good, then it does to a reprobate, till their actual
conversion? To say that Baptism admits them to the outward means, is to say
just nothing to the purpose. For, ask these men, what is it that makes a
person capable of the inward grace of baptism. They will answer; faith. But,
how is this faith wrought? By preaching of the word; say they. Well; admit
this: may not an infant unbaptized come to hear the word read or preached:
Anabaptists do not shut their children out of the Church when the word is
preached, but only exclude them from the Sacraments. And we also permit
excommunicate persons to hear Sermons, howeuer we debar them from other
ordinances. Therefore infants need not baptism merely for their admission unto
the outward means of faith and conversion, for as much as they may participate
of the word without baptism, and the word being, by these men's telling, the
only outward ordinary means of begetting faith. If Anabaptists might as
freely show themselves here among us, as they do in other countries, this
doctrine of Baptismal grace would be better entertained by such as now oppugn
it without consideration of this sequel. This therefore to me is without all
controversy, that, What the Scriptures do attribute to Baptism as the
principal part and as it were the soul of Baptism, is, ordinarily,
communicated from Christ unto the Elect, although infants (because in them
actual faith is not required) in their baptism. Where the Scripture makes no
difference, why should we?

What else does the Author of the Commentary on the Epistle to Titus mean,
where he says Page 63 9.
, We must conceive that in every Sacrament there be three essential parts,
the absence of any of which destroy the whole; 1. The Sign, 2 the thing
signified; 3. the analogy between them, which is the union of them both. The
first is some outward and sensible thing; the second inward and spiritual; the
third, mixed of them both? To this agree all learned Divines, and confessions of
Reformed Churches so far forth at least, that they unanimously conclude
Sacraments to be not naked signs, but cert^ine sure witnesses and effectual
signs of grace and Gods good will toward us, by which he does work invisibly
in us Articl^s of Relig. art. 25.
and convey some inward grace, ordinarily, from Christ unto all that have true
interest in the covenant of Grace, whereof Sacraments are the Scales. And so my
Mayor stands good against all Sacramentarians, and their unwitting Proctors
whatsoever. I come therefore to the Minor.

The Minor Proposition now to be proved is this. But the Scriptures do
attribute the conferring of the Holy Ghost to that ordinance, as the principal
part of it, This I make good by all such Scriptures as mention the conferring
of, and washing with the Holy Ghost, as well as with the outward element;
without difference of years, and without mention of actual faith to apply the
same.

I might begin with that place in Ioh. 3.5. Except a man be borne of WATER and
of the SPIRIT, etc. where Water and the Spirit are joined, as going together
into all heirs of the Kingdom. Which place, (how ever some make a doubt
whether it be meant of the Sacrament of Baptism, yet) not only the Ancients,
but Beza Sed de Baptismo ^^cag^, sieve simpliciter, sive al^qua ad legal^s
ablutiones allusione, omnino existimo. Beza in l^cum,
also without all doubt, do interpret of Baptism, so also, the learned Bucer
Nec enim audiendos puto eos, qui hic per aquam, non aquam sed Spiri^um Sanctum
volunt intelligi; q^asi vero Dominus voluerit spiritum Sanctum bis ponere: eo^
dicere, vel, qui n^n fuerit gent^us ex ^piritu sa^cto and spiri^u sa^cto; vel,
qu^ non fuerit ge^itu^ ex aqua, quae est spiritus sanctus. Bucer de vi and
effic: Baptis. inte^ scrip^: Anglic. page 596.
. But because I did not use it in my Lectures, and some may wrangle at the
exposition, therefore resolve to wave it: and quote only three other Texts.

The first is that in Math: 3.11. I indeed baptize you with water unto
repentance: but he that comes after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. In
which place John makes the Baptism of Christ to consist non only of Water,
but of the Holy Ghost, and of the powerful operation of the Holy Ghost
metaphorically described under the term of Fire. Nor can it be understood,
either of baptism administered by Christ in his own person, ( for Jesus
himself baptized not; but, his Disciples Ioh. 4.2.
) or only of extraordinary gifts of the spirit conferred on the Apostles to
work miracles, and to speak with tongues Act. 2.2.3.4. vid. Luke 24 49 Act.
1.4.5.
: but it is meant also of that which all the elect may expect in the right use
of that ordinance, by virtue of Christ's Institution, ordinarily, when his
Ministers do rightly dispense the outward element. For mark, John speaks not
this to Christ's Apostles afterward assembled at Jerusalem; but to the
promiscuous multitude, that came unto his Baptism. Therefore it cannot be
meant only of those extraordinary gifts bestowed on the Apostles in the day of
Pentecost; but of the ordinary course of Divine dispensation unto all the elect.

The better to justify this exposition, consider the Apostle Peter speaks
unto such as upon hearing of him, were pricked in their hearts; and demanded
what they should do? For he answers thus; Repent, and be baptized every one
of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost Act. 2.38.
. He requires them to repent, indeed, before Baptism, because they were of
years: but, upon their baptism, he assures them of the Holy Ghost to be
bestowed on every one of them. True, you will say; but that was, because they
repented? I deny that; for howeuer, if they had not repented, being such grown
persons as they were, they had not received the Holy Ghost: yet their
repentance was not the cause of their receiving the spirit in Baptism; but,
Christ's own institution and promise to accompany his own ordinance with the
inward grace. Else, what needed they to be baptized? For if repentance would
certainly fetch the spirit; baptism in that respect, should be superfluous.
It cannot honestly be denied that those very persons had received the spirit,
in some measure, before baptism: how else could they have repented? If then
they received not the spirit first, upon their repentance; but before it: shall
this seem a truth impregnable, that infants who cannot actually repent, do
not, ordinarily, receive the spirit in baptism, for want of repentance? Or can
it be inferred from any of the places before quoted, that they speak of the
efficacy of Baptism in persons of years only? Some perhaps will be ready yet
to press me, that both the place in Matthew, and those alleged out of the Acts
also, do clearly intend an extraordinary manifestation of the spirit visibly
upon the men there spoken of; and of extraordinary gifts bestowed on them; and
so cannot be drawn to prove what is ordinarily conferred in Baptism now. But
let such consider that how ever the places do indeed comprehend an
extraordinary manner and measure of conferring the spirit to those that were
then baptized; yet baptism was the ordinance wherein those extraordinary gifts
were given. And what can this teach us but that in baptism the spirit is still
bestowed, although not in like manner or measure as at the first? That
miraculous way of conferring the spirit was then necessary to gain honor to
the Gospel from unbelievers. This necessity being removed, we have no reason
to expect the like extraordinary manner of dispensation. But because we have as
much need of the spirit to regerate and sanctify us, as ever they had,
therefore have we even from thence as good warrant as they to expect the
donation of the spirit in our baptism, so far as the spirit is useful and
necessary for us in these times to fit us for Christ's work, and kingdom.

But some will yet object, that place in Matthew is so far from proving the
actual conferring of the spirit, in baptism; that it rather proves the clean
contrary: for John speaking unto such as he had baptized; says, of Christ, HE
SHALL baptize; not, HE HAS baptized you, with the holy Ghost, they therefore
did not receive the spirit in baptism, but were to expect it as a thing then
to come. How then can it follow hence that Water and the Spirit do ordinarily
go together in Baptism of the Elect?

To this I answer, 1. That it cannot be proved that this speech was directed
unto such as were baptized; although it were uttered at that time it was spoken
to such as came to his Baptism, to be rather spectators, then to be baptized
of him. For the 7th verse makes it manifest that this was spoken to the
Pharisees and Saducees; who if we believe S. Luke, Luke 7.30.
rejected the council of God against themselves, and were not baptized of him
i. If this answer will not pass, then I add. 2. The Bapist meant not to show
a difference of time between the outward washing, and co^ferring of the Holy
Ghost: but only to note a difference between him the ministerial Agent, and
Christ the Author of that Sacrament; thereby to raise their thoughts higher and
to teach them to depend upon Christ for the conferring of his spirit, which
John, his Minister, could not confer, although he baptized them outwardly
with water. He distinguishes, not de Baptismis, as if his baptism differed
from that of Christ: but de baptizantibus of the persons baptizing, showing
what was proper to himself; namely to baptize outwardly with water; and what
to Christ; namely to confer the Holy Ghost, says the Learned Chamier De
Sacram. lib. 5. cap. 13. par. 21.
who makes good his exposition, out of Augustine, Chrystome, and Hierome; The
speech therefore notes, not a distance of time, but a difference of Agents; it
shows, not what they that were then baptized, did not receive at the present;
but from whom that gift is received, and to whom the conferring of it is to be
ascribed So Calvin. lib. 4. instit. cap. 15. sect. 8.
. He speaks no otherways of Christ baptizing them, in the future tense, then
he does of his coming, in the same tense also He that comes after me, says
our Translation, shall baptize you, etc. But in the original it is, (...);
which, word for word, is to be rendered thus, qui venturus, he that is coming,
or about to come after me; as if he were not presently come: and yet we know
that he was come, even at that time, therefore both Beza and our translators
render the text in the present tense, Qui venit, he that comes: and in the
same sense must we understand that which follows of Christ's baptizing with
the Holy Ghost: he shall baptize; that is, says Beza Qua etiam ratione dixit
(...) futuro tempore, potius quam (...). Beza in Math. 3.
, he does Baptize you with the Holy Ghost. To this I may add that which
learned Bucer says of so many of them as were truly baptized unto repentance;
that, to the intent they might escape the wrath to come, it must of necessity
follow that they received the Holy Ghost as the spirit of saving repentance,
and faith in Christ, even in that Baptism of John Bucer. in script. Anglic. De
vi and efficacia Baptis. page 595. So also Dr Whitaker: de Sacram in Genere
quest. 4. cap. 2. Nec sequitur, Baptizabit; ergo non baptizat: nam illud
baptizabit, continuum actum, sieve continuam actionem significat.
. The reason of this exposition is that which was given before: viz that the
scope of the Baptist is not to point at the time when, but at the Person who
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost: nor, to restrain his speech only to such as
were then baptized; but to assure all other the elect of God of like benefit of
baptism, when thy should, by Gods providence, be partakers of it. Which being
so, I conclude hence that the Baptist, in that passage, declares what in
baptism is ordinarily communicated to all the elect, infants themselves being
not excluded. For as Dr Ames says well ibid vt supra.
, it is not in baptism as in other ordinances of God, that a man must
necessarily lay hold on the thing signified, by an act of his own, or else he
should not receive it, here receptio tantum passiua only a passive capacity to
receive grace offered is sufficient The same author answering to that of
Bellar. Baptismus aliquid sacramentale confert, etiamsi detur and non
percipiatur fide. Takes upon him to give this answer in behalf of the
Protestants, Nihil omnino in ternae qualitatis consert: adultis absque fide.
Colleg. Anti-Bellarm. tom. 3. Disp. 9. th^s. 7. And who will not thence infer
a concession of that I contend for, in infants? Why else does he not absolutely
deny Bellarmines proposition, but only limit it?
, which unto elect infants is never wanting, because theirs is the kingdom of
God.

A Second place is that in 1 Cor. 12.13 For by one spirit are we all baptized
into one body, etc. Here the Apostle makes baptism to consist chiefly in the
spiritual insition of a man into the body of Christ by the Holy Ghost: as if
he would give us to understand that, that deserves not the name of baptism
wherein the spirit does not ingraft us into Christ. Nor does he note this, as
some special privilege in extraordinary, conferred only upon a few; but he
manifestly declares it to be the common benefit of all that by election belong
to Christ, when he says; by one spirit are we ALL baptized into one body.

This is true, says Calvin upon the place, of all the faithful for howeuer
unto many, baptism is but a symbol without any further effect: yet the
faithful do, together with the outward Sacrament, receive the thing
represented thereby. And therefore in respect of God it is always true that
baptism is an insition into Christ: because God does not represent any thing
but what he is ready to fulfill, if we be capable thereof. Now that infants are
capable hereof, he proves in his Comentary upon the 7th chap: of this same
Epistle; where he shows, that the children of faithful parents are holy, ex
beneficio faederis; by virtue of the covenant: and, if holy; then faithful,
although not yet endowed with actual faith says Musculus Omnes Christianorum
infantes ad Christum pertinentes, deque numero fidelium existentes, recte
dicuntur esse in fide Christi, fideles and credentes, licet nondum sint imbuti
fide Muscul. in Math: 18.
.

Another place to prove that the Scriptures do attribute the conferring of,
and washing by the Holy Ghost, unto baptism as a principal part of that
ordinance, is that in Tit. 3.5. where the Apostle speaking of Baptism,
describes it to be the Lauer of Regeneration, and of the renewing of the Holy
Ghost: in which words it is as clear as the sun at noone day, that baptism
is not the Lauer of Regeneration alone, but of the renewing of the Holy Ghost
also: so as he that is partaker only of the former, is but half baptized: that
is, he is partaker but of the body of the sacrament, without that which gives
life, form and being unto that ordinance. And, to make the baptism of the
elect to be no more ordinarily, then a participation of the carkase of Christ's
institution, would, I think, be an harsh doctrine even in their own ears,
that deny the spirit to elect infants. More soundly Calvin in locum.
. The Apostles, says he, are wont even from sacraments to draw arguments to
confirm us in assurance of our participation of the things therein signed and
sealed to us. For this ought to be an undeniable principle maintained by all
the Godly, that God uses not to abuse his people with empty signs, but by his
power does inwardly make good, what by external signs he represents to us.
Wherefore, fitly and truly is Baptism styled the Lauer of Regeneration. Now,
if Baptism be fitly and truly invested with this title, because God, does
undoubtedly make good unto his own, inwardly, that which is externally
signified; who will call that baptism, in the language of scriptures, that is
destitute of inward grace?

I know the shift which is laid hold on, viz. that none of these places speak
of baptism with reference unto any, but such as bring with them actual faith
to lay hold upon the grace of Baptism: and that therefore these texts prove
nothing touching the communicating of the spirit to Jnfants.

Answer.

viz. that all the places before cited speak only of persons grown and
endowed with actual faith. This were answer enough till the thing objected be
proved, as well as said. For that which is but only affirmed without proof,
may be denied without wrong to any. I willingly admit that some places of
scripture speak of faith; some, of repentance, when the speech is of actual
sensible apprehension and application of the inward grace of baptism, by an
act of the person himself making use of, and receiving comfort sensibly from
his baptism Col: 2.12. Act: 2.3^ 1 Pet 3.21.
, But this proves not that the inward grace is never at all conferred upon the
elect where there is not actual faith to apply the same: no more then those
places which require actual faith in all persons of years, upon pain of
damnation if they be capable of the ordinary means of grace, and admitted to
them, does prove that not so much as an infant can be saved, without actual
faith. An opinion so harsh and rash, as no learned man would willingly be
guilty of.

2 I answer that of infants actual faith Zanchius, Martyr, Chameir, D. Ames,
D. Davenant, and the Author of the Com. upon Tit. who all confess that in
infants it is enough to make them capable of the inward grace in Baptism, that
they have the Holy Ghost in them instead of faith to apply the same.

3 I answer that (if these men will yet Anabaptists as to contend further that
elect infants cannot be capable of the inward grace in baptism, without
faith;) infants may, in some sense, be admitted to have faith; and so, not
incapable of the inward grace of that Sacrament. He that said, whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones that believe in me Mat. 18.
, would give us to understand that it is no extraordinary thing for infants
elected to have in them some degree of faith: not actual, but potentiall,
initiall, and seminall, which is no other then the spirit of faith
communicated, as Zanchius, and Peter Martyr, well.

If my words be worth nothing with these men, if none of the worthies before
alleged may prevail; let them yet give some credit to Mr Aynsworth, a man
far enough off from from Popery, and also from conformity to our present
Church. He, in his Censure of a Dialogue of the Anabaptists, when he comes to
that objection of theirs against the Baptizing of Infants: viz: that if it
cannot be proved that infants have their hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, have faith, repentance, etc. they ought not to be baptized; gives a
double answer; 1. That this makes as much against circumcision of old, as
against baptizing of infants now. 2. That Christian infants have the graces
they speak of, repentance, faith, regeneration, etc. though not actually, or
by way of declaration to others: yet they have through the work of the SPIRIT
the seed and beginning of faith, vertually, and by way of inclination; so that
they are not wholly destitute of faith and regeneration, though it be a thing
hid and unknown unto us, after what manner the Lord works these in them.
This he proves solidly and fully: and among other his arguments this is one:
They to whom God gives the sign and seal of righteousness by faith, and of
regeneration, they have faith and regeneration; for God gives no lying sign;
he seals no vain or false covenants: But God gave to infants circumcision,
which was the sign and seal of the righteousness of faith and regeneration.
Genesis 17.12. Rom 4.11.2.28.29. Col. 2.11. Therefore infants had (and
consequently now have) faith and regeneration, though not in the crop or
harvest by declaration, yet in the bud and beginning of all Christian graces.
Then mark his censure of such as deny this. They, says he, that d ny this
reason, must either make God the Author of a lying sign and seal of the
covenant to Abraham and his infants, or they must hold that infants had those
graces then, but not now: both which are wicked and absurd to affirm. Or they
must say that circumcision was not the sign and seal of the righteousness
which is by faith; and then they openly contradict the Scripture, Romans 4.11.
And after more full proof, he makes this sharp conclusion; Wherefore they
are but a faithless and crooked generation, that notwithstanding all that God
has spoken and done in this kind, do deny this grace of Christ to the infants
of his people, and the seal or confirmation of this grace by baptism now, as
it was by circumcision of old. Thus He, pressed hereto by the Anabaptists,
Read the Author himself page 42. 43. 44. 45.
whom it is not possible otherwise to shake off.

be as strong to exclude him from participation of the outward sign. For,
baptismall washing is (at least) significant and obsignant too, sealing to the
party baptized the inward grace signified and exhibited, by their own
confession that so much quarrel me for this Position of Baptismall
Regeneration. And if so, what should an infant do with this honorable mystery
and sacred Ordinance, he being not able to put any difference between
baptismall washing by the Minister, and ordinary washing of his face at home by
his Nurse? Now then, if his present incapacity hinder not his partaking of the
outward element, which yet, in the ordinary course of dispensation, requires
faith to discern the use and mystery of this Divine Institution, as well as to
apply the inward grace thereby signified; what should hinder but that an infant
belonging to the election of grace, should partake initially of the grace of
the Sacrament, by the Spirit which is in him instead of actual faith? Deny him
this, and deny him the Scacrament it self.

By all this I hope it is now evident out of the Scripture it self, that
either elect infants do ordinarily partake of the spirit, in Baptism; or
else, they receive not whole Baptism, but only a piece if we consider this
Ordinance, as the Scripture does: viz: not only as an outward sign, but as
that which ever is accompanied with the inward grace to all that are elected.

My other Arguments drawn from Divine Testimony, are two: and both taken from
two distinct uses of Baptism, which now follow in order.

Argument.

Major. That which was ordained to be the Laver of spiritual regeneration and
renovation unto all that are saved by it, must needs contain in it the
donation of the spirit, by which this work may be done.

Minor. But Baptism was ordained unto this end that it should be the Laver of
regeneration and of the renewing of the Holy Ghost unto all that partake of it
and are saved, ordinarily.

Therefore Baptism (taken as the Scripture takes it, for all that which, in
baptism, is usually given to the elect) contains in it, ordinarily, the
conferring of the spirit to all the elect that partake of it.

The Mayor is undeniable; unless we will maintain, that the effect may be
produced without it is proper cause: for how can Baptism wash and renew a man
spiritually, without conferring of the Spirit? This is as if I should grant a
man to speak, yet deny him to have a tongue; or, to admit him to act and move
rationally, and yet not yield him to have a reasonable soul. This Proposition
therefore I take for granted. This place was alleged in the former argument,
but to another purpose: there to prove the spirit of Regeneration to be one
maine branch of whole baptism; here to declare the end of baptism, in respect
of regeneration.


The Minor is express Scripture, Tit. 3.5. Of his mercy he saved us, by the
Laver of regeneration and of the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on
us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. Therefore the Conclusion is
sound.

But you will perhaps except, and say, that the Apostle speaks here of Actual
Regeneration, which, by my former distinction and foundation, cannot agree to
infants?

Answ: That he speaks of Regeneration, the Text it self will clear it: but
that he speaks only of actual Regeneration wrought by the Word, is not
apparent; yea no circumstance of the Text will warrant any man so to restrain
it. The Text tells us that Baptism is the Laver of Regeneration; but that it
is only to actual believers such, what words will bear such an exposition?
But to make all sure, let us hear what Judicious Calvine, and other of the
Learned speak of the true meaning of this place: that so in the mouths of two
or three witnesses every word may be established.

1 Mr Calvin, in his answer to the Anabaptists who deny baptism to infants
upon pretense of their incapacity of the end of Baptism, to wit,
Regeneration, till they be able to make use of the Word brings them in thus
obiecting: But how, say they, are infants? regenerated in baptism, they being
not capable of so much as any knowledge either of good or evil? To this, says
he, we answer, that this is the secret work of God, which, although to us it
be not evident, yet we may not say, that therefore it is none at all At quomodo
inquiunt, regenerantur insantes, nec boni nec mali cogni^ione praediti, nos
autem respondemus, opus Dei etiamsi captui nostro non subiaceat, non tamen esse
nullum Instit: lib: 4 cap. 16. Sect. 17.
. Now, if he meant not this of what God ordnarily works in and at baptism, it
were no answer to their objection which lies only against all present efficacy
of Baptism, in the ordinary course, in and upon Infants.

The same Author, prosecuting the same business, to that objection which they
further make* viz. that Circumcision, and therefore Baptism, is the sacrament
of repentance and faith? Says thus; Although infants, in the moment of their
circumcision, were not able to comprehend what that sign meant, they were yet,
truly, circumcised for the mortification of their corrupt and defiled nature,
which, after they came to years, they meditated on. In a word, this objection
is easily answered: they are baptized unto future repentance and faith, which
graces although they be not formed (actually) yet by the secret operation of
the spirit the seeds of both do lie hid in them. By this answer, is at once
overthrown whateuer these men object against us from the signification of
Baptism: such as that, for example, where Paul calls baptism the Lauer of
regeneration and renewing by the Holy Ghost, from whence they would conclude
that this sacrament is to be administered unto none, but to such as are capable
of these graces Etsi infantes, quo circumcide bantur mom^nto, quid sibi vellet
lignum illud intelligentia non comprehendebant; vere tamen circumcidebantur in
naturae suae corruptae, as co^taminatae, mortificationem, quam adulti postea
m^ditarentur. Denique nullo negotio solui potest obiectio haec, baptizari in
futuram paenitentiam and fidem: quae etsi nondum in illis formatae sunt, ar^ana
tamen spiritus operatione vtriusque semen in illis late^. Hac responsione semel
euertitur quicquid aduersum nos torquent a baptismi significatione petitum:
Quale estielogium quoa Paulo insignitur, vbi vocat laua^rum regenerationis and
renovationis, vnde ratiocinantur nemini nisi earum rerum capaci conferendum.
Idem, ibid: Sect. 20.
. So then Calvin you see, avoucheth infants to be partakers of Regeneration,
in Baptism, although not actual, yet seminall and initiall; and that from
this very place of the Apostle.

2 Zanchius, in his Confessions, affirms that not only those of years, but
infants also, if they do truly and indeed belong to the covenant; are, in
baptism so sealed, as they that even now are incorporated by the Holy Ghost
into Christ; and that therefore among other titles given unto baptism, in
scripture, it is called the Lauer of regeneration Baptismus primum Novi
Faederis sacramentum est quo cum omnes, qui vel paenitentiam peccatorum
professi, fidem etiam in Christum, adeoque in deum patrem, Filium and spiritum
sanctum profitentur, vel altem propter parentum pietatem ad faedus pertinere
creduntur. 1 Cor. 7.14. tum maxim illi qui vere ad faedus pertinent, Christo
tanquam ei iam per spiritum sanctum incorporati obsignantur: vt non sint
amplius sui turis, sed illius, per quem in faederis societatem, e^que in vnum
corpus cum eo sanctisque omnibus, and in omnium spiritualium caelestiuinque
bonorum participationem, asciti esse dicuntur. Act. 19.5, 1 Cor. 6.19. Per hunc
baptismum, tanquam lauacrum regenerationis, a peccatis vi sanguinis Christi,
mundati, and cum Christo consepulit in mortem. vt quemadmodum ille resurrexit a
mortuis per gloriam patris, sic and nos in novitate vitae ambulemus, vnde and
sacramentum paenitentiae in remissionem peccatorum, sacramentum fidei, ^ymbolum
faederis, Lauacrum regenerationis, etc. appellari consueuit lib. confess. cap.
de Cap. de Bap. sect. 1.
.

3 Peter Martyr expounds this place not only of that which is conferred on
persons of years endued with actual faith, but even upon elect infants also,
by virtue of the Holy Ghost supplying in them the room of faith. I alleged
the place before: yet because he speaks so fully to this purpose, I will
repeat the same again. This Author having declared himself for the efficacy
of baptism, does with all give us to understand that in persons of years faith
is so requisite that without faith they neither receive the seal of
justification, nor yet of sanctification, in their baptism? For as Austin
well, the efficacy of baptism is from the word of institution indeed; yet not
as it is pronounced by the minister, but as it is believed by the receiver. But
what benefit then can baptism (may some say) bring to Infants who cannot
actually believe? This, Loc. Com. clas: 4. cap. 8. sect. 2. See our former
Chap. where the Authors own words are quoted in the Margent page 51.
our Author wisely and roundly preuents, by adding, that in Jnfants who by
reason of their tender years cannot believe, the Holy Ghost supplies the room
of faith. And, to assure us that such infants have the spirit, he alleges
this very place of our Apostle to Titus, saying; The effusion of the holy Ghost
also is promised in Baptism, as the Apostle expressly writes to Titus, (where
he says) who saved us by the Lauer of regeneration, Vide etiam, Iucer de vi
and effic. Bapt. i^ter opera Anglic. page 597.
and of the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly by Jesus
Christ our savior. Lastly, the Author of the Commentary upon Titus, as has
bin already declared at large in our former chapter, is express for this, that
not only persons actually believing, but even elect infants also do,
ordinarily, receive, in the right use of Baptism, the inward grace. And this
he speaks as grounded on this very text, unless we will say that he forgate
his text, when he spoke it; which to impute unto him, were, in my apprehension,
a wronging of him.

wherefore I conclude this argument thus. If the judgment of Calvin, Zanchius;
Peter Martyr, And the Author of our English commentary on Titus, be sound in
exposition of this scripture, it does prove the ordinary communication of the
spirit of Regeneration as well to infants elect; as to persons of years that
actually believe; which is the substance of our maine Position.

My third and last argument is drawn another use of baptism; to wit our
insition and incorporation into Christ. I frame it thus.

Mayor. That which baptizeth elect infants into the death of Christ, and
initially incorporateth them into the true mystical body of Christ, in their
baptism; must needs be, ordinarily, communicated to them, in that ordinance.

Minor. But it is the spirit of Christ that thus does.

Conclus: Therefore the spirit of Christ, according to the scripture, is
ordinarily given to the elect in Baptism

The Mayor is confirmed thus. The elect are baptized into Christ's death, when
they are baptized outwardly and sacramentally; therefore they must needs then
receive that by which this is done. The Antecedent is express scripture. Romans
6:3.4. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Christ, were
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death, etc. What is this to infants? May some man say, Yes, says S. Augustine,
Ac per hoc etiam ad ipsos (nempe parvulos) pertinet quod sequitur, dicens
consepul^i illi sumus per baptismum in mortem, Aug. Enchirid: cap. 52.
it does pertain even to infants also, when it is said we are buried with him
by baptism into death. And Learned Danaeus, commenting on that passage of
Austin, defends him in it, if it be restrained to the elect, and understood
only of initiall regeneration Ergo and si^em and regenerationem habent parvuli
electi Dei, et si nondum illius opera nobis apparent: and ea dona habent pro
ratione aetatis, (i.) pro capacitate vasis. I amb. Dan. in Augustine Euch. ibid.
.

And does Calvine set narrower bounds unto this Text? Calvine does not say, as
some do, that the Apostle wrote thus, because they were actual believers to
whom he writes: but, he affirms it to be, from the very institution it self,
the common benefit of all us that are now baptized; although he could not but
know and remember that we were not baptized at man's estate, but in our infancy.
His words are these. It is a thing, says he, out of all controversy true,
that we put on Christ in Baptism, and were baptized upon this very ground,
that we should be one with Him Extra controuersiam induere nos Christum IN
B^ptismo and hac lege nos baptiza ri, vt vnum cum ipso simus. Calvin. in Romans 6.
. Was Calvine think we, asleep, when he wrote this; or, they, not in a dream
rather, that do deny it? Let no man tell me that, he, and all the Authors I
have named or can name, do more often speak against this very Position, then
for it; and that it is easy to produce them, in more then an hundred places,
avouching this expressly, that the sacraments do profit no man but him that
has faith to apply the grace offered in them: and so Calvin himself speaks
plainly, in that very place, besides sundry other passages that he has
elsewhere to this very purpose touching the efficacy of Baptism.

I am not either so ignorant, as these men would make me, in the Authors I
quote; nor yet so impious as to corrupt mine Authors in such manner, as some
insinuate. It is very true that Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 14. and cap. 15.
nec non in Commentarijs eius super Sanct. script. passim.
and other reverend Divines do often require faith as the hand of the soul;
to apply unto the believer the grace offered in the Sacraments. But is it not
also as true, that both Calvin and the rest have also written all that which I
have alleged out of them? If not, then let me bear the blame for ever: If
so: why do men complain that I wrong mine Authors? If I allege a passage
out of Bellarmine against the Popish Tenet in any particular, will any man
conclude that I have wronged him because they are able to show that Bellarmine
himself writes the quite contrary in some other parts of his works? If I
find an Author speaking for me, I cannot be justly taxed of falsifying him,
although he speak never so directly against me in another place; unless it
appear that he retracted the first, and professes an alteration of his
judgment. So then these Quick and Great-Read men, are too hasty in their
sentence that, J have wronged mine Authors, although I had no other Plea in
Bar, but only this.

Howbeit that I may give them a little further satisfaction then they deserve,
know all men by these presents, that for as much as Calvin and the rest do
acknowledge a present efficacy of Baptism in infants elected, although they
do not actually believe; and for as much also as these Authors have never
recanted such their judgment of those infants; those other speeches of theirs,
which require actual faith, must of necessity be understood with limitation
and reference only to such as are of years So Calvin in Mat. 19.14. talium est
regnum Dei, thus writes against the Anabaptists cavil Quod autem non aliter
reconciliari ros Deo and adoptionis haeredes fieri contenducit quam fide hoc de
adultis fatemur: sed quod ad i^fantes attinet falsum esse convincit hic locus.
whereas they contend that we are only by faith recon^iled to God, and made
heirs of adoption: we acknowledge it to be true of persons of years, but that
it is false in the case of infants this very place of our Savior conuinceth,
because it says that eue^ of such is the kingd^me of God.
; for as much as none of these can have any actual comfort and sensible
evidence of the inward grace conferred upon him in his Baptism, nor be
actually a partaker thereof, on his own part without actual faith to apprehend
and apply the same. Thus that Acurate Chameir expresses himself, in treating
of this very Argument; sometimes he affirms Justification and Regeneration to
be conferred in baptism Lib. 5. de Sacram. cap. 4. par. 8 9. 10.
; yet in some places seems to deny either Justification or Sanctification to
be given to any, till they come to age and believe Lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 7.
par. 24. 25.
. Howbeit the clear expression of his meaning purges him from the guilt of
contradictio^, and preserves his Reader from stumbling and mistaking. For, in
one place for all, he shows what he means by that sanctification and
Justification proper unto such as are of years, that, in the moment of
baptism of infants is not conferred: viz: 1. Not any justification or
sanctification at all, by any physical efficacy in the external Sacrament,
either in; or after the administration of it. 2. Neither the sense of
justification, nor yet sanctification, as it imports an actual change. By the
former he means that by which actually a man applies that justification unto
himself which is properly not in us, but in God: which sense can be in none
but such as are of years: by sanctification he understands an actual change
both of the understanding and will from falsehood to truth, from evil to good
Apello autem iustificationis sensum, cum per quem actu nobis applicatur
iustificatio illa, quae proprie est extra nos, and in Deo: qui sensus non est
nisi in adultis, and iudicio vtentibus. Sanctificationem vero notum est
significare actualem immutationem tum intellectus tum voluntatis, a falso in
verum, a malo in bonum. Cham. ibid. lib. 2. cap. 7. par. 12.
. This is that which he denies to be ordinarily communicated to Infants, So
did Calvine, and so do I Fatemur ergo baptismum pro cotempore (id est, ante
fidem) non profuisse nobis hilum, quando in eo nobis oblata promissio, sieve qua
baptismus nihil est, neglecta iacebat Instit. lib. 4 cap. 15. sect. 17. And in
Sect. 15. of the same Chapter. Ex hoc Sacramento, quemadmodum ex aliis omnibus,
nihil assequimur nisi quantum fide accipimus. All this he speaks of actual
application and sensible evidence on the part of the receaver, or else he must
needs be held a contradictor of himself in all the sixteen Chapters.
.

But least any should imagine that I cunningly play the Lapwing in carrying
away my Reader from the Objection made against me out of Calvine, with telling
him a fair tale out of Chameir; I will return to Calvine again, and make
good what exposition I formerly gave of such passages as may be urged against
me out of Calvine, or others; and that by Calvine himself.

This learned man having largely confuted the blind error of the Anabaptists
that furiously deny the baptism of Infants, shows also that, how ever he
admit of some present efficacy of Baptism even in and upon them; his meaning
is not that they do ordinarily partake of actual Regeneration in that
Ordinance, unless they be such as die in their infancy. For thus he
explicates himself in this particular. Whom God vouchsafes to elect, if after
they have received the Sacrament of Baptism they dye before they come to
years, them he does renew by the power of his spirit, by us incomprehensible,
as it seems best unto himself. But if they live to years of discretion,
whereby they may be instructed touching the truth of their Baptism, they are
then thereby the more provoked to the study of newness of life, the impression
whereof they then come to learn that they were endowed with from their very
infancy, whereby they ought more seriously to meditate upon the same all the
days of their life. And hither is to be referred that which Paul teaches
touching our burial with Christ by baptism, in those two places, (Rom 6.4.
Col. 2.12.) For there the Apostle meant not to show that it is necessary for
him that is to be baptized, to be thus buried with Christ before hand; but
what simply baptism does effect in and upon them that are now baptized Quos
electione sua dignatus est dominus, si accepto regenerationis signo, p^aesenti
vita ante demigrent quam adoleverint, eos virtute sui spiritus nobis
incomprehensa renovat, quomodo expedire solus ipse providet. Si grandescere in
aetatem contingat, qua baptismi veritatem edoceri queant, hinc magis ad renova
ion is studium accendentur, cuius tessera se a prima statim infantia donatos
esse descent, quo eam toto vitae decursis meditarentur. Eodem referatur quod
duobis locis Paulus docet, nos Christo per baptismum consepeliri (Rom 6 4. Col,
2.12) nam eo non intelligit consepultum Christo iam prius eam esse oportere qui
baptismo sit initiandus: sed quae baptismo subest doctrina simpliciter
declarat; idque iam baptizatis. Instit. lib. 4 cap. 16. sect. 21. If any shall
quarrel the translation of the word tessera (which is rendered properly enough)
let them know that Calvine meant more by it then only an outward badge or
sign, as appears by what he had spoken in the very next Secti^n before: viz.
Baptizari in futuram paenitentiam and fidem (infantes dicit) quae etsi nondum
formatae sunt, arcana tamen spiritus operatione vtriusque semen in illis latet
In English thus. They (viz: Infants) be baptized unto future repentance and
faith, which graces although they be not yet formed, yet by the secret
operation of the spirit the seed of them both lies hid within them. So in cap.
15.1 Proinde quibus visum est baptismum non aliud esse quam tesseram ac notam
qua religionem nostram apud homines profitemur, quo modo Imperatoris sui
insignia praeferunt milites, in suae professionis notam; ij quod primum erat in
baptismo non perpenderunt.
. By this all men may perceive that howeuer he affirms that the vigor and life
of this Sacrament cannot be sensibly applied on the part of the Receauer, by
any but by persons of years that have actual faith, yet he admits of some
initiall work of the spirit even upon infants, if they belong to the election
of grace. The like may be said of all other modern Divines that require
actual faith for the application of the inward grace of baptism, on the part
of the Receauer. Thus much be spoken to this so often iterated objection, by
which so many do think to strip me at once of all those Testimonies of
Calvine, or others whom I have produced. And so much also of the Mayor
Proposition of my present syllogism.

The Minor Proposition was this: It is the spirit that thus incorporateth us
into Christ. This is evident in the express words of St Paul. For by one
spirit are we all baptized into one body, 1. Cor. 12.13. Upon which words the
learned Morton thus writes. Why does not the Apostle say simply that, by one
spirit we are made one spiritual body: but rather thus, we are baptized into
one body? certainly that he might show that a man is then incorporated into
the Church in the beginning of his conversion and regeneration; at what time
Christ communicating his spirit unto him, makes him a member of the invisible
Church, as the Minister in the administration of baptism does admit and
ingraffe him into the body of the Church visible Quare non simp iciter dicit
per vnum spiritum simus vnu^ spirituale corpus; sed potius, baptizamur in vnum
corpus? Certe vt ostenderet hominem in Ecclesiam incorporari in initio
conversionis and regenerationis suae: quo tempore Christus spiritum suum
communicans, eum invisibilis Ecclesiae membrum facit, vt Minister baptismi
administratione eum in visibilis Ecclesiae corpus admittit and inserit. Morton
in locum.
.

If it be answered, that all this may be granted, and yet the maine point
still denied: because the spirit may be given to the elect, not at the moment
of baptism, but at their effectual calling by the Word: I reply; then,
between the time of Baptism and effectual calling outwardly by the word,
baptism is but a bare sign, to such as live to years. But this is confessed
by all sound Divines to be a mere fancy derogatory to Christ's Institution; and
is condemned in the Sacramentarians This Marlorat upon Ephesians 5.26 well saw, and
therefore says, that therefore the Apostle teaches that in Baptism we are
washed, because there God does both testify our ablation, and also effect what
he represents. For unless the truth of the thing were joined with the outward
sign, it were improper to call Baptism the Laver of the soul Quod baptismo
nos ablui docet Apostolus, ideo ^st quod illic ablutionem nostram testatur Deum
and simul efficit quod figurat. Nisi enim coniuncta esset rei veritas and
exhibitio, impropria haec esse* locutio, Baptismus est Lavacrum animae. Marlor.
in Ephesians. 5.
. And in that very place, says Calvine, Paul comprehends the whole church of
Christ, no less then where he says in another place 1. Cor. 12.13
that by baptism we are ingraffed into the body of Christ: so as from both
we collect that infants, whom Christ reckons among the rest of his members,
are to be baptized, least they should be torn from his body Vniversam enim
Ecclesiam complectitur Paulus, vbi dicit mundatam lavacro aquae. Nihilo secius
and ex eo quod alibi dicit, nos in Christi corpus per Baptismum esse insertos,
colligimus, infantes, quos me^bris suis annumerat, baptizandos esse, ne a suo
corpore divedantur. Ins t. lib. 4. cap. 16 Sect. 22.
.

If yet they answer; that this follows not by their doctrine: viz: that
baptism is a bare sign; because they grant it to be also a seal of after
Grace: I reioyne: this helps not (unless they grant, as Calvine freely does
some principle and seed of grace bestowed, ordinarily, in Baptism:) because by
their opinion it is a seal of some thing absent that is to be expected in
reversion only. They deny all present exhibition and collation of any grace in
the moment of Baptism, by virtue of Christ's institution; and so they do not
make it a sign signifying but rather prognosticating only some future effect:
which is a new kind of Divinity, that, so far as I am able to judge,
destroys the nature of a Sacrament, by denying to it both the chief part of
it, viz: the inward grace thereby signified and together with the sign
exhibited and conferred on those that truly and indeed be within the covenant;
as also the vigor and efficacy of the word of institution which makes the union
between the sign and the thing signified; and lastly this spoils elect
infants of the inward seal; to wit, the spirit of Christ which incorporates
them into Christ as members of his body. Were not such possessed with too much
prejudice they would not so easily leap over all these material arguments, but
be more sober in their censures, and wary in their doctrines. I deny not
future efficacy of baptism after the act of administration; but I only plead
for some efficacy of it when it is administered. In a word, I will conclude this
matter in the very terms of Calvine before alleged: Infants are baptized unto
future repentance and faith; which graces although they be not yet formed in
them; yet, by the secret operation of the spirit the seeds of them both ly hid
within them Ibid vt supra Inst. lib. 4. cap. 16. Sect. 20.
.

I see, me thinks, some ready to wrangle further, and to object elect infants,
do, then, receive the spirit?

To this I answer That when any of you will show me any express text of
scripture that in direct terms mentions the baptizing of infants, I will also
show you an express Text to prove their reception of the spirit in Baptism.
But if you cannot do the one (nor is it much material, so long as there is
such solid ground in the scriptures, and such undoubted arguments may be thence
drawn to prove the lawfulness and necessary use of Paedobaptisme;) what
equity is it to require of me the other? How is it possible to show an express
text proving that infants do receive the spirit in Baptism, when no text is
found that mentions their baptism. If in the judgment of all the Churches of
Christ, it be sufficient (as indeed it is) to confute all the Anabaptists in
the world, that infants are within the covenant, and therefore ought not to be
debarred of the seal of it, no more then infants of old were debarred of
Circumcision by reason of their inability and incapacity to understand that
mystery; that to them belongs the kingdom of heaven, and therefore the
admittance into it must be yielded them; that they are a part of Christ's
Church, yea of his body; lastly, that, although they have not actual faith,
yet, they have the spirit of faith to apply unto them the grace of baptism, if
God so please: and therefore in all these respects they may be baptized,
notwithstanding that no Text of scripture enjoin it in so many words: Then
this also ought to satisfy all ingenuous and moderate men, that by like sound
and necessary consequences I have from the scriptures made good this point in
hand. The places alleged I have seriously weighed, and found them all clear
for the proof of my conclusion. Nor have I been mine own judge, or expounded
them out of mine own head, but taken such expositions as the most Learned
Judicious, Reverend, and eminent Divines of this last age, as well as others of
less note had set upon them, long before I meddled with them: least any man
should say, that I take upon me to coin expositions of mine own, that might
look favorably upon that which is taken to be mine own cause.

One thing more remains that in a word must be dispatched. There are some I
know, will like well enough the allegations of Scripture brought to prove that
the Elect, that all the elect do receive the spirit in Baptism: but with all
they find fault at the restraining of those scriptures to the Elect only: for
they will have it thus, that the scriptures are clear to prove, that all that
are baptized, do receive the spirit in Baptism, as well as the Elect.

To this I breefly say thus much: The scriptures do not warrant any such
extent of baptismall grace; but plainly teach the contrary. For What do these
men make of that place, in Romans 8.30. Whom be did predestinate them he also
called, and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them
he also glorified? The Apostle restraines justification and effectual calling
to those that are predestined, to what? to Grace only? No; to glory, says
the Text expressly.

The ground of these men's mistake is this, that they think the efficacy of
baptism depends so certainly and universally upon the Jnstitution, that where
there is no wilful actual opposition in the party baptized he cannot miss of
the effect; to wit, the spirit of grace. But they must know that howeuer by
virtue of the institution we may assure our selves that the elect partake of
the inward grace yet it is not the institution alone, but Gods See afterward
in cap. 6. and 7, the judgments of Calvin, Iunius Dr Jewel, and, Dr Whitaker.
preordinatio^ of them unto grace and glory, that makes the sacrament
effectual upon them, and not upon others. We admit the word, in its kind, to
have efficacy to beget faith as an instrument in the hand of the spirit: yet it
begetts not faith in all? Why? Because they do resist? That may be true, but
why does it work faith in others? Chiefly, because they are elected unto
eternal life: so says the scripture, as many as were ordained to eternal
life believed Act. 13.48.
. Does S. Luke in that place, think we, mean other then this; that they, and
only they that were elected, did believe. Lastly, do but consider one plain
place more, it is in Gal. 4.6. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba Father. He does not say,
because they had received the sacrament of Baptism, which yet they had done;
nor yet, because they did believe, which no doubt many of them did; but,
because ye are sons: now this sonship depended not upon the sacrament, or any
ordinance of Christ; no nor yet upon their faith and inward grace; but upon the
eternal decree of Gods free Election. Ephesians. 1.4.5. So much of ^^e Proof of
this point by the Holy Scriptu^

CAP. 5. The judgment of the Fathers in this point.
I Am now come to the third part of my task, which is, to prove that this has
been the judgment and Doctrine of the chief and best approved Fathers of the
Primitive Church. In this, I will enforce my self to all possible breuity,
contenting my self with a few instances, least the work grow too large and
tedious to the reader. And that I may be as good as my word, I will mention
only such as lived within the first 500 years after Christ: because they that
came after may be liable to challenge.

1 Then, Cyprian.
to begin with Cyprian that eminent Doctor, and famous Martyr, who is styled by
Gregory Nazianzen, the chief and most approved Pastor of his time, and the
principal light: so as not only the Churches of Carthage, and Afric; but
throughout the whole Christian world, his fame and admiration did spread it
self Greg. Naz. in laudem Cyprian. (...), etc. Pastorum optimus and
probatissimus, etc.
. He in his epistle ad Pompaeium De Haeret: baptizandis, gives this for a
reason why such as were baptized by Heretics cast out of the Church, were to
be rebaptized; viz because there is noe presence of the spirit among such as
are not of the Church of Christ; and therefore their baptism is not
sufficient. His words are these. Wherefore, says he, let them grant that,
either the spirit is present where they say true baptism is; or, that it is no
true baptism, where the spirit is not: because baptism cannot be without the
spirit Quare aut and spiritum esse conced^m illic, vbi baptisma esse dicunt:
aut nec baptisma esse, vbi spir tus non est; quia baptisma esse sine spiritu
non potest.
. It is true that out of his zeal against Heretics of that time, who grossly
erred in maine Fundamentalls, he was over vehement against baptism administered
by such as the Church had then eiected out of her society; because he thence
inferred a necessity of rebaptization of all such as were so baptized by such
Heretics: yet the allegation reaches home to our present purpose, in that
this shows his judgment to be clearly for this truth, that the spirit is
ordinarily communicated in Baptism. Hence he afterward inferrs, in the same
Epistle; The nativity of Christians is in their baptism Natiuitas Christi:
no^um in baptismo est.
. And to make it evident that he understood this to be the ordinary effect of
baptism, even upon Infants, he elsewhere declares himself expressly. For, in
his epistle ad Fidum de Infant. Baptiz. he uses this as an Argument proving
the lawfulness of baptizing of infants; that, the spirit refuses not to
communicate himself even to them. The Holy scripture, says he, declares, that
divine grace is dispensed unto all, as well infants as others: which was
shadowed out in Elisha's stretching of himself upon an infant insensible of
the Good which the Prophet did unto him Esse denique apud omnes* sieve infantes,
sieve maiores natu vnam diuini muneris aequalitatem declarat nobis scripturae
diuinae fides, cum Helisaeus super infantem viduae filium qui mortuus iacebat,
ita se Deum deprecans superstrauit, vt capiti caput, and faciei facies
adplicaretur, and supersusi Helisaei membra singulis parvuli membris, and pedes
pedibus iungerentur.
. By which it is manifest that, had not Cyprian believed that the spirit
communicats himself to infants in their baptism, he would scarce have allowed
them to be baptized; for as much as this is the chief ground that he builds
upon, to justify their admittance unto the same. If any shall except against
what is urged out of this last epistle, as being no other then an Heterodox
opinion; Goulartius will defend it, if it be restrained to the Elect; and
Chameir iustifies Goulartius in that assertion Et vere Goulartius, in hunc
ipsum notauit locum, Quaecunque profere sac epistola Cyprianus noster de S.
Baptismi in electis Christi varijs effectis vt orthadoxe and ad fidei analogiam
scriptum amplectimur. Cham. de sacram. lib. 2. c. 6. parag. 38.
.

2 Gregory Nazianzen calls Baptism That Good thing which gives us initiation
into Christ; Gregory Nazianze^
which common benifit, and foundation of new life we all receive from God
(...). Imitationis diuina bonum, quod commune beneficium, and secundae vitae
fundamentu^ a Deo omnes habemnus. Greg. in Laud. Gorgo.
. In his Oration or Homily touching baptism, after a large and eloquent
narration of the efficacy of baptism, he says, that it has force even upon
Infants also, and therefore would have them baptized upon this ground, that he
takes it for granted, that they also are, in some degree, sanctified even in
baptism. Witness that speech of his, It is better that they be sanctified
without any apprehension of the thing done, then that they should depart this
life without baptism and initiation And of this thing circumcision may afford
us president: for; that, being the forerunner of baptism, was administered
unto such as could n thy the use of reason discern what it meant (...). Edit.
Graecolat. Billii. Pa is. 1609. Praestatu: absque sensu sanctificari, quam sine
sigillo and initiatione abscedere: Atque huius rei ratio nobis est circumcisio,
die octauo pagi solita quae Baptismi figur^m quodammodo g r^bat a^que it is qui
rationis adhuc expertes erant offerebatur.
. which place I urge not, to prove the necessity of Baptism, as if without
reception thereof it were impossible for infants to be saved: for I make no
doubt that in the time of the Law many infants were saved that dyed before the
eighth day wherein they were to be circumcised. But I make use hereof, only to
show what that Gregory believed and taught touching that which is ordinarily
communicated in Baptism, even unto Infants as well as others; supposing them
to be admitted thereunto.

3 That Great Athanasius, who, Athanasius
in his time, was the chief, and, in a manner, the only professed Champion the
Truth had left her, when (as Hierome complains) the whole world seemed to be
turned Arrian: A man that was, by the sentence of all Divines, the most
approved Doctor, as Vigilius Omnium Ecclesiasticorum virorum iudicio
probatissimus. Vigil. cont. Eutich. l. 2. c. 4.
the Martyr titles him: He, in his Book of Questions dedicated to Antiochus,
Quaest: 2. propounds this Question, Whence may a man know plainly that he
has been baptized and received the Spirit in baptism, seeing he was but an
infant when he was baptized? The answer he gives unto it is this: As a woman
with child by the springing of the babe in her womb, knows for certain that
she has conceaved fruit: so the soul of a TRVE CHRISTIAN knows, not by the
reports of his parents, but by the springings of his heart, (especially upon
those solemn days wherein Baptism, and the Lords Supper are administered) and
by the inward joys that then he conceaues, that he received the Holy Ghost
when he was baptized (...).
. This testimony is so clear and full, that I know not what can be said to
evade it He speaks indefinitly, therefore he excludes none that are
Christians indeed: but unto them he does restrain it in express terms; and
so, he speaks directly to our present point.

4 Chrysostom, one of the best and clearest Expositors of the New Testament,
among all the Fathers; calls Baptism our initiation into Christ Ho^. 1. in Act.
. And to let us see that he means it not of an outward admission only into
the visible Church, he afterward declares himself, when he makes the spirit
to be the chief part of baptism, as if there were no baptism worth that
name, which is not accompanied with the presence of the spirit to make it
efficacious. Jn Baptism the chief part is the spirit, by which the water
becomes effectual (...). Hom. 1. in Act. (...). Hom. 40. in Act.
. If any shall say, that this proves not that the spirit does always accompany
the outward washing; but rather the contrary, because Chrysostom speaks this
of the Apostles that had been baptized, and yet were commanded by Christ after
his resurrection to stay at Jerusalem in expectation of the Holy Ghost;
saying, Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence Act. 1.5.
I answer, that Chrysostom admits, that in them, the case was such indeed:
but, says he, in us, both are performed together (...). Aom. 1. in Act.
. I stand not to justify his Exposition of the place in respect of what he
says touching the bestowing of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, as if they
had not received of the spirit in some measure before that time. Let that
opinion shift for it self as it can. I only urge the words to show his
judgment of this thing: viz: that now, we Christians receive the spirit in
bapt^sme as well as the outward sign That this was his judgment even of
infants also, appears in his Homil. on Ps. 14. (i) 15. iuxta Heb. Adducit
quispiam infantem adhuc vbera sugentem, vt baptizetur, and statim Sac^rdos
exigit ab infirma aetate pacta conventa and assensiones, and m^noris aetate
fi^^^uss^r^^ accipit susceptorem and interrogat. Renunciat Satanae, and non
dicit, In finem: vel cum Christo ^^mungitur in sine^: sed statim in principio
vitae petit renunciationes and coniunctiones.
. And yet least any should imagine him to be so gross as to think that all
that partake of the outward washing do receive the inward grace hear him
afterward in the same Homily, expressing his grief for the contrary. What
anguish of heart, says he, do J sustain so often as I see some, even when
they are ready to breath their last, run unto Baptism, and yet are never a
whit the more purged by it (...). Eduio Savil. Ibid. Quos aestus pectoris
sentio, quoties alios video subextremum balitum festinantes ad initiatio^em,
nec hinc fieri puriores. ibid. prope sin. edit. Lat.
. This Father therefore did not hold, that all that are baptized do partake of
the Spirit in Baptism; how ever his judgment were clear for it, in the
Ordinary course of Divine dispensation. Nor let any Arminian think to take me
tardy, as if I abused the Reader by alleging that which mine Author speaks of
Persons of years (who do oftentimes ponere obicem, actually oppose the spirit
of grace even while they be present at the means of grace;) to prove the like
in the case of Infants. For howeuer it be too true that Persons of years do
often times resist the spirit by a wicked heart and corrupt life; yet this Father
speaks of men of another disposition: for he speaks of men even at the point
of death, apprehending a necessity of remission of sin by Christ, and
hastening to Initiation Festinantes ad initiationem. Ibid.
, which argues an earnest desire after the grace of Baptism; and yet they go
away without it. Therefore they of whom he speaks, are not such as do resist
the spirit when they are baptized: and so, the words are pertinent unto my
purpose.

5 Basil, to that Question, How Christians are saved? Gives this answer; By
being regenerated by the grace received in Baptism (...). De Spir. Sanct. c. 10
. And a little after, Baptism is unto me the beginning of life and the day of
regeneration is the beginning of days, in that respect (...). ibid.
. In another place, speaking of Baptism, he says that it is the death of
sin, the new birth of the soul (...). Conc: exhort. ad sanct. Bapt.
etc. I will not add more out of him. This may suffice.

6 Hierome, in his third book of Dialogues against the Pelagians, brings in
the Pelagian thus cavelling with the Orthodox; I pray thee tell me, why are
Infants baptized? To which he shapes this answer; that in baptism their
sins might be remitted Dic quaeso, and me omni ibera quaestione, quare
insantult baptizentur? Orthod. vt iis pectata in baptismate dimatantur. And so
much the Author of the Perpetuity of the regenerate man's estate, acknowledges,
and professes page 456. edit. 2
. And in the conclusion of that book, that he might at once hiss that absurd
distinction of the Pelagians (that, children are baptized not for remission of
sin, but to make them partakers of the kingdom of heaven) out of the Church,
he thus speaks in the person of the Orthodox, unto the Pelagians Hoc vnum
dicam, vt tandem finiatur oration; aut novum vos (Pelagiani nempe) lebere
symbolum tradere vt post Patrem, Filium and Spiritum Sanctum, baptiz^tis
infantes in regnum cael^^^ aut si vnum and in pa^vul^s and in magnis habetis
baptisma, etiam infantes in remissionem peccatorum baptizandos in similitudinem
prevaricationis Adam credatis.
. That I may at length put an end to this discourse, I will say but this one
thing: either you must forge a new Creed, and, after that form of baptism, I
Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,
add this, that thou may partake of the kingdom of heaven; or, if ye do
believe that there is but one baptism of persons of years and of infants, ye
must hold that infants also are baptized for remission of sin, as well as
others. But this cannot be without the spirit in an infant (then, at least, if
not before) communicated to apply the blood of Christ unto him, as the same
Father, against the Luciferians Hi^rom ^^uer. Lucifer: Nulli hominum sine
spiritu sancto peccata ^imittuntur. Quomodo ant^quis sordib^^ anima purgat^,
quae (...) habet spiritum? ibid. Neque enim (...) lavat anima^, sed prius ipsa
lavatur a ^p ritu, etc. vide locum.
, expressly teaches. Sins are remitted to none, without the Holy Ghost. And a
little before, thus: How can that soul be purged from old sins that has not
the holy spirit? And again, in the same Tract; It is not water that washes
the soul, but the water it self is first sanctified by the spirit; not unlike
to that speech of Moses in another case, The spirit of God moved upon the
waters: whence it is evident that baptism cannot be without the spirit. To
conclude, Christ, says he, was baptized, and received the spirit in Baptism;
not that he had it not before, for he never was without it; but that it might
be manifest to us, that true baptism is that wherein the Holy Ghost is
present. And to this also Calvine gives testimony, in his Institutions Lib. 4.
cap. 16. Sect. 18.
.

7 Ambrose, speaking of the parts of baptism De iis qui initiantur mysteriis,
cap. 4. Ires sunt in baptismate, aqua, sanguis, spiritus; si vnum horum
detrahas, non stat baptismatis sacramentum. Quid enim est aqua sinc cruce
Christi? elementum commune sine vllo sacramenti effectu?
, There are, says he, in Baptism, three things, Water, Blood, and the
Spirit. Take away but one of these, and ye destroy the Sacrament. For what is
water without the blood of Christ; or a common element, without any effect of
the Sacrament? If any shall say, that this is not clear for the efficacy of
Baptism at the time of administration; he shall therein show so much
ignorance in that Fathers Writings, as that the Learned would justly blame me,
if I should take up more time to demonstrate this unto him, and gnash their
teeth at such an Ignoramus.

8 Lastly, Augustine that great and famous Doctor of the Church is known to
all to be very frequent in this very Argument. It shall suffice to quote a
place or two. There is not, says he Sermon ad infantes. Nulli est aliquantenus
ambigendum, tunc vnumquemque fidelium corporis sanguinisque Domini participem
fieri, quando in baptismate efficitur membrum Christi.
, the least doubt to be made by any man, that then every one of the faithful
is made partaker of the body and blood of our Lord, when in Baptism he is made
a member of Christ. If any think that by the faithful, he means only
persons of years actually believing, let them consult his Epistle Epist. 23.
tom. 2.
to Boniface a devout Earl touching the baptizing of Infants; wherein they
shall find that Father to comprehend infants in the number of the faithful,
and that by reason of the Sacrament of faith. Again Epist. 57. ad Dardanum,
Dicimus in baptizatis parvulis, quamvis id nesciant, habitare spiritum sanctu^.
Sic enim cum nesciunt quamvis sit in eis, quemadmodum nesciunt and metem, cuius
in iis ratio qua vti ^^^dum possant veluti quaedam scintilla sopita est,
excitanda aetatis accessis.
, We say that in infants baptized, although they be not aware of it, the Holy
Ghost does dwell. For so are they without knowledge of his being in them,
although he be in them; as they are, of the reasonable soul; reason being in
them who yet cannot make use of it) like a little spark raked up under ashes,
and is not stirred up but by access of years. And in the same Epistle, with
which I will make an end Habitare autem ideo and in talibus dicitur, quia
occulte in eis agit, vt suit templum eius, idque in proficientibus and
proficiendo perseverantibus proficit. ibid.
, The Holy Ghost is said therefore to dwell in them, because he secretly works
in them, that they may be his temple; which he afterward perfecteth in those
that profit and make further proceedings, and persevere in the same. Then which
speech what can be said more plain and full to my present purpose touching the
Holy Ghosts ceazing upon infants, even in baptism, to prepare them in his own
time to be Temples for himself?

Such as would extend the efficacy of baptism indifferently to all infants,
will be perhaps ready to wrest all these testimonies out of my hand and make
use of them against me? for as much as all these allegations do seem to make
for the universal extent of grace to all that are baptized, without
restraining it to the Elect as I do.

It is true the Fathers except none, yet this proves not that therefore they
held that none are exempted by God: nay they often declare the contrary. They,
considering the charge which Christ has laid upon his ministers to deny
baptism to none to whom belongs the kingdom of God, and not taking upon them
to pry into Gods secrets to know who they be that belong to his election; and
who, not: as they baptize all, so they pronounce of each one, that his sins
are remitted, and the spirit is given him in baptism: yet withal, confining
the donation of these gifts only to such as have indeed interest in the
kingdom; although they take not upon them to declare who they be in particular
that have no share therein. Now, that notwithstanding their indefinite and
illimited speeches, touching the efficacy of Baptism they did hold and
declare that all are not indeed partakers of the grace of baptism, shall
appear by one or two of them, which I think is enough to declare the
judgment of the rest that were sound among them.

Not to repeat what I formerly urged out of Chrysostom, to show that he was
not of opinion that all, without exception, did certainly receive grace in
baptism, although they did not actually resist it when they were baptized: I
will mention only one passage out of Hierome, and another out of Augustine
concerning this point.

St Hierome, if it be not falsely fathered on him, writing on Galath. 3. In
Gal. 3. si igitur qui in Christo baptizati sunt Christum induerunt; manifestum
est eos qui non sunt induti Christum, non fuisse baptizatos in Christo. Ad eos
enim qui fideles and baptisma Christi consecuti putabantur dictum est: Induite
ves Dominum Iesum Christum (Romans 13.) Si quis hoc corporeum and quod oculis
carnis aspicitur, aquae tantum accepit lavacrum, non est iudutus deminum Iesum
Christum Nam and Simon ille de actibus Apost: acceperat Lavacrum aquae: verum
quia sanctum spiritum non habebat, indutus non erat Christum. Et Haeretici, vel
Hypocritae, and si qui sordide victitant, videntur quidem accipere baptismum,
sed nescio an Christum habeant indumentum. Itaque consideremus ne sort and in
nobis aliquis deprebendatur, qui ex eo quod Christi non habet indumentum,
arguatur non baptizatus in Christo.
. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ, has
these words; If they who have bin baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, it
is manifest that they who have not put on Christ were not baptized into Christ.
For unto such as were thought to be faithful, and to have attained the
baptism of Christ, it is elsewhere said, put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. Jf
any has received only that which is corporal and visible, viz: the Lauer of
water, he has not put on Jesus Christ. For even Simon magus received the
external washing, yet because he had not the Holy Ghost, therefore he did not
put on Christ. And so Heretics Hypocrites, and wicked livers seem indeed to
receive baptism, but I know not that they have put on Christ as a garment.
Therefore let us lay this to heart, least any man be found among us that being
not clothed with Christ, should prove not to have been baptized into Christ.

Some perhaps may snatch at this testimony and say that St Hierome speaks here
of such as are of years that do obicem ponere, make resistance to grace; and
not of infants of which the question is: and if he did speak of infants, yet
here is not a word of election, as the reason why some do receive that which
others go without. To these two cauills I must make answer in order. First I
deny that he speaks only of persons of years, for from the general
observation, that, there be some who were not indeed baptized into Christ, he
makes application in particular to himself and others, most of which were
baptized in infancy, (though some of years were daily added) and even them
would he have to consider seriously whether it were not thus with themselves,
although baptized in infancy. Nor does he make reluctation in Simon Magus to be
the reason why he was not baptized into Christ; but his not having of the
spirit: and this is as much in effect, as if he had said, he was not baptized
into Christ, because he was not in the number of Gods sons by election: for
the scripture assigns this as the reason why some do partake of the spirit;
because they are sons Gal. 4.6,
. The rule of opposition therefore, must needs make the contrary true: no son
no spirit: no spirit, none of Christ's Romans 8 9.
. Wherefore, secondly, I say, that in effect he restraines the grace of
baptism only to the elect; and for this reason, that they be elected. For if
Simon could not be baptized into Christ, for want of the spirit: it is true
that he could not be baptized into Christ, because not elected: for if he had
been a son by election, he could not have missed of the spirit, as is clear
both in Galath. 4.6. and in Rom 8.14. Now, forasmuch as the Holy scriptures do
so clearly teach that none partake of the spirit unto sanctification and
salvation, but only the elect, (as by and by we shall, by occasion, see
confessed also by Lombard himself;) it were too great a wrong to so worthy a
Father as St Hierome was, to interpret his speech uttered according to
scripture, as having in it a meaning contrary to the Scripture, to bolster up a
tottering error of some that drew it immediately from Bellarmine and the rest of
that crew.

What need many words. If Hierome be not thought clear enough, then see my
other witness, St Augustine; who, if Lombard abuse him not, I am sure, will
put all out of doubt. The Sacramenta in solis electis efficient quod figurant,
ita Lombard: 4. sent. did. 4. in A.
sacraments, says he, do effect or work that which they signify, only in the
elect. I willingly admit that Lombard seeks to give an answer to him; but
such, as rather stablisheth then opposes our present position. See what he
writes.

Peter Lombard takes upon him throughout his fourth distinction of his fourth
book In princ. Sacramentum and rem simul suscipiunt omnes parvuli, qui in
baptismo ab originali mundantur peccato: quamvis quidam diffiteantur illis qui
perituri sunt parvulis in baptismo dimitti peccata; innitentes illi verbo
Augustini (Sacramenta in solis electis efficient quod figurant.) non
intelligentes illud ita esse acc piendum, quia cum in alijs efficient
sacramenta remissi^nem, non hoc iis faciunt ad salutem, sed solis electis.
, to show the efficacy of baptism. He begins with infants, and as his own
opinion, affirms first, that they all obtain remission of sin in baptism.
Then he alleges the opinion of others that seemed to thwart his, Some, says
he, think that some infants notwithstanding baptism may perish, grounding
themselves upon that of Augustine, the sacraments do effect that which they
represent, only in the elect. But to euade this, he says, that they want
understanding in S. Austin who do not so interpret him, as that the Sacraments
do not procure remission of sin unto salvation, but only unto the elect. In
which answer of Lombard to the allegation of the adverse parties out of
Augustine, we may behold these three particulars. 1 A distinction between
that remission of sin which is indifferently sealed unto all in baptism, and
that grace which is necessary for them to obtain in it, that are undoubtedly
saved by it. 2 A confession that this last to wit, grace unto salvation, is
peculiar only unto the elect Gab. Biel in 4 Sen. did. 4. 42 concl. 7.
assigning some causes why some receive more grace in baptism then others do,
among the rest he puts down this for one. Cum Christus communiter ponitur nosse
omnia quae Deus scientia visionis, per consequens novit electos omnes, and ad
quem gradum gloriae sint electi. Potuit ergo pro praestinato ad maiorem gloriam
offerre before passionem suam and praecipue eum se obtulit pro genere humano
ad hoc vt impleretur praedestinatio divina: And this be says is a meritorious
cause of the inequality of grace given in baptism. And a little before ibid.,
he assigned election to greater glory, to be the cause why some receive greater
grace; so he urges it out of Scotus, which shows clearly that the sounder
Schoolmen did ever take it for granted that the efficacy of baptism was
extended only to the elect.
. 3 A concession that all they do receive in baptism what is represented
thereby in the outward sign. I willingly acknowledge that his own opinion is,
that in some sense, all infants do receive remission of sin in baptism; but
yet, in such a sense, as does not suffice for their salvation, if they be not
of the number of the Elect, as his own words do expressly manifest in the
place alleged, which restraint of his is full the same with that I hold St
Aug. de Pec. Mer. and remis. ad Marcellinum lib. 2. cap. 27. Sicut generatio
carnis peccati per vnum Adam in condemnationem trahit omnes qui eo modo
generantur, sic generatio spiritus gratiae per vnum Iesum Christum ad
iustificationem vitae aeternae ducit omnes qui eo modo praedestinati
regenerantur. Sacramentum autem baptismi prosecto sacramentum regenerationis
est. And the same S. Augustine De bono perseuerantiae. cap. 11. Proinde sicut
Apostolus ait, non volentis neque currentis; sed miserentis est Dei: qui and
parvulis quibus vult, etiam non volentibus neque currentibus subvenit, quos
ante constitutionem mundi elegit in Christo, daturus etiam iis gratiam gratis,
etc.
.

And thus out of the first Father of the Popish schoolmen that ever reduced
the body of Divinity into a method out of the Fathers, you have a confession
that S Augustine was clearly of this judgment, that only the elect do
receive the spirit, and grace in baptism; which therefore we have reason to
believe to be also the judgment of all the Fathers that lived in his age or
before him; unless we will make him a private opinionist that dissenteth from
the rest, which were a miserable shift, with palpable injury offered to so
eminent a Lamp in Gods Church, who has on his side Chrysostom and Hierome,
that for substance speak as much as he does; which is enough to acquit him of
the stain of a private opinion, and sufficient to stop the mouths of all
gainsayers, that would feign shake out this arrow shot out of his bow into the
sides of that error touching the equal efficacy of baptism upon all that are
partakers of the outward Element; an absurdity not hatched in the Church by the
spirit of error, till after Peter Lombard was dead and rotten.

It may not be denied that the Fathers in many passages speak not so distinctly
and cautiously, as the gross mistakes of after ages would have required; yet
their excessive speeches and flowers of Rhetorique must not be so far urged,
as to weaken their authority in what they took upon them to speak positiuely,
properly, and determinatiuely, according to the Scriptures. When no Adversary
as yet appeared to abuse their speeches to a wrong sense; they spoke more
securely and freely, not giving such exact bounds to their words, as otherwise
they would have done. If they found any that would presume upon salvation,
because they had been outwardly baptized; whether they were Heretics,
Hypocrites, or lewd livers, Chrysostom and Hierome (as we have seen) begin
then to restrain the saving grace of Baptism only to such as believe and live
as they ought. And if any think that Election makes no difference between man
and man, but that such as are not elected, as well as the elect, may be
partakers of Baptismal grace equally; S. Austin will take off that opinion with
protestation, that the Sacraments do not effect what they signify, but only
upon the elect: and this, Lombard himself will confess to be true, of the
efficacy of baptism unto salvation. When therefore we meet with any of the
Ancients that do not thus limit their assertions, we must yet conceive them to
be of the same mind with S. Hierome, and S. Augustine in this point; especially
considering that the Scriptures themselves (as in the former Chapter has been
declared) do so bound the same, from which we ought not to conceive that those
sounder Fathers would dissent, forasmuch as those three Worthies before
alleged (who are better Expositors of the minds of the rest of their Brethren
that lived with them or before them, then any perverse Papist or Arminian
either is, or can be,) have so fully and perspicuously declared themselves
agreeable thereunto. And thus much concerning the judgment of the Fathers.

CAP. 6. The Confessions of Reformed Churches.
I Doubt not but that I shall meet with some spirits that will deride and
scorn all these testimonies of the Fathers, as the dreams of erring men Nec
tamen Patres aliud dicunt, qua^ quod nos dicimus, fieri nos in baptismo novos
homines, and peccata nobis remitti, et spiritum sanctu^ esse efficacem: omnia
haec nos damus; sed non ideo sequitur, sacramenta confer gratiam ex opere
operato quasi quia sunt efficacia organa spiritus sancti, ideo ex via sua and
ex opere operato efficacia sunt. Whitak. de sacram. in genere quest. 4. cap. 2.
Et paulo post: ibid. Tribuunt illi (Patres nempe) multum baptismo, and merito
quidem, remissionem peccatorum, gratiam, vivificationem, regenerationem, and
alia huiusmodi: and forsan aliqui nimium tribuunt: quanquam re vera nihil
dicunt. quod non satis commode exponi potest. Non enim dicunt illam gratiam
esse inclusam in aqua, aut ex opere operato couferri: sed spiritum sanctum esse
in aqua and per aquam efficacem, quod ex eo Basilij loco constare potest, quem
affert bellarminus, (...), etc. vide ibi plura, in page 73. 74.
; and so will be ready to say; it is not much matter what the Fathers speak,
forasmuch as they spoke and wrote a great deal more than any sound Divine will
take upon him the justification of, or is able to defend. Therefore it is
requisite that I now show what the Churches of Christ, since the last happy
Reformation, have all conspired to acknowledge and profess in their several
Public confessions, printed at Geneva, concerning this point: by which it
will appear, that herein they do, in substance, concur with those Fathers
that some shallow brains please to set so light by. The judgment of our own
Church, as it is expressed in the Form of Baptism, the Catechism, and
Articles of Religion, we have already seen at large We are therefore now to
produce the Confessions of foreign Churches only, which here follow in order.

1 The Helvetian confession, cap. 20 runs thus: Baptizari in nomine Christi,
est inscribi, initiari, and re^ipi in faedus, atque familiam, adeoque
haereditatem filiorum Dei, immo iam nuncupari nomine Dei id est, appell^ri
filium Dei purgari item a sordibus peccatorum, and donari varia Dei gratia, ad
vitam novam and innocentem.
To be baptized in the name of Christ, is to be inroled, initiated, and
received into the covenant and family, and so into the inheritance of the
sons of God: yea to be even now called by the name of God, that is, to be
called a son of God; to be purged from the filth of sin, and to be
endowed with the manifold grace of God, unto a new and innocent life. And a
little after: Nam intus regeneramur, purificamur and renovamur a Deo per spiri
u^ sanctum etc.
for we are inwardly regenerated, purified, and renewed by God through the Holy
Ghost. And for a close of that Chapter, they add; Damnamus Anabaptist^^ qui
negant baptizandos esse infantulos recens natos a fidelibus. Nam iuxta
doctrinam evang li^am, horum est regnum Dei, and sunt in foedere Dei (...)
itaq, non daretur eis signum foederis Dei? Cur non per sanctum baptisma
initiarentur, qui sunt pec^^um and in Ecclesia Dei?
We condemn the Anabaptists, who deny young infants borne of faithful
parents to be admitted unto baptism. For according to the doctrine of the
Gospel, theirs is the kingdom of God, and they are within the covenant of
God: why therefore should not the sign of the covenant of God be given unto
them? Why should they not be initiated by holy baptism, that are Gods
peculiar, and within his Church?

2 The confession of Scotland. Certo credimus per baptismum nos in Christo Jesus
niseri, (...) quam omnia nostra peccata teguntur and remittuntur participes
fieri.
We do certainly believe that by baptism we are ingraffed into Jesus
Christ, and made partakers of his righteousness whereby all our sins are
done away.

3 The Belgicke confession. art. 34. thus speaks. SVOS igitur OMNES iussit
Dominus in nomine Pa^ris filii, and spiritus sancti pura aqua baptizari, vt
sign^ficaret sanguinem Christi per spiritum sanctum id^m praestare and efficere
interne in anima, quod aqua externe operatur in corporibus.
Therefore did the Lord command all of his to be baptized with pure water, in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; that he might signify
that the blood of Christ by the Holy Ghost does perform inwardly in the soul,
that which the water does effect outwardly upon our bodies. And that they
understand this of Infants also, they afterward express themselves, by
declaring against the Anabaptists, that even infants partake of Christ in
baptism, pro modulo suo, according to their capacity, as well as others:
saying, Re vera Christus non minus sanguinem suum effudit vt fidelium infantes,
quam vt adultos ablueret: ideoque signum seu sacramentum rei, quam Christus
eorum causa est operatus, illos recipere concenit.
certainly Christ shed his blood that he might no less wash infants of
faithful parents, then those of years; and therefore it is requisite they
should also receive the sign or Sacrament of that thing which Christ for their
sakes accomplished.

4 The confession of France, which is also the confession of Geneva, professes
this, Agnoscimus duo tantum sacramenta toti Ecclesiae communia, quorum prius
est baptismus, nobis testificandae nostrae adoptionis datus quoniam in eo
inserimur Christi corpori, vt eius sanguine abluti, simul etiam ipsius spiritu
ad vitae sanctimoniam renovamur. Art. 35.
We acknowledge only two Sacraments common to the whole Church, the former
whereof is Baptism, given unto us to witness our adoption, because in it we
are ingraffed into the body of Christ, that being washed with his blood we
might also be renewed by his spirit unto holiness of life. Again in the 37.
Art: Credimus, sicut antea dictu^ est, tam in coena quam in baptismo. Deum
nobis re ipsa (i) vere and efficaciter donare, quic quid ibi sacramentaliter
figurat; ac proinde cum signis conin^gimus veram possessionem ac finitionem
eius rei quae ibi nobis offertur.
We believe, as is aforesaid, that as well in the Lords supper, as in baptism,
God does bestow upon us in very deed; that is to say, truly, and effectually
whatsoever he therein sacramentally does represent unto us: and therefore with
the signs we join the true possession and fruition of that thing which is
therein offered to us. And in Art. 38 thus Dicimus itaq, elementum aquae,
quantumvis eaducum; nobis nihilominus vtre testificari interiorem animi nostri
ablutionem in sanguine Jesus Christi per sancti spiritus efficaciam. Romans 6.3
Ephesians. 5.26.
.

5 The Argentine confession, cap. 17. thus determines; De Baptismate itaque
confitemur, id quod passim scriptura de illo praedicat, eo sepeliri nos in
mertem Christi, coagmentari in vnum corpus, Christum induere, lavacrum
regenerationis, peccata abluere, nos salvare, Rom 6 3. 1. Cor 12. Gal 3. Tit.
3. Act. 22. 1. Pet. 3.
Touching Baptism we confess that which the scripture every where affirms
of it: that, thereby we are buried into the death of Christ, knit together in
one body, we put on Christ; it is the laver of Regeneration to wash away our
sins, and to save us, Romans 6 3. 1. Cor. 12. Gal. 3. Tit. 3. Act. 22. 1. Pet. 3.

6 The Augustane confession. art. 9. Docet quod infantes per baptismum Deo
commendati, recipiantur in gratiam Dei, and fiant filij Dei, sicut Christus
testatur, Mat. 18. non est voluntas patris vestri qui est in coelis, vt pereat
vnus ex parvulis istis.
teaches that infants being by baptism commended unto God, are received into
the favor of God, and made his sons as Christ testifies: Math. 18. saying;
it is not the will of your father which is in heaven that one of these little
ones should perish.

7 The Saxon confession cap. 14 thus. Retinemus et infantium baptismum, quia
certissimum est promissionem gratiae etiam ad infantes pertinere etc. nec
iudicamus hunc morem tantum otiosam ceremoniam esse, sed vere tunc a deo recipi
and sanctificari infantes.
We retain the baptism of infants also, because it is most certain that the
promise of grace belongs even to infants etc. nor do we judge this a mere
idle ceremony, but that then they are truly received by God, and sanctified.

8 The confession of Wirtemberg, cap. de Bapt. to the same effect: Docemus eum
qui baptizatur in nomine Patris, filii, and spiritus sancti, vngi spirituali
Chrysmate; hoc est fieri memb^u^ Christi, and donari spiritu sancto etc.
We teach, that he that is baptized in the name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost is anointed with a spiritual chrysme: that is, he is
made a member of Christ, and endowed with the Holy Ghost.

9 To all these we may add the pious and orthodox confession of the Palatine,
extant in the same Harmony of confessions; De virtute and efficacia sacri
baptismi credo and confiteor, liberos nostros, quia in hoc foedere, vt iam
dictum, etiam ipsi vna includuntur, cum in articulos antiquae nostrae and
catholicae fidei baptizantur, sicut in iis ipsis educari and institui debent,
etiam cruentis mortis domini nostri Jesus Christi, omniumque eius bonorum quae
illic morte sua acquisivit, vna participes fieri: idque hoc modo, quod
quemadmodum externum sigillum, sacrosanctum sacramentum, nempe elementarem
aquam a ministro ve^bidivini, extrinsecus in corpore recipient, ita quoq, simul
a Christo ipso, effuso illius sanguine, in animabus suis, hoc est interne
baptizantur, and per spiritum sanctum de integro, seu in novas creaturas
regenerantur.
Touching the force and efficacy of holy baptism, I believe and confess that
our children (forasmuch as they also are included together with us in the
covenant before spoken of) when they are baptized into the Articles of the
ancient and catholic faith (as in them also they ought to be trained up and
instructed) are made partakers as well as we of the bloody death of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and of all other good things which in that his death he has
procured: and that in this manner; viz: that as they receive the outward seal,
to wit the holy Sacrament, the elementary water from the Minister of the word
externally in the body; so also together and at once by Christ they are washed
with his blood in their souls; that is to say, they are internally baptized,
and are regenerated a new as new creatures by the Holy Ghost.

But some may object that, this last is not the Confession of the Church of the
Palatinate, but only of Frederick the third, the Palsgraue of Rhene? To which I
answer, 1. By confessing it to be true that it was indeed the Confession of
that religious Prince; yet such as was approved of by that whole Church, as
appears by the inserting of it among the public Confessions of the Churches,
nor is there any other confession of that Church to be found in the Harmony of
Confessions, but only this; by which it is evident that the whole Church of the
Palatinate, considering how full this confession was, and how exactly according
with their public catechism, thought it needless to draw any other public
body of confession, but rather to rest in this so well performed to their
hands. 2 I say that it does fully agree to the established doctrine of that
Church set forth in their public catechism. For in the 69 Quest of that
Catech: this is demanded; Qua ratione in baptismo admoneris and confirmaris, te
vnici illius, sacrificii Christi participem esse?
By what ground art thou admonished and confirmed that in thy baptism thou art
made a partaker of that one and only sacrifice of Christ? Quod Christus
externum aquae lauacrum mandavit, addita hac promissione, me non minus certo
ipsius sanguine and spiritu a sordibus animae: hoc est, ab omnibus peccatis
meis lauari, quam aqua extrinsecus ablutus sum, qua sordes corporis expurgari
solent.
The answer to it is this. Because Christ enjoined that outward lauer of
water, with this promise annexed to it, that J should be no less certain that
J am washed by his blood and spirit from all the filth of my soul; that is
from all sins, the^ that I am externally washed with water, whereby the stains
of the body are wont to be purged away.

To which I may further add, that learned Pareus, in his larger explication of
that catechism, how ever he require faith in the receiver that will have
sensible possession and benefit of the graces of that Sacrament; yet in his
commentary upon the 74 Question of the same, undertaking to prove against the
Anabaptists the lawfulness of baptizing of infants, the second argument which
he there uses is this; Ad infantes ecclesiae pertinet beneficium remissionis
peccatorum and regenerationis (h. e.) infantibus aeque ac adultis remissio
peccatorum per sanguinem Christi, and spiritus sanctus fidei effector
promittitur; ergo infantes Christianorum debent baptizari.
that remission of sins by the blood of Christ, and the Holy Ghost the worker
of faith, is promised to infants; as well as to those of years, and that
therefore infants ought to be baptized Again, in his answer to the second
objection of the Anabaptists by which they would prove that infants ought not
to be admitted unto baptism; namely, because they believe not. he thus says;
Infantes enim credunt suo modo, pro modo aetatis quia habent inclinationem ad
credendum. Fides inest inf^ntibus potentia and inclinatione, licet non actu, vt
in adultis. And a little after. Habent etiam infantes spiritum sanctum, and ab
eo regenerantur pro modo aetatis suae, sicut Ioannes baptista impletus fuit
spiritu sancto cum adhuc esset in vtero matris: and Ierimiae, cum nond^m
produsses ex vtero, sanctificani te. Si infantes habent spiritum sanctum, certe
operatur in eis regenerationem, bonas inclinationes, novos motus, and alia quae
ad salutem eis sunt necessaria: vel certe haec omnia ipse quasi supplet, and ad
baptismum eis sufficit, iuxta d^ctum Petri, quis potest arcere ab aqua eos, qui
spiritum sanctum acceperunt, sicut and nos, Act. 10.
they have faith, although not actual; yet, potentiall, and by inclination; or
at least the holy Ghost himself supplieth the room of it, and so suffices
for their baptism: For he that has received the holy Ghost ought not to be
excluded from baptism; according to that of the Apostle in Act. 10.47. which
that Author applies to this very purpose.

Thus have we the Confessions of nine several Churches of cheifest note beyond
the seas, professing and publishing as much as those eight Fathers of old, and
as our own Church at home, touching the efficacy of Baptism of elect infants;
or, if you will, indefinitely of all infants supposed to be truly and indeed
within the election and covenant of grace.

Some, happily, will be meddling here again, and say that all these confessions
do not set such a restraint upon the efficacy of baptism, as our present
position does, but extend it indifferently unto all. But to such I must give
the same answer that I did before, because the objection is the same and
because also it is set upon the same sandy foundation: viz. that the
Confessions are indefinite, so as none are excluded from the grace of the
sacrament, that are partakers of the outward washing. The form of expression
which the churches use is indefinite, and it is necessary it should be so,
because they speak of baptism considered in the nature of it when it is
applied to those within the covenant, to all which the grace of baptism is
ordinarily given: yet well knowing that all are not indeed within the covenant,
although borne of parents that are members of the visible Church; they do not
say universally that all infants are partakers of the grace of baptism; but
indefinitely, that infants are partakers of it. Now, although often times an
indefinite proposition in materia necessaria, be equivalent to an universal:
yet it is not always so, (as, has been formerly sh wed) when some
circumstance does occur that may vary the condition of the party to whom it
is applied As for example, to say that persons so and so educated in their
youth do prove wise and able men for such or such an employment, makes the
proposition to be taken as generally true, by reason of the sufficiency of the
means of their education: yet because there may be, and often is, some inward
impediment or incapacity in some particulars, that proposition is by no wise
men believed to be meant as, universally true of all that are under the same
helps and means. Yea some propositions that are universally propounded, have
yet their limitations implied which are discerned by all rational men that
either hear or read them: as for instance; ye are all the children of God by
faith in Christ Jesus says the Apostle, Gal. 3.26. yet who can be so
charitable as to think that there was not so much as one Hypocrite in all the
Church of Galatia? does not the same Apostle say elsewhere, that 2 These. 3.2.
all men have not faith? and again, Romans 9.6.
they are not all Israel which are of Israel? What then? Why, this. The Apostle
looking upon the powerful means of begetting the Galathians unto God, viz the
word and Sacraments; and considering their outward submission and conformity
thereunto, he professes of them in the Lump, ye are all the Children of God,
etc. Howbeit no man will take him otherwise then this; ye are all his children
if ye he indeed inwardly, what ye seem outwardly to me, that am willing
thus to hope and speak of you.

In like manner then, must the Churches be understood, if they should deliver
themselves in universal terms; for as much as all are not partakers of the
spirit and blood of Christ, that are partakers of the outward Laver of
regeneration, as some of the Fathers have soundly taught us, in the former
chapter. Because in the sacrament, by virtue of Christ's institution,
ordinarily, grace is given to all that are by election capable of it; and it
being known to none who they be that are not elected, it is more apt and
proper to speak indefinitly, rather then restrictiuely, in public
Confessions of Churches, that so all may with more care and reverence attend
the Ordinance of Christ, and expect that in it, which how ever it be not of a
certainty universally communicated to all indifferently, yet is not denied to
this, or that, or any particular, presented unto baptism, for ought any
mortal man can judge, or may take liberty to presume of any one in particular,
howeuer in the general he may set it down for a conclusion of truth, that
there are some which go without it.

If yet I should be further pressed, that at least all the Lutherans do
expressly and stiffly declare themselves to believe that all infants do
certainly receive the inward grace of baptism, so as to be indeed regenerated
in the very instant of the administration? To this I answer, that it is
perhaps true of some particular men among them, that, as all men who profess
themselves stiff followers of such or such a master, do usually in tract of
time and through heat of disputation, go further then their master, or then
those more moderate men that in former times did add here unto him, as they
now do; so these (who therefore, for some errors which they unjustly father
upon that Worthy, are termed pseudo Lutherans) going further then ever L^ther
did, may take upon them the defense of this error, which yet may justly pass
as a private fancy of their own, and no true issue of his that they seem so
much to glory in; at least no public definition of any of those Churches,
which are at this day (through the violence of some particular men in them)
nicknamed Lutherans Sure I am, and so also may all others be that will take the
pains to pervse their confessions, that no such thing can be necessarily
proved thence: but that the contrary thereunto may as probably be defended, as
that which some would deduct from those public Instruments and declarations
of their faith generally agreed upon amongst them all. And how the rest; to
wit, the French, Genevean, Heluetian, Netherland, and Palatinate Churches D.
Fran. White makes it the constant tenent of all those whom the quarrels of the
world term Caluinists, to restrain the efficacy of b^ptisme only to the
elect. In his answer to ^^sh^^ page 176 touching the efficacy of bap^. of
which more afterward.
are to be understood in their Confessions, let the most learned and judicious
among them declare unto us in their public writings, which is the next thing
that I am to show.

CAP. 7. The judgment of Foreign Divines.
I Shall not need to be long in this, because I have in great part showed the
judgment of Calvin, Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Junius, Bucer, Beza, Marlorat,
Daneus, and Chameir; so far as they have opened or cleared any of those
places of scripture before alleged in my fourth chapter, for the proof of my
position by Divine testimonies of holy Writ. Notwithstanding, for my words
sake, I must do something, and set down here also a brief of their opinions
concerning this matter, who are of most eminent note in the Church, that it may
be yet more manifest that I have not set abroach any new doctrine of mine own.
My purpose is not to be curious in marshalling the several Authors which now I
am to produce; but rather to rank them so as I may soonest have done.

I have every wherein my Treatise made use of Calvine, so as I have not much
more to allege out of him then that which I have alleged before. Howbeit,
because he is one of the principal modern Writers that I build upon, as being
very clear for this opinion, and of best reckoning with those that oppose me
herein, I will here also produce him again, and lay nearer together all such
passages of his, as are more scatteringly dispersed, in my former chapters,
upon the occasions there offered unto me. And because I may be thought to
mistake his meaning, I will together and at once show you how that renowned and
invincible Chameir does also understand Calvines writings touching this point:
and so I shall dispatch both Calvin and Chameir with one and the same labor.
Daniel Chameir tom. 4.


Chameir, dealing against the Pontificians, especially against Bellarmine,
touching the efficacy of the Sacraments of the New Testament, does disclaim
that position that, Sacraments are without all efficacy; and complains of it
as a wrong done to all sound Protestants, (who^ every where he calls by the
name of Catholics, which title the Papists unjustly attribute, and
appropriate unto themselves) that they are charged with such an error: For,
says he, Docent ergo Catholici in Sacramentorum perceptione effici gratiam in
fidelibus: atque hacte ^us sacrameta dicenda efficacia. Neque inviti audiunt a
Greg. de Valen. Dubitari non deber, quin per aliquem tandem modum, quicunque
ille sit, Sacramenta omnino sint causae conferentes gratiam. Et sane Calvini
verba haec sunt; praestat igitur vere Deus quicquid signis promittit, ac
figurat: nec effectu suo carent signa, vt verus and fidelis probetur little
Author. So Calvin lib 4. Instit. cap, 14. Sect 17.
The Catholics teach that in receaving of the Sacraments, grace is wrought in
the faithful, and that the Sacraments are to be held efficacious to the ends
for which they were ordained. Nor do they unwillingly hear that from, Greg:
de Valentia, viz: it ought not to be doubted but that in some manner, what ever
that be, the Sacraments are causes conferrring grace. For in very deed the
words of Calvin are these; God does truly perform what ever he promises and
represents in the outward signs; nor do the outward signs want their
effect, that He who is their Author might prove himself true and faithful of
his word. Then Chameir, goes on to explicate how and in what manner they work
grace, not as the principal cause, but only isntrumental; and that not
physical, but moral. The same in effect he speaks again in the same Book,
Calvine.
cap. 3. par. 10. Sane tum Calvinus tum omnes Catholici baptismi efficaciam
agnoscunt.
Verily both Calvine, and all Catholics acknowledge an efficacy of Baptism.

But here some will be ready to object: What need all this? Who denies this?
All the Question is, what efficacy does he, and Calvine mean? Answ: Let
Chameir himself explicate their meaning in his own words. They are these.
Lib. 5. de Sacram. cap. 4 par. 8. Nostra sententia minus est verbis ampullata,
sed long simplicior and solidior. Restaurationis humanae duas esse parts
interim dum expectatur salus plena; Iustificationem and sanctificationem, etc.
The doctrine of us Catholics is less g^rgeously set out (then that of the
Papists) but more solid: There be two parts of man's restoration unto
salvation, Justification and Sanctification: both of which he briefly
explicateth, then, concludes, Ibid. par. 9. Vtrique huic parti adhibitum esse
sacramentum baptismum, Scil. significandae and efficiendae.
Unto both these parts the Sacrament of Baptism is applied, to wit to
represent, and to effect them. This he makes good out of Calvines catechism,
which is the publicly authorized Chatechisme of Geneva and the Church of
France. Thus runs the Catechism. Qu^e est baptismi significatio? Ea duas
parts habet: mi ibi remissio peccatorum, deinde spiritualis regeneratio
figuratur.
What is the meaning of Baptism? Ans. It has in it two parts: for therein
both remission of sins, and also spiritual regeneration is represented. And
a little after thus the Catechism explaines the former word representation,
Sic figuram esse sentio vt simul annexa fit veritas. Neque enim sua nobis dona
pollicendo nos Deus frustratur, proinde and peccatorum veniam, and vitae
novitatem offerri in baptismo, and recipi a nobis certum est
I judge it to be so a figure, that the truth of the thing figured is also
annexed to it. For God does not frustrate our expectation when he promises us
his gifts; and therefore it is certain that both remission of sins, and
regeneration is both offered to us, and also received by us in Baptism. Thus
far the Catechism of Calvine, which does fully agree to all those passages of
his formerly cited; if not only I, but that Reverend Chameir be not mistaken
in construing of his words.

There is no question, say some, but that you are both out, if you say Calvine
meant this, of the efficacy of Baptism before faith. For Calvine even in that
very Chapter so often before quoted, says expressly; Instit. lib 4 c. 16. sect.
21. Quare nihil plus in p^dobaptismo praesentis efficaciae requirendum est qu^m
vt faed is cum illis a Domino percussum ob fi^met and sanci ^t. Reliqua eius
sacramenti significatio, quo tempore Deus ^p e providerit, postea consequetur.
There is no more to be required in the baptism of infants in respect of
present efficacy, than this, that the covenant of God made with them should be
ratified and confirmed: the rest that is signified in that Sacrament, shall
follow after, in Gods good time. To which I answer, that this is as much as I
contend for; viz: so much efficacy as may for the present confirm an elect
infant in Gods covenant. But this confirmation is not, in Calvines judgment,
the bare reception of the outward sign, but a conferring of the inward earnest
of the spirit to assure the^ thereby of after grace and glory. For so himself
speaks in the 15. chap. and 12. Section of the same book. The Apostle, says
he, having showed that we are accepted of God through Christ, he subioynes,
-- Subiungit, eos omnes qui iustitia Christi induuntur, simul spiritu
regenerari, and huius regenerationis nos ar^ham habere in baptismo.
That they all who are clothed with the righteousness of Christ, are also
regenerated by his spirit, and the earnest hereof we have in our baptism.
There is then a confirmation by an earnest, and this earnest is part of the
whole benefit promised, and by him assigned in express terms to be the
Spirit^ Baptizemur in mortificationem carnis nostrae, quae a baptismo in nobis
inchoatur, quam quotidie prosequimur; perficietur autem quum ex hac vita
migradimus ad Dominum. Sect. 11.
yea look but into the very last words of the next Section immediately preceding
the Section now quoted, and you shall find him there affirming; i That we are
baptized unto the mortification of our flesh, which mortification is begun in
us from our very baptism, we daily go forward in it, and it shall be
perfected in us when we depart hence unto the Lord. Lo here, what Calvine
means by confirming and ratifying the covenant unto an elect infant; and what
it is that is to be expected to follow after in Gods good time, even the
breaking out, grouth and perfection of that grace, which was begun even from
his baptism wherein he receaues the spirit as the earnest penny and Author of
the same.

But Calvine directly affirms, that, Fatemur ergo baptismum pro eo tempore
non profuisse nobis h^lum, quando in eo nobis oblata promissio, sine qua
baptismus nihil est, neglecta iacebat. Instit. lib 4. ca. 15. Sect. 17.
Till by faith we lay hold upon the promise sealed in baptism, our baptism is
not worth a rush unto us? To this I have sufficiently answered more then once
before; and particularly, in chap. 4. in confirmation of the major Proposition
of my third argument: the sum whereof is briefly this; The Sacrament profits
no man of years, without faith to apprehend the promise: nor can the elect
themselves sensibly perceive the fruit and comfort of their baptism, in the
ordinary course, until after they have obtained actual faith at their actual
conversion. Nor does it follow that they had not the spirit in baptism,
because they were not capable of so much as knowing the same at that time; much
less, of believing; for so says the same Author: Etsi infantes quo
circumcidebantur momento, quid sibi vellet signum illud, intelligentia non
comprehendebant: vere tame^ circumcidebantur in naturae suae corruptae ac
contaminatae mortificationem quam adulti postea meditarentur. Denique nullo
negotio solvi potest obiectio haec, baptizari in futuram paenitentiam and
fidem; quae etsi nondum in illis formatae sunt, arcana tamen spiritus
operatione vtriusque seme^ in illis latet. lib. 4. c. 16. sect. 20.
Although infants in the instant of circumcision were not able to comprehend
what that sign meant they were yet truly circumcised unto the mortification of
their corrupt and defiled nature, which after they came to years they
meditated on. And a little after; infants are baptized unto future repentance
and faith, which graces although they be not (actually) formed in them, yet by
the secret operation of the spirit the seeds of both do lie hid in them. Now
these two places laid together do make it evident that, when this Author said
that Baptism profits nothing till the promise be apprehended, his meaning was
not that the Spirit of God does nothing at all at the time of baptism in an
elect Infant; but only this, that the party cannot have any actual sensible
benefit till actual faith be begotten in him, and the same actually employed
in the application of those good things which were exhibited and sealed unto
him in his baptism.

But it will be yet further objected, that, admit Calvine were of opinion that
some infants are endowed with the spirit in their infancy, yet he meant not to
ascribe the communication of it to Baptism; but rather declares himself to
mean it of grace received before Baptism; as appears by the instances he
gives of John Baptist, Documentum praebuit in Ioha^ne Baptista que^ in matris
vtero sanct ficauit, quid in reliquis possit. ibid: cap. 16. sect. 17.
which he contendeth to have been sanctified in the womb by God, who therein
gave us an experiment of his power to sanctify others in like manner: now,
what is this to the reception of the spirit in Baptism? To this I answer,
first, that his maine scope is to confute the Anabaptists touching their
supposed impossibility of the capacity of regeneration in an infant, for which
reason they would not have him admitted to sacred baptism, as appears in the
beginning of the same Section. Ibid. Ratione^ quoque firmissima obtendere sibi
videntur, cur arcendi sint a baptismo pueri, dum causantur non esse per aetatem
adhuc idoneos q^i signa tum illi^ mysterium assequantur. Id autem est
spiritualis regeneratio, quae cadere in primam i^fantiam non potest.
Therefore hence I collect that his purpose was to overthrow this imaginary
bulwark, by making evident not only a possibility, but (in that particular of
John) a certainty of regeneration even in the womb, which was sooner then
baptism; so as their argument could not hold against Baptism: for, if an
infant be capable of the spirit in the womb, much more then in baptism, and
therefore he ought to be baptized. Secondly, if his purpose were not thence to
infer that an infant not only may, but does receive the spirit in baptism,
it were no sufficient answer to their objection: for they might justly reply
thus; if you intend only a possibility of regeneration of some, before
baptism, and not of what is ordinarily conferred in baptism, then it cannot
follow hence, that, because in some extraordinary cases some few may be
sanctified before baptism, therefore it ought to be drawn into an ordinary
practice that infants should be baptized because by your own confession, that
sanctification which some infants partake of, is not by virtue of the efficacy
of baptism, but by and from the special pleasure of God manifested upon some
few, here and there without this ordinance Thirdly, I add that, Calvin does
certainly and expressly intend that the first principle of regeneration, to wit
the spirit of Christ is ordinarily given in baptism: for in the 21 Section of
the very same chapter he thus speaks, Quos electione sua dignatus est
Dominus, si accepto regenerationis signo, prae ent^ vita (...) e demigrenr q^
in ido leuert (...) virtute sui spiritus nobis incomp ehensa re^^ uat quo modo
expedire solus ipse providet, si gra^des^cre in aetatem contingat, qua baptismi
veritatem edoceri qutant, hinc magis ad ren ua^io as studium a cendentur, cuius
tessera ^e a prima statim infantia donatos esse descent qui came toto vitae
uccursu meditarcutur. Eodem refe^atur quod duobus locis P^ulus decet, nos
Christo per bapt^smum c^nsepchri. Nam eo non intelligit, consepultum Christo
iam prius cum esse oportere qui bapt smo sit ini^iandus: sed quae b^ptismo
subest doctrina, simplicitur declarat; idque iam baptiz^tis, vt ne infani
quidem baptismo, praeire ex hoc loco pugnaturi sint. In hunc modum and Moses
and Prophetae populum admonebant quid sibi vellet Circumcisio qua tamen infant
^b^nati fuerant. Tantundem valet quod and Galatis scribit, eos dum baptizati
fuerant, Christum induisse. Q^^n ^um id? Nempe vt Christo in posterum viuerent:
quia non anio vixissent. Et quanquam in natu grandioribus mysterii
intelligentiam signi susceptio consequi debet: parvulos t^men alio loco ac
numero babendos, mox exponetur, etc.
Whom God vouchsafes to elect, if after they have received the sign of
regeneration, they dye before they come to years, them he does renew by the
power of his spirit, by us incomprehensible, as it seems best unto himself.
But if it so fall out that they live to years of discretion, whereby they may
be instructed concerning the truth of their baptism, they are then thereby the
more provoked to the study of newness of life, the pledge and badg whereof
they then come to learn that they were endowed with from their very infancy,
whereby they ought more seriously to meditate upon the same all the days of
their life. And hither is to be referred that which Paul teaches in those two
distinct places touching our burial with Christ by Baptism, (Rom 6 4. Col.
^.12.) For thereby the Apostle meant not to show that it is necessary for him
that is to be baptized, to be thus buried with Christ, beforehand; but, what
simply baptism does effect in and upon them that are now baptized, that so no
cracked brains should contend that this does go before baptism. After the
same manner Moses and the Prophets admonished the people what was the meaning
of circumcision; with which notwithstanding their very infants were also
signed. This is equivalent to that which also the Apostle writes to the
Galathians, that when they were baptized, they put on Christ. Why speaks he
so? Namely, that they might now live unto Christ, which before that time, they
had not done. And although in persons of ripe age the receiving of the
sacrament ought to follow the understanding of the mystery; yet infants are to
be accounted of another rank and number, as shall be presently declared, etc.
By all this then it is manifest that Caluines judgment was for the reception of
the spirit in Baptism, in the ordinary course thereof, notwithstanding the
instance he gives of the Baptist who received his first sanctification in his
mothers womb. His meaning was not to show when an infant receives the spirit,
as if he usually received it in the womb, or out of baptism; but only to prove
a possibility that an infant may receive the spirit in baptism notwithstanding
his infancy, because he may partake of it in the very womb.

Well; yet when you have all done, Calvin speaks this in some special cases
only; as namely in the case of elect infants dying in infancy, as the place
last cited may declare? Answer. It is very true that Calvin speaks not of all
that are outwardly baptized; no more do I. I restrain it to the elect; and so
does he Spiritus sanctus (quem non omnibus promiscue Sacramenta aduchunt, sed
quem d^minus peculiariter suis confe^t^is est qui Dei gra ias secum affert, qui
dat sacramentis in nobis locum, qui efficit vt fructificent. Instit. lib. 4
cap. 14 Sect. 17.
; as is evident in the last passage, quoted out of him. But yet he is not so to
be taken, as if he held that, only elect infants who dye in infancy, do
receive the spirit in baptism: but that all the elect, whether they live or
dye, do, ordinarily partake of the spirit in that ordinance. Touching elect
children that dye in infancy, I am of opinion that, by a secret and
incomprehensible work of the spirit, they are actually regenerated so as to be
made meet to enter into that Holy city into which no unclean thing shall
ever enter; and this Calvin also professedly maintains Porro infantes qui
seruandi sunt, (vt certe ex ea aetate omnino aliqui seruantur) ante a domino
regenerari mi nime obscurum est. Nam si ingenitam si^i cor^uptionem e matris
vtero secum afferunt: ea repurgatos esse opo^tet, antequam in regnum Dei
admittantur, quo nihil ingredi^ur pollutum aut inquinatum Instit. lib. 4. cap.
16. sect. 17.
. They therefore have a further work wrought in them, then, ordinarily others
have: howbeit it was never the meaning of that judicious man to restrain all
communication of the spirit to such as dye in infancy, but only, to extend it
to all the elect, and to the elect only. Why else should he say, that even.
Instit. lib 4. cap. 15. Sect. 12. of which but a little before.
WE are baptized unto mortification of our flesh, which mortification is begun
in us from our very baptism, and WE daily go forward in it, etc.? Why does
he else avouch that, Et sane ideo a prima infantia sanctificatus fuit Christus,
vt ex aetate qualibet sine discrimine electos suos in scipso sanctificaret. Nam
quemadmodum ad delendam inobedientiae culpam, quae in carne nostra pe petrata
fuerat, eam ipsam carnem sibi induit, in qua perfectam causa viceque n^stra
obedientiam praestaret ita ex spiritu sancto conceptus fuit vt eius sanctitute
in assumpta carne ad plenum p^rfusus, ipsam ad nos transfunderet. Instit. lib.
4 c. 16. sect. 18.
Christ was sanctified from his first incarnation, that he might sanctify his
elect of every age, without any difference. For as he took to him our flesh,
in which he perfectly performed perfect and complete obedience for our sakes,
and in our rooms, for the abolishing of the sin of disobedience committed by
us in the flesh; so he was conceived of the holy Ghost, that being fully
endowed with the spirit, upon the assumption of our flesh, he might transfuse
the same holiness unto us? All which he speaks, not of such as dye in
infancy, but of such as live to ripe years also. And if he meant not to
affirm this to be the ordinary course of divine dispensation, in the baptism
of such as live to years, he could not possibly repel the argument of the
Anabaptists who therefore disclaim the baptism of infants, because they
receive no part of the inward grace signified by the outward sign. For if He
should make such an imperfect answer as this; viz: that although elect infants
who live to years are not then in any degree partakers of the inward grace,
yet such as dye in infancy, do partake thereof; and therefore, for their sakes
atleast infants should be baptized, if, I say, he should thus answer, they
would hiss at so poor a shift, and reply thus; if you would have all infants
baptized, because some of them may dye and in that regard may need baptism,
for as much as they are to be regenerated in baptism, to make them fit for
heaven: this is a beggarly kind of reasoning: for, by your own confession, At
periculum est, ne is qui aegrotat, si absque baptismo decesserit,
regenerationis gratia priuetur, minime vero Jnfantes nostros, antequam
nascantur, se adoptare in suos pronunciat Deus, quum le, nobis in deum sore
promittit, seminique nostro post nos. Hoc verbo continetur eo^um salus Instit,
lib 4. c. 15. sect. 20.
elect infants, dying before baptism, cannot perish, so as there is no
necessity for baptizing of all infants for the regenerating of a few thereby,
that may happen to dye in infancy; in as much as they would be sanctified,
although they should never be baptized, and the rest, although baptized, would
not by your own doctrine, be then sanctified at all. Thus have I largly
declared the judgment of that judicious and justly honored Calvin, touching
this point: and have been more tedious herein, then a judicious reader will
(perhaps) bear with patience: but if any find fault, my apology is this; they
who should have had more wit and honesty, have filled the heads of the
multitude with this conceit, that, howeuer I made a great flourish with the
name of Calvin, for giving countenance to my opinion; yet the truth is,
Calvin delivered no such thing; but is rather against me, then for me, as they
are able to show, at pleasure, to any man that shall require it. Now to clear
my self of this foul aspertion unjustly cast upon me, I held my self bound
by a kind of necessity thus copiously to set down Calvines opinion; and to
meet with all objections that could possibly be put up against me, to weaken
the several testimonies I take out of Calvin for my defense; to the intent
that after all that can be said on both sides, the impartial reader, how
meanly soever gifted, may be able to judge, whether Calvin speak with or
against me.

What was the conceit of Chameir touching the judgment of all sound Divines,
and particularly of Calvin, you have seen in part already. And because
Chameir is of such eminent note in the Church, and so expressly delivers the
judgment of all Protestants; and therein, his own, concerning the efficacy of
baptism upon elect infants, Constat vtrinque consentiri in prius caput de
Iustificatione, nempe quo ad culpam paenamque omnium peccatorum, quam in
baptismo significari id est effici neutri negant. In altero itidem capite, hoc
saltem vtrinque poni, sanctificatione^ (i.) novitatem vitae conferri. Quid
igitur controuerti? N^mirum h^ius sanctificatio^is modulum and mensuram, etc.
De sacram: lib. 5. cap. 4. par. 10.
I will produce a place or two more out of him. He writing of this very point,
and stating the controversy between the Papists and us therein, says thus;
The question between them and us is not. 1 Whether justification from all our
sins be offered and conferred in baptism; for this, neither part denies:
nor, 2 whether any sanctification at all be then conferred: for that, both
allow: but the punctual difference is only concerning the quantity and measure
of sanctification. The Papists contend that sanctification complete is then
given; and this we deny, saying that it is only then begun, and is daily
perfected by degrees. Here least any man should dream of an ambi^uity in his
speeches, take notice that Chameir in that very chapter had before showed his
meaning to be of that which is ordinarily communicated in the very instant of
the administration of Baptism. Duo dissentionis capita sunt; primum, de
effectu praesenti, alterum de futuro. Praesentem effectum dico, qui assignandus
sit huic sacramento in ipso celebrationis legittimae momento: futurum vero qui
post eam celebrationem. ibid. par. 6.
For thus, He; The present difference between us and Papists touching the
efficacy of baptism, may be reduced to two heads; the first touching the
present effect of it; the other, touching that which is future. By the present
effect, J mean, says he, that which is assigned to be wrought in the very
instant of the right administration of baptism: by the other, that which
follows after the celebration ended. Then he goes on with his discourse that
was but now propounded, to show that even in the moment of Baptism all
Orthodox divines do allow of some present efficacy of baptism upon infants,
unto sanctification, as more at larg appears in the Author himself. Yea so
resolute is he for the efficacy of baptism upon infants, that he fears not to
affirm, that either the^ or never it takes effect upon the^ See his own words.
Etenim tantum abest, vt d^ceamus nihil agere baptismum, nisi cum adoleuerint
infantes: vt contra effectum baptismi, quem D^us ipse per se praestet, sciam^s
praecedere ipsam celebrationem baptismi: Itaque aut nunquam vllum futurum, aut
tum esse reapse quum celebratur: vere inqua^ remitti peccata; vere adoptione,
sed fieri moraliter. de sacr. l. 2. c. 6. par. 4.
So far is it from us that we should teach that Baptism effects nothing
upon infants until they come to age; that on the contrary, we know that the
effect of Baptism, which is performed immediately by God himself, (sometimes)
goes before the very celebration of baptism: therefore we say that, either
then, there is some effect, in truth and indeed, when the Sacrament is
administered; or else there will never follow after any at all, that is, then
our sins are truly remitted, and our adoption made sure to us: but all this,
morally, and not by virtue of any inherent force in the outward signs to
convey those graces naturally to the receiver by virtue of the outward act
performed in such manner as the virtue that is in a potion conveies it self
necessarily to the expelling of corrupt humors out of that body into which it
is received. This Physical efficacy, as they term it, is a thing which both
he and all sound divines do professedly disclaim. To make an end with this
Author, He allows an efficacy, we see, expounds himself to mean only a moral
efficacy, and this moral efficacy he affirms to be found, not in all; yet in
all the elect, as he also presently after declares himself Quid ergo; nimirum
been diximus, effecta sacramentorum non aliter expectanda, quam ex
institutione: extra quam externa signorum administratio vim nullam habet. Hoc
modo sacramenta ipsa valent per se plurimum: id est etiamsi nulla adsit actu
presens fides, vt in infantibus, saltem electis. De sacram lib. 2. c. 6. par.
40.
We rightly say, says he, that the effects, of the sacraments are to be
expected only from their institution; without which the external
administration of the outward signs has in it no force at all. But in this
respect (viz. of the institution) the sacraments, of themselves, avail very
much; that is, although no actual faith be present to the receiver; as for
example, in infants, at least in those that are elect. Thus much of the
judgment of Calvin and Chameir, the glory of France, and indeed of all
Christendom. I will be very brief, in the rest.

Our next witness shall be that great and profund divine, whom Calvin styles
a most potent man in the Scriptures, Martin Bucer, who treating of the efficacy
of baptism, plainly avoucheth that, Nec emim seruat Baptisma adultos nisi
credentes: salus quidem baptismate offertur omnibus: recipient autem illam
adulti non nisi per fidem; infantes per arcanam spiritus sancti operationem,
qua ad vitam aeternam sanctificantur. Ex bis iam omnibus locis clare
perspicimus, baptisma commendari nobis, vt instrumentum divinae misericordiae,
quo deus non sua, sed nostra causa dignatur vti, vt quo electis suis, quibus
ipse haec sua destinauit dona, conferat vsus suorum ad id ministerio, quod eis
praescripsit, peccatorum salutarem paenitentiam, certamque ablutionem and
remissionem, mortem, sepul^uram purgationem, spem certam resurrectionis, in
Christum incorporationem, eius induitionem, (i) sal^ificam communionem,
regenerationem, innovationemque spiritus. Nec minus efficax est horum omnium
donorum Dei instrumentum baptisma electis Dei quos eo statuit Dominus
regignere, quam est vllum remedium quantumvis efficax ex natura vt dicitur ad
conferendam sanitatem corpori, ad suscipiendum hunc effectum maxim parato and
accommodato. Ex dei enim verbo pendet effectus vtriusque rei. Imo multo
certius, p^rcipiunt electi Dei enumerata Dei beneficia per baptisma, quam
corpora humana sanitatem suam per illa, quae vocantur romedia naturalia. Bucer.
De vi and effic: Bapt. in clas. inter scripta anglica.
Baptism saues none of years, but believers. Salvation indeed is offered in
baptism unto all; but those of years receive it not, but by faith, and
infants, by the secret operation of the holy Ghost, by which they are also
sanctified unto external life. Then, for a Conclusion of all that he had said
and collected from many scriptures cited to this purpose, he thus shuts up the
whole matter. From all these places we now clearly perceive baptism to be
commended unto us as an instrument of divine mercy, which God vouchsafes
merely for our sakes to use, whereby he might confer upon his elect, by the
ministry of his servants, all these gifts, saving repentance, certain ablution
and purgation of our souls, undoubted hope of the resurrection, incorporation
unto Christ, putting on of Christ; that is the saving communion, regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Nor is this instrument of baptism less
effectual unto all these uses in the elect, whom God has resolved to
regenerate, than is any remedy, how effectual soever, by a natural energy, to
give health to a body that is most capable of such remedy, when it is applied
thereunto. For on Gods word the effect of each thing depends. Yea much more
certainly do the elect of God partake of all the forementioned benefits by
baptism, than humane bodies do receive health by natural means applied.
Thus we see Bucer to aver the efficacy of Baptism, not only to persons of
years believing, but to infants also: and this, to be ordinarily in the
baptism of the Elect, of all the eelct, and only of the elect.

Peter Martyr, writing of the very same subject, and endeavoring to make good
the solid doctrine of the Church touching the baptizing of infants, affirms;
that, they are not incapable of baptism for want of actual faith, because the
spirit, in them supplies the room of faith; nor are they excluded from present
efficacy of that ordinance, because that unto them, as well as to the rest of
the faithful, the holy Ghost is promised, at that time. His own words are
plain and full enough: therefore take the pains to read and mark them.
Infantibus autem qui adhuc per aetatem credere non possunt, spiritus sanctus in
eorum cordibus fidei vices gerit. Effusio quoque spiritus sancti premittitur in
baptismo, vt in Epist. ad Tit. diserte scribitur; qui salvos nos fecit, etc.
Loc. Com clas. 4. cap. 8. sect. 2.
Jn infants, says he, who by reason of their tender years cannot believe the
Holy Ghost supplies the room of faith. Also the effusion of the Holy Ghost is
promised in baptism, as the Apostle expressly writes to Titus saying, who saved
us by the lauer of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed
abroad on us abundantly. Afterward, in the same chapter, he, taking occasion
to debate what efficacy, in particular, infants are partakers of, in their
baptism, modestly refuses to determine it punctually: and thus waueth the
point; Iudico satis est, vt statuantur quod se^uan di sunt, eo quod per
electionem and praedestinationem ad pecultum Dei pertineant; spiritu sancto
profundi, qui radix est fidei, spei charitatis, and omnium virtutum, quas
postea exerit and declarat, cum per aetatem licet. ibid. sect. 14.
I hold that it is sufficient that we acknowledge they shall be saved, for as
much as they, by election and praedestination, belong to Gods peculiar flock,
that they are endowed with the spirit, who is the root of faith, hope, love,
and all other graces, which spirit afterward does manifest and declare
himself in the sons of God, when they come to years.

Musculus of Baptism gives this description: Defi^iemus baptismum esse
sacramentum regenerationis, purgationis, initiationis, sanctificationis,
obsignationis, and incorporationis in Christum seruatorem. Haec enim omni no
per spiritum Christi fiunt in electu and fidelibus, quorum sacramentum est
baptismus; vt recte in illo profici dicatur, quod per spiritum Christi reipsa
and spiritualiter perficitur Muscul de Bapt quest. 1. Sect. 8 Loc. Com.
We define baptism to be the sacrament of regeneration, purgation,
initiation, sanctification, obsignation, and incorporation into Christ our
Savior: For all these are effected in the elect and faithful by the spirit of
Christ, of all which graces baptism is the sacrament; so as in it this may
rightly be said to be done, because truly and spiritually it is effected by the
spirit of Christ. If any think to object against me that Musculus speaks this
of the faithful, and so, understands it not of infants? I answer out of
Musculus himself; Omnes Christianorum infantes ad Christum pertinentes, deque
numero fidelium existentes, recte dicuntur esse in fide Christi, fideles and
credentes, licet nondum sint imbuti fide. Musc: in Mat. 18
All infants belonging to Christ, borne of Christian parents, and being of the
number of the faithful, are rightly said to be in the faith of Christ, to be
faithful, and believers, although as yet, they be not endewed with actual
faith. Besides he that says, Christians being elect are, by the Holy Ghost,
ingraffed into Christ, in baptism, must not exclude elect infants; for as much
as none but infants are now usually baptized in the Church. Therefore he must
be understood of what baptism does ordinarily effect upon infants; or else his
definition is very improper; yea, false, being applied to children, beside whom
there are none (unless in some rare cases of proselites) baptized in these
latter times.

Francis Iunius, in his Theses of Paedobapt. speaks as fully to this point, as
any of the rest. Si enim in Christi corpus baptizandi omnes electi, si omnes
christum induere debent, infantes non secus ac adulti, eos a christi corpore
separare, and Christo non inserere nefandum esset. These. 4.
If, says he; all the elect are to be baptized into the body of Christ, if
moreover all of them, as well infants as persons of years ought to put on
Christ, then, to separate the^ from the body of Christ, and not to engraffe
them into Christ, were a most wicked thing. And again a little after, Cum
baptizantur infantes deus offert and confert omnia bona faederis and
stipulatur. ibid. These. 10.
When infants (What infants he means, he had sufficiently expressed before:
viz. elect infants) are baptized; God does both offer, and confer all the
good things of the Covenant, and engages himself unto it. In another place,
thus: Baptismus est actio sacra Dei lauantis suos, intus, lotione spiritus,
foris, lotione aquae, Mat. 3. Ioh. 1. and passim. Haec igitur relata sunt, aqua
and spiritus. lotio aquae and lotio spiritu Relatio vt (...) est i^^s illa,
sieve applicatio vntus ad alteram secundum naturam rel^torum, formam constituexs
sacramenti. Quemadmodum igitur homo in actionibus humanis, anima and corpore
actionem internam and externam agit vnica operatione, in qua, sicut anima est
forma corporis, ita actio interna formalis quodam modo, externa vero materialis
est: in cundum modum Deus spiritu suo and aqua, agit actionem internam and
externam vnica operatione, in qua, lotio interna a spiritu formalis est; and in
^terialis, externa: pr^ vt dicebat Ioannes, ego baptizo vos aqua, etc. Iun. in
Exam. Gratian. Prosp. Par. 3.
Baptism is a sacred action of God washing those that be he his own,
inwardly, with the washing of the spirit; outwardly with the washing of water.
Mat 3. John. 1. and elsewhere. These two therefore, the water, and the spirit,
the washing of water, and the washing of the spirit, are relatiues, And the
relation it self is that application or union of these one to another
according to the nature of relatiues, which constitutes the form of the
sacrament. Wherefore as a man in humane actions does, with his soul and body
produce both an inward and an outward action in one and the same operation, in
which as the soul is said to be the form of the body, so is the inward
action, after a sort; the formal; and the external, the material part of the
action: even so after the same manner God, by his spirit and by water, does
perform both an internal and an external action, in one and the same
operation; in which, the inward washing by the spirit is the formal part; and
the external washing with water, is the material part of that his action;
according to that of John the Baptist, I indeed baptize you with water, etc.
but he that comes after me shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, etc. This
passage passing from that learned man in a scholasticall confutation of a
subtle adversary, is perhaps more abstruse then it can be fully understood of
an ordinary reader; yet all that are judicious cannot see less in it than
this: viz that in the judgment of Iunius, that is not held for Baptism of the
elect, wherein God does not ordinarily accompany the outward administration of
that sacrament with some inward work of the spirit inwardly washing the soul,
as well as the water outwardly washes the body, in the Lauer of Regeneration.

But what manner of work that is, which is ordinarily performed by the spirit,
in the matter of Regeneration, the same Author also describes in the place
first cited, where he thus distinguishes of regeneration, and then explaines
himself in what sense he affirms infants elect to be regenerated in
baptism. De regeneratio ^e aliter consideratur in f^^ l^^ne to, id est, in
Christo, habitu, aliter in nobis, actu. P^im^ regeneratio (q^^e dici potest
transplantatio a vetere. Id mo in novum) tanq^am causa e^^, a^tera tanquam
fructus sequitu^. De prima inquitur Christus. John. 3. Apostolus vtramque
coniungit, Romans 6. Hac regenerantur infantes electi cum Christo inferuntu, and
huius obsignatio sit i^s du^^ baptizantu^. De Paed. bap. ch^^. 7
Touching regeneration, it is one way to be considered in the foundation, that
is to say, in Christ the habit thereof; and another way, in us, in the act
thereof. The first regeneration (which may be termed a transplantation out of
the old Adam into the new,) is as a cause; and the other follows as an effect
thereof. Of the former Christ speaks in the 3d of John. The Apostle ioynes
both together in Romans 6. With this (to wit the first) elect infants are
regenerated when they are set into Christ, the obsignation whereof is made over
unto them in the time wherein they are baptized. Thus we see the point
receiving clear testimony from this witness also, as full as can be desired,
if all the passages of the Author be laid together, and considered with
impartial eyes.

In the next place let us enquire of Zanchius what he thinks of this point.
We are in part informed already what his judgment is: but this being the place
which is proper for him to give up his verdict in, let us hear him more at
large in his own words. He, in the Confession of his faith, thus speaks of
baptism. Baptismus primum Noui faederis sacramentum est; quo cum omnes, qui
vel paenitentiam peccatorum professi, fidem etiam in Christum adeoque in Deum
Patre, filium, and spiritum sanctum profitentur, vel saltem propter parentum
pietatem ad faedus pertinere creduntur. 1. Cor. 7.14. tum maxim illi qui vere
ad faedus pertinent, Christo tanquam ei iam per spiritum sanctum incorporati,
obsignantur: vt non sint amplius sui iuris, sed illius, per quem in faederis
societatem, ceque in vnum corpus cum eo sanctisque omnibus, and in omnium
spiritualium caelestiumque bonorum particip^tion^m, asciti esse dicuntur Act.
19.5. 1. Cor. 6.19. Per hunc baptismum tanquam per l^^^c^um regenerationis, a
peccatis vi sanguinis Christi, mundati, and cum Christo consepulti in mortem:
vt quemadmodum ille resurrexit a mortuis per gloriam patris, sic and nos in
novitate vitae ambulemus. Vnde and sacramentum paenitentiae in remissionem
peccatorum, sacramentum fidei, symbolum federis, lauacrum regenerationis, etc.
appellari consueuit. Zanch. lib. Confess. cap. de baptismo Sect. 1.
Baptism is the first sacrament of the new covenant wherein all that either by
repentance and profession of faith in Christ, and so, in God the Father, the
Son, and Holy Ghost, or by reason of their parents piety are believed to
pertain to the covenant, 1. Cor. 7.4. but especially they that do truly
belong to the Covenant, are sealed up for Christ, as being even then
incorporated into him by the Holy Ghost: that they might no longer be their
own, but his, through whom they are said to be received into the society of
the covenant, and so into one body with him and with all the saints, and into
the participation of all spiritual and celestial blessings. Act. 19.5. 1.
Cor. 6.19 By this baptism, as by the Lauer of regeneration, they are cleansed
from their sins by the virtue of Christ's blood, and are buried with Christ
into death: that as he rose again from the dead by the glory of the Father;
even so we also should walk in newness of life. Whence also it is called the
sacrament of repentance for remission of sin, the sacrament of faith, the
badg of the covenant, the Lauer of Regeneration, etc. Lo here an efficacy of
baptism, and an efficacy unto regeneration, even in infants also belonging
truly and indeed to the covenant of grace, as well as to persons of years
attaining unto actual faith and repentance.

And least any man should stumble at the ambiguity of some words here used, we
may find Zanchius expressing himself almost in the same terms which I used
at the beginning of this treatise in the explication of my distinction of
initiall, and actual regeneration; for which they who term me a Dreamer, must
also take him; and the Fathers into the same number: for, thus He: Non
incongrue Patres decent effectum illum spiritus domini, quem describit Moses.
in G^n. 1. typum fuisse illius quem praestat spiritus sanctus in aqua baptismi.
Vt enim ibi incubabat aquis illis, and eas fouebat, animabat, praeparabatque ad
(...), rerumque omnium generationem: sic sp^ritus sanctus praesidet aquis
baptismi, and eis quasi incubat, illisque benedicit, and inde electos fovet,
regenerat, animat, faecundosque reddit ad bona opera. Zanch. de Trib. Eloh.
lib. 7. cap. 1.
Not unfitly do the Fathers teach, that effect of the holy Ghost moving upon
the Waters, which Moses describes in Genesis 1. to be a resemblance of that which
the Holy Ghost performs in the water of Baptism. For as there he rested upon
those waters, that he might cherish and prepare them for the producing of
living creatures, and for the generation of all things: so the Holy Ghost sits
upon the waters of baptism, and sits as it were abroad upon them, and blesses
them, and thence does cherish, regenerate and animate the elect, and makes them
fruitful unto all good works. The Holy Ghost then, does rest upon the waters
(not in the shape of a dove as some absurdly picture him; but yet truly in a
spiritual manner, as best becomes him) and does communicate himself therewith
unto elect infants, for producing of future actual newness of life, not
presently, but in due time and order, in them. It were easy to add to this
great cloud of witnesses, many more Oecolompadius. Pareus. Marlorat. Melanchton.
: but I must of necessity contract my self; I will therefore mention only two
more of this sort; and then draw nearer home to our own Divines.

One of the two I mean to cite, is Lambertus Daneus, an Author of great
learning and note in the Church, He, in his learned and fruitful commentary
upon St Augustines Enchiridion, cap. 52. (Where that Father quoting that of the
Apostle in Romans 6. we are buried with him by baptism into death, and
avouching that this belongs even to infants as well as to others;) allows that
saying of Augustine, being restrained to the elect, and understood only of
initiall regeneration, as I had occasion to note before. His own words are
these. Ergo and fide and regenerationem habent parvuli electi dei, etsi nondum
illius opera nobis apparent: and ea dona habent pro ratione aetatis, id est,
pro capacitate vasis. See more touching the judgment of this Author, in my
answer to the 4th main objection against this position of baptismall grace
Therefore little infants that are the elect of God, have faith and
regeneration; although the works thereof do not yet appear to us: and those
gifts they have, according to the condition of their age; that is to say,
according to the capacity of the subject receiving the same.

The other is that famous Vossius now so much bought up of all learned men, He,
in defense of the baptism of infants, after arguments to confirm the truth,
adds answers to the principal objections of the Anabaptists pleading against
it. And to that so often iterated cavil, that infants ought not to be baptized
because they want faith, shapes this answer. Nec vlii i^ est momenti, quod
aiunt, inc^edulos non esse baptizandos. N^m bifariam aliquis inc^edu^us
dicitur: negative, qui salutari fid^i quidem habitu destituitur, non tamen
contrario babi i^ e^^ pollutus: positive autem, qui and habitu fideicaret, and
contrario (...) malo laborat. Intan^es duntaxat negative sunt infideles, hoc
est nondum babentes fidem, cuius ne quidem capace^ sunt per naturam
Tamencapaces sunt spiritus fidei: per quem anima accipit esse spiri uale ac
supernaturale, c^ique principium operationum spiritualium, suoque tempore est
efficax, ac cessantibus etiam actionibus in homine manet. Absque hoc spiritu si
essent parvuli non vnire itur Christo, nec mystici eius co^poris membra forent:
eoque nec participes ess nt ^rivilegiorum ecclesiae, quae in symbolo
commemorantur. Etu igitur infantes non credant actu, tamen non magis hoc eos a
baptismo a^^ere debet, quam cibus iis debet den^gari, etsi ab Apostolo dictum
sit, qui non vult laborare, non manducet. Gera^d. Vossius: These. Theol. de
Paedobapt. par. 1. th. s. 15. nuper editis.
It is of no validity which they urge, namely that unbelievers ought not to be
baptized. For one may be said to be an unbeliever two ways. viz. negatiuely,
so he that is indeed destitute of the habit of faith, yet is not polluted with
the contrary habit of infidelity: or positiuely, as he that both wants the
habit of faith and also labors under the contrary of unbelief. Infants are
unbelievers only negatiuely; that is they have not yet the habit of faith, of
which they are not for the present capable. Notwithstanding, they are capable
of the spirit of faith, by which the soul receives a spiritual and
supernatural being, and that is the principle or beginning of all spiritual
operations, and is effectual in his due time, and remains in a man even when
there is a cessation of the actions of it. If they were without this spirit,
infants could not be united unto Christ, nor be made members of his mystical
body, and so neither should they be partakers of the privileges of the Church
which are contained in the Creed. Although therefore infants have not actual
faith, yet this ought no more to keep them off from baptism, than meat ought
to be denied them, because the Apostle says; he that will not work let him
not eat 2 These. 3.10.
. Here we see an initiall regeneration taken for granted, and so described, and
so described also as there is no need of labor to draw it home to my present
purpose: Let the reader here be advertised, that the Arminians are censured by
the four public professors of Leiden for joining with that blasphemous
wretch Socinus, and his Disciples, in that they in their public Confessions
of their faith, do make baptism to be only an external rite whereby men are
ingraffed into the Church, and admitted to Gods ordinances, without any
obsignation, and real collation of grace in and upon the parties baptized: and
although the Remonstrants do use some words that may seem to infinuate a
purgation, a deliverance from sin, and a donation of grace: yet those
professors censure them because they speak of those things, as that which is
to be expected in time to come, and not begun at the time of baptism. See the
confessions of the Remonst* at larg: cap. 23. Sect. 3 And the censure of it
page 304. where speaking of the former part of the Remonstrants description of
baptism, they use these words: Siquidem prior plane Socinianizat, quatenus
baptismum hoc vsu tantum definiunt, Quod hoc publico and sacro ritu saederati
per solennem aquae ablutionem Ecclesiae inseruntur, and cultui diuino
initiantur. Similia habent Sociniani in catetch: Racoviensi, quod fit ritus
exterior quo homnes e Iudaismo vel Gentilismo ad Religionem Christianam
accedentes, manifest profitebantur se Christum pro suo domino agnoscere.
Press eos insequitur Episcopius Disputatione de Baptis. Quod sit ceremonia and
ritus N T qui, quo ii ad religionem chirstianam accedunt, and Ecclesia Jesus
Christi public accenseri cupiunt, aqua abluuntur, ad testandum vitae male
anteactae derelictionem, and vitae melioris inchoationem. Ita vt ex part Dei,
nullam illi gratiae Dei in baptizatis obsignationem agnoscant. Vnde and Socinus
lib: de Offic: hom. Christ. cont. Evangelicos asserit, baptismi finem non esse,
gratia Dei de remissione peccatorum per sanguinem Christi obsignationem, sed
tantum significationem: nec fidei nostrae and gratiae Dei confirmationem, sed
tantum professionem. Paria e Socino suo Episcopius, These 9. Effectus sieve finis
baptismi, non est realis aliqua gratia collatio, sed sola tantum diuinae gratie
and professionis nostrae significatio. Ptior itaque illa Remonstrantium
definitio plane Socinum exprimit. And in page 306 thus the Professors to the
latter part of their definition, wherein they mention an inward purgation, and
donation of grace and glory, they thus censure the Remonstrants. Quum vero vsus
illos futuro tempore enunciant, nempe purgandi, liberandi, donandi vocibus, si
futura de continua action accipiant, recte sane, etc.
Thus have I made good what I undertook in producing the judgment of many
foreign Divines of best note in the Church. If any complain of length and
tediousness in citing so many, let them consider that they are not a few that
bandy themselves against this truth, and stick not to give out in all places;
that there is not one of all those Authors which I have alleged, but rather
makes against me than for me: of which now let the equal and able reader judge.

CAP. 8. The judgment of some Divines of special note in our Own Church.
WHat judicious Hooker, Mr Thomas Rogers; Dr Ames, Mr Aynsworth, and the Author
of the English commentary upon St Paul's Epistle to Titus, have written
touching this point, I have already showed in the third and fourth chapters of
this Treatise: by which it is evident that I am not the first Nam multi
protestants etsi non fidem actualem infantibus tribuunt: tamen inclinationes
quasdam bonas, novosque motus in pueris esse dicunt cum baptizantur. Whitak. de
Sacram. cont. de Bapt. quaest 4. cap. 5. in princ.
that have set abroach this doctrine in the Church of England, nor the first
English man that has published this point to the world; although it be my hard
hap to be first challenged for it. I will not in this place repeat what has
been formerly produced out of any of these, nor yet stay you with a large view
of all those that, upon further search, might be added unto these, to witness
the same truth with them. It shall suffice that I alledg only these 6. viz.
Bishop Jewel, Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Francis White now Lord Bishop of Norwich,
Doctor Davenant, now Lord Bishop of Salisbury, Doctor Fulk, and the learned
Author of the second Parallells.

B. Jewel.
1 I begin with that rare and much honored and admired Jewel, the first
champion of our English Church, since the last happy reformation, that, (both
by public Apology for our refusing to communicate any longer with the present
Romish synagogue, and also, by open challenge made to that side, for proving
their principal tenets now in difference between us, to have bin so much as
known to the Ancient Fathers for the doctrine of truth, within the first six
hundred years after Christ;) entered the lists with that great Goliath, in the
name of the Church of England, and came off so happily, that all that wish well
to the truth, do, to this day, (and for ever, shall) call him blessed. What
testimony and approbatio^ this worthy man's works frequently received from our
late learned K. James, they, who last published B. Jewels Works, in their
Epistle Dedicatory, to give public witness: viz. that they have long and
frequently upon all occasions had a most singular testimony and approbation of
his Majesty for the most rare and admirable works that have been written in
this last age of the World. And what general acceptance they find in the
whole Church of England, is evident by this, that every parish in England is
enjoined to buy them, and to have them open in the parish Churches, for all
that desire instruction in the truth, to read and pervse. And lastly, what
extraordinary approbation he received from the most judicious and eminent
divines beyond the seas, their frequent epistles, and dedication of books unto
him (of which we may read in the history of his life) do amply declare.
Therefore I think that what I alledg out of him, may justly be received (if
not as the doctrine it self of the Church of England, yet) as that which no
judicious son of this Church will refuse as dissonant from, much less
repugnant to the public doctrine of our Church, but as most agreeable both
unto it, and unto the truth of God maintained therein.

This Chariot of Jsrael and Father of our Church, in his Apology of the Church
of England (which was first written in latin and translated almost into all
languages, for the great esteem it received in all the Churches of God,)
speaking of the sacraments, and denying transubstantiation in the Lords supper,
thus says: Nec tamen cum ista dicimus, extenuamus coe^^m Domini, aut eam
frigidam tantum ceremoniam esse dicim^s, vt in ea nihil fieri, quod multi nos
docere calumniantur. Christum enim asserimus vere sese praesentem exhibere in
sacramentis suis in baptismo, vt eum indumus; in Coena, vt eum fide and spiritu
comedamus, and de eius cruce ac sangume habeamus vitam aeternam: idque dicimus
non perfunctorie and frigide, sed re ipsa and vere sieri. In B. Jewels works
last set forth, you shall find this in english in the defense of the Apology
cap. 14. divil. 1. page 269.
And in speaking thus we mean not to abase the Lords supper, or to teach,
that it is but a cold ceremony only, and nothing to be wrought therein: (as
many falsely slander us that we teach.) For we affirm that CHRIST DOES TRVLY
AND PRESENTLY give himself in his Sacraments. In baptism that we may put him
on: and in his supper that we may eat him by faith and spirit, and may have
everlasting life by his Cross and blood. And we say not, this is done slightly
or coldly, but effectually and truly. Now, in this passage this renowned
Prelate makes no difference between the efficacy of the sacraments; he allows
a presence of Christ in the one, as well as in the other: he professes, that
in Baptism Christ is as truly put on, as he is fed upon in the Supper: and
when he says that, in the Supper he is fed upon by faith and the spirit,
saying no such thing of the necessity of faith for putting on of Christ in
Baptism, when an infant is baptized: he plainly yields that, in baptism of
infants that truly and indeed belong to God, Christ is truly and indeed put
on, although they be not endewed with actual faith, which is required of
persons grown to years of discretion. And when M. Harding quarrelled him for
this, and charged him of error, in making the presence of Christ in baptism,
like to his presence in the supper. He thus answers; Defense of Apology: page
264. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians. hom. 20. Bernard, super missus est. hom. 3.
Leo in sermon. de 4. feria. c. 1.
Here is one error more then any of the learned Catholic Fathers ever noted.
Saint Chrysostom says; In the sacrament of Baptism we are made flesh of
Christ's flesh, and bone of his bones. Saint Bernard. says Lavemur in sanguine
eius: Let us be washed in his blood. Leo says: Christi sanguine rigaris quando
in mortem ipsius baptizaris: Thou art washed in the blood of Christ, when thou
art baptized into his death. By these few it may appear, that Christ is
present at the sacrament of baptism, as he is present at the holy supper:
unless ye will say, we may be made flesh of Christ's flesh, and be washed in his
blood, and be partakers of him, and have him present without his presence.
Therefore Chrysostom, when he had spoken vehemently of the sacrament of the
supper, he concludes thus; Sic and in baptismo, even so it is also in the
sacrament of baptism. The body of Christ is likewise present in them both.
Beda in 1. Cor. 10.
And for that cause Beda says (and he says it out of Saint Augustine,) nulli
est aliquatenus ambigendum, tunc vnumquemque fidelium Corporis sanguinisque
Dominici participem fieri, quando in Baptismate membrum Christi efficitur. No
man may doubt, but every faithful man is THEN made partaker of the body and
blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made the member of Christ. All this B.
Jewel urges out of the Fathers, and by approving their doctrine, confounds
his Adversary. If any question be made of the word faithful, I have
sufficiently showed how that is to be taken. And if Saint Augustine be not
mistaken, he tells us that even Vbi ponis parvulos non baptizatos, profecto in
numero credentium. De verb. Apost. Sermon. 1.
Infants were reckoned among the faithful; nor was there ever any question
among the Fathers in any Age of the Church, but that elect infants did receive
remission of sin, in baptism; and by consequent, regeneration, for as much
as these two are inseparable. All this, that reverend Jewel, very well knew;
yet is not afaid to subscribe to their doctrine. Yea, in the same Apology, he
thus particularly delivers his judgment concerning infants: Defense chap. 11.
divis. 3. page: 216.
We say that Baptism is a sacrament of there-mission of sins, and of that
washing which we have in the blood of Christ: and that no person that will
profess Christ's name, ought to be restrained or kept back there from: no not
the very babes of Christians; for as much as they be borne in sin, and do
pertain unto the people of God. I think his words are plain enough to prove
that infants partake of remission of sin, in Baptsme: because, says he,
baptism is a sacrament of remission, and because infants are to be baptized
upon this ground, viz: (not only because they are part of Gods heritage; but)
upon this ground, that they be borne in sin. Now, if they ought to be
baptized unto remission of sin, because borne in sin, will any man, well in
his wits, conclude other then thus; therefore they do partake of remission of
sin in Baptism.

I do imagine some will be ready to pull me by the sleeue, and say; I pray,
Sir, look again, B. Jewel, calls baptism the Sacrament of Remission, not
remission it self: and this he may do, yet never hold remission of sins to
be conferred in baptism of infants; but only that it is a seal of that grace
hereafter to be conferred, when by faith they apply the same?

Indeed so M. Harding the Papist See in B. Jew. ibid. page 217.
would needs understand him, charging him and the rest of the Protestants, with
speaking too slenderly of baptism, in that they call it a sacrament of
Remission; whereby (if ye will believe him,) they mean that it is only a
sign or token, or at the best but a seal of our new birth; and not believing
with the Catholic Church, according to the Scriptures, that in and by
baptism sins be fully and truly remitted, and put away. All this M. Harding
would father upon our Church, but pray mark the note that Jewel puts in the
margent (page: 217) over against that calumny of Harding viz. untruth. For we
say not so.

And whereas M. Harding is pleased to go on in his railing vein, professing
that the Church believes that remission of sins is given in baptism; Ibid.
and that, not through the faith only of the giver or receiver, or of any
other, (though hereunto it be necessary in those that be come to age of
discretion;) but through the power and virtue of the sacrament, and Gods
promise. B. Jewel, to that word faith, gives this note in the margent; This
tale is needless, and out of season. As if he should say, in the baptism of
infants, we require not faith, but rely only on Gods promise. For so, more at
large, in his answer to Harding, He explicates himself. First, he grants
it as a truth, that the sacrament depends, neither of the minister, nor of
the receiver, nor of any other: for though they be all the children of sin,
yet is baptism the sacrament of remission of sin. The place he alleges out
of Saint Augustine, speaks his mind plainly, that, he depends upon Christ
himself for the efficacy of baptism, and not upon the faith of the receiver,
if he be an infant, of which only the question between Him and Harding was (by
Harding himself) put up, who charge the Protestants with denying the present
efficacy of baptism unto Remission of sins upon infants, for want of actual
faith.

Notwithstanding, because the Adversary is so brag and confident that the
Fathers stood not upon faith in the baptizing of infants, the Bishop is pleased
a little to take down his pride, and to discover his ignorance in the Fathers,
and shows out of S. Augustine and S. Hierome, that to the intent Baptism
might be effectual unto infants, they thought it requisite that the faith of
their parents should then be employed on their behalf, and be imputed to them.
But yet for his own part he professes his dissent from that opinion,
although, it might be further backed out of Iustine Martyr; S. Cyprian, and
Saint Hierome. For thus they write, says he: How truly, I will not say. But
their words be plain. The Prophet Habbacuck says, Iustus ex fide sua vivet,
the just man shall live (not by the faith of his parents but) by his own
faith. Then he approves a speech of Augustine more consonant to the truth,
affirming that Habent fidem propter fidei sacramentum. Epist. 23. ad Bonif.
Infants have faith of their own, because they have baptism which is the
sacrament of faith: for he says; quemadmodum sacramentum corporis Christi,
secundum quendam modum, corpus Christi est, ita sacramentum fidei fides est. As
the sacrament of Christ's body (not verily and indeed, but) after a certain
manner of speech, is Christ's body: so baptism is faith, because it is the
sacrament of faith. Therefore says Jewel Cardinal Caietane is worthily blamed
by Catharinus, in that he says, An infant for that he wants instruction in
faith, therefore has not perfect baptism. Out of all which I can pick no
other English but this: There is no necessity that we should hold a necessity
of faith in infants: yet, if they have any, it is but improperly so called, it
is that, not which they brought with them to the sacrament; but that which they
are reputed to receive in the sacrament it self. And this, in effect, is the
very doctrine of Instit. lib: 4. cap. 16. sect. 21. compared with other
passages in the same chapter.
Calvin, set forth at large in the former chapter: viz. that it is not
requisite always that a Christian should bring grace unto baptism, to make
him capable of the grace of baptism; but he must come to baptism that there
he may receive it, if he be not of years; as he that is of years, receives a
confirmation of that which was wrought in him before. And so much this same
Bishop in his Reply to M. Hardings Answer. Art. 1. Div. 13. (of which place we
shall perhaps have fitter occasion afterward to speak) in effect declares
also.

For the present, you see, that what ever becomes of the faith of infants, he
ioynes with Catharinus in condemning of Caietane denying infants to be
perfectly baptized for want of instruction in faith. Then, he expresses that,
as the Ancient Fathers did, so does he hold baptism to be efficacious; yet not
the outward element, but the spirit of Christ does the deed when it is
effected. In brief, he denies not the thing to be conferred even on infants,
but only the manner which the Romanists contend for. They say that the blood
and spirit of Christ is in the very outward clement, by the consecration of the
Priest, as the virtue of healing is natural in a medicine, and that ex opere
operato by virtue of the bare outward administration of that sacrament every
one partakes certainly and indeed of the inward grace. This, The founder
Fathers disclaimed, as we have proved at large, and this B. Jewel makes good
out of them, against his adversary, that the inward grace comes from God
immediately, and not from the water, or outward act of the minister In sum, he
thus shuts up the whole matter, Defense of Apol page 219.
As for that M. Harding here touches as an error defended by certain, I know
not by whom, that haptisme gives not full remission of sins, he may command
it home again to Lovaine amongst his fellows, and join it with other of his
and their vanities. For it is no part nor portion of our doctrine. We confess
and have evermore taught that in the sacrament of Baptism, by the death and
blood of Christ is given remission of all manner sins: and that not in half,
or in part, or by way of imagination, or by fancy, but full, whole, and perfect
of all together: so that now, as Saint Paul says, there is no condemnation to
them that be in Christ Jesus.

I hope no man duly considering the controversy between him and Harding, will
have the face to say that the Bishop speaks not this of the present efficacy
of baptism, but of that which at actual conversion is to be expected. For the
thing whereof Harding complains is this that, we deny the present efficacy of
baptism, and make it only a sign, or at best but a seal to confirm future
grace, until we have attained actual faith. And the answer what it is, you
now see: viz. that we allow and teach that in baptism is given full remission
of all sins; which if the Bishop should not mean of the present effect of
baptism, his adversary might justly complain for want of answer to his unjust
complaint.

Thus much then we have gained out of this Judicious Father, that, at least,
remission of sins is ordinarily communicated to infants, in their baptism,
when it is administered. And, if remission of sins be then given, it must
needs be yielded further, that he held that, the spirit of God is communicated,
then also, unto infants, for the applying of that benefit unto them. Therefore
in the very same place, Defense Apol. page 218.
he voucheth a passage of Cyprian De baptismo Christi.
to this purpose; Remissio peccatorum, etc. The remission of sins, whether it
be given by baptism or by any other sacraments, is indeed of the Holy Ghost:
and to the same Holy Ghost only the privilege of this work does appertain.
The solemnity of the words, and the invocation of Gods holy name, and the
outward signs appointed to the ministry of the Priests by the Apostolical
institutions, work the visible outward sacrament, but touching the substance
thereof (which is the remission of sins) it is the holy Ghost that works
it. Likewise, says Saint Hierome, In Esaiam. cap. 4.
Homo aquam tantum tribuit, The Minister being a man gives only the water, but
God gives the Holy Ghost, whereby the sins be washed away.

If any passionate opposite should be so far transported, as to object; that
all that have been hitherto spoken out of Bishop Jewel, tends only to prove
that Remission of sin is given to infants in Baptism, which is another thing
from the present point of Regeneration: therefore all this is as much as
nothing to the purpose?

I answer, first, that this objection is so silly that it deserves no answer;
for what Author ever taught plenary Remission of all sins to be given to him,
that does not in some measure partake of the spirit unto sanctification? was it
ever known that these two were separated? Why then is it required that our
author should in express terms affirm both; or else, be denied to allow of
both, although he expressly avouch it of the one of them He had no occasion to
speak directly touching Regeneration, nor could he well do it, without
digression. For the Question between him and his Antagonist was only touching
the present efficacy of Baptism unto Remission of sin: if therefore he
should have fallen upon the other, he should idly have run out of his way,
and fallen upon another controversy not so much as named by the Adverse party.

Notwithstanding, that I may not leave the least shadow of an argument
unanswered, secondly, I add that, the same author, in his You shall find this
Treatise at the end of B. Jewels works of the last edition from Page 261 to
the end.
Treatise of the sacrament, affirms the efficacy of baptism unto Regeneration
also. For of Baptism in particular, he thus speaks. 265 Page.
Baptism is our regeneration or new birth, whereby we are borne anew in
Christ, and are made the sons of God, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven,
it is the sacrament of the remission of sins, and of that washing which we
have in the blood of Christ. And a little after, among other places of holy
scripture by him alleged, for proof hereof, he brings that of our Savior in
John 3. Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God; and then adds; for this cause are infants baptized,
because they are borne in sin, and cannot become spiritual, but by this new
birth of the water and the spirit. They are the heirs of the promise; the
covenant of Gods favor is made unto them, etc.

It is very true that in the very next page, he speaks of the necessity of
faith in some that are baptized: for thus he says; Page 266.
It is the Covenant and promise, and mercy of God, which cloatheth us with
immortality; assures our resurrection, by which we receive regeneration,
forgiveness of sins, life, and salvation. His word declares his love
toward us: and that word is sealed and made good by baptism. Our faith which
are baptized, and our continuance in the profession which we have made,
establishes in us this grace which we receive, as it is said, De consecrat.
did. 4. Verus.
Verus baptismus constat non tam, etc. True baptism stands not so much in
washing of the body, as in faith of the heart. As the doctrine of the Apostles
has taught us saying; Art. 15.9. 1 Pet. 2.
by faith purifying their hearts. And in another place; baptism saves us, not
the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the examining of a good conscience
before God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Therefore Hierome says; In
Ezekiel. c. 16.
they that receive not baptism with perfect faith, receive the water, but the
Holy Ghost they receive not.

But this no way makes against our position touching the efficacy of baptism
upon infants For mark, first, of whom he speaks those words; not universally
of all that are baptized; but only, of persons of years. For having in page
265. showed the efficacy of baptism upon infants, at the foot of that page he
makes a transition of his speech from infants, and comes on to declare the
efficacy it has upon others also. His words are these: And as the children of
the faithful by right ought to be baptized: so such others also as were borne
of unbelieving parents, and were aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and
were strangers from the covenant of promise, and had no hope, if they
acknowledge the error in which they lived, and seek the forgiveness of their
former sins, may well receive this sacrament of their regeneration. So, when
they which heard Peter, were pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter and the
other Apostles: Men and brethren what shall we do, Peter said unto them. Amend
your lives, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins. They were buried with Christ by baptism into his death,
and made partakers of his blood, and continued in the Apostles Doctrine and
fellowship. Then he goes on with his discourse of these, in the words before
cited out of the 266 page. Now in all this there is not one word of infants, of
whom he had spoken before; and so that passage cannot be taken as a deny all of
the efficacy of Baptism in any without faith, save only in persons of years.
And if this were not thus to be understood, he should directly contradict all
that he had before spoken of the regeneration of infants, in whom there is no
actual faith, by his own confession, in his defense against Harding, as I
have showed before: And to make this yet more clear that, he did certainly
believe that infants in baptism received some principle of regeneration,
although not actual renovation of the whole man, see what he says afterward
in the same Treatise of the sacraments, touching the state of infants baptized,
and of the care of parents in their education. Page. 282.
God says, your children are my children. They are the sons of God. They are
borne anew, and well shapen in beautiful proportion: make them not monsters.
He is a monster whosoever knows not God. By you they are borne into the
world, be careful also that by your means they may be begotten unto God, you
are carfull to train them up in nature and comely behavior of the body, seek
also to fashion their minds unto Godliness. You have brought them to the
fountain of baptism to receive the mark of Christ: bring them up in
knowledge, and watch over them that they be not lost. So shall they be
confirmed and will keep the promise they have made, and will grow up unto
perfect age in Christ. He says, they are borne anew; and yet bids parents be
careful that they may be begotten unto God: Therefore he well discerned the
distinction of initiall and actual regeneration. This is our first answer,
and this is abundantly sufficient. Howbeit, secondly, I pray mark, in those
words of his that are found in page 266: that even they that have faith, if
they be such as were baptized in infancy, are not then said to receive the
grace of baptism, when they have faith, as if that were the first time of
their reception of grace: but only then they come to be assured and confirmed
sensibly and evidently in that which before, in their baptism, they did
receive, for so he speaks in express terms, OUR FAITH which are baptized,
and our continuance in the profession which we have made, ESTABLISHES in us
this grace which we RECEIVE. And so, in his Reply to Harding, Artic. 1. Divis.
13. page 27. to like effect he speaks of persons of years that their
conjunction and incorporation into Christ is first begun and wrought by faith:
and then, the same incorporation is assured unto them and increased in
baptism. But yet well knowing that it is otherwise with us that were baptized
in our infancy, he presently remembers a place of Saint Augustine touching
the baptism of infants, August: de baptismo parvul.
Ad hoc baptisma valet, etc. To this avails baptism, that men being
baptized, may be incorporated into Christ and made his members. Now this must
needs be meant of such as are baptized in infancy, or else it were directly
contrary to his own assertion immediately preceding, wherein he says that,
some are incorporated by faith, and that incorporation is assured them
afterward in baptism: and then produces this of Austin, which affirms us by
baptism, to be incorporated into Jesus Christ. Therefore he goes on to show of
what use the other holy mysteries are unto us that were baptized in infancy, on
this manner: And for that we are very imperfect of our selves, and therefore
must daily proceed forward, that we may grow into a perfect man in Christ,
therefore has God appointed, that the same incorporation should be often
renewed and confirmed in us by the uses of the holy mysteries (which c^nnot be
meant of baptism, for that may not be repeated) Wherein must be considered,
that the said holy mysteries do not begin, but rather continue and confirm
this incorporation. All this which he speaks of the use of the holy mysteries,
after incorporation) he speaks, not of baptism, as if either we were
ordinarily, by means, first made members and then, baptized: or yet, were not
members, although baptized, till by faith we actually apprehend Christ on our
parts; (for then, woe to all infants that dye in infancy) but he speaks
directly of the Lords supper, when he says, those mysteries do not begin,
but rather continue and confirm this incorporation. And this is clear by the
very next clause following: First of all, we our selves must be the body of
Christ, and afterward we must receive the sacrament of Christ's body: as it is
well noted by St Augustine, ^nf^m^ ad infames, e^atur a Pedu in 1. Co^ 10.
Corpus Christi si vis intelligere, etc. If thou will understand the body of
Christ, he are what S. Paul says to the faithful: ye are the body and the
members of Christ. Your mystery is set on the Lords Table. see receive the
mystery of the Lord. To conclude then, the sum of all is but thus much. It is
not the bare receiving of the Lords supper, as M. Harding pleaded that we are
made one body with Christ, in the sacrament of the Lords supper; as appears in
the place cited This Jewel denies, saying that some are engrassed first. by sa
th; ot^^s, by bapt. but none by the Lords supper: for they must just be of his
body before they can partake of that sacrament.
M. Harding dreamed, that makes us members of Christ: but all that partake of
that ordinance, were first, made members of Christ, by faith, if they were such
as were not baptized in their infancy, but converted first by the word from
gentilisme, and then baptized; for unto such baptism also is a confirmation of
their incorporation. But unto all others, baptism is the first ordinary means
that initiateth us into Christ; and we, from that time, grow up unto more and
more perfection in his body; then we partake of the mystery of the Lords
supper, wherein, and whereby we are yet further nourished and confirmed in the
body of Christ: so as M. Harding shot beside the mark when he contendeth that
the sacrament of the Lords supper does first, unite us unto Christ. And this is
all that the Bishop aimed at in all these words.

D. Whitaker.
In the next place, come we to D. Whitaker, whom none but a corrupt Barowist,
or Tompsonian will refuse to honor among men of greatest parts and highest
worth. He in that learned Treatise of the Sacraments; howeuer he denies all
manner of efficacy to be in the sacraments ex opere operato, by virtue of the
mere external administration of the sacrament: yet he every where disclaimes,
as an intolerable calumny, that which Bellarmine and the rest of that rout
cease not to lay to our charge: viz. that we make the sacraments, and
particularly Baptism, to be without all efficacy at the time of
administration: or that De Sacram. Controv. de Baptis. quaest. 4. cap. 1.
Calumniatur ergo Bellarminus: and sic etiam Patres Tridentini, qui aiunt nos
dicere, peccatum tantum radi in baptismo, non tolli: quod olim Augustino
Pelagiani obiiccrunt, quorum ille calumniam diluit. Non enim peccatum in
baptismo tanquam novacula resecatur, sic vt radex haereat, and starim
renascatur, quemadmodum isti insulsi nos sentire putant; sed nos in Baptismo
dup^tcem gratiam consequimur: prima est remissio peccatorum secunda,
regeneratio. Remissio est p^riecta, regeneratio inchoa^a, propter peccati
reliquias, and propter originale peccatum, quod in nobis perpetuo quoad suam
substantiam remanet.
we will have sin to be only pared, and not wholly taken away in baptism in
respect of the guilt of it. For sin is not only shaven or clipped (as some
young thing newly sprout up, which though it be cut, yet the root still stays
behind and will presently spring up afresh again, may be said to be) as those
absurd obiectors imagine us to hold: but we obtain a double benefit in
baptism: the first is remission of sins; the second is regeneration.
Remission of sins is perfect: regeneration, in respect of the remainders of
sin, and of original sin, that for substance still abides in us, is then
only inchoate, or but in the beginning.

Nor does he speak this only of persons of years, (that can have neither of
these, without actual faith to apprehend them, as he proves strongly and at
large, in the first part of that De sacram: in genere quaest. 4 cap. 3.
Tractate:) but he affirms it also of infants, that some of them, viz. the
elect, are partakers of these graces in their baptism: as may be seen in
sundry passages of his book collated; for mark, when Bellarmine obiecteth
that, Ibid de sacr. in genera quest. 4. multotus.
some reap benefit by the sacraments without actual faith; and particularly,
infants, in their baptism: it is Doctor Whitakers constant answer, not simply
to deny that proposition: but to deny it in two respects only: viz. 1 If the
proposition be understood of all infants, because, all are not saved that be
baptized. 2 If it be meant that they partake of these graces merely by virtue
of the outward work done, or that the outward element should be thought to
contain in it any efficacy to convey these graces unto any infant at all: then
also he rejects it as false: but otherwise he admits it to be true. So does
he receive the Ibid cap. 2. p g. 72.
counsel of Nice; so, the Mileuitane counsel Ibid* c^^ 2. page 73. Ter^^^^n
testimoniu^ surui^ur ex Co^^^lio Milovitano. Parvuli qui nihil peccatorum in
semetipsis adhuc committere potuerunt, ideo in remissione^ peccatorum veraciter
baptizantur; vt in cis regeneratione mundetur quod generatione trax^runt.
Respond^o, Ba^tismum esse sacramentum regener^tionis, et^^^ in parvulis, non
negamus, sed non ex opere operato. Deas operatu^ libere, ei^ i^ b^^tis^o sadi^^
at quos ^^i^lt, etc.
which speaks expressly of infants thus: Little children who yet cannot commit
any actual sins of their own, are therefore truly baptized for the
remission of sins, that so that filth which they have contracted by
generation, might be purged out by regeneration. True, says he, we deny not
Baptism to be the sacrament of regeneration even to infants: but not by virtue
of the external work done. Yea, but (you will say) he denies this to be done
in all infants? True; and so do I. But, of what sort are they that he
admits to partake of the efficacy of Baptism? Surely none but the Elect.
For, thus He: Deus in baptismo ut significat remissionem peccatotum and
salutem, ita re operatur: and veritas cum signo coniuncta est in electis. De
sacram. in genere quaest. 4. cap. 2.
Jn baptism, as God does signify the remission of sins and salvation, so
indeed he works the same: and the truth of the things is i^ined together with
the sign, in the ELECT. Again; Ibid. quaest. 1. cap 3. page 15. Quare falsum
est quod ait Bellarm. baptizari apud nos infantesea solum de causa, vt sint
membra Ecclesia externae quemadmod^ (...) circiicisi eli n infantes Iudeorum
sum, illa tantum de causa, sed vt illis signum diuini soederis imprimatur. quod
etsi non venati^ and praedestinatis nal p edest, tanun electis predest co modo
quo D^us nov^t. Nam infantes clect^s, mo^te^ies antequom adoleverint, Deus
virtute sp ritus sui renovat, si vero vitun longius p^opagare illis contigerit,
comacis ad studium renouationis accenduntur, quod eius tess^ram se infantes
accep^^e sc^^t. Ergo etsi infantes baptizantur, tamen non semper infantes
count, sed tandem si vita (...) longiu^ contedatur vim eius Baptismisentient,
quem infantes susciperunt.
Wherefore it is false that Bellarmine affirms that Infants with us are
baptized, only that they might become members of the visible Church: for
neither were the Infants of the Jews circumcised only for that reason; but
that the sign of Gods covenant might be stamped on them, which although it
profit not such as are neither regenerated nor predestined, notwithstanding
it is availeable in the Elect, in such manner as is well known to God. For
such Infants as being elected, do die in infancy, God renueth by the power of
his spirit: but if it happen that they live, they are thereby the more incited
to the study of renovation, the badge whereof they then come to know that they
received in Infancy. Therefore although they be baptized Infants, yet they will
not always remain such; Tum siverum sit quod Bell^rminus ait, infantes
persolum sacramentum seruari, tum omnes qui baptizatur, seruarentur. Verum asia
causa est, propter quam seruanturiafantes, nempe divine bonitate, gratia,
electio, non solus baptismus. ibid quaest. 4. cap 3. page 88.89.
but at length, if they live, they will feel the force of that baptism, which
in their infancy they did receive. And yet again, to that objection of
Bellarmine that, Infants are saved without actual faith, by baptism alone; he
answers by denying that, only Baptism saves them; for, says he, many
Jnfants do perish that are baptized; and many are saved that were never
baptized Th^s Bern^rd made good against H^go^t S. Vict. under the person of
another enquiring whether infants can be saved without baptism E^^st 77. And
even G^b. Biel. in 4 sent. did. 4. quaest 2. dub. 2. was not afraid to affirm
as much, although ap p^sh schooleman saying: Voluit (Deus) itaque remedia
instituere con ram rburr p cca^tun Ecclesia, per sacramenta dispensanda, his
qui noti esse poterant Ecclesiae. ^orum vero qui nondum in lucem notitiae
predicrunt remedia in sua potestate sola constituit quos cum voluerit s^te
exteriori remedio and sanctificare and salvare potest, sicut factum de
quibusdam scriptura testatur. Insuper quod paucis in privilegium factum est,
potest quibuscunque voluit, impartiri qui potentiam suam sacramentis non
alligauit.
: and a little after, If that were true which Bellarmine affirms that Infants
are saved only by baptism, then all that are baptized should be saved. But
there is another cause also of the salvation of Jnfants: viz. Gods goodness,
grace, and Election. By all which it is evident that Dr. Whitaker, ever
restrained the efficacy of Baptism to the Elect only, and unto them he never
denied it.

And that he meant some present work of the Spirit to be wrought upon elect
Infants in the act of baptism, will appear farther by his approving of all
that the ancient Fathers have spoken touching this point. Now, we know that
they were all for a present efficacy of baptism even upon Infants as well as
others, as before has been declared. I will not repeat what I have Chap. 5.
there alleged; Non est falsa etiam in parvulorum b ptismate, Rem ssio
peccatorum, nec verba tenus dicatur, sed veraciter agitur, Austin. Epist. 157.
only I will add one place more out of St Augustine. It is no fable that we say
Remission of sins is given in the baptism even of Infants: nor is it said only
to make a show, but it is verily done.

This is not disliked, but both this and all the speeches of the Fathers
produced by Bellarmine, are approved by our De Sacram. in genesis quest. 4 ca. 2
page 73.
Author, being rightly understood: viz not as if they held that the outward
elements could convey this to every infant by virtue of the outward work done;
but that the grace of Baptism comes immediately from God, and is wrought by
the spirit, as he declares out of Basil. Yea he is not afraid to add; that,
Et quanquam Lutherus and Calvinus scribuat, quaedam dici a Patribu (...), and
esse immodica quaedam apud illos enconna sacramentorum, vt sic non esse
contemnenda, and esse Iudaicis meliora docerent: tamenre vera nullum est ex
omnibus testimonius, qua Bellarminus offert quod non satis commode sine
hyperbole exponi potest. ibid vt immediate supra. page 74.
however Calvine and Luther were pleased to say that some things were spoken by
the Fathers hyperbolically, and that sometimes we shall meet with advancings of
the Sacraments beyond measure, in their writings, which no doubt they took
liberty to do, merely to preserve them from contempt, and to prefer them
before the Sacraments of the Jews: notwithstanding to say the truth, there is
not one of all those places quoted by Bellarmine, but will admit of a good
construction, without any hyperbole at all: Thus He. And if we observe how,
every where, he expounds them, we shall find him thus to sense them: viz. that
what they say must be taken not as intending to place any efficacy in the
outward element; nor, that grace is given to any but to the Elect; and to them,
not by virtue of the outward Baptism outwardly administered, but by the
immediate operation of the Spirit in that Ordinance, as both the places already
alleged, together with many more, too long to recite in this place, do
sufficiently prove.

Moreover, when he comes professedly to treat of the efficacy of Baptism,
and of the says of infants, he first avoucheth that, Nam multi Prtotestantes,
etsi non fidem actualem infantibus tribuunt, tamen inclinationes quasdam bonas,
novosque moti^^ in pueris esse dicunt, cum baptizantur. De Sacram. controv.
(...) Bapt. quaest. 4. cap. 5.
many Protestant Divines, however they ascribe not actual faith to Infants,
yet they affirm that certain good inclinations and new motions are wrought in
them, when they are baptized. Which opinion he does not, I confess, take into
his protection; because he has afterward occasion given him to disclaim that
imputation cast upon Protestants by Bellarmine; that they ascribe actual faith
to Infants: (which, he acknowledges, to have once unadvisedly fallen from
Luther;) and to make it good that infants do not receive so much as the habit
of that or any other particular grace, in baptism, as the Papists contend.
Howbeit in that very passage he declares enough to clear me of novelty, for
as much as many Divines have gone farther then I have done: for they that
affirm that in baptism, there are some good inclinations and new motions, in
Infants, must needs acknowledge the reception of the Spirit, by which those
motions are infused: and so they affirm all that I do, and so much more. And
thus that Mirror of learning Phillip Melancthon, held, in his Common place of
Baptism: as our Author also has observed before me. And this those Divines
use to term seminal or potential grace.

But what should I stand beating of many bushes? In the Chapter now last cited,
Dr Whitaker speaks plain enough: for having spoken somewhat of Calvines
opinion touching the work of grace in Infants, he proceeds to Peter Martyr,
whose opinion he first briefly, yet fully, sets down; then, explaineth it and
embraces it as the truth. In substance thus he writes. P^trus Martyr vir
gravissimi iudicij ait se non audere eorum sententiam amplecti, qui fidem
tribuunt infantibus, non quin Deus iis infundere fidem possit, si velit, and
rationem producere in eorum mentibus ante naturae tempus, et essicere, vt
quanquam ipsi non intelligant neque congoscant quae creduntur, tamen spiritus
sanctus in iis apprehendat illa and illis consentiat, vt dicitur idem spiritus
nobis nescientibus intercedere pro nobis and orare quemadmodum oportet, and
deum, cum nouerit eius sensum, illum audiret tamen cum scriptura non dicat
parvulos credere, neque hoc videat esse necessarium ad salutem, satis esse
indicat, vt dicamus eos qui servantur, cum sint de peculio Domini per
praedestinationem and electionem, spiritu sancto perfundi, qui radix est si
lei, sp^i and charitatis, and omnium virtutum, quas postea exerit and declarat
in filiis dei, cum per aetatem licet. Posse ergo sic dici fideles, vt dicuntur
rationales Nam e^si non possunt infantes ratiocinari, lamen animam habent ea
facultate praeditam, vt possint, cumaetas accesserit, rati cinari^ ergo
rationales dicuntur, non propter praesentem vsum rationis, sed propter insitum
principium rationis, nempe animam, quae artium and doctrinarum om^ium capax
est: fidem igitur expressam^ equiri in adultis, in parvulis suffirere fidem
inchoatam in suo principio and radice, id est spiritu sancto, quo praediti
sunt, ex quo fides, suo tempore, and virtutes a^ae manam: nam infantes a
spiritu purgari, cum sint in Ecclesia, and ad ecclesiam pertineant: Ecclesiam
autem Christus sanctificavit, mundans came lavacio aquae per verbum. Si ad
ecclesiam pertinent, spiritu ornantur: si in caelum recipiuntur, a peccato
purgantur, etc.
Peter Martyr, a man of most profound judgment, says, he dares not embrace
their opinion, that ascribe faith to infants: not but that God can if he will,
infuse faith into them, and enable them to reason before the ordinary time; and
cause, that though they do neither understand, nor know the things which are
to be believed, notwithstanding the spirit, in them, may apprehend and give
consent to those things, for them; as the spirit is said to make intercession
for us unto God, even when we know not what to pray for, as we ought; and then
God, who knows the mind of the spirit, hears the same: Howbeit seeing the.
Scriptures do not say that infants do believe, nor does this seem necessary
to them unto salvation, he thinks it sufficient that we say that they who are
saved, (for as much as they are part of Gods peculiar by Predestination and
election;) are endewed with the Holy Ghost, who is the root of faith, hope,
charity, and all other virtues which afterward he produces and declares in
Gods children, when they come to years. Thus far he voucheth the words of
Peter Martyr: then he goes on in his own words thus to illustrate the same;
They may therefore be called faithful, or believers, as they may be said to be
reasonable creatures. For although infants cannot rationally discourse, yet
they have a soul, whereby, when they come to some years, they may be able to
discourse. So that, they are called reasonable creatures, not because they have
present use of their reasonable faculty, but by reason of the principle of
reason in them; to wit, the reasonable soul which is capable of all arts and
sciences. Therefore (we say) express faith is required in all of years, but
in infants, only faith begun or in his first principle or root, namely the
HOLY GHOST with which they are endewed, and from whom faith and other graces,
in due time, do, flow or issue forth. For infants are purged by the spirit,
seeing they are in the Church, and of the Church. Christ sanctified his Church,
purging it in the Lauer of water through the word. If then they belong to the
Church, they are adorned with the spirit. if they be received up into heaven,
they are then purged by the spirit.

The former passage is abundantly sufficient both to prove that I have not
abused Peter Martyr, and that D. Whitaker is fully of the same judgment with
him. Yet let me have leave (since I promised much out of this Author) to
allege a place or two more to the same purpose. In the Page 286. Sed ait
Christu^ habitare in infantibus per fidem: ergo ^abere eos fidem, saltem quoad
habitum? Respon deo. At hoc non minus de actu quam de habitu intelligitur. Quid
is enim dicamus in nullis Christum habitare, n si qui actu creduat? Et pueri
habent tum actum tum habitum fidei in su^semirie, id est, in spiri^u sancto, vt
antea diximus. Postremo ait, trsands parvu^s occultam gratiam, cum baptizentur,
idq Augustinam docere. Respondeo, Id nos quoque nicimas, Sed Augustimes non ait
habitum fidei insued, sed gratiam, and Bellarminus ^escit an haec gratia sit
Charitas cum side and spo, an qualitas alia, cum qua tres illae virtutes
perp^tuo sunt contunctae. Quis vnquam de eusmodi qualitate audiuit, quae nec
spes, nec charitas, nec fides est, sed has secum coniunctas habet? Infundi
gratia potest sine harum virtutumaut actu, aut hab^tu. Vid ^^r Augustinus id,
ens^sse, hancgratiam esse spiritum sanctum qui efficit sidem, licet non statim,
in infantibus.
next page following that we last cited, answering that of Bellarmine who
obiecteth that Christ is said to dwell in infants by faith, and therefore they
must needs have the habit of faith? He answers thus. But this may as well be
understood of actual faith (which Bellarmine denies to be in them) as of the
habit (which the Jesuit says they have) And what if we should say that
Christ dwells in none, but such as actually believe? (he means, what would
Bellarmine have to plead against it, seeing he maintains habitual faith:) But
even infants have both the act and habit of faith in the seed thereof that is
to say, in the Holy Ghost, as we before spoke. Lastly the Jesuit says, that
Augustine teaches that there is a secret grace infused into infants when they
are baptized? I answer, so say we too: but Augustine says not, the habit of
faith is infused; but, grace: and Bellarmine knows not what to make of this
grace, whether he should call it charity, joined with faith and hope, or any
other quality with which all these graces are perpetually linked. But who ever
heard of such a quality which is neither faith, hope, nor love, and yet has
all these conjoined with it? Grace may be infused without either the act or
habit of any of these. S. Austustine seems to be of this opinion, that this
grace is the Holy Ghost which indeed works faith, but not instantly, in
infants.

Ibid. cap. 6.
I will not dissemble that, in the next chapter, Dr Whitaker, taking upon him to
lay open the Doctrine of the Fathers, touching the faith by which infants are
partakers of the grace of Baptism, and are saved, if they die in infancy; is
very loath to declare himself against that charitable conceit of Antiquity:
viz. that for as much as infants having in them no sin, that is, every way
their own, but original, which is done away in baptism, if any faith be
farther required to bring them to heaven, in case they then depart this life,
they may be saved by the faith of their parents. But this he does, as admitting
this rather then the other touching actual or habitual faith of their own,
which, in the ordinary course, he thinks (as all other judicious Divines ever
do, and ever did to be very incongruous and absurd, whether we consider the
nature of grace, or the capacity of nature in an infant for reception of such
grace. But, for a Conclusion (however he, following the judgment of many more
in the ancient schools of the Papists themselves Vid Alex. H^l. par. 4. q. 8.
(...) ^rt. 3. (...) esp^t. (...) ^ast in 4. sen. did. 4. etc. non Extrast. de
Bapt. maiores.
, will not hear of any infusion of so much as of the habit of faith, in
infants;) he comes back to his former position, wherein we saw his accord
with Peter Martyr, and S. Augustine, and shuts up all, thus; Sed etsi infantes
non habere fidem habitualem, tamen a spiritu sancto purgari dicimus, and sieri
novas creaturas, quia caro and sanguis regnum culorum non possiarbunt, and
^^^ex aqua and spiritu sancto r^nati suerint. (...) in regnum (...) ^^^cpera^t
spiritum sa^ctum ^^dabiliter (...). Cont^^^ce Bapt. qu^d^ 4. cap 6. in conclus.
But although infants have not habitual faith, yet we say that they are purged
by the holy Ghost, and made new creatures, for as much as flesh and blood shall
not inherit the kingdom of heaven, and unless they be borne again of water
and of the spirit, they cannot enter into the kingdom of God: therefore we
conclude that the spirit of God works in them in such a manner as cannot by
us be expressed. I willingly admit that this purging and renewing of infants,
which he speaks of, is to be understood of the work of the Spirit in such as
die in infancy, and are saved. Howbeit he yields the spirit to be in all the
rest also that belong to Gods election, although the same effects be not
produced till they co^^ to age, as those two plain and pregnant p^^ces
alleged but now our of his 5. Chapter concerning the efficacy of baptism,
clearly and fully proclaim to all the world. And so I have done with him also.

D. White B. of Norwich.
Our next witness is that learned Doctor Francis White, now L. Bishop of
Norwich, in his Answer to Fisher the Jesuit, whom though I have alleged
before, and might therefore well be excused if I should pass him over here.
Yet because some that are resolved never to assent to this truth, when they see
or hear any testimony produced out of any good Author that is clearly for
me, they use to shift it off, among those that either cannot, or will not,
examine the Authors themselves, with this aspersion cast upon me; It is true,
say they, that he makes a noise with quotations out of many Authors: but how?
He catches up here and there a word, or a sentence that seems to make for
his purpose, and uses them quite contrary to the Authors meanings, as would
easily appear by examination of what goes before and follows after, in those
Authors. I am therefore constrained to be tedious, in many things, not only to
others, but to my self also, in being more large then I intended at the first,
merely to vindicat my self from that, which, I am afraid, they too well know
that they unjustly lay to my charge, upon all occasions. And for this reason am
I compelled to repeat what formerly I alleged out of this Author, and to
add thereunto all that he has spoken of the point; that it may be manifest
that I have not wronged him, as some give out to their disciples.

The charge which Fisher comes on withal, upon all Protestants at once, is
this; Their errors against Baptism, the gate and entrance into Christian life,
whereof they deny the virtue to sanctify men, and the necessity thereof for
infants, to whom they grant salvation without Baptism. In which complaint the
Jesuit would feign persuade, that Protestants deny both the efficacy, and the
necessity of Baptism. Our Author answers him to both particulers We have here
to deal only with the former, touching which the whole passage runs thus.
viz.

Page 175.176
Although some persons have been Christians before their Baptism, as S.
Augustine says of Cornclius. Even as in Abraham the justice of faith was
precedent, and the seal of circumcision followed after: so likewise in
Cornelius, spiritual sanctification, by the gift of the Holy Ghost, went
before, and the Sacrament of Regeneration in the Laver of baptism succeeded;
yet notwithstanding, the ordinary gate, and entrance into Christian life is
baptism. S. Ambrose (sive Prosper) d. vocat. Gent. li. 1. ca. 5. The beginning
of true life and righteousness, is laid in the Sacrament of regeneration, that
look where man is newborn, there also the verity of virtues themselves may
spring.

Neither do Protestants deny the virtue and efficacy of Baptism, to sanctify
men; But according to the Holy scriptures, Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5. Gal. 3.27. 1
Pet 3 21. Act. 22.16. Romans 6.3. And the ancient church, they teach and
maintain, that this sacrament is an instrument of sanctification, and
remission of sins. The Leiturgy of the Church of England, in the form of
administration of Baptism, has these words: Seeing now D.B. that these
children be regenerate, etc. We yield thee hearty thanks most merciful
father, that it has pleased thee to regenerate this infant with thy holy
spirit, to receive him for thine own chi^d by adoption, etc. And master Hooker
says; Baptism is a Sacrament which God has instituted, in his Church, to the
end, that they which receive the same, might be incorporated into Christ, and
so through his most precious merit, obtain as well that saving grace of
imputation, which takes away all former guiltiness, and also that infused
divine virtue of the holy Ghost, which gives to the powers of the soul their
first disposition toward future newness of life. Zanchius has these words,
When the Minister baptizeth, I believe that Christ with his hand reached as it
were from heaven be sprinkleth, the child baptized with water, with his blood,
to remission of sins. And in another place, The Holy Ghost moves upon the
water of Baptism, and sanctifies the same, making it to be a Lauer of
Regeneration. Calvine says, Per Baptismum Christus nos mortis suae participes
fecit, vt in eam inseramur, By baptism Christ has made us partakers of his
death, that we may be ingraffed into it. And in another place; If any demand,
how can infants which want understanding be regenerate? I answer, Although we
are not able to fadome or unfold the manner of this work of God, yet it
follows not from thence, that the same is not done.

And the same Author, with others of his part, maintain the former doctrine
concerning the efficacy of the Sacrament of Baptism, and they differ only from
Lutherans and Pontificians. First, in that they restrain the grace of
Sanctification only to the elect. Secondly, in that they deny external
baptism to be always effectual, at the very instant time when it is
administered. Thus far our Author, word for word. I forbear to add his
margent, because I am here to use his words, and not his Authors, from whom he
had them. We see that, in the name of all sound Protestants, he professes an
efficacy of baptism even in infants elected; and this, he tells us, is the
doctrine of our Church, of Antiquity both in respect of particular Fathers, and
of whole Councels also; and this is the professed doctrine of Mr Hooker,
Zanchius, Calvine, and of all others that are not Lutherans and Papists. So as
now, our Author must by all men be confessed to be a Lutherane and a Papist,
(from both which, in that whole work, he sufficiently clears himself) or
else to be directly, fully, and every way of the same opinion with our Church
in this point, touching the efficacy of Baptism in and upon the elect only.

Fourthly, I produce that learned and worthy successor of Bishop Jewel in
Sarisbury, D. Davenant, D. Dauenant B. of Sarisb.
now L. Bishop of Sarum, whose worth is so well known, that no man that knows
a profound scholar and sound Divine, but will yield him to be of the highest
form. He, in his excellent Commentary that he lately put forth in Lattine,
upon the epistle to the Collossians, says thus, (upon those words of the
Apostle Collos. 2.12 buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen
with him through the faith of the operation of God, etc.) Non solum in persona
Christi, sed in nobismet-ipsis etiam sepulta dicuntur peccata in baptismo: quia
illa mortificatio and sepultura peccati non solum sacramentaliter vno momento
peragitur in action baptismi, sed realiter etiam per spiritum gratiae IN
BAPTISMO ACCEPTVM, per totam vitam Christianam protenditur.
Not only in the person of Christ, but also in our own selves our sins are
said to be buried in baptism: because that mortification and burial of sin
is performed not only sacramentally in the very moment of baptism; but also
really, by the spirit of grace received IN BAPTISM throughout the whole life
of a Christian. And a little after, when he speaks of mortification as a grace
actually wrought, he says that, In fieri non in facto ^sse.
it is rather a thing not yet begun, then in the actual work done, in our
baptism. And afterward, in exposition of that clause, in whom also ye are
risen by the faith of the operation of God, he thus explicates the meaning
thereof; Non frustra est quod exigitur fides ab Apost^lo, vt beneficium
spiri^ualis resurrectionis obtineamus. Nam vt in baptismo adultorum requiritur
fides praevia, iuxta dictum Saluatoris Mar. 16.16, qui crediderit and
baptizatus fuerit, saluus fuerit. Sic ab illis qui baptizantur cum iam infantes
sint requiritur fides subsequens: quam si non praestiterint postea, retinent
externam tantummodo baptism^ sanctificationem: interna sanctificationis effecta
non habent.
The Apostle does not in vain require faith, to the end we may obtain the
benefit of a spiritual resurrection. For as in the baptism of those of
years, precedent faith is required, according to that of our Savior Mar.
16.16. He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved: so, of those that are
baptized in infancy, future faith is required: which if they perform not, they
retain only the external sanctification of baptism, not having the inward
effects thereof. Again speaking of the faith of infants, he thus determines
that doubt: Ibid. in sol. dub. 2 sufficit qu^d peccati mortificatione^ and
fidem habeant non proprio actu sese exerentem, sed in habituali principio
gratiae inclusam Spiritus autem Christi principium hoc habituale gratiae in
illis efficere p^sse and solere, nemo sanus negauerit
It is sufficient that they have mortification and faith, not actually
declaring it self by any act of theirs, but included in the habitual
principle of grace. And that the spirit of Christ both can and ordinarily does
work this habitual principle of grace in them, no man well in his wits will
deny. Now in these four passages who sees not these 6 things. 1 That infants
do not only partake of an external washing, or obsignation, in baptism, but
they then RECEIVE the Holy Ghost. 2 That though they then receive the Holy
Ghost; yet he does not presently regenerate actually: for then, the work is
rather in fieri then in facto esse, as a thing not yet begun, rather then for
the present, done. 3 That all that are outwardly baptized, if they live must
attain actual faith, ere their baptism will appear effectual unto them. 4
That there are some who do partake only of the outward lauer, without the
inward effects: else, their faith would spring and show it self, when they
come to years. 5 That it is ordinary with the Holy Ghost to work seminall
grace in those infants that belong indeed unto Gods election. 6 That they
savor of cract brains that deny it. I am afraid the reader will be impatient to
be stayed longer in a point so plain I will therefore add only one Testimony
more out of D. Fulk; and another out of D. Featly, who, understanding from my
self how I stated my Position, gave this answer; neminem habebis aduersarium:
sure you will have no adversary.

Judicious and industruous D. Fulk, D. Fulk.
in his Answer to the Rhemists Annotations upon the New Test. says thus, In 1
Pet. 3.21.
Neither is baptism an efficient cause of salvation unto infants, but a seal
of Gods spirit regenerating them to eternal life. Where he does not more deny
the overplus which Papists unjustly attribute to baptism, then he willingly
acknowledges, what is due unto it: viz. that it is outwardly a seal of Gods
spirit, which spirit inwardly regenerateth unto eternal life. So then Doctor
Fulk could also discern the spirit in the baptism of those ordained to life.

D. Featly.
Lastly that Learned and nimble Author of the second Parallel, (who is thought
to make against me, I was at first much pressed with the Authority of the
Author of the perpetuity of the regene^a^e man's estate. But he that shall
pervse page 353. 354. of his book in the first edition, shall find that still
he runs upon these two points. 1 That not all, but only the elect receive any
kind of regeneration at al in baptism. 2 That the elect do receive a
cleansing and washing from the guilt of original sin, so as if they dye in
their infancy, before their ACTVALL Regeneration, and real conversion unto
God, they shall be saved. And all this he says is done by the spirit. Which is
as much for me as I can desire. If my adversaries have no worse weapons to
beat me withal, I shall never complain at their blows.
because in page 89 he says, as I also ever said from the beginning: viz. that
all that are regenerated sacramentally, are not necessarily and infallibly
regenerated spiritually;) is clear of this opinion, page 90. Although the
inward grace ordinarily accompany the outward sign, and we ought to believe,
by the judgment of charity, that all who are baptized are truly regenerate: yet
indicio veritais as Iunius; distinguishes; that is; by the judgment of precise
and infallible truth, all are not so, as the Fathers speak roundly and
plainly. In which words we see, first a concession of that we contend for,
viz, that the inward grace ordinarily, accompanies the outward sign.
Secondly, that yet this is not always; for it is not done at all, in the
baptism of some. But who are those some? They that are not elected: for he
denies it of all that fall away and perish, as the maine substance and drift of
that discourse declares. Thus you see that many English Divines of best note,
speak clearly and fully to this point, as well as I that alone am singled
out, and worried by passionate and heady men.

CAP. 9. 6 Objections against the maine position answered.
I Have at length gotten through all those particulars propounded in the end of
the Second chapter of this Treatise; and I hope, made it evident to Judicious
and impartial readers, that, (in the judgment of our Church, according to the
scriptures, as they have been understood by the Ancient Fathers, by the
present Churches of Christ beyond the seas, and by particular Divines of
chiefest note, both foreign and domestical;) All elect infants do
ordinarily, receive from Christ, in Baptism, the spirit of regeneration, as
the soul and first principle of spiritual life, for the first solemn
initiation into Christ, and for their future actual renouation, in Gods good
time. I have also given answers to all such objections as might occasionally
fall in against my a^guments brought for confirmation of the point. Now it
remains that I add Answers to all such Objections as either have been made
by others, or conceived by my self as likely to be urged by others, against
the maine assertion it self, which I have labored all this while to prove and
make good by so many witnesses.

In the performance hereof, I shall endeavor to deal as clearly and plainly
as possibly I can, although I thereby be constrained to use more words then may
be needful (or perhaps grateful) to more acute capacities; that I may not be
thought to darken my meaning on purpose in the foggs of needles terms of Art
not generally understood, which might give ordinary Readers cause to complain
of Obscurity or sophistry. And unto ordinary readers I must premise one
advertisement which others need not: viz. That in this part they expect not
further corroboration of the maine conclusion; but only, a manifestation of the
impertinency and weakness of their arguments that object against it. If I can,
in that which remains, make it appear that, nothing of all that has been,
or can be said against my position, is able to overthrow it, but that it is
possible for the point to stand whole and unbroken, notwithstanding all their
battery; I have don enough how weak so ever mine own grounds on which I have
hitherto built, may to those that proclaim me a dreamer and a broacher of a
gross and pestilent error seem to be.

1 Objection. Christians are regenerated by 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. therefore not by
baptism, in their infancy.

Answ. Antecedent Proposition is granted, being understood of actual
regeneration of persons of years, as it imports an actual and through chang
of the whole man, upon their effectual vocation, inwardly by the spirit, and
outwardly by the Word, in ordinary course. And of this only, those places are
to be expounded. For, the words are spoken only of the work of the word in and
upon aged persons called either from Iudaisme, or Gentilisme, by the preaching
of the Gospel; who, as Lidia; (Act. 16.14) had their hearts opened by the
spirit, to understand and receive the things, preached unto them, and so were
begotten anew unto God: that is, made new men in Christ, to perform new
obedience actually unto God, contrary to their former course in the state of
corrupt nature.

In this actual conversion and renouation, the spirit is the efficient cause;
and the word an instrument only, that he pleases to make use of; not, as if
he could not dispatch this work without it: but this is that which he has
sanctified, and commanded us to attend upon, so soon as we are able, by
accession of years, to understand the use of it, for conversion in the
ordinary course thereof. Now mark the weakness and imperfection of this
argument. S. James, and S. Peter do both of them affirm that, the persons to
whom they wrote, being persons of years, were actually renewed by the Word,
therefore, it is false that elect infants do receive the spirit in baptism
for their initiation into Christ, and as the soul and principle of after
actual renovation by the word? This is all the strength that this objection
has in it, when they have improued it to the utmost. And, how weak this
strength is, who does not see? It does not reach home so much as to touch (much
less to pierce) the point in question For, the Apostles speak of persons of
years; we, of Infants: they of actual renouation; we of initiall
regeneration only: They of such as are able to make use of the word, we, of
such as are not capable of any speech. Those places therefore do well prove
that which I deny not; viz that Let the reader observe that Whereas I often use
this phrase my meaning is not at any time to understand thereby any other thing
then what in the stating of the question, c. 2. I have expressed. viz. such a
work of the spirit as does actually renew a man and makes him a new man in
Christ by effectual conversion wherein he receives the habits of all saving
graces by the spirit,
actual regeneration in persons of years is usually wrought by the word; but
they do not restrain regeneration either to persons of years only; or, to
this means only; nor deny the spirit to be given to infants before they come
to make use of the word, for their first ingraffing into Christ, and as the
first principle of the new Creature.

If any shall doubt whether I be right in expounding the places alleged: and
suppose that, the words do not only affirm the Word to be the ordinary means
of Regeneration, but the only means also of regenerating all that are
regenerated, in any kind; or degree whatsoever; let them be pleased to consult
M. Calvine, who interpret, S. Peter, (that says the same with S. James,) in
the very same sense that I do, in his answer to the Anabaptists, who were the
first Fathers of this objection, and of all that follow, against this point.
Thus, He: Qu^d c^ntra obi^ctant spiritum in scrip^uris nullam n^si ex
incorruptibili seruine, id est, Dei verbo regenerationem agnosc^re, perperam
illam Petri sententiam interpretan^ur, qua fid^les modo comprehendit, qui
evangeli^ praed catione ed^cti fuerant. Tal^bus qu^dem f^tent^^, verbum D mi^i
spiritualis esse re^^n^r^^ionis ^eme^ v^icum: sed ex eo ne^^m^s c^^ligengu^,
n^n po^se ^ei virtute ^^generari inf^ntes; quae illi tam ^^ci^^s and prompta
e^t, ^^^n nob^s in^o^^^^hen^^ and adm^rabi^is. Inst. l. 4. cap. 16. Sect. 1^.
Whereas they object, that the spirit of God in the Scriptures, does
acknowledge no regeneration at all, but that which is by the incorruptible seed
of the Word: they do most absurdly interpret that place of Peter; wherein the
Apostle only comprehends such as had been taught and instructed by the
preaching of the Gospel. Unto such, we confess, the word of God is the seed,
and the only seed of spiritual Regeneration: but we deny that from thence may
be gathered, that God by his power cannot regenerate infants without it: which
to him is as easy and ordinary; as it is to us incomprehensible and admirable.
The like he says, in the particular of faith, in the very next Section, as
there more at large appears. Nor did this speech fall from him only once, or
unadvisedly: but it was the constant Answer he ever gave to this objection; as
himself professes, in his Answer to Servetus disputing touching the same
subject of the Baptism of Infants; as may be seen in the end of the same
Chapter last cited. For, to Servetus obiecting, that, Obijcit rursum, Inf^ntes
n^n posse ^ovos homine^ c^n^eri: quia non gign^ntur per sermonem. Ego, vere,
quod saepius iam dixi nunc quoque repeto, ad nos regenerandos d^ctrinam semen
esse incor^uptibi^e, siquid^m ad eam percipienda sumus idon^i: vbi vero nondum
per aetatem n^bis inest d^cilitas, Deum tenere suos regenerandi gradus. Instit
4. ca. 16, sect 31.
Infants cannot be thought new men, because they be not regenerated by the
Word; Calvin makes this answer: I have said often, and I now repeat it, that,
the Word is the incorruptible seed of regeneration unto us; provided that we be
capable of it: but where infancy makes incapable of instruction by that means,
God does retain his course of working some degrees of regeneration, without
it. If it be replied; Calvin speaks what may be; and what, in some
extraordinary cases, sometimes happens; but not what is usually done in the
baptism of the Elect? I reioine, That, if Calvine meant only thus much, his
Answer could not satisfy the Anabaptists, who therefore deny baptism to
infants, because they are not then capable of regeneration and faith: and he
on the contrary, says they be capable of some regeneration, and therefore
ought to be baptized. If he meant not baptismall regeneration, how can their
possibility of regeneration be a warrant for baptism, seeing they have, or may
have that, without baptism. Lastly, if it were not ordinary with God to
regenerate elect infants in baptism, his answer would fall short too. For
they might justly reply, that an ordinary practice of baptizing all infants is
not to be warranted from some extraordinary cases. If you confess that it is
not ordinary that elect infants are regenerated in baptism; what reason have
you to tie all men to that, wherein you cannot promise them the grace that is
represented thereby, and promised to all that use it with understanding and
faith. This, and much more might be unanswerable returned upon Calvine, by
Servetus and his Clients; if they had understood him to deny Initiall
Regeneration of elect infants, to be ordinarily communicated to them in
Baptism. I conclude therefore, with judicious Calvine: However it be true,
which the Scriptures speak of the actual regeneration of persons of years;
that they are regenerated by the Word; yet Elect infants may be, and are, for
ought appears in either of the places of scripture objected to the contrary,
partakers of Initiall Regeneration, by the Spirit, in their Baptism: and so
this Objection does our Position no harm.

2 Objection. But there is no such thing as Initiall

Answ. ^^s^ere.
If this Objection contain a truth without equivocation, I confess the
Posi^ion to be a toy indeed. But there may ly some ambiguity in the terms of
Initial, and Actual; which being cleared, the objection may perhaps appear as
weak, as they declare themselves rash and uncharitable who took upon them to
confute that distinction, which they never understood, nor would ever vouchsafe
so much as to hear explicated by my self, either in public or private.

Touching the distinction of Initial and Actual Regeneration, I have
sufficiently declared before, in my second Chapter, in what sense I use it. I
will therefore forbear to repeat what there I have written. The Reader may
view it at his pleasure. If any man demand express Scriptures for the very
terms, he will soon declare of what Spirit he is. But if by sufficient
consequence the distinction be not clearly deduced thence, he shall then have
cause to complain. Let him view the foundation on which it is built, and
afterward tell me his mind, if he remain unsatisfied. In the mean time I
shall only add thus much: that by Initial, and Actual Regeneration, I do not
mean to insinuate two several kinds of spiritual life; for which, I
acknowledge, there is no footing in Scripture: but I understand only two
distinct considerations in respect of the degrees of spiritual life in the
same subject, which the places of Scripture before alleged in Chapt. 2. do
sufficiently warrant. For, by life, in Scripture, is sometimes meant the soul
infused as the principle of life: sometimes, the very actual being and
enliuening of the subject by that soul, making it actually to produce the
actions of life. Hence I distinguish of life into Initiall, and Actual: Not as
if the Spirit were not actually communicated, or did not actually work, or
actually begin, from the very first instant, to dispose and prepare the soul
to future actual newness of life, by infusing some potentiall and seminall
grace; but my meaning is that, the Spirit does not at that time, ordinarily, so
plenarily change and renew the whole man, as to work in him either actual
faith, hope, or love, etc: or so much as the habits of these or other
particular graces, for the present as afterward he does. Something the spirit
does, from his first entrance, toward actual regeneration, therefore we call
that first work, Initiall: thereby understanding the first disposition to, or
degree of actual regeneration. But for as much as that first work does not
(for ought we know) extend to a present actual change of the whole man in the
same manner and degree, that afterward is wrought in him, at his effectual
calling; therefore we call that latter work, Actual Regeneration.

This ought not to seem strange to any: for just so is it in the course of
nature. Ipse (Deus scil.) itaque animae ^umanae mentem dedit, vbi ratio and
intellgentia in infant sopita est quodammodo, quasi nulla sit, excitand^
s^ilicet atque exercend^ aetatis accessu, qua sit scientiae capax atque doct
in^e, and habilis perceptioni veritatis and amoris boni. August. de Civit. Dei
lib. 22. c 24. To the same purpose also he w^^te h, lib 2 ^ Peccat. (...) 25
and ali^i.
So soon as the reasonable soul is infused, there is in some sense, (not
every way, in respect of degrees) a rational life. But how? The soul is
there, and in that soul are included all the principles of reason: but the
soul does not send forth those principles unto action (unless in some
insensible manner by little and little preparing the infant unto humane
actions) till afterward that the senses begin to act. Before that time, the
reasonable life cannot wholly be denied to be in an infant, because the soul
rational is actually in his body: yet forasmuch as the infant has not at that
time the actual use of reason, for this cause we call the further perfection
of his natural principles by tract of time attained, when reason puts it self
into act, actual rational life; and we term the same life, in respect of
the first degree and principles thereof, which together with the reasonable
soul, in the first infusion thereof, it received, Initiall life.

This is no more, in substance, then what we have learned from S. Augustine,
Calvine, Peter Martyr, Iunius, Daneus, Dr Whitaker, Zanchius, and sundry
others, whose judgments have been at large set down in this treatise in
sundry places upon sundry occasions. And shall any man think it nothing in a
magisteriall humor, to tra^ple so many worthies under his feet, at once, as if
he were wiser than all others? if it be only the terms that displease him,
because, perhaps, the same are not found in any of these Authors; he shall but
show himself a caueller to quarrel them; unless he can show that the terms
are used to signify that, which, in substance, these Authors do not allow and
teach. Breefly then, this Objection is grounded upon a false information, and
supposition: for it supposes me to use the terms of Initiall and actual
regeneration, as intending thereby to teach that there be two distinct species,
or kinds of regeneration; whereas my meaning is only to speak of the same
spiritual life, in two distinct considerations, in respect of degrees. And so
the Objection fights with a shadow, and not with me.

But it will be replied that, in Regeneration there be no degrees: but that it
is performed and dispatched at an instant, as natural generation is. It is true
say they, that there be degrees in (...).
Renouation which notes a growth in sanctification, in a man regenerated. But
(...)
Regeneration is never taken for any other than for the first act of the spirit
entering into a Christian, and begetting him a new man in Christ, in the very
first moment of his entrance Therefore the distinction of actual and initiall
regeneration cannot be admitted in any sense?

I Answer, That those two words, Regeneration, and Renovation, may perhaps, by
some, be used, the one, to signify the first infusion of grace making a man
actually a new creature in all parts at once; and the other to note the
continual growth of a Christian in grace infused; if men will before give notice
of their meaning, and for the more clear expression of themselves, will say;
when I speak of the first infusion of grace, I will use the word regeneration
to express it by; and when I speak of continual growth from one degree unto
another, I will ever call that, Renovation. Men may, if they please, make use
of words, as they do of Counters in casting of accounts, wherein, of the same
set, and value, some Counters are made to stand for pounds; some, for
shillings; and some for pence. And yet, as those Counters which stand for
pence, might as well have stood for pounds, as those that do stand for pou^ds,
if it had pleased him that set them to have so disposed them: So men may put
words of the same value and native signification, to signify diverse things,
by a liberty justifiable enough in use of speech: and yet those words, may
without wrong, be used by others to signify other things: always provided
that when a man uses a word in a sense different either from the prime
signification of it, or from the common acceptance of it, he give warning
that, where ever he uses such a word, he would be understood in such or such a
sense, and not according to the etimology of it, nor according to the common
use of it. And thus I grant, that, if it please any Divine to say that, he
will ever restrain Regeneration, to note the first infusion of grace, and by
Renovation signify a daily increase of grace, in all his speeches or writings,
for want of fitter terms to express himself in, he may do it.

But if any man shall say that, the proper meaning of the word Regeneration,
and of that which the Scriptures call (...), is the first infusion of the
Spirit actually to make a man a new Creature in all parts at once, so as in
this there can be no degrees; and affirm that, so the Scriptures do ever use
that word; and also add that, by Renovation, the Scripture never means the
same thing that it intends by Regeneration, but that (...) or Renovation is
ever put for another thing, to wit, for continual growth in grace once
infused: I must crave leave to dissent from him, and to deny his assertion.
For, neither is there any such difference in the proper signification of these
words, but that they may both signify one and the same thing: Nor is the
Scripture so nice as to observe such a difference between them, as the
Obiectors would persuade us.

That in the proper signification, there is nothing either why regeneration
should signify only the first infusion of grace; or rather this then the daily
growth of it; nor, why Renouation should not signify the first beginings of the
new creature, as well as the growth of it, those that are skillful in the
Tongues, will easily bare me witness; and I take them that make this nice
distinction betweee these two words, to be better skilled then to say that
these words in their proper signification, will justify this conceit. Therefore
they must of necessity fly to the Scriptures, and prove that there, (...),
usually translated Regeneration, is ever so restrained as that it always
signifies the first infusion of grace, and not that further work of the spirit
which admits of degrees and is ever expressed by (...), or Renouation: or
else their conceit will prove but a fancy too weak to ruin the distinction of
Jnitiall and Actual regeneration.

But the Holy Ghost in the scriptures does not observe this nicely of words:
for sometimes we shall find regeneration, put for sanctification expressed by
obedience unto Christ and his Gospel, or else for the beginning of glory, and
not for the first infusion of grace only: So in Mat. 19.28. Our Savior thus
gives answer to Peter demanding of him what they should have, who had forsaken
all to follow him; verily I say unto you that ye which have followed me (...),
in the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his
glory, yea also shall sit upon twelve thrones, etc. where the word regeneration
cannot be taken for the first infusion of grace only, because it notes such a
thing as Christ's disciples did actually exercise and express in receiving of
his Gospel, or else, as Beza rather thinks, it signifies the very state of
glory wherewith they shall be invested at the latter day; and the words ought
to be read thus: ye that have followed me, (here making the comma) in the
regeneration when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye
shall sit, etc. that is, you that follow me now, shall hereafter, when the
elect, being perfectly sanctified, begin their kingdom of glory, namely at the
latter day, when I shall come again in glory, then shall ye sit upon twelve
thrones. And so did Saint Augustine Aug. de Piece. Mer. and Remis. lib, 2. cap.
7.
long before expound that text. Therefore the word is not restrained only to
signify the first infusion of the spirit, and of grace by the spirit. Again,
sometimes we shall find (...) and (...), Regeneration and Renouation put one
for another, the one to explicate the other: for so Zanchius says expressly in
his commentary upon Ephesians. 5. And he says the truth: for so the Apostle uses
them, Tit. 3.5. according to his mercy he saved us (...), by the lauer of
regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Ista vero Regeneratio and
Renovatio non sunt duo diversa. sed haec est illius declaratio. Beza in loc.
where the Apostle uses those two words of regeneration and renouation not to
signify two things; but the latter declares the meaning of the former, as Beza
well. Wherefore I conclude that, for as much as the holy scripture does not
restrain the word Regeneration, to the first infusion of the spirit, or of
grace by the spirit, wherein there be no degrees, but extends it further, even
to that further work of the spirit, wherein (as all grant) there be degrees;
the distinction of Regeneration into initiall and actual, still stands upright
without battering by this second Objection, that will admit of no degrees in
that, which the scripture every where calls by the name of Regeneration.

Objection. The Apostle expressly ascribes the conferring of the spirit, to the
word of faith preached. Gal. 3.2. Therefore the spirit is not given in Baptism?

Answ. Caluines judgment, so much alter the case, (if the same words should be
used to deny the communication of the spirit unto infants in baptism) as would
give just occasion to deny the consequent of that proposition. For so Calvine,
to Seruetus obiecting that, Addit postea, neminem fieri fratrem nostrum nisi
per spiritum adoptionis qui tantum ex auditu fidei consertur. Respondeo; semper
in eundem relabi paralogismum: quia praepostere ad infantes trahit qu d de
solis adultis dictum est. Docet illic Paulus hanc esse deo ordinarium modum, vt
electos suos ad fidem adducat, dum illis suscitat fides doctores, quorum
ministerio and opere manu^ porrigit. Quis inde legem imponere ei audeat quo
minus arcana alia ratione infantes Christo inserat? Instit: lib. 4. cap. 16.
sect 31. resp. ^d obiectionem 15tam Serveti.
no man is made our brother but by the spirit of adoption which is co^ferred
only by the hearing of faith; gives this answer. He ever falls into the same
sophisme: because preposterously he draws that to infants which is spoken only
of persons of years. Paul in that place teaches that the hearing of faith is
Gods ordinary way of calling, whereby he brings on his elect unto faith,
raising them up faithful teachers in whose ministry he reaches out his hand
unto them. Now, who shall dare to set such a law unto God, that he should not
by some other secret way ingraffe infants into Christ.

But there is more in that case of the Galathians, and so in that of Cornelius
his company, Act. 10.44. then this, that they were persons of years, when, in
hearing the word preached, they received the Holy Ghost: for they were, till
that time, no part of the visible Church and flock of Christ, but gentiles and
mere aliens from him and all his ordinances till the Gospel was preached to
them. And it is one thing to be a Gentile, without the Church, that has
nothing to do with Christ or his spirit, till he hears him published in the
preaching of the Gospel, which is the first ordinance of Christ that he
partakes of: (for first, Christ is preached unto him; then, believing, he is to
be baptized) and it is another thing to be borne of parents that are visible
members of a settled and stablished Church, so as the party so borne is to be
held and reputed for one of the faithful even from the womb. It is no wonder
if the former sort receive the spirit in the hearing of the word: for, how else
should they come by it in the ordinary course of dispensation by means? But it
cannot but be wondered at, that any should infer that, elect infants borne and
baptized in the Church, should not, ordinarily, partake of the spirit, before
they come to age sufficient to be capable of the word preached, upon this
ground that, the Galathians and others mentioned in scripture, that were
converted by the word, from Paganism, did not receive the spirit before they
heard the Gospel preached. I shall not need to spend time and paper to prove
that the Apostle speaks of the former sort only, and not of the latter.
Therefore this Objection does not at all touch the point in hand.

4 Objection. If the spirit be given in Baptism, 1. Pet. 3.21. Therefore the
spirit is not given in Baptism.

Answ. Mayor, and to the Minor also.

1. To the Mayor, I answer by denying the sequel. For, in the case of infants
dying in infancy, the spirit can, and (no doubt) does actually regenerate them,
without the word; how else should they enter into the kingdom of heaven? In
what manner the spirit does regenerate such, is to us unknown. Nor will I take
upon me to determine that which the Scripture is silent in. They that deny all
actual regeneration till the word come, without exception of such as die in
infancy, do conclude all infants dying before they be able to make use of the
Word, to be damned. A damnable conclusion not to be endured in the tongue or
pen of any sober Christian. Thus we see in few words that the Consequent of
the Major, is an idle non sequitur; grounded on a false supposition. For,
although we say that, actual Regeneration is not wrought but by the Word, yet
we grant not this Universally of all, but only of persons of years.

2 To the Minor I answer thus,

1 I deny that the Apostle, in that place, does speak of Regeneration wrought
by the Word: for he speaks not at all either of Regeneration strictly and
formally so called; but only of an act which supposes regeneration; nor, of
that act, as wrought by the Word; but, of an act wrought, without declaring by
what means it is wrought: so as, for ought appears in the Text to the
contrary, it may be wrought in baptism, as well as by any other means.
Therefore in this respect, the proposition is weak and lame: because I may as
well draw it to my purpose, and say that, baptism has such efficacy in it as
to enable a Christian to make answer unto God, because the Apostle says that
Baptism (although not the outward washing yet the inward Grace) saves: as
others may urge it against me, by inferring thence that, Baptism cannot save
without the Word. For, there is not, in that place, any mention, or so much as
the least insinuation of the Word, but only of Baptism.

2 I add that Expositors agree not in the exposition of that Text; and yet
notwithstanding their disagreement, there is nothing to be drawn either from
the Exposition of any one of them, or from all of them together, that concludes
any thing against this Position. That Expositors agree not in the rendering of
the Text, is evident by their different rendrings of the word (...), (which in
our last Translation, is rendered, the answer of a good conscience, etc.) in
which word lies all the difficulty of the whole passage.

1 Some would not have it translated, the answer of a good conscience; but,
the request or confident demand made by a good conscience unto God. So, the old
Translators; and so M. Cartwright also, in his answer to the Rhemists, upon
Math. 3.11. but what the conscience makes request for, these Authors speak no
syllable of And how a request made to God, should be the inward part of
baptism here opposed to the outward washing which purges the filthiness of
the flesh, is beyond my capacity to comprehend. But I let that pass wishing
they had more clearly explained themselves.

2 Some take it for an allusion to the usual Jnterrogatories in baptism, and
to the Stipulation made by the party baptized, to perform the conditions
tendered unto him, and accepted by him, in his baptism; which stipulation he
must answer and make good, ere he can expect that his baptism should save
him. So Beza took it, says D Fulk upon the place. Yea, and so, Mr Cartwright
also, when he comes to write upon that Text, and to vindicate it from Rhemish
falsifications. But he adds that, those Questions were made to persons of
years, and unto such the Apostle writes: and so, this, in his judgment,
belongs not unto infants, nor is spoken touching the efficacy of Baptism upon
infants. Howbeit he denies not the spirit to be given to infants: for T.C.
against D. Whitgift, touching interrogatories in baptism. p. 134. the last
Section,
elsewhere, he says thus; I will not deny but that children have the spirit of
God, which works in them after a wonderful fashion But this, by the way. All
that may by this exposition be concluded hence is this, That baptism saues
none of years, no not as an instrument, till there be a faithful performance
of the Covenant on their parts. But in the case of infants the matter is far
otherwise, forasmuch as they cannot, ordinarily, actually believe or repent. So
Dr Fulk: Stipulation and solemn promises are necessary to be acknowledged,
that baptism may be effectual to them that are of age.

3 Some, as Oecumenius, and others interpret the word somewhat otherwise.
Oecumenius, who should best know the force of the Greek phrase, expounds
(...), by three other words, (...): an earnest, a pledge, and a demonstration:
using so many words not to signify diverse things, but more fully to set forth
the force of that one word, which he could not sufficiently express by one.
But what he means by this earnest, pledge, and demonstration, he leaves to
his Readers to divine. I think it can be understood of nothing else but the
inward grace signified by the outward washing; to wit, the blood and spirit of
Christ given to a Christian in his Baptism, as a seal and pledge and
demonstratiue evidence both of the remission of his sins by the blood of
Christ, and also of Regeneration by the Spirit of Christ, whereby the
conscience is purged from dead works, and sanctified that a man does now
answer and make good his promise and vow in Baptism, which now, not as a
cause, but as a means instituted by Christ to seal unto him justification by
the bl^od, and sanctification by the spirit of Christ, is said to save him. So
Basil (...).
; (...). If there be any grace (or virtue) in the water, it is not from the
nature of the water, but from the presence of the spirit: for baptism is not
the deposition of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
unto God. Upon which words of Basil, Vides v m purgandi denegari aquae, asseri
spiritui sancto praesenti: and quidem argumento a verbis Petri De Sacram. lib.
2. c. 9 par. 11.
Chameir thus descanteth: You see that the power of purging the conscience, is
denied to the water, and affirmed to be in the spirit there present, and this
he proves by an argument drawn from the words of Peter. And in the same
manner judicious De sacram. in genere quaest. 4. cap, 2. page 73.
Whitaker, understands and approves that of Basil.

Bullinger is of the same judgment; for thus In 1. Pet. 3.21 Ne quis
p^aecedentia de nudo baptismi signo intelli^eret, hoc addit: non is quidem
baptismus nos salva^, quo abluimus sordes externas humani corporis sed per
baptismu^ intelligo illam vim fidei, illum spiritum and virtutem Christi (quae
cum externo signo coniuncta est) qua sit vt conscientia nostra pacata secure
agat coram oculis Dei.
Marlorat alleges him upon the place. Least any man should understand him to
speak those words of the naked sign of baptism, he adds these; that
baptism saues not, which purges the outward filth of the flesh; but by
baptism J understand that efficacy of faith, the spirit and power of Christ
(which, as Marlorat adds, is joined with the outward sign) whereby it comes
to pass that the conscience being pacified, it may confidently appear and
plead before the Lord. To the same purpose speaks the English note in our old
Bibles, which understands hereby, Christ's inward virtue, which the outward
baptism shadoweth. So that the purpose of the Apostle here is only to teach
what it is in baptism that is so efficacious, as to save a man: namely, not
the outward element, or washing with that element; but the inward grace thereby
signified: which grace is here set forth by the effect of it in such as are of
years, which is, the enabling of them with a good conscience to make good
their vows, as also confidently to depend upon God through Christ for their
salvation. Bucer is large in the explication of this Text; his conclusion is
this; Neque enim seruat Baptisma adultos nisi credentes. Salus quidem
baptismate offertu^ omnibus^ re^ipiuat autem illa^ ^dulti non nisi per fidem:
infantes per arcanam spiritus sancti operationem, qua ad vitam aeternam
sanctificantur. In script. Anglic. de v^ and essic. Bapt. in calce.
Baptism saues none of years but believers. Indeed salvation is offered in
Baptism unto all but none of years receive it, but by faith. As for infants,
they are saved by the secret operation of the spirit, which sanctifies them
unto eternal life.

Now, take the words which way soever any of these Worthies have expounded
the^, what do they make, when they are cleared, so much as in show, against
the present Position that Elect infants do ordinarily receive the spirit in
baptism, as the first efficient principle of future actual regeneration? For,
let any man frame an argument from this place (though he make the best
improument that any exposition of it will yield) he cannot make ^ more forcible
then this, viz. Saint Peter says that, Baptism is effectual to none of
years, unless they partake of the inward grace of the spirit and blood of
Christ by faith, that may both assure then on Christ's part that they are
ingraffed into him, have their sins pardoned, and the old man in them buried;
and also enable them to keep touch with Christ actually on their parts in all
such things as they promised. Therefore elect infants do not receive the
spirit in baptism, to beget faith and other graces in them afterward, by the
word, when they come to years. Would not such a kind of arguing seem very
ridiculous? It is just as if one should dispute against the slowing of the
water at London Bridge, at any time save only about three of clock, in this
wise. It is never high water at London Bridge about three of clock, but when the
moon is either at the full, or the chang: therefore there is not the least
beginning of any new flood, ordinarily at all, till either it be about three of
clo^k, or till the moon be at the full o^ ^h^ng^ ^o here persons of ripe age
baptism does not save, without faith, therefore, not infants: yea therefore,
there can be no seed of grace, no spirit of grace communicated to infants, till
they do come to years; as if there could be no beginning of a following of
the water, till it be high tide. This and no other is the force of the
Objection founded on this place; so as now I appeal to any ordinary capacity,
whether our Positio^ have any cause to fear the least shaking by it I have
been larger in answer of this objection then the strength of it deserves,
because I was willing to clear the Text, which has difficulty in it.

Objection. Wheresoever the spirit is, he works faith and regeneration; else
it would follow that the spirit were idle, which were little less then
blasphemy to affirm: But in elect infants, ordinarily, no such work appears,
rather on the contrary, many of them show manifest opposition to all grace and
goodness for many years together, notwithstanding their baptism. Therefore
we must conclude that either they loose the spirit received in Baptism, so
soon as they be able to commit actual sin; or else, that they do not
ordinarily receive him in their Baptism.

Answ. Impossibility that any such thing as the conferring of the spirit on
infants in Baptism, should ordinarily be; because of the gross absurdities
that thence do follow: viz that, then the spirit must either be confessed to be
idle; which is no better then blasphemy to affirm; or else, that the spirit of
sanctification and adoption may be wholly lost, so as a man once truly
regenerate, may totally loose all regeneration, and be in the same state in
which he was before his baptism, which is flat Popery to maintain. The whole
company of Remonstrants convented at the synod of Dort in their declaration
touching the 5 Art set forth by themselves do with one consent disclaim such
a falling from grace, as renders him to his former estate before grace, so as
he should need any new tota^l and vniversa l regeneration in all parts of his
soul; for the^ (as they Well saw) it would follow that such a man must b
rebaptized, ere he could be again regenerated by the ordinary way. Therefore
they say, he is only set out of the state of grace (that is, out of the favor
of God so as then it shines not upon him: for they cannot mean it of grace in
the person himself, because they confess, he has not wholly lost all grace,
so as to need a new regeneration) until he recover it again by repentance.
For see what they write, a little before the middle of that declaration. circa.
5. Art. de Pers^ver. Ex quo consequitur cum. qui a ver^ fide deficit, non
protinus in eundem illum statum delabi, in quo erat antequam ad fidem
vocaretur, ac proinde totali and universally regeneratione quoad omnes animae
patres opus non habere, neque vt novo baptismo rebaptizetur necessum esse, sed
tantum extra statum gratiae collocari, quamdiu ad statum illum a quo defecit,
non revertitur.
^f therefore I can clear the point from both these absurdities which are
thought to lay an impossibility upon it; and make it appear that, it is
possible for the spirit to be in an elect infant from the time of his baptism
unto his actual conversion many years after, although no manifest sign of
grace, but rather the contrary do to us appear in him; I shall sufficiently
quit my self of this objection. And this I will now assay, by answering
distinctly to both propositions in order.

1 Then let us examine their Mayor proposition, which has in it 2 parts, which
we may call the Antecedent, and the Consequent. The antecede^t or the main
body of the proposition is this, wheresoever the Spirit is, he works actual
faith and regeneration, the consequent, this, or else the spirit is idle. To
both these parts I answer thus.

1 I deny the former part, if it be taken universally. For it is not necessary
that the spirit, from the very first time of his entrance, should work actual
faith and regeneration (in the sense before expressed) in all in whom he may be
said to be, as has been sufficiently proved, in the case of infants, of whom
only we treat. I have made it manifest by a comparison of the reasonable soul
with the heavenly spirit, as many others have done before me.

The reasonable soul is infused so soon as the body of an infant is organized
and made capable of such an inhabitant: yet it does not presently act, or
enable the infant to act rationally, so soon as it is infused. But it will be
said, that so soon as the soul comes into the body, the body is quickened, and
stirs even in the womb: true, but that motion is not rational, but only
animal. Even after the infant is borne, it cannot move it self rationally,
till the senses be first able to exercise themselves, and be actually
conversant about and upon their proper objects, and present the same unto the
understanding faculty by the Phantasy, and Common sense. So it is in the
Spiritual being. Therefore it follows not that infants must be presently made
believers and regenerate actually, so as to move spiritually, so soon as the
spirit is given unto them.

This is the answer not only of Saint Dicimus in baptizalis parvulis, quamvis
id nesciant, habitare spir^tum sanctum. Sic enim nesciunt quamvis sit in eis
quem^dmodum nesciunt and mentem, cuius in iis ratio, qua vti nondum p^ssunt,
veluti quaeda^ ^^intil^a sopita est, excitanda aetatis accessi^.
Augustine in his 57 Epist: ad Dandanum, as I have showed before in the 5
chapt. but also of Peter Martyr, D. Whitaker and others which I will not here
repeat, having already set down their words at large. Thus also Daneus, In
Augustini Enchirid. cap. 52. nec eoram animae rationalis ope^a vlla ad^uc
cernimus; neque tamen propterea potest negari eos anima rationali esse
praeditos, ^rgo and fidem and regenerationem habent par^^li electi^ D^i etsi
nondum illius opera nobis apparent: and ea dona habent pro ratione aetatis, ^d
est pro capacitate vasis.
not only upon Saint Augustines Enchiridion, but also in his Treatise of the
Sacraments, where he says that, Ergo qui effectus baptismi est in adultis,
idem est in infantibus, qua^quam vim eius tam cito infantes non proserunt,
neque illius fructus edunt, quam adulti, sed demu n cum ae^^s adue^erit, and
vsus rationis. De sacram: lib. 5. cap. 25.
look what efficacy baptism has in persons of years, the same it has upon
infants, although infants do not manifest the same, nor bring forth the fruits
thereof, as those of years do, but yet afterward they do it, when they come
to age of discretion. M: Aynsworth, in his Censure of the dialogue of the
Anabaptists, is copious in this very particular. See page 44. If (says he) we
cannot justly object against Gods work in nature, but do believe that our
infants are reasonable creatures, and are borne not bruit beasts but men;
though actually they can manifest no reason or understanding no more then
beasts (yea a young lamb knows and discerns his damme sooner, then an
infant knows his mother) then neither can we justly object, against Gods work
in grace, but are to believe that our infants are sanctified Creatures, etc.
And again page 45. answering that Cavil of theirs, that if infants have any
grace, it would appear by the acts and exercise of it; he says thus: They
reason ignorantly and perversely not only against the light of Gods word, but of
nature. As if some brutish person should plead thus. A man is a living
creature that has a reasonable soul; and the proper affections of a man, as
he is a man, are the faculty of understanding, of thinking, capablenesse of
learning, of remembering, reasoning, judging, and discerning true and false,
good and evil, etc. of willing, of nilling, of speaking, of numbering, etc. Now
let them which affirm Jnfants are borne men, as Christ does Ioh: 16.21) prove
that infants do understand, think, remember, judge, discern good and evil,
approve, will, speak, etc. or else they say nothing. Were not such a disputer
worthy to be laughed and hissed at, who requires the actual use and
manifestation of humane affections and faculties in infants, which are in them
but potentially and in the seed and beginning: and because they cannot declare
these things by their works, therefore he denies them to be of the generation
of man kind, or borne men into the world, or that they have the faculties of
men in them any manner of way? Even such is the argumentation of these
erroneous spirits against the truth of religion. Thus far he.

By this little, so much is gotten that, if all the divines, who have
professedly entered into the particular consideration of this point, be not out,
and, if the Anabaptists be not in the right, there is a possibility for the
spirit to be in an infant, and yet not presently manifest his presence by any
work of grace actually, so as it may be seen and known either by the infant
himself, or by the beholders.

2 Wherefore in the next place I say, that since the spirit may be in an
infant, and yet not work actual faith and regeneration, therefore the
consequent of this proposition that concludes the spirit to be idle if he
work not such grace, must needs be false also. Must he needs be idle that
does not always let us see his work? Shall we conclude, he does nothing,
because he will not tell us what he does? Has he no work but one, in an
infant? Do we know all the works of God? Or shall we deny all, that we
know not? This is a bold speech to say, either the spirit must work this or
that particular work in an infant, which he usually works in all persons of
years where he pleases to dwell, or else he is idle. Was Great Basil a
blasphemer when he De spiritu sancto cap. 26. (...). etc.
affirmed, that, like as Art is in the Artificer, so is the spirit in him that
has received him; he is always present, but does not always work. For Art
is always in the Artificer potentially, but then is it said to be in him,
actually, when he exercises it; so the spirit is always present to such as
are worthy, but he works only as their benefit and necessity may require? To
such therefore as are ready to say to me of the work of the spirit, as Thomas
of Christ, except I see and feel, I will not believe: I can do no more then
the Disciples did to Thomas; viz: let them alone, till the spirit himself do
bid them feel and see, by persuading them to believe this truth. For however I
cannot demonstrate in what manner the spirit initially works in an infant,
the first principles of Regeneration, because the work is secret, and both the
work and manner of working are hidden from us Ille in quo omnes
vivificabuntur, praeterquam quod se ad iustitiam exemplum imitantibus praebuit,
dat e^iam sui spiritus occultissimam fidelib^s gratiam, quam latenter infundit
and parvulis. Aug. de peccat. meriti^ and remiss. lib. 1. cap 9,
: yet I answer such as put me to it, as Calvine did the Anabaptists: At
quomodo, inqui^nt, regenerantur infantes nec bo^i nec mali cognitione praediti?
Nos autem respondemus; opus dei, etiamsi captui nostro non subiaceat, non
tamenesse nullum Instit. l 4. cap. 16. Sect. 17.
There is a work of the spirit in them; although we cannot comprehend what it
is, yet we must not therefore conclude that there is no work at all: and (as
Dr Whitaker determined the question of the work of grace in infants for a
close of his disputation touching that subject) In eis operari spiritum sanctii
ineffabiliter dicimus. De Sacr. Contro. de B^pt. Quaest. 4. cap. 6.
We say that the Holy Ghost works in them, in a manner to us inexplicable.
Both Calvine, and Peter Martyr, and Doctor Whitaker, are all clear of opinion
that there is some work of the spirit in an infant, and yet not any of them
apart, nor all of them together, dare to determine what that work is. Calvine
says, it is certain there is some work: Peter Martyr says, it is enough
that we believe they have the spirit, the root and principle of future grace,
and that if they dye in infancy, they are saved Dr Whitaker comes after, and
says the very same, illustrates his and Peter Martyrs opinion by the former
comparison of the reasonable soul, commends Calvine for his modesty, and
professes that he would most willingly be his Scholar that could take off
all difficulties from this point. It is therefore an unreasonable and captious
demand of the Adversaries to this position, to require of me to show what the
spirit does in an infant, or else to confess that he is idle, or rather nor
there at all. So much for answer to the Major, which would conclude from a
false ground, and groundless position, that the spirit cannot be in infants,
because where he is, he cannot be idle; and, he cannot but be idle, if he
work not in them actual grace.

2 I come now to the Minor Proposition, which was this; But in elect infants,
ordinarily, no such work does appear; rather on the contrary, many of them
show manifest opposition to all grace and goodness, for many years together,
notwithstanding their baptism: and to this I give a threefold answer.

1 C^lv. in Mat. 19.14. Tal^um est regnum Dei. Sic scribit de Infantibus. Quod
poenitentiam vitaque novitatem simul illic figurati ab^iciu^t, facilis solutio
est, renouari Dei spiritis pro ae atis modul^, donec per gradus su^ t^mpore
quae in ill^s occulta est virtus au^escat, and palam refulgeat. That infants
do cast off a^l repentance and newness of life that are ioint^y figured in
baptism, the answer (to such as object this against the baptizing of infants)
is easy: that they are renewed by the spirit of God according to the capacity
of their age: until by degrees that efficacy or virtue which lies hid in them
do in due season increase, and openly sparkle and shine forth.
That although no such work does appear in them, yet this proves not that no
such work is begun secretly in the soul, as I have before showed, in answer
to the former Proposition. Nor is it impossible that even actual grace should
ly hidden, so as neither others, nor the party himself in whom that grace is,
can discern the same at all times, as after shall be declared.

2 That I never affirmed any actual change of the soul, in the baptism of
infants that afterward live to years of discretion; no, nor so much as any
particular habits of particular graces, answerable unto those that are usually
wrought in others at the time of their actual Conversion. Yea so far have I
been from affirming hereof, that I have always upon all occasions disclaimed
it. But I only say that, the spirit is given to elect infants, in baptism,
ordinarily, (pardon my so often repetition of the substance of the Position,
which the Adversaries so often forget) to be the first principle of
regeneration in them, and as the first seed, whereby the heart is seized upon
for Christ, and the whole man taken up for his use, and made in a secret manner
capable of a further work, in Gods good time. This spirit is, unto such, in
the room of grace, as Loc. C^m. class 4 cap. 8. sect 14.
Peter Martyr affirms, and the root also out of which all grace in due time,
flows, in all Gods children, as the same Author (who is also seconded by Dr
Whitaker) further speaks; and as Calvin had done, before him. This Principle
of Grace lies hid, as seed under ground; as wheat under chafe; as fire under
the ashes; as the faculty of reason seems to lie asleep, till a child be
grown up to some capacity; and as the spirit of God moved upon the waters
before the several creatures were actually produced by the word of his power.

By this we may discern what answer to give to that Dilemma, urged by some
to this effect: viz: If the spirit be given to an infant in baptism, either
the infant is alive or dead; regenerate, or unregenerate? Regenerate he is not,
because there is in him no actual change: and how can the spirit of
regeneration abide in him that is unregenerate for a long space after the
Spirit first enters into him? To this I say that the infant is alive and
regenerate seminally, and initially, in respect of the root and principle of
life, but not actually in respect of the particular habits actually wrought in
him. An infant may be said to be alive so soon as he has received a soul;
yet he cannot be said to be alive actually in respect of a rational life till
the soul be able to act in a rational manner. Of such an one we cannot say
he is not alive, because he has in him the reasonable soul the principle of
life: nor yet can we say that he lives a rational life, till his reasonable
soul do put it self forth to rational actions. Therefore, all men conclude
such an infant to be alive potentially, and not actually, in respect of that
rational life whereof we now speak. The same distinction will solue the
present Argument: and so is it resolved by all that touch upon the point, as I
have often showed. That which I have urged out of St Augustine, Calvine, Peter
Martyr, D. Whitaker, and Daneus, I will not rehearse in this place, which yet I
might do, in so large a Treatise, for their sakes that cannot easily carry all
with them. Only I will add one passage more of Daneus, not before mentioned:
Denique per baptismum infantes Christo inseruntur, quia natura sua a Deo sunt
alieni. Baptizantur autem non vt statim suae in Christo regenerationis fructus
eda^t qui sint nobis conspicui sed vt interim foederis sigillo obsignati and
donati Deo conserventur et maneant. Nam quum tempus advenerit sui baptismi
fructus proserent eosde^ quos and ii qui iam adulti baptizatisunt. De sacram.
lib. 5. cap. 35.
Infants by Baptism are ingraffed into Christ, forasmuch as by nature they are
aliens from God. And they are baptized, not that they should presently express
the fruits of their regeneration in Christ, which might be conspicuous to us:
but that in the mean season till they come to years being confirmed with the
seal of the Covenant, and given unto God, they might be preserved and remain
unto his use. For when the time shall be accomplished they will bring forth the
same fruits that they do who are baptized in riper age. There is then in them
a seed of grace howeuer it do not presently spring up and bear fruit: and in
respect of that seed we say they are not wholly without life and regeneration;
as the smoking flax, so soon as it begins to smoke, is not wholly without
fire in it, although as yet, it be not wholly kindled by that fire.

This is, I confess, a great secret, a deep mystery of His whose works are
unsearchable, and his ways, past finding out. Howbeit, the
incomprehensiblenesse of it, must not make us to deny it; unless we resolve to
believe no more then we see, or can fathom with the short line of our weak
reason, which were a sinful resolution that would breed many August. de peccat
Mer. and Remiss. l 3. c 8 Ecce vnde plerunque convalescit error, cum homines
idonei sunt bis rebus interrogandis, quibus intelligendis non sunt idonei.
Idem, de bono persev. c. 14. Nunquid ideo negandum est quod apertum est, quia
compreh^ndi non potest qu^d occultum est? N^quid, imp^^m proptere a dicturi
sumus, quod i^a esse se^ ^p^cimus, non ita esse, quoniam cur ita sit non
p^ssumus inveni^e?
errors both in judgment and practice, of dangerous and desperate consequence.
There are works as strange in nature, yet no man makes doubt of the truth of
them, because he cannot come to see how they are done. Therefore we must take
heed how we deny the spirit to be in infants to work in such a strange
manner, forasmuch as the works of grace, are more strange and admirable then
any work in nature. The wise King wisely gives a check to their curiosity that
are too bold in prying into the secrets of God, and that by posing them in a
point of Natural Philosophy: As thou know not what is the way of the
spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even
so thou know not works of God who makes all. Eccles. 11.5.

3 I answer that howeuer I will not affirm any actual grace to be,
ordinarily, in infants; yet we may often times see strange and admirable sparks
of grace, and footsteps of the spirit, in diverse infants, long before they come
to any ability of discourse: so as for ought we know, the elect might
ordinarily attain to actual Regeneration much sooner then many of them do,
if there were that care taken of them by parents, that ought to be, in
catechizing and training them up in their infancy, in the way that they should
walk: for so, would they not forget it when they be old, if Solomon mistook
not. (And how could he mistake in that, which the spirit himself dictated
unto him.) That part therefore of the objection which says that, for many
years they make opposition to all grace, etc. howeuer it make a great noise,
and seem to aggrauate the matter much against this Position: yet has it in it
more sound, than weight For, the reason why so many stand out so long, is not
always or ordinarily from the want of efficacy in their Baptism; but, from
defect of education. Either they lived not under careful, faithful, religious
parents that would have been diligent with all their might to teach them the
fear of the Lord, by all ways and means of instruction and good example, to
pray continually for them, to watch over them narrowly to keep them from evil
company and evil practices; or else, they wanted a powerful Ministry; or
both. And if they want either, the other, for the most part, does little good.
Cast your eyes upon such as have not wanted for either of the former helps;
and tell me how many you can find of those that ever come to good at all (in
respect of the best good,) who do not, ordinarily, take in Religion and grace
insensibly even from their tender youth: so as many of them cannot, with their
best search, find out, directly, the time of their Conversion, although they
cannot (when they be themselves, free from temptation) deny themselves to be
converted. As for such as have enjoyed the former means, and yet fly out into
debauched courses, they seldom or never return to God at all; and therefore
no marveile if they stand out long, notwithstanding the helps afforded; for
they, by this, declare themselves not to be of the number of Gods elect; and
so, not of those in whom baptism is so efficacious as here we affirm it to
be. And as for such as stand out longest, and come in at last, you shall,
ordinarily, observe them to be such as had ungodly, or careless parents; or,
no sound and powerful Ministry; or, had the reins too soon let loose unto
them; or were poisoned with bad examples of Parents, governors, or companions,
or, were not instantly plucked out of some delightful sins, ere they were
rooted in their wickedness, by long custom, etc. And then, what wonder if
they live many years without apparent conversion and actual regeneration.
Notwithstanding, if you ask some of these, after they be converted, whether in
the time of their rebellion, they had not sometimes strong conflicts in
themselves to break off their wickedness, and to come in; and whether they
did not sometimes find inward risings of heart against their secret sins,
even for the very filthiness of them, as well as for the danger; and they
will, for the most part, answer, yea, if they had had the grace to accept and
follow those good motions within them: but they found the contrary, that after
such inward stirrings unto conversion, their lusts have presently raged and
burst out more strongly, than at other times. This is the confession, in
substance of diverse of them; which shows them not to be wholly destitute of
the spirit, even when the flesh was most violent and insolent in them, before
actual conversion. And this observation (seconded by others of far greater
experience) is mentioned here merely to still their cry which tell us that,
many are unconverted thirty, forty, fifty years; and is it likely say they,
the spirit should be all that while in them, and never actually convert them
unto God. Although he can work without means; yet that he might grace those
of his own institution, he does not, usually work without them, when he
vouchsafes them. And when he uses them he does not always perform the work
at the first, or second, or many assaies of his Ministers; because he would
have us to know upon whom, after Paul has planted and Apolloes watered, the
increase depends.

By all that have been spoken, we now see that it is not universally true;
which the Mayor Proposition supposes: viz. that the spirit must either work
actual faith and regeneration, or else be confessed to be idle: and that it is
of no validity which the Minor assumeth and affirms: viz, that in infants
ordinarily no such work appears, but rather the contrary for many years
after baptism: For, it is possible for the spirit to work, although he do
not work actual grace: nor is it material, that such grace does not appear
because there is no necessity that any particular habit of grace should be at
that time in them at all. And therefore I conclude that this Objection is of no
strength, forasmuch as it concludes nothing against the point in Question, the
premises being thus examined and searched to the bottom.

6 Objection. The very seed of grace cannot 1 Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of
God sins not: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is borne of God. But in infants baptized, till they be actually regenerated,
sin reigns. Therefore the spirit is not given unto them as the seed of
after grace?

Answer. Mayor proposition I answer three ways.

1 There is an ambiguity in the word, seed. For, seed may be taken two ways,
Actiuely, and Passiuely. 1 Actiuely for some actual efficient principle of
grace going before both the acts and habits of particular graces: which, (as in
the natural, so in the spiritual seed) we may term seed seeding: Even as
those first plants or herbs, in the Creation, were termed herbs (...)
seminificantem semen, vt vertit. Arias Montanus.
seeding seed. Genesis 1.29. 2 Passiuely, for that yield, or fruit which is
produced by the active principle thereof, which may be called seed seeded. as
in the former place of Genesis 1. may also be seen. Now, when, with other
Divines, I say that, the spirit is given to elect infants as the seed of future
actual grace, I speak not of seed passive, or produced; but of seed active
or produceing a further seed in due time and season. But contrarily, the
Apostle S. John speaks of seed in the other sense, which imports at least the
particular habits of sanctifying and saving grace infused by this seeding seed
whereof we treat. This is manifest in the words of the Text; Whosoever is borne
of God, sins not: that is, whosoever is actually regenerated, does not
commit sin: as all expound the place: and the reason is given, because his
seed abides in him, which is no other then the habits of grace infused by the
spirit, as all acknowledge. Therefore this proposition speaks not to the
point, because it understands by seed, another thing from that we mean in
our assertion. I speak not of seed in the ear, but of the first seed cast
into the ground, that afterward yields and brings forth the blade, the stalk,
the ear, and all that grows upon it.

2 I answer that I cannot see what absurdity would follow by granting that
initiall regeneration may stand with actually reigning sin: because howeuer a
man has by the first principle of Regeneration a possibility of making
opposition against sin when that possibility comes into Act: yet he is not by
that possibility alone enabled, for the present, actually to resist sin,
(which resistance is a fruit of actual conversion) no more than a man is
enabled actually to reason and discourse so soon as the reasonable soul is
infused, before his senses do actually exercise themselves upon their proper
objects, and thereby give occasion to the rational faculty to exercise it
self. Therefore, as in an infant which may afterward prove a very wise man,
the principle of reason may and does consist with actual folly, till that
child have his senses excercised to discern between good and evil, so, in
the same infant, the first principle of regeneration (which we term initiall
or I call initiall regeneration potentiall, in respect of the habits and acts
of particular graces.
potentiall Regeneration) may stand with such sins that in outward appearance
(for ought any man can discern) are noe other the^ reigning sins, which a
man gives himself up to the commission of, without reluctation or fear. The
ground, we had but now. No man either does or can make actual opposition
against any sin, as sin, from any inward principle of grace, till he be
actually a new creature, endowed with habitual and actual graces of the
spirit: as appears by that very text now urged against me. For, who is he
that gives not himself to sin, but he that is borne of God?

3 I add further, that if this objection were of force against infants, it
would be much more such, against persons of years actually converted. For, it
would prove that they have not the spirit constantly abiding in the^, because
it does not, in great falls evidently show it self at all: but sin seems
to prevail so far, as that (for ought any lookers on, or themselves can
judge) the flesh has gotten full dominion over them. For, they often sin
without any apparent reluctation at all. What appearance of the spirit in Peter
when through the strength of fear, and weakness of faith, he not only denied
his Master and Savior again and again, against his conscience; but (thinking
thereby the better to save himself, took liberty to show himself in that
exigent a man of another stamp and disposition, than Christ and his Disciples
were of, and fell to rageing, to swareing and cursing; when as no man, or thing
(unless his own fear and cowardice) urged him to it? You will say, that was
a sudden unexpected surprizall, and so could not be a premeditated sin; and,
he was no sooner down, but he got up again. True: but this satisfies not.
For, in the carriage of that business, as short as that time was, what grace
appeared? What degree of evil was wanting to make that, in all outward
appearance, a Reigning sin? You will say (which indeed is the truth, if S.
Austine, Chrysostom, and Theophilact, (as De Pontif. Romans lib. 4. cap. 3.
Bellarmine himself shall witness, be not deceived) the spirit at that time
suspended the act of grace, and lay as it were eclypsed in him, to make him
(who before hand boasted so much of his valor,) the better to know himself.
This I acknowledge to be true: but this will not serve their turns, who must
ever see the fruits of the spirit, or deny him to be there.

If this of Peter, will not serve for instance sufficient to show that sin
may (as far as men can judge by looking on) so far prevail, as that it may
seem to the beholders, to reign in some that are (questionless) actually
regenerated and renewed, because that was but a sudden assault, and lasted but
for a small space: Then what say you to David? For, howeuer his adultery grew
from a sudden temptation occasionally objected, yet his sending for Vriah, the
making of him drunk, the murdering of him in the battle, and the drawing of
Ioab into the conspiracy, were deep premeditated plots: and he wallowed in all
this mire and blood (as most Divines think) for the space of almost a year
before he recovered himself, and ere the spirit stirred in him, sensibly, to
any purpose again. What show of the spirit here? What opposition? What was
here wanting of reigning sin? You will say, there might be inward combats? I
deny not what might be: but yet show me what appeared. If no work appeared in
all that time, it is then possible that the spirit may lie hid, and that for a
long time together, in some persons actually converted, and not be discerned. I
know David had the spirit all that while, as appears by that prayer of his;
take not thy holy spirit from me. Psalm. 51.11. But I deny any sensible working
of it that was able to difference David, by any outward carrage, in any man's
apprehension (I except not his own) from a mere carnal man that ever made
any formal show of religion, in the interim between his fall and recovery.

If any man reply; It is perhaps true that David lay in that miserable estate,
for so long a time as you mention: but what is that to so many years as even
the elect lie in sin, before their actual conversion? To this I must
answer, 1 That if the spirit lie hid a year, a week, or but an hour, he
may (possibly) ly hid twenty years. That which the objection drives at is, to
prove that, such a thing is not possible to be done at all: for, that which is
possible to be, for a short time, is not impossible, for a longer space. 2. It
is more for the spirit to lie hid in a person actually converted, for the space
of a year together, than for him to lie hid in any other, forty years: as it
is more for a wise man to play the fool once; then for a child, or a fool, to
do nothing else. 3. If you think the instance of David not to come home
enough, then (for a close) take also that of Solomon, his son. He lay years
enough, ere he repented. He fell from God to flat Idolatry, and that not on the
sudden, but by slow degrees: when he was in it, he lay still for long
continuance, in so much that some make a doubt whether ever he recovered. Yet
those men that do oppose this position, will not, I think, deny Solomon to be
regenerated by the spirit before that fall, or to have the spirit still abiding
in him in all that time of his fall, to restore him again. Therefore it cannot
reasonably be denied that, forasmuch as the spirit may and sometimes does lie
hid in persons actually regenerate, for a long time together not showing it
self apparently in opposition against great and scandalous sins; it is not
impossible for the spirit to be in an infant elected from the time of his
Baptism until his actual conversion without any such manifest opposition
against sin, as may give the person in whom he is, any ground to believe that
the dominion of sin is taken away from out of his soul. So much, in answer
to the Major.

2 To the Minor Proposition (that, in infants sin reigns, till they be
actually regenerated) I answer that there is a Dominion in the full strength,
and a Dominion that is in the wane, like that of a Prince who yet is possessed
of his kingdom which daily waxes (like the house of Saul) weaker and weaker.
There is a Dominion which is more intense and in the highest degree: and there
is a dominion which is more remiss, and improperly so called. This distinction
has footing in the scripture, which says of some that sin shall not have
dominion over them: and the reason is added, because they are under grace, Romans
6.14. this is a Dominion in the highest degree. It says unto others, let not
sign reign in your mortal bodies, Romans 6.12. This is a Dominion in a more
remiss degree, as sin is taken for a masterly tyrant that has, by want of
vigilance in a Christian, gotten the upper hand in some particular. Unto this
they to whom he wrote were subject, if they looked not the better about them.
For the Apostle himself, even after his actual regeneration, complains that
sin was yet a Law in his members warring against the law of his mind, and
bringing him into captivity to the law of sin. Romans 7.23. Now, in that he
calls the power of sin by the name of a Law, that did captivate him, he
plainly intends to give us notice of some kind of sovereignty which sin,
at some times, exercised over him, after his conversion. This will appear by
comparing this phrase with the very same in ver. 1.2. The Law has dominion
over a man as long as he lives. For the woman which has an husband is bound
by the law to her husband so long as he lives: but if her husband be dead,
she is loosed from the law of her husband: that is, from the power and
sovereign authority, which in the family her husband did exercise over her. So
that where there is a law in force, and exercising it self, there is a kind
of dominion: for none can set up a law, and give such life unto it, but such as
have sovereign authority And if it might be thus in Paul; then much more, in
the Romans to whom he wrote Therefore he bids them to take heed and not to
let it reign that they should obey it in the lusts thereof. And yet they were
regenerated; for he says, they were under grace (ver. 14.) and so under
grace, that he assures them, sin should not have dominion over them; as
there he speaks: that is, not an absolute and complete dominion, which cannot
stand with saving grace; although they were in danger to be under some kind of
Dominion of it, notwithstanding Grace. So then, there is an absolute dominion
which cannot consist with saving grace: and there is an improper and more
remiss dominion, which may be for a while, in the same subject, with saving
grace. If any man ask me, what that absolute dominion is; in a word I conceive
it be this; viz: Such a complete sovereignty over the whole man as makes him to
be totus, totum, in toto peccato, whole, wholly, in the whole sin he gives
himself up unto, wittingly, willingly, wilfully; desiring he may ever live in
that sin and enjoy his fill of it, that there were no law forbidding it, nor
God to punish it; and, although there be both, yet he will follow it still,
and cannot for his heart so much as get free of the love of it and desire after
it, but will part with any thing rather then with his sin. This, in
scripture, is called, presumptuous sin. Psalm 19. But this no man can
warrantably affirm to be in Elect persons after their baptism, even before
their actual regeneration. And I think if I should deny the proposition, they
that frame it had need to take day enough to prove it. For to tell me that,
they commit many gross and scandalous sins; that, they be some of them (as
Paul was) persecutors and blasphemers, does not sufficiently prove that sin
has any absolute Dominion over them, ordinarily, although, in respect of their
outward carriage, no man can discern their sins to be other then reigning
sins: for so, you know, do many sins committed by such as are actually
renewed. Therefore their outward carriage alone is not enough to warrant such a
censure of them. That sin reigns and domineereth as a tyrant over them, in
a more remiss degree than he does in reprobates, is too too evident by daily
leading them into captivity to the law of sin. This is not denied But for any
man to say that the elect, after their baptism till their actual conversion
and regeneration, are under that absolute and complete dominion of sin, that
the devils and reprobates are, is a thing which may be said, but will never be
proved. For, suppose the spirit did not work any general dispositions and
inclinations unto grace in infants (which yet the soundest divines affirm) yet
it is something that there is that in them which will so far abate the edge
of the malice of sin that they cannot sin that great sin against the Holy
Ghost No elect person can (according to the principles which the adversaries to
this point and I agree in,) sin that sin against the Holy Ghost; as the
opposites will freely confess: for, if he could, how were it possible for him
to be at all converted and saved? And if, notwithstanding his want of actual
regeneration, he cannot sin against the Holy Ghost, I demand then, what is it
that keeps him from that sin? Is it not the spirit that restraines and
curbes the malice of his corruption against God and his grace? But you will say
this restraint is common to reprobates as well as to the elect, for the most
part; and therefore I may (say you) as well prove the spirit to be in the one,
as in the other; if this be all the ground I have for it. To which I reioyne
that there is a maine difference between the elect and reprobate: viz. that
the Elect not only does not, but cannot commit that sin: for, the spirit
keeps him that he may be a vessel of grace and honor: but the reprobates
are restrained, not by the spirit of Christ; but rather by the powerful
providence of God merely that they might not hurt the Elect, as otherways
they would do. And yet notwithstanding that restraint, they are never
converted nor saved; which shows that they never had the spirit of Christ. Nor
is there in the elect so near approaches to that sin, as there is in
reprobates. But of this I shall have some occasion to speak more afterward;
therefore I spare to add more thereof in this place; praying the reader to
remember that, I have sundry other grounds beside this; so as, what ever
becomes of this, the point it self cannot suffer by it, so long as the other
stand vnbattered. And thus much of this sixth Objection.

CAP. 10. 6 Objections more against the maine position, answered.
I Have in the former Chapter given answer to such objections as are thought
to be of cheifest rank, and to make most strongly against the maine tenent
here discussed. In performance whereof, I have not (God is witness) strained my
wits to set a show upon any one passage Which has not substance in it; so
far as I am able to judge between substance and shadows: but have dealt
heartily and syncerely throughout, to the full satisfaction of mine own
conscience, and I hope to the content of others also that are not studious of
parts, but of the truth. I might therefore justly demand my quietus est, and
crave a discharge here; because the maine work is over, and those objections
that follow after, are of less weight. But, because I am willing to give every
man an answer to the least appearance of an Argument against this position, as
well as to those of more strength and substance; I will in this chapter add
answers to all the rest that ever I could yet see, or read, or hear of: so as
no man shall have cause either to complain that I have slighted him by not
giving answer to his objections; or to triumph over my silence, as if, in
that, I did acknowledge his reasons to be unanswerable.

7 Octiection. What circumcision was to the Romans 7.14 I was a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and injurious. 1 Timothy 1.13. and in Tit. 3.3. he puts himself among
the sort of unhallowed persons: for we our selves, says he, were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice, and
envy, hateful, and hateing one another. Therefore, the spirit is not,
ordinarily, given in baptism, no not to the elect?

I Answer. Mayor: then, to the Minor Proposition in order, thus.

1 To the mayor; that it may be understood three ways, and it holds true but
only in one of the three. For Circumcision may be said to be the same with
baptism, either in respect of the substance which both do lead unto: viz
Christ's blood and spirit, or in respect of the manner of representation; or
lastly, in respect of the measure of grace conferred. The proposition holds
true only in the first of these three. And even in that, it must be considered
that, the Apostles calls Circumcision a seal of the righteousness which is by
faith Rom: 4.11. that is, of that righteousness which the Gospel proclaims,
and not of that which is expected by the law. Now, the seal of righteousness
unto the elect, is not the outward ceremony alone, but the inward grace annexed
thereunto, and exhibited and conferred therewith. And the seal wherewith they
are sealed, is the earnest of the spirit in their hearts. 2 Cor. 1.22. If
therefore the elect were sealed in Circumcision, it follows that they received
the spirit. As for the manner of representing the inward grace of the
sacrament, and for the measure of grace conferred in the sacrament, I doubt not
to say with Judicious Lib. 4. Instit. cap. 14. sect. 22. nec non in Antidoto.
Calvin, (forasmuch as Cum Calvino integerrimo Theolog. respondeo: vetera
sacramenta vmbras dici, non quod non omnino, Christum representarent, sed quod
minus clare and significanter id facerent, quam nostra, and quod in nostris
vberior spiritus gratia se proserat quam in illis Whitak. de sacram. in
genequest. 5. cap. 2.
D. Whitaker has so answered before me, and calls Calvin a most complete
Divine, for so saying,) the sacraments of the old Testament were called
shadows, not because they did not at all represent Christ: but because they
did it less clearly and significantly, than ours do; and because there is a
more plentiful measure of grace of the spirit conferred in ours, then was in
them. The Mayor proposition then comes short of what it should; because it
ought to affirm that, there is no more efficacy in baptism, in respect of the
measure of grace conferred, than was of old, in circumcision: which, both Mr
Calvin and Dr Whitaker do deny. That proposition therefore, proves nothing
worth.

2 I deny the Minor: viz: that, in circumcision the spirit was not ordinarily
given to the Elect, notwithstanding the instance of blessed Paul, For,

1 It is no good arguing; Paul had not the spirit, in circumcision; therefore
none of the Elect did ordinarily then receive it. They that deny our maine
position, will not deny that any at all do receive the spirit. The only thing
they take offense at is, that I say, this is ordinary in the baptism of the
elect. For; say they, some particular cases, do not prove an ordinary
practice. Now then, I retort their own rule upon them. What if Paul had not
the spirit? Does this prove that none at all have him? He that says, the
spirit is ordinarily given, but not, always; may say true, notwithstanding one
or two instances, wherein it falls out otherwise. If they like not that I
should from the particular instance of John Baptist, infer that, all are
sanctified in the womb: what reason have they to conclude from one example,
that the thing in not ordinarily done at all. viz: Paul had it not therefore,
ordinarily, none have it. This is but trifling and unequal dealing,

2 I say, that I will not doubt to maintain that, Paul (who says of himself
that, God separated him from his mothers womb, Gal. 1.15.) did receive the
spirit in circumcision, notwithstanding any thing to the contrary in any of
those places alleged for confirmation of the Minor proposition. For, let us
examine them, and we shall find that they fall short of proving that which
they are produced for.

1 That place in Romans 7. (I am carnal and sold under sin;) is confessed by
all Orthodox Divines to be spoken in the person of a man actually regenerated;
to show, what he is, in part, even after such his Regeneration, in respect of
the flesh lusting against the spirit, and leading him oft-times, into captivity
to the Law of sin. And so this confirms what I formerly affirmed in answer
to the sixth Objection, touching some kind of reigning sin that the
regenerate are not wholly freeed from. The dominion of sin in the regenerate
(which is but improperly called a Dominion) may be distinguished from the
proper dominion of sin in reprobates, by the insta^ce in two men swimming in
a strong tide one swimming against the tide the other with it. They are both
carried down the stream by the strength of the water, but one strives against
it even when he is most violently carried away with it, the other is carried
away and never strives but puts out all his strength to swim along with the
tide willingly and wilfully, with delight and desperate resolution.
For, in respect of the victory of sin over them, at some times, in some
particulars, sin may be said to reign; because it has so gotten the upper
hand, that it leads them captive: yet it does not absolutely reign, because
they do not freely and wholly give themselves up unto it, without any desire to
change Lords. They are sold under sin, but yet they do not, as Ahab, sell
themselves to work wickedness. They are overcome; yet they obey not willingly,
but only unwillingly suffer, in respect of the part regenerate. In the same
sense also, the same Apostle calls them carnal. 1. Cor 3.3. whom but a little
before ( ver: 1.) he had pronounced babes in Christ. This place therefore
proves not Paul to be without the spirit, in his circumcision: no more then it
proves him to be destitute thereof even after his actual Regeneration.
Wherefore, now I turn this weapon back upon the Obiectors themselves, and
urge it thus against them: If the spirit may be in such as are carnal and sold
under sin, then he may be in elect infants, although carnal and sold under
sin. For if he may be yet in part, carnal, whom no man will deny to have the
spirit: the spirit may be in elect infants that are not, after Baptism, under
an absolute dominion of sin, as has been before proved. So far as there
is any flesh not totally subdued, so far there is a want of the spirit even
in a person regenerated: therefore so far as there is the least abatement of
the absolute Dominion of sin, there is the spirit notwithstanding that the
party be yet so far carnal, as that he is sold under sin, and led captive to
the law of sin in the general course of his conversation, till actual
regeneration be wrought within him.

2 That place in 1. Tim. 1.13. (where Paul says, J was a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and injurious,) proves not Paul to be utterly void of the spirit,
till his actual Regeneration: for if it does, it must be, either because the
facts were so heinous as cannot agree to a regenerate man; or, because he
committed them with such a witting malice, as cannot subsist with the spirit of
God, in the same subject.

1 For the quality of the facts; David, after his conversion, committed as
great sins, for kind and haynousnesse, as ever Paul did in his kind, before
his conversion. What greater did Paul commit, then Adultery, Drunkenness, and
murder committed by David? Now, if the spirit were in David notwithstanding so
many crying sins at once (especially in a time of war, when, above all
other times, he should have kept himself from every wicked thing, Deuteronomy. ^3.9.)
why might he not be in Paul? If you say that, to kill a Christian as a
Christian, that is, because he is a Christian, is a greater sin, then to
commit any other murder. I answer that it is so indeed, if the Persecutor do
willingly murder a Christian, knowing him to be such, and doing it out of
malice to Christ and his religion. Otherwise, not. Let us therefore search a
little further into the particular of Paul, and we shall find.

way which he blasphemed and persecuted, was the truth. He made conscience of
the Law of God, so far forth as he knew it to be the Law, Phil. 3.6. and
was zealous toward God, Act. 22.3. even before his conversion. It was a blind
zeal of the Law that made him to persecute the Gospel which he understood
not; and not any malice to God. So it follows in that very Text now urged
against me: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly. Yea further he
professes that, he did no more then what he thought himself bound in
conscience to do, merely in obedience unto God. For, says he, J verily
thought with my self that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of
Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26.9. And upon this ground, he did all those things,
wherewith he so deeply charge himself: Now, if David that committed as
great sins for kind, and greater, in regard of circumstances, (for he did
it wittingly, willingly, with premeditation, knowing very well that he ought
not to have done any thing of that he did) shall be allowed to have the spirit,
even at that very time; with what reason can we deny the spirit to St Paul
when he did those things, which in that text of 1. Tim. 1.13. he so much
bewaileth and condemns in himself; for as much as he protests that all
this was but through ignorance of the truth, and blind zeal toward God and
the truth, doing nothing wittingly either against God or his conscience, but
only that which he erroniously supposed would be acceptable unto God. All this
therefore, makes for me, and no way against me.

3 As for that place in Tit 3.3. which is thought to make strongest against me,
it is as weak as those other two already examined. We were sometimes foolish,
etc. says the Apostle. When was that? After Circumcision, say some But how
does that appear? Those to whom he writes were never circumcised, for they
were Gentiles. Nor is there one syllable of his own Circumcision, nor any
circumstance of the Text that requires us so to understand it. But, he himself
was circumcised? True: yet there is no mention in that place, that he was such
after circumcision, as that he could not have the spirit at all in him. He only
shows what he, and they, and all men are by nature, before their effectual
calling, or rather before their first initiation into Christ.

It will be replied, that this place shows what he was even after
Circumcision: for it contains a confession of sundry actual sins which must
needs be committed after his circumcision, because he was circumcised the
eight day after his birth, at which age he could not commit those actual
sins? To this I answer that, he might be guilty of committing all those
sins there reckoned up, and yet not wholly destitute of the spirit; as has
been proved before* If the spirit may be in such as are not actually
converted, they may commit many gross sins, in their course of life. And in
such he may be, notwithstanding the commission of such sins, since they may
sometim^s commit as gross sins who are actually converted; as we saw but now
in the instance of David and others. I never affirmed (as the Objection drawn
from this Text would suppose) that the spirit is so given either in
Circumcision, or in Baptism, as to keep the elect from actual sins; it is
enough that the spirit takes off that extremity of malice which is to be found
in the sins of such as are not elected.

But happily, there may be more pregnant evidence in the words following: viz:
in ver. 4.5.6.7. I am content to join issue here also. The words are these.
But after that the love and kindness of God our Savior toward man appeared;
not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us. By what? By the lauer of regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that
being justified freely by his grace, we should be made heirs according to
the hope of eternal life. And what of all this? Does any of this prove that
Paul had not the spirit in his Circumcision? Yes, you will say, it does. For
Paul herein declares how, and when, he and the rest of whom he there speaks,
were regenerated: viz: in their Baptism, of which they were partakers, not
till they were of ripe age, so as by faith they apprehended the inward grace,
and so came to be partakers of the spirit. But does this place prove that Paul
had not the spirit before his baptism? I trow not; for then who wrought in him
that faith to apprehe^d the grace of his baptism? Rather therefore it proves
the contrary, that he received it in his circumcision: for it is plain, he had
it before. And if he had it before, why not in his Circumcision? No, may some
man say; not so for in Acts 9.17. Ananias deals with him as with a mere
carnal man wholly destitute of grace, and tells him that God had sent him to
him that, he might be filled with the holy Ghost: and, it follows in the next
place, that, he was baptized, which shows that he had not the Holy Ghost
before that time. But to this I answer breefly that, this proves not that he
had not the spirit, in any measure, before that time: for, it is not said, that
God had sent Ananias unto him that he might receive the Holy Ghost; but that he
might be filled with the Holy Ghost: and that not only unto sanctification but
to the performance of an Apostolical function: for it is afterward added, that
straight way he preached Christ in the Synagogue. ver. 20. Now although he
received the spirit in his circumcision, yet he was not filled with the spirit,
nor was he filled with the spirit in the first instant of his reception of it,
at what time soever he first received it, for the spirit does not work all
his graces at once but by degrees. It may here be remembered what have been
formerly spoken upon that place in Acts 2.38. Saint Peter bids those that were
pricked at their hearts, to repent and be baptized; telling them that, so they
should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Now if they must repent; certainly
they must have the Holy Ghost to enable them hereunto, else they could not
repent. Therefore it must be confessed that their receiving of the spirit in
baptism was no sufficient proof that they were not at all partakers of him
before they were baptized. Before they received him; but more secretly, and
sparingly: now, they received him again; but more solemnly, and plentifully.
And thus we see that none of these places apart or together, no not when they
be wyre drawn to the utmost, have in them any solid proof to make good the
Minor proposition, that the spirit was not given in circumcision: and so we
have overthrown this argument also; without the least prejudice to our
position.

8. Objection. Those places of scripture that speak of baptism, do usually
speak of the spirit given before baptism; as that in Acts 10.44. the Holy
Ghost fell on all them that heard the word: and then afterward it follows in
verse. 47. Can any man forbid water, that th^se should not be baptized that have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? or else they speak of Faith or
repentance going before baptism which is equivalent to the former speech: for
it supposes a reception of the spirit before baptism. Therefore, baptism was
not intended for the conferring of the spirit; nor can the places of Scripture
brought to prove it, be sufficient proof of it, but rather of the contrary.

Answer. spirit before baptism. Howbeit that place in the 10. of the Acts is
improperly alleged for it; because it speaks of an extraordinary bestowing of
the spirit upon such as Peter preached unto, in respect of the gift of tongues,
as appears in verse. 45.46. where it is said that, they of the circumcision
which believed, were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on
the gentiles also was powered out the gift of the Holy ghost: for they heard
them speak with tongues, and magnified God. Notwithstanding, I say, It is
manifest that faith and repentance were to precede the baptism of such as were
of years, at least the public and solemn profession of those graces was to
be made by them, before they were baptized. Yet, as not only Saint Vide supra
in cap. 7.
Ambrose, and Saint Quaest: 84. super Levit. and quaest. 33. in Number.
Augustine, and after them Instit* lib. 4. cap. 16.
Calvin well speaks,) they received the spirit in Baptism more solemnly,
which they had received more secretly before. They being of years, ought to
express their faith; therefore there was a necessity of their receiving of the
spirit before Baptism. But this concludes not that, therefore it must needs be
so in infants also; forasmuch as in them actual faith is not required; nor yet
that, therefore elect infants do not receive the spirit in baptism; because
there is no need of faith to receive the spirit, but only need of the spirit
to work faith in due time.

2 I say that howeuer some places do suppose the spirit to be given before
baptism, yet that proves not that therefore those places of scripture which I
have alleged, do prove no such thing as I would infer thence; because I
have not brought one of those places for a proof, which mention actual faith
and repentance, forasmuch as they concern persons of years only. Now this
objection would have the world believe that I have taken up some of those
places, for my use, which speak clearly of faith and repentance going before
baptism: which is not so. And so it does cast an unjust aspertion upon me, and
not give any blow to the point it self.

3 I never affirmed that infants do not at all receive the spirit before their
baptism; but only that, Baptism is the first instrument or means applied for
their first solemn receipt of the spirit, that may be taken notice of by us; as
also for their first manifest initiation and engraffing into the body of
Christ. Admit that they had the spirit before, yet it follows not that they
receive him not also in baptism, in respect of confirmation thereof, if not in
respect of a further degree and measure of his grace. The Holy Ghost descended
upon Christ in his baptism: yet no man will say Christ had not the spirit
before he was baptized. They in Acts 2. before mentioned were bid to repent
before they were baptized, and no doubt they did so, which yet could not be
without the spirit, as I have often said: And yet for all that, The Apostle
assured them that in Baptism they should receive the Holy Ghost. What lets
then, why elect infants should not do so too? I conclude therefore that, in
persons of years the spirit must go before, to qualify them with actual
grace thereby to make them capable of the inward grace of baptism: and to
elect infants also, the spirit may be given before baptism: but yet both unto
the one and unto the other he is given again in baptism, in respect of the
more solemn confirmation thereof unto them: so as those places of scripture
that prove the spirit to be given before baptism, do not disprove him that
says, the spirit is given in baptism.

9 Objection. Jf there be no difference between an heir and a servant, an
elect child and one not elected, till they come to years, and be effectually
called by the word, then the spirit is not given to elect infants, in their
baptism. But the Antecedent is true; for Saint Paul says it in express
terms. Gal. 4.1. No^ I say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, d
ffereth nothing from a seru^nt, though he be Lord of all; but is under Tutors
and Governors until the time appointed of the Father. Therefore, the
Consequent, that the spirit is not given to elect infants, in their baptism,
is true also?

Answer. 1 I grant the Mayor, inwardly by some se^ret work of the spirit,
although no outward work appear; as has been proved before.

2 I deny the Minor. for, between the elect and reprobate there may be an
inward difference, notwithstanding the place brought to confirm it. For that
text is so miserably drawn awry, that any one may discern it at the first
casting of his eye upon that which follows in the same place, so as I hold
not this Argument, worthy of an Answer. The Apostle intends not there, to show
the difference between the elect and reprobate, in their infancy; nor to
declare that, then they differ when they come to age, by the actual conversion
of the one, and the final impenitency of the other: but, as Mr Perkins upon
the place well says; The Apostle uses a similitude borrowed from the Civil
Law, and it may be framed thus. Heirs in their minority live in subjection to
Tutors and Governors; but when they are of riper years, at the appointment of
their parents, they are at liberty. Even so the people of God, before Christ,
were in their infancy, under the law, as under a Tutor: but when the fullness
of time was come, which God had appointed, they entered into the fruition of
their liberty. Thus he. And he speaks truly and pertinently. For, let any man
view the place well, and he shall find the Apostle to have no other purpose at
all, then to prove Christian liberty from Mosaicall ceremonies of the Law, by
the coming of Christ in the flesh, who was the body and substance of all those
shadows; and that until this time, even the true heirs by virtue of Gods
election, were as much bound to the observance of those legal rites; as any
others whatsoever, but now were freed from them, in the fullness of time, by
the coming of Christ. Here is not one syllable touching our present Argument.
Therefore, for pitties sake, I will lay aside this Objection, and go on to the
next.

10 Objection. 10 Object.
That Position that ties the spirit of God to means, can neither be safe nor
true, for as much as Gods spirit is not tied but blows where it lists, Ioh.
3. But such is this Therefore, it cannot be true?

Answer. If we distinguish of the Major, Minor. That position which ties the
spirit of God to means, where God has not first tied and engaged himself,
can neither be safe nor true. God is a free Agent, and cannot be tied by any
creature; and so I admit of that place in Ioh. 3. although, to speak properly
and precisely, it is to be understood, rather of the freedom that Gods spirit
takes to work where, and in what persons he pleases; then, of the time when
he works in those persons. For howeuer this last, in some sense, be true
too, yet it may well deserve to be questioned, whether it be the true meaning
of that Text. But admit this also: yet I say, what formerly I have said in
chap. 3. that there is no danger to say that God is tied, so far forth as he
has vouchsafed to promise to be present in his own Ordinance, ordinarily: nor
is it untrue to say so, nor unwarrantable to expect it, yea and (in an humble
manner) to require it of him. Whatsoever God has promised, we may safely say,
he is tied to perform: for he is tied by that which cannot but hold him: viz:
his own Fidelity. Therefore the Psalmist challenges God as engaged to him,
Psalm. 119.49. Remember the promise unto thy servant, wherein thou have caused
me to put my trust. And God bids his children do it; yea, to command him: Isay
45.11. Thus says the Lord, the Holy One of Jsrael and his Maker; Ask of me
things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands
COMMAND ye me. That is, what ever I have promised, require it, spare not, so
they do it in any humble manner. Now that Position which only affirms God to
be present ordinarily, where he by virtue of his promise has engaged himself
to be, does not lay any unwarrantable tie upon God, but rather gives him the
honor of his fidelity, and puts comfort into his people, by giving them
assurance of it.

Thus having distinguished of the Major and made it appear that there may be
an affirmation safe and true, which says, God is tied or engaged unto some
things, so long as any promise going before can be found to engage him: I come
now to deny the Minor, because how ever that Position which ties God where he
has not tied himself must needs be not only false, but full of presumption
also; yet this position is no way guilty of any such thing. For God has made a
promise to show himself thus gracious in the ordinance of baptism,
ordinarily, when it is administered to elect infants, as the learned Author of
the Commentary upon the Epistle to Titus, expressly avoucheth, saying; here by
virtue of his PROMISE we may expect it, here we may and ought send out the
prayer of faith for it. If any man shall doubt hereof, and demand where any
such promise is to be found; I would refer him to Zach. 13.1. to Math. 3 as
also to the Institution of Baptism, wherein a promise is involued: to Tit.
3.5. wherein a promise is supposed; and, to sundry places more. If the doubting
party rest not satisfied with these, the^ I refer him to the Author himself,
who surely ca^ name some promise for it, else he would never have set down so
much under his hand. He is still alive, and has engaged himself both
privately and publicly to make good any thing written in that Commentary
touching this point. Therefore I leave this work to him, and hasten to another
objection, after I have added one short Advertisement to such as will not be
satisfied either by me, or by him, or by any man else, with any reason. Some
there are, who complain that, howeuer many Scriptures have been alleged by
me and others, to prove that the spirit is given in baptism: yet they cannot
see any one place of Scripture that says directly and in express terms,
that, The spirit is given to elect infants, in Baptism. Show them but that
they say, and they have done. But if they be such as allow of the baptism of
infants, let them satisfy me in another thing, and I will soon give content
to them in their demand. Let them show me where the Scripture speaks, in
express terms, of the Baptism of infants by name, and I will show them an
express text for the communication of the spirit unto elect Jnfants by name,
in their baptism. Here I know they will say that, it is not necessary to
bring express words of Scripture that says the same thing in so many
syllables, but it is enough if it be concluded thence by sound consequence:
and herein they say the truth. Now, if they require that, all Anabaptists
should for ever lay their hands upon their mouths (that have been opened so
freely and erroniously to plead against the baptism of infants) because
however the Scripture says not, in so many words, let Infants be baptized; yet
the thing is grounded on the Scriptures, and may by sound consequence be
sufficiently proved thence: Let them forbear to press me, or any man else to
produce an express Text that names elect Jnfants, so long as the thing is
made good by undoubted and impregnable consequence from many Scriptures
alleged for this purpose And if either I or the Author last above named, in
this kind of proof have failed, let them show us our error, and they shall
find us no Heretics.

11 Object.
11 Objection: That Position which offensiuely trencheth too near upon Popish
error and a^surdity, ought not to be taught and published by faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, although the point should not be altogether untrue.
But so does this, for it seems to ascribe too much to the outward work done,
and is of near affinity with that absurd fancy of the Indelible Character
which Papists talk so much of, and affirm to be imprinted in Baptism.
Therefore, whether the point be true or false, it was ill done to publish it in
such a manner.

Answ: Popery; but upon me also, for publishing of that which, if it be not
Popery, yet comes too near Popery, and so should have been buried in silence.
I answer therefore.

1 To the Major, two ways. 1 by way of protestation. 2 By way of distinction.
First, I protest (although I think I am so well known to all those that take
offense at this particular; that I need not to make such a solemn
protestation) that I do utterly from my heart abhor and renounce all points
of Popery whatsoever, and that, as I have done, so I shall ever endeavor to
confute them, by all the ways and means that possibly I can upon all
occasions. Secondly I distinguish of the present Proposition, that: some things
do, truly and indeed, trench too near upon Popish absurdity, and have such
affinity with them, as that whosoever venteth them, shall give just occasion of
suspicion that he has a Pope in his belly, what ever he has in his mouth, or
pen. And these things, by whomsoever they are vented and published, do give
just occasion of offense, and so do argue great indiscretion, if not a false
heart to the truth, in him that publishes them. Other things there are which
do only seem to trench too near upon Popery, in the opinions of those that
hear or read them, either because they do not, or cannot or will not
understand the difference between those and Popish absurdities. And these,
again, are either Positions, or Actions. As for Actions done, which Actions
have in them no small appearance of evil, in that (in every man's judgment,
that is a looker on) they symbolize with Popish superstition and and no course
being taken to explain and declare, in what sense they are done, and how they
differ from their practice who use the self same Actions in an unlawful
manner, I ingenuously confess that it should be a fault in him that should so
near trench upon Popery, as to use those actions in such a manner: because the
Apostle gives charge abstain from all appearance of evil: 1 These. 5.22. And
the same Apostle professes in the particular of meats offered unto Idols, that
he would eat no flesh while the world stands, whereby he might make his
brother to offend* 1 Cor. 8.13.

But as for Positions, wherein the truth is explained, and the contrary
disclaimed, I must crave leave to be of another opinion. For I cannot be of
their mind who hold that nothing must be delivered which may seem to some
hearers or Readers to trench too near upon Popish absurdity, so long as it be
not indeed a popish absurdity, but the truth; and that the difference between
that truth, and the popish absurdity, to which it is supposed to lean, be so
fully manifested and cleared, as all that are capable of truth and willing to
receive the same, may discern it, if they please. I like not that vain
conceit (which has drawn after it many absurdities indeed; and those, of
dangerous consequence) that we should, in all points, go as far from
Papists and other Heretics, as possibly we can This is that which never did
good; ever did, and will do hurt, when men will take that to be the truth only
which stands in most direct opposition to that which is known and confessed
to be a gross error, for, as in some persons, it is only a degree of heat or
cold over and above the just temper, that makes them of such a poisonous
quality, so as if they be corrected by some other ingredient) they may not only
prove safe, but very useful to the party to whom they are administered; so it
is in many Propositions, which, as they are propounded, may contain some
falsehood in them; yet may be so qualified and bounded as that a small addition,
or substraction might make them pass current, by drawing out all that venom
of falsehood contained in them when they stand without those qualifications
added to them.

If we go any one step, in any one point, from the grossest Heretics in the
world further than mere necessity of truth compeleth, they will soon (and
that justly) open their mouths against us, and complain that, we study, not
so much to maintain the truth as to cross them; and, that it is enough for us
to disclaim any truth, because they hold it. What can follow hence but extreme
obstinacy in such as are out of the way, (and under obloquy for it) when they
shall discern and be able to plead that, we do hold that, a direct
opposition to them in all things, is the best and safest rule to walk by;
whereas they, in the mean time, can make it appear that, howeuer they may be
wide in some degrees from the truth, yet not so many degrees as we would make
the world believe: for, in such and such particulars they can prove it to all
men capable of understanding, that they err not; and yet we will not consent
unto them so far, as every ingenious man will confess them to have truth on
their side? For my part, I will not give such an advantage unto any
aduerversary, but rather hold my self bound to assent unto him, be he Papist,
Familist, Turk, or Jew, in any truth whatsoever: so that I may have liberty to
express my self clearly, how and to what end I hold that truth with him, and
that I disclaim all such uses as he puts that truth abusiuely unto.

Nor do I take up this resolution without warrant, but have vnquarrellable
president for it For mark. Saint Paul who professed that, in matter of
practice, he would be careful not to offend a weak brother, even in those
things which are not in themselves simply unlawful; yet he would not; for any
man's sake, refuse to declare his judgment concerning the lawfulness of the
things that cannot be simply and absolutely condemned, how much soever they have
been, and perhaps still are unlawfully abused in their use. He gives instance
in the matter of meats offered unto Idols, in that 1 Cor. 8. before mentioned.
Some were of opinion that they might be lawfully eaten, being received with
thanksgiving and prayer, and without reference to the Idol, or doubting about
it. Others held the contrary, and were so stiff in their opinion that they not
only refused to eat thereof themselves, but took great offense at others, that
upon any reason whatsoever took more liberty therein, than they did. The
Apostle comes in as an Vmpire between them. He concludes that for matter of
practice he would so far gratify the weak that he would forbear to eat of
such meats: yet first protesting in that very place, that he could not suffer
his judgment to be so far captivated: nor the truth to be so much wronged, as
not to hold the thing lawful in it self. Therefore in point of judgment he
concurred with those that held the truth, but in matter of practice he
professes his dissent from them because they abused their liberty to the
offense of the weak, and so did swerve from the rule of Charity. By which we
see that the abuse of any truth must not make any man unwilling to hold it even
with those that do abuse it, so long as he abstain from the abuse whereof they
are guilty. Therefore my discretion will not be much wounded by this objection;
unless it can appear that this does indeed, as well as in show, trench too
near upon Popish absurdities, as the Minor affirms; which now I come unto.

2 To the Minor I answer, by denying it, and by making good my denial of it.
1. I deny that this assertion of Baptismall regeneration of elect infants, as
it has been before stated, and prosecuted, does trench upon any Popish
absurdity at all. 2 I make my denial good thus. If this assertion be any way
guilty of what it is charged withal, it must be either because it ascribes
such a Physical efficacy (as they term it) to the outward element of water,
after consecration, that the very water should have force in it, ipso facto to
confer the inward grace to every person baptized; at least, to the elect, so
soon as they are sprinkled or washed with it in the name of the Father, and of
the son, and of the Holy Ghost, by virtue of that external work done and
performed outwardly by the Minister: or else because it iumps with, or at least
draws too near to that other absurdity of theirs, touching the impression of
an indelible character upon the soul of every one that is outwardly baptized,
whether he be elected, or not.

1 Of the former it cannot be guilty; because, (as in my preaching of the
point, all that heard me with attention and understanding; so in my publishing
of it thus to the world) all that will vouchsafe to pervse and consider the
second chapter of this treatise, cannot but bear me witness, that I do not
hold, nor ever did affirm, that all that partake of the outward baptism, be
also partakers of the spirit, in it: nor, that the elect themselves do partake
thereof by virtue of the outward work done; or that the water contains in it
the spirit, or has in it any physical effi^acy to convey the spirit, as if
the water were as a channel or conduit pipe through which the spirit passes
unto the souls of elect infants in that ordinance. But I say expressly that the
spirit is given immediately by Christ himself at the same instant wherein the
Minister performs the outward act of baptism. Now the Popish tenent is
directly contrary to all this, as they well know that understand what the
Papists hold in this particular. And it were but an unthrifty wast of time and
paper, to set down the same more at large.

2 It is no less free from the other absurdity of the Indeleble character.
This may be sufficiently evident, by showing their doctrine herein, and
co^paring it with the point in hand. It is very true that the popish schoolmen
speak much and often of this supposed character, which every one that is
baptized, according to their fancy, receives in baptism; and this Character,
they say, can never be blotted out again, in any of those that have once
received it. Howbeit, (as Soto, out of Scotus affirms and confesses) this
doctrine was never known to the Ancients, because neither Lombard nor Gratian,
who took upon them to collect all that the Fathers had written touching
baptism, do make any mention of it. Therefore it appears to be a new device
of the latter schoolmen, hatched after Lombard was dead and rotten. But that
Position which is here defended is of more antiquity in the Church of Christ,
as appears by those testimonies of the Fathers before alleged, to which it
were easy to add many more, if need required.

After that toy was set abroach in the schools, there quickly grew as many
different Opinions about it, as there were Authors and abettors of it. This is
manifest to all that are conversant in their writings, of which the learned De
Sacram. l. 2. cap. 12. etc.
Chameir among many others, have drawn a short survey. And as men differed
about it when they were apart; so they were not able to compose the
differences, when they met together in their Grand Council of Trent it self,
where there was no small stir about it, as we are informed by the Author of
the Page 239.
History of that Council. It was worth the knowing, says he, what thing they
meant by it, and where situated, in such multiplicity of School opinions. Some
made it a quality: and among those were four opinions, according to the four
kinds of qualities: some, a spiritual power: some, an habit or disposition:
others, a spiritual figure: and the opinion that it was a sensible
metaphorical quality, wanted not abettors. Some would have it a real relation:
some, a fabric of the mind, who had somewhat to do to declare how far it
differed from nothing.

The same variety of opinions concerning the subject, was troublesome. Some
placed it in the essence of the soul: some, in the understanding: some, in the
Will. And there wanted not, who gave it place in the hands and tongue. Hierome
of Portugal, a Dominican Friar, thought that the Sacrament did imprint a
spiritual quality before the coming of grace; and that it was of two sorts*
One, which can never be abolished; the other, which may be lost, and regained.
The former was called a Character; the latter, a certain ornament. The
Sacraments which give the first, cannot be reiterated, because their effect
ever remains: the other, may, when their effect is lost. This carried a fair
show, but was not approved of by many, because there was no other Author of
that ornament, but their S. Thomas of Aquine; who also, though he begat it, yet
did not think it worthy of education.

In so much perplexed contrariety of Opinions they durst not conclude expressly,
what that Jndeleble Character was. Yet in their seventh Session Can. 9. they
boldly anathematized all, that, in Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders, shall
say, no indeleble Character is imprinted upon the soul. Nor have their
greatest Champions, Vasquez, Suarez, Bellarmine, Valentian, and others, who
have stood up in the defense of that Council, been able to bring the point to
any head: no, nor yet his Holiness himself, with all his infallibleship, has
vouchsafed to explain his Council, or to help out his Vassalls in defining
precisely what that thing is. Surely, here is need of implicit faith indeed,
when even the very greatest and most admired Grandees of the Church, cannot yet
tell what they hold and believe distinctly herein. It is not to be denied but
that (with much labor) a man might find out those particulars wherein they do
in some sort agree. But they agree rather in declaring negatiuely what it is
not; then in concluding positiuely and affirmatively what the thing is. This I
shall be able to make good out of the industrious collections of Ibid.
Chameir, wherein we shall find that the Papals do agree in these things (if
we may take Bellarmines words for it;) viz:

1 In determining what it is not: viz: that it is not any grace, but a thing
distinct from it, which makes them disposed and capable to receive or
administer things appertaining to Divine Worship. They will not have it to be
faith, justification, regeneration, or the gift of the spirit himself. All
these Bellarmine disclaimes.

2 In determining to whom it is given: viz. to all that receive the Sacraments,
whether worthily or unworthily: so as it is not any thing peculiar to such as
are saved, but common also to such as are damned, who do carry this indeleble
Character with them to Hell it self.

3 In determining in what Sacraments the Character is given: viz: not only in
Baptism, but in Confirmation, and in Orders also; both of which they put into
the number of their Sacraments; as they do also, Marriage, Penance, and
Extreme Unction.

4 In determining in what manner it is conferred: viz, ex opere operato,
merely by virtue of the external administration of those their Sacraments; so
as (if the Papists say true) no man can miss of that supposed Character, so
soon as he partakes of the outward part (I mean, the outward signs) of those
Although I use their manner of speech, in calling Confirmation and Orders, by
the name of Sacraments, as they do: yet I disclaim the error which allows of
any Sacraments of the New Test. properly so called, but only Baptism, and the
Lords Supper. I use their terms, because I am speaking of their Tenets.
Sacraments.

By all this it appears that there is a vast difference between that figment
and Popish absurdity of the indeleble Character, and this position which is
here defended. For, 1. they are yet to seek touching the very substance of the
thing; and howeuer in the general they hold it to be a kind of quality, yet
they will have it to be such as differs from all grace, and from the spirit of
grace. But I affirm clearly and roundly that, it is the spirit of grace that
is given in baptism, which they deny 2. They teach that their Character is
given to all, without exception of any of the reprobates themselves. I affirm
that the spirit is given only unto the Elect,; and, to them, ordinarily, not
always, but that some may and do receive the spirit, before baptism; some,
after it. 3. They teach that there is a Character given in Confirmation, and
Orders, as well as in Baptism I speak only of what is given in Baptism. 4.
They affirm their Character to be given by virtue of the outward work done: I
say the spirit is given only by Christ himself immediately.

Wherefore I conclude that this position does every way so far differ from that
absurdity, that it has no likeness in it thereunto, in any respect at all. I
never taught other thing then that, the spirit is given ordinarily, to elect
Infants, in their baptism, to be the first principle of future grace, and, in
the mean time, to seal them up for Christ. If any please to call this an
Indeleble Character, So Scharp. Cursu Theol. de Bapt. Danaeus de Sacram. lib.
5. cap. 28. Etsi enim in Baptismo, Regio and divino charactere, vt ita loquar,
signatisumus, etc.
I would not be afraid to affirm that in Baptism there is such a thing
ordinarily, given in Baptism to elect infants who are sealed by the holy
spirit unto the day of Redemption; which spirit; is also an ointment that shall
abide with them forever.

12 Object.
12 Objection. This position will, by some, be taken to be of this ill
consequence in carnal Persons, (who naturally are over apt thereunto) that
thereby occasion will be taken of too great a reliance upon, and vain opinion
of that ordinance, with more neglect, or slight and perfunctory use of the
means of grace and salvation: whereas the doctrine of baptism otherwise
delivered, would enforce the contrary care and diligence. Therefore, say some,
it was very unadvisedly done, to publish such a doctrine unto the people?

Answ. Answ (...).
Because it was a friend that made this Objection, and because by his friendly
letter I have been made acquainted with more objections against the point, then
otherwise I should have come to the knowledge of, (for which I truly profess
my self beholding to him) I will purposely forbear to aggrauate such slips as
are made in some passages of the Antecedent: viz: that, Baptism seems to be
turned out of the society of the means of grace and salvation: and (which is
insinuated further) that, for the ill consequences which, by accident, carnal
persons may, happily, draw from it, I should rather have taught the contrary
doctrine (as some others seem to do;) or else have held my tongue, what ever
the truth be in this point, and how deeply soever I have been charged with
Error, and Heresy, in which cases no good man ought to be so patient as not,
in a fair manner, to clear himself, if he know himself to be innocent.
Forbearing, I say, all such aggravations, I deny the Antecedent, and render a
reason of my denial, as follows. The bare and clear propounding of this
truth gives no occasion at all of any such corrupt deductio^s. If any such
abuses follow; Occasion, by accident, is taken up by them who are too apt, and
do too usually attempt to abuse all other the ordinary means of salvation, to
their own destruction, as well as this. This gives no more occasion of such
ill consequences, then the doctrines of Gods free and absolute Election of
particular persons unto life and glory, and of the final perseverance of the
Saints, do. For what ever ill collection may be drawn from this Position, may
as well be drawn from either of those but now mentioned.

A carnal person, say you, when he hears it proved and so much inculcated
that, the Elect do, ordinarily, receive the spirit and first principle of
grace, in their Baptism, will be over apt to conclude thence, as follows;
Why then, there is no such need of so much preaching, hearing, praying,
fasting, etc. For if I belong to God, J have the spirit in me already, how
wicked soever J appear to others to be; and I have had the spirit, ever since
I was baptized. And, if the spirit, I cannot miss of grace and salvation,
though J never hear sermon nor pray, all the days of my life, but follow my
lusts as freely as any man.

To this I say, that if a man will be so wicked, he may. But who is in fault
but himself? May not he conclude as much from both the other? and is it not
perpetually bawled by the Arminians: viz. that the doctrine of Gods absolute
election taught by the Calvinists (as they please to nickname all maintainers
thereof) does make many men exceedingly presumptuous and secure; it occasioneth
in them such desperate conclusions as these, If I be elected I shall certainly
be saved, let me live as J list, and do what I will; what need I care for
prayer, sermons, holiness of life, etc. If I shall be saved; I shall be
saved, let me do what I will to hinder it. But if J be not elected, I shall
be damned, let me do what I can to prevent it. Again, how is the comfortable
Doctrine of final perseverance daily calumniated; as if it taught no less
security and presumption, than the former. will not this, says the Arminian,
make men careless and impenitent, when they shall be told that, let them do
what they will, they cannot either finally or totally loose all grace, if ever
they had any at all? Will not such persons conclude against any man that shall
exhort them, upon any falls into some gross sins, to speedy and serious
repentance; that, he is much mistaken in them: they are sure that they had
grace once, and they are taught by such and such Divines, that they can never
loose all grace again, by any sins never so gross and scandalous: therefore,
no necessity of any such have unto repentance, as he pretends. Their state is
good and sure enough. They have that in them which cannot be lost: and that
being not lost, they cannot miscarry.

It may not be dissembled that such wicked conclusions may be made from those
heavenly Doctrines by hellish men. But yet we can find answers to all such
objections, easily enough: and those, not shifts; but, sufficient abstertions
of all such calumnies. We can tell such obiectors, that the Doctrines of
Election and Perseverance do not, in themselves, lay any grounds for such
divelish conclusions, (no more than good meat intends to yield matter of
corrupt humors, in a bad stomach) but do sufficiently declare and teach the
contrary, and all that are under the one, and partakers of the other, do take
out the contrary lesson from them. We can tell the^ that, they who are elected
to the end, are elected to the means, and to a conscionable use of the means
whereby the end may be attained. So also the doctrine of perseverance teaches
that, though perseverance be certain yet it is also of the nature of that
grace in which men persevere, to make and keep them diligent in the use of all
good means whereby they may, and do persevere, and work out their salvation
with fear and trembling: according to that of Saint Peter 2 Epist 1.8.) If
these things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall never be barren
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.
Therefore, we usually add, that, if any shall or do make any other uses of
these sweet and divine Truths, thereby to continue in sin, this is not to be
imputed to the Doctrines themselves, but to their wicked heads and hearts that
dare thus damnably to draw them awry. The Gospel which is the wisdom of God,
and the power of God unto salvation to all that are saved, is yet held for no
better than foolishness to the rest of the foolish and unbelieving world. So
the law which was ordained for the means of life, works death in all that
abuse it. But neither the law nor Gospel are in fault of this; nor must
therefore be concealed and not taught and inculcated, because wicked men do
daily wrest them to their own damnation.

And will not the same answer be good enough to uphold the point in hand
against the same objection? And, if it will: why should it be held a greater
indiscretion to publish this doctrine so daily useful, and so fully
comfortable to all the Elect, both parents and children: than to publish those
other points before touched, as deeply charged with the same ill consequences,
as this is? When I say, that, Jn the baptism of Elect infants, Christ does,
ordinarily, bestow his spirit; I add withal, that, this is not sufficient for
the salvation of such as live to years of discretion, but actual conversion
and renouation is to be expected and labored for, in due and conscionable
attendance upon the use of all those further helps and means which God has
sanctified to that purpose. For so God vouchsafes to grace all his ordinances,
that he will not have any of them despised nor neglected, by leaving either of
them vnvsefull, through such an efficacy of any one that have gone before, as
might leave nothing to be done by those that follow after. As he puts his
spirit in the hearts of the elect, in their baptism; so he afterward puts
power into his word effectually to call them home unto himself: and then the
same spirit works mightily by that word, and infuseth the habits of faith and
all sanctifying graces that do accompany salvation. The word therefore, and the
rest of Gods ordinances must be carefully humbly and constantly attended upon,
by all that expect any actual and sensible assurance, and comfortable feeling
of the spirit bestowed on them in their baptism. As for such as rely upon
baptism, alone, making no conscience of the word, and other means of grace
ordained of Christ, but live securely in their sins; they thereby give just
cause of suspicion that they never received the spirit, in their baptism, nor
were in the number of Gods elect whose names are written in the book of life.
If they will needs take offense at this doctrine, they take what was never
given. The Godly Will employ it better: and, for their sakes, it ought to be
not only sometimes taught, but often pressed to the uttermost; unless we
should suppress every good and necessary truth whereof wicked men will make an
evil use.

Musculus on Math: 19.14. Ratio humana non sustinet agnoscere gatiam Dei in
hacre, sed putat vbique opus esse vsu rationis and scientiae, alioqui nihil
commercij posse homini infanti esse cum Deo. Videmus autem hic potiores esse in
regno Dei infantes, tam abest vt non sint illius participes.

Humane Reason cannot endure to acknowledge the grace of God in this particular,
but thinks that (without all difference) there is need of the use of reason
and knowledge, or else that a man whiles he is an infant can have no commerce
with God. But by this Text we see that infants rather than others have
interest in the kingdom of God; so far are they from not being at all
partakers of it.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge. 5. line 14. read see. p. 8. l. 15. r. of battle. p. 12. l. 20. r saui
ur p. 20. l. 19. r. Ordinary. p 37. l. 3. r. race. p. 45. l 11. dele the first
when p. 41. l. 1 r profess. p. 52. in marg. l. penult. r. de Sacram. l. 5: p:
58. in mar. r. D. George p 69. l. 12. 1: Art. p: 77 l. 10. r: unto p. 83. in
marg. l. 9. r. (...). ibid. l. 12. r: (...) p. 106. in marg. l. vlt r. 16 cap.
p. 117 l: 17. r: in the Churches. p. 151 l. 11 r: ^dhere p. 154, in marg. r.
Dan. Chameir. tom. 4 l b. 2. De sacram ^ ip. 2. par. 8. p. 157. in marg. l
antepenult: r. Migrabimus p. 174. l. 10. in mar. r. perfundi. p. 176 mar. l.
14. dele vt (...) and r. vero p. 181. l. the last. r. abrood. p. 187 l 5 r: do
give. sometimes in the top of the leaf, viz* p 231. page 240. odiections is put
for objections. p. 248 l. 5. r. nicity, p. 262. l 6. r. slowing p. 266. l. 9.
r. Dardanum p. 297. l. 15. r. objection. p. 300. l. 22. r. is.

There are also some errors in the pointing, which have happened by the Authors
absence from the press: and those the Charitable reader is requested to
correct or pardon, as he passes by them.


