A true DESCRIPTION OF THE PASSION OF OUR SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST: As it was acted
by the bloody Jews: And registered by the blessed Evangelists.

In English Meetre by JOHN BVLLOKAR, Calend. Nouemb. 1618.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his
shop near Holburne Bridge. 1622.

A true DESCRIPTION of our Saviors PASSION.
Wrapped in our sinful flesh, yet free from sin,
The louing-worlds Redeemer long had sought,
Unto himself the stubborn Jews to win,
With mighty signs and wonders daily wrought:
But wished fruit his zeal could never gain:
He plowd the sands, and reapt but loss of pain.
And when he had full thirty three years space,
For men, and with men dwelt on earth below,
Lending rich treasures of his heavenly grace,
To pay those countlesse debts that Sin did owe.
The time was come, that should our God restore
To heaven above, from whence he came before.
Whose passage must by Death prepared be,
(As erst the holy Prophets had foretold)
That so his death from death might set us free,
Whom sin from life, as slaves to death had sold.
So deadly was the devilish Serpents sting,
That naught but Gods death, life to man could bring.
Which to assure us, ere he parted hence,
He leaves behind for our immortal good,
A full release of Adams first offense,
Scaling the Charter with his dearest blood:
That man might see his love, and learn thereby,
To loath the sin that made a God to die.
Yet never could the powerful stroke of death,
Nor Fate, nor Chance, nor Satan's secret blow,
Nor humane force enforce him yield his breath,
Until his Will gave leave it should be so:
The Jews might rage, yet heaven had fore decreed,
He chose to die, though they did act the deed.
But lest the sudden storm, if vnforetold,
Should drown the seeds of Faith so lately sown,
Or make new kindled love of him grow cold,
In weak conceits not to perfection grown:
He shows them every thing must come to pass,
That of him in the Scripture written was.
And knowing that the hour approached now,
To his small number of Disciples, he
Plamely foretells his death* and manner how:
Withal, the time when as his death should be,
To strength their doubtful thoughts, and make the know,
He could foresee, though would not shun the blow.
Two days there are (says he) and then the Feast
Of Easter comes, when Moses did command,
In memory that Israel was releast
From hard oppression of proud Egypt land,
The Paschall lamb should yearly eaten be,
Of all their seed, whom God had Io set free.
But now the old Laws end approaches nie,
These shadowing Figures shortly must away:
The Son of man shall be betrayed to die,
And on the Cross the worlds great ransom pay,
To free it from infernal Charons power,
Whose tyrant rage would life and soul devour.
Thus having warned, whilst at Bethania he,
Received in Simons house, does there remain,
A woman by him late from sin set free,
Does come her loving Lord to entertain;
Bringing a box of Alabaster fair,
Filled with an ointment, costly, sweet, and rare,
O Love! sole life of Peace, and death of Strife:
Strong knot to tie: sweet union of consent:
Thoughts purity: fair Map of Angels life:
Heavens new-made Livery: Nurce of all content:
How true it is the world of thee does say?
That whosoever loves, can brook no long delay.
The curious Box she breaks, and quickly powers
This precious liquor on her Saviors head;
Whose sweet distilling drops full mainly showers
Adowne his neck, and on his garments shed,
Refining all the air near which they fell,
With fragrant odor of their pleasing smell.
But envious Malice soon occasion finds,
This woman's godly meaning to reprove:
Some standers by do murmr in their minds,
As discontent to see such zealous love.
His own Disciples too that sat at board,
Do grudge such cost bestowd upon their Lord.
Why need this needless waste be made (say they)
Of what was worth three hundred pence at least?
It better had bin sold, and given away
To poor for alms, against this holy Feast:
It Is pity such sweet oil so dearly bought,
With idle vain expense should come to naught.
Thus they: But Christ that sought to save his foes,
Forgets not now to help a friend at need:
He soon perceiues the grudging thoughts of those,
That were mislikers of this woman's deed,
And mildly does rebuke them for their sin,
With praise of her that did the work begin.
O why should you, whom I have chose for mine,
Against your loving Lord offended be?
Why should your murmuring hearts with spite repine
At her, whose faith wrought this good work on me?
Take heed, this lesson first was learnt at Hell,
To grudge at grace, and envy doing well.
The poor may be relieved when you will,
No want of them the earth does ever find:
But me you shall not have amongst you still:
The work's now done that heaven had erst assigned,
And she that knew I shortly hence must go,
Against my burial did this cost bestow.
Of truth therefore I say, in each place where
The worlds Redemption shall be preached or taught,
This woman's zeal shall be related there,
In memory of what she now has wrought.
Great love shall surely reap a great reward:
Heaven does the heart, not outward shows regard.
By this, the Priests and Scribes, whose hearts were set
A fire with burning spite, and deadly hate,
At Caiaphas palace are together met,
In council closely to deliberate,
How they might Jesus take by subtle train,
And with some show of Justice have him slain.
Yet must we not (say they) in any wise,
At this great Feast, in such a course proceed,
Left the rude people should against us rise,
Or stir rebellion to withstand the deed:
His words, his works, and doctrine have bin such,
That him as now we cannot safely touch.
But Satan fearing, lest by this delay,
His long-desired work should rest unwrought,
Presents them with an unexpected way,
Whereby their mischief might to pass be brought,
Judas one of the Twelve, whom Christ had chose,
(Unhappy wretch) to this assembly goes.
There does the Traitor set his Lord to sale,
Among those he knew long sought to suck his blood:
Whose precious worth this caitiffe counts so small,
He bids them make the price as they thought good:
What will you give me, (thus does Judas say)
And I into your hands will him betray?
O blessed Lady! had thou present been,
When thus thy Son by theeuish hands was sold
To bloody Merchants, it had soon been seen,
How dear true owners wel-got pearls do hold:
Thy tender love had pitched the price so hie,
That Jewish wealth one hair should never buy.
But thou true picture of pure piety,
Resignst to heavens decree thy proper right,
Suffering a damned wretch contemptuously,
To make a market of thy dearst delight:
Then hie thee, hie thee, since the case so stands,
Come buy thine own from these Priests murthring hands.
And Judas, O if greedy hope of gain
Entice thee thus thy Savior to forgo,
Why do thou show thy self so fondly vain,
As offer him to those that hate him so?
His friends (I wis) would give more money for him,
Then scornful foes, whose pride and spite abhor him.
O what would Lazarus, new brought to live
From grave, have paid to keep his Lord from death?
What price would Magdalen refuse to give,
That loved her Master dearer then her breath?
Or Martha, and his Virgin Mother too,
That loved him more then all the world can do
Yea leave the earth, and ask of Angels bright,
What they would give thee for their King divine?
(Doubtless to get him home) their chief delight,
They would exchange their heavenly state for thine:
O had thou thus made sale of Christ before,
Thy guilt had been the less, and gain the more.
But Sin with self conceit it self still blinds,
Daring, without respect of what it may:
Witness false Judas, who with desperate mind,
Tells proudly to the Priests, he will betray:
As if the Maker of heaven, earth, and seas,
Were in his power to use him as he please.
They glad with others blame to effect the deed;
Whereto their proper malice would aspire,
Resolve to prosecute it now with speed,
And thirty pence appoint him for his hire.
He straight accepts the wages they assigned:
Slight gain soon sets to work a willing mind.
Ah Judas, sink of sin, and earthly shame,
First lucklesse lamb that straid from Christ's dear fold,
Monster of mankind, vile reproach of fame;
Sequestered from all grace, most impious bold:
Blind reprobate (alas) what have thou done,
To buy hell fire with sale of Gods dear Son?
O did thy wretched eyes so grieve to see,
Three hundred peniworth of oil bestowd,
Whose costly value should aduantag'd thee,
If thy false hand had sold the same abroad:
That now to make amends for such shrewd loss,
Thou must betray thy Savior to the Cross.
Did this bad crop spring up from heavenly seed?
Did Christ's example such vile thrift maintain?
Ah no, he taught thee by his Word and Deed,
T'abhorre the muddie mind of worldly gain,
To Embrace pure thoughts, whose safety fears no fall,
To hurt no man, and to do good to all.
But thou (unchanged) a graceless Impe of hell,
With Jacobs spiteful sons, in sin art grown;
Whose malice did their brother Joseph sell
For twenty pence, to Merchantmen unknown:
Yet Joseph was preferred to honor hie,
And called the Savior of the world thereby.
So Christ thy Lord, by thee sold to be slain,
Though death and hell strive both to press him down,
Shall Phoenix-like with glory rise again,
And win by death an everlasting Crown:
That in his Name, eternized without end,
All knees in heaven, in earth, in hell may bend.
The Feast of sweet bread now was hard at hand,
And spotless pascall lambs were marked to die:
When Christ's Disciples came to understand
Their Masters will in this Solemnity:
Where will thou (say they) we prepare for thee
The Passover, that now must eaten be?
Straight blessed Peter readiest to obey,
And John, whom Jesus always held most dear,
Are called for, and sent without delay,
To make provision for this heavenly cheer:
Receiving by their Lords directing care,
A sign that showed them where they should prepare.
You two (says Christ) shall now this task begin
At yonder town, where you shall surely meet
A man, as soon as you are entered in,
Bearing a pot of water through the street;
Him follow, wheresoever he does go,
What house he enters, enter you also.
Ask of the owner for some place, where I,
With my Disciples, may this Supper eat;
And he (I know) will show you by and by,
A parler room, well paued, fair and great,
Which will be fit: make ready there for me,
For there shall this last Supper eaten be.
O happy Feast held by a heavenly King,
Where bread of life with bounty was bestowd:
No more a Type, but now a figured thing,
True Rock, whence pure sin-cleansing waters flowd:
Sweet antidote, whose virtue sets man free,
From deadly surfeit of forbidden tree.
When thou were made, each ceremonious Rite,
that had prefigur'd better things to come,
^y Gods appointment was abolisht quite;
^ew Sacraments succeeding in their room:
Whose worth in Christ who worthily embrace,
Adopted are new heirs of heavenly grace.
Clear light was then in place of shadows brought:
^igures for better Truth exchanged away:
^he joyful Gospel for the Law was taught;
and Mercy crowned, where Justice erst bare sway:
New Life was borne, and Death began to die,
In this great Suppers heavenly mystery.
^here did the King of Glory think no scorn,
Leaving behind a pattern for us meet)
^ith girded loins addressed in servile form,
^o stoop and wash his own Disciples feet:
That those which after should the Gospel preach,
Might by himself be cleans'd, ere they did teach.
^^t this is not yet all that then was done:
^or the new-spoused Church redeemd so dear,
^he precious Body of Gods only Son,
^as instituted to be eaten here:
That blessed Body borne for sinners good,
True Manna, far exceeding Angels food.
Such wisdom did The Almighty workman show,
In altering shadows into substance true:
Such humble service did a God bestow,
Pure humbled thoughts in proud man to renew:
Such precious cates were by our dying Lord,
Bequeathed for ever to this heavenly board.
The bright Sun now with Western clouds was hid:
Dim darkness on the errth began to grow;
Nor day, nor night it was, when Jesus did
With his Disciples to this Supper go.
And as they ate, he spoke: Of truth I say,
That one amongst you here shall me betray:
They straight with dead pale looks bewray their fear,
And gaze together, doubtful to suspect:
As mazed persons wonted are, that hear
A sudden presage of some dire effect:
And willing there their innocence to try,
Each after other said: Lord, is it I?
Judas that felt himself near touched herein,
Wondering to hear his guilt so soon made known;
And fearing, silence might disclose the sin:
(For Craft and Treason still are linkt in one)
Asked last of all, faining himself dismayed,
Lord, is it I? Christ answered, Thou have said.
But woe be unto him that makes this match;
Selling the Son of man to sinners spite:
Far better had it bin for that vile wretch,
^f he, unborn, had never seen the light.
O ten times happy life, that lives well!
But cursed is he that lives, to live in hell.
These threats in Judas could breed no remorce,
That black detested action to abjure.
Obdurat hearts, though warned, yet still wax worse:
Like rotten ulcers mastring Physickes cure.
So hard it is, except Gods grace be strong,
To save that soul where sin has harbord long.
Peter, whose daunted thoughts could take no rest,
Until the author of this ill were known,
Makes signs to John, who leaned on Jesus breast,
To ask his name, whose sin should cause their moan.
Resolving boldly, if in him it lay,
To kill the wretch did plot his Lords decay.
But Peter's purpose could not come to pass:
The hateful traitor closely sits concealed:
In secret John demands who it was,
And Christ in secret thus to him revealed:
Who next receives a dipped sop of me,
Shall do the deed, the rest hereof are free.
O John, dearst darling of thy dying Lord!
Earths flower, heavens star, pure virgin, foe to lust:
What pen can worthily thy praise record,
Or blaze thy blessed name with titles just,
That foundst such grace to ask and understand,
When none of all thy fellows durst demand?
Soon after in the dish Christ dips a sop,
And gave it mildly to his murdering foe;
Who unrelenting takes and eats it up:
But straight the devil entered in him tho;
Urging his traitorous heart still more and more,
To execute what he had vowed before.
That which thou do (says Christ) with speed fulfill:
Not animating him to do the deed:
But showing by these words, the great good will
He had, that man's salvation should proceed:
For which absented from his Fathers sight,
His love thinks long till it be finished quite.
Whereto these words were spoke, none then did know,
Only (perhaps) false Judas understood:
They thought Christ bade him buy, and to bestow
Some thing in alms, to do poor people good,
Or for the Feast provide: thus Error too
Helps forward what this Traitor means to do.
But see how apt man's frailty is to sin,
When humbled thoughts with pride are overthrown?
These late-amaz'd Disciples now begin,
(Forgetting quite Christ's last example shown)
To reason hard in words, and disagree,
Who should among themselves the greatest be.
Ah fondlings! is your Master cumbred now
With humane error of his dying day?
Has one amongst your selves conspired how,
By treachery, to take his life away?
And can you, warnd hereof, mis-spend your time,
In idle folly of ambitious crime?
O pluck up sin whilst yet the root is young:
Surcease this variance, breeding but offense:
Weep your own loss, wail your Redeemers wrong,
And wish to die with him in innocence:
Rather then strive to be exalted hier,
As pamperd worldlings, in their pride, desire.
But Christ overcome with that exceeding love,
Which from the world had chose them for his own,
Surprest with grief, forbearing to reprove
This folly, and defect of duty shown:
Yet to make known their faults, and strife appease,
He gently warnes them in like words to these:
Supremacy and honor is embraced
Of profane Potentates, and earthly kings;
Not worthy those desires whose thoughts are placed
On better love of God, and heavenly things:
For such, though greatest, must inferior be,
And minister to those of low degree.
The master who does sit at meat alone,
Exceeds the servant that attends his will:
Yet you to me this duty have not shown,
For I do minister among you still:
And by humility example give,
How such as are my followers ought to live.
But you for my sake have abandoned clean
The late-lou'd world, renounced your selves and all,
And in my greatst temptations always been,
Abiding with me since I did you call:
And therefore I appointed have for ye,
As God my Father does appoint for me:
I mean a Kingdom, not of earthly bliss,
Such as mortality aspires to get:
But one in heaven that perpetual is;
Where, at my table you shall drink and eat:
Where you shall sit on seats, as is decreed,
Judging the twelve great Tribes of Isreal's seed.
So spoke our Lord, when from the table rose
Judas, full fraught with hel-nurc't desperate sin,
And hastily out of the house he goes,
Leaving his Master and the rest within,
True type of heavenly bliss at latter day,
When no bad bides, nor good does go away.
And now does Christ in sweetest speech commend
His love, and mutual concord to the rest,
With promise, that he would from heaven send
Another Comforter to make them blessed:
Whose presence should abide for evermore,
And teach them all the truth they heard before.
His peace likewise he does among them leave,
Exhorting perfect unity in one,
A growing: branches from the Vine receive
Their fruit, and bear not of themselves alone.
Forewarning too, that troubles, hate, and spite,
Should shortly for his Name upon them light.
Which to endure, without grudge or despair,
He cheares them up by his examples still:
Concluding lastly with a fervent prayer,
That God would bless and keep them from all ill.
As that together they in one might grow,
As he himself was with the Father, so.
The night is now far spent, the Supper done;
The Grace is said, the Table took away:
The Ghests are risen, and the work begun,
For which the Son of God on earth did stay:
Judas is coming with a kiss to greet him,
And with the Eleven, Christ goes forth to meet him.
A place there is, where (raisd from lower ground)
A goodly fruitful Mountain threats the sky;
Whose top with Olive branches shadowed round,
Forbids the heat of heavens bright burning Eye,
And ouerlookes a garden fair and sweet,
Close situated to Gethseman street.
Hither, as was his often former guise,
When he in private for his Church would pray,
Or did his own Disciples catechize,
This last night our Redeemer took his way:
That so he in a Garden might restore,
What Adam in a Garden lost before.
And by the way thus warnes: All you this night
Shall run in scandal great because of me:
For it is written, I will surely smite
The Shepherd, and his sheep shall scattered be:
But when I risen am from Death below,
To Galilee before you will I go.
Ah poor Disciples, weak and miserable,
Now is at hand the comfort-killing hour;
The hour of fear and darkness palpable,
Whose foggie dampe shall in your hearts obscure
Bright beams of Faith, and yet lend light to see,
How frail and feeble of your selves you be.
In one way now together all do go:
In diverse (shortly) all shall scattered sly*
True faithful followers now your selves you show,
As ready with your Lord to live and die.
Yet danted with base fear, you shortly shall
Renounce your truth, your faith, your Lord and all.
Thus still fresh cause of sorrow Christ does find,
His ouer-burdened senses to dismay:
Ere-while he troubled was, to think in mind,
That one of his own Twelve should him betray:
And now not one alone, but all the rest,
Shall false their faith, and leave their Lord distressed.
Alas, sweet Savior, who shall comfort now,
The dreadful terror of this sad nights fear?
Thy Father threats the sword with angry brow,
Against thee, for our sins, which thou must bear.
Thy mother wails, thy friends shall all forsake thee,
Whilst death devising foes conspire to take thee.
O might the merit of thy bitter pains,
Endured for all alike, alike redound
To all of Adams sons, whom death detaines,
Some consolation herein would be found:
But (O dear God!) thou know how few indeed,
For all these torments shall the better speed.
And to th'increasing of thy griefs, do see
Millions of mis-beleeuing Souls misled
With sins sweet bait, or infidelity,
Shall run into perdition void of dread:
Scorning thy Cross and Passion suffered here,
Or valuing light what thou have bought so dear.
But Peter hearing what his Master told,
And clear in conscience from so black a sin,
Presuming of his strength with courage bold,
To promise for himself, does thus begin:
Though all the world offended were in thee,
Yet herewith spotted Peter would not be.
O Simon, Simon, (thus does Christ reply)
The subtle Fiend your settled thoughts to quail,
Has sought to sift you all as wheat, but I
Have prayed for thee, that thy faith might not fail.
Thou therefore once turned to the perfect way,
Confirm thy weaker brethren what thou may.
To whom The Apostle, (grown more confident,)
Lord, I am ready with resolved heart,
Not only to endure imprisonment,
Or in such slight affliction take thy part,
But with thee lose my life, if need require,
To show my love, and further thy desire.
The wakefull Cock (says Christ) twice shall not crow
This night, till thou have three times me denide:
Yet Peter cannot be persuaded so,
But plights his faith most constant to abide:
At which, the rest, seeing his courage such,
By solemn vow, protest to do as much.
O what high taskes can rashness undertake,
Ere difficulty of the work be known?
What vaunts can ouer-weening humors make,
Which in an instant will he overthrown?
Great odds in what they will do, and what they speak:
Their words are strong, their deeds will be but weak.
Boldly they boast themselves, resolved to slay,
And die with Christ in such a quarrel good:
Yet one small storm shall blow them all away,
And he for them must bide and shed his blood.
So feeble are th'attempts by man begun,
When heavenly grace is not relide upon.
But Christ in mercy does not sue the debt,
Which they by vow stand bound this night to pay:
Knowing their weak estates unable yet,
He well is pleased to grant a longer day;
When after his Ascension they shall,
In unknown shores be wider scattered all.
Then shall self-penance scourge the trothles blame
Of this nights work, that now their work defaces:
Then shall they boldly preach his healthful Name;
Not recking danger, or the worlds disgraces:
Then shall they go to prisons joyfully,
And for his Truths sake glorious Martyrs die.
By this, the Lamb of God, who for man's sin,
With willing steps, went meeting to be slain,
And made a Sacrifice: is entered in
The Garden with his yet-vnscattered train;
To whom he sorrowing speaks, Here sit and stay,
Whilst I withdraw my self awhile to pray.
Then Peter, James, and John he takes aside,
When straight with an exceeding fear oppressed,
His stonisht senses could no longer hide
The grief, that had surcharged his guiltless breast.
My soul is heavy to the death, says he,
Abide you here, and watch awhile with me.
Accompany thy Savior, O my Soul,
In outward signs of inward griping woe:
Break forth in sighs, and with true tears condole,
The dreadful horror that torments him so:
Since for thy sake this sorrow pierced his heart,
Good reason in his grief thou bear some part.
See how that heavenly face is altered quite,
Scarce to be known by what it was even now:
Dead-pale usurps the seat of red and white:
And Care sits figured in his wrinkled brow.
Distressefull fear seems drowned in watery eyne,
That ouerwash his cheeks with weeping brine:
Like as the bright Sun in a Welkin fair,
With pitchie mist on sudden ouer-cast,
Shoots forth his beams in vain to clear the air:
Cloud upon cloud still thickning wondrous fast:
Black night does ouer-hang the shadowed land,
Threatening a cruel tempest out of hand.
Or as the Sea tossed by some boisterous wind,
Does mainly beat upon the quiet shore,
Swells in huge waves above due course of kind,
And with selfe-motion labors more and more:
Such is the troubled state, and deep unrest,
Wherewith our Saviors soul is now oppressed.
O heavens great'st strength, and Angels chiefest joy,
Earths hope, hels fear, true God omnipotent!
What grief can vex, or terror strange dismay
Thy spotless soul with such sad languishment?
What terror can these pangs of passion breed,
Which make thee seem not as thou art indeed?
Is death, the entrance to felicity,
The final date of all terrestrial woe,
The glorious triumph of thy victory,
The way by which perforce all flesh must go,
So dreadful to affright thee, like as those,
Which here on earth their highest bliss repose?
O wherefore did thou leave thy heavenly Throne,
And shroud a Godhead in our mortal frame?
Why have thou here by signs thy might made known,
And taken to thy self a Saviors name?
If not to quell the rage of hellish powers,
And lastly by thy death to redeem ours.
If now (woe worth the while) thou should give over,
And leave thy work so near an happy end;
Who then (ah who) shall promisd health restore
To us, whose hopes on thee alone depend?
No Son, but thou, of earthly mother bred,
Has power to crush the cursed Serpents head.
^n outward show thou did pretend of late,
An inward longing for this present time;
^rging the Traitor to accelerate
The issue of his il-conceiued crime:
Yet now the hour and Judas both are nie;
Thy courage fails, and thou art loath to die.
But oh! what have I said? can fear dismay,
Whom, moved to wrath, the earth does quake to see?
Can his thoughts change so soon, whose power does stay
All powers in stable order as they be?
Ah! no defects impair not heavenly store;
And he is now the same he was before.
This sad eclipsing fear, that seems so dim,
The glorious Sunshine of his Deity,
Could never have a rising cause from him,
But from our natures imbecility;
Which, though supported by celestial grace,
Yet faintly shrinkes, and shows of what it was.
In what he has assumed our feeble flesh,
Therein he trembling faints, and stands dismayed:
Like as that strength we have in our distress,
Comes not of us, but of his heavenly aid:
To right our cause, his Godhead suffers wrong:
He weak by us, and we by him are strong.
When first made Adam ioylesse all alone,
In Edens beauteous Garden did remain,
To fashion Eve he gave his proper bone,
And had with flesh the place filled up again:
So Christ's deare-loued Spouse the Church still wears
His rib of strength, and he her frailty bears.
Retired about a stones cast from the rest,
Hemmed in with horror, such exceeding weight
Of earth-committed sins his soul oppressed,
That on both knees he falls, and after straight,
His pain increasing, prostrate lies to pray,
That from him this sad hour might pass away.
Ah, Abba, Father, which all things did make,
And do preserve them made, (if so may be)
Bow down thine eyes, and for thy mercy sake,
Remove this bitter cup of wrath from me.
Yet let not my will be fulfilled herein,
But thine (dear Father) which has ever bin.
Full often elsewhere good Christ did intercesse
For us, and never had one suit debarred:
And yet folliciting his own distress,
Obtaines not of his Father to be heard:
For God so loved the world, that now he gave
His only Son from sin the same to save.
Who Lambe-like mild in league with heavens decree,
Folding earth-dwellers in as dear embrace,
Would, pleading for himself, repulsed be,
That for us praying, he might still find grace.
O rare obedience, perfect zeales true sign,
How much owe we for this great love of thine!
But now he rises from the dewie ground,
To visit his Disciples left distressed,
And finds them all securely sleeping sound:
When waking Peter, (heavy as the rest)
O Simon, art thou now asleep? (quoth he)
What? could thou not watch one bare hour with me?
As he would say, Were thou of selfe-accord,
So prodigal of vows, with timelesse speed,
And do so soon neglect thy helpless Lord,
In drowsy slumber at his greatest need?
Ill can thou in my safeguard spend thy blood,
That wilt not wake to do thine own soul good.
Not so false Judas, who for petty gain,
Sleeps not a wink this night, nor can forbear:
Posts round the waked streets, calls up his train,
Sollicits help, seeks armor every where,
Marshals his Band himself, and thinks a year,
Till he may come to apprehend me here.
O shame! that Satan's slaves so forward are
In acting mischief, that shall bring damnation;
And you, to save your souls, deuoid of care:
O watch and pray therefore, lest ill temptation
Oppress your faith: the spirit feign would do it,
But that weak flesh is hardly brought unto it.
Not yet through-wak't, he leaves the^ slumbring still,
And fraught with fears, departs again to pray,
Impulst by weakness of his humane will:
O Father, if this cup in no wise may
Pass by, unless the potion work in me,
Thy heavenly pleasure let performed be.
Thus this good Shepherd, jealous of his sheep,
Whom ravening Wolves, he knows, will soon molest,
Watches with care, whilst they securely sleep,
And sighs alone, that they in peace may rest:
Not sparing to engage his proper life,
To save them all from slaughtring butchers knife.
His prayer ended, he returns again,
And finds like comfort, that he found before:
They still slept hard, unable to refrain
One minutes rest; and, which did grieve him more,
So careless of the former words he spoke,
Quite unprovided what excuse to make.
O now what horror in this soul does dwell?
^aked of help, forsaken all alone,
^^ught by his bloody foes, assailed of hell,
^etraid, or else neglected of his own:
Given up by heaven to die with painful shame,
And bare the burden of all sinners blame.
^wake, my soul, run forth with joy and dread,
(...) to this garden where thy Savior lies;
^^ere shall thou see the Book of life wide spread,
^ith lessons stored of heavenly mysteries:
There shall thou see thy truth, thy strength, thy food,
Thy way, thy life, thy light, and all thy good.
^here shall thou see the way of patience,
^he Sun-bright lamp of burning charity,
^he perfect pattern of obedience,
^he mirror of profound humility,
The root of love, the goal of virtues race,
The salve of sin, and fullness of Gods grace.
^here shall thou see the strength of Isreal's weal,
^^at valiant David, thy most loving God;
^^est to the fight, armed all in fiery zeal,
^^rning with hot desire to spend his blood,
And wash away the foul opprobrious blot,
That threats vile bondage, if he succor not.
Emboldened with exceeding love of thee,
Here in these paled lists alone he stays,
Expecting till his foes arrived be:
Mean while accumulating sundry ways,
With willing mind to his al-ready store,
Such pains, as never flesh did feel before.
O with what sorrow did the nobler part
Of his pure soul, where Reason has her seat,
Pity the inferior, where weak Sense does smart?
How faithfully for it did he entreat,
Until at last, concorded both in one,
They jointly cride, Father, thy will be done.
Yet though this blessed Union did gainsay
Detract of time, whereto faint flesh aspires,
From the Disciples he departs away,
And to his praying place again ^et^es,
And there the third time, does with tears implore,
Using like words as he had used before.
When lo, an Angel gliding through the air,
Appears to him, from starrie Region sent,
Which makes him for a while desist his prayer,
To hearken what this heavenly Herald meant:
Who nearer comes, with sweet speech comfort
His fainting Lord, against dismay of death.
Sweet Jesus, how art thou dejected now,
From sublime glory, to disgrace and fear?
Most true it is the Prophet spoke, That thou
Art somewhat lower made then Angels were,
Since in thine agonizing languishment,
To comfort thee, an Angel down is sent.
See, see, O Angel, how thy Maker lies
Below, and here on earth, afflicted sore;
Whom, placed in majesty above the skies,
With fear and reverence you do all adore:
Wonder of wonders, the like never done,
How can thine eyes endure to look thereon?
Can rivers add unto their fountains slow,
Through whose supply, those streams they have, do run?
Can branches help the quickening root to grow?
Or pale-fac't Moon lend light unto the Sun?
How can thou, Angel, comfort then his mind,
In whom thy self do all thy comfore find?
But this, O man, must needs on thee be laid,
Whose fleshes frailty, and sins earned smart,
Does with surcharging horror so invade:
That even almost forgetting his best part,
(His Godheads power) be sdaines not in this dread,
Of his own creature to be comforted.
And yet, alas, this comfort could not cure
The death-sicke dolours of his wounded heart:
But now the time grew on, his body pure,
Unto the dreadful Cross, must needs depart;
And rising up, he thus to them did say,
The man was near, that should their Lord betray.
No sooner had our Savior told this news,
But straight the traitorous Judas with a kiss,
Betrayed his Lord and Master to the Jews,
A cruel act, which lost eternal bliss:
The sands on shore in number are not told:
His sundry faults pass number to unfold.
O let me breathe, before I do proceed:
Surcharging loads will crave a little rest:
The grants are small to them that stand in need,
That will not bring some comfort to their breast:
And he that writes what does in wicked lurk,
Shall breathe him twice before he end his work.
Look how the Sea-fowles on a stormy day,
Do flock themselves about the Ocean shore;
As thick as Leaves when Summer fleetes away,
So throng these Jews unto him more and more:
Cruel reward! he ought to them good will,
And they, like traitors, sought his blood to spill.
^^en from the Garden they their Master brought
(...) to the Priests and Elders of their crew:
^^ey bore false witness, there his life they sought.
^ch cride, that death should be his only due:
Laboring (indeed) as much as in them lay,
To take the Life of lives, their Lord away.
^^d then from thence they dragged him to his death:
^^en to the Cross they nailed his hands and feet:
^^en did they stop their blessed Saviors breath:
^^en did they him with scornful titles greet:
And now the Scripture true is brought to pass:
For he amongst the wicked counted was.
(...) now the hour of death being fully run,
^^e heavens were dark, he to his Father cries;
(...) God, my God, why do thou leave thy Son?
^^d ending so, his soul from body flies.
A happy death, since death does make us live:
And blessed be He, that blessed life does give.
FINIS.

