THE Coronation of David: Wherein out of that part of the History of David,
that shows how he came to the Kingdom, we have set forth unto us what is
like to be the end of these troubles that daily arise for the Gospels sake. By
Edm. Bunny.

printer's device of Thomas Orwin, featuring a crowned male figure or King
David holding a harp or lyre (not in McKerrow) decorative compartment,
featuring a male figure or David holding a harp or lyre and a male figure or
Moses holding two stone tablets; below are two imps or demons pointing toward a
winged boy's head; above a winged female figure holds two horns from which
water flows

Psalm. 89.20. I have found David my servant, with mine holy oil have I
anointed him.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Gubbin, and John Perin.

1588.

Unto the right honorable, Henry, Earl of Huntingdon, Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter: L. President of her Ma. Counsel in the North parts
established; and Lieutenant General of her Ma. people, and forces there.
IT is sufficiently known to us all, that of late years the Lord has
diversely exercised us, under his gentle chasticing hand. For having touched us
before in our cattle and corn; and, that more is, in certain dangerous,
strange, and unnatural practices against our Soueraign, tending to the
overthrow of us all: now of late he has threatened us with hostility and
foreign invasion, and with the worst, that a proud, an idolatrous, and an
insolent people is able to do. Wherein although he has not forgotten us
clean, but in the midst of those threatenings, has hitherto used great
mercy toward us, yet do we our selves plainly perceive, that as yet he has
not left off calling upon us, but still does put us in mind of our ways, as
otherwise also, so especially by hostility now, and by the continuance of our
enemies malice against us. Jn which case so long as we stand, it is needful
we take good heed to these two things: that the cause be right wherein we
stand, and that we our selves do take it in hand in such sort as we ought to
do, The equity of the cause both is now, and ever has been so plain in it
self (seeing that it is for the Ghospels sake, that so they bend themselves
against us) that when of late I entered into a deeper consideration of these
callings of God, and thought it needful to set forth somewhat concerning the
same: yet notwithstanding J then thought it needelesse to bestow any labor in
beating out that which was plain enough in it self, and rather chose to
employ my pen in the other, to show in what sort this good cause of ours should
be taken in hand of us. Whereupon I did then set forth an admonition out of
the Prophet Joel, the better to gather us nearer to God, by occasion of the
scarcity wherewith at that time we were something touched: a text that then
did, not only in respect of that scarcity, but otherwise also, and yet does
fitly agree to these present days, and out of which we might take to our
selves, both then and now, instruction and comfort in plentiful measure.

Since which time I have often marked, that what by our enemies themselves, and
by their favorites that are among us, and what by the weakness of diverse of
us likewise, there is such a desperate fear conceived of many, that they are
utterly void of any good hope, that these our troubles may be ouerblowne, or at
any time sorted to prosperous end. For the enemy (we see, and often have
found) whenever by his own strength or our looseness he does hope to
preuail, is then passing full of presumptuous boasting and resolute threats.
Their favorites also do as redily then get hold thereof, and help them
forward the best that they can: ever blowing such terrors abroad, and, for the
most part, increasing them also, and ever casting, wheresoever they come, great
perils themselves. And when they are foiled, and have gotten the worse, and
find that God in those their attempts is flatly against them: yet do they not
thereupon leave of and turn unto him: but ever continue their former malice,
and busily repair their forces again. Among us likewise as there be some,
that by such occasions draw nearer to God, and acknowledging that our sins
deserve, that we should be clean cut off, do nevertheless, in the goodness
of the cause, and the mercies of God, conceive good hope: so are there others,
that refusing the comfort that those groundworkes do yield, do so much rely
on the just desert of our sins, and the severity of God against it, or being
of a timorous nature, are stricken with such fear by the enemies threats and
continual malice, and by the great perils that their confederates do cast at
home, that they have left them no hope at all, but verily think that in the
end all will be naught.

Having therefore already done my endeavor, by my former admonition out of Joel
to stir us up to a sensible feeling of those gracious callings of God, and
unfeignedly to turn unto him: I have now thought good, out of some one text
or other for to declare what comfort the faithful may justly conceive, out of
the nature of the cause that we have in hand, being as it is, for the gospels
sake, that we are so much maligned. For which matter I have made choice of that
part of the history of David, that shows how he, being anointed of God to
the kingdom, nevertheless could not come unto it, but thorough many perils, and
with much business before. But although he were kept out for a season, and had
many lets (for a long time together) cast in the way: yet in the end he came to
the crown, and had it confirmed unto himself and his line for ever. Jn which
story we may see, as it were in a table, both what crosses we must look for
to be cast in the way of the gospel now: and how notwithstanding it shall
preuail in the end against them all. And as it was the godless and loose
government of Saul, that gave that occasion of removing that same, and of the
bringing in of the godlier regiment of David: even so, in the late days of
ignorance, the government of most of our princes has bine such, so far short
of that which it should, as that it ought to be less marvel to any, if now it
the be pleasure of God to advance the gospel (the scepter of the son of
David) to reform whatsoever before was decayed. Which story lies in the
latter part of the first book of Samuel, and in the beginning of the second:
for which cause also (seeing that it lies altogether within this compass)
therefore have I but seldom set down in my quotations the name of the Book,
but the chapters, and verses only. And seeing that it goes of this matter only
(whereas there are many other stories and places of scripture besides, that
would yield the self same comfort) therefore have J thought The Coronatio^ of
David, to be the meetest name for the treatise.

Now, such as it is, if it please your honor to accept in good part, I thought
it my duty, for to offer the same unto you, For being of this mind, that as
I wish the benefit thereof unto al, so notwithstanding J special, wish it to
the people here, such as belong to your Ho. Liuetenancie (to who^ I also, in
diverse good respects, am most bounden) in all these parts I was not able to find
any one, that was more exercised in these affairs: or to whom my self (in all
humble duty) was more beholding, or under whose protection I could rather wish
the same to come forth. Which although I had finished and sent up to the print
before, to have come forth the last term, before the attempt of this late
foreign invasion: yet, by reason that (upon some private respect) a small
occasion was taken by such as should print it, to require my further advice in
one special point, the long vacation that has come betwixt, has easily
brought to pass, that it could not come forth till now. In which mean time,
the danger of the foreign invasion (God be thanked) is grown to be little, and
the fear thereof with us much less. But yet notwithstanding, neither is that
danger clean removed, neither may we look for any other, but that still they
will be doing with us, if they may get us at the advantage: and, besides that,
we may in this one attempt of theirs (being so much broken as already, and but
hitherto it is) see some part of that truth, that out of the Scripture is in
this Treatise delivered unto us. Which things being considered, although now
it come forth somewhat with the latest in some respect: yet in others J do
not doubt, but that it may, and will be thought, now also to come forth
fitly enough.

J grant, it were to be wished rather, that neither now, nor at any time else,
there need to be any use of this, or of any such like, but the causes
remaining, the effect also must needs continue. Our enemies will be enemies
still: the seed of the serpent will ever lie in wait, for to annoy the seed
of the woman. Though now they be foiled, and often have been (yea, and though
they had been clean overthrown): yet notwithstanding they will not give over,
but cast about it again for some other advantage, and redily take it,
whenever it falls into their hands, so long as they are not yet subdued
unto the obedience of the Gospel, but remain enemies still, there is nothing
else to be looked for of them, but that on al occasions they will be ready to
exercise, whatsoever enmity they are able against us. We also on the other
side, have many things among us that should be amended, which we are not
disposed to amend, nor so much, as to hear of them neither. Having found the
spoil of many of our Churches in our late Monasteries and Chaunteries (as
apparent dens of thieves, as ever were any) we are not therewith contented.
Those that are left we suffer their Patrons (if they be greedy, and wily
withal) to abuse at their pleasure. Whereby God is robed of his glory, and the
people of their salvation. We suffer also merciless men, daily more and more
to eat up the pore: to dispeople fermings, and towns, and to take in all to
them selves. If therefore there were no more but these things only (which in
deed I take to be the greatest): yet were they sufficient, without any other,
so strongly to cry to the Lord for vengeance, as that it may be no marvel
unto us, if the Lord do still raise up enemies against us. If needs we will
spoil the Lords houses here, and his people withal, both of his word, and
of their own livings, and will not restore, nor grow to amendment: the more
that we do such things our selves, the less may we marvel if the Lord send
in enemies to do the like, and to be avenged on the Lords behalf, of that
which we mean not to amend.

Being therefore so likely a matter as it is, that some heavy judgments of
God are growing against the ungodly that are among us, (and so consequently
much business to al, one with another indifferently) and being so certain,
that the Lord is ever wont to exercise those that are his, it cannot be but to
needful purpose, that this kind of argument should be debated: that so the
godly may see what security is laid up for them, and others likewise may know
of that refuge, whenever they are disposed to use it, and turn to the Lord.
And so now having said, what J thought most needeful, to express the cause and
general end of the Treatise ensuing, J am not to trouble your Honor any
further at this present: most humbly beseeching the Lord of his goodness,
that as now already these many years he has bestowed great blessings on
these parts by your godly, mild, and prudent government, so it may please him
long to continue your L. among us, and to increase all his graces and mercies
toward you in Christ Jesus.

At York, 28 of August. 1588. Your Honors most humble in the Lord, Ed. Bunny.

A Table declaring what is the Method, or manner of handling the matter ensuing.
Besides the enterie into the Treatise, in the first Section, and the
Conclusion, Prayer, and Psalms, in five of the last: we have here set down,
out of the history of David's advanceme^t, what hope we may conceive (in these
troublesome times) for the like advanceme^t of the Gospel also: and First,
out of that which is already done with us: because it does so fitly agree with
that which was done for David before: But herein, First, how God did bring him
forth, to be in a readiness to enter into the kingdom, when the time should
come. Sect. 2, 3. Then, how he brought him unto the Kingdom, but herein,
First, of his persecutions, which were chiefly two. Sections 4. 7. Then, how
God perfoormed his promis unto him: first bringing him unto some part of the
Kingdom, and then to the whole. Sect. 8, 9.

Then, concerning our further hope, to have the Gospel yet better advanced,
First, it is declared, what course it is, wherein we may conceive such hope.
Sect. 10, 11. Then, how to answer certain objections that may be conceived
against it, upon the difference that may be supposed to be, betwixt his case,
and ours. Concerning which, First we are taught, that in such case there is
with God no regard to that matter. Section. 12. Then it is further showed,
First, as touching David's own person, that he also was not without his
infirmities. Sect. 13. Then, as touching his Kingdom, that there was not more
need of it then, for want of better government in Saul, than there is now for
the like cause also. Sect. 14, 15.




The Contents of the Book ensuing, gathered after so plain a manner, as best
may serve to lead on the simpler sort unto the better understanding of it.
COncerning those troubles that are for the Gospels sake, first it is set down
generally, that out of the Scripture it may sufficiently be gathered, whereunto
they are like to sort themselves in the end. Sect. 1. Then, out of this part of
the story of David it is declared, that as David was Anointed unto the
Kingdom: even so (in some sense) is the Gospel also. Sect. 2, 3. Likewise, as
David was grieuouslie persecuted, before that he could attain to the Kingdom:
that so it has bin, and yet is, with the Gospel of Christ. Sect. 4, 5, 6, 7.
And that as David was afterward brought, first to one part of it, and then to
the whole: so the Gospel, being in such sort advanced as already it is, is
therein as likely also to be further advanced. Sect. 8, 9. But yet that we are
to await this goodness of God, in such a course as David did. Sect. 10, 11. And
so doing, that we need not to doubt, for that such advancement of his glory
stands not on our worthiness, but on his goodness also. Sect. 12. And though it
did, yet that there is no such difference between David then, and the children
of God now, because that he also was subject unto great infirmities. Sect. 13.
Besides all this, that the want of government in the world now, does as much
require the advancement of the Gospel to make supply: as the want of
government in the days of Saul, did then need the kingdom of David. Sect. 14,
15. Diverse examples of the like works of God, brought in: and applied to our
comfort. Sect. 16. 17. A Prayer to that end, going upon the whole story. Sect.
18. How David exercised himself to Godward in those his troubles: and what
Psalms they are which then he made. Sect. 19, 20.
FINIS.
The Coronation of David.
1 HOw great broils at this day are raised in these parts of Christendom
against the Gospel of Jesus Christ, What is like to be the end of these
troubles that are for the Gospels sake.
and how (as yet) they are like to continue, because that new and fresh
troubles do continually follow hard upon such as are gone before: is a thing in
it self so plain and evident, that no body at al, would he never so fayn, can
be ignorant of it. Insomuch that as in the lake Genazereth the wind and the sea
did both together seem to conspire against that Bark, wherein Christ was with
his disciples, for to have drenshed and drowned them al; the wind stirring up
and raising the sea, the sea getting up and growing rageous, and both together
furiously beating with all their might on that seely vessel: even so now also,
ever since it pleased the Lord to vouchsafe us the Ghospel again in so
plentiful manner, all the powers and states of the world have redily bent
themselves against it, those that are especially led by the spirit of error,
and have a mouth given them to speak proud things, stirring up both Princes
and their people against the truth; those Princes likewise, and their people
with them, willingly taking that quarrel in hand, and both together, with might
and mayn rushing upon the word of life, and earnestly laboring (all that they
may) clean to suppress and extinguish the same. Which whosoever does with
aduisement consider, he in reason might easily be in danger to think, both
that there were some special great cause in this profession, why it should be
so much maligned; and that, ere long, needs must it be destroyed also. Howbeit
the truth is, that neither is there in it any cause at al, why they should so
rage against it: neither shall any, nor al together, in such sort prevail
against it, when they have done all that they can. Nevertheless it cannot be
denied, but that there are of the weaker sort, that can hardly conceive so good
assurance of the inuinciblenes of the cause it self: and others again so much
presuming of the goodness of the cause, that they regard not much, what
carelesnes or iniquity of theirs they mingle withal; and hope notwithstanding
that al shall be well, laying al on the goodness of the cause. For which cause I
think it a work not unworthy the labor, and very meet for the present time,
that such as are the Lords watchmen commend unto the people of God such places
of Scripture as best may serve, both to describe and to lay forth these matters
unto them, and withal to teach them, what shall be the issue thereof in the end,
and how to behave themselves therein. An example of the like, among the Jews
at Jerusalem. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 37. Socr. lib. 3. cap. 20. and Sozom. lib.
5. cap. 2.
And so may we read in ancient time, as of many others, so namely of Cyril the
Bishop of Jerusalem, that when the like occasion was offered unto him, he also
took the self same course. The like occasion that was offered unto him, was a
great fear that many of the people of God in those parts conceived, that
Christian religion having already been received and planted there by public
authority, should after give place to Iudaisme again. For Julian the Emperor,
himself professing the faith at the first, and finding the same already
established by public authority (forty years before that he came to the
Crown, by Constantine the great and Constantius his son) and having a secret
intent with him to set up heathnish idolatry again, among other practices that
he used to cross the faith of Christ, and those that did profess it, so much
as he could, gave liberty, comfort, and aid unto the Jews to build up the
Temple at Jerusalem again, and there to sacrifice, and observe the law as
before they were wont. Whereupon great multitudes of the Jews assembled
themselves together out of al quarters; set in hand with their business in great
confidence; prepared things needful for the building in great pentie, had (in a
bravery) many of their working instruments of silver, even to their baskets,
spades, and mattokes; before hand threatened the Christians there, how near
they would sit unto them ere long: and in all things had held such a course
therein for the time, as that it seemed unto many, that the faith of Christ
should be abolished there, and Judaism set up again. But Cyril the Bishop,
perceauing what offense this might breed unto many, and that diverse were not a
little dismayed thereat (and therefore much weakened in the faith thereby)
calling to mind what things Daniel and Christ himself before had spoken of the
utter overthrow of that Temple and city, did resolutely set down unto the
faithful, even when the matter was at the highest, and their new building in
greatest likelihood to go forward, that yet notwithstanding it should not
prosper, but go back again, and come to no proof in the end. And so it came to
pass immediately after. For the lime and the sand they had gotten together in
great heaps, was with mighty winds so blown away, that they knew not where to
find it: the old foundation, when they had taken the rubble from it, and now
were ready (the next day after) to have begun their new building thereon, was in
the night by a strange and mighty earthquake so clean turned up and shaken in
pieces, that there was not left one stone upon an other, that was not shaken
out of his place: and as for the timber and stone which they had provided (and
that in great quantity) and their instruments or tools wherewithal they
should have wrought, (and many of the people themselves) they were destroyed by
fire, such as the Lord in extraordinary manner cast upon them. As therefore
Cyril at that time was able, out of the Scriptures to minister sound comfort to
the people of God, against that discomfortable case of theirs; and, as he was
able, accordingly did it: so the godly in these days also have (in great
plenty) wherewithal to comfort those that are weak, and that in their weakness
doubt very much whereunto these broils may grow. For now also these Jews of
ours have obtained ye comfort and aid of certain Iulians, that they hope ere
long to banish the Ghospel, and to set up Popery again: they have also
contrived, and complotted their matters so, that nothing they hope, shall
frustrate their vayn presumption therein. But he that dwells in the heavens
does laugh them to scorn: the Lord will have them in derision. Let the Lords
watchmen but look about them, and they shall be able to find (and that in very
plentiful measure) wherwithal soundly to comfort, and fully to establish the
hearts of those, that in their weakness so readily fear, that when tyrants
begin to threaten, and make preparation to do some mischief, then is the
Gospel not like to escape it, and the power of darkness (that of late
overwhelmed the face of the earth) like to prevail against us again. To the
which end, as I wish those that can rightly do it, diligently to beat out this
point of doctrine to the people of God: so my self also have thought good to
take in hand some such argument at this present, and among so many places of
Scripture that yield for this matter most singular comfort, to deliver some one
to the instruction and comfort of those, that in these days of ours do in such
sort need to be called upon. For which cause I have made choice of that part of
the story of David, wherein we have set forth unto us, how, being ordained to
be King over Israel, he was kept back, and notably exercised for a time, and
yet notwithstanding fully possessed thereof in the end. For seeing that David
was a figure of Christ, and such as was the estate of Christ here on the earth,
such also must be the state of the Gospel whenever the same is sent unto us:
therefore must it needs follow, that as in that part of David's history, we
may see a lively description of those matters in Christ, both how he was kept
back for the time, and how in the end he was advanced; so may we likewise
therein behold the estate of the Gospel in these our days, for both those
matters: that is, how great resistance for a time it finds among us; and how
notwithstanding it is most sure to prevail in the end. The text therefore
being so pregnant, and so effectual to such a purpose, that I likewise may the
better find out (in some good measure) whatsoever does belong thereunto, I
humbly beseech that son of David, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
vouchsafe me that mercy, that I may so do it, as may soundly tend, both to the
advancement of his eternal and only truth, and to the comfort of all those
that unfeignedly love and embrace the same.

2 And so being purposed (by the goodness, and grace of God) in such sort to
unfold that part of the story of David, What comfort we have, in that which is
already done on behalf of the Gospel.
as that our selves may now also the better see, what to think of those
broiles that now are for the Ghospels sake, and how we are to demean our
selves in the mean season, it shall be good first to consider how far-forth we
are helped forward to good assurance by the accord that we find in that which
is already done here among us, with that which in this history of David we
find to have bin done before: and then to advise our selves further, of the
hope that we may conceive, of the full accomplishment of it, for the time to
come. The good assurance whereunto we are helped by the accord that we find, in
that which is already done among us, with that which in this history of David
we find to have bin done before, will best appear, if we shall first set down
the chief and principal parts of the history it self: and then lay unto it,
from point to point, such things as we find in these our days to agree
thereunto. The chief and principal points of the Story it self, are two:
how it pleased God to bring him forth to be in a readiness for that matter: and
afterward, how he brought him unto it. That it pleased God first to bring him
forth to be in a readiness for that matter, may sufficiently appear, first by
the manner that he used to make the matter known to David himself: and then,
for that he did so effectually commend him to others. Unto himself he made it
known, for that by the ministry of Samuel the Prophet, he did anoint him
thereunto. In which his Anointing we are first to consider, The Anointing of
David unto the Kingdom.
how it stands with a certain Prophetical direction that was given forth
long before: and then of certain other things which to that present time
apperteined. That Prophetical direction that I now speak of, was given forth
by Jaakob himself on his deathbed, among other blessings of his, to his
children: namely, Genesis 49.8, 10.
that the chief government should be in the tribe of Judah. Whereas therefore
Ishai the father of David was of the tribe of Judah which had the promis, it is
so much the more likely that some one might be taken thence, unto whom the
Kingdom should be established: then of the family of Kish the father of Saul,
being of the tribe of Benjamin, unto whom no such promis was made. Insomuch
that whereas it had pleased God, now for a time to call Saul unto the kingdom,
it may seem that it was no more, but to make a readier way unto the other that
was to stand: and therewithal to set down a pattern unto all Princes that
were to follow. A readier way might be made thereby unto the other that was to
stand, both for that thereby they should now be inured to some obedience: and
for that they were wont to obey, not only a mean man by parentage, and of the
least tribe among them all: but also in such hard cases sometimes, as wilful
regiment is wont to yield. A pattern likewise may therein be left to all
Princes whatsoever, to take good heed to their manner of government, when as
they may see, with what severity the Lord did punish those two faults in the
first King of Israel, in whom there were many good things otherwise found: that
so they may the better understand, that although God does put up many greater
matters at their hands since for a time; yet may they before hand see, how they
are like to be dealt withal, when the day of vengeance shall come, unless
they provide for it before. Those other things which to that present time
apperteined, are two, his outward anointing, and the inward grace that was
given withal. 1. Sam.
In his outward anointing we are to consider, that it was but 16.1.5.13.
privately done, in the house of Ishai (or at the most, but only in that one
town, which was but little in respect of the whole people) and yet
notwithstanding a sufficient testimony unto himself, and to those that knew
it: and that both his father 16.10.11.
left out him, in that account, and Samuel the Prophet also 16.6.
could well have settled his choice in one of the other. The inward grace that
was given withal, was the 16.13.
Spirit of the Lord which then came upon him, and wherewith, from that day
forward, he was endewed. How effectually God did commend him to others, may
likewise appear, How beneficial David was made, both to the King, and to the
people.
for that shortly after he wrought forth of him some special benefit unto
others: and in others likewise a special favor to him again. The benefit
that it pleased God to work forth of him unto others, did partly respect Saul
himself: and partly ye whole host of Israel. That which respects Saul
himself was, that 16.23.
by his instrument he sometimes eased the Kings mind, when by the evil spirit
of the Lord, he was vexed with his melancholy passions. That which respected
the whole host of Israel generally, was ye slaughter of Goliath. Concerning
which, to the end that the benefit, that it pleased God to work forth of David
in that action, unto them all generally, may better appear, it shall be good,
more specially to consider, both how sore an enemy that Goliath was unto them:
and how notably David delivered them from him. How sore an enemy he was unto
them, may soon appear, whether we consider, what terror might justly proceed
from him to the children of Israel: or whether we regard the great fear that
they had of him. The terror that might justly proceed from him to themwards,
does partly arise out of the consideration of himself alone: but chiefly of
him and his company together. He alone was not only of 17.4.
extraordinary stature, and strength (far exceeding the ordinary proportion
of others) and 17.5.7.
furnished with armor, and weapon accordingly: but also, both a natural
enemy to the people of God, and to their religion; and so confident in
himself and his company, that he 17.10.45.
defied the host of Israel, and God himself. His company also might well be
terrible to the people of Israel, both because that they also were natural
enemies, both to themselves, and to the truth that they professed: and
sometimes before had the children of Israel in strong subjection. The children
of Israel were so afraid of him, that 17.11.24.
they did not only fear to encounter him: but also shrank aside at his
presence for very fear. How notably David delivered the people from these
their enemies, may likewise appear, not only in that which he did, but also in
the manner of doing it. That which he did, was, that he destroyed 17.49.51.
that outgrowne monster Goliath: and therewithal stroke such a terror into the
hearts of all the other Philistims, that forthwith 17.51.
they turned their backs, and fled. His manner of doing the same was notable,
both for undertaking the attempt at the first, and afterward in the performance
of it. In his undertaking of it at the first, we are to consider, how strong
temptation he had against it: and whereby notwithstanding he conceived
undoubted hope to prevail. The temptation that he had so strong against it,
was partly in Eliab his eldest brother, and partly in Saul the King himself.
In his brother Eliab he found 17.28.
himself reviled and disdained in plentiful measure, only for that he did so
much as talk of the matter: in Saul likewise 17.33.
his attempt condemned, as altogether impossible, for him to bring to any good
proof. The thing whereby he strengthened himself against these temptations was
an invincible faith 17.34.37.
upon the experience of Gods goodness toward him, in two such like attempts
before. In his performance of it we see likewise, that he notably behaved
himself both in his preparation toward it: and in the execution it self,
when he came unto it. In his preparation we see, that he 17.39.
refused Saul's armor, and all the ordinary furniture of war, and took unto
him but only his 17.40.
Sling, and a few stones for the same. In the execution it self we plainly
see, that first he did notably 17.45.47.
rebuke the insolency and pride of that mighty Giant, and then though he had
no other weapon but only his Sling, yet did he 17.48.
hasten with marvelous courage to encounter with him. What favor it pleased
God to work in others to David again.
That special favor that it pleased God to work forth in others to him
again, was partly found in the first benefit that redounded to Saul alone: but
much better in this that redounded to all. In his first benefit that redounded
to Saul alone, we find thus much, both that he did 16.21.
love him very well, and gave therewithal good tokens of it: one, that he
16.21.
made him his harnes-bearer, the other, that he 16.22.
sent to his father to have him still (though 17.15.55.
as it seems, David tarried not long there.) In his latter that redounded to
all, we find that God procured him favor, both with certain special persons,
and with the whole multitude also. Those special persons were, Saul himself,
and two of his children. In Saul we find, that 18.2.
now he would suffer him to return no more unto his father: and that 18.5.
both he used him in diverse of his affairs, and set him over his men of war.
Those two children of Saul, in whose hearts God had wrought forth a favor to
David, were Jonathan his son, and Michal his daughter. In Jonathan was wrought
a very singular and rare good will: insomuch that he is 18.1.3.
said, not only to love David as his own soul, but also to have expressed the
same by notable tokens. One was, that he 18.3.
made a covenant with him; and that of love: the other, that he 18.4.
took from his own body, and bestowed on him, both abiliments of honor, and
furniture to the field likewise. In Michal likewise was wrought such good will,
that both at the first she 18.20.
loved him, as one whom she would be glad to make her husband (that so whereas
Saul 17.25.
before had promised to give one of his daughters in marriage to him that should
slay Goliath, now he might the better perform it, and David might thereby have
a readier way to that whereunto God had called him a little before) and
19.11.12.
after saved his life likewise. In the multitude we also find, not only that
they thought very well of him for this his victory: but also that they did the
like of his other behavior besides, in such things as were now at the first
commended unto him. For this is his victory 18.6.7.
they do not only welcome him home in very good manner, out of all their
cities, and with their instrustuments of music: but also 18.7.
rightly apportion the commendation thereof, yielding to Saul, the ordinary
power, the praise of one thousand; but unto David, or to the extraordinary
goodness of God, no less than ten thousand. And as for his other behavior
likewise, in all such things wherein it pleased Saul to employ him, 18.5.
it is also recorded, that he was accepted, or highly e^steemed in the sight of
all the people: and, that is more, even in the sight of Saul's servants also.

3 Whether the Lord have in like sort dealt in these days of ours, is now to
be seen: that is, That such a like thing is in these days done, on behalf
of the Gospel likewise.
whether in such sort he has brought in any David (upon the want that is found
in others) as that by the nature and course of his dealing therein, we may hope
to see the same David, to be by him not only advanced, but established also
for ever. Concerning which it is most certain, that in these days also he
has begun to advance such a David, and so fitly agreeing to the pattern that
is here set down, as that we may upon good ground look to see the full
accomplishment thereof in his good time. For whereas Christ and his Gospel can
in no wise be parted, and seeing that the Gospel is the scepter of his
kingdom here on earth, whatsoever wisdom and power of God we find in the
manner of David's advancement, look by what right we may translate the same
from David unto the person of Christ, as from the figure unto the truth, by as
good right may we translate it unto the Gospel likewise, the only Scepter of
his kingdom on earth. First therefore needs must it also be so inseperably
annexed unto the government that was promised to the tribe of Judah, that by
virtue of the promise made unto it, we may look for the accomplishment in
this likewise. And it may be, that for that cause especially God has for so
long a time (in the late power of darkness) inured Christendom unto so base
and hard a government (much worse then was that same of Saules) that so the
lawful, and most blessed regiment of the Gospel (otherwise irksome to flesh
and blood) might be more welcome, not only to the children of God, but even to
the common multitude also. It may be also, that seeing that Princes have
governed so ill, as for the most part they have al done (few of them so
tollerably as did King Saul) therefore the Lord does now begin to advance the
Gospel, that so those godless and careless Princes may better see what their
government was, that now by the Gospel they find to be so playnlie called
unto the check, and in many things so sharply reproved, and so flatly
condemned likewise. For it is meet, that if the casting away of Saul will not
serve to be a warning unto them, then that they, and their government also
should be removed, so far as is needful, that they be no hinderance to the
Gospel of Christ. In what sort it is anointed.
In the outward annoynting, that the Gospel has had in these days of ours,
though we deny not but great fault is found: yet in effect is it none other,
but such as was in David's also. For if they say, that the Gospel (with us) was
not at the first received by any public consent of all: no more was it at the
beginning in the time of Christ and his Apostles; neither had David at the
first any such annoynting. If they say, that the wiser and greater sort made
but little reckoning of it, and had better liking to their own profession: yet
therein also they allege nothing else, but the same that before we did see, to
be the portion of David likewise. And seeing that the Gospel now, has the
inward testimony of the spirit in so plentiful measure (for that now also the
blind do see, the deaffe do hear, the lame do go, the sick are cured, the
dead are raised, and such like; and the same, not only in particular persons,
and several congregations, but in whole States, and diverse mighty Kingdoms
likewise) such petite quarrels about the outward annoynting, can be no great
matter, when as the outward is by the inward so thoroughly confirmed. But to
make it more out of doubt, may we not see (if we look well about us) that God
has made a way to the Gospel, even as before he did unto David? And though
his wisdom and power be infinite, and so he were able to devise and use many
other ways whatsoever: yet may we not see, that he has done it in the self
same manner, that he used for David before; that so by the former, we might the
sooner acknowledge his hand in the latter? For first we may see, How beneficial
the Gospel is made unto diverse. First in comforting our troubled minds.
that by the Gospel he has bestowed great benefits on many: and namely such,
as it pleased him by the hands of David to bestow upon others. It pleased God,
by the instrument, and musik of David, to give unto Saul some ease in those mad
fits of his? And does he not much more appease the troubled and desperate
conscience of man with that spiritual and heavenly musik, which by his Gospel
he brings unto us: and by that notable Harmony that is betwixt the old
Testament, and the new, in those great mercies of God toward all believers
now, as well as to the Patriarchs and Prophets before, and by the virtue of that
Communion, whereby he has coupled all the Saints together in one? And in what
manner or measure soever the evil spirit departed from Saul, and gave him some
respit, whenever David played on his Harp unto him: sure we are, that when
as now the son of David plays on his instrument unto us by the preaching of
the Gospel, we have not only a great refreshing in our inward man, but also
are clean rid of many evil spirits that before did much molest us. The
servants of Saul taking his malady to be but natural, thought of no other
help but natural also: yet did it please the goodness of God, to bless the
natural help that they sought, with supernatural operation. So now likewise,
though many that know not their own estate, give ear to the Gospel but only
in some earthly respects: yet those also oftimes are vouchsafed an
extraordinary and special blessing thereby, accompanied with everlasting
peace. Then in the overthrow of certain of our Philistims, and of their Goliath
withal.
As for the other benefit of David, that belonged to the whole host of Israel,
by the overthrow of Goliath, and consequently of the whole army of the
Philistims besides, that is (among us) so evidently and plainly performed by
the Gospel of Christ, that I shall not need to stand to declare it. For our
Philistims also have their Goliath, an outgrowne monster, of merueilous
stature, much greater a great deal (as his Canonistes say; and usurpation, we
know has brought him unto) then the greatest of the great men of the earth:
his furniture likewise, strong, and fearful: a natural enemy to the people
of God, and to God himself: his mouth speaking proud and cruel things against
God and his people: coming into the field with a mighty army, all enemies
unto the Truth, and to all the professors of it: such as heretofore have had
the people of God in great subjection: of whom also the children of Israel have
been so afraid, that they durst not abide their presence, but have fled from
them by heaps: none of them al having the heart to encounter with that strong
and mighty Giant, so fearfully armed, and blustering out so terrible speeches.
But now we also (God be praised) have our David in the power of the Gospel,
that Jesus Christ (the son of David) has now in these days sent unto us.
When our brethren disdayned to hear us talk of any such matter; when the
wiser sort thought it impossible; without Saules armor, without any earthly
help whatsoever: upon assurance of such like matters before achieved, with a
sting and a stone, is Goliath with great courage incountered, and with as good
success, in a manner clean overthrown, even when the attempt was either
distrusted, or scorned of all. The residue also of those godless and
idolatrous Philistims, seeing their champion so little able to stand before
David, are likewise discomfited, and seek to save them selves by flight, Such
favors likewise showed forth to the Gospel, as were showed to David before.
so well as they can. The favors also, that by the goodness of God are
showed, to the Gospel, and to those that profess it, are not inferior to
those that were (as before is declared) showed to David. For (God be thanked)
there be diverse even of our earthly Princes (such as are no better then Saul)
that seeing the dignity and mighty working of the Gospel of Christ in these
days of ours, are so taken with the majesty of it, that themselves love both
it, and many of those that profess it also, as much as Saul at that time loved
David, and that was, as the text says, very well: and, to confirm the same
the better, both desire to reteyne it still; and bestow honorable rooms, and
of special credit, on those that profess it. Some Ionathans also, and godly
Princes we have besides, that love the Gospel most entirely: and, for the
Gospels sake, and for the love that they bear thereunto, do gladly make a
covenant with it, and with those that profess it; and from their own backs
most freely bestow upon it, and on those that profess it, both ornaments of
honor, and convenient furniture likewise. Neither does the Gospel altogether
want those Michals neither, that is, such godly and Christian souls, as though
they be according to the flesh descended of Saul, yet bear they so special a
love unto David, that both they desire to be joined together in marriage with
him: and are ready at al times, as need shall require, to save the lives of
those that are of the Truth (wheresoever they come to any such danger) how
near soever they be unto them, by whom such persecution is moved. And so
far as Michals good will may stand in stead, in time to come to help to the
kingdom, so far also she does not stick, now to bestow the same upon him.
Amongst the multitude also many there be, that are heartily glad to see our
Philistims also with their Goliath, to be so much brought down as they are;
to whom our David in that respect is merueilous welcome: who also have learned
so to distinguish, betwixt the special working of God, and the secondary
means that he uses, that although they give unto Saul his thousand also, yet
do they ever keep their ten thousand for David alone. Neither do they thus
solemnize only this victory of the Gospel; but also conceive a special good
liking of the whole course and proceeding of it: and not only those that are
the freest, and so may safelier like as they list, without controulment; but
many of the servants of our Saul's likewise, such as on their masters behalf
have no such cause to like of David. Where we see thus much already, there may
we hope there is more behind, and in due time to be accomplished.

4 To find out now in what sort it pleased God to bring him to the kingdom,
That for a time David was exercised with great affliction, before that he was
brought unto the Kingdom.
after that once he had anointed him unto it, and so effectually commended him
to others, we are to know, that he did not bring him unto it, till first he
had notably exercised him with much affliction, sundry trials, and many
crosses cast in the way. So are we first to consider of those his afflictions,
and then how it pleased God notwithstanding, at length to bring him unto the
Kingdom. His afflictions were such persecutions and molestations, as it
pleased Saul to stir up against him. Concerning which it is to be known, that
they were especially two: whereof the former was finished with a reconciliation
that was made by Jonathans means: the other continued so long as Saul himself
did live. His former persecution.
Concerning the former of these two, we are first to see upon what occasion it
was raised against him: and then what was the manner of it. The occasion of it
was first his own distemperature: The occasion of it.
then the towardnes or likelihood that David was in, to come to the Kingdom.
His own distemperature (we may plainly see) might well be great, not only
because the evil spirit of the Lord 16.14.
was sent unto him, and 16.15.18.10.19.9.
often did vex him: but also for that we may see likewise, that 18.8.9.20.31.
it grieved him much to part with the Kingdom. And then less marvel, if he
were so far out of temper, and consequently so rageous withal, when as he did
so impatiently take so great a loss: and sometimes also was extraordinarily
vexed by that evil spirit, that from the Lord was sent unto him. The towardnes
or likelihood that David was in, to come to the Kingdom, was first in that
sentence of God, that now it should be given to another: then for that David
was likeliest to be that other that God did speak of. For the text does not
show, that he knew as yet of David's anointing: and, because that he never said
any thing to Samuel about it, nor otherwise makes any mention of it, it is the
most likely, that he did not know of it. Yet thus much he knew, that
13.14.15.23.26.28.
Samuel had told him twice already, that the Lord had cast him away, and now
provided himself of another: and he might well see, that David was likeliest
to be that other, both for that 17.34.36.38.51.
God had wrought such things by him, and for the 18.7.
favor that now he had gotten. Concerning the manner of this his first
persecution, first he sought by secret means, The manner of it. First in secret.
to have taken away the life of David: and then he set in hand more openly with
it. Secretly he did attempt, first by his own hands to have done it: and then
by the Philistims. By his own hands he would first have done it, at such time
18.10.
as he was in one of his fits, as David was playing on his instrument to
mitigate his passions, even on the morrow after that they came home from the
slaughter of Goliath, and the Philistims: 18.11.
twice together he had in his mind, for to have executed this mischeuous
purpose. A wonderful thing that he should be so minded, though he had bin so
minded but once: not only in respect of the fact it self, but also in respect
of diverse circumstances thereunto apperteining. The fact it self must needs
have bin wilful murder: then the which there needed no greater, both to have
convinced him of great iniquity before men, and utterly to have cast himself
away before God. The circumstances that are, do chiefly appertain unto their
persons, but partly also unto the time. The persons are two: Saul, and David.
Saul being the King, and so consequently being ordained to be the mainteiner of
equity, and a buckler and shield unto the oppressed, ought not to have made
such a fault himself: besides that at that time, being in one of his fits, and
sensibly feeling the hand of God upon him for his former sins, he should
rather have used it to his further amendment, then so to take the advantage of
it, to a further mischief. David was not only innocent, but also had (in that
very matter for the which he should have bin destroyed) deserved marvelous
well, both of all generally, for that he had given so great an overthrow unto
the common enemy of all, and especially of Saul, because they were, by reason
of the person that he sustained, enemies to none so much as to him. The time
when he would have done this mischief, was the very next day after that they
were welcomed home from the victory, the people reioicing and singing unto
them, that Saul had slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand: as
unseasonable a time for such a purpose, as could be devised, because that as
yet the benefit that he had received was so fresh, that it ought so to have
filled all the powers of his mind with all thankful remembrance, as that
there might have bin no corner at all in his heart, wherein so much as a little
spark of so great unthankfulness might find any place. In that he had this
purpose twice, it does both argue his unthankfulness and ill dealing to be so
much the greater: and might be withal a warning to David not to think, that
because Saul had once failed, when first he attempted to do him that mischief,
he would never for shame attempt it again. When this way failed, he then
thought good, that it should be done by the Philistims: his hand now should not
be upon him. And that by ye Philistims it might better be done, he 18.13.
both gave him the charge of a thousand men, and would needs 18.17.21.
set him forth one of his daughters in marriage also. In giving him charge over
such a band of soldiers, he would seem, not only to put him in trust, but
also to seek his preferment and honor: and yet (in truth) he sought nothing
else but his overthrow, hoping that by that occasion, more boldly encountering
with the enemy, one time or other he should be overthrown. In setting him
forth one of his daughters in marriage, and in such sort as he did, (both
18.22.25.
earnestly laboring it by such means as he used, and 18.25.
requiring of him no other dowry, but an hundredth foreskins of the Philistims)
although (in truth) he sought 18.17.21.25.
nothing else in this also, but only his overthrow: yet herein did he seek it
more cunningly (and therefore to David so much more dangerously) for that
hereby he would seem, both to bear a special favor to David, and, in the
overthrow of the enemy, chiefly to respect the cause of religion. The former of
them is plain enough in it self. The latter also does plainly appear, for
that he does not require their heads, or other parts, but only their foreskins:
which (in those days) was a special difference betwixt the people of God, and
the heathen. When he had made some trial of those secret practices, Then
openly.
and found that they never came to any such proof, as he desired (but on ye
other side 18.27.28.
that they were means to make David both much stronger, and more renouned then
he was before) being able now to stay no longer, he 18.29.19.1.
brake forth into open persecution, and gave special charge both unto
Jonathan, and to all his servants, one way or other to make him away: wherein
it seems, that he used Jonathan, as one of whom he might be assured: the
others for the spedier dispatch of the matter. It might seem that he might
make sure of Jonathan, both because he was his son, and especially because
that the cause was his, so near as it was. For being the Kings son, and next
to the Crown by lineall descent, it was likely in reason, that he would have
bin as ready as Saul, to have taken David out of the way. And his other
servants being many, it was likely also, that seeing he gave the charge to them
all, it must needs be quickly dispatched: either for emulation among themselves;
who should first gratify the King therein, or for that some one or other among
so many was like to be found, that would attempt any mischief whatsoever,
having once the Kings commandment for it. Howbeit, Jonathan hereupon so
19.4.5.
labored the King (after that 19.2.3.
first he had warned David to keep himself close) that he wrought a
reconciliation betwixt them: and so this first persecution ceased.

5 In which point if we come to our selves, That the Gospel in these days is
under the like persecution also.
and to the estate of these our days wherein we live, it is evident enough,
that although the course of the Gospel be in such sort blessed already, as
that we may see that it is like to prevail in the end: yet is it so crossed
also by many, that it is not to be looked for of us, but that it is to pass
through great tribulation, before that it shall atteyne to the victory that
after ensues. And as it was Saul the King of Israel, that so persecuted David,
and held him back (so much as he could) from the estate that God had provided
for him: even so we may see (at this day also) many Princes and great states of
Christendom, much to hinder the course of the Gospel; and, as they find
opportunity to serve their turn, still to stir up persecution against it.
But to the end that all things may so much the better appear in every point,
if we consider the matter well, we may plainly see, The occasion of this
persecution to be al one with the other.
that such as was the occasion, and such as was the manner of that persecution
of his; such also is the occasion, and such is the manner of this persecution
of theirs also. For first as touching the occasion of it, not only Saul was so
much moved unto it by that evil spirit to persecute David: but these also, out
of the selfsame solicitation, come forth with many of their persecutions
against the Gospel. For though by the common corruption of nature themselves
also are bent against it, even of themselves, without the solicitation or help
of an other: yet after that themselves are disposed still to abide in that
corruption of theirs (refusing the Gospel, by which they should be begotten
again the children of God) it is most certain, that they cannot be alone in
any such action of theirs as this. For he that goes about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, finding them so fit instruments for his purpose,
to trouble the course of the Gospel, and to molest the professors thereof,
will soon be with them, and hurrie them headlong to and fro to his most
advantage. So that it need not to be doubted, but is in it self so clear as
may be, that most of our persecutions also, that are by worldly and godless
Princes raised against us, may well be referred to that evil spirit that
reigns in the world, and has already so strongly possessed these Saules of
ours. Neither is it only by this evil spirit of the Lord, that these Saules of
ours are so far out of temper: but for that it greeueth them also to part
with their kingdom. Not that the Gospel does any way meddle in the disposing
of earthly kingdoms, or to encomber the title of any (whether it be by
descent, or election; of one, or mo; or whatsoever other form their state may
have:) but for that it calls to account their manner of government, and
sometime urges them to make a plain alteration of it. For commonly it finds
the Princes of the world so far out of order in their manner of government (in
matters of religion very often: and sometimes in such things also as do
concern their civil estate) that it cannot but strongly urge them to make
alteration therein. So far therefore as they are wedded unto their corrupt
manner of government, and so far as they account their kingdoms and states
to stand thereby: so far also may they stand in some doubt of their kingdoms
by reason of the Gospel, and fear that it will molest them therein. And then
is it (in this respect also) no great merueile, if many of them be so ill
minded toward the Gospel, as such discourtesies of theirs do import. On the
other side, as the towardliness of David was one of the matters that so much
did whet Saul against him: so at this day also it is not the least, that
moves Princes to be so grievous against the Gospel, because they see that
it is so likely to prevail as it is. For they see well enough that the Gospel
has the self same likelihoods to prevail that David had. For as touching
that manner of government which worldly Princes have set up of themselves, but
not agreeable to the word of God, the text it self Ier. 23.1.8. Eze. 34.1.24.
Nah. 3.17.19. Zec 11.8.15.17. Math. 15.13. 2. Cor. 10.5. etc.
does plainly witness (more often then twice) that it must be removed, and a
better brought in, in the place thereof. And that it is the kingdom of Christ,
whereunto those others are to give place, and which is to succeed in their
roumes, is in like sort playnlie set down Isay. 9.5.6. Dan. 2.44.45.
in many places, or rather throughout the whole course of the Scripture, from
the beginning unto the ending: besides that in these days of ours, not only
such great things are done thereby; but it has gotten great favor also. That
such great things are done thereby, as before were done by David, may
sufficiently appear in that which is before set down: and that it has gotten
such favor with many, is playnlie seen in these days of ours, when as many
Princes and States have wholly yielded to the obedience of it, and not a few
among those also that are most against it. Neither is it material in this case
of ours, that the annoynting of this our David has not been in so public
manner, as flesh and blood would conceive had been most convenient. Men may not
look to bear such a sway in the matters of God. The Gospel is not therefore
to be refused by any, because they were not made privy unto the inauguration
of it, nor called unto it. God that is free, and in nothing to hang upon any,
is in such case especially to show it, and ever to use his freedom therein.
It proceeds in the self same manner that was used in the other before.
As touching the manner of their persecution, that upon this occasion they have
raised, therein also they do fitly answer the pattern that we find in the
other. For first they labor themselves to do it in secret: then do they openly
fall unto it. In secret also sometimes they labor themselves to do it: First
in secret.
sometimes again they will have it done by the hand of others. And even as
Saul being the King, would nevertheless by his own hands have taken him away
in very ill manner: so are there diverse of our Princes also that have not
thought it unseemly for them, to lend forth their own hands to the
persecution of the Gospel, altogether in as ill manner as Saul in that other.
If that which Saul meant against David were no less then murder: neither can
these Saules of ours hold themselves contented with less. Insomuch that they
which by virtue of their office ought to be a shield and defense to all those
that are oppressed, themselves are ready, even with their own hands to do
that violence, that in no wise they should suffer to be offered by any. And, as
they are as forward as Saul in this: so are they not behind in the other
neither, for diverse of them. For on them also is laid the hand of God in
sensible manner, and in such sort (either on their own person, or on their
States) as does plainly urge them unto repentance, and namely to strive no
longer against the Gospel offered unto them: and yet being under some such
special hand of God, they nevertheless have a secret intent, one way, or
other to make away the Gospel of Christ, and utterly to chase it away from the
face of the earth. And as David had deserved merueilous well, in that very
matter for the which he should have been destroyed, both of all generally, and
more specially of Saul: so the Gospel likewise of those that cross it so much
as they do, both generally of them altogether, and more specially of those that
are the leaders of them. For the Gospel also in these our days, and before
our eyes (we standing by and looking thereon) has overthrown those
Philistims of ours: which were both common enemies unto all; and specially to
Princes themselves. Common enemies they were unto all, whether we respect the
slavery that they held us in; or whether we respect the corruption of
religion and life, that they brought with them. Unto Princes more specially
they were so dangerous enemies, both because that they took them down, and
got above them: and for that the corruption that they bring with them is so
contrary as it is, unto the right and orderly government of any state. The time
likewise is the same with these, that it was with Saul: immediately after that
they have received, by the benefit of the Gospel, so many good blessings, as
ought to have filled all the powers of them with most thankful estimation
thereof. And whereas Saul (as yet) had this purpose with him but twice, these
of ours have had it more often: and therewithal do both show themselves more
playnlie, and leave a sufficient warning to others, how little in such case
they are to be trusted. But when themselves are not able so to perform their
secret intents, then will they seem busily to seek the preferment of those,
whom they would have so feign dispatched: then must they be put in some
special trust; then must there be treaty of some special marriage. Which
things are so clear in themselves, that we need not take any pains to show
them: this only shall be sufficient for us, to know what they mean, when any of
that sort, do offer such favors to any of us. Our selves may yet very well
remember (and cannot forget it, would we never so feign) what hurt the cause of
religion susteyneth by accepting such courtesies from them. And yet
notwithstanding, as in some particular cases the cause of religion has been
for a time hindered thereby; so has it been at other times (and that very
often) by such kind of dealing notably helped, though full sore against their
wills: God, of his goodness, so disposing, that the same that they had laid as
a bait or snare unto us, should turn to some great advantage to the cause of
the Gospel, and withal be a snare to those that laid it. And as Saul would
seem in that his preferment of David, not to seek the overthrow of any, but
only of the common enemy of both: so has it been the manner of diverse among
us, with such color to cast those into danger, by whom they have seen the
cause of the Gospel to be mainteyned. To war on the Turk for the holy land,
was wont to be an old tale to such a purpose: but that being known unto all,
and their devise being grown much finer now, they handle their matters so much
more cunningly, and so much the hardlier can be espied. Whereby
notwithstanding themselves do find that they have prevailed so little, Then
openly.
that as with Saul they have walked in the dark for a time: so do they as
readily with him also break forth into open tyranny. For howsoever it be the
manner of such, to dispatch their purposes in secret, if they may: yet when in
such sort they cannot come to the end of their wicked endeavors, then do they
fall openly in hand therewith, howsoever they can think, that any way is open
unto them. And as Saul gave a more special charge unto Jonathan for the
execution of that matter, and then generally to all his servant besides: so
these likewise take the same course, that so they may the sooner attain unto
their desire. They specially stir up all such Ionathans as they have among
them, that is, all such, as may seem to be touched any thing nere, with the
quarrel that they have taken upon them: hoping that the nearer that they are
touched with it, the more willing and ready they will be, to join with them in
this kind of quarrel the best that they can. And to the end that it fail not
to be done, they in like sort give the same charge to all their servant
generally: that howsoever it may fall out, that some of them cannot be induced
unto it, and others may want such opportunities, or such other means as were
needful to such a purpose; yet among so many there might ever be some, by
whom it might be as fully effected as themselves could desire. In which
point, the likelihood in this case is so much the greater, as we may see, that
the commandment of a King to do such a matter, is in it self never so
strong, as when there is a persuasion conceived, that the same has a further
warrant from the head of the church that cannot err: and being done, as they
think, on the behalf of the catholic Church, is not only allowable, but
commendable also, and meritorious. Princes we may think, may have their
infirmities, and be ready sometimes, without any cause to take away such, as
they are offended withal. But when it is further, not only warranted, but
strongly also urged by him, that is thought to do all things by the only
direction of Gods holy spirit, that carries such a color with many, as that
they think, they need no more to excuse them for any thing, whatsoever it
be, even before the judgment seat of God himself.

6 As touching the latter of those persecutions that against David were raised
by Saul, His latter percecution.
as it was by Saul more egerly followed then the former: so God on ye other
side afforded David a little more help in this, then he did in the other. So are
we here to consider; first of the persecution it felf, as it was raised against
him by Saul: and then of that help, What the persecution it self was. The
occasion of it.
that herein it pleased God to give him. In the persecution it self we are
again to consider the occasion of it, and then the manner of it likewise. The
occasion of it was in a manner the same that was before: David's good success
against the Philistims, and for that the evil spirit of the Lord, was now
again come upon Saul. That David's good success against the Philistims should
be some part of the occasion, that now again he raised this persecution against
him, may well appear, for that it goes immediately before in the text, that
19.8.
the war began again with the Philistims, and that David, going forth
against them, put them to flight, and slew them with a great slaughter. For
Saul must needs perceive thereby, that as that victory was honorable unto
him: so must it make him the stronger also. That the return of the evil
spirit of the Lord unto him again, was an other part of the occasion also,
may likewise appear, for that it follows immediately after, (and before that
any thing is noted of the manner of this persecution) 19.9.
that the evil spirit of the Lord was upon him, at such time, as when he first
began this persecution. The manner of it.
As touching the manner of it, it is to be known, that even as first he went
about to do it in secret, and afterward openly: even so now also he still
observes the same course. In his secret practicing of it, Secretly first.
we are to note, that first himself pursues David: and then ceasing for a
time from that pursuit, awaiteth when David, by the opportunity of a special
time, should unwittingly come into his hands of his own accord. Himself
pursues him, first at hand: and then somewhat further of a sunder. At hand he
did it, as before; when 19.9.10.
David was playing on his instrument, something to ease him of those his
passions: at which time Saul was secretly determined with himself, with his
Iaueling that he had in his hand, suddenly to have stricken him unto the wall;
and came so near to the effecting of his purpose, that he stroke at him, and
smote his spear into the wall where David sat. Somewhat further of he did it,
immediately after, when as David hereupon did flee, to save himself: and that he
did first by certain messengers, and then by himself. By messengers he pursued
him twice: 19.11.17.
first to his own house, whether he had escaped at that present; and then soon
after 19.18.21.
to Naioth in Ramah, whither he fled, after that he was feign to leave his
own house to save his life. In the former of these his pursuites of David, by
his messengers, he does plainly show himself to be egerly bent to have his
life, both by his dealing with those his messengers, so long as he stood in
hope to obtain the pray he desired: and by his dealing with Michal his
daughter, David's wife, after that he saw he was escaped. That dealing of his
with those his messengers, that conuinceth him to be greedily bent to have his
life, rests in two principal points: first that 19.11.
he gave them charge to kill him, when as he knew not how he himself might be
able to reach him; then, when they brought him word that he was in his bed
sick, that 19.15.
he sent them again to see him, and to bring him away bed and all, that he
might slay him. His dealing with Michal rests likewise in these two points:
that 19.17.
he rebukes her for sending him away, and counts himself mocked therein.
And yet, both she was his own daughter: and now also given by himself in
marriage to David. Of which two considerations, as the former of them might well
have pacified him (in such a case as this) even only for that she was his
daughter: so the other ought to have made him ashamed also, that he should so
much as look for, that she, being his wife now, should have been so
treacherous unto her husband. In the latter of his pursuits of David when he
heard that he was at Naioth in Ramah, in one point he does better cloak that
greediness of his to have his blood; but in another he bewrays himself
plainly again. He cloaketh his greediness somewhat better, in that now 19.20.
he gives no further charge (that we read off) but only to take him, and to
bring him unto him: which, it may be, was for the reverence he bare unto Samuel
19.18.
with whom David soiourned now. That other point, wherein notwithstanding he
plainly declared, how greedily he was bent to have him, is, for that he sent
19.20.22.
so often for him, (by three several companies): and that, 19.20.
when as he understood in how wonderful manner the first sort of them were
defeated, and strongly eluded (and yet in very gracious manner) by the mighty
power of God. By himself he manned forth this his pursuit, when as he saw
that his messengers had not done, as he would have them: For then 19 22.
he went himself also: loath to leese so goodly a pray, when now he did so
certainly know where to have him. A strange, and yet a pitiful sight, to see
the King himself, that should be a defense unto the oppressed, so greedily to
follow upon innocent blood: and of such a one too, as both had deserved well
before, and whom he might so plainly see, to be by the mighty hand of God
defended now. When so 19.23.24
he was, in his own person, in like sort defeated (as all his three companies
of catchpoles were before) then he ceased for a time from that pursuit, and
awaited when David, by the opportunity of a special time, should unwittingly
come into his hands of his own accord. Which special time was the 20.5.18.
new moon, or the beginning of the month next approaching: and the opportunity
which that time brought with it, was, for that at such times 20.6.
they held of custom solemn feasts unto the Lord, and David at such times
20.5.18.
was to sit at meat with the king. That Saul did secretly awayte this
opportunity, the text it self does not directly say: but yet may it be
gathered that so he did, both because that 20.5.7.
David conceived that doubt of him, and 20.5.
thereupon absented himself to prevent the peril, and for that Saul
20.30.31.33.
was so very angry that he was not there, and 20.31.
therewithal commanded Jonathan forthwith to send for him thither, that he
might slay him. That all this while hitherto Saul in this sort pursued David
but in secret manner, saving only that he did impart his meaning to those whom
he used to that purpose (so needs he must, or at least a good part of it) may
hereby appear, both for that 20.2.9.
Jonathan was so ignorant of it, and thereupon would needs assure David that
his father had no such purpose: and for that David himself 20.5.6.
did not as yet openly shun him, but absented himself under color of other
business. Openly after.
But being now again in this sort defeated of all his secret practices, he
thereupon sets in hand again to lay all colors aside now, and openly to
rush upon it, howsoever he may. Wherein we have set down unto us, first how he
rages against others for David's sake: then how he persecuteth him self
likewise. His rage against others for David's sake, First raging against others
for David's sake.
did partly appear, even at that instant, when Jonathan excused that absence of
David: but much more a little after. It did then partly appear, Against
Jonathan.
because at that time both 20.30.
he fowly reviled Jonathan his son: and besides that 20.33.
cast his spear at him to have slain him. A little after it did more fully
appear, both in a certain speech of his to his servants: and in his cruelty
against certain others. In that speech of his to his servants, he lays
grievous things to the charge, partly of them all that were present: but
especially of David, and Jonathan also, who then was absent. Unto the charge of
his servant he lays, that 20.8.
they also, and they all had conspired against him (because they told him not,
Against his servant.
that his son had made a covenant with David, and had stirred up David
against him,) and that none of them were sorry for him; and 20.7.
that by all likelihoode they were won thereunto by some great promises of
David, both of commodities, and of preferments. Unto the charge of David and
Jonathan he lays 20.8.
that the one had conspired against him, Against the Priests of the Lord.
and to lie in wait for him: and that the other had made a covenant with him,
and set him on. These others against whom he showed such cruelty, were certain
Priests of the Lord, and many others together with them. Concerning which we
are to note, both how great cruelty he showed: and upon how small occasion.
His cruelty appeared for that he 22.18.
slew so many priests of the Lord, even fourscore and five: (which his 22.17.
own men abhorred so much, that he could not get them to be executioners of
his bloody commandment) and 22.19.
destroyed besides both men, women, and children, Oxen, Asses, and Sheep, and
the whole city of Nob where those Priests had their aboade. The occasion was
small, because the fault (if any there were) was but in 22.9.10.
one man, Ahimelech only, and that none other, but that ( 22 14.15.
not knowing then, but that David was in high favor with Saul) 22.10.
he both asked counsel for him of the Lord, and did a little relieve him with
some victuals, and with a sword, such as David had good right unto, having
won it of Goliath before in the field: and all this, 22.9.22.
but upon the accusation only of one evil person, Then against David himself.
Doeg an Edomite. After that so he had raged against others, then does he
follow on David himself: and that in such sort, that it may appear he was
egerly set, not only by the nature of those his pursuits in themselves, but
also by one special circumstance thereon depending. As touching the nature of
those his pursuits in themselves, it is set down how he did follow upon him,
first when David upon certain occasion, was now gotten into a city: and then
failing of his purpose there, afterward in the fields at large. The city was
23.1.
Keilah, Ios. 15.22.
in the tribe of Judah, whether 23.5.
David went to fight against the Philistims that came against it, and spoiled
theraboutes: whom when David had overthrown, he remained with the citizens of
Keilah for a certain season. But when 23.7.8.
Saul came against him, hoping now that he had him sure, 23.12.13.
David understanding that the lords of Keilah would not stand fast unto him,
got him thence, and so defeated Saul in that his enterprise. How he followed
on him in the fields, we have the same first set down generally: then certain
of those his pursuits more specially. Concerning the former, there is no more
set down but this, 23.14
that he sought him every day. Concerning the other, there are set down three
special pursuites: one of them broken of, by the coming in of the Philistims:
the other two by the kindness and faithful caling of David himself. That which
was broken of by the coming of the Philistims, did hassard David very sore:
partly for that the Ziphims (who, 1. Par. 2.42.
as it seems, were of that Ziph that was son to Caleb, and then were they
of one tribe with David) 23.19.20.
undertook to betray him: and for that 23.26.
Saul, having got that advantage, did so hotly pursue him, that being for a
time but on the one side of the hill, while they were on the other, at the
length he had compassed them in (but, as it seems unwitting to him) on every
side. But then on the sudden 23.27.
he was feign to break off, because he had word, that the Philistims had
entered already. Of those others that were broken of by the kindness and
faithful dealing of David himself, the former of them was in Engedi: the
other in Ziph. In the wilderness of Engedi it was that he pursued David so hotly
(even 24.2.
among the tops of the rocks, where no body else but only wild goats were wont
to be) that in the end 24.45 12.
he fell into David's hands, entering into a cave where David was: and there
finding that David had spared him when he was in his hands, thereupon 24.22.
he left of pursuing him for that present. But having as yet his wonted
blood-thirstinesse remaining in him (though 24.16.22.
it were for a time somewhat flaked, by that great and singular favor that he
found at the hands of David on his part altogether as much unlooked for, as
undeserved) he does no sooner get opportunity, but forthwith he returns
unto his old bias again. Here therefore it is good to consider, not only
how he came in with this his other pursuit: but also how fair likelihoods he
had given, that he would never have done it again. He came forth with his
other pursuit, by occasion of the Ziphims, 26.1.
who now again came and told him where David was: whereupon 26.2.
he came forth again with 3000 chosen men to set upon him. But David 26.7.
privily coming into his camp, when he, and his company were fast a sleep,
26.12.
took thence such tokens with him, as whereby he was able to show, that he
had the king in his hands, to have done with him whatsoever he would. Which
when the king perceived 26.21.25
he was now again for the time so moved with it, that presently he brake of
this his pursuit, and so returned home again. The likelihoodes that Saul had
given, that he would never have offered to David so hard measure again, were,
24.22.
that he did acknowledge his fault in pursuing of him, and besought his favor
unto his seed: and these with tears. That special circumstaunce that
depends heereon, and somewhat better helps forward to show how egerly he
was set upon David, was, that so much he followed on him, when as it had been
a great deal meeter to have deal with the Philistims the common enemy,
because that they, 23.1.
both came unto Keilah, and fought against it, and 23.27.28
afterward again came into the land, during the time of this his pursuing of
innocent David. The little help that in this persecution God did give him, What
help it pleased God to afford him in this persecution.
was in the company that came unto him for his defense, when he was in
distress by that persecution, to the number of six hundred men in all.
Whereof 22.1.2.
four hundred came unto him while he was at Adullam, and other two hundred mo
a while after. For we have mention of six hundred in all, 23.13.
both when he departed from Keilah: and 30.10.
when he went against the Amalekites that had spoiled Ziklag. The first four
hundred 22.1.2.
were, some of his kindred: the residue such as were in debt or timber. Of the
other, there is no special thing reported: not so much as the time when they
came unto him. Saving that, seeing they are found with David when he departed
from Keilah, and we have no mention of them before, it may seem that they came
unto him while he was there. And likely enough, that seeing that David was
known to be of great valor, that such as were disposed to give themselves to
such adventure, would easily upon such occasion resort unto him.

7 All which things if in these days we shall apply to our selves, and lay
the^ to such doings, as our eyes have often seen, That this latter persecution
of David's, is rightly exemplified in these days also against the Gospel.
and daily yet see: we shall find them to agree so fitly together, as could be
devised, and sufficiently to teach us, both what to look for at the hands of
many, and how warily to behave our selves in the mean season: whether we
respect the occasion of this his persecution, or else but the manner whereby it
proceeds. For if we respect the occasion of it, The occasion whereon this
persecution of ours is raised.
what is it else that so much offends, and so grievously incenseth the Saul's
of our time, but only the good success of the son of David against these
Philistims of ours: and for that same evil spirit of the Lord, does hereupon
help to kindle the furious rage of them against us: For seeing that the Gospel
ever now and then gets (in these days of ours) some good hand against all
those that seek to suppress it, they see very well, that if it may still
hold on this course, it were like shortly to come to pass, not only that their
craft should be in peril to be set at naught: Act. 19.27.37.
but also that the Temple of their great Goddess Diana should be despised, and
her magnificence should be destroyed, whom (almost) all Europe, and (as they
would have it thought) the world did worship; whereunto if they have any
special fit of that evil spirit of the Lord adioined, it is less marvel
then, if all the company of them thereupon grow to some rageous uproar: no
marvel then if they be full of wrath, and cry out (as if they were mad) Great
is Diana of the Ephesians. No marvel then if in their fury, they rush
together into the common Hall, if they catch, and hurrie with them Gaius and
Aristarchus, Paul's companions: if some of them draw forth Alexander, out of the
multitude, and others thrust him forward as fast, that getting him forth, they
may there dispatch him as they list: if it be a sufficient cause for them all
to stop their ears, to whatsoever he were able to say for his defense, only
for that he was a Jew: and, if having no cause at all of any concourse, much
less of such a tumultuous uproar, yet notwithstanding a shout almost for two
hours among them does rise, crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And when
once they are set on such a gog, it is not then to say, in how eager manner they
are like to follow on the servants of God: nor how outrageous cruelty they are
like to practice against all such, as on the behalf of the Gospel of Christ
shall stand in their way. And yet notwithstanding if we come to the manner of
such dealing of theirs, In what manner it is prosecuted.
we shall commonly find, that for the most part they ever proceed, in such
sort, as the pattern before prescribes unto us, and almost even after the
selfsame manner that before they find in the other. First in secret.
For first they do ever desire to do it in secret manner, so near as they can:
and then if they find that so they cannot, they stick not likewise to rush upon
it, howsoever they think occasion offered. And as Saul would now again first
have done it by his own hands, in another mad fit of his, so to have colored
the matter the better, and now came very near unto it, belike because that
David did overmuch trust the oath that he did take to the contrary a little
before: even so we may see that our Saul's also would not stick with their own
hands to put such things in execution, especially, the case being such, as
would afford them any reasonable color unto it: whereunto they also come
oftimes over near, for that upon their promises and oaths they are overmuch
trusted. When themselves are not able to do it, then do they employ others
about it, and that howsoever opportunity is offered: neither sparing such as be
sick, but seeking to have them bed and all, nor so much as able either to hold
patience with any (though never so near) that any way frustrate their wicked
attempts, or to find any other meaning if so they should, but that they are
mocked therein. And that which is more, when they find themselves in such sort
defeated, as that they may plainly perceive, that it is no meaner then God
himself that does resist them: and though he do the same also in never so good
and gracious manner, yet will they never be warned thereby, nor any thing stayed
in their wicked attempts, but ever run on to the uttermost point that they are
able to reach. Neither are they able to deny, but that by the self same
spirit, which in others they persecute with all extremities, many of themselves
are so taken, that they also prophecy in many things, in respect of that
palpable error that both we and they were in before, and of that knowledge that
now we have common unto us both. In which case also if any man think, that
they should so reverence, either that special gift of Prophecy (an evident
work of the spirit of God) or his great goodness to them, 2. King. 1.9.12
in that he does not cast some fearful judgment upon them (as, in the like
case, fire from heaven upon many of those that came for Eliiah) but does so
graciously compass them in, or rather embrace them with the arms of his rare
and singular mercy: this one example of Saul in this case, (a man, no doubt,
nothing so ill as most of them) may sufficiently teach, how far such an one may
be deceived. If that will not, the daily experience of these days of ours, is
so passing fruitful in such examples, that it only may put it clean out of
question. And as Saul, when he saw that he did no good in pursuing of him,
withdrew himself for a time, to await some such opportunity, as that David
might of himself have fallen into his hands, and for that purpose stooke not to
take a time appointed to special devotion, for to accomplish his bloody
enterprise: so these likewise both await such opportunities, and stick not for
any solemnity of the time whatsoever, but can redily find in their hearts,
then to commit any iniquity whatsoever, when as the time does specially call
them, utterly to abandon all ungodliness, and with all sincerity and holiness of
mind to sanctify themselves unto the Lord. Then openly.
Coming unto their open practices, there also we find that their rage is so
great, that first others feel it for David's sake: and then, Against others for
the Gospels sake.
that they pursue David himself likewise all that they can. And among others
that find of their outrageous cruelty for David's sake, sometime Jonathan
himself is not free. For neerenes of blood in this case helps but little
oftentimes: and it were no hard matter to find a great Prince among us, that
not only attempted upon the like occasion to destroy his own son, but most
unnaturally and most ungodly did it in deed. Neither can they be persuaded,
but that so many as favor any thing at all the righteous cause of those that
are oppressed, and are sorry to see such unreasonable cruelty practiced
against them (and such especially as profess the Gospel themselves, and are
entered into a covenant with it) do all conspire their overthrow, and set up
their own servants against them. Insomuch that not their own retinue can be
void of this suspicion, but that they also conspire against them, unless they
be ever whispering in their ears whatsoever naughtines they can devise, both
against the truth it self, and against the professors of it. But as for the
Priests of the Lord, they are ever sure to pay for it, whenever any quarrel
can be pretended against them: no regard being had of the multitude, nor of
such as are innocent among them, nor how justly any thing they have done might
be excused: nor how slender an accusation (either in respect of the party, or
thing it self) is brought against them. In what case they were in his time,
how poor and needy, he little regarded: and it may be, he did not so much as
know it neither. And yet must it needs be very apparent, when as Ahimelech
the high Priest had neither sustenance, 21.4.9.
wherewithal to relieve a man if need were, nor so much as a weapon for his
just defense, but was feign to take of the Shewbread for the one, and the
Sword of Goliath for the other, that, as it seems by the place it was in, had
now bin consecrated unto the Lord. This without question he might have
perceived, and of duty he should have amended. But here he is blind, and
sees nothing: and yet in the other he is so very sharp, that for an hillok he
has quickly found no less then a mountain. Wherein also the Saul's of our
time are nothing behind. They never cast how to take any good order, for the
needful and honest maintenance of the true servants of God: and likely enough,
that they do not so much as conceive, that they have any such want. But if
those servants of God at any time slip, if they tread their shoe awry never so
little, or, if they have not offended at all, but only by unjust and hard
construction: yet if an accuser may once he found, if any thing may be surmised
against them, it is enough: by and by they must hear, thou shall surely dye
Ahimelech, thou and all thy fathers house. Against the Gospel it self.
In their pursuites of our David also we may see, that they follow the steps of
the other. If he be in a walled City, he is forthwith shut up in their hands,
and then must they make all the have that they can, that they leese not such an
opportunity as it. All good deserts must then be forgotten, and either must
the Lords of Keilah falsely betray him that saved them and their City, and
treacherously deliver him up to the hands of his enemies, or cast their City,
and themselves withal, into the peril of present destruction, Saul being so
furiously bent as he was. If we wot not what is become of him, yet must he be
fought for every day, that so in this matter we leese no time, but so little as
may be. If any get knowledge where he haunteth, and how we may come to obtain
our desired pray, then are they the blessed of the Lord, and they forsooth have
compassion on us: and though they be such as could not detect him, but that
withal they must condemn themselves to be naught; and to betray the godly,
and just, yet must such treachery be covered over with so goodly a name. And if
once we be in the chase, and near to our pray, hardly can any thing turn us
aside whatsoever it be. Neither does it any thing avail, though David witness
plainly enough his own integrity, though our selves have never so good
experience of it, and though for a time our hearts do break, and tears gush
out, to think how unkindly we have gone about to take away the life of him,
that so faithfully has preserved ours. It is no more but a morning clowd: and
we can no sooner hear of any other opportunity offered, but by and by we
return to our former bent, and persecute David as freshly again as ever we
did. Howsoever we may seem to leave off, so long as we see not how to
prevail: yet if once we get but some glimse of any good hope, by and by we
rush unto it again, nothing at all regarding how far we misliked sometimes our
own doings therein, nor what we promised to the contrary. Not only in
laboring for Kingdoms, but in this quarrel also, oaths must be no oaths with
us now. And that which is more, this hideous quarrel must so be manned, and
toughly followed, that the common enemy must rather be suffered, to do what he
will, then so much as a latchet wanting in this. But as God then also gave
David some little help, Such a like help as was affoorded to David before,
affoorded unto the Gospel now.
in the company that came unto him: so it pleases him now also, not
altogether to leave those destitute, whom the Saules of our time so busily
persecute for the Gospels sake. Those that are of the kindred of David, and
others besides that feel themselves indebted to God; and are of a broken or
troubled spirit, will now and then be stealing to David, do Saul (in the mean
time) what he can to the contrary: and so much the more, as they see David so
valiantly to employ himself against the Philistims.

How David was afterward brought to the kingdom.
8 How it pleased God, notwithstanding these persecutions, to bring David at
length to the kingdom is now to be seen: and first how he brought him to one
part of it; and then how he brought him to all the rest. Unto some part of the
kingdom we find that he brought him, First but unto some part of it
immediately after the death of Saul: but not to the rest til Ishbosheth also ye
son of Saul was taken away. In the former of which we are to note, how
convenient a way he made him unto it a little before he was to enter, and then
how he brought him to the fruition, or unto the real possession of it. He made
him a convenient way to enter, both in such things as concerned the preparing
of David unto it: What way was made unto it. First preparing David unto it.
and then in remoouing certain others out of the way, that otherwise might be
an hinderance unto him. He prepared David unto it, both in preserving him from
such things as were against him: and in providing him one special help which
made to his purpose. Those things that made against him, were two: one, the
peril of his person: the other, the hazard of his good name. For the
preservation of his person, the Lord was so good and gracious unto him, that
27.1.2.
when he was afraid to tarry in Judea, and thereupon fled unto Achish (one of
the Princes of the Philistims) the Lord nevertheless gave him safety there
also: when as notwithstanding David 27.8.9.11
so behaved himself there, that it was great marvel that he brought not
himself into greater danger there, then he was in before in Jury: as after
we shall have more convenient place to declare. The peril that his good name
was in, was, for that being now among the enemies of Saul, and being 28.2.
ready to go to the field with them against him, the Lord nevertheless
28.2.11.
so provided, that he should not be in the field that day that Saul should be
overthrown: whereas otherwise, either himself might have been some cause of
his overthrow: or else at least he had been more open to that reproach. That
special help that it pleased God to bestow upon him, and which made so much
to his purpose at that present, consisted in two principal points: whereof the
former was 30.20.
a great booty or pray, which (by occasion that then fell out) he got from
certain of the Amalekites: the other was a greater power of men that at that
time also drew unto him. With his booty he 30.26.31.
remembered his friends in Jury, where he and his men were wont to haunt: to the
number of thirteen cities by name, and to certain others besides: a very good
preparatiue to make his friends faster unto him, now that he was (very soon
after) to stand in need of their help for the kingdom. That greater power of
men that came unto him 1. Chro. 12.1.22.
were diverse of the tribes of Benjamin, Gad, Judah, and Manasses: all active,
valiant, and expert men, and meet for the wars. Who are said to have resorted
to him Ib. 1.20.
at Ziklag: but because there is no mention but only of his former six hundred
at his return from the Amalekites, therefore it is likely that they came not
unto him, till he was returned thither again, and that the same was shortly
after that Saul received the overthrow. At which time coming as they did, they
came very fitly for David's purpose, now that he was to enter the possession of
some part of the Kingdom. Those others that might be some hinderance unto
him, Then by taking others out of the way, that would, or might have been some
hinderance unto him.
are especially Saul, and his sons: then also as many of the army besides,
as being that way affected, were there overthrown. That Saul himself would
have been an enemy to David in that quarrel, all his doings do so fully
witness, that we need not to stand upon that point of the matter: and yet
shall it be good to consider more specially, in what manner he, the greatest
enemy that David had, and the strongest hinderance unto his kingdom was
removed. The manner whereof rests in two principal points: one, how he
might understand himself to be altogether forsaken now before his death: the
other, how he was accordingly brought to a miserable end. He might understand
him self to be altogether forsaken, both in the strangeness that he found in
the Lord toward him, when (after a sort) he sought to have some direction of
him what he should do, when now the Philistims came in again so strong upon
him: and in that answer that was given by such, as he in that case thought good
to seek unto. The straungenes that he found in the Lord toward him, was such,
as that now 28.5.15.
in this great danger approaching, and when he was so heartily afraid thereof,
and he in this his distress 28.6.
sought unto him, nevertheless the Lord gave him Ibid.
no answer at all: neither immediately, by dreams; nor by the ministry of
others, either ordinary as by Urim, or extraordinary as by any Prophet. And
good reason it was, that he which 13.8.13.15.9.
twice before had made so light account of the word of the Lord; and now at
this present did so hotely persecute David, directly against ^^ 21.
his own knowledge of the ordinance of God leaning to David; and that in so
cruel and rageous manner, as that for his sake, and otherwise for no cause at
all, 22.18.
he slew so many Priests of the Lord, should at no hand find any answer at
the mouth of the Lord in this his distress, or whenever he most should
need, or faynest would. The Lord so estraunging him self unto him, he did not
humble himself before his face, nor so much the more earnestly seek his
favor: but presently turned aside to such as gave themselves to ill arts, and
such as for that cause himself had 28.3 9.
before destroyed so far as he could. And the answer that so he received was
altogether evil: 28.15.19.
that the Lord was his enemy, for that he did not execute his fierce wrath
upon the Amalekites: and that now the Lord would deliver him and his, both his
sons and his people into the hands of the Philistims. Which heavy sentence
was notwithstanding 28.19.
the next day after 31 1 7.
fully performed. Jonathan, 23.17.18.
it seems (of himself) would never have molested David for the kingdom: but
fully would have contented himself, to have been as a friend near about him.
But yet were it likely, that those that were of Saules faction would have
labored, for to have set him up against David: or, if he would not, then some
other of his brethren: as notwithstanding 2.8.9.
Ishbosheth was shortly after set up against him. So that this way, though not
of himself, yet by the solicitation of others, it was likely enough that
Jonathan also might have been sin hinderance unto him. As for Abinadab and
Malchishua, his other sons, 31.2.
that together with Jonathan at that field were slain, they were more likely
to have been an hinderance to David, because that as they were the sons of
Saul, so do we read of no such favor that they bare unto David that were like
to stay them from encombring of him in that action. Those of the army that in
that quarrel or controversy held with Saul, and with him were there
overthrown, would no doubt, if they had lived, have wrought what comber they
could unto David about the kingdom: as afterward also those that remained
2.8.9.
readily did, and therewithal showed what might be feared in the others. That
it pleased God therefore to take away those, we may see that thereby he made a
readier way unto David to come to the kingdom. To find out how he brought him
to the fruition of it, it is to be noted, The performance of the first part of
the kingdom unto him.
that now that this way was prepared unto it, and the time was come, wherein
God was purposed to bring him to some part of the kingdom it self, he wrought
forth such things as thereto apperteyned, both in David himself: and in the
whole tribe of Judah likewise. In David now again he wrought 2.1.
to seek unto him for his direction, (both whether it was his pleasure that
now he should enter unto his kingdom, and where he should begin the same) and
withal 2.1.
he gave him direct and plain answer to both those questions (willing him now
to enter into it, and telling him likewise where to begin it) and wrought in
him 2.2.3.
to do accordingly. In the whole tribe of Judah likewise he so wrought, that of
their own accord they 2.4.
came and made him their King: at which time David was now again by them
thereunto anointed. To find out how he brought him to all the rest, Afterward
he brought him unto the whole.

Diverse ways exercising him for a season.


we are to consider, that here again we have noted unto us, first how it
pleased God to exercise him for a time: and then how it pleased him in the end
to bring him unto it. As touching that exercise of his in the mean season, it
rests in two principal points: one, the substance or nature of it: the
other, the time of the continuance. The substance or nature of it is such, as
has two principal points of hardness: the one, that he was wrongfully kept
from the greatest part of his kingdom: the other, that when opportunity was
offered, as David took it, to come to his full right therein, although he was
ready for to have taken the benefit of such opportunity, yet he found that
it came to no proof in the end. He was wrongfully kept from the greatest part
of his kingdom, because that 2.8.9.
Ishbosheth was set up by Abner, directly contrary to the ordinance of God: and
because that 2.10.
but one tribe only claue unto David, and all the others were drawn unto
Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and yet no better then a plain usurper now. The
opportunities that David was so ready for to have taken, to have come to his
right thereby, but yet came to no proof in the end, were two: whereof the one
was but only for a part of that which yet stood forth against him: the other
seemed to offer the whole. That which was but only for some part of it, was,
2.4.
that the inhabitants of Iabesh-Gilead having buried Saul, 2.5.7.
David thereupon taking occasion to send unto them, to give them thanks for
it, and to assure them of a good turn at his hands, if it came in his way, did
withal somewhat inuit them to take him for their King, as the tribe of Judah
had done already. But 2.8.9.
Abner, belike fearing that the same embassage of David was like enough to take
effect, if it were not in time prevented, forthwith speedeth himself to those
parts, and there sets up Ishbosheth to be their King, and to rule not only
over those two tribes and an half beyond Jorden, but also over all the rest:
and so was David herein prevented. That which seemed to offer the whole, was
when Abner 3.8.
being grieved with Ishbosheth his Lord and Sovereign (unto whom he had plight
his allegiance) for that he was by him justly reproved for a fault that he
made (and yet, it may be, ouer-slenderly esteemed also) 3.12.20.
came unto David for to bring the whole kingdom unto him: being false unto
him, whom he had set up a little before. Nevertheless David 3.20.21.
was content, so to have received it, if so it had fallen out. But God that had
determined of a more orderly course for David to come unto it, gave no success
to that inordinate way. For Abner 3.26.27.
was slain before he could return to do it: and so was David in that also
defeared. The time of continuance 2.11.
was somewhat better then seven years: during which time 3.1.
the house of Saul and the house of David were at variance about the Kingdom,
and ever among tried their quarrel by the sword. But then bringing him unto the
full fruition of it.
How it pleased God to bring him to the whole in the end, has likewise two
principal points: first how he made him some way unto it, then how he put him
in possession of it. The why that he made him unto it, was partly in that which
concerned the estate of both the Kingdoms generally: and partly in that which
concerned David more specially. That which did concern the estate of both the
Kingdoms generally, was 3.1.
that the kingdom of Judah ever increased: and the house of Saul waxed weaker,
and weaker. That which concerned David more specially, was that he 3.28.39.
made it so well known, how clear he was from the blood of Abner, and that
many of the contrary part 5.2.
did know that it was David (and none other) that was thereunto appointed of
God. He put him in possession of it, by taking away Ishbosheth that had set up
himself against him: and putting into the hearts of the people now to yield
their obedience unto him. Ishbosheth was taken away 4.2.5.8.
by two of his own Captains, (without the consent, or knowledge of David)
and, on their parts, in very ill and treacherous manner: for the which David
4.9.12.
put them to death, so soon as they brought that tidings unto him. Which being
done, then whole Israel 4.1.
being first stricken with a great fear, as upon the death of Abner before, so
now upon the death of Ishbosheth also, 5.1.3.
no all come in (to the number of 1. Chro. 12.23.40.
above three hundred forty and five thousand, and those also Ib. 38.
with consent of the rest) and making a covenant with him, do anoint him King
over all: and so is David entered now into the possession of the whole.

9 If now again we return to our selves, there may we find that in these
days also God has such a work in hand among us. That God has so dealt for
the Gospel likewise.
It has pleased him already to bring the Gospel to some part of the Kingdom
thereunto apperteining: and we trust that in the end he will bring it unto the
whole. And this we hope so much the rather, for that he obstrueth a much like
course now as he did before: and, walking as it were in the selfsame path,
gives us before hand to understand thereby, whether he means to come in the
end. That first he makes a way unto it.
For first we see, that he makes now as convenient away unto the Gospel, and
to the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, as he did unto David before: partly in
such things as concern the preparing of those that do advance the Gospel, to
be the meeter instruments to such a purpose: but especially in removing out of
the way many of those that would be against it. By preparing those that are to
advance the Gospel.
For to the end that such as are to advance the Gospel, may be the meeter to
do the thing for the which they are ordained, he preserves, not only their
persons to be in a readiness against the time that they are to be employed: but
their good name also in that point of duty to their superiors (for the most
part of them, though otherwise it is not unlikely, but that some particulars
may in a great number be found, that by infirmity hasten thereunto somewhat
faster then it were meet that they should.) So likewise he puts into their
hands, wherewithal to make them such friends as they need, against the time
that they shall have occasion to use them: and sends in unto them a further
power, to help to bring them unto their right. And by removing others out of
the way
Those also whom he has removed out of the way, and daily yet does more and
more, are both such as are the chief resisters of this ordinance of God: and
their adherents together withal. In those that are the chief, as they are the
greatest cause of offense, so may we see the hand of God heauiest on them. For
we may very plainly see, that the Lord denies to give any answer unto them:
either immediately betwixt him and them, by secret inspiration, or by inclining
their hearts to such a course, as it were meet for them to walk in, or by the
ministry of any of those, whom it pleases him in such case to use. For
being destitute of the ministry that have their anointing in Jesus Christ,
needs must they be destitute of Urim also: and so can they have no answer by
such. An idolatrous, and a massing Priesthood they have, that stands upon the
invention of man, and upon their own usurpation withal: and for the better
credit thereof, they have an outward kind of ointment also, such as stands on
no ordinance of God, and therefore is destitute of the inward grace without any
question. But such a ministry as Christ himself did leave unto us, and by
the Apostles his servants was afterward delivered unto the Church, faithfully
distributing the word of life unto the people, and holding themselves contented
there, that is altogether wanting in them, and therefore have they (in their
greatest affairs) no answer by Urim, nor by the ordinary ministry of the
word. As for that which is extraordinary, it pleases not God now to use the
same to his children, but very seldom: much less to those that are without.
For they have destroyed the Priests of the Lord, with all the cruelty that
can be devised: and that for no fault at all on their parts: but only upon
pretenced quarrels, and causeles furmises of their own. And as the Lord does in
this sort before hand, by such estraunging of himself from them, give them to
understand, how much he is offended with them (and justly too:) so may we see,
that in the end likewise he takes them away in such sort, as may well betoken
his displeasure therein also: and many of them, in as miserable and desperate
manner, as he took away Saul. For as in the end he spared not himself, whom
David's hands ofttimes had spared before: so many of those, that in these days
of ours have been principal doers, in the persecuting of the Gospel of
Christ, and contriuing trecheries against those that profess it, being often
spared before, by those that justly might have been revenged of them for those
their trecheries, have at the length laid hands of themselves: and so the just
judgments of God, that others in compassion and pity would not, themselves
have executed in most desperate manner upon themselves. Among the adherents of
these we may see likewise, that not only such, as of whom there was no better
hope, are taken away: but also that some of our Ionathans likewise, are wrapped
up together with them in the same judgments: such I mean, as though they did
bear good will themselves to the Gospel of Christ: yet some way or other were
such notwithstanding, as by whom the course of the Gospel might have been
hindered. But what may those that are enemies hope for, when as such as (for
their own parts) are faithful friends, are notwithstanding by God himself
sometimes removed: and yet for no malice in them; but for that by some other
circumstance they might be offensive to the kingdom of Christ. Which course, if
we see that the Lord has at any time taken, we need not to doubt, but that
now he means to have the kingdom of Christ more fully advanced, when as we
see that he does so much remove whatsoever offenses are in the way. We may see
likewise, Then that he has given in some good measure, the thing it self.
that he has not only made away unto it, but that already he has in some
good measure advanced that kingdom of his among us. For as then he did put
into the heart of David to seek unto him, and wholly to refer himself to his
direction; and then stirred up the whole tribe of Judah to receive him
likewise: so now in like manner he has both put into the hearts of diverse
Princes to seek the Lord, and to take their direction of him; and withal has
stirred up many, therein to yield their allegiance unto them. But as then it
was no other tribe among them all, that at the first did so readily yield to
the kingdom of David, but only the tribe of Judah, whereof David him self
came, and which had the greatest promise of spiritual blessing: so now
likewise we find not, that all generally receive the Gospel, at least not so
readily when the same is first preached unto us; but that it is only those that
are of the spiritual lineage in Christ, and to whom God has vouchsafed (in
those things that apperteyne to the kingdom of God) a more special blessing
then otherwise he has done to many others. This being done, That we are in
such sort exercised before.
before that God bring all the whole generally unto the obedience of the
scepter of Christ, we may find likewise, that God is disposed to exercise us,
even as he exercised him before: both in respect of the nature of that his
exercise, and in the respect of the continuance also. For as touching the
nature of it, diverse hopes and likelihoods are likewise given to those that do
earnestly wish the advancement of the kingdom of Christ, which
notwithstanding come to no proof in the end. Sometimes it seems, that when
some have yielded their obedience already, others thereupon might be more
easily persuaded to come in also. But that course can no sooner be taken, but
that some Abner or other will quickly cross it, and in no wise suffer
Iabesh-Gilead to come in so soon. And they on the other side may well be
ready, and very forward to do such a point of civil duty, as to commit the
body of Saul to burial: and yet notwithstanding be nothing the nearer to any
sincere love of the Gospel. Insomuch, that as David, when he saw that noble
mind in them, thereupon belike conceiving good hope, that they might easily
have been induced to his allegiance, was notwithstanding deceived therein: so
we likewise may be as far to seek, if where we find in such civil
duties so heroical minds, we hope that they also might soon be won to
the Gospel of Christ. It is very true, that (for the most part) of base minds
little good may be looked for to the kingdom of Christ: and that our best hope
(for such matters) lies in those that are more nobly minded: which also, it
may be, was a good secondarie cause, why so many Capteynes and Soldiers (who
for the most part are more nobly minded, at least if it be their own
disposition that has brought them to that kind of life) are found in the
Bible, but especially in the new Testament, so readily to have embraced the
truth, and to have joined themselves unto the professors of it. But yet in
such also may we be often deceived, if we rely overmuch unto it. Sometimes
again there is hope conceived, that if Ishbosheth and Abner fall out, and
Abner thereupon be purposed to reuoult, and to reduce the kingdom to David:
then will the matter be soon at an end, and that it must needs be a sure and
a ready way, to put David in possession of the whole. But that course also
does not find so good success in the end, as to flesh and blood it might
seem that it would. God is most honorable in all his doings: and though
sometimes he turns such devises to good in the end, yet to those that awayt
him in godly patience, he lays forth (in his good time) more orderly means
to atteyne to the thing that they desire: especially when the matter concerns
the advancement of his kingdom here on earth. As for the time it is not so
much as to be expected, that the Gospel should by and by be spread abroad over
all. As it had a time to come to so low an ebb, as in these days of ours we
have found it to be at: so must it have a time again to get up to that height
that we would gladly wish to see it in, if so it might stand with the pleasure
of God. And that the likelihoods are great, that the Gospel is ere long to be
much more advanced.
But as David after that he had reigned over one part only for the time, was
afterward brought unto the whole: so our trust is, that our Israelites also
that now stand out, will at length remember themselves, and with one consent
submit themselves unto the scepter and kingdom of Christ. Their leaders they
may find, although that they be the contrary party, yet to be innocent of the
blood of all such Abners, as opposing themselves against the kingdom of
Christ, have justly fallen (but not by the hand, or consent of David) into the
like judgments of God. At least though men be so subject unto their own
infirmity, and so carried away sometimes by their affections, that ever in such
points all can not be so fully excused: yet those also are so free herein, that
any reasonable man may hold himself therein contented; and whatsoever thereof
wants in man, that is fully supplied by Christ. For he came not into the
world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved:
and so is there no man that needs to doubt, but that he is absolutely free
from the blood of all. Neither may these Israelites of ours see only that David
is free from the blood of such Abners, as otherwise of themselves, or by the
hands of others have justly perished: but also that it is he that ought to
reign, and that is ordained of God to be their King. Of which they have so
evident proof, both in the word, and many other ways besides, that we need
not to stand upon it: especially if the comparison be betwixt those base
ordinances of man which they would have so highly advanced; and the excellency
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, unto whom all power is given, in heaven, in
earth, and also in hell. If therefore the children of Israel were by such
things in David induced to make a covenant with him, and to yield their
allegiance unto him: how much rather may these Israelites of ours be induced
thereby, to make a covenant with Jesus Christ, and to yield themselves to his
kingdom? For if David were free from Abners blood, and if he were ordained of
God to be their King (as in truth he was) and if the matter were so evident
in him, that now they all did playnlie perceive it: much more must those things
be in Christ, and in his Gospel, in far greater measure without comparison;
and so consequently much more evident also in him. And so it is not to be
doubted, that how far of soever these Israelites of ours, do yet stand out
against Christ and his word: yet is there a time which God has appointed when
as they shall mislike their folly, and with one consent make him their king,
that so he may enter into ye whole. For if the children of Israel were so
effectually touched (at the length) to yield up their obedience to David, that
they came with so great a number, and those the principal men of them al, and
with the consent of all the rest: it may not be doubted, but that Christ also,
and his eternal truth shall have the same in some good time performed
likewise. And seeing that David was but a figure, and Jesus Christ is the
truth it self, so much the rather may we hope, that as we saw the glory of
Christ at the coming in of the Gentiles, a great deal greater then was this
of David at the coming in of all the Israelites: so we may now also atteyne to
see the like general assent in some good time yielded to the Gospel of Christ,
by the states and people of Christendom, that in some good measure may
proportionably answer the comfortable pattern that we have seen already in
Christ.

10 But so being come to good opportunity to treat of the hope that we may
conceive of this matter, that is, What course it is, wherein we may justly
conceive this hope aforesaid.
of a further accomplishment of the kingdom of Christ by his word, we are to
consider, first what is the course wherein we may conceive the hope
aforesaid: then how to answer that which may seem to go against it.
Concerning the former of these two, we are to know, that if we would exactly
have it, we are to gather it, not only out of this book of the history, but
also out of all such Psalms, as belong unto this compass of time. But because
the history will be sufficient for this matter, and more agreeable unto the
order that hitherto we have observed, we shall hold our selves contented
therewith: and yet, because that out of those Psalms we may learn, how to
exercise our selves to good purpose in these our troubles, in the end we shall
consider of those also, both to see how David exercised him self therein, and
how we may do the like our selves. Keeping our selves therefore, but unto the
history at this present, we are there to mark, what is the course that David
held in these matters: and then, how we may in these days of ours, apply the
same unto our selves. In the course that David held in these matters, we are
to consider, what mind he carried, first toward God: and then toward others.
What mind David carried toward God. Seeking after spiritual comfort.
Toward God we may find that he bare a very good mind so soon as ever
this persecution was raised against him: and in the course of all his dealings
afterward also. For at the first, so soon as ever persecution was raised
against him, he being forced to step aside to avoid the present danger,
forthwith got him to the godlier sort: first unto Samuel at Ramah, and then
unto Ahimelech the Priest. Unto 19 18.
Samuel he came when Saul had mist of him 19.10.
himself, and thereupon presently 19 11.
sent unto his house to overtake him there, and to dispatch him. Whereupon
being driven to save himself by flight, he took his course to Samuel the
Prophet, there (belike) in this distress to seek some comfort in the Lord.
Shortly after understanding more fully by the help of Jonathan, that Saul was
fully bent to destroy him, being then occasioned again to save him self by
flight, 22.1.
he came to Ahimelech the Priest: belike to worship the Lord there, and to see
what comfort so he might find, in this his perilous and troublesome case. And
as thus he began, when persecution was first raised against him, so held he on,
in all ye course of his dealings besides. For whereas Abiathar one of the Priests
and son to Ahimelech, escaping that great and cruel slaughter that Saul did
make of all the whole company of the Priests at Nob, for his safety and succor
came unto David, although it were a dangerous matter for him, to give any
entertainment unto him: being so far in displeasure himself as he was: yet 22
23.
did he not only receive him, but (such love bare he to the Priests of the
Lord) he willed him also to be of good comfort, and told him plainly, ye with
him he should not miscary so far as he should be able to help. Ever inquiring
of the Lord, in all his great and doubtful affairs.
And having so gotten one of the pristes of the Lord unto him, accustomably in
his weighty affairs he asked consel of the Lord: that so he might be able to
direct his ways the better to the good liking and pleasure of God. As for
example, when word was brought him that the Philistims were come against Keilah
23.2.
he asked counsel of the Lord whether he should go against them, or not. At
which time although the Lord bad him go, yet because that his company made
further question 23.4.
he asked the Lord of the same point again, and again received the same
answer of him. So likewise during the time that he was at Keilah, after that
he had delivered them from their enemies, hearing that Saul was determined to
come against him, and then wisely premeditating with himself in what danger
he was like to be, if the Lords of Keilah would not stand fast unto him,
although in reason he might have presumed, that after so good deserts of his:
he needed not to doubt of any of them, especially so very soon after: yet
knowing how easily he might be deceived, if he should rest overmuch in men,
there again 23.10.12.
he sought to the Lord, to know in deed, whether Saul would come thither, and
if he came, whether the Lords of Keilah would deliver him and his men into his
hands. Whereunto the Lord answered, both that Saul would come in deed: and
that the Lords of Keilah, notwithstanding his former deserts, would deliver
him, if there he tarried, into his hands. In like manner, when at his return
he found Ziklag spoiled, and his soldiers in their impatience were about to
have stoned him 30.6.8.
he in this distress plucked up his heart, and again asked counsel of the
Lord, whether he should follow on those that had done it: and whether that
voyage should be prosperous unto him. And so, receiving answer to his
desire, he set in hand with the voyage, and not only recovered all they had
lost: but also gained much more unto it. Afterward again when word was
brought him, that Saul and his sons were slain in the field, so that now
the kingdom was deuolued unto him, and the time came that he was to enter into
the possession of it (in which case there are not many, of the most godly that
these days) have that would awayt any playner or further calling yet would he
in no wise take that course, or be so bold as to step one foot toward it,
until the time that he had 2. Sam. 2.1.
first inquired of the Lord: both whether it was his pleasure, that now he
should make any entry into the kingdom, and in what city he should begin.
But being answered in both these points, he them forthwith addressed
himself to do accordingly. It may be also that when he was with Ahimelech,
he did there likewise, by the ministry of Ahimelech, ask counsel of the
Lord: both because that 22.10.
Doeg does so charge Ahimelech and because that 22.15.
Ahimelech does net deny it. But otherwise we have no mention in the Text it
self, that so he did. And yet notwithstanding Ahimelechs answer does well
import, that at other times before he had done it: and so consequently, that it
was an usual exercise with David, so to do. Neither did he only thus
religiously hang on the Lord himself, Obeying the Prophets of the Lord.
but also on a time 22.5.
when the Prophet Gad, but one of the servants of the Lord came unto him,
willing him not to abide in the hold (which for a time he had taken in the
land of Moab for his own safety, and with the Kings good license therein
first obtained) but to return into Jury again, him also in this point he
redily obeyed. And yet was it, but such as we term a matter of state, and in
reason, full of danger, and so consequently no good advice: neither does the
text declare, that it was the word of the Lord, but only that the Prophet
did will him so to do. Longing after the Sanctuary.
Neither was he so devoutly given to reverence God himself and his servants,
but even the place it self of Gods worship, and the assembly of the people of
God were so dear unto him, that 26.19.
he specialy complained of the want thereof unto Saul, as the greatest, and most
grievous part of al his troubles: as Psalm. 84.3.
elsewhere also he does very grieuousslye complain of that matter, not unto
Saul (who might think it to be nothing else but of ostentation) but to God
himself apart from men, that in that point his estate was so miserable, that
the estate of the birds of the air, What mind he carried toward others.
Toward his enemies.
that might approach the sanctuary of the Lord, was better then his. How good
a mind he carried to others, may likewise appear two special ways: first and
principally by his dealing with his enemies, but partly also by his dealing
with others besides. His enemies that now we speak of, who were the causers
of these his troubles, were (to make account of) none other but Saul for his
time: and, after him, Ishbosheth his son, and Abner the general of his army.
Against all which he so defended himself, that nevertheless he never sought,
by any ill means to take away them, so to ease himself of his troubles the
sooner. For his own needful and just defense, we find, that 18.11.19.10.
ever he took diligent heed unto Saul, that he did him no displeasure on the
suddayne: and that 18.14.30.
wisely he behaved him self in all his ways. Then also, not despising the
help of others, such as it pleased God to offer unto him, we find likewise
that 22.2.
he took such aids as came unto him of their own accord, though otherwise
many of them were so infamous and base, as many (of a nice kind of holiness)
would have disdayned: and both 20.5.8.
used the help of Jonathan his friend, and 23.18.
renewed his bond of amity with him. But as touching any evil practice against
any of those his enemies, first as touching Saul, we find that he spared him
24.3.7.26.7.11.
twice, when as not only himself might have done it very easily, without any
danger to his own person, or shedding any man's blood besides, but also, if he
would but have suffered them, others would have done it for him: and that,
when as without his knowledge one had destroyed him in the field, and brought
him word of it, he 2. Sam. 1.2.16.
both avenged the death of the one with the death of the other: and besides
that Ibid. 17.27.
mourned heartily for him. As for the others, he likewise both 3.31.35.
mourned for Abner, and 4.9.12.
avenged Ishbosheths death yt hough these had hitherto kept a great part of his
kingdom from him, and now that these were taken away, he mght well perceive,
that it must needs presently come all to his hands. Those others besides,
with whom David is found here to have dealt so well, are partly strangers,
or those that were further of from him: and partly his friends, or those that
were nearer unto him: Toward the oppressed.
Of the former sort we may account the Citizens of Keilah: and such of the
country, as among whom he soiourned. With the Citizens of Keilah his dealing
was, that although 23.3.
he was in distress himself, and it was dangerous for him to be acknowen
where he was: yet 23.5.
both readily he came to their help, and valiantly delivered them also. With
those others of the country among whom he soiourned, how he dealt,
Toward those among whom he soiourned.
we have it not so plainly set down. But so far as one story may be some
help to gather it, and one circumstaunce of likelihood besides, we may well
conceive that he dealt very well with them. That one story that I speak of, is
of his good dealing toward Nabal: by whom while he soiourned, 25.7.15.21.
he did not suffer his soldiers to pray upon him, or to take any thing from
him (thought 25.2.3.
he were but a churl, and very wealthy) but moreover 25.16.
was a wall or defense unto him and to all that he had, both day and night
against any that would. So that if this were his manner of dealing with others
also by whom he soiourned, no doubt it was marvelous good. That
circumstaunce of likelihood that I do mean, is, that when he got that booty
from the Amalekites 30.26.31
he did so friendly remember many of his friends, and about thirteen Cities
by name, where he, and his men in time of their distress were wont to haunt.
For seeing that David showed such friendship to them be like they showed, when
he was among them, friendship to him. But it is not likely, that they would
show him any such friendship if he had lived on the spoil among them.
Whereas on the other side if he dealt with them, as he did with Nabal, and
when he had need, made his moan unto them to obtain such help at their
hands, as he might with their favor: then was there no reason, but that, if
there were any good nature in them, they must needs both help him for the time
so well as they could, and ever after also be friendly unto him. Those that
were more near unto him, were his soldiers: and those his friends that now
we speak of. His soldiers 30.22 15.
he did not defraude of a liberal portion of the pray they had taken, Toward
his soldiers.
and when there were of the company that would have allowed nothing to some of
their fellows that for 33 10.21.24.
weariness tarried behind, and thereupon were left to keep their stuff, he
would not suffer them to be defrauded of any part of their portion neither.
Of his friends also we see, that he retained so thankful remembrance, that
so soon as God sent him wherewithal to remember them, Toward his friends.
30.26.31
he by and by sent a remembrance unto them: and seeing that he sent to so
many, and the text it self does plainly say, that he sent unto all places
whether he and his men were wont to resort, it seems that he could not
content him self to remember some few of them, How to derive this good course
of David unto our selves.
but would have been loath for to have missed any one of them all.

11 How to apply the same in these days of ours unto our selves, is now to
be seen: and first as touching his devotion toward God: What mind to carry
toward God.
and then as touching his good dealing with others also. And out of his
devotion toward God we may do well to take to our selves, in our distress
or grief of mind to seek to good company, unto the Prophets and Priests of
the Lord: with them, and by their help, the better to exercise our selves in
the comfort of Scripture, and in worshipping toward his holy temple. And in
truth, howsoever that the vain pleasures of the world are otherwise
pleasant to flesh and blood, and that not only to the children of the world,
but also in some measure to the children of God: yet notwithstanding,
whenever we are in distress, in such sort that in any good measure we are
humbled thereby, and that we find kindly indeed, that the world does hate
us, and and we are fallen out with the world again, or, as the Apostle does
utter it, that we are crucified to the world, and the world unto us, then is
there nothing sweeter, than in such case to flee to the Lord, neither is there
any sound comfort, but only in him, then the heart does gladly prease to the
soil, and never can rest till he come there. The children of the world do in
such case seek, to some worldly comfort or other: but it is because they know
no better. And seeing that such hauock is already made of the servants of God
(by the Roman state of long, and by the confederates thereof yet) that skantly
have they left unto us some one Abiathar, or other, that has saved himself by
flight (in comparison of those, that otherwise the church of God might have
enjoyed, to their great and singular comfort) what could be more seemly for
the David's of our time, those Princes I mean that profess the Gospel, then
to receive into their protection such Abiathars as are escaped? wherein could
they better express their zeal toward God, wherein may they take a better
course for them selves? For David having Abiathar with him, now upon every
occasion had opportunity (and often times did accordingly use it) to inquire of
the Lord what he had to do: when the Philistims invade Keilah, and when Saul
does cast to surprise him, when his own City is spoiled, and himself in peril
to be stoned for it, when he is to go to his kingdom, and where he is to
make his entry. And (no doubt) by these Abiathars of ours, our David's also may
in all things understand, what is the good will and pleasure of God, in
whatsoever it is that they have to do. Where that anointing is, there the
Lord will answer by Urim, there is no question. And blessed be God, that as
he vouchsafed that mercy to David, in that his distress to send unto him such
an Abiathar with the Ephod with him, as by whom he might be safely guided in
all his actions, in those troublesome and dangerous affairs: so now also he
has provided our Princes likewise of the self same help, by such as he has
to the self same use of his goodness preserved from all such massakers as
heretofore have been of the Lords servants, when as by the wicked it was
intended, utterly to have destroyed them all, if by any means they could have
performed it. And seeing that so good opportunity is offered, of so ready and
sure advice, far be it from any of our David's, that any of them should so
much forget, or so little esteem so good an help, Josh. 6.3.16.
as not take the benefiet of it. Joshua him self, and all the Princes and
Elders of Israel, and generally the whole people besides (whom Moses did a
little before so much advance for understanding and wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4.6.8.
in respect of those most worthy and excellent laws that were given unto them;
and because that the Lord was in all things so near unto them, and so present
with them in all their affairs) were notwithstanding notably ouer-reacht by
the Gibeonites, when as they inquired not of the Lord what they were to do in
that matter, upon a wrong supposall, that themselves had already espied the
bottom of it. And the truth is, that if ever we take our advice of the
Lord, then can we never be deceived, how simple soever we are besides: but
if we leave him, and rest in our selves, then are we much and often deceived,
how great soever our wisdom may be, in whatsoever we have to deal. Much
like hereunto it is, that he did so easily yield to the Prophet Gad, in so
great a matter as it was unto him: and it were much better for many of us
likewise, to give ear to our Prophets (such as we find to be of the Lord)
than otherwise to run the course that we do. Let all things be done by the
rule of the word of God, and it is the thing, that, for this matter, is the
vttermoste that can be desired. In which word the more that any body is
faithfully and effectually exercised, the meeter is he (if other things want
not) to such a purpose: and our Prophets (except their calling) are nothing
meet or then any others (by the ordinary course of Gods dealing with us now)
but only so far, as in this point they have the advantage, and there by are
better enabled then others are. The lesser that Princes them selves are
exercised in Gods holy word, the vnlikelier they are to govern their affairs
by the level thereof: and the vnlikelier they are themselves to do it, the
more do they need to have the help of those that can. And, for the most
part, we see it to be the manner of God; that giving the sovereignty or stroke
unto one, direction and counsel he gives often times more fully to others. In
his want that he felt in that his banishment of the exercise of religion, in
that thereby he was kept from the tabernacle, and from the public worship of
God, as it shows a notable good disposition in him, so may it teach as like
wise, how precious a treasure we ought to account it, to have access to the
Temple of God: and ever to have a part in those things that there are done:
but in the public service of God, and for our own instruction besides. And
the more plainly that we may find it to be our manner, that the greater we
are, the more do we for the most part absent our selves from those
assemblies, and either break us (for our honor, or ease) unto our private
chapels at home, or altogether absent our selves from all places of public
worship, the more needful is it, that we should remember what David was in
that respect: a man of great honor and calling, employed about great and
weighty affairs, and so deeply in danger of his life for a long time now,
that he had enough to one, to keep him self from the jaws of death: and yet
complaining most of this, that he was kept from the house of the Lord, and
from his inheritance there. In the mind that he carried toward others, What
mind to carry toward others.
and first toward his enemies we find that although he was careful of his own
safety: yet against them might he never use any evil practice. Out of his
care for his own safety we also may learn to take this lesson, not only that
it is lawful for such, to defend themselves against unjust violence: but also
that it is expedient that so they should. It is meet that we take good heed,
yt the Saul's of our time in any of their mad moodes do us not some displeasure
on the sudden: it is meet also, yt we behave our selus wisely in all things, so
much the rather, for that the enemy does diligently await al such occasions, as
whereby he may be able any way to annoy us, and so to come to any part of his
desire. And as for such helps as draw unto those, that in such case are now
molested, it may be also that sometimes they are such, as of whom in some
respects they might be ashamed: and yet in no wise to be refused, being such
as the Lord thinks good to se^d us. And seeing yt Christ himself has none
other, we are, so much ye rather, for to content our selves with the like:
especially, when as we may hope, that he that gives so few, and simple at the
first, will at length give mo and better, as we see that heere-tofore he dealt
with David himself. If God also vouchsafe (of his goodness) to bestow any
Jonathans on us, such as will deal faithfully for us, and themselves are
desirous and ready to be in league with us: it is our parts again, both to use
their help as occasion serves, and not to refuse to be in league of friendship
with such. But as we may use such lawful means for our own defense: so must
we take heed, that we lay no violent hands on any of the Lords anointed; such
I mean, as are his anointed to us, and unto whom we are none other but mere
subjects. Insomuch that if God at any time bring them into our hands, and never
so eagerly bent upon us: yet are we to know, that they are not therefore
brought into our hands, that we should take them at that advantage; but that by
sparing them, we should declare, how much we abhor to seek our own safety or
peace by inordinate ways. Neither are we to content ourselves, only to bear
them no heavier minds, but that we can be content to spare the^: but also to
bear them so sound good will, as that we do in heart detest any violence done
unto them; and unfeignedly mourn when their ease is such as any way deserves
to be lamented. Then also coming to others, we are to have that care of the
hard estate or distress of others, that although we be in hard case our
selves, yet should we be ready if it lie in us, to help such others as are in
need. If any of these Philistims of ours, come and spoil any Keilah of our
neighbors adjoining, though we have business enough of our own, yet if it be
in us to help those distressed neighbors of ours, we may not slip from their
just defense in time of need. But being in arms, then are we especially for
to take heed, that we and our company be not grievous to those among whom we
abide, or by whom we pass as occasion serves. Better a great deal, so to use
them, that both we may do our selves good, and still they may be our faithful
friends, then by ill dealing to make them our enemies, and to hurt our selves
withal. A rule that is so little regarded with us, whensoever we are in arms,
that lightly we do more hurt to our neighbors and friends in lying by them,
then to our enemies in warring upon them. Our soldiers also are much
forgotten, and have their due inter-cepted by those that are their leaders.
Though ever we send them forth like men, yet seldom find we, but that they are
beggars when they return. But, besides that is no wisdom, so hardly to use so
needful helps, it is injury also and great oppression, so far to defraud
those that lay down their lives in our quarrel: and the greater that the cause
is, about which we are to employ them, the more does it aggreuate, whether our
folly, or else our fault, wherewithal in this case we are to be charged. As
for our friends, I trust, I need not speak for them: but sure it is, that if
they be not from time to time well remembered, as ability and opportunity
serves: and that, not only that so we may the better keep them to our own
benefit, but also of the inward and unfeigned thankfulness of the heart: we are
in great ieopardie with God, that seethe our in-most thoughts, justly to leese,
those that we do so loosely keep. In both these therefore, if we regard to
hold on that course that David did, or but in needful manner to help forward
the cause it self that we have in hand (which as we know is of more price,
then to be hassarded by the want of either of these) we must be liberal unto
the one, and thankful also unto the other.

12 That which may seem to go against that hope of ours that expects a
further accomplishment of these things to us, That this goodness of God toward
David, was not founded on David's excellency.
is the difference that is supposed to be, betwixt David to whom it was
performed before, and all those is whom the application that we have made does
seem to promis the same now. Concerning which difference, first it is to be
known, that though such a difference there be, yet may it not abolish this
hope that we speak of: and then are we more specially to examine, what is the
difference that is betwixt us. That although such a difference there be, yet is
it not to abolish the hope that we speak of, may sufficiently appear, for
that such mercy of God toward us is not measured forth unto us, according to
the measure of our deserts, but so far-forth as he in his wisdom is
determined for to advance his honor among us. For if the case be of that
nature, that the worthiness or unworthiness of the persons be not respected,
then, though the difference that is betwixt us were much greater then it is,
yet may it not bar us of that hope, That God is purposed of himself, ever more
and more to increase his goodness toward us: and that thence arises great hope
unto us.
that in such case may arise unto us. But thus rather we are to gather, that
the Lord is so fully purposed, more and more to show or open himself to the
world, that he will still hold on that course of himself, not respecting
whether those on whom he bestows such further manifestation of his glory,
deserve it or not. And yet notwithstanding he does oftimes withal avenge
himself with great severity, on many of those that do receive the grace of
God in vain. Howbeit for this time it shall be sufficient for us to consider,
how we may find him to hold this course, that ever as the world grows nearer
to the consumation thereof, and so consequently the full advancement of the
kingdom of God the more approaches: so does he likewise more and more advance
his glory on earth, not respecting the desert or worthiness of those that live,
whether they were better or worse then those that were before, or after in
their several times do follow. This may we see in the whole course of the
world generally: and in both those sorts of people, the Jews, and the
Gentiles, with whom it pleased God to deal more specially. This to be
apparent, in the whole course of the world generally.
In the whole course of the world generally we may behold, that he was much
more gracious unto the world, when he chose unto him one people among them all,
and bestowed the Law upon them: then, for the space of two thousand years
almost, he was to those that lived before, among whom he chose to himself no
one people, stock, or family that we do read of, but only a few several
persons, on whom also he bestowed no such knowledge, as afterward he did on
those others. So likewise when afterward he vouchsafed to enlarge the kingdom
of God to all nations, and to their better instruction to bestow the Gospel
upon them, we may plainly perceive, that herein he was much better to the
world now, then he was before unto it: for that now he has taken in all
nations indifferently, and given unto them the truth it self, whereas before
he took but one, and gave unto the^ but figures also. But shall we therefore
say, that those ages that have succeeded, are better then those that were
before? Or may we not herein plainly perceive, that he in such case does
nothing respect, either the worthiness, or the unworthiness of those on whom he
bestows such mercies, but only that himself at all times does, even as he in
himself has ordained? To come to the Jews, In his dealing with the Jews
that first were chosen the peculiar people of God, Abraham, Izhak, and Iaakob
had but the promises made: but their posterity, in process of time, had the
accomplishme^t of all those promises. The people that came out of Egypt
perished in the wilderness: but those which followed came into the land of
promis. Moses could but see it from the top of a mountain, a far off: but to
Joshua was it given to enter in, to make a conquest of it, and to divide it
unto the people. For a time they had in a manner but a popular state: but
afterward they grew to a Kingdom. At the first they had but the Law: but
afterward had they the Prophets also. Christ was for a time but very obscurely
propounded unto them, by those figures and shadows of the Law: but afterward,
by the preaching of the Prophets, a great deal more plainly opened unto them.
The glory of the first Temple was very great, but could not in any wise
compare with the latter. The Kingdom of Christ was much advanced among the
Jews, by his own preaching and works, while he was on the earth among them:
but nothing like to that which afterward followed, by the ministry of the
Apostles, when himself was taken up from among them. Should we therefore
hereupo^ prefer, before Abraham, Izhak, and Iaakob, that imbased posterity of
theirs that after followed, Joshua, before Moses, and the Disciples of Christ,
before Christ himself? Or should a popular estate, be preferred before a
Kingdom: the former Temple, before the latter: the ceremonies and shadows of
the Law, before the plainnes and truth of the Gospel? Yet so must it be, if God
should have bestowed those greater blessings according to the dignity of the
persons: or if he held not a set course to make his goodness more apparently
known to those that follow after, then unto those that went before. In his
dealing with the Gentiles.
Among the Gentiles we may see the selfsame course observed also. For though
there were not many of the^ at the first got into ye faith of Christ, yet a
while after they were innumerable, though for a time they were excedingly
hated, and under most bitter persecution, yet shortly after they were honored
of all, and enioied the faith in peace. After which time, many of those
Churches were carried away with error again, and in those which remained, the
truth of God was very much corrupted also, according as the scripture
foreshewed before, and as the sin of the world had justly deserved. Whereupon
God in mercy disposed to call back certain of those Churches again unto their
former faith in him, and to that end raising up to the world notable men,
mightily furnished with his holy spirit, although we find that unto them and
to many others of his people then he gave a notable light: yet find we also,
that the light which he gave unto the^, was far inferior unto that which now he
has given forth to many others, otherwise far inferior unto them. In which
case we are not in deserts or worthiness to prefer those that follow, unto those
that were before, as though that God for that cause were so much better to
them, because he found them better then others, but ever to ascribe all to the
mere goodness of God, nothing at all in such case respecting whether men are
worthy or not, whom ever he should find, without question, to be of themselves
as void of all deserts and woorthines, as could be devised. But thus rather we
are to gather, that as the Sun, the nearer it is to his rising, the more
light it spreads forth on the face of the earth: so Christ also the Son of
righteousness, the nearer that he is to advance his glorious Kingdom, unto that
fulness that is due unto it, and that the faithful are put in hope once to
behold, the more does he increase his comfortable blessings in the mean
season, that so we may be so much the better prepared thereunto, against the
time that he shall bestow that fulness upon us. Among all the men of the world
that ever were, are, or shall be (Christ only excepted) there is not one of that
desert or worthiness in himself before God, that might procure any such
special blessing of him: nor, till God himself of special favor has
otherwise wrought it, not one of us all, any thing better than any other. The
enlarging of his goodness unto the world, is altogether his own, and none of
ours: it proceeds nothing at all from us, but altogether, and only from him.

13 But now more specially to examine what is the difference that is betwixt us,
we are to consider, That on David's part, there is no such difference betwixt
him at that time, and the children of God since.
whether it be such as may justly import, that although God were so gracious to
him, yet is there no cause for us to think, that well may he be as gracious to
us. But the truth is, that we find no such difference betwixt us, as makes any
odds for this matter: whether we respect but those things only, that concern
his own person, or the occasion, whereupon it pleased God to bring him to the
Kingdom. For if we respect those things that concerned his own person, the
event it self will plainly declare, that he had not all those mercies of God
bestowed upon him, so much for himself, as for the people whom he was to
govern. Insomuch that whether David were without his infirmities, or not, and
those that on the behalf of the Gospel were to be advanced now, had their
infirmities many and great, yet were not such odds betwixt the persons of any
such force, as might bar us of the hope before described. But it cannot be
denied, but that David had his infirmities: and that as he notwithstanding
otherwise had good cause to await the full accomplishment of those great
mercies that God had begun to bestow upon him, so we also have such reason for
us, as that in like manner we may look to enjoy a further manifestation of the
Kingdom of Christ, that in some measure already is advanced among us. The
infirmities of David (such as belong to the compass of time that now we speak
of: Of David's infirmities.
for we are not in this case to search any further) are of two sorts: some of
them such, as in some sense might be excused: others again so apparently
evil, as in no wise may be defended. Such as in some sense might be excused.
Those that in some sense might be excused, do most of them arise out of the
troubles that he had in hand: but one there is, that was nothing at all (so far
as we read) occasioned thereby. Those also that arose out of his troubles, are
some of them belonging to that compass of time wherein Saul himself lived: one
to the time of Ishbosheth his son. Of those that belong to the time of Saul,
two there were, when first for altogether he fled the presence of Saul: and two
others also shortly after, when now he had openly professed to fly his
presence for his own safety. Eating of the Shewbread.
The two former are, that he did eat 21.4.6.
the Shewbread: and that he did take back again the 21.87.9.
sword of Goliath to his own private use. For the Shewbread, it may seem,
that he is in some measure Mat. 12.3.4. Mar. 2.25.26. Luc. 6.3.4.
excused by Christ. And yet because it is by the Law plainly Lev. 24.9. Exo.
29.33.
set down, that only the Priest might eat thereof, and Christ himself in the
places alleged does so acknowledge: it cannot be avoided, but that needs it
must be, either a breach of the law of God, or that David's face therein was
extraordinary. If it were a breach of the law of God, then do not those words
of Christ tend to excuse him: but only to put them in mind, how themselves
might he able to find, how great their malice was toward Christ and his
Disciples, that could so easily put up that in David, and so hardly exact this
of them. As when the Ioh. 8.3.7.
adulteress was brought unto him, and he willed that whosoever he were among
them that was without sin, he should cast the first stone at her: he did not
thereby excuse her lewdnes, or made no reckoning of ye Law, of God, but himself
not meddling to be her judge, rebuked the^ also that they were so prying into
other folks sins, and so forgetful of then own. But his fact might very
well be extraordinary also, and so no breach of the law of God, nor to be
reckoned among his infirmities, if we could any way be certain that so it
were: such as that Nomb. 25.7.8.
known fact of Phinehas is most commonly taken to be: and such as was that
fact of Christ himself (as he came in the form of a servant) when he Ioh.
2.14.17 Math. 21.12.13.
scourged the buiers and sellers out of the Temple. For so it pleases God
sometimes so thoroughly to seize up to holy uses, and so fully to possess the
children of God, that in their zeal they are carried beyond the bounds that the
Law prescribes: and yet in no wise to the impeachment or derogation of the Law
prescribed to all. In which sense whether David, in that want of other victuals
did it, or not: yet do those words of our Savior teach, that the same fact
Math. 12.2.
which the Pharisees misliked in the Disciples might be of that kind, for ought
that they did know to the contrary, and that such an other they had long
before in David himself. And seeing that David was a man subject to infirmity
as others were, and seeing that it is not unlikely, but that these words of
Christ may rather show, in what sense David might have done it well, then
precisely in what sense it was done in deed: therefore it remains that this
also might come of his infirmity, and so be gathered to that account. Taking
again the sword of Goliath to his private use.
As touching his sword, it Pet. Mar in 1. Sam. 21.9.
may well be, that he had consecrated it to the Lord, to the honor and praise
of God. If so he had, then was there Leui. 27.28.
a law, that nothing altogether separate unto the Lord, might again be taken
to common use. So that it may be, that in this also he did offend, unless he
were helped by the self same warrant, that we may suppose he was in the other.
But because that that does not so appear, and otherwise the law was directly
against it, we cannot well hold him excused herein, unless we had some
further warrant: although notwithstanding we do not deny, but that it may be,
that in this also he was excusable. The two latter are, that he 22.2.
enterteyned such a band of infamous persons for his defense: and that,
Interteyning infamous persons: and swearing to Saul.
at the request of Saul 24.21.22.
he was content to swear, not to destroy his seed after him. In both which
although it may be, that some governed himself in them both, as that in them
also he was unreprovable: yet is it not to be denied, but that the case might
also be such, as that he might have offended therein. In the former of them,
for that he enterteyned forces now, especially so infamous as many of them
were: in the latter, for that he could not be ignorant, but that the Lord had
cast away Saul, and raised him to govern in his place; and so consequently was
in likelihood to be called to such actions, as were likely to accord but ill
with the oath he had taken. That which belonged unto the time of Ishbosheth the
son of Saul, Not refusing the falsehood of Abner.
was that when Abner, being fallen out with Ishbosheth (aforesaid) his Lord and
master, thereupon came unto David, and offered to bring the whole kingdom
unto him: although this offer were of that condition that he could not perform
it, without some kind of il dealing with him that put him in trust, yet 3.20.
did he accept of him, and enterteyned him with solemn feasting. Wherein
although it might be, he did no more, but that which he might in all points
justify (the place it self being his own, and for that the means whereby
Abner would seem unto him to go about to bring it to pass, might also be
good:) yet because that the other also might be, and is as likely, therefore in
this also, it may seem unto us, that his doing therein might proceed of
infirmity. His Polygamie.
That one that we noted to be nothing at all (so far as we read) occasioned
by those troubles that now he sustained, was 25.41.43.
his Poligamy, in that he had so many wives: first, with Michall the daughter
of Saul, Ahinoam also; and, when Saul had bestowed his daughter in these his
troubles upon an other (it may be, not only for hatred of him in his principal
quarrel, but also for that David held not himself contented with her, but
took unto him an other besides) Abigail also, the widow of Nabal, but a
little before deceased. In which, although he did manifestly corrupt the first
institution of that holy ordinance (as Math. 19.4.6. Mar. 10.5.11.9.
Christ himself did afterward more fully teach us) and having one already,
could not take an other unto her, but that needs he must do a manifest wrong
unto the former (as the 1. Cor. 7.3.5.
Apostle also did in like sort afterward witness:) yet because that it was in
those days over common a fault with many of the Fathers, and so little either
forbidden by the law, or rebuked by the Prophets, that most men hold it as
tolerated of God himself unto that people (for the time) in other respects,
therefore have I placed it here among those his infirmities, that in some sense
might be excused: whereas otherwise if we should separate it from that people,
and from that time, it were in no wise to be allowed so easy a censure. Those
others that are so apparently evil, as that in no wise they may be defended,
Such as were apparently evil.
are some of them again not so immoderate as others of them: but certain of
them very immoderate, and such as no man might look for in him. Some not to
immoderate.
Those that were not so immoderate were employed about his own defense: first
at home; and then abroad. At home, he 20.5.6.
both directs Jonathan how to excuse him by an untruth: and 21.2.
himself also makes an untrue report of his coming to Ahimelech the Priest in
such sort as he did. Abroad there were two. First flying to Achis, one of the
Kings of the Philistims (to escape the present danger that he was in) there
also espying himself to be in danger 21.10.15.
he fell to dissemble, and in very dishonorable manner for such an one as he
was) feigned himself to be out of his wits: and shortly after 22.3.5.
flying to the King of Moab, there to leave his father and mother till he saw
what the Lord would do with him, by the Prophet Gad he was forbidden there to
abide, and willed to return into Judea again; and so found that course of his
to be wrong likewise. Others very immoderate.
Those that were so very immoderate, and such as none might look for in him,
were especially two: one, that cruel revenge that he had intended against
Nabal, and all his family: the other, about his own flight now the second
time to Achish again. His intended cruelty against Nabal was such, His
intended revenge against Nabal.
as that for his chorlishnes showed unto him, when he sent certain of his men
unto him, to desire him to help him with some victuals 25.22.34.
he thought forthwith to have destroyed him, and all his, with the edge of the
sword: whereas notwithstanding there was one of that family, whom shortly
after he took to himself, unto the nearest friendship that could be. His
second flight unto Achish: and his doings there.
In his second flight unto Achish we may find diverse things, that a man would
be sorry to find in him: both in the manner of his fleeing thither, and in
his demeanor while he was there. In the manner of his fleeing thither, we are
to note, that it was not of a sodeyne now, as it was before, to avoid a
present danger: but that it was 27.1.2.
with deliberate advise: and then must it needs be so much the worse, both
because he fled to that idolatrous Prince, a natural enemy to the people of
God: and for that he did it upon distrust of the providence of God to be safe
at home. In his demeanor while he was there we find, that he did not only
27.8.9.11
deal very ill with certain of the people of those quarters (the Geshurites,
Girzites, and Amalekites) destroying man, woman, and child, leaving none to
complain of his doings; and, the better to cover his doings from Achish his
friend, 27.10.
deeply dissembled the same unto him: but also that 28.2. and 29.8.
he was content and ready, to go to the field under Achish, against the
Israelites his own countrymen and the people of GOD, That hereby may appear,
that our infirmities also can not justly hinder his good hope in us, of the
accomplishment of that, which already he has begun.
and against the King his master. The reason why we may look to enjoy a
further manifestation of the kingdom of Christ, that in some measure already
is advanced among us, is so dispersed throughout this whole discourse of the
history we have in hand, that here we shall not need to stand thereupon
specially. But this is the thing that here I would note, that if such were the
purpose of God then, to advance his own glory, and to do his people good,
that notwithstanding these imperfections of David, yet he would not be hindered
thereby, but went on forward unto the end: there is no cause why we need to
doubt of the same purpose of God now likewise for the advancement of his truth,
when we see that it should so plainly tend to his glory, and to the benefit of
his people: and in this David of ours, that is in the Gospel of Jesus Christ
there cannot be found, not only no so gross infirmities, but also no blemish
at all, no not the least that can be conceived. And as for those that now do
wish the advancement of it, both professing it themselves, and commending the
same unto others the best that they can, although they be sinners: yet, seeing
that David also was not exempted, and this work stands not on the desert or
merit of man, as we have great cause to hope it, if we respect the excellency
of the Gospel it self, so (in this case) have we no great cause to doubt it
neither, though we do find no small infirmities in those that profess it.

What want there was in the government then, why David should be brought to the
kingdom.
14 The occasion whereupon David was brought to the kingdom, was the want that
was found in Saul that reigned before him. Which that we may the better
perceive, we need to consider but these two things: in how ill estate the
common wealth of Israel was, when he came unto it: and how slenderly he set in
hand to redress the same. That the common wealth of Israel was in ill case,
The hard estate of the common wealth of Israel, when Saul came to it. Subject
unto a forreyne people.
it appears sufficiently in these two things: that the people were so much
ouerlayd by grievous servitude to a forreyne nation: and that the forreyne
people to whom they were subject, were so idolatrous, or so clean contrary to
them in religion. How much they were ouerlayd by grievous servitude, may
likewise appear, both for that the text it self does plainly say it: and by
other undoubted tokens that there are found. The text it self does plainly say
it, for that it tells us 13.6.
that at that time the people were in great distress. Those other undoubted
tokens thereof are two: one, how the people at that time demeaned themselves:
the other, what want there was of such warlike furniture as was convenient. The
peoples demeanor at that time was, that they had not the heart to look their
enemy in the face, but that some of them 13.6.
hid themselves in caves, and in holes, and in rocks, and in towers, and in
pits on that side of Jordan that was next to the Philistims: some others again
did leave that part of the country, and 13.7.
went over Jordan unto the land of Gad and Gilead, so to be farther from the
danger of them. The want that they had of such warlike furniture as was
convenient, was very great: both for that the Philistims did not suffer any
13.19.
Smith or Cutler to dwell among them, by whom they might have had some weapons
made (no 13.20.21.
not so much as for their instruments of husbandry, but either must carry them
to the Philistims to be mended or sharpened there, or else might not have but
only the help of the file at home) and for that among all the people that
followed Saul to withstand the enemy (which also were but very few, but only
about 13.15.
six hundred in all, when the others were gone that 13.8.11.
gat themselves away for fear) there 13.22.
was not so much, as either a sword, or a spear found, but only with the King
him self, and his son. That the people to whom they were subject were
idolatrous, and directly contrary to them in religion, And those idolatrous.
is most apparent, not only for that they were none of the people of Israel,
but of the Gentiles, and enemies unto the people of God: but also for that the
text does make particular mention, both of one special Idol that they
worshipped; and of their blasphemous dealing against the true and living God.
That one special Idol that they worshipped, was Iud. 16.23
Dagon, being as the learned do note, 1. Sam. 5.2.
for the upper parts like to a beautiful woman: and for the nether like to a
fish: as the text also does ascribe to the upper parts both 5.4.
head and hands; and says that the residue that remained (as Tremelius
translateth) represents a Ibid.
fish. Their blasphemous dealing against the true and living Lord, does not
only appear in their delivering up of the Ark of the Lord 5.2.
into the Temple of their Idol Dagon, as though that their Idol had been the
better, and that by his power they had then prevailed against the God of
Israel: but also in that n David does charge that great monsterous beast, their
champion Goliath, for to have rayled on the God of the host of Israel. And
though he were but one man, yet seeing he was their common champion, and came
forth in the name of them all, they may all by good right be charged
therewith. And then, when themselves are not only so corrupt in the highest
matter of all, even in religion, but also so contrary unto the Truth, and so
blasphemous to GOD himself, it could not be otherwise, but that in these
things the common wealth of Israel must needs be in hard and pitiful case,
that was in such thraldom unto so ill a people as these. How little they were
helped by him.
How slenderly he set in hand to seek redress in these matters, may
sufficiently appear, if we do but unfold his doings herein, and consider of
them. For certain it is that somewhat he did, and such as might bear a
reasonable show: and yet notwithstanding, his doings being better considered,
he did in a manner nothing at all. That somewhat he did.
That which might bear some reasonable show, was first on behalf of some
part of the people: then afterward somewhat that he did on behalf of them all.
That which he did on behalf of some part of them, was that piece of service
that he did at 11.1.13.
Iabesh Gilead, one of the the Cities beyond Jorden, which Nahash the King of
the Ammonites had strongly besieged, and when the Citizens sued for peace, he
would in no wise grant it unto them, but upon a very cruel and dishonorable
condition: which was, that he might thrust out the right eye of every one of
them, and so bring a perpetual reproach upon them, and upon the whole nation
withal. Whereupon the spirit of the Lord coming upon Saul, he sent forth
his messengers to command the people forthwith to follow; he quickly got a
great number together; made haste to Iabesh; raised the siege; and gave a
notable overthrow to the enemy. Insomuch that whereas before certain evil
persons made light account of him, which also was easily put up of the rest,
now were the people generally so far in love with this their new King, that
had not Saul himself stayed them, needs would they have had those ill persons
to have been sought out, and for that their former contempt to be put to death
now. That which afterward he did on behalf of them all, was some part of it of
his own accord: and some part again, by the direct commandment of God. Of
his own accord both he did somewhat at the first entry into his kingdom: and
afterward he proceeded somewhat further also. At his first entry into his
kingdom both 13.2.
he chose out 3000. men to have in a readiness upon all occasions (two
thousand to attend upon himself, and the other thousand on Jonathan his
son:) and 13.5.
when the Philistims now began to invade them again, he did not only 13.35.16.
address himself to give them battle: but also when as 14.1.15.
by other means they were discomfited, he 14.20.
followed upon them and gave unto them a great overthrow. That which somewhat
after he did, was in effect no more but this, that he did his endeavor (in some
measure) to deliver his country from their enemies. Which thing is delivered
unto us by two special points: one, how he esteemed of such as were meet for
the wars: the other, in what sort he dealt with the enemy. Concerning the
former, 14 52.
it is said that he made much of them. Concerning the latter, it is said first
generally, that 14.47.
not only he did still war upon them on every side (and that 14.52.
right sore against the Philistims) but also that he 14.4.
ever put them all to the worse, and did 14.48.
much rid his people out of the hands of those that spoiled them. More
specially there are numbered among them, not only those of whom we have some
story set down, as the Ammonites, Philistims, and the Amalekites: but others
also of whom we have no further story, as the Moabites, Idumeans, and the
Kings of Zoba. That which he did by the special commandment of God, was his
expedition 15.1.9.
against the Amalekites, at such time as God was disposed to be avenged on them
for an old injury, that almost 400. years before they had done to the children
of Israel, as in the Wilderness they were passing on to the land of promise.
In which expedition although he did not execute the judgment of God against
them, so strictly and fully as he was commanded to do: yet 15.7.8.
made he a great destruction of the enemy: and besides that, 15.6.
had a special care of the Kenites, certain ancient friends of the children
of Israel to get them out of the way, But, that it was nothing to speak of.
that they perished not with the other. That yet (notwithstanding all these
goodly shows) he did in a manner nothing at all, it appears in this, for
that the Lord does flatly reject him for the want that he found in him. Which
want of his was of the chief and principal matter of all: that is, of an
heart, or settled purpose, in all things to awayt the Lords direction, and then
to frame his doings thereafter. For seeing that now he was chosen to be King
of Israel, that is, both to sustain the person of God among them, and to
govern them, not as his own, but only as the people of God: how could he but
see, that now of necessity he must needs resign himself unto God, ever to
seek his direction of him, and in all things to do as he should appoint? That
so he did not, we have delivered unto us by two examples, that playnlie declare
how short he was in those two points: one, in that 13.9.
he awayted not the coming of Samuel: the other, in that 15.9.
he did not execute the sentence of GOD against the Amalekites, with that
severity that was appointed. In both which notwithstanding we may see that he
grew so near to his full duty in those two points, that a reasonable man
would think, he had done very well; and yet in truth he came very short of
that which he ought to have done in deed. For as touching the former of them,
that is, the awayting of Samuels coming, the story is this, that Samuel
promised to come thither unto him; 10.8.
both to instruct further what he should do, and 11.14.
to renew or establish the kingdom unto him, with the general consent of all
before the Lord: and therefore willed him there to abide till he came unto him,
10.8.
naming in deed but seven days, (after the manner of their kind of speech)
but yet not meaning any determinate number, but that if he thought he tarried
somewhat long, yet not to be weary for so small a matter. This platform being
laid forth unto him, now are we to see how near it is that he seems to come
unto it: and how far in truth he comes short of it. He may seem to come
near unto it, both in that he tarried so long as he did: and in that he had so
good cause as he had, then to break up. He tarried 13.8.
until the seventh day: and, as it seems, until the time of the evening
sacrifice of that day: it may be also, that he tarried fully the seven days
outright: and so consequently, altogether so long, as the Prophet (in strict
letter) required of him. The cause that himself alleges, why he was so bold
as to break up then, was 13.11.12.
for that the people began to steal away apace: and seeing that the enemies
lay so near as they did, he thought he might seen be driven to encounter
with them: and that he would be loath to do, before he had sacrificed unto the
Lord. But it may be further, that seeing he was 10.6.9.10. and 11.6.
before endued, in some good measure, with the Spirit of God, and his kingdom
so much established as 11.12.
before it was (both by his victory against the Ammonites, and for that the
people there, upon that occasion accepted of him) he was now persuaded, that
neither he needed any further instruction of the Prophet, nor any further
inauguration by his ministry before the Lord: especially at such a time, when
as those other considerations (in reason) required such have as they did. Short
he came 13.13.14.
for that he awayted not that further instruction, and that further renewing or
establishing of the kingdom to him before the Lord: notwithstanding that the
Prophet tarried so long as he did: and notwithstanding those reasons he had so
much to hasten. Now as touching the latter of them (wherein his doings do lie
more open, than in the other) he might seem to have gone very near to the
Lords commandment, for that he 15.8.9.10.
destroyed so much as he did: and for that the residue that they did not
destroy, yet 15.15.
brought they away, and to 15.15.
offer in sacrifice unto the Lord. But yet was he short, 15.18.19.22.23.
for that upon his own reason, and the liking of those that were with him, he
did not execute the sentence of God to the uttermost point that was commanded:
and withal turned unto the pray, or greedily sought some advantage thereby.

That as good occasion has bin offered, now to adva^ce the kingdom of Christ,
in the want of government that was before, and yet is: as before to advance the
kingdom of David, for the want of government that was in Saul.
15 To come to our selves, we are to consider, whether the estate of
Christendom were in any such misery now as the estate of Israel was then:
and, if it were, whether such as have reigned among us, and yet do, have better
employed themselves, then Saul did, unto the redress of whatsoever they find
out of square. For if the estate of Christendom also were of late, or yet is
in many places, as far out of square, as then the estate of Israel was, and
those that have reigned, or yet do, be in most places as short of their duty,
as Saul was then, it is not to be denied by any, but that the like occasion
being offered now, as we find to be offered then, the like hope may be
conceived now also of the advancement of the kingdom of Christ already begun,
as herein we find of the kingdom of David, that upon that occasion was now
first advanced. First therefore as towching the estate that Christendom was
in, In what estate Christendom was, under Popery, and yet is.
before these days of the Gospel, and yet is where the Gospel is not
received, and among all those that after a sort receive it, so far-forth as
they do not soundly receive it in effectual manner, it may soon appear, that
it was altogether as ill, as was the estate of Israel then: as yet also it is,
either fully agreeable thereunto, where the Gospel is so much rejected, or
somewhat favoring of it, where the Gospel is not so fully received, in such
proportion as yet they hold it out from among them. For whereas the text said
of them, that the people were in distress, not only Math. 24.29 Luke 21.25.26.
2. Tim. 3.1.5. Apo. 8.13.9.1.5.
the text it self does likewise fore-shew in many places, that such should be
those days of vengeance proceeding from the wrath of the Lord that now we
speak of: but also both the histories do so plentifully witness the same, and
the experience of those days has made so sensible demonstration thereof unto
us, that no body now can be either altogether ignorant, or but so much as
doubtful of it. So likewise where were there any then to be found, that durst
look those enemies of ours in the face? or rather who did not, either hide
themselves in the most secret places that they could think of: or else
abandoning their own countries, and houses, got them farther off out of
danger? for such has bin the power of those our Philistims of the Church of
Rome for certain ages, that it was past the power of Princes (and much rather
of meaner estates) to deal with them, after that by their slacknes before,
they had now got the bridle into their teeth. As for any furniture against the
wars, who knows not, but that they swept all as clean from us, as ever the
Philistims did from them? For whereas the word of God is the sword of our
warfare (as Math. 4.4.7.10.
Christ in his own person has taught us, and as the Ephesians. 6.17.
Apostle likewise does call it) what part thereof did they leave unto us in our
mother-toong, or in such sort as we might be able in time of need to attain
thereunto? neither the old Testament, nor the new: neither the Prophets, nor
the Apostles, nor Christ himself: neither the preachings, nor yet the writings
of any of their. And this have they done in so greedy and watchful manner,
that as among the children of Israel only King Saul, and Jonathan his son
were found to have either sword or spear (and yet being but six hundred in
all, it had bin but a small matter, if fo many had had weapons ynow threefold
over:) so likewise with us, though in that corrupt time there were not many,
that so much misliked the seruititude they were in, that they could be content
to take part with their Princes, against those other Philistims of theirs, but
that it had bin as small a matter for them to have had weapons ynow: yet among
them also but few were found, here and there one with some rare and principal
man, and otherwise not so much as one among them all. Neither were our
Philistims content to spoil us of our weapons only, but they took away all
such artificers also, or men of learning, as were able to make any mo. Insomuch
that as they for the repairing of their instruments of husbandry, were feign
to seek unto the Philistims, or else at home might never have but the use of a
file (a seely, and a busy help for the mattok, coulter, and share:) so we
likewise, even for the arts and liberal sciences, were driven to seek unto
these Philistims of ours, that they only might give the heat, and have the
hammering of all those matters. And if any of us thought much, in those things
to be so beholding to them, or would not take the pains to seek so far, they
had laid the coast so sure in all such cases, that what we were loath to take
of them, we were sure but hardly to find any where else. And as a man may
easily guess why those Philistims allowed the Israelites to have no weapons,
nor any to make them: so is it as easy in these days also, to say what the
cause is why ours likewise allow not the people to have the Scriptures among
them, nor any to show us what they require, or to lead us into the knowledge
of them. They pretend, and boldly bear the peeple in hand, that the Scriptures
are both hard, and dangerous: but the truth is, they would keep us in bondage
still, and therefore can they in no wise allow us to have our weapons. They
are hard in deed for them to answer: and therefore deal they so hardly with
them. They know that to their estate they are dangerous and therefore make they
so great danger to let us have them. But now if we come to the idolatry and to
the blasphemy of the Philistims, there will it most plainly appear, that in
both those points these our Philistims do far exceed, both in number of idols,
and in multitude of blasphemies also. And then being so idolatrous as they are,
and so blasphemous unto the true and living God, look how much more these two
vices are found in them, so much more miserable must out estate be under these,
then was that other of the children of Israel, under that other idolatrous
people. In this case Christendom stood, under that late power of darkness that
overwhelmed the face of the earth: and wheresoever that power of darkness does
yet remain, in the whole or in part, there may a man quickly find ye like
misery as yet remaining, so far as will serve to answer the other in due
proportion. How little the most of our Princes have helped this distress of
the people.
Now therefore we are to consider, in what sort our Princes have set in hand to
come in with their help: and namely this one thing, whether they also have not
so slenderly done it, but that it may be as needful now, to have the Gospel
advanced among us, to supply the defect that is in them, as the wisdom of God
found needful then, to bring in David, Somewhat they have done.
to supply whatsoever wanted in Saul. And first it is in no wise to be denied,
but that diverse things they have done, and daily do that are able to make a
goody show: and yet on the other side is it true again, that few of them do
better than Saul, and many much worse. Some few (God be thanked) there are,
that have delivered the people that are under their charge, from that cruel
Nahash of Rome, that in no wise yields to conditions of peace, unless that
he might thrust out our right eyes (by depriving us of the word of God) and so
bring upon us perpetual shame: and not only have done it, but also have done
it in as valiant manner, and with as fervent and quick a zeal, as ever Saul did
accomplish the other. Others there be, that either mind it nothing at all, as
little or nothing apperteining to them, or as a matter of small importance: or
else but faintly, or very slenderly meddle therewith. Of those that help
forward so bad a course, or do no more but only bear with it, I say nothing at
this prefent: although of that company there be not a few, that full ill
represent the person they bear. Since less will serve, we shall not need so
far to charge the^. In like sort we have among us, that beforehand provide
them of competent forces, to be employed against the enemy as need shall
require, and to that end also make much of such men, as they find meet for the
war that they have in hand; and readily stand, when occasion is offered, in the
face of the enemy: using also whatsoever advantage falls unto them the best
that they may. It may be also that there are some (but those are but few) that
without intermission continually war on all the enemies of the Gospel of
Christ, on every side: especially against those our Philistims, and against
all others by whom ye people of God are spoiled. And yet notwithstanding though
so they do: yet unless they ever put them to the worse likewise, in that point
must they needs come short of Saul. Neither is it to be doubted of any, but
that diverse of our Christian Princes there are, that by the virtue of Gods
commandment, and in respect of justice it self, already have executed, and
daily yet do, the judgments of God against all our Amalekites whatsoever, that
heretofore have bin so offensive, or yet are, unto any of the people of God,
that at any time pass from the bondage of ignorance, error, or sin, by the
wilderness of this present life, unto the land of eternal promis, the kingdom
of God: who being possessed with a special care on the behalf of all that are
friends to the people of God, do nevertheless destroy the enemy with a
mighty destruction. These things no doubt at least in some measure, are found
among our Christian Princes: and needs must they make, wheresoever they are, a
great good show of performing all that is required. But the chief thing is
wanting. A full resignation of themselves.
But then as in Saul the chief was wanting: so is it likely, in this case to
be with us likewise. For although they acknowledge that God has called them
thereunto, and that they are to govern in his name: yet are there not many,
that altogether resign themselves unto him, and fully determine or set down
with themselves, than in all their ways they will be have themselves, as those
that represent the person of God, and as those that have the managing or
government, not of their own, but only of his. Seldom is it seen, that in
all things they purpose, and fully determine, ever to await the direction of
God, and they is frame their doings according. Such an inward sound resolution
is far to seek in many of them. And as the compass of scripture that now we are
in, shows the same to be wanting in Saul, but only by those two special
points before rehearsed: so we likewise shall need none other to find the same
also to be wanting in us. For there are not many, that in such case would await
the coming of the Prophet to inuest them further in their kingdom, and better
to instruct them what they should do: neither can they find in their hearts in
such sort to punish certain offenders, as God has commanded that they should.
Awaiting the Prophet.
As for awaiting the Prophets coming, because it was (in one point especialy)
but extraordinary, and peculiar to that case, therefore do they take no part
thereof to belong to themselves. For though it were in that case meet, to have
the ministry or help of the Prophet to his further inauguration at Gilgal, in
a public assembly of the people: yet does it not follow thereupon, that there
is any use of such help in their case also. It was meet for Saul, for that as
yet he was not fully invested in the Kingdom: notwithstanding that he was
before 10.1.
anointed by the Prophet at Ramah, 10.17.24.
chosen by lot before the Lord in Mizpeh, 11.12.
and with special joy and favor acknowledged and accepted of the people at
Iabesh-Gilead. For his anointing was but secret, 9.27.
none other being privy thereto, but the Prophet, and himself alone: but yet
to him ward 10.2.10.
notably confirmed by signs that followed: but election at Mizpeh was no more
but 10.20.21.
only an election, showing unto them who it was, whom the Lord would have to
be their King: and though he were ackowledged, and accepted of the people at
Iabesh-Gilead, yet 11.7.8.12.
was it but of a part of the people, only of those forces that were gathered
together against the Ammonites (and yet to the number of 330090.) And because
all this was no full establishing of the Kingdom unto him, therefore was he
first to awaite a further solemnity of inauguration in some general assembly
of al, and wherein ye ministry of the Prophet was very convenient. Many of
ours would have thought, much less then thus much to be sufficient: especially
when as so vrge^t occasion should make them to hasten to enter into it, without
so perfect inauguration. And yet Saul as it seems, did not of any greediness
in himself, so hasten his entry (for he awayted the Prophet seven days, as
before is declared) but only for that he took himself to be very justly
called unto it, or rather by strict necessity strongly urged. And as for
instruction not many of us, if in our judgment our title were good, and so
ready a way laid open unto us, would have thought that a sufficient cause to
have awayted the Prophet so long: especially if our selves before had received
the spirit of prophecy 10.10.
as he had done, and if we had at that present 13.5.
so weighty matters in hand besides. For it is the manner with us, either
altogether to shut out the Prophet, from all our aduices and councelles in such
matters, even of contempt or inward dislike that we have to such a course: or
at least, under pretense of our own sufficiency, if so be that we have any
measure of knowledge: or else upon every slight and easy business, to hold
our selves as justly hindered. As for the other, that is, Punishment of
offenders, such as God appoints.
in such sort to punish offenders as God appoynteth, that is such a matter, as
hardly can we frame our selves in diverse causes to come any thing near.
Insomuch that although Saul were in this point so marvelous short, that
chiefly for that cause he cast him away: yet if we consider that case of his,
we may find that he went much nearer to that which the Lord did appoint him
to do, then we in such case were like to have done: whether we respect the
nature or substance of that case it self: or certain circumstaunces
thereunto appertaining. Unto the nature of the case it belongs to consider
that it was an execution: and the same very severe. If we have to deal in an
execution, commmonly we think, that some work of mercy does much better become
us. If it taste of severity, though never so just, yet, if much it stand
thereupon, as in this case it did (being 15.3.
commanded to destroy both the people themselves, and all that did belong unto
them, both man, and woman, infant, and suckling, Ox, and Sheep, Camel, and
Ass, and to have no compassion of them, and all this, for no cause else, but
only for that 15.2.
certain auncesters of theirs long before laid wait for the Israelites in
the way, as they came up from Egypt, and skirmished with them) then do we
seek to give it the slip so much as we can, and ever lightly do but sliue it
when we have any such thing to do. The circumstaunces are two: one of the
time: an other of their persons. As for the time, it was almost 400 years
ago, when that fault was made that now was punished, And this execution was to
be done, when first he entered into his kindgome. As for their persons, the
time it self sufficiently proves, that they were not the offenders
themselves: but their posterity, very near to the tenth generation. And yet
notwithstanding although he spared some, the Text it self does bear him
witness, that, those excepted, 15.8.
he utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword: and himself
adds further, that 15.15.
he destroyed all the rest. Neither do we read that he spared any thing,
for any benefit to himself or his people, but 15.15.22.
only to offer them in sacrifice unto the Lord: though Samuel 15.19.
does tharge him, that in that case also he did no better then turn to the
pray: and did exceeding wickedly before the Lord. How much the rejection of
Saul ought to touch our Christian Princes.
But, O merciful God, if Saul in thy justice deserved for this to be cast
away, as altogether unmeet to sit in the throne of thy judgment on earth:
how justly have our Princes also deserved to be removed, and to give place
to the word of thy power, that truth and equity may be established, and set
up for ever! And how comes it to pass, that Saul being made so fearful
an example to us, we nevertheless do so much transgress, wherein we see
that a small fault in him (in comparison of a thousand of ours) nevertheless
had (and justly to: it must needs be so) an heavy judgment! But at this
present we need no more, but so far to consider of the want that was found
in Saul, as that if we find the like in our late government also, we then
acknowledge it to be so much the more likely, that God will now advance the
Gospel or kingdom of Christ, as we see that the want of good government, in
the Princes and States of Christendom, have justly occasioned that so he
should.

16 And so have we heard, The conclusion: wherein, to the further raising up of
the hope aforesaid, diverse examples are brought to show, that although for a
time God has suffered his people, and his glory to be held under: yet in the
end he has advaunced them both. Izhak. Iaakob.
that as it pleased God first to anoint David to be in readiness, and to
procure him the favor of many, so has he done in these days of ours for
the Gospel also: and as afterward it pleased him, by many tribulations to
bring him to the kingdom, so has he brought the Gospel likewise to so good
a forwardnes for that matter, that well may we hope of the like success in the
end. We see also what is the course wherein we are to awayt this goodness of
God: and of how little force it is, that out of the odds betwixt David and
us, may be objected. What therefore remains now, but to lift up our heads,
and to awayte the full advancement of that glorious kingdom of Christ among
us? In the house of Abraham, Ishmael for a time was grievous to Izhak, because
of the promise: but his mother and he were for the same cast out in the end.
In the womb of Rebekah, Esau strove against Iaakob his brother: but both it
was told Rebekah by and by that the elder should serve the younger, and
afterward it was brought to pass in deed that so he did. Esau hated Iaakob
again, because of the blessing wherewith Father Iahak had blessed him: and
although him self had made but very slender account of it, yet when he saw
that his brother had it, he fully purposed to destroy him for it. But Iaakob
was had to a place of safety in the mean season, while his brothers wrath was
assuaged, and his brother himself otherwise placed: and afterward was he
brought home in peace with abundance of riches, many children and a great
family, unto the quiet and peaceable fruition of so much of that blessing of
his, as that present estate of his was capable of: peaceably soiourning in that
land of promis (an earnest to him, and to his children of greater mercies
inte^ted toward them) whence Esau and his were already removed, Joseph,
Joseph.
for the special knowledge that God had given him of great advancement in
time to come, was by his natural (but unnatural) brethren soulde for a
bond-slaue, and so by them cast, what was in them, into the most yrkesome and
grievous misery of perpetual bondage and after again by the false accusation
of the wicked, and by the credulity of such as had authority, was cast into
prison: and there, for a time, both he and his innocence lay fast bound, and
in a manner buried together. Yet in the end he was delivered: his innocence
made known, and himself brought to marvelous honor: unto whom not only
the Egyptians, but his own brethren also, yielded all the obeisance they
could. The children of Israel in bondage.
The children of Israel for a time were in bondage, and served the Egyptians a
long season, and by them were kept in miserable slavery: and when Moses
himself pitying their estate, was very forward, and would have helped them
somewhat before the time was come, though at that true he was in great favor
in the court, and very mighty, yet was he not able to bring it to pass: but,
meddling with it somewhat to timely, made it worse then it was before. But
afterward, when the time was come, God himself required the King of Egypt to
let his people go to serve him: and when he would not, he powered forth his
plagues upon them in so plentiful manner, that he made him feign against his
will to let them go: and to suffer them to take away with them all their jewels
and precious things, even all the spoil of the Land of Egypt. Entangled.
And when soon after hearing that the children of Israel were entangled in the
Wilderness, so that he might have them at great advantage to destroy them every
one, he repented now that he had let them go before, and sought for to get
them into bondage again, or else to destroy them, he quickly found, that the
date of the bondage of the people of God was now at end, and that he might
not in any wise look, not so much as to bring them now afresh into their
former estate of bondage again: much less to prevail against their lives,
although of long time they had so done before. Their intangling in the
wilderness, was not to put them into their hands again: but to provoke them
to come out to receive the vengeance that they had so justly deserved: that,
seeing they would in no time find the good and merciful calling of God,
leading them unto a sound repentance of the former oppression and cruelty,
that they had exercised against the people of God, they might now in their most
just destruction give matter of great comfort and joy to the people of Israel
then, and of better advice and moderate dealing to all posterities that were to
come. In the wilderness as they passed by, In the wilderness.
and having already now begun that long and tedious journey of theirs, as they
travailed on (in their own weakness, fayntly enough) to the land of promis,
the Amalekites that dwelt thereby could not find in their hearts to suffer
them to pass so quietly by them: but must needs lay themselves in ambush to
annoy them, and ever now and then cut of some straglers of them. But such
order was taken with them, that both presently they were beaten home, by a few
soldiers that were sent to encounter them, and while Moses getting up to an
hill that was thereby, held up that staff of his, whereby so many great
works have been done, as the standarde of the Lord unto his people: and had
withal for the time to come an heavier judgment denounced against them, that
for this their discurtesie to the people of God, they should afterward be
utterly destroyed from the face of the earth. A while after themselves,
Refusing to to enter into the land of promis.
even all the whole company of them (a very few several persons only
excepted) did so much offend the Lord, for that they would not enter the
land, when the Lord had laid it open unto them, that now by oath, and
sentence given, he excluded them for ever, and would never suffer any of them
all to go in and see the goodness of it. But yet mindful of his promise to
Abraham, Izhak, and Iaakob, he afterward brought in their children into it, (as
many in number as their fathers were that were excluded, and somewhat me) after
that they were grown up to man's state, and had for a time born the punishment
of their fathers sins. Toward the end of this their journey, how did the
Moabites and Midianites together (when they saw the children of Israel to be
a mightier people, Secretly assaulted by the wicked practices of the Moabites
and Midianites.
then that by strong hand they could have any hope to prevail against them)
give themselves to secret practices: how earnestly did they labor Balaam for
that cause to come unto them, how many sacrifices did they willingly offer:
how earnestly and how often did they entreat the highest power of all, to
have given them some hand against the Israelites, the Israelites that meant no
ill against them, and that quietly lay in their camp, little knowing how these
were occupied? And yet, when they had done all that they could, they could
do nothing. Israel was blessed, and so must stand: it could not be altered.
If they desired so to destroy them that they should be no people, or but a
few: it was plainly told them, that they should be as the dust of the
earth, that is, innumerable. If they desired but to hold them under, for that
point they had their answer also, that they had the strength of the Unicorn,
and that as a Lion, they should anietly send on their pray, Easily
distressed by others when the Lord was offended with them: but afterward
invincible wheresoever they came.
and rise up and lie down at their pleasure. During the time that the Lord
was offended with them, and for that cause, would not give them any entry yet
into the land of promis, nor to prevail against their enemies, a few of the
Canaanites beat them away, when they approached but somewhat near to the
border of them. But afterward, when the time of that his displeasure drew
toward an end, and that now he was disposed to bring them in, and to make
it known that they were his people, how notably did they prevail in
whatsoever they took in hand. Nom. 21.3.
They notably prevailed against certain of the Canaanites that provoked them
in the way, Ib. 21.35.
they utterly destroyed the two kingdoms of the Amorites that denied them
passage: and they did so great an execution against the Midianites (who by
their wiles had won certain of the Israelites to idolatry, Nom.
31.32.35.49.50.25.
and whoredom) that being but twelve thousand in all, they stewe the five
kings of the Midianits, and Balaam their, lewd Prophet with them, and took a
notable pray besides, of six hundred threescore and fifteen thousand sheep,
threescore and twelve thousand beeues, threescore and one thousand asses, and
thirty and two thousand maidens, and yet notwithstanding lost not one man of
their company, whereupon they gave a free will offering of sixteen thousand,
seven hundred and fifty shekels of gold, amounting unto, in our coin, about
7468 ounces. When they were to make their entry how did Jordan that great
water stay his course (being at that time strong, and great) and gave them
passage on the dry ground: and immediately after how did those strong and high
walls of Jericho of themselves fall down on every side, as the people of
Israel stood about them? A while after again, when a great power of the
enemies had gathered them selves together against the people of Israel, Josh.
10.11.14.
how did the Lord destroy a great number of them with hail from Heaven: and
how did both the Sun and the Mooone stay their course, and stood still
where they were, at the commandment of Joshua, to give them time and light,
to make an utter destruction of them? And so proceeding in the conquest, he
slew one and thirty Kings, took away their kingdoms, and parted the same
among the people. But the whole course of the scriptures (besides) do plainly
witness, that howsoever it has pleased God often times, to stay for a season the
just and due advancement of his own glory, and therein to hold his children
under some hard and grievous discipline: yet in the end, and when the time
appointed was come, he has fully declared, what regard he had, both unto
the cause it self, and unto those that took part with it. And seeing that by
these few (not culled out of the whole, but taken as they lie together, within
that compass) it is apparent enough, what comfort we might have in the rest
that are of this kind: therefore it shall not be needful to prosecute all,
but to hold our selves contented only with these.

17 Wherein if (yet this once more) we come in our selves, what lets, The
application of those former examples unto our selves, and to the present estate
of the Church now.
but that out of the examples before set down, we also might raise unto our
selves the self same comfort that before we spoke of? Has Ishmael been so
long grievous to Izhak already, and yet may we in no wise hope, that he can
be cast out as yet? Shall Esau still be so heavy to Iaakob, for the blessing
that is bestowed on him, shall he make him still to run his country, and to
serve in so hard a bondage elsewhere: and shall the Lord plainly pronounce
that the elder should be subject unto the younger: and yet may we not, after
so long and grievous banishmentes endured, hope in the end to see the
performaunce of that his promis: no, not now, when we see that from Heaven
he has given us such helps, and made us so ready a way unto it? May we in
Joseph so plainly behold the very cause, why they have bin so grievous unto us,
lively set forth in perfect colors: and yet may we in no wise hope to find the
like issue likewise in the end? for what other cause have they, but for that
they do perceive, that God means for to advance the self same cause that
we have in hand? And seeing that for a time they have kept it under: why may
we not hope, that there is a time likewise, when it is to prevail against
them, and to attain unto the honor that is due unto it? In bondage likewise
long we have been, with the children of Israel in the land of Egypt: and
may we not look, with them also to be delivered? When the Lord, we see,
has sent his Moses and Aaron with the word of his mighty power, when we see
that those his servants faithfully do their message to Pharaoh, and require
him in the name of the Lord to let his people go, when we see it is evident
also that the Lord so joins with them, that notably he shows forth his
power before them all, and strongly shakes certain of those states that
stand against him: must we notwithstanding be so far out of heart without
former oppression, that we may in no case hope (although we have so pregnant
tokens) that now the Lord is in hand to work forth our wished
deliverance? And what though now it do repent many of them, that they have
set us go so much as they have? what, though hearing that we are sometimes
entangled in some wilderness of theirs, thereupon they come forth against us
with a fresh power, either to bring us back into bondage again, or else to
put us all to the sword? Is it of necessity that because they would so have
it, therefore it must be so in deed? Can they in no wise otherwise take it,
but that if once we be entangled, then are they sure to prevail against us?
When they have seen such judgments of God before, and themselves have lately
enough sufficiently felt the hand of God in this quarrel, can they
notwithstanding never suspect, that the wrath yt of Lord which they have so
many ways so justly provoked may by such means train them forth to further
vengeance? Or, if the opportunity of the place give heart unto them (as
sometimes having us, in the cause that we sustain, at great advantage, having
the Sea before us, our enemies behind, and such rocks on either side, as do
yield no passage by them at al) can they in no wise so much as think, that in
such case God knows how to deliver those that are his, and has yet left him
ways ynow beyond the devise and reach of man? If now they annoy us, as we
are in our way, traveling toward the land of promis, what do they else,
but as the Amalekites did before? and if they take part with them in their
sin: may we not hope, that they shall be made partakers of their vengeance
also? Let Moses on the top of the hill, in the sight of the host of the Lord,
and in the sight of all their enemies, advance the Lords Standard, if he be
old, and therefore somewhat weak, and be not able still to advance it in
such sort as he should, let Aaron and Hur be supporters unto him, that so
the Lords Standard may still be advanced: and then it need not to be
doubted of any, but that our Amalekites also shall soon be beaten back, and
taught to give more quiet passage to the children of Israel, as they are (at
the Lords appointment) to pass by their borders. And if these Amalekites of
ours, in this large space of repentance that God does give them, will in no
time turn to the Lord, why may we not look, but that on them the Lord will
at the length bring an utter destruction, even before our eyes in sight:
unless it please him, of mercy to spare them, or to reserve them to heavier
judgments against that day, when he shall call to account all the ungodly of
the earth, for all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and
for all their cruel speakings which ungodly sinners have spoken against him?
That (as yet) we are not so fully entered into the possession of our
inheritance, whom may we thank so much as our selves? For when God would
have brought us in, we made light account of it, and did not believe his
goodness toward us: we would needs have searchers to go and see, whether
it were so good a land, and whether we should be able to get it. God had
already told us, both that it was a notable land, and that he would give it
unto us: but that would not serve. If men of our own choice did not tell us
so too, we thought it no wisdom, so soon to yield unto the bare word of
God alone: and we were not ashamed, to put to his trial even the truth of
God himself, and to make him to stand at our bars, and there to be tried
by the verdict of lying men. What reason therefore, but that, having done so
great dishonor (or vilany rather) to the God of all truth and glory, we
should justly he excluded for a time from that comfortable fruition of this
land of promis that now we would so fayn enjoy. But seeing that we the
children of those our great ancestors have so long been kept out, and borne
the iniquity of our parents refusal, what lets but that now, when we
see that God begins to perform his mercies toward us, we may hope that
the time of that wrath of his is almost expired, and that now he is willing
and reedie to bring, us in, and to put us in full possession? If we also have
had our Moabites and Midianites, that have busily sought to infringe our peace,
and to make, a breach into the good estate that God has given us, and have
hiered their Balaams against us, if not once or twice, but very often they
have assayed, by secret practices to do us some mischief: If they have
multiplied their masses against us, and never so often reiterated that
sacrifice of theirs which they call unbloody, but yet is bloddy and cruel in
deed: must we therefore doubt, that sometime or other they shall prevail,
and that the Lord will cast us headlong down, into that insatiable gulf of
their blood-thirstinesse? Or many we not rather hope, on behalf of the
quarrel that we have in hand, that as at that time he confounded all their
devices, and made frustrate all their attempts, and turned the cruel and
deadly cursing that they had intended, into a ritche and special blessing: so
now likewise he will in like sort accurse all their open attemptes and
secret counsels, that never they shall be able to prevail against the cause
that we have in hand, but that, even by their own endeavors, they must come
down more and more? Est. 6.18.
If not only the wiser friends of Haman but eue^ Zaresh his wife likewise
espied, that whereas they perceived now, that Mordecai whose destruction he
sought, was found to be one of the people of God, he should never prevail
against him, but should certainly fall before him more and more: how much
rather ought we to be assured, and what dulnes were it not to perceive, that,
seeing they have already attempted the like cruelty against the people of
God, utterly to destroy them all, but now in these days have begun to fall
before them, they should not now be near to their end, and daily more and
more come down before those that they would have devoured, the invincible
race that is borne a new, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, the
eternal truth of the living God? And if we could open but the ears of our
minds by faith, no doubt we might find, that even in their secret corners
among themselves, many of them have such speeches one with another, complaining
of their own ruinous state, and setting it down for a very truth, and that
themselves do look for no other, but that in this cause we are so blessed of
God himself, as that their cursings can take no place, but that the cause we
have in hand must still prevail, and that their impugning of it can be of no
force, but against themselves. Not long since we grant, that a few of them did
very often and very easily put to flight many of us: and, if any stood against
them, they easily bereft them of their liberty, lands, and life. But those
were the days of the heavy wrath of the Lord: and the time as then was not
come, wherein God meant to show forth his power on their behalf. But as the
Israelites did shortly after, when the time of vengeance was ouerblowne,
notably prevail against the Canaanites, Amorites, and Midianites, clean
beyond all expectation: so, what lets, but that the Lord having alredie
begun to work so mightily for us also, in the quarrel we have in hand, we may
with good comfort lift up our heads, and confidently look for the full
performance of it at his good pleasure? Jordan with us also had filled the
brinks, and seemed at the first utterly to deny all passage to any that would
attempt to enter: in earthly power they were so strong apart by themselves, and
in this quarrel so knit together the one with the other, the ecclesiastical
and civil together. But when now the time was come, the Priests that bare the
Ark of the Lord, could no sooner by the commandment of Joshua step into the
river, and but profer to make their entry, but that by and by (a wonder to
see) the waters parted and gave them passage on dry ground. Our Jericho also
was very strongly walled about. But are not the walls thereof in good part
fallen already: and do they not yet daily fall more and more, at least
wheresoever the Priests do sound their trumpets, and the people, according
thereto, lift up their voice, and cry them down? Many Kings and Princes there
are that have gathered themselves together against our Joshua also, so soon as
ever he has made his entry: and though it were in so wonderful manner, that
therein only they may plainly perceive that his entry was from above, by the
mighty hand of God, yet were they not so touched therewith, but that still
they would bend their forces against him so much as they could. But what have
they gained thereby? Diverse of them have sharply felt the mighty hand of God
against them: and what lets, but that we may look to see these beginnings,
at the length to be brought to happy endings? Certainly our Joshua is to
prevail, against all those that come against him, and to divide the promised
land to the children of Israel. Only let us take heed to this, that when God
is so ready as to bestow these mercies on us, our selves be not so far to seek
when we should receive them, or do not endeavor in such sort to address our
selves thereunto, as our own good, and the nature of the cause does require.
Let there be no want in us: and then shall we undoubtedly see the goodness of
God in the land of the living. For he is faithful, that so has promised.

18 And now, O Lord what else remains, A Prayer upon this whole story.
but that as thou have already begun, to thy glory and our comfort, thus
far to advance thy kingdom among us: even so it would please thee to
proceed unto the end, even to the full accomplishment of it? The Gospel that
thou have sent unto us (and which as thou have advanced already in some good
measure, so we desire that it may be advanced still, every day more and more)
what is it else but the power, and very Scepter of thine anointed? And what one
is there among us all, that may reasonably doubt, but that thine holy oil is
upon it? When thy holy spirit works so mightily with it, even that only does
sufficiently witness that it also is anointed by thee. The benefit, that
thereby redoundeth to others, is so apparent and great, that in that respect
also it may not be doubted, but that it proceeds from thee, and right well
deserves to be further advanced, that so the benefit that comes with it
may be thereby enlarged to mo. For by it also our troubled spirits and
doubtful hearts toward God are notably appeased, and deeply settled in sound
comfort and joy: in that we understand thereby, how thy wrath is appeased
toward us, and that there is no damnation to those that are in thee. And
whereas we also were as much in bondage to certain of late, as thy Israel was
to those Philistims then, and out faced likewise with a monsterous Goliath,
that defied thy saints, and often brake forth into most blasphemous speeches
against thy truth, and of whom al thy people were so afraid, that they durst
not abide his presence: thou have in these days, and before our eyes, by this
the power of thy outstretched and mighty arm, so notably overthrown and
trodden down, that out-growne Champion of theirs, and therewithal put the
whole power of them to such a flight, as that thereby thou have delivered many
of thy people out of their hands, and so unjointed their power over the residue
also, that now it is no hard matter for any that will, to deliver themselves
from this their tyranny. Neither can it be denied but that in these days
there are not a few that do bear it such a good will, as that thereby thou
have made unto it (in these secondarie means with us) a readier way to come to
the height that is due unto it. For not only the people generally do in many
places bear good will unto it, and leaving the glory of a thousand to Saul,
ascribe no less then ten thousand to it: but many Ionathans also there are,
whose hearts thou have in such sort touched, that they have it in so great, not
estimation only, but even admiration also, that al they can do is too little
for it. Neither their furniture, nor abiliments of honor are so dear unto
them, but that it must have them all: and though it be their own father that
would do it any dishonor, or hurt: yet can they not suffer it at their hands
neither, but still prevent it so much as they can. And whereas yet there are
many likewise, that are enemies unto it: yet does not that enmity of theirs
proceed of other occasion, then that of Saul did against David; nor yet is
prosecuted in other manner. For what other thing is there, that so kindles
their hearts against the Gospel, but only the ill temper that is in them, and
for that they playnlie see, that it is the thing that thou art disposed now to
advance: and that themselves, and their loose regiment must now come down, and
give place unto it? And that it might the better be known to be of the same
nature that the other was of, how does it proceed after one and the self same
manner: first in secret, and openly after; and yet very rageous not only
against David himself, but also against many others for his sake, even as their
fury therein does lead them? A thing that though themselves perceive not, yet
is it to us, and to all that are able to see, a sufficient matter whereby to
decipher, both what it is they do impugn, and who they are that do impugn it.
We see likewise and must needs acknowledge (and as to our comfort we do behold
it, so do we right gladly acknowledge it also) that notably thou have begun
already to advance thy Gospel among us: that thou have made it a ready way,
by preserving, increasing, and strengthening those, by whom it pleases thee to
advance it: and that thou have already subdued many countries and kingdoms
unto the obedience of the same, and much weakened diverse of those that stand
against it. In Hebron thou do already reign, over the tribe of Judah thine
own kindred: and though Israel (for many of them) do as yet stand out against
thee: yet those also have thou weakened much, and daily encreasest in strength
against them. But O Lord such is thy majesty, and so worthy art thou to rule
over all, that not only those that are nearest unto thee, but the farthest
also, even to the uttermost ends of the earth, ought to yield their obedience
to thee. True it is that in David we found very good things, and such as might
well commend him to us, unto the place that thou at the length did call him
unto: toward thee, a special good regard to thy will, and a delight in thee
and thine: and toward others, a very good heart, not only to his acquaintance
and friends, but even to strangers and enemies also. But whence had David
these, but from thee? In him they were but in some measure: and, in comparison,
but in small portions neither: in thee they are immeasurable, and in greater
abundance, than can be conceived. He was but a shepherd at the first: though
it pleased thee after to make him a King. The baseness of his estate before,
might be no hinderance at all unto him, to his further advancement when the
time was come, wherein thou did mean to bestow it upon him. Thy Son our
Lord, has been, thou know, a Shepherd already: he disdayned not to abase
himself unto it: and he stuck not for any traueile or pains, that did
apperteyne to the full accomplishment of it. And should he not have as ready a
way thence to the kingdom, as David had? Or could the son of Ishai be so
advanced: and shall not the eternal Son of the Father, the God of all power
and glory, and to whom only al kingdom and majesty does only belong, have as
ready a way unto it? Our selves, we grant, by whom we would have this kingdom
of thine to be advanced, are far short in all such graces as were meet for
those that should be vouchsafed that special favor. But neither is there any
flesh and blood in thy sight found worthy of any such favor: neither is it
meet, that for our unworthiness, thy kingdom should not be advanced on earth;
in such sort as to thy glory does apperteyne, and may stand with thy pleasure
here on earth. And seeing that it pleased thee, in the face of thine anointed
to vouchsafe that favor to David thy servant, notwithstanding that of himself
he was no better then any others, and notwithstanding those great infirmities
of his that were found in him after his calling: we humbly beseech thee, in
those thy mercies so to cover whatsoever corruption is in us, as that for it
thou suffer not the advancement of thy kingdom to be hindered among us. Israel
(thou see, for a great part of us) is yet in bondage unto those Philistims of
ours, and by them kept under, in miserable slavery, and gross idolatry: and,
such as thou have set up among us, to proceed and go forward with this our
deliverance, do (for the most part) so little remember that part of their
duty, that therein they do but very little: and many of them nothing at all.
Saul did somewhat, and merueilous well, in comparison of many of ours: not
only, when his kingdom was better confirmed (as against the Philistims, and
Amalekites also) but even at his first entrance likewise, when as he was but
newly come to his kingdom, and the same did hang but loosely unto him as yet,
as in that valiant expedition of his against the Ammonites at Iabesh-Gilead.
But the less, O Lord, that they have done, and are disposed as yet to do: the
more needful is it for thee, to take some further order for it, both for the
relief of thy distressed people, and for the advancement of thy kingdom among
us. The less likewise, that our mean and base estate here in this life, is
capable of so great prosperity and glory, as to thy kingdom of right
apperteyneth, the more we desire that it would please thee to hasten the time
of the second coming of our Lord and Savior, that he taking down this
Tabernacle on earth, may set up thy palace for ever in heaven, and there
advance thy glorious kingdom even to the full. The cause, O Father, we know
is thine; and we are thine: and now having made our prayers to thee, we humbly
beseech thee to hear the same, even in the face of thine anointed, Jesus
Christ thy Son our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be ascribed al
power, thanks, kingdom, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The exercise that David used, more specially described.
Of the exercise of David in those Psalms that he made in the time of trouble.
19. IN what sort David exercised himself in those his troubles, is already
declared, so far as the course of the history yielded. But then it was noted
withal, that it might be farther gathered out of the Psalms: those I mean
that he made in those his troubles, as occasion from time to time was given
him. Of which as then I promised to (...) somewhat to the end of ye treatise,
so now I mean, by the greatness of God, here to perform it: that so we may,
with one (...) the selfsame labor see, both how David in that case was
occupied, and how we also might, in these days of ours, to good purpose employ
our selves. And first the truth is that if we were of that good temper that
David was of, we needed none other, In wh^^^ they (...) fit us lik^^.
but even those Psalms in order as they lie that then he made: so often as our
occasion is none other, then was that of his whereupon they were made. For then
being in like sort exercised, they would as fitly agree unto us, as they did
unto him, if we were of such disposition as that we could so fitly and redily
apply them to our case, as he at that time did apply them to his. But then must
we be of a quick and a nimble spirit, and well experienced in such manner of
exercise, as it pleases the Lord to use toward his children: so that we may
at once, and, as it were with one breath, redily fall in with all sorts of
passions and affections whatsoever, that the spirit of God in such case
stirs up, in those whom it pleases him to exercise. For so shall we find
that David did, in most of the Psalms that ever he made: not only in these
that now we speak of, but in most of the residue also: sometime beginning with
a prayer, and by and by falling into thanksgiving: sometime acknowledging his
great fear of the enemy, and straight way growing to invincible boldness:
sometime complaining of the great corruption of the world, and forthwith
reposing himself in the goodness of God. But the forms and examples hereof are
so many and diverse, that it were hard to reckon them up: and it is sufficient
for us, unto the purpose that now we have in hand, to be thus far warned
before, that we can hardly apply most of the Psalms to our use, saving only
when we are in such sort exercised as David was at the time when he made them:
and unless we first suppose our selves to that pliablenes of mind, that we may
be (...) readily to fall in with whatsoever motion it is, that the Sp^^^^ of
God shall stir up in us. In which case, as I said before (...) I again, that
we need none other, but only to (...) Psalms in order as they lie: and add
this further, not only that we need none other, but also that we can not have,
as I do take it, so perfect a course any way else. And for those that are
disposed to take that course, it is not amiss here to set down, what those
Psalms are, that do apperteine to this compass of time, and to the matter that
now we speak of. Wherein because there is some diversity of opinion among the
best approved authors, therefore I cannot promis to do it, but in such sort, as
that some may take exception unto it: as that, either there are mo, that might
be referred unto this place: or else, that some of those that are taken in by
me to that account, might better be spared. For though most of them be such, as
by the text it self, are plainly noted to appertein unto that time: yet others
again there are, that have no such euidencie in the matter, and yet by good
circumstances are most likely to belong unto it. And those that are of this
sort I take to be a sixth part of the whole, or to the number of twenty and
five: not that I prejudice the judgment of any, that inclines to another
opinion, either on the one side, or on the other, but that I content my self
to set down, Which are those Psalms that David made in this time of his
trouble.
4.7.11.26.34.35.42.43.52.54.55.56.57.58.59.60.63.84.94.109.116.120.131.140.141.
In what case they may fit us best, when they are drawn unto certain
principal heads.
what, by the search that I have made, I find to be the most likely. Which 25.
also are these, the 4, the 7, the 11, the 26, the 34, and 35, the 42, and 43,
the 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, the 60, and 63, the 84, the 94, the 109, the
116, the 120, the 131, the 140, and 141. But now because that many of us are
not any thing near in such sort exercised as David was, nor of so quick and
nimble spirits to any good: therefore in that order and course that they lie,
they do not so much affect many of us, as otherwise they would, that lightly
have not any such feeling, but only of some one or two special matters, every
one as he finds himself to be more specialy touched: or, if we have feeling
of mo besides, yet because we are not so thoroughly exercised therein, we are
not able, in such fort as those Psalms direct us, so redily to go from one to
another, but incline rather, either still to abide in some one, for that one
time of our prayers, or at least not to depart from it unto another, but by
some such manner of digression, as might serve by little and little to draw our
minds (as it were by degrees) from the same that we have in hand, unto that
other with the which we should fall: in. And yet is it good for us to consider,
that in such case we are not to think of our selves alone, but to lay before
us the estate of all generally, and of every member in particular. Which course
if we take, then is there nothing in these Psalms of his, but such as at all
times does fitly belong, either to our selves, or to some others that are
members (with us) of the mystical body of Christ. But because that many there
are, that ca^ not take so perfect a course, for this cause have I thought it
worth the labor, to sort such things as we have in those Psalms, unto
certain principal heads: that as those that can redily go with David, and are
so exercised, have that course that is meetest for them in the Psalms
themselves; so others likewise that are less exercised, or not so ready, may
have wherein they may be fruitfully occupied, in any of those points, wherewith
David at this time was exercised. And those chief and principal points
wherewith David was exercised when he made those Psalms, What those chief and
principal heads are, whereunto the effect of all those Psalms may be reduced.
(as may appear by the matter or substance of them) were generally but two.
For either he considers of the hard estate that by means of his enemies he
was in: or else of the goodness of God toward him. When he considers of the
hardness of that estate that by means of his enemies he was in, sometimes he
does but unfold it, and sometime he prays against it. When he considers of
the goodness of God toward him, sometimes he is occupied, in declaring that
trust and confidence that he has in God, notwithstanding all his calamities
and evils whatsoever, sometime he promises that he will be thankful. And the
better to declare what trust and confidence he has in God, notwithstanding all
his calamities and evils whatsoever, he does both profess the same unto God,
and so frames his speech unto others withal, as that thereby also he does
plainly declare, that there was in him a notable confidence. Which his speech
unto others rests in two principal points: one, that he vpbraideth the
enemy, and as it were triumphs over him; the other, that he comfort the
godly, and, being himself in great distress, nevertheless he will be a
comforter to others. So, if we mark, they all do make six principal heads.
For, either he unfolds the estate he was in: or prays against it: or
shows his confidence in God: or vpbraideth the enemy: or comfort the
godly: or is occupied in thanksgiving. Which, being six may yield one to every
day in the week: and all to the Sabbath. The first also, and the last, do each
of them yield a couple of Psalms: the second, and third, each of them three:
and the fourth, and the fifth, are both but single. The reason whereof will
better appear in the arguments of them, as heere-after ensues to every one.

20 The Argument of both the Psalms of the first sort.
He first unfolds the hard case that he was in: which also may be a right
pattern (being rightly applied) of the estate of many of those that profess
the Gospel. And as David so opened his case then: so is it good for us also,
to open our case now.

The first Psalm of the first sort.
The Argument.
In the former of these two Psalms, he shows the rage of the enemy: how
they gather themselves together, how proudly and cruelly they use their toongs,
how ill and wicked they are in their deeds, and, on his part, how undeserved.

The Psalm. The first Psalm.

O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of the violent men
have sought my soul: and have not set thee before them. 86.14.


For strangers are risen up against me: tyrants seek my soul: they have not
set God before them. 54.3.


They gather them together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the
innocent blood. 94.21.


They gathered together and kept themselves close: they mark my steps because
they wayt for my soul. 56.6.


They prate and speak fiercely: all the workers of iniquity vaunt themselves.
94.4.


They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under their
lips. 240.3.


For the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth full of deceit are opened upon me:
they have spoken to me with a lying tongue. 109.2.


For they speak not as friends: but they imagine deceitful words against the
quiet of the land: 35.2.


With the false scoffers at banquets, gnashing their teeth against me. 35.16.


Behold they brag in their talk, and swords are in their lips, for who, say
they, does hear? 59.7.


The words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet war was in his heart:
his words were more gentle then oil, yet they were swords. 55.21.


They smite down thy people, o Lord, and trouble thine heritage. 94.5.


In whose hands is wickedness, and their right hand is full of bribes. 26.10.


They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. 94.6.


Yet they say the Lord shall not see, neither will the God of Iaakob regard it.
94.7.


Mine enemies would daily swallow me up, for many fight against me, o thou
most high. 56.2.


Which imagine evil things in their heart, and make war continually. 140.2.


And they gaped on me with their mouths, saying, Aha, Aha, our eye has seen.
35.21.


For lo the wicked bend their bow, and make ready their arrows upon the 11.2.
string, that they may secretly shoot at them, which are upright in heart.

For the foundations are cast down, and what has the righteous done? 11.3.


Many say, who will show us any good? but Lord, lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us. 4.6.


They go to and fro in the evening: they bark like dogs, and go about the
city. 59.6.


Because they have no chaunges, therefore they fear not God. 55.9.


Day and night they go about it, upon the walls thereof: both iniquity and
mischief are in the midst of it. 10.


Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her
streates. 11.


Mine own words grieve me daily: all their thoughts are against me to do me
hurt. 56.5.


The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net with cords in my pathway,
and set grens for me. 140.5.


They have laid a net for my steps: my soul is pressed down. 57.6.


For lo they have laid want for my soul: the mighty men are gathered against
me, not for mine offense nor for my sin, o Lord. 59.3.


For without cause they have hid the pit and their net for me: without cause
they have dug a pit for my soul. 35.7.


Cruel witnesses did rise up: they asked of me the things that I knew not. 11.


They compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against me
without a cause. 109.3.


For my friendship they were mine adversaries, but I gave my self to prays; 4.


And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my friendship. 5.


They rewarded me evil for good, to have spoiled my soul. 35.12.


In mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: the
abjects assembled themselves against me, and I knew not: they tare me, and
ceased not. 15.


They run and praepare themselves without a fault on my part: arise therefore
to assist me, and behold. 59.4.


The second Psalm of the first sort.
The Argument.
He unfolds his hard estate in respect of himself, and others of the godlier
sort, not only showing that their case is hard, but also that it is on their
part undeserved, and that it is grievous unto him to have so much as his being
among them. We also may find the selfsame measure, at the hands of those that
are enemies to the Gospel, and may fruitfully occupy our selves, in respect
thereof, as we are hereby directed.

The Psalm. The second Psalm.

AS the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, o
God. 42.1.


My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come, and
appear before the praesence of God? 2.


My tears have been my meat day and night, while they daily say unto me,
where is thy God. 3.


When I remembered these things, I powered out my very heart, because I had gone
with the multitude, and led them into the house of God with the voice of
singing, and praise, as a multitude that keeps a feast. 4.


They going through the dry vale of Baca make wels therein: the rain also so
covers the pooles. 84.6.


They go from strength to strength, til every one appear before God in Sion. 7.


Yea the sparrow has found her an house and the swallow a nest for her, where
she may lay her young: even by thine altars, o Lord of hosts, my king, and my
God. 3.


O God, thou have cast us out, thou have scattered us, thou have been angry:
turn again unto us. 60.1.


Thou have made the land to tremble, and have made it to gape, heal the
breaches thereof: for it is shaken. 2.


Thou have showed thy people heavy things: thou have made us drink the wine of
giddines. 3.


Our bodies lie scattered at the graves mouth, as he that heweth wood or
diggeth in the earth. 141.7.


My God, my soul is cast down within me, therefore do I remember thee (in all
the places of my banishment:) from the land of Jorden (on the East) from Hermon
(on the North,) and from the lesser mountains (of Iudeah, on the South.) 42.6.


One deep calls another deep, by the noise of thy water spowts: all thy
waves and thy floods are gone over me. 7.


My bones are cut asunder, while mine enemies reproach me, saying daily unto
me, where is thy God? 10.


My heart trembles within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me. 55.4.


Fear and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible fear has covered me. 5.


And I said, oh, that I had wings like a dove: the^ would I fly away and rest.
6.


Behold I would take my flight far of, and lodge in the wilderness. 7.


I would make have for my deliverance, from the stormy wind and tempest. 8.


My soul is among Lions: I lie among the children of men that are set on fire:
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. 57.4.


Because I am poor and needy, and mine heart is wounded within me. 109.22.


I depart like the shadow that declineth, and am shaken off, as the grashoper.
23.


My knees are weak through fasting, and my flesh has lost all fatness. 24.


I became also a rebuke unto them: they that looked upon me, shaked their
heads. 25.


Surely mine enemy did not defame me: for I could have borne it: neither did
mine adversary exalt himself against me: for I would have hid me from him.
55.12.


But it was thou, o man, even my companion, my guide, and familiar. 13.


Which delights in consulting together, and went into the house of God as
companions. 14.


He laid his hands upon such, as be at peace with him, and he brake his
covenant. 20.


Yet, when they were sick, I was clothed with sack: I humbled my 35.13.
soul with fasting: and my prayer was turned upon my bosom.

I behaved my self as to my friend, or as to my brother: I humbled my self
mourning as one that bewayleth his mother. 14.


I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept company with the
dissemblers. 26.4.


I have hated the assembly of the evil, and have not companied with the
wicked. 5.


Lord, mine heart is not haughty, neither are mine eyes lofty, neither have I
walked in great matters and hid from me. 131.1.


Surely I have behaved my self, like one weaned from his mother, and kept
silence: and I am in my self as one that is weaned. 2.


My soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace. 6.


Woe is me that I remain in so long an exile, and still wander as those that
dwell but (only) in tents. 5.


I seek peace, and when I speak thereof they are bent to war. 7.


The Argument of those three Psalms that are of the second sort.
Secondarily he prays for help: beseeching the Lord; that he will consider
the estate they are in, and that himself will give them help, whereunto
appertein these three Psalms that follow.

The first Psalm of the second sort.
The Argument.
In the first of these Psalms he stirs up the Lord to hear, and to regard
his prayer: and to address himself to help. Whereby we also may better see
how (in this case of ours) we may power forth such prayers also.

The Psalm. The third Psalm.

O Lord, I call upon thee: have thee unto me, hear my voice when I cry unto
thee. 141.1.


O God, hear my prayer: hearken unto the words of my mouth. 54.2.


O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: hearken o God of Iaakob. 84.8.


Behold, o God, our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed. 9.


Give care, o Lord, unto my Prayer, and hearken unto the voice of my
supplication. 86.6.


In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou hear me. 7.


Thou art my God: hear, o Lord, the voice of my Prayers. 146.6.


Hear me when I call, o God, of my righteousness: thou have set me at
liberty when I was in distress: have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my
Prayer. 4.1.


Let my Prayer be directed in thy sight as incense: and the lifting up of my
hands as an evening sacrifice. 141.2.


Hold not my tongue, o God of thy praise. 109.1.


Arise, o Lord, in thy wrath, and lift up thy self against the rage of mine
enemies, and awake for me, according to the judgments that thou have
appointed. 7.6.


O Lord God the avenger, o God the avenger, show thy self clearly. 94.1.


Exalt thy self, o judge of the world, and render a reward to the proud. 2.


Thou have seen it, o Lord: keep not silence: be not far from me, o Lord.
35.22.


Plead thou my cause, o Lord, with them that strive with me: fight thou
against them, that fight against me. 34.1.


Lay hand upon thy shield and buckler, and stand up for my help. 2.


Save me, o God, by thy name, and by thy power judge me. 54.1.


Turn unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy servant,
and save the son of thy hand-mayd. 86.16.


Show a token of thy goodness toward me, that they which hate me, may see it,
because thou, o Lord, have helped me and comforted me. 17.


Exalt thy self, o God, above the heavens, and let thy glory be upon all the
earth. 57.5.11.


Wilt not thou, o God, (which had cast us off, and did not go forth, o God,
with our armies.) 60.10.


Give us help against trouble? for vain is the help of man. 11.


O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee,
my flesh longs after thee, in a barren and dry land without water. 69.1.


Bring out also thy spear and stop the way against them that persecute me: say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation. 35.3.


So shall the congregations of the people compass thee about: for their sakes
therefore return on high. 7.7.


The second Psalm of the second sort.
The Argument.
In this second Psalm ensuing, he does more specialy direct his prayers
against the enemies, desiring God to abate their force, and to bring them
down. This he does very earnestly, and by many apt similitudes, and other
force of speech: notably expressing how much he desires, on the behalf of
Gods glory, their utter destruction. And we likewise, coming to these that
are enemies to us for the Gospels sake, if so be that we firmly retain an
unfeigned love of their persons, and of such good things as are in them (and,
in that respect pray for them) not only we may in such sort pray against them,
in respect of the glory of God: but also we ought so thoroughly to be touched
therewith, that how dear so ever otherwise they are unto us, yet in this
respect we should spare them nothing at all, to the impeachment of any part of
his honor.

The Psalm. The 4. Psalm.

LOrd, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? 94.3.


Even thou, o Lord God of hosts, o God of Israel, awake to visit all the
heathen, and be not merciful unto those that transgress maliciously. 59.5.


Let not the wicked have his desire, o Lord, perform not his wicked thoughts,
least they be too proud. 140.8.


Let them not say in their hearts, o, our soul rejoice: neither let them say,
we have devoured him. 35.25.


Break their teeth, o God, in their mouths: break the jaws of the young
lions, o Lord. 58.6.


They think they shall escape by iniquity: o God, cast these people down in
thy anger. 56.7.


Destroy, o Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen cruelty and
strife in the city. 55.9.


Let death cease upon them, let them go down quick into the grave: for
wickedness is in their dwellings, even in the mids of them. 15.


Let him consume like a snaile that melts: and like the untimely fruit of a
woman that has not seen the Sun. 58.8.


Let them be confounded and put to shame, that seek after my soul: let them
be turned back, and brought to confusion, that imagine mine hurt 35.4.


Let them melt like the waters, let them pass away: when he shoots his
arrows, let them be as broken. 58.7.


As raw flesh, before your pots feel the fire of thorns: so let him carry
them away as with a whirlwind in his wrath. 9.


Let them be as chafe before the wind, and let the Angel of the Lord scatter
the^. 35.5.


Slay them not, least my people forget it: but scatter them abroad by thy
power, and put them down, o Lord, our shield. 59.11.


For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips: and let them be
taken in their pride, even for their perjurie and lies that they speak. 12.


Consume them in thy wrath: consume them that they be no more: and let them
know that God rules in Iaakob, even unto the ends of the world. 13.


Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them 35.6.


Let coals fall upon them: let him cast them into the fire, and into the deep
pits that they rise not. 140.10.


Let destruction come upon him at unawares, and let his net, that he has laid
privilie, take him: let him fall into the same destruction. 35.8.


Let the wicked fall into his nets together, whiles I escape. 141.10.


Set thou the wicked over him, and let the adversary stand at his right hand.
109.6.


When he shall be judged, let him be condemned, and let his prayer be turned into
sin. 7.


Let his days be few, and let another take his charge. 8.


Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow. 9.


Let his children be vagabonds and beg their bread, coming out of their
places destroyed. 10.


Let the extortioner catch all that he has, and let the stranger spoil his
labor. 11.


Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to show
mercy upon his fatherless children. 12.


Let his posterity be destroyed, and in the generation following let his name
be put out. 13.


Let the iniquity of his fathers be had in remembrance, with the Lord: and
let not the sin of his mother be done away. 14.


But let them always be before the Lord, that he may cut off their memorial
from the earth. 15.


Let destruction be unto him, as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle
wherewith he shall be always girded. 19.


Let this be the reward of mine adversary from the Lord, and of them that
speak evil against my soul. 20.


As for the chief of them that compass me about, let the mischief of their
own lips come upon them. 140.9.


Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with
their confusion, as with a cloak. 109.29.


O let the malice of the wicked come to an end: but guide thou the just. 7.9.


Let them be confounded and put to shame together, that rejoice at mine hurt:
let them be clothed with confusion and shame, that lift up themselves against
me. 35.26.


But let them be joyful and glad that love my righteousness: yea let them say
always, let the Lord be magnified, which loves the prosperity of his servant.
27.


The third Psalm of the second sort.
The Argument.
In the third he prays for the praeseruation of himself, and the godlier
sort: as having consecrated themselves unto him: and for that they have
deserved no such thing at their enemies hands, as was by them intended against
them. And as there is, in these days of ours, good cause, as earnestly for to
beg for our safety at the hands of God: so may we likewise in these respects
be bold to do it, and hope well of the success that God shall give it.

The Psalm. The fifth Psalm.

IVdge me, o God, and defend my cause, against the unmercifull people: deliver
me from the deceitful and wicked man. 43.1.


Incline thine care, o Lord, and hear me: for I am poor and needy. 86.1.


Be merciful unto me, o Lord: for I cry unto thee continually. 3.


O my God deliver me from mine enemies, defend me from them that rise up
against me. 59.1.


Deliver me from the wicked doers, and save me from the bloody men. 2.


For the voice of the enemy, and for the vexation of the wicked: because they
have brought iniquity upon me, and furiously hate me. 55.3.


Hearken unto me and answer me: I mourn in my prayer and make a noise. 2.


Hear my prayer, o God, and hide not thy self from my supplication. 1.


O Lord my God, if I have done this thing: if there be any wickedness in my
hands: 7.3.


If I have rewarded evil unto him that dealt friendly with me (yea I have
delivered him, that without any cause is mine enemy) 4.


Then let my enemy persecute my soul, and take me: yea let him tread my life
down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. 5.


Stand up, O Lord, in thy wrath, and lift up thy self: because of the
indignations of mine enemies, arise up for me in the judgment that thou have
commanded. 6.


But judge thou me, o Lord my God, according to thy righteousness, and let
them not rejoice over me. 35.24.


O Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells. 26.8.


Gather not my soul with the sinners, nor my life with the bloody men. 9.


Judge me, o Lord, for I have walked in mine innocence: my trust also has 1.
been in the Lord: therefore shall I not slide.

Arise and wake to my judgment, even to my cause my God, and my Lord. 35.23.


Be merciful unto me, o God, for man would swallow me up: he fights
continually and vexes me. 56.1.


Deliver my soul; o Lord from lying lips, and from the deceitful tung. 120.2.


Deliver me, o Lord, from the evil man: praeserve me from the cruel man. 140.1.


Least he devour my soul like a lion, and tear it in pieces while there is
none to help. 7.2.


Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and from the grens of the
workers of iniquity. 141.9.


Let not them that are mine enemies unjustly rejoice over me: neither let them
wink with the eye, that hate me without a cause. 35.19.


Keep me, o Lord, from the hands of the wicked: praeserve me from the wicked
man, which purposes to cause my steps to slide. 140.4.


But thou, o Lord, my God deal with me according to thy name: deliver me (for
thy mercy is good.) 109.21.


Lord, how long will thou behold this? deliver my soul from their tumult, even
my desolate soul from the lions. 35.17.


For thou art the God of my strength: why have thou put me away? why go I so
mourning when the enemy oppresses me. 43.2.


Help me, o Lord my God: save me according unto thy mercy. 109.26.


And they shall know that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it. 27.


Though they curse, yet thou will bless: they shall arise and be confounded:
but thy servant shall rejoice. 28.


Prove me, o Lord, and try me: examine my reins and my heart. 26.2.


Teach me thy way, o Lord, and I will walk in thy truth: knit my heart unto
thee, that I may fear thy name. 86.11.


Send thy light and thy truth: let them lead me: let them bring me unto thy
holy mountain, and to thy tabernacles. 43.3.


Set a watch, o Lord, before my mouth: and keep the door of my lips. 141.3.


Incline not mine heart unto evil, that I should commit wicked works, with
men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their delicates. 4.


Let the righteous smite me: for that is a benefit: and let not him reprove
me, and it shall be a precious oil, that shall not break mine head: for
within a while I shall even pray in their miseries. 5.


Praeserve thou my soul, for I am merciful: my God save thou thy servant that
trusts in thee. 16.2.


Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, o Lord, do I lift up my
soul. 4.


The Argument of three other Psalms that do apperteyne to the third sort.
Thirdly, he conceiueth good hope in the goodness of God: and does not only
acknowledge the same unto him: but labors also to strengthen himself therein
more and more. Unto which three other Psalms likewise do apperteyne.

The first Psalm of the third sort.
The Argument.
In this first Psalm he expresses the confidence that he has in the goodness
of God, in respect of the cause that he has in hand, and notably stirs up
himself thereunto: and yet but generally: and more specially after in those two
that follow. And we likewise may hereby, not only express such confidence as
we have: but see whereunto we may justly rise, (our cause being now, all one
with his then) and how we are to stir up our selves unto it.

The Psalm. The 6. Psalm.

O Lord my God, in thee I put my trust: save me from all that persecute me, and
deliver me. 7.1.


Have mercy upon me, o God, have mercy upon me: for my soul trusts in
thee, and in the shadow of thy wings will I trust, til these afflictions do
overpasse. 57.1.


For thou, o Lord art a pitiful God and merciful, slow to anger, and great in
kindness and truth. 86.15.


Mine eyes look unto thee, o Lord God: in thee is my trust: leave not my soul
destitute. 141.8.


For thou Lord art good and merciful, and of great kindness unto al men that
call upon thee. 86.5.


My soul cleaves unto thee: for thy right hand upholdeth me. 63.8.


Thus I behold thee, as in the Sanctuary when I behold thy power and glory. 2.


When I was afraid, I trusted in thee. 65.3.


Thy vows are upon me, o God: I will render praises to thee. 56.12.


In God do I trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me. 11.


When I cry, the^ shall mine enemies turn back: this I know, for God is with
me. 9.


Thou have counted my wanderings: put my tears in thy bottel: are not they in
thy register. 8.


That thy beloved may be delivered, help with thy right hand, and hear me.
60.5.


And now thou have given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be
displayed because of thy truth. 4.


The Lord is in his holy place: the Lords throne is in the heavens: his eyes
will consider: his ey-lids will try the children of men. 11.4.


God judges the righteous, and him that contemns God, every day. 7.11.


I will walk in mine innocence: redeem me therefore and be merciful unto me.
26.11.


I will lay me down and sleep also in peace: for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety. 4.9.


The second Psalm of the third sort.
The Argument.
In this Psalm he does more specially express his confidence against his
enemies: that though they be many and mighty, and fiercely bent: yet shall
they notwithstanding be overthrown. And in the cause that we have in hand, we
may in like sort make that account, if there be no fault in our selves: and so
hereby we are to raise up our selves unto the like confidence also.

The Psalm. The 7. Psalm.

IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul, flee to your
mountain as a bird? 11.1


How long will ye say, tush the Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of
Iaakob regard it. 94. 7


Take heed ye unwise among the people o ye fools, when will ye understand? 8.


He that planteth the ear, shall he not hear? or he that forms the eye,
shall he not see? 9.


Or he that chasticeth the nations, shall he not correct? he that teaches man
10.
knowledge, shall he not know?

But thou, o Lord, shall have the^ in derisio^, and thou shall laugh at all the
heathen. 59.8.


The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. 94.11.


He is strong, but I will wayt upon thee: for God is my defense. 59.9.


Behold he shall travail with wickedness: for he has conceaved mischief, but
he shall bring forth a lie. 7.14.


His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his cruelty shall fall
upon his own pate. 16.


My merciful God will praevent me: God will let me see my desire upon mine
enemies. 59.10.


The Lord will try the righteous: but the wicked, and him that loves
iniquity does his soul hate. 11.5.


He has also praepared him deadly weapons: he will ordeyne his arrows for
them that persecute me. 7.13.


Except he turn, he has whet his sword: he has bent his bow and made it
ready. 12.


Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and stormy
tempest: this is the portion of their cup. 11.6.


And thou, o God, shall bring them down into the pit of corruption: the
bloody, and deceytfull men shall not live half their days: but I will trust
in thee. 55.23.


Therefore they that seek my soul to destroy it, they shall go into the
lowest parts of the earth. 63.9.


They shall cast him down with the edge of the sword, and they shall be a
portion for foxes. 10.


He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: oh cut them off in thy wrath. 54.5.


Through God we shall do valiantly: for he shall tread down our enemies. 60.12.


God has spoken in his holiness: therefore I will rejoice: I shall devide
Sichem, and measure the valley of Sucoth. 60.6.


Gilead shall be mine, and Manasseth shall be mine: Ephraim also shall be the
strength of my head: Judah is my lawgiuer. 7.


Moab is my washpot: over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Palestina show thy self
joyful for me. 8.


Who will lead me into the strong cities? who will bring me into Edom? 9.


The third Psalm of the third sort.
The Argument.
In this likewise he does more specially express his confidence, yet not so
directly of the enemies now: but only on behalf of himself, and others of the
godlier sort: showing that although their case be hard, yet shall they not
miscarie: but shall have a ready help, in their mighty and merciful God. By
direction whereof we likewise, in the cause that we have in hand, and so far
as our selves are no hinderance unto our selves, are to raise up our faith unto
the fullness of this assurance that we find in him.

The Psalm. The 8. Psalm.

GReat are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of
them all. 34.19.


Surely the Lord will not fail his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance. 94.14.


The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. 34.7.


The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry. 18.


I know that the Lord will avenge the afflicted, and judge the poor. 140.12.


Why art thou cast down my soul, and unquiet within me? wayt on God: for I
will yet give him thanks, for the help of his praesence. 42.5.


Surely the righteous shall praise thy name, and the just shall dwell in thy
praesence. 140.13.


For judgeme^t shall return to justice, and all the upright in heart shall follow
after it. 94.15.


For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the
just. 11.7.


For he will stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from them that
would condemn his soul. 109.30.


He keeps al his bones: not one of them is broken. 34.20.


The Lord will grant his loving kindness in the day, and in the night will I
sing of him, even a prayer unto the God of my life. 42.8.


I will say unto God which is my rock, why have thou forgotten me? why go I
mourning when the enemy oppresses me? 9.


Blessed are they that dwell in thine house: they will ever praise thee. 84.4.


Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: and in whose heart is thy ways.
5.


Blessed is the man whom thou chasticest, o Lord, and teach him in thy law.
94.12.


That thou may give him rest from the days of evil, whilst the pit is
dug for the wicked. 13.


The lions do lack, and suffer hunger but they which seek the Lord shall want
nothing that is good. 34.10.


Why art thou then cast down my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
wayt on God: for I will yet give him thanks, he is my praesent help and my God.
43.5.


Behold God is mine helper, the Lord is with them that uphold my soul. 54.4.


My defense is in God, who praeserveth the upright in heart. 7.10.


The Lord is my refuge, and my God is the rock of my hope. 94.22.


He will send from heaven, and save me, from the reproof of him that would
swallow me: God will send his mercy and his truth. 57.3.


The Lord shall judge his people: judge thou me, o Lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to mine innocence that is in me. 7.8.


For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes: therefore have I walked in
thy truth. 26.3.


I will rejoice in God because of his word: I trust in God, and will not fear
what flesh can do unto me. 56.4.


Thou have given me more joy of heart, then they have had, when their wheat and
their wine did abound. 4.7.


Why art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? wayt
on God: for I will yet give him thanks: he is my praesent help and my God.
42.11.


I will call upon God, and the Lord will save me. 55.16.


Evening, and morning, and at noone day will I pray, and make a noise: and he
will hear me. 17.


He has delivered my soul in peace from the battle, that was against me: for
many were with me. 18.


God shall hear and afflict them: even he that reigns of old. 19.


O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee. 84.12.


Let Israel wayt on the Lord from henceforth for ever. 131.3.


The Argument.
Fourthly, he vpbraideth his enemies, and triumphs over then, charging them
with great malice in heart: and the same to break forth of them plentifully in
word, and deed: and withal, that they shall certeynly come to confusion to the
comfort of the godly, and to the glory of God himself. A very good course for
us also to follow in these days of ours: and such as we need not to estraunge
from our selves, whenever we can find in our hearts, to cleanse us truly
from our wonted sins: and in the goodness of this our cause to cleave to the
Lord.

The Psalm. The 9. Psalm.

IS it true, o ye congregation I speak ye justly? o sons of men, judge ye
uprightly. 58.1.


Yea rather, ye imagine mischief in your hearts: your hands execute cruelty
upon the earth. 2.


The wicked are strangers from the womb: even from the belly have they erred
and speak lies. 3.


Their poison is even like the poison of a serpent: like the deaffe adder that
stops his ear. 4.


Which hears not the voice of the inchanter, though he be most expert in
charming. 5.


O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? loving
vanity and seeking lies. 4.2.


For be ye sure that the Lord has chosen to himself a godly man: the Lord will
hear when I call unto him. 3.


Tremble and sin not: examine your own heart upon your bed and be still. 4.


What does thy deceitful tung bring unto thee? or what does it avail thee?
120.3.


It is as the sharp arrows of a mighty man, and as the coals of Juniper. 4.


Why boastest thou thy self in thy wickedness, o man of power? the loving
kindness of God endures daily. 52.1.


Thy tongue imagines mischief, and is like a sharp rasour that cutteth
deceitfully. 2.


Thou do love evil more then good, and lies more then to speak the truth.
3.


Thou love all words that may destroy: o deceitful tung. 4.


So shall God destroy thee forever: he shall take thee and pluck thee out of
thy tabernacle: and root thee out of the land of the living. 5.


The righteous also shall see it, and fear, and shall laugh at him, saying: 6.


Behold the man that took not God for his strength: but trusted in the
multitude of his riches, and put his strength in his malice. 7.


He has made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the pit that he made. 57.6.


Because he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the afflicted and
poor man, and the sorrowful hearted to slay him. 109.16.


As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him: and as he loved not blessing,
so shall it be far from him. 17.


As he clothed himself with cursing like a raiment: so shall it come into his
bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. 18.


For the backbiters shall not be established upon the earth: evil shall hunt
out the cruel man to destruction. 140.41.


And in the evening they shall go to and fro, and bark like dogs, and go
about the city. 59.14.


They shall run here and there for meat, and surely they shall not be
satisfied, though they tarry all night. 15.


The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance be shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked. 58.10.


And men shall say, verily there is fruit for the righteous: doubtless there
is a God that judges the earth. 11.


And he will recompense them their wickedness, and destroy them in their own
malice: yea the Lord our God shall destroy them. 94.23.


But I shall be like a green Olive tree in the house of God: for I trusted in
the mercy of God for ever and ever. 52.8.


But malice shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall
perish. 34.21.


The Argument.
Fifthly, he calls on the godly to their further encouragement, showing the
great goodness of God toward them, and that, in the way of godliness,
whatsoever their troubles are, yet notwithstanding they shall never fall A very
good exercise for us also, in respect of the weakness of many, and loosenes of
others: and the shorter that David is in this matter, and the more thereby we
are left to our selves, the more careful we ought to be thereof.

The Psalm. The 10. Psalm.

WHo will rise up with me against the wicked? or who will take my part against
the workers of iniquity? 94.16.


Come ye children hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
34.11.


Taste ye and see, how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in
him. 8.


Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and trust in the Lord. 4.5.


Praise ye the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together. 34.3.


Fear the Lord ye his saints? for nothing wants to those that fear him. 9.


What man is he that desires life, and loves long days, for to see good? 12.


Keep thy tung from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. 13.


Eschew evil, and do good: seek peace, and follow after it. 14.


Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: he will not suffer
the righteous to fall for ever. 55.22.


The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles. 34.17.


The Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite heart: and will save such
as be afflicted in spirit. 18.


Last of all, having laid all these things together before him, he notably
acknowledges the great goodness of God toward him, and promises thanks and
praise. And so it is our duty likewise, in such sort to unfold the goodness
toward us, in all these points before rehearsed, as that thereby we stir up
our selves, ever to be thankful more and more. Unto which apperteyne these
two Psalms following.

The first Psalm of the sixth sort.
The Argument.
In the former of them he does no more but promise, or set down with himself,
that he will be thankful. A good purpose in him and such as is as justly
deserved at our hands also.

The Psalm. The 11. Psalm.

I Will give thanks always unto the Lord: his praise shall be in my mouth
continually. 34.1.


I will give thanks unto the Lord greatly with my mouth, and praise him among
the multitude. 109.30.


I will praise thee, o Lord my God, withal my heart, yea I will glorify thy name
for ever. 86.13.


And my tung shall utter thy righteousness, and thy praise every day. 35.28.


That I may declare with the voice of thanksgiving, and set forth al thy
wondrous works. 26.7.


I will praise thee, o Lord, among the people, and I will sing unto thee among
the nations. 57.9.


So will I give thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee among much
people. 35.18.


Thus will I magnify thee all my life, and lift up mine hand in thy name. 63 4.


My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatnes: and my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips. 5.


When I remembered thee upon my bed, and when I think upon thee in the night
watches. 6.


Because thou have been my helper, therefore under the shadow of thy wings will
I rejoice. 7.


Thy loving kindness is better than life: therefore my lips shall praise thee.
3.


For thy mercy is great unto the heavens: and thy truth unto the clouds.
57.10.


For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest grave. 86.13.


For thou have delivered my soul from death, and also my feet from falling
that I may walk before God in the light of the living. 56.13.


All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the
poor from him that is too strong for him? yea the poor that is in misery,
from him that spoyleth him. 35.10.


When I said, my foot slideth, thy mercy, o Lord, stayed me. 94.18.


In the multitude of my thoughts in mine heart, thy comforts have rejoiced my
soul. 19.


Has the throne of iniquity fellowship with thee, which forgeth wrong for a
law? 20.


My foot stands in uprightnes: I will praise thee, o Lord, in the
congregations. 26.12.


O Lord God the strength of my salvation, thou have covered my head in the day
of battle. 140.7.


Among the Gods there is none like unto thee: and there is none that can do
like unto thy works. 86 8.


All nations whom thou have made shall come and worship thee, o Lord, and shall
glorify thy name. 9.


For thou art great, and do wondrous things: thou art God alone. 10.


O Lord of hosts, how amiable is thy Tabernacle. 84.1.


For a day in thy Courts is better than a thousand other-where: I had rather be
a dorekeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of
wickedness. 10.


For the Lord God is the Sun and shield unto us: the Lord will give grace and
glory: and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. 11.


I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy in the morning: for thou
have been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble. 56.16.


Unto thee, o my strength, will I sing: for thou art my defense and my merciful
God. 17.


S. D. G.

