Questions of Religion cast abroad in HELVETIA by the Adversaries of the same:
and answered by M. H. Bullinger of ZVRICK: reduced into. 17. Common places.

Translated into English by John Coxe. 1572.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, for George Bishop.

To the right Reverend father in God, and my very good Lord, William by Gods
providence Bishop of Excester, John Cox Wishes all grace, and peace of
conscience from God our heavenly father, through Christ Jesus our Lord, now
and for ever.
WHEN I HAD finished the translation of this Book, (right Reverend father)
and being persuaded by some of my godly friends, to publishe the same in
Printe, for that it was a Book not only containing the whole sum of our
Christian Religion, but also answers to all the objections which our
adversaries the Papists may or can obiecte against us, bearing any similitude
or likelyhode of truth: and again also considering with my self, that in
these our days, being the last, and therefore the most perilous and
dangerous days, for so our savior Christ him self teaches us, vvherin we
have great need to be furnished against the assaults of the enemies of true
Religion: and vvaying with my self the godly mind of the author, D. Henry
Bullinger, who vvrote the same in his own natural tongue, for the profit
of his Countrymen, as more largely appears in his own preface, where he
declares why he took this matter in hand, a man of most singular learning
and virtuous living, for whom all christendom is bound to magnify the
majesty of god, declaring his love toward us, in sending such an excellent
member to his Church, who paynfully traueled, not only in Lectures and
Sermons, even in his old and feeble age, but also vvrote many Books, so that
it can not well be discerned, in which of these two exercises he did most
excede in labor: thought I could do God no better service, and no greater
pleasure to my Countrymen, than to make them partakers of such a precious
perle as this. For that it is a sure shield and strong furnished fortress
against the carping tongs and clapping clacks of Mo^^^ his race. For such is
the great frovvardnesse and obstinacy of some men, that although God of his
mercy and clemency has repressed and beaten down the frosen, frostie, and
dark mountayns of Popish Cimmeria, vvherby the clearenesse of his Gospel was
kept from us, and has caused the most comfortable bright beams of his
Gospel to shine forth over us, yet they most wickedly blyndfield them
selves with the thick and foggie mystes of man's imaginations, and so
rebelling against God their Creator, chose rather stubbornely to abide in their
old horrible darkness, than willingly to embrace the comfortable light of
so merciful a God. Wherefore I mused with my self, to whom chiefly I
might dedicate this treatise: and amongst many grave and wise personages, I
found none so meet as your fatherhoode, and that for two causes: The one for
that it has pleased god of his mercy to take away hence unto him self, that
most precious levvel and excellent ornament of his Church, D. Jewel late
Bishop of Sarisburie: for whose death what sighs and tears are amongst the
godly I cease to declare, partly for that I will not augmente and renew your
Fatherhoods conceived sorrovves, which you have planted within your breast,
(such was the great amity, love, and faithful friendship betvveene you,) and
for that partly the abundance of mine own tears forces the same, (such
are the vehement affections of man's nature:) to whom this Book was
dedicated by one Josias Simlerus, one of the chief Ministers in the Church of
Zuricke, who turned the same out of Dutche into Latin, vvherin the author
vvrote it, as I said before: that as the Book was a defense and fortress to
many, so he lykevvyse might be a sheelde and defense unto the same, against
the brauling tongues of the barking enimyes the Papists, who are ever ready
to spit forth the pestiferous humors of their malicious and ungodly stomachs,
as their tyrannous practices from time to time, have and do most manyfestly
declare. Wherefore right reverend father, and my singular good Lord, sith
it has pleased God (as I said before) to take away from us such an ornament
and Ievvel, for some good cause unto him known, I offer this his defense into
your hands, being no less worthy to take so good a matter in hand. The
other is your good Lordshyps accustomable favor and good will, continually
bestovved on the chief of my friends, which forces me to dedicate this unto
you: thereby to signify, that although there wants power and ability,
both in them and me to requite any part thereof, yet such is our bounden
duties toward your Lordshippe, that neither blind oblivion, nor time with
his crooked sith, shall be able to cut that reverend affection and love, from
our breasts which we have duetifully conceived toward you. Wherefore I
most humbly beseech you, to accept this my travel in good part, and as the
only token of him, who prays daily unto the almighty God, that he may
encrese you with honor, and so govern you with his holy spirit, that as you
have begun, so you may continue a most vigilant and paynfull pastor in Christ's
Church, to the comfort and increase thereof, the quiet and discharge of your
own conscience, the defacing and ouerthrovving of the adversaries of the same,
and the incoraging and provoking of your godly Ministers and Preachers to
follow your steps, in paynfulnesse, diligence, love, humility, and other
most excellent virtues, for the which, amongst all the godly you are most
vvorthely commended, and that so finishing your life, with a long and an
honorable age, you may with Christ Jesus our head and only chief pastor,
possess the crown of eternal glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Your Lorpships most humble at commandment, JOHN COXE.

To the right reverend Father in God, John Iuel Bishop of Sarisburie: Josias
Simlerus wishes health.
I Have heard oftentimes many godly men greatly desire some writing, in the
which there might breefely be confuted all the chief arguments of the Popish
prelates. For (said they) there is much written very copiously and learnedly
against them, but all me^ have not leisure to read over so great and large
works: And furthermore, to those which travel, and by cruelty of the
persecuters of our religion, are forced to read them privily, these great
volumes are to them very incommodious: because they cannot easily be carried
about with them, nor thrust or hid in their bosom. And remembering that a
few years agone, the reverend father in God John Parkhurst, did often times
desire me, that like as D. Bullinger my father in law (whom for reverence
sake I name) had breefely set forth the chief points of our religion, and
confirmed the same by testimony of holy scripture, intituling it the Sum of
Christian Religion, so I in like manner should gather together all the arguments
which the papists are wo^t to bring out of ye scriptures against us and our
doctrine. And he encoraged me heerunto, saying: that this labor would not be so
tedious and hard unto me, as profitable and grateful unto many good men. And
it would be the less labor for that many of our countrymen had written
very largely in the same matter, so as there remained nothing else unto me, but
to bring them into some brief order. And as touching the profit hereof, he
said it might well be perceived, for that heretofore there was set forth
an Enchiridion of common places by John Eckius, a very stout champion on the
Popes behalf, which being studiously and earnestly read of many Papists,
confirmed them in their erroures: and therefore he had no doubt, but if some
like book were set forth by us, many would willingly read the same, and
thereby also take great profit: which thing he said might well be gathered,
because that little Books, of all those chief points might very easily be
spredde abroad by the Printers, and so be studiously read of all men.
Wherefore, these and many other things which he was wont most gravely and
learnedly, according to his custom, to rehearse unto me, did easily persuade
me that such a book would be very profitable and acceptable to many, but that
I should attempt or enterprise to begin such a work I cannot yet persuade my
self, not for that there wants good will both to gratify my friend privily
as also openly to pleasure others, but because I stood in doubt how to finishe
the same. But when the year last past, there was put into Printe a little book
by the Reverend father Doctor Henry Bullinger, in which he Answers to
certain Articles or Questions wherewith the Inquisitors of B^^^ria, as they
say, examine those which are suspected in Religion, I thought with my self,
that the same would not only satisfy the minds of diverse godly men, but also
the special request of our^ Parkhurst, and therefore have I turned the same
into Latin, that all men might read it. For in this book are all the
chief arguments of the Papists (and especially those with whom they are
wont to pose and trouble the minds of the simple and unlearned) breefely
confuted and answered. And whereas Phillip Melancthon of most worthy memory,
father of all the learned men that hither unto have lived in Germany, wrote a
Book answering these Articles of Bauaria, as ye title of his book does
testify: yet of. 61. questions he only answered but. 18. peradventure
supposing that by the Answers made unto those, the rest also might easily be
confuted. But D. Bullinger having regard to profit the simple and unlearned,
makes answer orderly, to each one of these questions: and therefore though he
took this matter in hand after that great learned man D. Melancthon, yet is it
profitable: because not only Melancthon did not answer to them all, but also
because in that his answer are some such things which are not altogether
allowed of the godly, and cheefely those things which are written in the 22.
Article touching Free will: Of the which matter I will now say nothing, but he
that reads both the books, and wayeth the arguments, may easily judge.

This Book do I send unto thee, most learned Jewel, first because of the
great friendship between thee and our Parkhurst, that so by you I may
satisfy his desire and request: or else that at the least he may heerewith
content him self, until some better learned than I, may take this his desired
work in hand. Furthermore my desire was, that by this a public testimony
might be extant, not only of my duty toward you, but also of your love
toward me, which I not only perceived when we were together, but also do
perfectly understand by your letters since sent unto me. And although the
Popish doctrine be through Gods great mercy quite chased away from your
Country of England, (for the which all godly do greatly rejoice) yet I
trust this my work shall not be unprofitable, to weed out of the minds of the
simple the dregs of that Doctrine, so as thereby the pure doctrine of Christ,
may be the faster and better engrafted. And in the exercise hereof, you have
not only many helpers to me unknown, but also those whom I right well know,
men of excellent learning and virtue, true Bishops in Christ, D. John
Parkhurst, D. Eduin Sands, D. Robert Horn, The reverend father John Bale, D.
John Pilkinton, D. Thomas Lever, D. John Fox, and D. Laurence Humfrey, all
whom I beseech Christ to preserve.

From Zurich Idib. August. 1560.
Henry Bullinger to the Christian Reader.
THere are almost every where through Germany scattred abroad certain
Questions, written or Printed, and that to the end the professoures of the
gospel, and especially such as amongst the^ are unlearned, might by them be
troubled, brought into doubt, and as it were quite driven from the gospel, as
from a new, doubtful, false and corrupt doctrine. For some of these Questions
are so colored with scriptures, that at the first sight they seem to have some
show of truth. But they all shute to this mark, that they may thruste in and
plant, not the true church of Christ and his doctrine, but the church of Rome,
her doctrine, manners, statutes, and other abuses. Whereby it comes to pass by
the infirmity of man, and by reason of persecutions, that many conceive an
evil opinion and lothsomnesse of the gospel, and that chiefly when they see
there is no man to instruct them, strengthen and comfort them. Wherefore when
by some I was requested to make some brief and plain answer to the said
Questions, and somewhat to open the matter, that both they might perceive how
to understand those places of scriptures, as also see that our relion
grounded on the Gospel, is not such as they slander it to be, I took that
matter in hand: And applied my diligence to defend the true religion (as
indede it is the duty of every good Christian) to comfort the godly and
such as were afflicted, and according to the talent given me of God (for
without his help all man's doing is but vain) I answered the.lxi. questions,
for so many came unto my hands, and therefore whether there be more or less in
other places I know not. Wherefore I beseech thee good Christian Reader to take
this my travel in good part, and follow the Counsel of S. Paul, who byddeth
thee to prove all things, and to keep that which is good. And thus much more
I say for their sakes that shall either read or hear this Treatise, that if
they be weeried with the contentions and strifes in Religion, and the sharp
tauntes that oftentimes fall out in that cause, I have in this Book cheefelye
labored to teach the matter most briefly and plainly, and that without all
heat of contention, to Gods glory, and the profitable ^difying of the godly.
The Artycles or Common places which are touched in these lxj. Articles, I have
here breefly set, following in order.

The Common places which are handled in these Questions.
1 OF the holy Trinity. Fol. 1. 2 Of the holy Christian Church, and of the
Church of Rome. eodem. 3 Of Counsels and decrees of the church. Fol. 30. 4 Of
Free will. Fol. 43. 5 Of faith and good works. Fol. 46. 6 Of the intercession,
invocation, and worshipping of Saints. Fol. 58. 7 Of Relikes, Images, and
such like. Fol. 70. 8 Of purgatory, and prayers for the dead. Fol. 75 9 Of
Sacraments. Fol. 83. 10 Of Baptism of children, and of the Anabaptists. Fol.
85. 11 Of the Lords supper and receiving thereof. Fol. 88. 12 Of the sacrifice
of the Mass. Fol. 103. 13 Of repentance and Confession. Fol. 108. 14 Of the
authority of Priests. Fol. 116. 15 Of Marriage, vows and Chastity. Fol. 120.
16 Of Enoyling. Fol. 139. 17 Of the Magistrate and lawefull obedience. Fol.
141.
The first Common place. Of the holy Trinity.
The first question.
What they do think of the holy Trinity.

The Answer.
TOuching the holy How and what we ought to believe of the holy Trinity.
Trinity, I do believe all that which the true and sacred word of God does
teach to acknoweledge and believe. To wit, that there is one only true and
living God in Trinity: one (I say) undivided in substance, and three distinct
parsons: God the father, God the son, and God the ho y ghost: being of like
power, and equally to be worshipped. So are we taught Deuteronomy. 6. Exodus 20. Matthew.
18. Luke. 1. John. 1. 3. 5. 6. 8. 9. 10. 14. 15. 16. and 17. Romans 1. and. 9. 1. Corinthians. 8. 1. John. 5. Likewise we confess the true faith of the Trinity,
contained in the twelve Articles of our Christian faith: where we say: I
believe in God the father, in his only begotten son, and in the holy ghost.
And therefore, what so ever in times past has been written or taught against
this Doctrine by Praxeas, Arius, Macedoni^ and such like: yea and whatsoever
the Jews, Turks, Michael Seruetus that Spaniard with their adherentes have
written, we abhor and detest, assenting only to the old holy Apostolic
Church.

The second Common place. Of the holy christian church and of the church of
Rome.
The second Question.
Whether they believe in one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolical church?

The Answer.
LIke as there is contained and expressed* in the. xij. Articles of our
christian faith, so do I believe that there is one holy and Catholic There is
but one Catholic Church.
church, and yt the same, or the Saints which are therein, be partakers of all
the grace and gifts of Christ. I call the same one, and Catholic, because
there is but one only true Church, biside the which there is none other. And
the same is the congregation and fellowship of all the faithful throughout the
whole world, which at any time have lived on this earth, in what time or
place so ever they have bin, or that now are, or hereafter shall be. And as
there is one God and Lord, neither any more Gods or Lords* (as appears ^.
Corinth. 8. and Ephesians. 4.) so also it is of necessity, that there be but one
only church. Wherefore although this church be dispersed, diverse times into
diverse and sundry members, through out the face of the whole earth, yet has it
but one spirit, one faith, believes in one God the father, and in one savior
our Lord Jesus Christ and in the holy ghost: And therefore is knit in one
charity and in one mind with all faithful, where and The Church is holy.
in what place so ever they be. And this church is holy (that is to say)
sanctified and purged from sins, beutified and endued with holiness and
righteousness, and yt through the grace of God the father, in the blud of his
only son, by the power and effectual working of the holy ghost. Why the
church is called Apostolical.


It is called the christian and Apostolical church, because it is grounded and
built by ye blissed Apostles, upon the true rock, and that only everlasting
foundation Jesus Christ, in ye which foundation also, it is preserved,
reedified and increased by the doctrine of thapostles, as we may learn by S.
Paul 1. Cor. 3. Ephesians. 2. and. 4. 1. Pet. 2. And here is to be noted, yt as the
Israelites did believe Moses, (yt is to say) did believe the doctrine and
commandments which he brought to the^ from God: even so the christians
believe the true church. Paul also calls it the pillar and foundation How
the Church is believed.
of truth, because she hears the voice only of her pastor Jesus Christ, and
not the voice of any stranger. Nether is it believed because it is the church
only, yt is to say ye congregation or fellowship of me^, but because it is the
church of Christ and hears only his eternal truth, preserves, confesses and
teaches the same: and for this cause she is called the pillar and fou^datio^
of truth. Wherefore we believe the church for Christ's sake, and for his truth
and doctrines sake, which by his faithful ministers is taught in ye same.
Neither ought any man to believe in the We must not believe in the Church.
church: because she is collected of men, and therefore is of ye order of things
created. And it is manifest that God abhors all those which trust in men.
Ierem. 17. wherefore this preposition, ^n, is joined in the. xij. Articles of
our faith, only to ye three persons of the holy Trinity. For we confess
that we believe in God the father, in his only begotten son, and in the holy
ghost. Furthermore, Cyprian and other holy fathers do excellently teach in
their interpretations of the Creed, yt we must believe there is an holy
church, but not to believe in the church. And therefore do we not teach any new
thing, but that which the fathers before us, have themselves most plainly and
diligently taught.

The third Question.
What they understand by the name of the church?

The Answer.
WE understand thereby What the Church is.
the congregation or company of those which believe in Christ. For the church
in the Germain tongue is called Kirch, as though it were derived from the
Grecians which call our Lord Jesus Christ (...), that is to say, Lord.
Wherefore all those which are coupled or knitte to Christ, the true head and
fruteful vine, as his proper members and branches springing and growing in
him, are the true Christian church. And this interpretation of the name of the
church we The Communion of saints
have also in the Articles of our faith: for to the confession of the catholic
church we add, yt we believe in the Communion or fellowship of Saints: as
though we should say, the church is none other thing but the congregation of
Saints. And even in this sort do the blessed Fathers interpret these things.
The church is called the Communion or fellowship of Saints for these causes.
First, because all the faithful there, are partakers of all the gifts and
graces which Christ has purchased: that is to say, cheefely the remission of
sins, like as it is said in the Creed next after this Article: I believe the
remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting.
Secondly, it is called the Communion or fellowship of Saints, Saints.
that is to say of the faithful: (for as appears by the Epistles of S. Paul,
the Apostles and other blessed Fathers, called the faithful or Christians,
Saints.) Because (as I said before) they are sanctified by Christ in his blud
through the holy Ghost. But because the church is a congregation or company,
peradventure therefore it is called in our mother tongue Kuch, by this letter L,
and not as some other Germans do sound it by the letter R. For in the Hebrewe
tongue the people or church of God is called K^ha^ and Keh^^a^, whereupon the
Germans say Kilcha. But whether it be derived from the Hebrew or from the
Greek, it is all one. For each of those words signify the congregation or
fellowship of Gods people, even as this word Ecclesia amongst the Latins
does also signify, which word is borrowed of the Grecians. And although the
universal Church of God in this earth can not be brought into one company or
fellowship before the last day: yet notwithstanding, is the same
nevertheless, a spiritual and invisible body, perfectely compacte under one
1. Cor. 12. Ephesi. 4.
head, Jesu Christ: even as diverse members having sundry operations, are
joined in one body. The universal How the universal Church is divided.
Church of Christ is divided, first, into the congregation of them, which
having finished the course of this their life, and passed over all corruptible
things, do now rejoice with christ their head, in heaven, and praise God for
evermore. Secondely it is divided into the congregation of those which do yet
live here on this earth, in daily battle, in the Church of Christ, and have
this hope, that at the time appointed by god, they shall come to Christ their
head, and the fellowship of their elect brethren. And in this congregation
there are some which have true faith, and therefore are the lively members of
the Church, under their head Christ: some lack that lively faith, and
therefore are hypocrites, Hipocri^s in the Church.
being yet numbered in the visible Church, so long as their wickedness
springs not forth, nor they bewray themselves. Touching these. S John
writes 1. John. 2.
thus: They went out from us: (by this it appears they were reckned in the
Church, for else could they not have gone out the^^e) but they were not of us,
(that is to say, they were not the lively members of the church and true
beleuers) for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us. And
hereupon it comes to pas, that many divide ye church into the inward and
invisible, and into the outward and visible Church. Yea furthermore it is
divided into the congregation of those which have lived from the creation of ye
world, unto the coming of christ, and into ye company of those faithful which
have been since the tune of christ, and shall be to the end of the world. And
every congregation of each these parts, are called the Catholic or universal
church: yea each of those churches which are scattered in this world, have but
one spirit or faith, has each the name of universal church. For in the
scriptures there is mention made of particulare churches in this earth: as
that Paul writes to the church of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, and such others.
And therefore eue^ as many Cities and Provinces are contained in one kingdom,
and of many members is made one perfect body: so also those churches which are
dispersed upon the face of the earth, make but one church, one kingdom, and one
spiritual body of Christ, be being the head thereof.

The fourth Question.
Whether they believe that the universal church of Christ, be guided, ruled,
and governed by the holy Ghost?

The Answer.
GOd has always even God governs his church by his holy spirit.
from the beginning of the world been present with his people and church,
governing the same by the ministry of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, and that through the holy Ghost. For oftentimes God speaks in the
old Testament, saying: Behold I am alvvayes with you, I will guide and
defend you. etc. And in the new Testament our Lord Christ says: Behold I am
with you for ever, until Math. 28. 18 John. 14
the end of the world: And again, I will give my spirit unto you, that he
may abide with you for ever: And again, where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. But the purpose of The
end of this Question.
this Question is to bring the godly and simple into perplexity and doubt.
For when they confess, that god governs his church by his holy spirit,
forthwith the popish bishops conclude thereof, that the church neither has,
nor can err: and hereby they suppose, that all other things are sufficiently
proved: to wit, that what soever they under the title and name of the Church
shall thrust upon men, are both good and enspired by the holy Ghost. But unto
these mates we answer: First, that we do not acknowledge that church whereof
they brag, to be the true primative apostolic church, as hereafter we shall
prove. Secondely we d^^ not confess, that the How the Church either erreth or
does not err.
Church can not altogether, or in all points err. For so long as she is
governed by the holy ghost, and only harkeneth unto him, doing nothing but by
his motion and word, she neither does nor can err. But if she swerve at any
time from the government of the same spirit, and governs after her own
lust, then truly she not only may, but also does err. But if any will
ask whether the Church may swerve from the direction of Gods spirit? I
answer, that it is evident, and may in no wise be denied, that the Church of
God here upon this earth often times under Moses, the Judges and the Kings of
Israel and Judah has erred. Yea, and that the Disciples of Christ (who yet
nevertheless were the church of christ) did err, and had their falls. For
who is ignorant what happened to David, Aaron, Peter, and other the holy
Saints and Disciples of Christ? Yea, we must note, that the Church is
gathered not of Angels, but of men. Wherefore although it be inspired and
governed by the spirit, yet it is not thereby turned into the spirit: for it
keeps still her flesh, and the infirmities thereof, yea even unto death. Who
is ignoraunte of those writings which Saint Paul has generally uttered
touching the battle between the flesh and the spirit, and that not in the
ungodly and unbelievers only, which are not of the Church, but even in the
faythefull also, and members of the Church. And this battle is so vehemente
and sharp, that even thereby the godly are forced, not to do that good and
just thing which they know, but to do that which they ought not to do:
Read S. Paul's fifth chapter to the Galathians, and also the seventh to the
Romans. Yet nevertheless, the same Apostle calls the Galathians and
Corinthians, 2. Cori. 1. 6. Galat. 1. 1.
the true church of Christ, as purified by his blood, and governed by his holy
spirit, whereas notwithstanding, he accuses them of grievous erroures and
vices, and exhorts them to repentance, and amendment of their lives. Whereby
it is evident that even these most excellent churches of the Apostles have
erred. But there is an other Objection brought against us out of the ballades
of Solomon, and out of the fifth Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle to the
Ephesians: where it is said, that the church is beautiful, and without spot or
wrinkle: which place S. Augustine interprets, saying: that this purity and
holiness is begone in this life, but in the life to come, when through death
we shall put of this flesh, it shall be fully perfited, so as we shall have
neither spot nor blemishe, but be most perfectly pure. Heereunto we add the
words John. 13. John. 15.
of Christ, who most plainly expounds this matter in the Gospel, saying:
He that is vvashed, needs not save to vvash his fete, but is clean every
whit. And again he says: Every branch which brings forth fruit, my
father purges that it may bring forth more fruit. Now are you clean
through the word which I have spoken unto you. He does not only say that
the Church is pure, but altogether pure: yea that it may bring forth fruit:
and yet nevertheless he speaks of the washing of the feet, and of the
purging which his father shall do. Whereby we may easily gather and perceive
that the church is clean through the grace of God in Christ Jesus, and yet by
her own nature, and through the manifold infirmities of the flesh, which she
retains even until this temporal death, she has need to be washed and
purged. Wherefore she daily prays: Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us. And S. John the Apostle says: If we
say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.
^. John. ^. wherefore being delivered from this miserable flesh, we are made
perfectly pure in the life to come, and free from al blemishe. But so long as
the Saints live here on this earth, clothed with their flesh, they are
subject to many infirmities. And therefore hereby it appears, that by this
reason, the Church both may, and does err: although it cannot be moved,
because she is grounded upon the true rock: and so long as she hears and
follows the voice of her true pastor, she erreth not.

The fifth Question.
By what marks or tokens may the church of Christ be known?

The Answer.
CHefely the Church of The chief tokens of the Church.
God may be known by the pure word of God, perfect faith, charity, innocency,
newness of life and the continual calling upon god in all her necessities. For
Christ plainly says: He that is of God, hears gods word. And again: My
sheep hear my voice: but the voice of a stranger will they not hear, but
will flee from it. And again, In this shall all men know that you be my
Disciples, if you love one an other. And S. Paul: The sure foundation of God
abides, having this token: God knovveth who are his: and let every one
which calls on the name of Christ depart from evil. And again: Every
one which calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved. And to this end also
appertain the The Sacraments are signs of the Church.
blessed Sacraments, whom Christ has ordained as outward signs of his
church, and therefore ought most reverently to be received of us, as they
have been by the Saints before in true faith as may appear. Matthew. 28. Mar.
16. Luke 24. Act. 2. 8. 10. etc. 1. Cor. 10. and. 11. But because many godly
men which are the true and lively members of Christ, do oftentimes want the
sacraments, not through contempt, but by reason of necessity, being yet
nevertheless knitte unto Christ and his members by true faith, spirit,
love, and newness of life, exercising themselves in all Godly studies, I have
placed the first order of signs, as most chief and necessary, whereby the
Church may be known, yet not omitting these godly signs or Sacraments.

But now the Prelates of Rome The succession of Bishops.
think and say that the true and lawefull sign of Christ's Church, is the
orderly succession of Bishops in the Church, with their spiritual
government: And because the Church of Rome has such succession, therefore
they say that it is the true and primitive Church, and that they have the true
gouernemente of the same, so that who soever is out of that government, is out
of the true Church.

They call succession a continued order, wherein one Bishop has succeeded
in the place of an other, and has governed the Church even from Saint Peter
the Apostles time, unto this Pope called Paul the fourth. But they greatly
err, which think that any thing may be proved by succession, whylest they
leave out tha^* which is of most force therein: That is, that if like as they
have succeeded in the place of Peter and the other Godly Bishops (which thing
we grant them) they have also succeeded them in the spirit of Christ, in
Doctrine, in faith, gravity, godliness, humility and patience.

Wherefore sith they want this point, being the cheifest (as all men know
and find by experyence, so as it neadeth no further proof) their vaunte of
succession, is nothing else but an idle sound, to bleare the eyes of those
which are simpie.

Saint Paul the Apostle says thus: Be ye folovvers of me, even as I
follow Christ: Whereby appears, Success^o^ proves nothing.
that Succession takes his force and effect only in Christ, without whom,
it neither proves or aua^^eth any thing.

Wherefore even in their own Canons it is thus written. Dist^n. 40. It is not
an easy matter to stand in the place of Peter and Paul, and to occupy the
seat of those which reign with Christ.

Because it is said, they are not the children of holy men, which occupy
the place of holy men, but they which exercise the works of them. We,
therefore which govern, ought to be known, not by the Nobleness of birthe
or of the place, but by the excellency of our manners, not by the famousnesse
of Cities, but by the purity of Faith: The seat makes not a priest, but a
priest makes the seat: the place sanctifies not a man, but the man the
place: Every priest is not holy: but every one which is holy, is a priest.
He that occupies the seat well, receives honor of the same: But he that
uses it evil, does vvrong unto the seat.

By these words it is manifestly taught that the chair or seat wherein holy
Bishops have set, or succession, is nothing woorthe: except he be also
holy, which succeeds in the place of holy men, imitating the steps of
those, which were before him: but if he be wicked, he then receives no honor
of the seat, but dishonors the same. Wherefore these Prelates may now
consider what honor they receive by their succession, which daily (to the
end they may bring us into contempt) they obiecte against us. The high
Priests and Prelates, who in the time of Christ, did set on Moses chair, could
have derived the petigree of their succession from them selves even unto Aaron,
but because their life and Doctrine did not agree with the life and Succession
of Bishops against Christ and his Apostles.
Doctrine of Aaron and other godly Priests, their succession auailed nothing
against Christ and his Apostles: neither were Christ and his Apostles false
Doctoures, or disseuered from the true Church, because they were not able to
prove their succession as the Pharisees could: For the word of God and the
institution of Christ was sufficient for them.

Wherefore since even we also now have on our side the word of God, and the
institution of Christ, there is no succession of Bishops that can prove us
to be no Christians, or to be out of the true Church. The Histories of Popes
and other like Prelates, which are written, yea even by their Succession
degenerated.
bear friends and defendoures, do sufficiently ^e^^^ie that almost al of
them, have obtained this dignity and place, by most ^ilt^^e means, by
Symonie, wi^ked arts, violence, murders, and tray^erous conspiracies:
wherefore if it would ple^le them a little more narowly to consider hereof,
they should ^^nde by better advise, there were no i^lt cause to brag of
their succession, but rather to bury the same in silence, since by it their
euilles and horrible filth^^esse is so clearly detected. But God has ^one
this, to the end the truth Of the Apostolic seat.
might be revealed, and the go^ly warned to gather them selves together under
our head Christ, and into his true Church.

In times paste about a thousand years agone, it was an usual kind of
speech amongste the Fathers, to say: The Apostolic seat, the Sea of
Antioche, of Alexandria, of Rome. But by the name of sea or seat, they did not
understand only the seat or place, out of the which the Bishops ^f those
Cities did teach, but rather the Doctrine which the Apostles and their
Disciples preached first in those cities. Wherefore the ancient Bishops, which
by lawful election obtained any of those seats, did preach, defend, publishe,
and preserve in the church, the Apostolical doctrine, and that out of the
wrytings* of the blessed Apostles. But where is now I pray you the Apostolic
seat? Where are the books and preachings of the Apostles? Where is their holy
life? What Doctrine teach they, and in what sort live they now, which boast
of the Apostolic seat? Teach they and govern they not contrarily to the
Apostles Doctrine? There is no need to speak much of it here, for all men
see it, and know it, yea they find by experience, that they are so shamefully
wandered from the Apostles, that if now the said Apostles and holy Bishops
of the primitive church, should come amongste them, and behold the pride and
pomp which these Prelates use in their gouernemente, they would not only
disalowe them for their successoures, but also accuse them for their ennimies.
And Paul truly speaks very well, of this kind of succession of Prelates in
the. 20. of the Acts of the Apostles: For I know What Paul teaches touching
the succession of Bishops.
(says he) that after my departure, there vvil come amongste you gredy wolves
not sparing the flock: Moreover of your own selves shall men arise speaking
perverse things, to dravv disciples after them. But when Paul spoke these
things where (I pray you) was there a more holy congregation than his
disciples? And yet notwithstanding he says: Out of you, yea even out of your
own selves, there shall come evil and wicked men which shall scatter and
destroy the flock of Christ. Wherefore it is no wonder to hear that at Rome,
and other places, there were in times past holy Bishops, in whose places now,
succeeds most wicked men, corrupt, both of doctrine and life. And in that
part adds that these things shall shortly come to pass after his departure
or death, we may easily perceive that to be of no force which the Popish
Prelates so often allege, saying: It is impossible that errors should be of so
long continuance in the Church, neither that God would suffer errors so long
to remain. And again: that it is impossible that in those places wherein the
Apostles have preached, and so many godly Bishops have bin resident, all
corruption and abomination should now altogether reign. But all men see what
the state and conditions of these things are: yea and moreover (with great
grief and sorrow I speak it) it is evident under what government, and in
what miserable corruption, the ancient and chiefest churches of the East
parts are now in these days. But of all these things the blessed Prophets
and Apostles have spoken and forewarned us, to the end we should not thereby
be offended, nor seduced by any.

The. vj. Question.
Whether they do believe that the christian Church is not only visible, but
also invisible?

The Answer.
IT behooves in this place to use some distinction. For the congregation of the
saints which are in heaven (although we behold them with-the eyes of our faith,
and desire to be coupled with the^ in the rest and joy which they possess) yet
are they invisible to the faithful which live here on the earth touching the
bodily sight. Furthermore, ^ith God alone knows the hearts, and that he only
knows who are faithful, and who not, and because many do boste them selves
to be faythefull, which notwithstanding are nothing so, but are mere
hipocrites, which thing none sees but God alone, yea and because many times
men judge those to be wretched ^inners, and abiectes from God, which yet
nevertheless are not separated from him, but are better affected in their
heart toward God than we do know, and are also known to him only: therefore
in respect hereof also the church of Christ is called invisible. Again because
the universal church of Christ can never be gathered together that we may
wholly see it before the la^^e day and judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
is also called invisible. But she is not called invisible, as though s^e were
not at all: for we do willingly confess, that upon this earth the church of
Christ is visible also. For it is evident that the congregations of the
Corinthians* Ephesians, Philippians. etc. are called of Paul the church, and
we know also that every one of those faithful in those churches were visible,
although yet nevertheless ye spirit and those spiritual gifts which they had
were invisible, but when they showed forth them selves by the exercises of
sundry virtues. But what needed this question? Or what profit comes thereby
to the faithful? Truly it tends ^o th^^ e^de: the Popes and Prelates desire
to be accounted the visible Church, and hereby would feign have all power and
authority to be conveyed over unto them.

The. vij. Question.
Whether they do believe the Church of Rome to be the true catholic Church?

The Answer.
SE here I pray you, their Whether the Church of Rome be the catholic Church.
purpose, for to this end grows the drifts of all their arguments, namely,
to have us confess the Church of Rome which now is, and the head thereof, the
Pope, to be the true and only Church of Christ, which the faithful throughout
the whole world without all manner of question, ought to believe and obey: as
shall manifestly appear by the questions following. And this question truly
is very absurd: for it is alone, as if it should be demanded whether any one
city in a Realm be the whole Realm or no? Or, whether that any one man in a
multitude be the whole company or no? Or, whether the hand or foot of some one
body, be the whole body or no? For before I have already showed that this word
Catholic signifies universal: and yet I am not ignoraunte also that it may be
taken for any faithful man. But by these questions they openly show unto the
world their foolishness, or rather their exceeding and int^lerable pride
whilst they would have us to acknowledge one part to be the whole, and to
have full power and authority to govern in the whole kingdom, company and
body. Wherefore to this question: Whether the Church of Rome be the true
catholic What we ought to think of the ancient Church of Rome.
Church or no, I answer thus: If they demand of the ancient Church of Rome,
to the which Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, in the which also he
remained a prisoner and preached by the space of two years: then I confess
the same to be the true and faithful Church of Christ: but not the universal
Church, or the head of all other churches, but only a member of the universal
church under one head Christ, of like and equal power with other the churches
of Christ which are here on the earth: and that the Ministers thereof are of
no greater power and authority than the Ministers of other Churches. The like
has Saint Hierome written concerning the Church of Rome, and the Bishops
thereof in these words: Neither is it to be thought that there is one Church
of Rome, and an other of the whole world. For where so ever a Bishop is,
whether it be the Bishop of Rome, or of Eugubiu^, or of Constantinople, or of
Rhegiu^. etc. he is of like authority, and like priesthood. By the which
words he teaches, that the church of Rome is no better than other churches,
wheresoever they be in the whole woride, and that the Bishops thereof have no
more power or superiority of Priesthood, than other Bishops, whether they
be in small or in great Cities. But if they demand of the Church of Rome,
which now is in the sort and manner The new or late Church of Rome is not the
Catholic Church.
as all men see, under these Bishops, and as it has been also of late by
the space of a few hundred years: I answer, that it altogether differs
from the state of the ancient and Apostolyke Church of Rome, and therefore
may in no wise be acknowledged for the universal and catholyke Church,
whereof it boasts. For the signs of the true Church of Christ, buylte by
the Apostles at Rome, and else where, are no more there to be sound: Namely
the spirit of Christ, which loves pure, modest, and humble hearts, and
departs from all impuritie, arrogancy and pride. Yea the word of truth,
and that only voice of the true Pastor, is not only, not heard any more, now
in the Church of Rome, purely, and truly taught, but it is also forbidden,
and persecuted, with fire and sword: on the other side the doctrines of men,
which is contrary to the word of GOD, is by violence and all manner of
deceytfull means maintained and thrust upon (...). That sincere faith, which
ascribes all man's salvation to that only Me^iator between God and man, very
God and very man our Lord Jesus Christ, is obscured: and those things which
are to be sought in Christ, are appointed to be found in his creatures, and in
the works of men. The invocation of God due to him alone, through our only
mediator Jesus Christ, is turned from God, and attributed to many other his
creatures, whom they by images do represent unto the simple and all other
christians, to be honered, even in their temples. The Sacraments of Christ are
most shamefully abused for lucre, and are so mingled with the opinions and
ordinances of men, that the sincerity and first institution of them, can very
hardely be perceived, yea even of the faithful. What kind of charity and
peace is in the Romish Church (from the which what great and exceeding bloody
battles and spoiling of men and Regions are sprung up and daily do arise
within these few hundred years, in the which an innumerable number of
widows and fatherless children are increased) except they would willingly
be blind, all men have known to be tootoo much. But this miserable matter is
rather to be lamented, than as doubtful to be proved: like as also the things
whereof I have before spoken are too well known, and that to the whole world.
And touching the life and manners of the Romish court and church, especially
the principal states and chief spiritual persons, it is right evidently
known: whereas nevertheless Paul says, that those which 1* Cor. 5. 6.
Ephesi. 4. 5.
name them selves Christians, and yet without repentance serve Idols, are
covetous pillars, shameless whoremasters, adulterers, drouned in all other
filthy and abominable wickedness, giving them selves to gluttony and
drunkenness, hatred and backbiting, shall never possess the kingdom of God:
yea, and no christian ought to have any company or fellowship with such. And
sith it is so, every christian may hereby gather what he ought to think of
the church of Rome, and whether he ought to be bound to that Church, or
rather flee from it, rather to Christ and his true Church, as the Lord him
self has taught his in the seuententhe and eyghtenthe Chapters of the
Revelation. Truly it is very lamentable, that so great turmoyles and
vexations of godly men, should be for the Romish Church: and that such
rumors should be blown abroad, as though shie were still even as the
primative Church of Rome was, when all men may see, what manner of Church
she is, what is done therein, and what we may hope to have from thence.
Therefore we must depart and flee from her, and cleave to Christ our Lord,
and to his Christian Church, which in deed we confess to be holy, and the
communion or fellowship of all the Saints.

The. viij. Question.
If any man doubt of the church of Rome, that then he show where the true and
Catholyke Church of Christ has hitherunto ben, or as yet is, and that he name
the place where the Church is, and where it may be found?

The Answer.
THe Donatistes, against To tie the Church of Christ to on^ place only.
who^ blessed Augustine wrote, did think that the Church of Christ was tied
or bound to one certain place, and that she could be found no where, but
in Africa. and the secret corners of the Donatistes, because they thought that
in all other places she was extincted or put out. In like sort these men go
about to include and bring ye whole church of Christ into ye Papal See of Rome,
so as there should be no christian church, but at Rome, and that church which
agreed not therewith, to be excluded from Christ's church. And therefore they
have excommunicated the Grecian and East churches, and have herevppon stirred
up grievous troubles, offenses, and braulings in the whole universal church
of Christ. But to this Question we answer thus: Because the church of
Christ is catholic or universal, it can not be bound, tied, or shut up
into one certain place: for how can it otherwise be called the catholic or
universal church? Therefore if it continue to be catholyke (as the undoubted
Truth does testify) then it both has been in times paste, and is now also
in those places where the true members of Christ are: for those only are they
which believe in him, call on him, worship and honor him for their only
Pastor and Savior, and have those principal tokens, whereof I have spoken
before. And thus have I showed you the place wherein the true and universal
Church of Christ has heretofore been, and is yet to be found. And we
speak of the universal Church, which is on this earth, and not of that
which is in heaven, because the place thereof is known and manifest unto the
faithful.

But what answer will these Prelates The ^^spell took not hy^ beginning from
Rome.
make to that, that there was a glorious and scattered church of Christ
throughout the world, before there was any Church of Christ at Rome, the
which was not called the Church of Rome, but the Church of Christ, and was
in every place where any faithful were? For the Popish Prelates them selves
do confess, that Saint Peter came to Rome the second year of Claudius the
Emperor: and that was ten years after the ascension of Christ, and that
there he did begin and preach the Gospel. For the gospel sprang not up
first at Rome, but it did spread from Jerusalem to Rome, and so into the whole
world, whereupon some have called Jerusalem the mother Church. Therefore
the Romish Church has over soon and to quickly, desired the government of
other Churches, and for that cause has stirred up turmoyles and discordes: no
small confusion and trouble, to the universal Church. Furthermore, not only in
Grecia, but also in There are many countries that does not acknovvledge the
Pope.
the south and in the east, there are many faithful, which not only do
confess Jesus Christ, but also worship, call upon him, and serve him, and do
undoubtedly appertain to the kingdom of Christ, although they be subject to
the civil government of the tyrannous Lurk, and such like tyrants. Yet none
of all these men care any whit at al for the Bishop of Rome, the church
thereof, or for any customs or Ceremonies by the same Church devised or
ordained, being contrary to the word of God: I say, they esteem them no more
than we in this our age, and in this our country esteem them. And do they
not now therefore appertain to the Church of Christ? Wherefore, it is
evident, that Christ has his church, yea even in those Countries. But when
as in times paste, the Bishop of Rome desired certain of those Nations, to
submit them selves under the Church of Rome, they (as the Story testifies)
answered: We know your power and your pride: we can not satisfy your
covetousness, nor will suffer your tyranny and unlawful lust: and
therefore as we are, so we will remain. And yet these godly men refuse not
to obey the Chrystian Church, but only they do refuse to obey the unlawful
lust of these pontifical Prelates, and yet notwithstanding, love and serve
Christ, yea so much the more, for that they submit not them selves to the
Bishop of Rome.

The. ix. Question.
Whether they do believe, that without the Church of Rome there be no
salvation or remission of sins? and whether they do also believe that all
those which separate themselves willingly from that church, are to be condemned
as Heretics, and Schismatikes?

The Answer.
LEt us make some difference Out of the christian Church there is no salvation.
between these questions: whether there be any salvation or remission of
sins without ye church of Rome? Or again: whether there be any salvation or
remission of sins without the Christian church? For thus truly we suppose
and say, that there is no more salvation to be looked for, without the
christian church, than there was health to be looked for in the flood without ye
ark of Noah. For our savior Christ Jesus, the remission of sins, and al
other good gifts of God, yt are declared unto us by the preaching of the
gospel, and are written in our herts by the holy ghost, unto eternal life, are
only to be found in the communion or fellowship of saints. For without the
Church there are many erroures in this world, as of the Gentiles, Jews,
Mahomets, and diverse other Heresies, yea the laws and superstitious
constitutions and Ceremonies of the Popes, which all are unknown and repugnant
to the church of Christ. Wherefore, we say that salvation There may be
salvation without the Church of Rome.
and remission of sins, may very well be had without the church of Rome.
For the faithful which believe Christ's word, and feel the power of faith
and redemption of Christ, and in the mean while behold what is done in the
church of Rome, wherein Heaven, remission of sins, and all other holy things
are set out to sale, and are bid to be redeemed with our unrighteous riches,
as by the shameful mart of their indulgences it appears: do not long abide
in such a church, nor study not to be pertakers of these knackes: but flee
with a quiet and faithful heart, without money, to the only grace of God,
because Esaie in his. 55. Chapter, shows that even for this cause, the Lord
speaks unto, and reproves men, for that they come not to him, but lay out
their money for those things, which profitte nothing to their salvation. Let
therefore every man I beseech you, read the five and fifty chapter of this
Prophet. And how such buying and selling in the church, displeases both
Christ, yea and Peter, (of whom the church of Rome does so busily, but yet
without cause brag) Christ himself declares by his example, in that he
drove twice out of the Temple the buyers and sellers, yea even with whippes:
John. 2. Matthew. 21. In the Acts of the Apostles also it is written: That when
Simon Magus saw the holy Ghost was given of the Apostles by laying on of
their hands, he brought money unto them, saying: Geeue me also this power,
that on whom so ever I lay mine hand, he may receive the holy Ghost: but
Peter answered him: Let thy silver perish together with thee (or as some do
interpret it: Let thy money be with thee into perdition) which think the
gift of God may begotten with money. For thou have neither part nor fellowship
in this doctrine: for thy heart is not right before God. Act. 8.

And because God, here by Peter, cursseth all those which are not of an
vprighte heart, and pronounces them to have no part or fellowshippe with
Gods elect, which make merchandise of his grace and other gifts, amongste
whom, salvation and the remission of sins are the cheifest: And for that the
church of Rome cannot clear her self of this fault: therefore the faithful
seek not salvation or remissions of sins in her, but flee from her unto
Christ our Lord, and of him by true faith, they crave salvation and
remission of their sins.

But the defenders and preachers of Of the faith and salvation of our
forefathers.
this pontifical church, do object against all these (as by the same to bring
us into an infamy amongste the people) and say: if salvation and remission of
sins be not obtained in the church of Rome only, then should none of our
forefathers be saved, since they acknowledged none other but the Church of
Rome? Truly we have a good hope of our forefathers touching their salvation,
but yet not for that they lived in the Romish church, and were subject unto
the tirannie thereof: but because they kept and held truly and sincerely the
chief sum and argument of the doctrine of Christ's church, to wit the
xij. Articles of our Christian faith, the x. Commandments of God, and that
holy Prayer given us by Christ, commonly called the Lords Prayer: which
Principles of Doctrine, together with Baptism, are not found or inverted by
the Romish church, but proceed from the holy Apostolic doctrine, and have
remained continually in ye church, even unto this time, God by his merciful
providence so governing the matter, that amongst so many laws, Decrees and
Ceremonies of the church of Rome, yet these chief principles might be preserved
pure, and untouched. Yea also God so gave his grace unto the godly, that in
most extreme necessity, and in the very hour of death, they for the most
part have despised and contemned all the superstitions of the Romish bishops,
and have wholely committed them selves to the grace of god, and to the death of
Christ, and have so remained, even unto death in the confession of the
Articles of the Faith, and making their petitions only by the Lords prayer.
For although in all ages, men have been oppressed with the errors and
superstitions of the Bishops, yet has God even in the very hour of death,
most mercifully vouchsafed to bestow his grace, as we may see by the thief
on the cross, and therefore he did not reject them because of the unhappy
state of the papacy. Furthermore, in all ages there has ever been some godly
men, which never liked well of the city of Rome, the Pope, their Priests, nor
manner of life: but have maruellously complained from time to time, of their
grievous burdens. Yea furthermore in every age, and chefely in the extreemest
tyranny, and most pride of the Romish church, God has ever stirred up
learned me^, which have instructed the godly, and preached out of the word
of God the true salvation in Christ, and have revealed the Hypocrisy of those
which were called the spirituality. And although the most part of those
godly men were put to death, even as Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles
did foreshewe, yet their Doctrine has continued to the comfort of the
elect: so as thereby God has in all times, yea even in the midst of most
wicked Papistrie, had his elect. So even then, as likewise now, it happened
as it did in the time of Elyas: For when he thought him self only to be
left alone of all the faithful, and that the church was quite overthrown:
God answered unto him, saying: I have seven thousand men which never bovved 3.
Reg 19.
their knees unto Baal. It is therefore without all doubt, that Christ has
his elect at all times, who never bowed their knees unto papistrie, neither
yet hereafter will: yea and that because in the Revelation of Jesus Christ
unto John, it was showed that after many and grievous dangers, which should
happen to the Church, there was sealed many thousands, yea an infinite number
of men, to whom these troubles should be nothing hurtful.

But although many of our forefathers, did more earnestly clean unto the
Papisticall Doctrine, than was meet for their salvation to be done, as I have
said already, because there was Prophesied a great miserable departure from
the Faith: yet hereby it follows not, that the Church of Rome should be
the only Catholic Church, no more than it should follow that the Church
of Jeroboam should be the true Church of God, because the greatest number of
the Israelites did a long time cleave unto it.

Yea even in this time there were a great number in Israel, which were not
forth with condemned, because the kingdom was wickedly governed by Jeroboam.

For God has his elect in all ages, for whose sakes cheefely he sends his
Prophettes to detecte the erroures, and teach the truth.

Furthermore we think, they may What is to breed Scismes or Heresies.
lawfully be counted for Schismatikes and Heretics, which with a set purpose
follow their own mind, and separate them selves wickedly, and peruersly from
the holy catholic church of Christ. To separate him self, or to be a
Schismatike, or to hold an Heresy, we take to be all one thing. For in the
Germane tongue, an Heretic is called Kaetzer, derived from the Hebrew word
Kazar* which signifies to cut or to separate. And therefore in the Germane
tongue we call a torn clothe or flesh that is cut into pieces Zerkaetzeret,
that is separate, cut or torn. Wherefore this word Schismatike, which is
also an Heretic, signifies an author of Schisms, factions and discordes, and
not one that defiles him self with lust, contrary to nature, and is to be
punished with fire. And although the Germans do name him, that defiles him
self with lust, contrary to nature Katzer* because he has violated and
broken the league and order instituted by god, whereof the scripture testifies,
that when all living creatures were brought before Adam, there was not one found
like unto him, with whom he might have company and be coupled: wherefore God
framed the woman out of the side of man, and ordained that they should be joined
together in marriage, and so to be made one body. But ye Latins derive these
words, heresy and Heretics, from this word Election or choosing. For God
has most diligently and plainly prescribed by his Prophets and Apostles in
his holy word, what we ought to believe and to do, and therefore says: ye
shall Deuteronomy. 4. 1^.
do what so ever I command ye, neither shall thou add any thing thereunto,
nor take any thing therefrom. Neither shall ye do every man, whatsoever
seems good in your own eyes, but what I command you, that shall ye do.
Whosoever therefore is disobedient, and deuiseth and chooses such things, which
God by his word has not commanded, and hereby separateth himself from the
word of God and the true folowers thereof, and applies unto him self a
peculiare way and order, alluring also others to follow the same, and is
arrogant, obstinate, contentious, and disobedient, and though he be diverse and
sundry times admonished, does yet nevertheless persevere and abide therein,
such a one does the fathers call an heretic. For the Latins interpret this
word heresy by the name of sects: and these words sects and sectaries are
usually received in common speech. But because they are derived from the
Latin tongue, many simple people do not perfectly understand them. These
words sects and sectaries, are derived from the word which signifies to
cut: as when an whole piece of wood is hewn or cut into diverse parts: or when
those which were first of one mind, do now disagree, and are divided into
sundry opinions, so as almost every one has a several opinion with him self:
and so these parts being thus separated, are called sects: even as amongste
the Philosophers were sundry sects, as of the Epicures, Stoickes and
Peripatetickes, amongst whom each sect had his peculiar or proper opinion.
Yet notwithstanding, the fathers do make some difference between these words
heresy and schism, of which difference there is no need here to speak,
saving only to note that every schism is not heresy. For when the Apostles
began first to preach and build the church, that is to say, to bring a
peculiare people both of the Jews and Gentiles unto Christ, and that they
might seek al things in him, their Doctrine was called heresy, as plainly
appears. Acts. 24. And because the Doctrine of the Apostles did differ much
from the doctrine which heretofore had been taught amongste the Jews, they
called it heresy, supposing it to be a defection or separation from yt which
they judged to be the true faith.

Wherefore, whersoeuer any discord, Where in the unity of Christ's Church does
consist.
schism, or heresy is begone, it must needs follow, that there was first
an unity, which is now divided by the Heretics: whereupon we must perfectly
know what that unity is, which the Heretics so deuyde, by means whereof
they take this their name. (...)true church of Christ, which puts her trust
only in god the father, through our lord Jesus Christ his son, by the power of
the holy ghost. Yea also ye sacraments of* Christ, Baptism, and the Supper of
the Lord, serve to this purpose, by which ye godly bind them selves to God,
and mutually knit the^ selves together in love. And this therefore is that whole
sum An example of the breach of unity in the Church and faith.
or unity, which being separated, makes heretics. And we have examples
hereof, in the ancient people of God, to who^ God gave in commandment, that
they should love him with all their heart, with all their soul, with all their
strength, and therefore he included them into one church, gave them one law,
made one covenant with them, instituted amongste them, one Tabernacle or
Temple, one arc of covenant, one altar, Sacrifice and Priesthood. Yea their
sacraments, that is to say Circumcision and the Passover, serve also to this
unity, teaching them yt they were all one people, under one God, and in one
faith. And therefore he forbad them to worship or serve strange gods, that is
to say, to have in stead of God, or of a savior, any thing whatsoever besides
him self, who is the true and living God. He also forbad them to hearken after
strange religions, or to worship him or offer Sacrifices unto him, in any other
place but in yt only, yea and after yt sort, which himself had ordained. But
Jeroboam king of Israel, did first manifestly, contrary to the ordinances of
god: For first he separated the unity of ye church into diverse parts, and
brought. x. tribes from the only temple, altars, priesthood, sacrifice, and
brue them from the appointed and written service of God, built two temples
after his own mind, in which he placed idols, built altars, and chose priests
after his own will: whereof we may read in the first of Kings, in chap. 12. and
13. And this was the chefest heretic or deuider of gods church* for the which
oftentimes he was most sharply reproved by the word of God. Then after this
man came King Achab, who besides this, added heerunto the worshipping of Baal,
and so led the people yet further from the true and right way: wherefore God
rooted out both them, and all their posterity.

Again, after that the blessed Apostles The first Heretics and Scismaticks
in the Church.
had preached Christ, and all salvation of man to be contained in him, and on
this foundation have builded the church in this world, left their wrytings
and the books of the Prophets, (wherein is contained the fullness of all good
doctrine) unto the same: they foreshewed in their wrytings, that there should
come such which would divide or tear their doctrine, faith, and church: And in
short space after, such entered into the church, and have daily increased: Of
whom some denied the Trinity, some the divine, and some the humane nature of
Christ: Other some of them did extenuate or take away the corruption of man,
or as some call it, Original sin, and some did attribute righteousness and
salvation of man, to man's own power, and free will, to the works of the
law, and merits of men, and that clean contrary, to the free grace of God.
And each of these most lamentably, have torn and rent the holy scriptures and
the church, to the end they might establishe some peculiar opinions, and by
those crooked sleightes to seduce the foolish, and lead them from the only
way and Apostolic church, to their utter destruction: which sleightes and
peeuishe opinions, they either have devised of their own brains, or else
received them from other traditions without the warrant of the holy Scriptures:
and having thus received them, they most obstinately defend and teach them.
And therefore the ancient fathers have right worthily counted and esteemed
them for Schismatikes whither they be Heretycks which in our age do peache the
Gospel.
and Heretics. Wherefore if any now in these our days do raise up, or
renew any of the aforenamed Heresies of sedicious opinions, or devise any thing
of them selves, contrary to the Scriptures, or do otherwise rent and divide
asunder the scriptures and the holy christian Church, and attribute that unto
them selves, whereof they have spoiled Christ: and being nevertheless better
instructed out of the word of God, will not revoke their foresaid errors,
but preach unto them selves an other God, an other Gospel, an other Christ,
renting the hearts of the faithful, teaching them not to love one god with all
their hearts, but other Gods also, not to pray unto God only, but to other
creatures, to serve them, worship them, and pray unto them. Again, they teach
not al salvation and health to be in Christ alone, but to be in other creatures
also: and that christ is not in the holy scriptures so called, a pastor, head,
chief bishop, advocate, and intercessor, sacrifice for sins, the
righteousness, and redemption of the faithful, as though these were so proper
unto him, that to this end none other things might be joined to him.
Furthermore if they use ye Sacraments for any other purpose than for the
conservation and increase of the unity of the Church: If (I say) either even
we our selves, or any other do the things whereof I have spoken, they are
undoubtedly to be suspected of Heresy, as the authors of sects and discordes
in faith and the true Church of Christ. Wherefore ^ithe we give our whole
diligence, labor and study, that the Ancient and Primative purity and
unity of the faith and christian Apostolic Church may be restored, and that
Christ may obtain that reverence in the hearts of the faithful which is due
unto him, and we in this life may live holily, and in the life to come
eternally in him: I hope that no good and godly man can then slander or
condemn us for Heretics, because we have forsaken, (not the aunciente Church
of Rome in those things which she had common with the universal Apostolic
Church) but this latter Romish Church, yea and that only in those things
which to most shameful abuse and offense, she has devised and ordained,
not by the authority of Gods word, but of her own brain: yea and
moreover, because she is fraughte with all horrible filthiness, and that our
Lord commands us to go out of her. Romans 16. 2. Cor 6 Apoc. 18. etc.

The third Common place. Of the Decrees and Counsels of the Church.
The. x. Question.
Whether they do steadfastly and without all doubt teach and believe, that which
the holy Catholic church of Rome does command and teach to be believed?

The Answer.
TOuching the holy Catholic In what sort we must believe the decrees of the
Church.
Church, we have already written, that the Gospel teaches us, she only
hears the voice of her only pastor, and not of any stranger. Whereby we may
easily conclude, that she commands nothing to be believed which she has
not heard from the mouth of our Lord: and that chiefly because Paul says,
that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, or of Christ:
Wherefore when the faithful do steadfastly believe the word of God, then do
they also believe all that the holy Church commands and teaches to be
believed, for she commands nothing to be believed, but that which is
contained in the word of god. And whatsoever is contrary to Gods word, ought
not to be believed, although it were colored with the name of the Church, or
any other title. And as touching the church of Rome, it is manifest, that
under her name many things were commanded to be believed and kept, which
were both unknown to the primative Church, and clean contrary to the word
of God: And all such things God forbids to believe, or to receive, saying
by his prophet Iere. 22.
Jeremie: Do ye not hearken to the words of the Prophets which speak the
imaginations of their own hearts, and not out of the word of the Lord. And
our Lord out of the prophet Csai says in the Gospel* They worship me in
vain, teaching for doctrynes, the Esaias. 29. Math. 15. Tit. 1. Gala. 1.
preccptes of men. And Paul affirms, there is no truth in the decrees of
men, and curses every doctrine that is contrary to the Gospel.

By this Question it may easily appear, The purpose of this question.
that these men desire or couete nothing else, but that the Church of Rome,
that is to say, themselves, might be accounted the only and true church, and
that whatsoever they command to be kept and believed, might without further
question be received. But why command they not all men without all question
to believe the holy Scripture or word of GOD, and to acknowledge that all
which is needful to salvation, is fully contained, faughte, and written
therein, like as Paul says in his second Epistle to Timothe, the third
Chapter? Truly, because they seek not the honor of God, and the increase of
his word, but their own honor, the authority and confirmation of their
own laws and customs.

The. xj. Question.
Whether they do believe that the Decrees and Precepts of the Church, the
Canones and Ordinances of the Fathers, be of the holy Ghost, and not contrary
to Christ, or the Scriptures?

The Answer.
TOuching the decrees of How far the decrees of the fathers are to be believed.
the Church, we have answered in the former question. But concerning the
Canones and ordinances which the fathers have ordained, thus much of them: God
our most saythfull father gave unto his Church his holy word contained in
both the Testamentes, to be as a certain direction or touchstone by the which
all that in steed of gold, that is to say, for the ordinance of god, and
undoubted truth, was offered unto us, might be tried and proved whether they
were pure or corrupted. Now the Canons and ordinances of the fathers are
offered unto us for Gold, and as the true Oracles of God. But sith them
selves were men, and might err, and did also command their ordinances and
decrees to be no further believed, but as they were proved and allowed by the
touchestone of the holy Scriptures: they ought therefore to be tried and proved
by the same, as Paul teaches. 1. Thessa. 5. and John. 1. Epist. 4. Wherefore
if they agree with the scriptures, then are they of the holy Ghost, and not
contrary to Christ and his word: but if they agree not with them, then are
they not of the holy ghost, but contrary to Christ and his word, and therefore
ought not to be believed nor kept. But how many Decrees of the fathers do
apparently show themselves contrary to the Scriptures, it would be too tedious
to recite, and therefore as much as is needful to be known, may easily by
these questions be perceived. For almost all that these men strive for, are
nothing else but the ordinances and decrees of the fathers, or of other men.
And to say the truth, the decrees of the fathers are many times clean
contrary one to an other. For some of their decrees forbid the marriage of the
Ministers of the Church, and on the contrary part, it is evident what the
Counsel of Gangra^^ did teach concerning the same, excommunicating all those
which forsake or despise those Priests that he married. And many such like
shall ye find, yea even in the very Popes decrees. But why I beseech you, do
not they see men strive as earnestly for the Laws and ordinances of God, to
commend them as the wholesome knowledge of our salvation unto the world? But
truly in all their Questions there is not one word spoken hereof. Do they not
therefore most lively represente unto us the Scribes and Pharisees, who were at
continual debate with Christ and his Disciples, and that only about the
decrees of the fathers, neglecting the law of God, and as Christ often did
^ast in their teeth, preferred them to the ^awe of God? Math. 15. Mark. 7.

The xij. Question.
Whether those general Councelles, which are lawefully kept, ought to be
believed and obeyed: and whether they may be called into question as though
they had erred, and so be disputed upon?

The Answer.
THis Question conteyneth In what sort general councels are to be believed.
three others: First whether those general Councelles which are lawfully
made, ought to be obeyed and believed? To this we answer, that all councels
both universal and prouincial, as they term them, ought to take their
authority from the word of god. Wherefore if the laws and decrees of Councels
be derived from the word of God, and confirmed by the same, then ought they no
less to be believed, than the word of God it self. But if it be otherwise,
then is there no authority of any Council to be accepted against the truth
of the holy Scriptures. Constantinus Constantin^
the Emperor in the first general Counsel holden at N^c^, offered unto the
fathers there being lawfully assembled, the Books of the old and new
Testamente, commanding them thereby so judge and determyne all controversies.

The second Question is, Whether Whether Counsels have erred.
that Counsels have erred? But their Question is so demanded, as though they
might never err. But because all the Councelles that have been heretofore,
as also those which are now, were gathered from men, and and that men do and
may err, like as in times past they have often erred: for David says: God is
true, but every Psalm. 1^. Romans 3. ^acob. ^.
man is a liar: and saint James says: In many things we sin all. It follows
therefore that councils may err. On the other side, if they follow god and his
word, they ca^ not err, as we before have sufficiently declared. That councels
have erred, and thereby often have been quite contrary one to an other,
co^demning one an other, does manyfestly appear by Hystories. For it is not
needful at large here to discourse them all, sith I have only determined
to answer the Questions aforesaid briefly.

The third Question is, Whether Whether the articles which are decided and
confirmed may be disputed on again.
those things which are well and sufficiently decreed upon, once in some
general Council, ought to be called into question, and to be disputed on
again. To this question I answer thus: Those things whereon the Counselles
have rightely and truly decreed by the word of GOD, to those must we
submit our selves, neither are they to be called into question. As the first
general Counsels holden at Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus, did well and
rightely decree touching the holy Trinity, the Divine and Humane nature of
Christ, the holy Ghost, and of such things which did hereunto
appertain. They now therefore offend not against GOD, which dispute and set
them selves against those that call these things again into question, and
make doubt of them: but they which are the causers and authors of these
Disputations offend, as namely Seruetus the Spaniarde in our age, and diverse
others, which have done the like by their open works and wrytings. We also
confess, that the laws of the godly Emperors and Kings, were and are right
profitable and necessary, wherein blasphemouse and wicked disputations are
forbidden. But the Popish Prelates can not by Whether it be lavvfull to
dispute against popish doctrine
this title defend or shield them selves, as that nothing ought to be
written or disputed against their late new holden Counselles, which thing in
deed they greatly desire, because they know them selves guilty of
infidelity. For it is tootoo manyfeste, and can by no manner of means be
denied, that in their Counsels they have ordained and decreed many things
contrary to the custom of the Primative Church, and the manyfeste testimonies
of the holy Scriptures, which by their leave we may not leave untouched.
Whereupon within these few hundred years, many holy, learned, faithful,
valyaunte and sincere Ministers of GOD, have cried out, saying, that the church
of Rome is fraught and full stuffed with all abuses, errors, sins, wicked and
horrible factes and offenses, and therefore has need of great and earneste
reformation. But these men would that all these things should be covered
and smered over, and therefore they say, It is not lawefull again to speak of
or dispute against those things which were once decreed and establyshed by
general Councels. But whether this be right and just before God and men,
the wise may easily perceive. Touching Augustines judgment touching the
counsels and the fathers.
this matter Saint Augustine does very well instruct us, for he commands
us without all doubt to believe the Scriptures of the holy Bible, and to
believe the writings of the fathers, so farrefoorthe as they be confirmed and
proved by the witness of the holy Scripture, Epistle. 19. 111. 48. against
Cresconius. Lib. 2. Capitu. 32. ni his Book De peccatorum meritis, and remis.
cont. Pelag. Li. 3. Ca. 7. De vera regione. Cap. 10. Contra Epist. Pelag. ad
Bonifac. Lib. 4. Cap. 8. And in his third Book against Maximinus he says:
But now neither ought I to bring the Council of Nice, nor thou the council
of Arimineus, as to be prejudicial one to an other: but let us dispute by the
authority of the Scriptures. And in his second Book against the Donatistes
and third Chapter, he submits Councelles to the authority of the
Scriptures, and says, that it often comes to pass, that the former
Councelles may be amended by those which are holden after. Again De V^itate
Ecclesiae in his sixeteenthe Chapter he says, That the Scripture is the
foundation and Pyller of the Church, and of all that is therein.

The. xiij. Question.
Whether that Paul, Peter, James and the rest of the Apostles in the first
Counsel holden at Jerusalem, did take into the^ the Heretics which urged
Circumcision, and the observing of Moses law upon the godly, or the lay men
which were of that sect?

The Answer.
THe whole scope and drift The Papists will be both accusers and Judges.
of this question is this, that if there chance a free conference or
disputation in any counsel, wherein they are required to render a reason of
their faith and Religion, and so may not refuse the same, that then they may
have at the least some kind of prerogative, to the end that nothing may be
decreed against the^, and that they may not be drawn from their sins,
errors, and other abuses, to a virtuous and acceptable life before god.
Therefore seek they by all means, that them selves only may be placed in the
councels, and that they may not be constrained to admit any lay man, or such
as are not of their stamp, amongste them, but that they alone may have full
power and authority to accuse, to be witnesses, to determine and to judge,
and that by this means nothing may be done, but as it lists them. And eue^
in this sort, have some of their forefathers now a great while holden
councels, being the ready way (as they thought) to provide for them selves.
But whether this were acceptable before God, upright before men, or profitable
to the church, the time it self, the oppressing of the truth, the slaughters
of most godly men, and the miserable government of the thurche, does
evidently declare, yea and all faithful and wise men, may easily judge. Of
this Whether the Apostles admitted Heretics into the Counsel.
question there is two parts. The first is, whether the Apostles in the
first council at Jerusalem, did take into the same, those heretics which
went about to thrust upon the godly circumcision and the law of Moses? Now
here they suppose, we must needs deny the same: whereupon they will
conclude, that because we are Heretics, we neither ought to be heard, nor be
admitted into the council. But although there were no place nor license given
to the heretics in the council at Jerusalem to speak, yet it follows not,
that we ought not to be heard, or ought not to be admitted into a lawful
council, (for as touching other Councelles which are unlawful, and fosterers
of their factions, we do not pass) because we are not Heretics as they
were, which contended against Paul: but we defend, preserve, and purely
teach the Apostolic doctrine, which Paul proponed in that council, whereas
our adversaries defend ye doctrine of Paul's enemies, and by all violence and
force, thrust the same upon men. The sum of Paul's doctrine was this: That
sinners The some of Paul's doctrine and of his adversaries.
were justified before God, by faith in Christ, and not by circumcision or the
deeds of the law. Against this doctrine did the enemies of Paul (who
notwithstanding were reckened amongste the faithful, and taught the faith in
Christ, but yet not sincerely) set them selves, saying, that they ought to be
circumcised, to keep the law, and to be saved by the works thereof. And that
this was the doctrine and judgment of both the parts, does evidently
appear by the xv. chapter of the Acts, and the Epistle to the Galathians.
Wherefore since ye teach the merit of works, and dare to say that
justification is not of faith only in Christ, but by good works, consider
whether we, or ye with your doctrine, come most near to the judgment and
opinion of Paul's adversaries. And although they were such, yet
nevertheless, they proponed their opinion in the Council at Jerusalem,
Whither Heretics ought to be admitted into a counsel.
and were heard: for in the. xv. of the Acts it is written, that there was
great disputation between Paul and Barnabas. Wherefore if we were Heretics
(as we are not,) yet ought we by right, to be hard in the council as they were.
And because the example of the Apostles, which ye do use, shows yt they
condemned those which taught contrary to Paul, and we have already proved that
ye teach the same, it follows that ye also are condemned in them. But if as
you suppose, the adversaries of Paul had no place in the council, then ye
which agree with them in opinion, shall have no place by your own judgment,
in a lawful council. But if they which consented to Paul's doctrine, were
admitted into the council, and gave sentence against Paul's enemies, then
ought we by good right, to set in the council, and to give sentence against
you. For we teach like doctrine with Paul, touching Christ, faith in Christ,
and of justification, to wit, that we be justified by faith in Christ, and not
by works. And hereby it appears that this question makes directly against
your selves.

The second part of this Question, Whether the Apostles admitted lay me^
Heretics into the Counsel.
is whether the Apostles did take into the council, lay or unlearned me^ which
followed the foresaid heresy? But yet these men do rather in this place, seek
whether that lay men, which follow herestes, are to be admitted into councels?
Here first is diligently to be considered, who they are which follow herestes,
and then to consider to what end this Question is directed, and who they are,
which they go about to exclude from councels. To this second part we answer,
that those godly Princes and magistrates, and honest lay men which believe the
gospel that we do preach, do not follow heresies, and therefore they may be
admitted into Christian councels and assemblies. We are not ignorante of your
custom, and tyrannous government, whereby sometimes ye do admit lay men
into your councels, but yet to learn as ye term it, but when any weighty
matter is to be concluded, then ye exclude them, and place them only in your
council, which will give sentence as you list, and those be your Bishops
only. But in the same place of the Acts, which ye allege for your selves,
it is thus written: Then it pleased the Apostles and elders, with the whole
church. etc. In the which place lay and unlearned men are numbered, because
they have the grace and spirit of Christ: And therefore they neither may nor
ought to be excluded from councels, which are ordained to the reformation of
religion. Neither ought the Princes and Magistrates, to suffer these
spiritual nien (as they call them selves) to have the whole authority of
these matters to them selves.

The fourtenth Question.
Why did not Paul and Barnabas make an end of this sector heresy at
Antioche, but came to Peter at Jerusalem, and entreated him to give sentence
upon it?

The Answer.
THE Apostles could not It was not lawful for the Apostles to have any
agreement with their adversaries. Galat. 2.
make an end with their adversaries, except they would revoke some part of
their doctrine, and bring it more near to the doctrine of their adversaries,
and that their adversaries would gladly have had them done. But there can be
no similitude of agreement, between these two sentences: Faith in Christ
justifies men without the works of the law: And this, The law or
works does justify men before God, and not faith in Christ Neither was it
meet that the Apostles should retracte any part of their Doctrine, and yield
unto their adversaries. For Paul speaks hereof, saying: To whom we gave
not place by subjection for an hour, that the truth of the gospel might
continue with you. Knovving that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. If then while we seek to be made
righteous by Christ, we oureselues are found sinners, is Christ therefore
the minister of sin* god forbid. For if I build again the things which I
have destroyed, I make myself a trespasser.

Hereby it evidently appears that the Apostles could not agree with their
adversaries, neither at Antioch, neither at Jerusalem, nor yield to any part
of their doctrine, neither yet would they. Neither came they to Jerusalem, to
the Why Paul went to Jerusalem.
end they would make agreement, and join with their adversaries, much less
then to entreat Peter that he would pacify the matter between them. But the
cheifest cause of their going, was, for that the Heretics did brag them
selves to be sent from the Apostles that were at Jerusalem, and that they
agreed in their doctrine, and that the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas touching
the gospel, did not agree with the doctrine of the other Apostles. Wherefore,
to the end it might evidently appear, that this their brag was false, they
went to Jerusalem, and thereuppon the Apostles, and the whole church of
Jerusalem writ to the churches of the Gentiles, amongst whom the heretics
had scattered these things untruly against Paul, and so among others they use
these words: Because we have heard that certain are come from us, and have
troubled you with their words, to whom we have given no commandment.
etc. Read the fifteenth of the Acts, and the second to the Galathians.

The fiftienth Question.
Whether that Paul did not speak his mind first in that Council? Also,
whether the holy ghost were not there present? Wherefore if these be true, why
do they with their sects, spoil the Church of Peter of her honor, and how
dare they call in dout those things which the holy ghost does inspire?

The Answer.
NOw it may plainly appear by this question, to what end the former Questions
were written by their authoure: namely, that all men should come to the Sea
of Rome, to finishe all controversies of religion, and that they should take al
interpretations from the Popes holiness. But if the church of Rome were now as
free from errors, as was the church in that time, when Paul and Barnabas came
thither, we would not be ashamed to require and take answers from her. But
because the doctrine and church which Peter planted in Judea, is in this our
age, neither to be found in Rome, or at Jerusalem, and they of Rome are rather
found like unto those, of whom Peter prophesied in the second chapter of his
second Epistle, we therefore by good right ought to depart from that church:
And yet do we not spoil either the church of Peter, or the aunciente
doctrine of their due honor: for we do follow the true and aunciente
Doctrine and church of Peter, and seek to have all controversies of Religion,
judged by the doctrine of Peter and the other Apostles. Wherefore let these
Romish harlottes look rather upon their own wallet, and diligently consider
what great honors they give to S. Peter, and his seat, and Church, which
have changed the same into a market of marchaundise, and sincke of al horrible
sins, as all the world may see, and each godly man does greatly Paul had the
chefest place in the counsel.
lament. In deed Paul spoke his mind first in the council at Jerusalem, but
what would ye therewith? Know ye not that he accused his adversaries, and
therefore it behooved him to speak first. But yet I marvel much, that ye
attribute not the cheifest place in this council to S. Peter? For your
contention, is only for the cheifest place, the greatest pomp and glory. For
these men have quite forgotten that doctrine of Christ, saying: He that will
be greatest amongst ye, let him be your servant, and submit himself
under all, if he will enter into the kingdom of heaven And therefore me
thinks they are like to the Pharisees of who^ Christ speaks in the gospel,
saying: that they love the uppermost ^eates and to be reue^enced of men. But
that they may see me will deny them nothing, that may justly appertain unto
them, let them endeavor, first to be made like unto Paul and Peter, and
then will we gladly give them the cheifest place. But if they be not such,
then is there no cause why they should brag unto us of their holiness and
great titles, for we may know them, even as the rotten tree is known by his
fruits.

Further more, the holy Ghost was in that council at Jerusalem, for so it is
written in the fiftienth of the Acts. But what makes that for you? Or what
does it further your cause? For it follows not that the holy Ghost is in all
your councels, as we have sufficiently proved already. And again, we do not
call in Question, the things which are inspired and given by the holy Ghost,
but those things only, which you and your forefathers have feigned out of your
own brains and so thruste upon the church contrary to the word of god. But if
you esteem the holy Ghost so much as you bear the world in hand ye, do,
why then obey ye not the things which by his inspiration he has delivered?
For in the council of Jerusalem, (in which the holy Ghost was present) thus is
it decreed: It seems good to the holy ghost, and to us, that we lay no more
burden upon you. And why I pray ye, have not you and your forefathers
observed this? Why have ye laid so intolerable burdens on the backs of the
poor Christians? Why call ye us heretics, for that we go about to restore
the church to her former liberty, and deliver the same from these
intolerable burdens? But if those your ordinances are so necessary to
salvation, why the^ do not you your selves observe the same? Truly, you
manifestly declare your selves to be of the number of those, of whom our Lord
said: They lay heavy burdens upon the shoulders of other men, but they will
not touch one of them with their little finger. Matthew. 23.

The sixtienth Question.
Whether the church of Christ have decreed any thing against, or contrary to
god: and that the^ they show the same, and in what points it consists.

The Answer.
WE have already sufficiently spoken, concerning the holy christian church,
which depends only upon ye word of God: and therefore we have not either to
charge or accuse the same. But as concerning the late vpstarte church of Rome,
we not only accuse it of diverse crimes, but also have already showed, and that
evidently, what she wants, and wherefore we forsake and accuse her.

The fourth Common place. Of Free will.
The seuententh Question.
Whether men have not fre will to do good and evil?

The Answer.
THis Question touching the free The doctrine of free will is an arrogante
doctrine.
will of man, is the very ground and foundation of that proud and arrogant
doctrine concerning the merits of man: as though there were any good in us of
our own selves, or as though we were able to do good freely, by our own
power, for the which God must needs let us have eternal life. But yet the
holy scripture teaches us an other lesson, how that man ca^ not do any good
thing as of him self, neither by all his power accomplish any good. For his
understanding and free will, not being regenerated, is so fowly blotted and
defaced in him by his first tra^sgression, and so wrapped in sin and
wickedness, that even by nature he is carried hedlo^g unto al manner of evil,
so as he is made very unfit and unapt to goodness. And then what liberty or
free will can be attributed to such a man? S. Paul says: The wisdom of the
flesh is an enemy to God: neither is it subject to the law of God, neither
can it be. Read the third Chapter also of his Epistle to the Romans. But who
so ever is borne a new by grace, through the operation of the holy Ghost, of
him is this saying of Christ to be understood: He which does sin, is
the servant of sin. But if the same have made you free, then are you free
in deed. That is, you are made free from sin, the devil, death and damnation,
yt freely and with good will by the operation of the holy ghost, and not by
co^pulsion, you might do ye good thing, which you do. And they which are so
redeemed and indewed with Christian liberty, they attribute not the good which
they do unto their own power, and free will, but to the grace of Christ, and
to the holy ghost, which works the same in them. For Christ says in the
fiftienth of Jhon. He that abides in me, and in whom Joan. 15.
I abide, he brings forth much fruit, for without me you can do nothing.
And S. Paul's says, in the second Epistle 2. Corin. 3.
to the Corint. and third chapter: we are not able to do any good thing of our
selves, as of our selves: but all our ability thereunto comes of God. And
in 1. Corin. 4.
an other place he says: what have thou that thou have not received? wherefore
if thou have received it, why bostest thou as though thou hadste not received
it? And again he says: It is given to you Philip. 1. ^.
in the things appertayning to Christ, that not only you should believe in
him, but also suffer affliction for his names sake: Likewise he says: For it
is God that woorketh in you both the will and the deed, even of his own good
will. And although the faithful do all that they do with a free spirit, and
willing mind, yet nevertheless this their freedom and willingness is let
and hindered very much through the defectes and infirmities of the flesh,
which always remains with us, even unto death. Wherefore Paul greatly
complayneth, saying: The flesh rebelleth against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, so that the things which I would not do, that do I. Touching
this matter read more Roma. 7. And yet in this case do we not attribute unto
man any more free will than that which the free mercy of God works, by whose
holy spirit he is freely governed and preserved. But as touching the infirmity
which dwells in us, the operation and working of the spirit is hindered and
let thereby, so that man's free will can do nothing that is good, and so that
good which it is willing to do and does, is of the free grace and holy
spirit of god. And therefore Paul attributes not his good works to his own
free will, but to the grace of God, saying: By the grace of God, I am that I am:
and his grace was not in me in vain, but I labored more than they all, and yet
not I, but the grace of God that was with me. 1. Corinthians. 15. Mark well that
he says, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. But touching evil
(like as we have said already) we do it not by compulsion or against our
will, but willingly, and that by reason of the corruption which is grafted in
our nature. And yet when we run headlong to the Devil, God can let and
stop us, and give us an other manner of mind, whereby we may be stirred
and dr^uen, (as it were) to the things wherein before we had no delight.

The fithe Common place. Of Faith and good Works.
The. xviij. Question.
What they think of faith, hope, and charity?

The Answer.
TOuching these three, being in deed the chief points of our Christian
religion, I think very well and truly of them, even as the word of god has
taught. Faith is the sure confidence Faith.
of a man that is lyghtened of God, whereby he trusts in God and in his only
son our Lord Jesus Christ and his undoubted word, and that to the remission of
sins and eternal life. Hope is a steadfast, pacient, and Hope.
comfortable looking for of those things which we believe, chiefly if the
receiving of them be deferred, and appear otherwise tha^ they were believed to
be. Charity.
charity is poured into our hearts, increased and preserved, and is due both
to God and man, so that we should love God above all things, and our neighbor
as our self, even as Christ also has loved us. The places of Scripture from
whence these descriptions are taken, I have therefore willingly left out, least
this Book should grow and increase unto an huge volume.

The. xix. Question.
Whether these three virtues, faith, hope and charity are but one thing, or
else distinct virtues in the holy Scripture: and chiefly whether the one may
not be taken for the other?

The Answer.
TOuching these three singular Each of these virtues have their peculiar
properties
gifts of God, S. Paul speaks distinctly, giving to each of them their
peculyar properties. 1. These. 1. We give thanks unto God almighty for you
all, making mention of you in our prayers: remembering always your effectual
faith, dilligent or working love, and steadfast hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.
etc. And forasmuch as he gives thanks and prayers unto God, he teaches,
that these virtues are freely given from him unto men, and that therefore they
ought to pray and render thanks unto him. And unto faith he attributes a
certain effectual working, because that from her all good works, yea hope and
charity do spring. And he calls charity dilige^tor working, because true
charity or love laboreth and exercises her self to please both God and man.
And to hope he attributes steadfastness and patience, because Paul in the
eight to the Romans says: That we are made safe through hope. But hope if
it be seen is no hope. For how can a man hope for that which he sees? But if
we hope for the thing which we see not, by patience we look for them.
Therefore faith, hope and charity are distincted virtues, and have each their
proper operations. And therefore are they severally reckened by S. Paul 1.
Corin 1. in which place he says that These three virtues are so coupled
together that the one springs of the other.
these three are. Again these virtues are so coupled together, and depend so
one of an other, that they can not in any wise be had severally. For who so
rightly believes in God and his word, the same also hops to receive the
things he looks for: Like as Paul teaches out of the Prophet Abacuc in the
Epistle to the Hebrews cap. 10. Again, who so rightly believes in God, loves
him as his chief and everlasting good: and loves man because he is the image
of God, redeemed by him, as S. John teaches in his Epistle. And therefore Paul
to the Hebrews Cap. 11. interprets faith by hope, saying: Faith is the
substance or ground of things which are hoped for. And in his first Epistle
to Timothe he shows that charity springs from faith, saying: Furthermore
the end of the commaundementis, love from a pure heart, a good conscience, and
faith unfeigned. Therefore like as there is but one sun, and yet he is not
alone: so is there but one faith, and yet is she not alone. But as from the
sun proceeds two several things, so that thereby three things are in the
sun, that is, the globe or body of the sun, from which proceeds
brightness and heat, and these three are so joined in one sun, that by no
means they can be separated, and yet are they three distincted things, having
each their several properties. So likewise these three virtues, faith, hope,
and charity are so knytte together, that by no means they may be separated,
and yet are they severally distincted. Wherefore, even as from the Globe or
substance of the sun, as from one spring, light and heat do flow, so
from faith also, both charity and hope do spring. And as the body of the
sun is not the light or the heat, so Faith is neither Hope nor Charity.
Yet nevertheless, the body of the Sun is not without Heat and Light, and
Faith is not without Hope Faith is one but not all one.
and Charity. And as the sun shines by his brightness, and not by his
heat, so faith inasmuche as she receives Faith justifies.
Christ, justifies us before God, and not through charity. Therefore like as
it follows not that the body of the sun, because it is not alone, but has
light and heat, therefore shines not only with his light, but also with his
heat: so likewise it follows not which our adversaries affirm, Faith is not
alone, but joined with charity, therefore faith only justifies not before
God, but charity also. But touching justification I shall by Gods help
hereafter speak more at large.

The. xx. Question.
Whether men be justified before God by faith only in christ, or by good works
also?

The Answer.
FIrst we will show what it is to be justified before To be justified before
God.
God: and that is to be purged from sin, delivered from the punishment
thereof, and to be had and received into the number of the sons of God, and
heirs of eternal life, yea and that before the judgment seat of God, before
the which all men are accused and condemned as guilty. And that we shall every
one of us before the judgment seat of God be convicted and found gyltie of
sin and eternal damnation, Paul in the third to the Romans does plainly
teach. And again that justification is the taking away and remission of our
sins, the same aptly also teaches Acts. 13. Wherefore the remission of the
sin, and the punishment or damnation is called of him justification. Romans 5.
And that to be justified and adopted in the number of the sons and heirs of
God is all one, we may gather by that Paul says: We are justified by
faith: and Saint John says, But as many as believed him, he gave them why god
chose us to be his sons and heirs.
power to be made the sons of God. Secondely, we must seek the cause why
God forgiueth our sins, delyuereth us from damnation, and adopteth us into
his sons and heirs. Truly the proper cause hereof is his mercy and grace,
by the which he gave unto us his only son to take our nature upon him, and
to suffer death, and shed his blood for our sakes, to the end that being
delivered from our sins, eternal death and damnation, free from all
accusations, we might be absolved before the judgment seat of God: yea and
that being made righteous by Christ (for his righteousness is made ours) we
might be made heirs of eternal life. Wherefore it is only the grace of God,
the blood and death of Christ, and his innocence and righteousness, for whose
sake we are not condemned, but are adopted into his sons and heirs, and are
made partakers of eternal life. Of this doctrine there are diverse proofs in
Paul, Romans 3. 4. and. 5. 2. Corinthians. 5. Ephesi. 1. Coloss. 1. and. 2. Tim. 2.
etc.

Furthermore we must note by what means the grace of God in Christ, By what
means righteousness is impu^ed to us.
redemption, righteousness, and eternal life is imputed unto us, and on the
other side how we receive it, and by what means they be made ours, so that
Christ in us, and we in him do live. All the good gifts of God are imputed
unto us by the holy Ghost, as the holy Scripture testifies almost every
where, and chiefly our Lord him self says: It is the spirit which
quickens, etc. And we receive all these things by faith, yea by faith only,
and by none other thing. And therefore it may very well be said, that a man
is justified by says only. For Christ him self in the third of John
teaches us, that we must be saved even after the same manner as the
Israelites were healed of the deadely stinging of the Serpents. For as they
could by none other means attain unto health, than by the beholding of the
Brazen Serpent hanged up in the myddest of their Camp: so we can by none
other means be delivered from everlasting death and damnation, and be
preserved in eternal life, than by the beholding of Christ Crucified. And
this beholding of Jesus Christ is faith, yea faith only. For as no Works,
no Prayers, Fastings, Alms, Sacrifices, or any thing else, whatsoever could
help the stynging of the Serpente, but only the beholding of the Brazen
Serpente, so is there nothing that can save us, but Faith only. Wherefore
Christ in the sixthe Chapter of Saint John, says: Verily verily I say unto
you, except you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you
have no life in you. And to eat, the Lord him self interprets it to
believe. But if there be any that desire to know more testimonies, by the
which our Justification in Christ by Faith only is proved, then let him
read the third and fourth Chapters of S. Paul to the Romans, and also the
Epistle to the Galathians, where the Apostle in the second Chapter writes
thus: Now live I no longer, but Christ lives in me. And the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God. etc.
Wherefore when we say, that Faith only in Christ justifies, we attribute not
Justification to Faith, as in respect that it is any work of ours, (for
Faith also is the free gift of GOD) but because that Faith only beholds
or regards the grace of God in Christ, and trusts only herein, and in none
other thing. And the grace of God in Christ justifies, as we have said
before. Therefore, when we strive and contend about this question, Faith
only justifies, we strive for Christ's cause and the glory of GOD, that this
justification may be attributed to none other than Christ, to the end we
may have one only true righteousness. Last Why vvoorke^ do not justify.
of all we must show why not only we do not attribute justification to
works, but also wherefore we suffer not part thereof to be attributed to
Works, and part to Faith, but say plainly, that we are justified only
by Faith, and not by Works. First, for that God will in no wise have us to
glory and trust in our selves, but in him alone: Like as it is manyfestly
taught Romans 3. 1. Corinthians. 1. lerem. 9. Those therefore which impute their
righteousness to Woorks, they trust in them: but those which believe in
Christ, by whom through grace their sins are forgiven, and obtain
salvation, they trust not in them selves, but in the grace of God alone.

Secondely, all good Works are wrought of good men. Wherefore it is of
necessity that the tree be made good, before she bring forth good fruit,
and therefore the fruit makes not the tree good, but is rather the sign of a
good tr^e: so it follows that Works d^^, not iustfie, because they are
^oone of those which before were made righteouse through grace. Wherefore all
men may easily know, that the righteouse do not good Woorks, to the end they
might thereby be ryghteouse, but rather because they are righteouse: so that
now those which without woorks were first justified by grace, bring
afterward forth good works, even as the good tree bears good fruit.

Thirdly, the works even of the faithful by reason of the infirmity of man's
nature which remains with us, yea unto death, are never so pure and perfect,
that they durst ascribe thereby righteousness unto them selves. Wherefore Job
says, Although I were just, yet would I not make answer, but entreat Job.
9. Psalm. 14^.
my ludge. And David says: Enter not into judgment O Lord with thy
servant, because no man living shall be justified in thy sight. And it is
evident what Saint Paul writes to the Romans, the seventh Chapter.

Fourthly, if any man should be justified by his works, then Abraham and the
Apostles should be justified by the works of their faith: but that they were
not justified by works is manyfestly taught, Romans. 4. Galathians. 2.
Wherefore justification is not to be attributed to works, although lively
works proceed from says.

Fifthly, nothing ought to be done or suffered in the church of Christ, that
should obseure or darken the death and merits of Christ, and free mercy of
God: but if we attribute justification to our works, then they blot out both
the merits and death of Christ, and the free mercy of God, as Paul teaches.
Galath. 2. and. 5. Therefore we must not ascribe justification to works.
Sixthly, we must keep faithfully and purely the Apostles doctrine, and that
teaches that we are not justified by works, but through faith in the froe
mercies of God, like as it appears Acts. 15. and in all the Epistles of Paul:
wherefore we must faythefully and steadfastly cleave to this doctrine. But yet
amongst many testimonies, I will bring only one, whereby it shall manyfestly
appear that this Answer of ours, to this twentieth Question, is taken out of
the words of S. Paul, and therefore in the second Chapter to the Ephesians
he says thus: By grace are The sum of this doctrine.
ye saved through Faith: and that not of your selves, it is the gift of
God, and not of works, least any man should boaste. For we are his
woorkemanshippe created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which GOD has
ordained that we should walk therein. And truly I think, there is no man
could speak this more plainly: wherefore it is meet that we believe this the
Apostles doctrine, and that we be not so miserable and wicked men (as a great
number are) to affirm that it is a false and heretical opinion, to beleeus
that faith justifies before God, and not works.

The. xxi. Question.
If faith only justify, whether the^ the Devil, Judas, and such like be
saved? If not, then whether it does not follow, that men are not saved only
by faith* but also by charity and hope?

The Answer.
TOuching the Devil, Judas, Simon Magus and such like, they had not true
faith in Christ: for if they had had this true faith in him, then had they
also had Christ and eternal life, like as it is written: He which believes
in the son of God, has a testimony in himself. And this testimony John. 5.
is, that God gave us eternal life: and this life is in his son. He which
has the son, has life Wherefore since they have not life, they neither have
faith, nor Christ, for so it is written: He which has not the son of
God, has not life. And again: Except you believe John. 8.
that I am the son of God, you shall perish in your sin. But whereas S.
James says, in the seventh Chapter of his Epistle, that the Devils do
believe and tremble, and S. Luke in the eighte Chapter of the Acts, says
that Act. 8.
Simon Magus believed, it is not to be understood of true faith, but of a
false and dissembling faith. For in the holy scripture there is mention made
of two kinds of faith, that is true faith and false. True faith is lively,
and of great force in Christ, justifying us in him, and afterward
bringethforthe good woo^^^^ Yet notwithstanding it follows n^^ that we shall
not be saved through faith but by charity and hope also. For if we be not
saved by faith only, then those things must needs be false, which are read
in the gospel and wrytings of S. Paul, touching Christ and faith in him. But
because those which believe in Christ, are made heirs of salvation by his
merits, therefore they hope and love also. Therefore when the scripture
attributes How works are called righteousne^
justification to hope and charity, or calls good. woorks the righteousness
of the faithful: that is not done for the woorks sake, but because the true
believers are united with god, and so please God in him, and therefore are their
works acceptable unto him: and because they are justified by faith in Christ,
they do also the works of righteousness: so that all honor and glory
might be given to faith, or rather to Christ and the free mercyes of God.

Wherefore when we say that we Faith brings forth good works.
are justified by faith only before God, we do not say that says is alone
without hope, charity and good works: but we say yt faith alone justifies,
because we receive by faith, the free mercy of God, Christ and his redemption
(for in him only our true justification consists) and not in our works
which proceed of faith. Not for that faith wants these, for if it be true
faith, it woorketh good works, as Peter, Paul, James, and John teach: and
yet notwithstanding it first justifies, and so man being justified by the
grace of God through faith in Christ, does finally bring forth good works.
2. Pet. 1. Romans 6. Jacob. 2. 1. John. ^. etc.

The. xxij. Question.
Whether they believe that good works done of charity, and through the grace
of God do deserve eternal life through Christ, and for his sake?

The Answer.
THe grace of God and Of the discer^ing of works.
merits of Christ cannot be coupled with our works. For Paul says plainly:
If we be justified by grace, then not by works: for else grace were no
grace: But if we be justified by works, then is it not by grace, for else
works are no works. Romans 11. The like does the Apostle teach. Rom 4. And
in the second Chapter to the Galathians, he says: I make not the grace of God
of none effect: for if righteousness come by the law, then died Christ in
vain. For if we were able to deserve eternal life, what need had Christ
to suffer? Whether our merice^^ are made meritorious by the merits of Christ
But here is objected unto us, that the merits of man be made effectual
through the merits of Christ: but this they find not in the holy scripture,
for they teach that righteousness and salvation is bestowed upon us for
Christ's sake, and not for our works: and how then might they teach, that
our works are made meritorious through the merits of Christ? But these men
cannot abide that all things which we receive, should be referred to the free
mercies of God, but they would have some part with it. And therefore herein
they diligently labor, that although they are constrained to grant the glory
to Christ, that yet nevertheless in the wrapping up, they might pluck
somewhat to themselves. And to this The revvard of works.
end they wrest those places of Scripture, in which reward is promised the
righteousness of the faithful.

In deed we Confess that many things are written in the holy Scripture,
touching the reward of the righteous, and punishment of the ungodly, which
reward is not referred to the deserving of our works, but to the free
mercy of God: and therefore when the faithful do any thing, for the which God
gives them a reward, they receive not the same as of duty, but as given
them freely by grace. And this same does the Scripture manyfestly teach, for
Paul says: The reward Romans 6.
of sin is death, but eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Wherefore it is manifest that our sin deserves death,
but our righteousness deserves not eternal life. For it is the free gift of
God which Christ has deserved for us, and is therefore freely given unto us.
Wherefore the Apostle says: For I count not Romans 8.
the afflictions of this present time worthy of that glory which shall be
shevved on us in the life to come. Yet neuerlesse these men go about to
persuade with all men yt we deserve so great things by our own works: and so
wilfully set them selves against the faithful Doctrine of our Lord, who
says: So Luke. 7.
you likewise when you have done all that you can, yet say that you are
unprofitable servants, we have done that we ought to have done. And
against this saying of Augustine: God revvardeth his own gifts, and not thy
merits. Again: If thou vvilt be an abiecte from grace, then brag of thy
merits.

The. xxiii. Question.
Whether that Marie Magdalenes sins were not forgiven for the earnest loves
sake, which she bare unto Christ?

The Answer.
IF that sinful Mary's Marie therefore loved because her sins were remitted.
sins were forgiven her, for the love which she bore to Christ, then she
recompensed this her forgiveness, and therefore it was not the free gift of
God, neither were her sins remitted by grace? But the Gospel teaches that
she had remission of her sins, without any desert: For the Lord says.
There was a certain man which had two detters, and when they were not
able to pay him, he forgave both of them the dets. Wherefore if her det were
forgiven and pardoned, then did she not purchase, or deserve it by her love.
Furthermore, the words of the gospel plainly teach that Mary's love sprang
from the forgiveness of her sins, and not the forgiveness of her sins
from her love: for so is it written. Of these two therefore (that is to say,
of the two detters which were pardoned) tell me which will love him most.
Simon answered, saying: I think him, to whom most was forgiven. And he
said to him, thou have judged right. And therefore he afterward tells with
what great love Marie embraced him, and that because he had forgiven her many
sins. Yet notwithstanding, these men dare manifestly affirm the contrary, to
wit, that ^ure Lord forgave her her sins, and that for her loves sake. But
yet they object yt Christ said: Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved
much. To that I answer, that it is all one, as if he should have said: many
sins are forgiven her* and therefore she loves much. And that this is the
true meaning of our Lords words, the things which go before, and the things
which follow after, do manifestly teach. For even immediately after these words
he says, To whom a little is remitted, he loves a little. Then knitteth he
up his words thus: Thy fins are forgiven thee. Thy faith has saved thee, go in
peace. See therefore what saved her: first the free grace of our Lord, by which
her sins were forgiven: secondly, faith, by the which she received the mercy
or grace of god, and committed her self wholely to him. And here hence it
came that she obtained quietness, and faithfully loved him.

The. xxiiij. Question.
Whether Christ did not reject those which believed in him, and cast out devils
in his name, and did not good works: and whether he will not call all those to
eternal life, which have done good works, and whether he will not condemn al
those at the last day, which are workers of iniquity?

The Answer.
IT has bin ever known Faith to work miracles.
that the faith to work miracles, is distincted from the faith in Christ.
Wherefore it follows not, yt because the faith to work miracles, saves not
those which do them, therefore true faith in Christ, saves not. Like as it
follows not (as we have said before.) The devil believes and yet is not
saved, therefore faith saves not. For there is one faith of the deuels, an
other of the faithful, whereby they trust in the grace and promise of God.
Furthermore Christ shall Why Christ will judge not according to faith, but
according to works.
judge in the last day after the manner of men: for they judge of things
manifest and known, and so also shall Christ do. But because faith is the gift
of God, spiritual and invisible, and yet notwithstanding shows it self by
works, so that thereby is made manifest, who are faithful, and who not,
therefore the Lord judges according to works: But let us Math. 25.
hear the sentence of the judge: Come (says he) you blessed of my father,
possess the inheritance or kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of
the world. And in whom are we blessed but only in Christ. Gal. 3. Wherefore if
ye kingdom come by inheritance, the^ is it of grace. Furthermore, if it be
prepared before the foundations of the world, then was it prepared before we
were borne, or could do good woorks. Of this matter Paul speaks more.
Ephesi. 1.

Thus much have we spoken of faith and good works, which we do not condemn
or despise, as our adversaries do falsely accuse us, but this is it we only
seek, that we would not have that to be attributed to good woorks, which only
is due unto Christ. For otherwise, we exhort all me^ to the doing of good
woorks, and that not such as we feign or devise of our selves, but such as
God has commanded to be done through true faith, and not to make
merchandise of them. Yea we testify unto all those churches which we teach,
that they are greatly reproved and condemned, if they brag of faith, and
declare not the sam^ by good works.

The sixth Common place. Of Intercession, Invocation, and woorshippyng of
Saints, which now live in heaven.
The. xxv. Question.
Whether they do not believe that Christ and his members, that is to say, the
Angels and Saints which live in heaven, do pray unto God for the universal
church of Christ?

The Answer.
IT is both faithfully and Christ is the only intercessor with the father.
manifestly taught in ye gospel, and the wrytings of the Apostles, that
Christ does pray for his universal church, and for all faithful, and is
their only intercessor, advocate, and mediator to God his heavenly father. For
Christ himself in the Gospel, says: Verily, verily, I say unto you, what
so ever you shall ask of my father in my name, he will give it you? Hitherto
you have not asked any thing in my name, now ask and you shall receive it.
And again. Come unto me all you that do labor and are heavy laden, and I
will refreshe you.

These words therefore of Christ, do all the faithful in the universal
church believe, and acknowledge Christ to be their only intercessor to God
the Heb. 9. Romans 8. Heb. 7.
father, and therefore come they unto him only. For they steadfastly believe
that he is the Christ, that is to say, the anointed and ordained King and
Priest at the right hand of God, who has delivered us, and has ascended
into the heavens, even unto the right hand o^ God, that he might always
appear^ before his heavenly father for us, lik^ as Paul says, that Christ
is entre^ into the heau^s, that he might appear^ in the s^ght of God, and make
intercession, and pray for us.

But because Intercession or Prayer, is reckened amongste the cheifest parts
of the office of a Priest or Bi*shop, and that there is but one Priest hoode,
yea, and that so united, that it cannot be translated, given, or imparted t^
any other, whereby it is called eternal and immutable: therefore, the faithful
seek not any other Bishop, advocate, or intercessor besides Christ, no not
unto the Angels, or saints living in heaven. But content them selves with
Christ alone, and use him their only advocate and intercessoure to God, as he
which is best accepted with his father, and can most faithfully, readily,
excellently, effectually and wisely do this office. For the Angels and Saints
can in no wise be compared to Christ. Furthermore, he both can, and will
perform those things which we crave, knows our want, and calls us unto
himself, neither can we hereby weary him: and knows what is profitable for
us, and how all things may be done most commodiously for us. And all these did
he confirm while he lived here in this world, both with his words and
deeds. For he readily gave care to all men, yea, he knew their necessities
better than they could express them by their words, was never wearyed, but
healed all diseases, help all men, had ever inoughe for them, and
although he cured many, and gave marvelous gifts, yet had he still as much
grace, help and other gifts as he had before. Yea, and when his disciples
would oftentimes have put men off, he took it not in good part, but how much
the more they thronged unto him, and craved many things of him, so much the
more declared he his power, oftentimes exhorting them that they should
continually come unto him. etc. Whereby the faithful receive this comfort,
that even this our Lord Jesus Christ, being now at the right hand of God
i^ heaven, is no less gentle, willing, ready, and able to help all those
which put their trust in him. And therefore i^ all their needs they content
them selves with the intercession and med^ation of Christ. And that cheefely
sith^ 1. Tim. 2.
Paul says, in the first Epistle to T^mothe, and the second Chapter. The^ is
one God and one mediator between God and manne, even the manne Jesus Christ
which gave him self for the 1. John. 2.
redemption of all men. And S. Jho^ says: If any man sin, we have an
ad^uocate with God the father, Jesus Christ the righteouse, and he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the
whole world. Touching the intercession of The Scriptures makes no mention of
the intercession of Saints or Angels.
our Lord Jesus Christ in heaven, we have the manifest and invincible
testimonies of the holy Scriptures, but as touching the intercession of Angels
and Saints, which are in heaven, we have no testimony thereof, and therefore
the godly care not for it. Yea, those which believe the word of God, in which
we have taught us but one only intercessor Christ in heaven, they ^eeke for
none other intercessor there, ^ycause they have the same full and ^erfectly in
Christ. But they which ^oo not believe nor acknowledge Christ ^or their only
and perfect intercessor and advocate, those Infidels shall never be helped
with any prayers of An^els or Saints, although they did ^ray for them.

The.xxvj. Question.
If Christ be our only inter^ssor, why did he then teach us this prayer which
we call the Lords prayer, which was also used of the apostles, and so with one
accord continued in prayer, as it is written in the first Chapter of the Acts
of the Apostles.

The Answer.
YT may very easily appear How we pray in Christ's name when we say the
Lords prayer.
by this question, that those wicked men which were the authors of these
questions, did never rightly understand this holy Prayer common unto all men,
and commonly called the Lords prayer. For they speak thereof, as though we
dyd^e pray the same of ourselves without Christ, when as much rather it is
the prayer of Christ, and is so named, not only for that he made the same,
but also for that we now pray the same as even by his mouth. For when we
say the Lords prayer, we then with those words pray even as it were with
Chrysts own mouth: therefore the father, who loves his son, acknowledges
his words and prayer, and those are most acceptable unto him, and therefore
even for his sons sake he hears us. And therefore in the Lords prayer Christ
is made the only intercessor, and although we pray the same with the Apostles,
yet are we not herd for their sakes, but for Christ's: for even their prayers
are made effectual and acceptable unto god through Christ. In the Acts they
require the gift of the holy ghost, of who^ the Lord before had spoken in the
gospel, saying that his father would send him in his name: and therefore it
every where appears, that Christ is the true advocate and intercesser of all
the faithful. And it were not a little to be wondered at, why these men sho^^^
more set by and regard the intercession of sa^^c^s, than of Christ, on less
they did man^festly declare the^ selves to be of that number of whom Paul
speaks in the ^^^ste Chapter to the Romans, saying. which worship and serve
the creatures more than the creator, etc.

The.xxvij. Question.
Whether the charity and love of the Angels and Saints which are now in
heaven, be clean put out and taken away from us, when as Paul yet says,
that Charity never fails.

The Answer.
Charity or love can never Whether the Saints in heaven do pray fos us
because they have charity
in heaven, nor yet in earth, bring to pass, that the Saints should challenge
that unto them selves, which is only due to Christ: that is to say, his
priesthood and the office of a mediator to make intercession to God the
father. Furthermore in the Saints all things are purged and perfected after
they be departed out of this life and flesh, unto eternal felicity, and
therefore Charity, which in this life rejoices not in the misery of the
ungodly, is not in the life to come troubled, nor sorroweth not for their
damnation And because that God in heaven is all in all, and that the saints
have given them selves all wholly over unto the will of God, so as his will is
their chief felicity or joy (and therefore we pray, thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven) therefore no kind of charity moves them to make
intercession. For why, they perfectly know, that in Christ is the fullness of
all, and that in him wants nothing belonging to intercession, but that he
most perfectly does all things with his father, and that therefore his only
intercession is sufficient for the faithful: yea they see that the father
loves mankind, and would that all men which obtain grace, might be made
partakers thereof by Christ. And therefore is it written, that the elders fall
down before the throne of God, and give all glory and honor unto him, and
that amongst other things they say unto the Lamb, Thou only art worthy to
take the book, and open the seals thereof, for thou art slain, and haste
redeemed us by thy blood. Apo. 5. Neither does our charity cease toward
the Apostles, although we pray not to God for them. For we believe that they
are blessed, and have no need of our prayers. Wherefore in like sort, when
they now in heaven see that nothing is wanting to the intercession of Christ,
and that there needs no mo intercessors, but him alone, does not then their
charity still remain, although they make no intercession for us?

The.xxviij. Question.
Whether the Saints in heaven be inferior to me^ living here on earth?
Therefore sith Paul commanded us to pray one for another: and the Apostles
each where required others to pray for them: whether ought we not to desire the
prayers of the Apostles being in heaven, as more worthy and more effectual?

The Answer.
IT appears by this question, Whether the saints because they prayed here
on earth do the same for us now in heaven.
that they go about to defame us, that we think no better of the Saints in
Heaven, than we do of sinful men living here on the earth: and as
though we affirmed them to be subject to infirmity and myserie. But
herein they do us great wrong. For we include not the Saints in heaven as
subject to any corruption or infirmity: but rather their doctrine is to be
suspected hereof. For we teach and believe that the Saints which are in
heaven are far better than they which live here in this world: because they
are free from all infirmity, and are perfect and pure, subject to no sorrow,
but without all care and trouble live with God, rejoicing in everlasting joys,
and therefore are they ignorant of our miseries, which else would vex, trouble,
and make them sorrowful. And that they be free from al cares and all things
that might trouble them in any thing, we may read in the. 7. and The glory of
the saints which are in heaven.
21. Chapters of the Revelation. And as touching the miseries of this world,
they are only known to God, and to his son our Lord Jesus Christ, and yet
without all manner of grief and sorrow unto them. But the Saints know not
all things which are done every where through the world, nor are not
omnipotent to help, neither are they present in all places, nor know the
hearts of men, for the secret thoughts are secret, and hid from them: and
where as they say that the Saints do behold and see all things in God as in
a most brighte and clear mirror: this is more foolish than needs
confutation. And as touching these things aforesaid, they are only proper to
the majesty and wisdom of God. And as touching the Saints, they enjoy all
glory most perfectly of the heavenly life. And whereas the Saints in this
life have commanded us to pray one for an other, and have also here prayed for
others, and required others to pray for them, yet hereby it follows not,
that they which are in heaven pray for us, or that we ought to desire them to
make intercession for us, that they might now pray for us in heaven, because
they prayed for us when they were here on the earth. And yet notwithstanding we
ought to pray one for an other so long as we live here. And there is also (as
we have said) an other state of the saynctes in heaven: for they do not all
that there, which they did here on earth. We are expressly commanded to pray
one for an other in this life. But let them show us one word or sentence in
the holy Scripture, where the Saints which now live in heaven, are commanded
to pray for us: or else show where the Apostles did command us to pray unto
the Angels and Saints to make intercession for us: or let them bring one
example where any of the Apostles did pray unto any Angel or Saint, to make
intercession for him. Wherefore if they can bring forth no one example (as in
deed it is impossible so to do) because the invincible verity testifies,
that they prayed to one God only, and were contented with the intercession of
Christ: then should they also content them selves with Christ, and bid that
their intercession fare well, for which they are not able to bring forth any
one word or testimony of the holy Scripture. And no doubt, if there were any
intercession of Saints in heaven, the Scripture would in some one place or
other make mention of it.

The. xxix. Question.
Whether the rich man which was condemned, did not in hell pray for his
kinsefolkes? Although he were not heard because of his sin and damnation,
which thing the Saints and Angels have not.

The Answer.
SUrely it had been much Whether the rich man in the 16. of Luke did pray for
his brethren.
better for these miserable wretches, if they had let slip this Question,
sith they have no better argument and testimony, than that they have from
this damned rich man. But this is Gods judgment, for that they are not content
with that most sure, excellent, faithful and perfect intercession of Christ.
For if they thought this intercession only sufficient, why then make they
mention of any other intercessors? And because they often speak of other
intercessors, which yet, notwithstanding are none, neither would they be, and
because they set forth rather the intercession of creatures than of Christ,
as not content with him, therefore are they justly for their deserts
punished with so great blyndenesse. Furthermore it is not written in the
Scripture, that the rich man did call upon GOD, and pray for his brethren,
that GOD might have mercy over them: But rather defired, that him self
might be delivered to the end that he might warn them. And therefore was it
denied him, because God will not have the living to have any respect to the
dead, as to look for any Doctrine, Revelation, or salvation, from them, but
to content them selves with the doctrine of the holy Scripture. Wherefore if
our Adversaries acknowledge this, then on Gods name let them content
themselves with the intercession of Christ, which the holy Scripture does
allow and commend unto us only. And this similitude makes quyte against
themselves.

The. xxx. Question.
Whether they believe that the blessed virgin and mother of Christ, the Angels,
Apostles, Martires, and the other saints in heaven, be not to be worshipped,
honored, and prayed unto, to help us, and make intercession for us?

The Answer.
WE must here touching Of the worshipping of saints.
this word woorship, make a certain distinction. For if by this word
worship, is understood adoration, invocation, prayers, holy days, fasting
days, gifts, sacrifices, alms, dedicating of Churches, lyghting of Candles,
and such like, then say we that God alone is to be worshipped, inuocated,
and honored, and not the Saints. Yea, the Saints will not be worshipped
and served in this sort. But if this worship signify, to reverence, and
honestly and reverently to think of them, and acknowledge them, praise and
commend them, as the dear friends of God, and to embrace them as the singular
Ministers and members of Christ, then do we gladly believe, and truly
confess that all the godly, the blessed virgin Mary, the Angels, Apostles,
Martyrs, and all other Saints, ought by good right to be worshipped.
Furthermore we condemn all those which contemptuously think any thing of the
Saints which live in heaven. And chiefly, we What we ought to think of the
blissed virgin Mary.
confess, that the blessed virgin Mary is worthy all praise, and that she is
a pure undefiled virgin, both before, in, and after the birthe of Christ: and
that she is blessed above all other women, and that of her womb was borne the
son of God, and therefore may very well be called the mother of GOD. Yea we
also acknowledge and confess, that she was the dearly beloved handemayden of
God, who for hir^faythe, love, purity, lowliness, holiness, patience, hope,
and such like virtues, can never be sufficiently praised, and that she was
above all others beautified with most singular gifts of grace, and therefore we
ought to think mo^e reverently of her.

And as touching the Apostles of our What we ought to think of the Apostles and
other Saints.
Lord Jesus Christ, we acknowledge them to be the chosen and singular friends
and servant of God, endued with most excellent gifts, by whom it was his
pleasure that the gospel should be preached unto us, that thereby the world
might receive light, and we be delivered from the mouth of Satan, and
adopted in Christ into the number of the children of God. Yea we defend the
doctrine, faith, love, virtues, and example of life, both of the Apostles,
Martyrs, and all other the godly against all the enemies of GOD, and of the
Saints, yea we praise God in them, and love them as the very members of the
self same body with us under our only head Christ, we study to follow
the example of their lives and faith, that we may together with them after
this life, have the fruition of eternal joys with God. Furthermore,
whatsoever the holy Scripture teaches, or God commands to be done unto
them, we must readily and willingly yield it unto them. But now, why How the
saynctes are to be worshipped
we do not attribute and give unto them those honors, which the Papists
require, that is, to ask and seek help of them in time of trouble, as from
our intercessors, and sauiors, I will here breefly render the reasons: and
further also show why we so earnestly teach and affirm that god alone ought
to be worshipped, called upon, and served, and our lord Jesus Christ to be
acknowledged the only everlasting mediator and intercessor before god the
father in heaven.

First, we have a manifest commandment, that in all necessities God only is to
be prayed unto, and called upon, and that he alone is sufficient for us, and
that he both can and will give unto us all things necessary both for our
bodies and souls: for he him self calls us unto him, and promises us all
good things, and is displeased so often as we seek unto others, and not unto
him: and therefore when we come unto him, we greatly delight him, and thereby
worship him.

Secondely, by the examples of all Saints, and in the Psalms also we are
taught, that God alone in all cases is to be called upon, and to be thanked
for those benefits which we receive, what so ever they be.

Thirdely, that common and holy prayer, called the Lords prayer, can only be
said and offered to God the father, and to no manner of creature. Wherefore if
we had no other thing but this prayer of our Lord, yet might we thereby
sufficiently know that none other is to be called upon but God only. Last of
all S. Paul says, he Romans 10. We have need of an advocate for us to God.
ought to be called upon, on whom we do believe: but we do believe in God
only: and therefore we ought to call upon him only, as he who alone knows, is
able and will help us. And yet we do not reiecte the intercession of Christ,
neither say we, that we have need of no intercessor with God. But like as God
alone is to be called upon, so ought we to use none other intercession, nor any
other advocate or intercessor before God, than Christ Jesus only, because the
father has appointed him alone to this function, and therefore in him he
hears and receives our prayers, as I have heretofore sufficiently preued.
Wherefore if we would do obedient The Angels and saynctes send us from
themselves to Christ.
service to the Saints, then should we content oureselues with God, and
Christ our savior only. For unto this mark have the Saints always sent
all men, and would not suffer themselves to be worshipped or called upon.
Wherefore, if they suppose yt the saints did not send men to Christ alone, but
to others also, then let them show us who they were, to whom they sent the^.
For we have our opinion confirmed by the manifest scriptures. For when S. John
twice, as appears in the Revelation. 19. and. 22. fell down before the Angel
to worship him, the Angel answered: Take heed thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, worship thou God. Again,
at the marriage in Cana a city John. 2.
of Galelei, when there lacked wine, the mother of Jesu said unto him, They
have no wine: Jesus ansvvered unto her, and said: woman, what have I to do
with thee? mine hour is not yet come His mother said to the servant, what
so ever he says unto you, do it. And this is the only will of the virgin
Mary, that what so ever her son commands, we should do it. And because he
commands us to come unto him, to call on him, to pray in his name, doutlesse
the blessed virgin would have us so to do, and to serve him and not her, which
thing we do when we call upon her son, and not upon her. In the Acts also it
is Act. 3.
written of Peter and John, that when they had healed the lame at the gate of
the Temple, the whole multitude being amazed, ran unto them: but the Apostles
sent the people from them selves unto Christ, saying: why meruell you at
this? Or why look you so on us, as though by our power or virtue, we had
caused this man to walk? God has in this sort glorified his son. etc.
Likewise Paul and Bar^abas, when they had healed the man that was, as is
written in the four and twentienth of the Acts of the Apostles, and that the
men of Lystra would have done Sacrifice unto them: Paul refused it as a
thing horyble in the sight of GOD, and so renting his garments, diligently
taught them, that God only was to be woorshipped, and not the Apostles which
were ^ut men.

In like manner John the Baptiste, (than the which there was never any holyer
amongste men) whom Christ also comme^deth, sent his disciples from himself
unto Christ, as to the true savior, yea he rebuked them, because they
attributed more unto him, than was convenient, although they yet attributed
unto him nothing so much as these men now adays attribute to the Saints.
Read the first and second Chapter of S. John his gospel. Wherefore since it is
most sure yt the Saints in heaven have not altered their minds, then is it
without all doubt, that God is to be called upon, and prayed unto through
Christ only, and that from him all things necessary are to be asked for, and
not from any Saint.

The seventh Common place. Of the relikes of Saints, images and such like
things
The. xxxj. Question.
Whether they believe that the going on Pilgrimage to the bones and churches of
the saints, be not a godly thing?

The Answer.
THis question compriseth in it three others. First, what we think of
Pilgrymages that are taken in hand for religions sake? Secondly, what we
think of the relics and bones of the Saints? Thirdly, what we think of
their temples? To these we answer: All those things are godly which men do
being thereunto comau^ded of God by his word. Wherefore if you will have us
judge these Pilgrymages godly, then show us out of the scriptures where they
were instituted and commanded of God. For we can find no one letter or title
of holy Scripture, where any mention is made of these pilgrymages, but most
perfectly know that our Lord has taught us not to esteem one place in this
earth better than another, nor to gadde hither and thither for the obtaining of
grace. For God is present and merciful wheresoever the faithful have need of
his grace and call upon him with a true faith: Psalm. 107. and. 145. Amos. 5.
Jere. 7. 23. John. 4. 1. Timothe. 2. and many other places. Again, sith in
the Questions before going, we have already showed that the Saints send us
from them selves to God and to his son Jesus Christ, it is euidente that
they allow not of these Pilgrimages, and that they are not profitable nor
healthful for those which take them in hand, and therefore we ought not to do
them.

Touching the bones and Relikes of Of the relics of saints.
Saints, there is three sorts of them: Either they are their wrytings,
containing their Doctrine: or some parts or menibers of their bodies: Or some
exterioure things which they used as their garments and such like. Their 2.
Pet. 1.
wrytings therefore which contain their Doctrines, are the right Relickes, yea
the unspeakable treasure of all good Christians, which ought therefore to be
had in most great honor.

Again, the bones and bodies of the Saints, are worthy of their honor, as
having part in the Resurrection of the dead, for the which they look, and
were bisides, the houses of that most excellent spirit with which they were
fulfilled. But even as the bodies of the Patriarchs, of Moses, Aaron, Josua,
the Kings, Prophets, and the holy body of Christ, of John, Stephen, and
other the Apostles, were most honorably buried: So are the bones of the
Saints committed to the earth, until the day of judgment, and are not to
be dug up, nor set to be worshipped of the Christians in their churches,
as Athanasius has taught in the life of blessed Anthony.

Furthermore if we have ought, which we know the Saints used in the time of
their life, yet ought we not to woorshippe it: For as the aunciente Fathers
have taught us, such woorshipping is superstition, and displeases both God
and the Saints, as before it is said: what thing else may be said touching
Relickes I here omit, because their deceites are evidently known. For
oftentimes it happens that the head, arm or some one or other member of a
saint is found to be in two or three places, as though he had had three
heads, or three arms more than any other man. Again, in the stead of
Relics, fond and foolish things are offered unto men to be woorshipped, by
means whereof the saints are rather dishonored than honored: yet in this
their merchandise they so shamefully behave themselves, that those which have
in them any spark of honesty, although they delighte in Papisticall doctrine,
yet are they dyspleased hereat. Lastely, Temples and Chapels are Of Temples
dedicated to saints.
not to be dedicated and built unto saints which now are in heaven, but they
only ought to have sepulchers or graves as becomes mortal men. Wherefore
although it may be supposed that our elders for some good intent did build
temples unto the saints, yet is it evident yt it displeseth both god and the
saints. For temples are not to be built in ye names of saints, nor
congregations ought to be collected in their names, for that honor is due to
the creator only, as it may easily be proved by diverse authorities both of
the scriptures and of men, which here for breuities sake I do omit. Wherefore we
judge that the christians have need of churches to be built to the honor of
god, and of our lord Jesus Christ, in the which his word ought to be preached,
public prayers to be made, ye sacraments ministered, and alms to be bestowed.
And of these churches we think very honorably, and therefore gladly call them the
churches or houses of god, and of Christ, and ought in no wise to be
profaned: as I have already else where sufficiently taught.

The. xxxij. Question.
Whether they believe that it is good and godly to light up candels before the
sacrament of the altar, and the images and relikes of saints?

The Answer.
THe use of candels is necessary The use of candels in the churches.
in the churches in the night times, by reason of the darkness, as in ye
morning before day etc. And after this sort did the apostles use candels in ye
church or congregation. Acts. 20. But to set up light in stead of a sacrifice,
to the woorshipping of saints, or for the salvation of souls, this is clean
contrary to the holy scripture, and therefore condemned by Lactantius a most
ancient wryte^. Lactan. inst. li. 6. cap. 1.
Our hearts must be kindled unto God in the New testament, and we must give
light by our good works, and that Math. 5. Romans 22.
shall be an acceptable sacrifice unto God. And because the Lord commands us
to take and eat the sacrament, it is not Lights before the sacrament.
lawful for us to keep it and shut it up, but we must eat it: and therefore
there is no need to set lights before it. But let them rather which are
partakers of that sacrament, provide that the bright and shining light of true
faith may be in their hearts: for this setting up of lights before the
Sacrament is a new devise found out of late, and utterly unknown to the
Primitive Church. And as touching Images, this is our judgment. First, God
has forbidden to make Images to worship them, as appears in the second
Commandment. Again in the wrytings of the law, the Of Images.
Prophets and Apostles, he has altogether, and that very earnestly forbidden
Images, yea, most grievously threatening all those which either make them, or
woorshippe them. Wherefore, that which God abhors, calls evil, and
cursseth, we can not call the same good. Wherefore, if any man desire to see any
testimonies hereof, let him read the twentieth of Exodus, Deuteronomie the
fifth, fourth and seventh, and twenty seven. Psalm an hundred and thirti^ne.
Esaias forty, and forty four. Jeremie tenth. Romans first, first Corrin. tenth,
first Peter fourth, and first John the fifth. etc. And where as some of them
say, they woorshippe not the Image, but him whom it signifies, that is but a
single souled reason: for neither God nor his Saints will be so worshipped.
God nor his saints can by Images be represented.
Again, Images are not like unto God nor to the Saints. For God is a spirit
that can not be measured, without beginning and without ending, of most ^reate
power and Majesty, and can therefore be expressed by no Image, as the holy
scripture does evidently teach us. Acts. 17. and in diverse other places.
Again, the Angels which are spirits, how can there be made any image of
them? The Saints while they here lived on the earth, had both a body and a
soul, that is consumed, and this remains in heaven: how therefore can they
be expressed by any image? The image of their bodies, can nothing at all help
us to eternal life, and therefore although we had them, they could nothing
help us. Again, that which is cheifest in the Saints, as the grace of God,
faith, and such like gifts, can never be expressed unto us by any color,
wood or stone. To conclude, God, the Angels and Saints, are in heaven,
endowed with a more excellent glory than that they may be expressed or
represented by any images: which images the holy Prophets of God have scorned
and derided, as Esaias. 44. and Baruch. 6. But if they say that images must be
made to teach and instruct only, then do we know that we have received a
more perfect and excellenter way heereunto from God, which is, his holy
spirit and word. And because neither in the Apostles times, nor in the
primitive Church, there was any use at all of images, we cannot then truly
call them good, sith they are so condemned (as we have said) of God and his
Saints. Touching Relikes, we have spoken in the Question before going, and
therefore contented therewith we will speak no more thereof.

The. xxxiij. Question.
Whether they like well of the halowing of water, herbs, and other things used
in the Christian Church?

The Answer.
THe primytiue Apostolic The making of holivvate^ and holy fire.
church, was altogether ignorant of these consecrations and blessings of
water, fire, salt, butter, oil, palm, herbs wafers, and such like. And
therefore, because they are abuses and mere inventions of men, they can in no
wise please us. For we believe, that Christ has blessed all those creatures
whereof the faithful have need, so as if they use them moderately in faith,
with giving of thanks, they cannot be hurtful, but pure and good unto them,
as Paul witnesses. ^. (...). 4. and Tit. ^. But to believe and trust that
these hallowed things, whereof we have spoken, can defend and keep us from
evil, is mere superstitious, condemned of God, and reproved of all Gods
faithful ministers.

The eight Common place. Of purgatory, and prayer for the dead.
The. xxxiiij. Question.
Whether they believe that the souls of those which are dead, be tormented in
the fire of Purgatory, who not perfecting their repentance, nor being thoroughly
purified, have departed out of this life?

The Answer.
ALL that depart out of this Either men die in faith or in infidilitie.
life, either depart in the true faith, or else without the same: and of both
these has our Lord pronounced sentence in these words: For God sent not his
son into the world, to condemn the world, but that it might be saved
through him. He therefore which believes in him, is not judged, but he that
believes not, is judged already: because he believes not in the name of the
only begotten son of God. But our adversaries Obiecte, yt a faithful man may
die, who yet notwithstanding he be faithful, yet is not thoroughly purged,
because he has not performed his penance, and such one say they cannot be
saved, because he is yet vnpure, neither can he be dampened, because he is a
faithful. And therefore it necessarily follows, yt there is a middle place
between these prepared of god, in the which such are thoroughly purged, and with
their pains, repay that wanted in penance. And this place they call Purgatory,
because as they say, the souls are purged there. But in this kind of Doctrine
which has no authority at all in the Scriptures, we find fault with diverse
things.

For first Christ teaches that the faithful are made all pure in him,
although there remain some part of infirmity in them, whereof they have
need to be cleansed, for he manifestly says: He that is vvashed, has no need
save to wash his feet: for he is clean altogether, John. 13. and. 15. And
S. Paul teaches the same, Romans. 7. and. 8. where he shows, that many
things are yet wanting in the faithful, which are not imputed unto them
because of their faith in Christ. And therefore in ye articles of our faith we
confess, that we believe ye remission of sins, the resurrection of the body,
and the life everlasting. And as we believe so shall it be unto us: we believe
our sins are forgiven us, and therefore they are so. Furthermore when we say
sins: we do not only mean the fault, but also the punishemente due for
the same. Wherefore when the sins for the which we are punished, are
forgiven us, how then I pray you are we unclean? Or if sin be quite ^ake^
away, why then should they suffer, as though they were not remitted. Wherefore
if they had true faith in Christ, then shall they live for ever: but if they
believed not, then are they damned. And this does our faith teach us, which
is confirmed, Esai. 53. and John. 3. 5. 6. and. ^. Chapters. Secondly We are
not counted pure for our own works sake.
we blame in their doctrine, that they ascribe perfect purity to perfect
repentance, which purity is only had by the death, blood, and merits of
Christ. For if purity were had by our merits, then is Christ dead in vain.
But Christ is not dead in vain, therefore purity comes only by the grace
of God, through faith in the death of Christ. Acts. 1^. Gala. 7. and. 1.
John. 1. But how feeble an argument that is, which they say, that the souls
requite with their punishments in the fire of Purgatory, which before they
wanted, to perfect repentance, we have heretofore showed, when we
entreated of Faith and Works, proving then those things which we both do and
suffer, not to be worthy of that joy whereof in the life to come we are made
partakers by Christ. Thirdly we blame in their doctrine of Purgatory, that
they attribute not purity to the blood of Christ only, without the which
yet nothing can purge us: but without all authority of Gods word, they feign
unto us I know not what kind of fire, to the which they without all shame
attribute our purging. This also we find false with them, for that they say
the faithful, who depart out of this life, are tormented in the life to come,
quite contrary to the words of Christ: Verily verily I say unto you, he that
hears my word, and believes him that sent me, has eternal life, and shall
not come into judgment, but passes from death to life. John. 5. Wherefore if
he went into Purgatory, then must he needs come into judgment: but since the
faithful pass from death to life, we answer, that the faithful are clearly
purged of the Lord, and are not subject to any fire of Purgatory.

The. xxxv. Question.
Whether the prayers, alms, and sacrifices which are done in the christian
Church for those who are tormented in purgatory, be profitable to the^, or
not?

The Answer.
Forasmuch as we have Of prayers and such like things done for the dead.
already plainly declared, yt our adversaries err, even in the chefest point of
this question, and that is, in the fire of Purgatory it self, because it has
no testimony in the Scripture, therefore I conclude the souls of the
faithful can not there be punished, because there is no such thing: and
therefore we need not pray for them after they be dead, or do any thing for
them, saving only to make a reverend remembrance, and render thanks unto
God, for that it has pleased him to call them out of this world (in the true
faith) unto his kingdom, and that it would please him to increase our faith,
and so in time to couple us with our forefathers in eternal felicity.
Furthermore we teach, that if we could do anything for their sakes,
acceptable to God, and profitable to them, that then we ought to do for their
wives, children, and kynsfolk. And I am not ignorant that many civil men are
maruelously offended with us, because they think it very vndece^t, yea
horrible, and a thing in no wise beseeming a christian man, that we not only
do nothing to help our forefathers, but also speak and write against so
ancient a custom (and as we ourselves know) so universally received and
used. And therefore I heartily beseech all those, to hear and way those our
reasons, which move us hereunto. For we do not this, neither cease we to pray
for them, or neglecte so usual things, because we love not our forefathers, or
for that we care not for them, but because the christian faith teaches and
confirms, yea forces, so as by no means we can acknowledge* it good and
sound doctrine to pray for them, or that these things ought to be done for
their salvation, yea we know that our fathers have no need hereof, and that
they require no such thing of us. For we faithfully and certaynely believe
and know, that sins are remitted both here in this life, and in that to
come, by none other means, but by the grace of God in the blood of Jesus
Christ through faith: and as for the fire of Purgatory, which stands on our
merits and punishments which we suffer, is nothing appertayning to the grace
of God, nor the blood of christ in faith. Again it is certain that our
fathers dyed in the confession of the same faith with us, wherein we say, I
believe the remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Wherefore sith the universal faith, and the manifest testimonies
of the Scriptures do evidently prove, that al they which by true faith commit
them selves to the grace and mercy of God and dye in Christ, are preserved of
him so as they come not into judgment, into any fire, pain, or punishment,
(...) are received into everlasting ioye^ how then I beseech you, can we pr^
for them, or do such like things for the^ salvation, whereof in deed they sho^^
have need, if they suffered any pay^ or punyshmente. But they suffer no^ and
therefore there needs nothing be done to deliver them from it. F^^ if after
the departure out of this life the true Faith, they yet neuertheles^ suffered
the fire of Purgatory, punishementes and torments, then we^ all that vain and
to no purpose which are read and taught us out of (...) holy Scryptures,
touching the fr^^ merciful promise of God, the del^ueraunce by Christ, and of
the certai^ tie and verity of faith: yea our fay^ it self, should be most
untrue. B^ our faith is certain and sure. Ther^ fore as our fathers did
undoubtedly b^ leeue the forgiveness of sins, and ete^nall life, so have
they undoubtedly o^* teyned the same, and feel no pain in ^^e other life. And
therefore both for the glory of God, the praise and confession of our faith,
as also for the honor of ^^r fathers, touching whose salvation ^e doubt not, we
do nothing after their (...)ath for the salvation of their souls. (...)ea we
think that by these kind of do^gs and prayers of ours, both our salvation, and
faith is called in doubt, as (...)oughe they believed the remission of
(...)nes and everlasting life, and yet have (...)t obtained it. But this is
most wicked be thought, and therefore not to be spoken: (...) it is all one, as
though God and our ^^th might deceive us, which is impos(...)le. Moreover for
breuities sake I will They are but filthy merchandise vvherevvyth they vvoulde
have us redeem^ souls.
(...)t here declare how vile those things (...), and without all authority of
Gods ^^rde, which they command us to (...) for the help of our fathers: so
as they should feel but some of those ^ollerable pains of Purgatory, as ^y
say they do, yet could these (...)ngs help them nothing at all: for ^t for
the most part their delyue(...)nce and remedy is boughte of those who are
most filthye and wicked Wherefore it is much better not to seek^ the salvation
of our fathers at the hand^ of those wicked and filthy marchaunts* who do
nothing but for money, or from the traditions of men, but rather steadfastly to
knitte our selves to the sure foundation of the grace and mercy o^ God in the
blood and death of our savior Christ through perfect faith. And so by this
means shall our minds be assured of the salvation of our fathers, where as
otherwise by celebratyng yearly Ceremonies for them, we are still left
doubtful when they are effectual, or they receive profit by them. Again we
learn not to trust in the We may not for purgatories sake trust in any thing.
merits and works of other men after our death for Purgatories sake. For
those five foolish Uirgins perished by such negligence, whylest they sought,
and would bye Oil of others. For the Scripture byddeth us to do good, and not
to defer it whylest we have time. And therefore we earnestly exhort all men
while they are here in this life, and in perfect remembrance, to serve God,
and prepare them selves to their journey, and not to trust in the works of
other men to be done after their death for them, because they can not then
help them. But if it chance any man to lie at the point of death, then with
the words of the Gospel we send him to Christ, to pray for the remission
of his sins, to trust to the grace and mercy of God, and so with full
consolation hope for eternal life. And this and none other was the doctrine of
the primative Apostolyke Church, like as Paul writes of the dead. 1. These. 4.
And therefore by Gods grace we will keep the same.

The. xxxvj. Question.
What they say to the glory of Lazarus, and his systers Martha John. 1^.
and Marie, who prayed unto Christ for their brother? Act. ^0.
Likewise of Eutiches, whom Paul raised from the dead, whether this were done
without prayers, and whether that Saint Peter did not raise Tabitha to life by
prayers?

The Answer.
I Suppose that Mary, How and wherefore the apostles did pray.
Martha, Peter and Paul prayed unto God, but yet not as our adversaries teach
us to pray for the dead: that is, that God would be merciful to their souls,
and deliver them from the fire of purgatory, and receive them into eternal
life: but they prayed, that unto the glory of god they might be restored to
this life. And do they think that Lazarus, Where Lazarus was that time he
was dead.
Eutiches and Tabitha were in the fire of purgatory, and after their death
suffered prayers? I suppose they dare not affirm it. And therefore they bring
us such examples as serve not their purpose, but are only to blere the eyes of
the simple. But if they say, they were in Purgatory, then I pray you, how
prove they the same. But some of them affirm and say. If Lazarus were in hell,
then could he not be delivered, for in hell there is no redemption: but if he
were in heaven, then had he wrong to be brought again to this earth of
misery. And here therefore they conclude, that there must needs be a third
or middle place. To these I answer: first yt hereby they have not proved this
middle place to be purgatory, but that it may be as well some other place only
known unto God. Secondly I say that their whole argument is false and vain.
Lazarus (as the scripture there techeth) was Christ's friend, and therefore his
soulo was received into the bosom of Abraham after his death, like as we may
see in the other Lazarus, of whom Luke speaks. ca. ^6. Neither had he any
injury offered him, when his soul (to ye setting forth of Gods glory) was
again coupled to his body: for all creatures do of right and duty serve
their creator. The Lord said unto the these hanging on the cross, This day
shall thou be with me in paradise, and yet the. 3. day he rose again, and did
not thereby suffer any wrong. etc. Truly I think that if these men which are
called the Spirituality, were compelled tobestow so much money for the dead
upon the laypeople, as they for this matter do receive of them, their fire of
Purgatory would not burns so hot, and their prayers would come down to a
lower price. But if this doctrine of Purgatory be so necessary: how comes
it then to pass I beseech you, that the Cast Churches in Grecia did never
receive it, nor know of it, until the time of Eugenius the fourth, at which
time very shortly after, Constantinople was taken by the Turk.

The. xxxvij. Question.
What they say to this place of the Machabees: It is therefore an holy and
wholesome thought, to pray for the dead, that they may be delivered from their
sins.

The Answer.
SAint Hierome, Ciprian Of the second book of the Machebes.
and Gelasius shall unto this place answer for us: that this second book of
Machabees is read in the Church, but has not like authority with other
canonical scriptures of the Bible, to take authority thence as from other
scriptures in the controversies of religion. Therefore because in all the books
of the old and new testament there is not one word spoken of the sacrifices
for the dead, we leave this place as we found it, as not being able to prove
any thing. Again all the acts of holy me^ are not to be followed, neither are
they acceptable to god. Ge^eon for a good intent made an Ephod in ^phra, which
yet had bin better if it had not bin done. In the. 14. Chapter of the history
of ye Machabees Raazias is praised for killing himself, that he might not al
into the hands of his enemies, and yet his act, as the whole scripture techeth,
(...) the best of the fathers do judge, deserves neither praise, nor is
thought well of: for every man touching death, ought to abide till God do call.
And as touching this Book I could say more, but this is sufficient.

The ninthe Common place. Of Sacraments.
The. xxxviij. Question.
How many Sacraments there be? also whether those be effectual signs of Gods
grace, by the which we receive the same?

The Answer.
THe Romish church has seven Sacraments, of al How many Sacraments there be.
the which we do account but two to be true Sacraments of Christ's church,
and that is Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord: and unto these we attribute
so much as the holy Scripture wills us. And as touching these two,
Confirmation and Extreme unction or anointing, as they be now used in the
church of Rome, we do not acknowledge them for any Sacraments of Christ,
neither suppose we that they have their original from gods word. The other
three, that is, penance, Imposition of hands, or Orders and Matrimony,
although we reckon the^ not amongst the Sacraments of Christ's church, as we
do baptism and the supper of the Lord, yet we acknowledge them to be
profitable and necessary institutions of God, and very wholesome for the
faithful, if they use them in such sort, and to the end for which they were
ordained, and as the Saints have used them in times paste. Neither do we
allow or think well of al those things which the church of Rome does use in
these three, but we allow that only which is agreeable with the word of God.
But where we allow baptism and the Lords supper only for true Sacraments, I
have else where more largely taught, showing that it only belongs to God,
and not to man, to institute or ordeine Sacraments, the signs of Gods verity
and grace, but also how the promises of God are in the Sacraments and
outward signs of his benefits.

Touching the efficacy and virtue of Of the virtue and power of the Saints.
the Sacraments, we answer, that all those things which God has ordained,
have power and virtue to bring to pass and perform all that, for the which
they were ordained of God, and so have the Sacraments their power: to whom
therefore we ought not to attribute any other thing, than that the Scriptures do
attribute unto them, and for which causes they were ordained. Wherefore if we
find the Sacraments ineffectuall unto us, that is not to be attributed to
them, as though the institution of God were of no sorce, but it is to be
attributed unto me^, which use them not rightly, but without faith. The word
of God abides evermore true, and is left unto us for our instruction: but in
that all men do not acknowledge it to be the truth, and suffer them selves
to be instructed thereby, they, yea their lacks of faith is the cause thereof.
Simon Magus was baptized, but not purged, not for because baptism is without
effect, or is not the true sign of our clensing, but because he believed not.
In like manner Judas at the supper of our lord received not the body of Christ
unto eternal life, not because the sacrament did not represente and offer the
same meat of eternal life, but because he received it without faith.

Again, the use of the sacraments do Whether the sacraments received do give
us grace.
not therefore obtain the grace of God unto us, because it is our work, but
we receive ye Sacraments, because through grace we are reconciled unto God in
Christ by faith, and now be in his favor, and therefore by this means show
our selves thankful and obedient toward him. Again, we know that the grace
and gifts of God, do oftentimes increase and grow in the faithful. S. Paul
to the Romans the fourth, asks whether Abraham were justified through
Circumcision, and whether he was justified before, or after he was circumcised,
he answers: not in circumcision, but before he was circumcised: and yet was
not circumcision vnprositable, or a vain sign, for he received the same as
the seal of the righteousness of faith, that is to say: to confirm and
testify yt his righteousness came by faith, and that thereby we be justified.
So may we say of our sacraments, for baptism is come in the stead of
circumcision, and the fathers also did eat of one spiritual meat with us, as
Paul testifies, Coloss. 2. and. 1. Cor. 10.

The tenth Common place. Of Baptism.
The. xxxix. Question.
Whether they believe that infants ought to be baptized? and whether they
think the first baptism sufficient, or that men ought to be baptized
again, when they come to have the use of reason?

The Answer.
IT appears by this Question, Of the Anabaptists.
they mind to make some proof of us, what we do think of ye Anabaptists.
Wherefore we answer, that even you which are the vpholders and maintainers of
the Popish kingdom, and the hinderers of the preaching of the gospel, do most
wickedly offend, and that the fault is cheefely in you, why that many are
first seduced by the Anabaptists, and then secondly for lack of teaching, do
perish in that error. For if ye would suffer the pure preaching of the
Gospel to have his free passage, then could not this heresy, nor any other
so mightily prevail and take place, to the deceiving of simple and unlearned
men, which think what so ever is taught them, is straight ways the
doctrine of the gospel. Neither go we about to defend the Anabaptist, from
whom we descent very much, as in all our books we do plainly declare. But
many of them are very simple men, and otherwise of an honest nature, who have
skarce heard any thing of the gospel, or if they have, yet because they see so
little ame^dment of life among those yt profess the same, and are called
Gospellers, yielding to the subtle persuasio^s of the Anabaptists, think they
should greatly offend if they baptize their infants, take an oath, or come unto
those churches, in which as they say, sinners do yet remain. Yea, that no
minister which receives any stipende for his ministry, or does not him
self all those things which he teaches others to do, can teach the true
doctrine: and that there is no congregation a true church, in which the order
of Prophesying and excommunication is not according to that form which S.
Paul has prescribed. 1. Corrin. 14. Therefore, as these their errors are not
to be suffered, so yet must they be friendly instructed by the word of God, and
so brought home again, as S. Paul teaches. Romans 14. But if they be
contentious and stubberne, they must not yet therefore straight ways be cast
off, but hope better of them, taking heed in the mean time, least they
infecte any other with these their obscure opinions, whilst we look for their
amendment: And if they be not converted, yet must we always deal soberly,
vertuoussy, and holily with them, having a consideration of the matter and
person, in correcting and punishing of them.

Other some of them are not of a simple and honest nature, but malicious,
troublesome, envious, covetous, which all their life time have been unquiet and
obstinate, ever loving contention, and so falling into that error, do amongste
themselves, raise up broiles, stir me^ against their Magistrates and
Preachers, against oaths, against judgment and punishment, against taxes,
rentes, and tiches, and many other things: furthermore they stir up
contention between man and wife: and yet notwithstanding, they cloak and
smoothe themselves with a certain glorious and hipocritical kind of speech,
to the end they might seem to be far honester men, than they are in very
deed. For what they would do, if they might have free liberty, we have good
experience in the Monkishe Anabaptists. If therefore these men which are so
malicious, might be freely suffered, and no punishment done unto them, the
common wealth would quite be overthrown, as experience does teach us. And
these men being the heads of this faction, abusing the simple sort, do in like
manner stir them up to be contentious and raise tumultes. Whereupon being thus
instructed, although they be manifestly overthrown by the truth, yet leave
they not their error, nor will receive any godly instruction, but despise the
gentleness and mercy of the Magistrate, never keeping touch, though they
promise and swear never so much, having no regard to honesty, never cease
to molest and trouble the congregatio^s with their rash and seditious dealings.
And touching these men, what both Gods law and man's, does decree of
them, it is manifestly known: wherefore, we do not go about to excuse any
such, neither have we any fellowship with them, or with their teachers, nor yet
by Gods grace mind we to have. Touching the baptism of infantes, it Baptism
of infantes.
has his authority from the scripture. For because we all confess that
Baptism is, a sign of the couenaunte and people of God: and that it cannot be
denied that infants are in the covenant of God, and are numbered with his
people: therefore baptism which is ye sign hereof, cannot be denied unto
them. Again, S. Peter in the Acts teaches, Acts. 10.
that they ought to be baptized, which have the holy Ghost: But if the infants
of the faithful had not the holy Ghost, then should they not belong unto God,
neither should they be holy, nor have the kingdom of God: But they are
belonging to God. Romans 8. they are holy. 1. Corinthians. 7. and to them belongs
the Anabaptism
kingdom of heaven. Mar. 10. Therefore they ought to be baptized. But there is
no need we should be baptized again, when we come to the use of reason, being
once in our infancy baptized in the name of the father, the son, and of the
holy ghost. For if we should be baptized again, yet could we have no more than
we had before, only this would remain, that hereby we should deface our former
baptism, to the great displeasing of God, the breach of laws, and the
incurring into the danger and punishment thereof.

The.xj. Common place. Of the sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord, and
of the receiving under both kinds.
The.lx. Question.
Whether they believe that the living body and the very blood of Christ, be
substantially in the Sacrament, so that after the words of consecration, the
bread is transubstantiated into the body of Christ, so as there then remains
no more bread, but the true and natural body of Christ?

The Answer.
Certain of the later Doctors Diners opinions touching Christ's presence in
the Sacrament.
of the Romish church. do evidently, and freely confess that before the
council of Lateran. which was celebrated at Rome, Innocentius the third, the^
Pope in the year of our Lord. 121, (in ye which Synod the doctrine of
transubstantiaon was first decreed and confirmed) there were diverse and sundry
opinions in the church touching the presence and substance of Christ in the
Sacrament. So that if any man did not believe that the substance of bread was
turned into the substance of Christ's body, yet was he not reckened for an
heretic. But in this council it is decreed, yt all those which will avoid
the suspicion of here^ie, must believe that the very body of Christ is
naturally in the Sacrament. and it is greatly to be wondered at, wherefore this
council would condemn the faithful as heretics: for that which hither unto
for the space of. 1200, years, was never done nor meant. Whereby let any wise
man think, whether the council had authority now after. 1^00. years to
Decree these things. For if those men which lived from Christ 1200. years,
were not counted heretics, and yet did not believe that the substance of bread
was changed into the substance of Christ's body, why then should they now
be called Heretics, which believe not those things which the Church never
believed in all that space of years before said? But if those things which
that council now holden 1200. years after Christ, were true and necessary to
be believed, then all those which lived before this time, and believed not
these things, did not believe a right: but if their faith were true (as
undoubtedly it was) then is it not necessary for us to believe that, which after
were devised and imagined.

And truly the ancient fathers did The true and ancient doctrine of the
sacrament against transubstantiation.
thus believe and teach concerning this holy Sacrament: to wit, that there
is two things cheefely to be considered: the signs: that is, the bread and the
wine: the things signified, that is, the body and blood of Christ. But if it
be true which the church of Rome teaches, that the substance of bread is not
in the sacrament, but only the body of Christ, then surely, the Sacrament is no
more a sacrament, but only the thing signified. And is not this their
definition of a sacrament? A Sacrament is the sign of an holy thing? If
therefore the bread be no bread, neither keeps his substance, but in the
place thereof comes the substance of Christ's body, I pray ye then, what is
that they do break in the sacrament? Is it the body of Christ, or what other
thing else? For it is no bread, for they say there is no bread in the
Sacrament. Therefore if the body of Christ be present only, then is the same
broken, which thing cannot ^e. Neither is it any more a Sacrament, for it is
not the sign of an holy thing, but the very holy thing it self. Then was
there no need that the Lord should have given bread and wine in ^ys last
Supper. But if it be as they were woonte to say, that the form and accidents
of the bread, as the ^hytenesse, color, roundenesse and ^aste, be the signs
and the things that are ^roken, then do we demand of them (...) what
substance the whiteness, ^oundnesse and taste does abide? They ^^nne not say
I trow, that they are the accidents of Christ's body, or that they rest in
his substance, and therefore it necessarily follows, that they remain in
the bread. And therefore the substance of the bread in this Sacrament, is
not changed but remains, and so their Doctrine has no good foundation. Yea
these words also, Substance, Accident, form, and accident without
substance, does sufficiently declare that this their doctrine, was forged
from the devises of subtil^ Sophisters and their craft, whereof the Apostles
were altogether ignorante. But now, when they are at a sopp^ game, then say
they, these things a^^ altogyther done miraculously by the omnipotent divine
power of God: b^^ yet they cannot prove that, and there (...) no cause so
false, but that it may be defended by this kind of reason. In the gospel and
wrytings of the Apostles oftentimes this Sacrament is plaine^ called bread and
wine, and that without dout is in respect of the signs, that might thereby
manifestly appear, that the substance of bread and wine doth^ remain in the
sacrament, which thi^ also we perceive and fast, when we receive the same,
although the Papists go about to persuade us the contrary.

Neither by this does it follow, that The faythefull do not receive bread
only in the Supper.
be acknowledge and receive in this sacrament, nothing else but bread and wine
only, as in other bankettes, where our body is fed. For our Lord when he gave
(...) his supper, the bread and the cup vn^^ his disciples, commanding them to
^ate and to drink, he added: This is my body, this is my blood. And it is to
be ^oted, that it is an usual thing, to give ^^to the sacrame^tall signs, the
names (...) those things, which they do signify* (...)s in this sacrament,
the bread and wine (...)e the signs of the body and blood of Christ, and
therefore Christ names the^ is body and blood. The like is to be said Baptism,
Circumcision, the Passeoer and other Sacrifices. And they are ^us called, to
the end we should not ^pende upon the signs, that is, on the ^reade or on
the Wine, but being by ^ese visible things put in mind of ^ings invisible,
we might lift up our ^es unto heaven to the things signified, and that is to
the body of Christ which was given for us, and to his blo^^ which was shed for
us, and so study (...) receive these.

But how, or in what manner d^^ we receive the body and blud of Christ How
the true body of christ must be received.
Truly, spiritually by Faith, so (...) outwardly with our bodily mouth^^ we
eat and drink the Lords breade^ and the Lords wine, the holy signe^^ and
inwardly with the mouth of ou^ soul, that is to say by faith, we recey^^ the
body and blood of Christ. F^^ like, as with our mouth, we recei^^ meats to
sustain our body, so likewis^ by Faith in Christ, is his body and blood,
which he offered on the Cross made meat unto us, to eternal life* For the
body of Christ which was (...)uen for us, and his blood that was sh^^ for us,
is our life, or life is thereby purchased to us, and these do we receive b^
faith, so as thereby Christ does li^^ in us, and we in him. Wherefore in the
holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ* we do not eat bread, and drink win^
only, but his body and blood also: bu^ yet in such sort as before I have
said, spiritually by faith, so as the presence of Christ in this supper, is
spiritual, is the eating thereof also is. For the body of Christ, which is,
and remains (...) heaven, even unto the last day, is a ^aturall body,
subject to a place, and ^s therefore in heaven over us, and can ^n no wise,
bodily or fleshly, be in di^ers places at once upon this earth, ^r be
carnally eaten. And therefore in the celebrating of this Supper, they have
always said: Lift up your hearts. and therefore the aunciente writers have
always, in interpreatyng the ^oordes of Christ touching the eating and
drinking of his body and blood, ex^ounded the same to be done spiritually by
faith, because the flesh profits not, as in the sixth Chapter of John: and
therefore they have interpreated these ^oords of Christ: This is my body, This
is my blood, thus: It so signifies, or it is the sign or Sacrament, or token
of my body and blood. For even immediately after ye forsaid words, our Lord
himself ^aith: Do this in the remembrance of me. And Paul says, show you the
Lords death until he come, to wit, to judgment. Wherefore to this Question
we Answer: that the natural body and true blood of Christ is in heaven, as
touching the substance, and that in the supper, or in the bread and wine (which
two retain their propre substaunces) they are Sacramentally or spiritually
present, not substancially or bodily. For the bread and wine are the true
Sacraments or signs of the body and blood of Christ, which being once
offered on the Cross* are now abiding in heaven, and are spiritullay by faith
received of us unto eternal life. But some not being How each man ought to
behave himself in the controversy of the sacrament.
concente with this plain exposition, obiecte, that in our days there is
great strife about the sacrament, some teaching that Christ must be eaten
spiritually, other some saying that it ought to be carnally etc. And these men
we heartily beseech, that they would diligently mark those, which thus so
earnestly hold, that the bread it self, or that under the bread or forms
thereof the very body of Christ is present, and corporally to be eaten: for
after they have contentiously tossed themselves and others herein, yet at the
last they come to this point, that they confess this not to be done so grossly
or carnally, because the whole matter is heavenly, Sacramental and Spiritual.
Wherefore if this be true, why then yeeide they not here unto, and cease
henceforth to be contentiouse, and to persuade this thing to be carnally
spiritual, and that the substance of bread no longer remains. etc. Whereby
neither them selves, nor yet others can tell what they mean. Let the ancient
doctrine of Christ's Church remain, which always believed that Christ had a
true natural body, and that glorified in his resurrection, yet still remaining
a true natural body (even such as our bodies shall be at the last day) and
that with this body he ascended into heaven, there remains, and shall from
thence come to judge both the quick and the dead. And that yet nevertheless
he is present spiritually in the Sacrament of the supper, and so received of
the faithful spiritually, and not carnally, unto eternal life. This is the
ancient and plain Apostolical truth, to which not only thou may yield
thy self, but also know what thou beleeuest. Wherefore if thou goo forth any
further to seek, to contend or to quarrel, then must we let thee alone, that
even through thine own default, thou may al thy life long remain and
continue a most miserable man. etc.

The. xlj. Question.
Whether they do believe that Christ being present in the Sacrament, is to be
worshipped, when the same is elevated or lift up by the priest, given unto
other, carried to the sick, or is otherwise showed or carried about?

The Answer.
TOuching the presence of The presence of Christ.
Christ, we have answered in the former question: but if any man be not
sufficiently answered therewith, let him hear the answer of S. Augustine upon
the words of Christ Trac^. in ^oan 50 The poor shall you have always with
you, but me shall ye not have always Thus he writes: According to that
substance, after which he was borne of the Virgin, taken of the Jews, nailed
on the Cross, and appeared manyfestly in the resurrection, according to that
substance you shall not have me always with you. Wherefore he was conuersaunt
bodily forty days with his disciples, and after ascended into heaven, and is
not now here on earth. For there he sits on the right hand of his
father, and yet is here also: for the presence of his Majesty did not depart.
Therefore according to the presence of his majesty we have Christ always
present, but as touching the presence of his humane body, we have it not. For
the Church had him present but a few dais, yet faith apprehe^deth him, though
our eyes see him not. And this is S. Augustines doctrine. Touching the
worshipping of Christ, we believe he ought to be worshipped in what place so
ever he be, in body. For whylest he was here on earth the Apostles and
others did worship him here: and after he ascended into heaven, they worshipped
him there. Luke 24. Wherefore sith we have already sufficiently declared, that
Christ is not bodily present in the earth under the form of bread, but is
in heaven, therefore is he to be worshipped in heaven, sitting on the right
hand of God, and not under the form of bread. Furthermore touching the
worshipping of the Sacrament, we have neither commandment from God, nor
example of the Apostles. For the Lord says: Take ye, eat ye, and not show
it, and worship it. Neither did the Apostles keep this Sacrament and shut it
in a Box, carry it to the sick, or in procession, or dedicate any festival
day unto it, no more than they did to Baptism, which notwithstanding is an
holy Sacrament, given in the name of the blessed Trinity, the father, the
son, and the holy ghost. And we truly do worship rightly the holy Trinity,
and yet not in Baptism. Last of all it is evident by Histories, that. 1200.
years, and somewhat more after Christ, the invention and buylding of Chapels
to the Sacraments, and feasts, and carrying of the same about on procession,
was invented and ordained only by men clean contrary to the word of God.
Dan. 11. and Math. 24.

The. xlij. Question.
Whether those Priests which are not consecrated, such as a great many be
amongst the gospellers, have power to make of bread and wine, the true body
and blood of Christ?

The Answer.
Saint John in his Gospel Whether the Priests make bred and wine, the very
body and blood of Christ.
bids men to attribute no more unto them selves, than they have received
from above. Therefore tell us where the professors of the Gospel did at any
time take upon them authority or power, to make of bread and wine the body
and blood of Christ? No they never received any such authority from God.
But we are not ignorant what the Church of Rome teaches of this matter, and
how those which are consecrated by that church, and of their Bishops, into
priests, shorn and anointed with oil, have these words by their Bishops
pronounced over them: O Lord voutchsafe to consecrate and sanctifye these
hands by this Oyntmente, and through our blessing, that what soever they
bless, may be blessed, and what so ever they consecrate or hallow, may be
consecrated or hallowed. etc. And again: Receive thou power to offer sacrifice
to God, and to say Mass as well for the living, as for the dead. etc. But we
beseech them of their courtesy to tell us who gave them this authority or
power? Did they receive it of Christ? If they did, then let them tell us where,
and with what words he commanded them to do it? But had the Apostles trow
you this power, and gave the same in like manner to others, and so after this
sort did consecrate and ordeyne Ministers in the Church? For the thing it
self whereof they speak, is very great, and the power and authority such
and so wonderful, that it is Divine. Wherefore it is necessary, that they
show some commandment or ordinance of the word of GOD, to ratify this
their ordinance, consecration, and power. But as touching any one of these
^hynges, it is undoubted true, that they have no manner of commandment, nor
sufficient warraunt from the word of God. And therefore we may not allow
or ratifye their ordy^ance. In deed there are certain thin^es written in the
old Testament tou^hing the annoynting of Priests, but ^ll men know that the
Leuitical priest^ood with all his ceremonies was abro^ated, and so detested of
God, and for^idden to be renewed in the Church of Christ. We know yt the
Apostles did in ^^e making or ordring of ministers use ^nely prayers and
putting on of their ^^ds. And in the new Testament there is no mention made, no
not a word of this Romish custom touching the consecration and offering of
sacrifices in the Mass. Neither did our Lord say, I give you this power, to
pronounce the words of consecration over the bread and wine, and of the same
to make the true body and blood of Christ: But he said: Take and eat, this
is my body: Take and drink ye all of this, this is my blood. Besides this
there are diverse opinions amongst the Doctors of this Romish Church with what
words our Lord did consecrate. And the Apostles did not use this form of
consecration which the Romish church uses. But in the reformed Churches The
true ordering or making of ministers.
of the Gospel the Ministers are ordained by election, and by laying on of
hands, and the prayers of the congregation, according to the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles. And therefore we do not put the efficacy or force of
the Sacraments in the power, deeds, or words of the Ministers, but in god,
his institution, power, and word. And because God has commanded that
Baptism and the Lords supper should be administered by them, we steadfastly
believe, that when the minister does recite the words and institution of the
Lord, and the Congregation do reverently obey the word and ordinance of
God, that then the Lord him self is present, at his institution and
ordinance, making the same effectual by his holy spirit, which thing the
faithful do chiefly regard. And hereof we have else where more largely
written.

The. xliij. Question.
Whether there be not as much comprehended under the Elemente of Bread, as
under the two Elements of Bread and Wine, so that Christ wholly may be
contained under the one Elemente of the Sacrament, and that therefore the
whole body of Christ may be given to the lay men under one kind only?

The Answer.
THere is no need of Whether Christ be wholi under one kind.
these subtyle questions. But give you unto the faithful rather the same which
Christ ordained and appointed for them. For we know that the true and lively
body of Christ is not without blood, but that they are joined together,
neither was christ ignorant hereof, and yet nevertheless he did not institute
this Sacrament in the form of bread only but also of wine. But if this
Sacrament being received under one kind be sufficient for the lay people
unto salvation, for that therein is the whole body of Christ: then also why
should not whole Christ be sufficient for your The papists will eat up al
Christ and no more.
Priests and then so to receive but the one half of the Sacrament? But by
this their Question and doing, the institution of Christ is brought into
doubt. But the Lord himself teaches, that this is the manner of them which
defend and set up the ordynaunces of men: for through these their
traditions the commandments and ordynaunces of God are violated and broken.
Mat. 15.

The xliiij. Question.
Whether they believe that Christ did celebrate his Supper with the Apostles
only, and that the Lay men did not thus receive both kinds?

The Answer.
IF the Apostles, (as an Whether the Lords supper were given to the Apostles
only.
example for Priests only) did alone receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: then by good reason we demand of you by what power, or by whose
commandment the Priests do not only not deliver the Cup, but why also
they give the bread, or why they do admit women to the Lords supper, since
they also being numbered amongst lay men, were not present in the first
institution of the same? If therefore the lay men ought not to receive the
Cup of Christ's blood, because they were not at Christ's last Supper, and
that it belongs to the Priests, because they were there, it must needs
follow that the whole Sacrament belongs only to the priests, and that neither
the one nor the other kind of the Sacrament ought to be given to the laity.
For the Priests do very ill, and without al authority give those things to
the laytie which Christ gave only to them selves. But this is a detestable
saying. But the doctrine of the Gospel and of the Apostles is far better and
fuller of comfort, which teaches, that Christ our Lord in his last supper
spoke of the redemption of all mankind, which he should obtain by his body
given on the cross, and by the shedding of his blood. And therefore he most
plainly and evidently says: This Both the kinds in the sacrament are due to al
men.
is my body which is given for you: This is my blood which is shed for you, and
for many for the remission of sins. Wherefore sith the body and blood of
Christ are the only salvation, food, and drink of all the faithful, whether
they be Priests Ministers of the Church, women, men, lay people, or of what
name or condition soever they be: it then follows, that the whole supper of
the Lord as well the cup as the bread, is free for all men. But if the
Sacraments appertain not unto them, then have they no part of the body and
blood of Christ. But the Lord plainly and distinctly says: Drink you all
of this: and Mark adds saying, and they al dr^nk. Furthermore Paul says:
That which he received of the Lord, he gave to the Church or congregation (and
this not to the Priests or Ministers only) but to all the Corinthians. And it
may be proved by seven sufficient testimonies out of the tenth and eleventh
Chapters of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, that he gave both kinds,
that is to say, bread and wine to all the faythefull, as well women as men,
laymen as Priests. And therefore it can not be denied but that he received
this from the Lord to deliver the Sacrament to the faithful. Therefore it
follows that in Christ's last supper the Apostles were not only an example
of the Priests, but also of all other faithful. And the Lord gave not a
peculiar or proper Sacrament to the Priests, and an other to the lay men: but
he instituted one holy Sacrament to be given as well to the lay men as to the
Priests. For neither does the Priest receive or do more than the lay man,
saving only that when he ministers the Sacrament, he executes the office of
a minister, and delivers the same unto others. And herein does the Romish
church greatly offend, that the Sacrament which is instituted of our Lord to
be a Sacrament of unity, by which the faithful might be coupled into one
body, they apply the same to defend their separation, power, and pride,
whereby they seek to excel others, and to be taken for gods, whom above all
others we ought to prefer with worship and honor. Of these matters has
Gabriell Biell upon the Canon of the Mass, Lect. 4. written very strange and
wonderful things, extolling the Priests above the virgin Mary the mother of
Christ, above all the Angels and Saints, and above things both in heaven and
in earth.

The. xlv. Question.
Whether they do believe that Christ with the two Disciples in Emaus, and the
Apostles. Act. ij. and Paul. Act. xx. and. j. Cor. xj. used but one kind
only, and gave the bread only to the lay people?

The Answer.
THat Christ sitting at the The supper of Christ with his two disciples at
Emaus.
Table with his two Disciples at Emaus, brake bread, does not prove that the
lay men ought only to be partakers but of the one half of the Sacrament.
Neither yet can they prove that this supper was a commemoration of yt mystical
supper which he celebrated with his Disciples a little before his death. But
yet if it were, nevertheless it could prove nothing, because it is an
History of one singular fact contrary to a manifest commandment. For in the
Gospel it is plainly set forth, how the Lords supper ought to b(...)
administered, to wit, with bread a(...) wine. Wherefore since this deed whereof
Luke speaks Chap. 24. agrees no^ with the institution of our Lords supper,
it makes nothing against the first institution thereof Yea it may be also that
one kind is named, and the other understood by the figure Sinecdoch^ Again
they can not prove that Cleophas and his companion were lay men. Wherefore if
they were Disciples* Priests or Ministers, and chosen of our Lord to preach
the word, as it seem most like to be, then this example can prove nothing.
In the Acts of the Apostles the Lords Supper is calle^ the breaking of bread,
as spoken in the respect of one part, and yet thereby can they not conclude,
that they had no^ the use of the cup, sith our Lord did institute the same.

The. xlvj. Question.
Whether the Corinthia^s which used both kinds, did not greatly offend when
they used the Wine, and that Paul therefore writes unto them, saying, that
when he comes, he will better instruct them.

The Answer.
THe words of S. Paul manifestly The Corrinthians did not offend because
they used the cup of our Lord.
teach that the Corinthians did amiss in other matters, and not in that they
received the Sacrament in both the kinds. For the Apostle plainly says, that
he received both kinds of the Lord, that he might so deliver the same unto
them, and therefore he wills them to receive it: and the words of S. Paul.
1. Corin. 11. chapter, give testimony heereunto, to ye which place I remit
those that will read them. I pray you then how could he write, that when he
came, he would better instruct them, that is to say, teach them otherwise,
than, he had done before out of the words of Christ? And truly it is to be
wondered at, that they dare bring forth this Question, as in the name of Paul,
which is in deed so plain against Paul. Wherefore I might in this place more
sharply dispute against the^, but that my purpose is rather, to lay the plain
truth evidently to the eyes of the godly and faithful, than rigorously
according to their deserts, to answer or reprove our adversaries. And
therefore I leave this unto others, and as I have begone so will I proceed and
answer their questions: hoping hereafter to have occasion to speak more
hereof, and therefore I will not now say all, reserving something to a more
convenient time.

The xlvij. Question.
Whether they believe that in the Councels holden at Constantinople and at Basil
for the avoiding of many dangers and strives, it was godly and well decreed,
that according to the doctrine of the Christian Church, the lay men should
have only the one kind of the sacrament?

The Answer.
YT plainly appears by the The council of Constance touchyug both the kinds.
thirteenthe Session of the Council holden at Constance, that the fathers then
confessed that Christ did ordain the Sacraments under both kinds, and so
gave it unto his Disciples, and so likewise did the primitive church also use
the same. Wherefore if this be true, as it can not otherwise be, then I leave it
to the judgment of any good Christian, whether that the council of Constance,
which was holden. 1400. years after Christ, or the council of Basil, which
was celebrated since, or any other council what so ever the same be of name or
authority, have power to abrogate that which Christ did ordain, and the
primitive church did use, or condemn the same for heresy.

Surely no man, no not the Angels have this power, and therefore if they go
forward to condemn that for heresy which Christ did institute, and was
received of the first Apostolical church, it may then easily appear to all
men, that Christ him self, and his church, is had in suspicion by those
Councels: And truly, I had rather be counted an heretic with Christ and his
church, than to bear the name of a Christian with these late councels.

But yet here have they an other of the decrees and sclanders that hap in
the use of both kinds.
shift, to wit, to avoid slander and other dangers, least the lay men should
shed any of the wine, and so by this means bring the sacrament into contempt.
As though the eternal wisdom of God saw not these things before he
instituted the cup, and could not he, if it had seemed to him good, have
forbidden the lay men the use of the same? But since the eternal wisdom of
God has given the same unto them, let us content our selves therewith, unless
we would seem to have more wisdom than god. And may not the priests I pray
ye, shed the wine as well as the lay men? And why then, should not the same be
forbidden unto them? But the Lords supper is brought into contempt for far
many other causes, than when any part of the Wine falls by chance on the
ground, or is shed unwillingly. For true faith, burning charity, steadfast
hope, faithfulness, mercy, justice, and the purity of those which
communicate, are the true ornaments of the Sacraments. Wherefore, what
offenses, or what honor they bring to this Sacrament which daily use the same
to get their living thereby, and yet in the mean time are drunkardes,
whoremaisters, unclean persons, studying all ungodliness, and live publicly
in their naughtiness, to the great offense of many, is now by the great mercy
of God, most manifestly known. Wherefore I heartily beseech almighty God to
grant all those the true knowledge of their sins, whereby they may repent
and amend their lives.

Amen.
The. xij. Common place. Of the sacrifice of the Mass.
The. xlviij. Question.
Whether they do believe that the true body and blood of Christ in the
sacrament of the altar be a true and an acceptable sacrifice unto God, which
ought to be offered in the Church of Christ in the blessed office of the Mass
incessantly for the quick and the dead, until the coming of Christ?

The Answer.
Since we have sufficiently Christ's body is offered no more.
before proved that the true body and blood of Christ, is not in the
Sacrament corporally, it follows of necessity yt the same can not be
offered up in the Mass by the priests. But yet the Romish church teaches
that the body and blood of Christ is corporally and substantially present,
and in the office of their Mass offered up to God by the Priests, for the
sins of the quick and the dead, and therefore ought to be woorshipped. But
the form of the Mass does not agree with the institution of the Lords
supper, but is increased by the long continuance of time with diverse
additions, rights, and Ceremonies, so as Gregorius the seventh Pope does
confess that in his time the Mass was not celebrated in all places of ye
world after one manner: wherefore without all doubt the Apostles, Peter, James,
and Mathewe did never celebrate the Mass used in the Church of Rome, but were
altogyther ignoraunte thereof. Therefore the Churches of the gospel have by
good right put away and abolished the Romish Mass, and in the stead thereof,
have rightly and godly ordained the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was godly celebrated in the old Apostolical church, without any of the Popes,
or man's traditions, or additions. And therefore, to the foresaid question we
answer: that we do not acknowledge nor receive the Mass, for the institution
of God, but flee from it, as being contrary to our profession, partly for
causes already showed, and partly for such causes as hereafter we shall show.

But that we may the better know Of the sacrifices of Christians.
what sacrifices are, we will here unto add a few words. There are amongst
the Christians cheefely, two kinds of sacrifices, the one propiciatorie for
the reconciliation and remission of sins, and the other of thanks giving, in
which we exercise our faith, serve God, and give him thanks, both with words
and deeds, for his benefits bestowed upon us. In the old Testament, the
sacrifice propitiatory, was shadowed and figured by many figures, yet was
there but one thing, which they all did signify, to wit, the body and blood of
Christ offered on the cross. Wherefore, after that Christ came into the
world, and remained here a certain time, that he might offer his body and
blood on the cross, for the remission of sins, he ordained ^n his supper,
the Sacrament of the ge^ing of his body, and the shedding of his ^loud, calling
it the cup of the New ^estament in his blood. Wherefore this Sacrament ought
from hence forth on^^ to be in stead of all the Sacraments of the Old
testament which were figures, and to witness that as Christ by the Sacraments
of the Old testament, was promised a savior, so in the ^ewe testament he is
come, and has ^^rformed it, and so by the sacrifice of his body and blood,
has taken away for ever, all the sins of the faithful: Wherefore, when our
Lord would of^^r Christ is the only sacrifice that takes away sin.
himself upon the cross, and that (...) hour was come in which he would
^^liuer up his spirit, and so by his death ^ll sin, death, and hell, he
cried with ^^oud voice: It is finished. As who should ^^y that sacrifice is now
ended and ful^^lled, in which all the figures and pro^isses of the fathers are
accomplished, (...)ne freely pardoned, and eternal righ^^ousnesse, is obtained
unto everlasting life. And therefore so soon as our Lord was dead, and had in
this sort offered up him self a sacrifice to God his heavenly father, the
veil of the Temple rent in two pieces, great miracles were seen both in
the living and in the dead, yea in heaven and in earth. And thus did the old
Testament, the Leuiticall priesthood, and all the other Sacrifices take their
end whereunto they were ordained.

Therefore now rests but the one only and everlasting sacrifice of Christ, as
the cheifest, holiest, and most perfect.

And such is the propretie of this Sacrifice, that it neither could, nor yet
can, be offered of any living man, because not only for the excellency and
holiness thereof, but also because of the imperfection of man. And therefore
Christ offered up him self, that is to say, gave him self unto death, and so
became the one and everlasting Bishop, after the order of Melchisedech as only
Bishop and sacrifice offered to God by him self only. Yea this sacrifice
which he offered, is but one, that is to say once offered, neither can it any
more be offered again. For that his one sacrifice is his death once made
effectual, that it only, and for ever, might be sufficient for all ages,
for the reconciliation and remission of sins. And because Christ has
suffered for us, dyed, was buried, and arose again from the dead, and
ascended into Heaven, appearing for ever even unto the last day as one
sufficient sacrifice in the sight of God, for the full and perfect redemption
of all the Faithful, that is sufficient, neither needs there any other
Sacrifice to be offered in the Church for the remission of sins.

Wherefore, if there be any that will offer a Sacrifice for his sins, he does
manifestly hereby declare, that he does not believe that his sins are
forgiven him by the only Sacrifice of Christ. For if he steadfastly believe,
that they are washed away, why then does he seek a new Sacrifice to be
offered? And therefore it follows, that the holy church, even to the end of
the world, does acknowledge none other sacrifice propitiatory for sins, but
the death and passion of Christ alone. And that which of this only sacrifice
of Christ I have hither unto spoken, is most truly and manifestly confirmed
by the evident testimony of holy scripture, as Leui. 16. Zach. 3. Hebr. 5. 7.
8. 9. and 10. chapters.

But to return to the Lords supper, In the Lords supper there is only a
remembrance of his only sacrifice.
it is not in that respect that we do minister it a propitiatory Sacrifice,
that by the doing and celebrating of it, we should be delivered from sin. For
the death and sacrifice of Christ upon the cross (if we have faith) has
delivered and purged us from our sins. Neither is Christ in his supper
crucified again, or his body offered in the same again, for why, no Priest is
able to offer it: but there is only celebrated a remembrance of his Sacrifice
once perfected, and that not by the Priest alone, but by the whole church. For
so our savior Christ commanded, saying: Doc this in the remembrance of me,
wherefore S. Augustine (very agreeable with the holy scripture) writes
against the Manachees, saying: That before the coming of Christ, the
Sacrifice of his body and blood was promised by the figured sacrifices of the
old Testamente: but by his coming and passion it is finished: and that after
his ascension, the remembrance thereof is celebrated. Wherefore the opinion of
those which say that the body and blood of Christ is offered in the Mass for
the quick and the dead unto the end of the world, can in no wise be
confirmed by any testimonies of holy Scripture. And to pass over, that the
dead have already received their judgment, as it is already said in the
thirty four and thirty five Questions: they besides can not any more be made
partakers of the Lords supper: for the Lord says, Take and eat, which thing
the dead can not do. But in that they say the priest eats for the dead,
they do it contrary to the commandment of Christ. To conclude, the supper
of the Lord is only the remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ once finished,
and not the sacrifice it self, and that done only by those which here do
live. The sacrifice of praise and thanks giving comprehends The sacrifice of
praise and thanks giving.
first the praise and thanks which they offer to God by a pure faith for all
his benefits bestowed on them. And because in the Lords Supper, we cheefely
make a remembrance of Christ's death, and our redemption, and therefore praise
God, and give thanks unto him, the fathers have called the same supper a
sacrifice: and we also do willingly acknowledge that this sacrament in this
sort, is an acceptable Sacrifice unto God: and yet not because the priest
offers the body and blood, or prayers for to merit or gain thereby, but
because the whole congregation in their prayers offer unto God praise and
thanks giving for the benefit of Christ's sacrifice which once offered up him
self upon the cross. Many things in deed are spoken of this Sacrifice in
the holy scriptures, as in the Psalms, the Prophets, the Epistles of Paul, and
cheefely in the thirtienth chapter to the Hebrews. Yea also of the Fathers, as
Ireneus, and Tertullian, upon the words of Malachie in his first Chapter.
etc.

Furthermore, the study to obey the commandment of God, to the increase of
our faith, and the provoking of others unto good, the forgeuing of offenses
and mutual love, yea the study of righteousness and holiness, the offering
of our bodies and souls, is an acceptable sacrifice unto God. Like as the
Psalms, Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles do each where exhort^ us, and
cheefely in the twelfthe chapter to the Romans.

And we think it more necessary and profitable that men be well instructed
touching this Sacrifice, and that these things should be taught them, than to
force them to believe the sacrifice of the Mass: by the marchaundise whereof,
those which call them selves spiritual, do rather increase and enlarge their
own riches, than the glory of Christ, and the salvation of the faithful.
Therefore let every good man well consider with him self, the doctrine
concerning the sacrifices of the Christians whereof we have hither unto spoken,
and leaning neither the one way nor the other, let them due^y consider which is
best for their salvation.

The. xiij. Common place. Of repentance and Confession.
The. xlix. Question.
Whether they believe that there be three parts of repentance, to wit,
contrition, confession, and satisfaction?

The Answer.
THere are many things written in the Holy scripture of repentance, and the
amendment of life both in the New and Old testament. For the doctrine of
repentance is very necessary What repentance is.
and profitable for all Chrystians. And this word Repentance seems to come
of this word repayring: as when torn, broken, or things rent, are renewed and
repaired. The Hebrews call repentance returning or converting to God. But he
which is returned to God, ought first necessarily to know and understand how
he fell from him, and to know what God is, how we fall from him, and how
we ought to turn to him again. So that he which must repent, ought to know
his own naughtiness and wickedness, and also by what means the same may be
amended which is broken or spoiled. And these things can in no wise be don of
any wretched sinner, unless they be drawn hereunto, and therein instructed by
the spirit and word of God, which they must also most steadfastly believe. For
these things are so necessarily required, that unless GOD by grace through his
spirit open and draw the heart of the sinner, and by his word show us the
perfect way, govern and keep us in the same, give us true faith True
repentance.
whereby to quicken and justify us, that unless I say, he give us these, al
repentance, how hard or greenous soever it seem, is no true repentance.
Let Judas be an example hereof, who repenting for his sins, confessed the
same to the Priests in the Temple, saying: I have betrayed the innocente
blood. Yea and he in this part made satisfaction, that he threw the unrighteous
price of blood into the temple. But what did this repentance profit him,
although it had in it contrition, confession, and satisfaction? they help him
nothing at all: and because he lacked true faith, he dispaired, and hong him
self. On the other side, the Lord looking back upon Peter, and the Cock
crowing, he remembered the words of the Lord, and believing them departed from
the wicked company, wept for his sins, and amended his faults: and this his
repentance was a true and perfect repentance. And Jeremie the Prophet
confirms this doctrine, who in his. 31. chapter prays to the Lord, saying:
Convert me O Lord, and I shall be converted, for thou art the Lord my God:
and after thou haste converted me, I shall repent, and after thou haste showed
thy self unto me, I will strike my self on the thighe. Wherefore true
repentance and the right sorowing for our sins, must proceed from God,
stirring up the same in us by faith, so as it must not be a repentance or
sorrow, according to the world, but after the will of God. ^. Cor. 7. Touching
confession and satisfaction shall be spoken hereafter.

The. L. Question.
Whether they believe that sins with all their circumstaunces, ought to be
confessed to the Priest in the Sacrament of confession?

The Answer.
COnfession or the numbering of our What confe^sion is good and necessari^*
sins, which must be done before the priest, with all the circumstances
thereof, as how, when, who, with whom, how often, and wherefore he has offended,
is but in vain, and without all sufficient proof called the Sacrament of
confession. For God alone, as we have before showed, did institute the
Sacraments, but he ordained not this confession to be any of them, neither did
he command it as necessary to our salvation. For the holy Scripture
teaches an other manner of profitable and necessary kind of confession, and
byddeth us to confess our sins with a true faith from our hearts meekely
unto God. For God it is alone whom we have offended, who knows our hearts,
deeds, and determinations, remitteth or punishes sins, and has given his
son unto us, an high Priest and one eternal sacrifice. Therefore must we
come to GOD the father through Christ, and that with the same words which he
has given us, teaching us to confess our sins, saying: Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And after this sort
may all the faithful in all their troubles, and at all times, and in every
place confess themselves to GOD both secretly and openly. Secretly when each
man prays alone and confesses his sins to God. Openly, when any man in the
Church together with the whole congregation prays and confesses the same.
And there are many examples in both the Testamentes, of those who confessed
themselves to God, and not only craved, but also obtained of him forgiveness
of their sins. But on the contrary, there are no examples of any which
confessed themselves to Lay men or Priests: for this honor belongs to God
alone, which has given us his We must confess us unto God.
son to be our high Priest, who hears sufficiently the confession of all the faithful, so that there is no need to substitute any in his room to
hear them. For who so ever with a true faith from the bottom of his heart in
manner as is said) confesses his sins to God the father, and to his son our
only chief Bishop Christ Jesus, ^auing his grace and mercy, they
undoubtedly receive full remission of all their sins. And therefore I demand
of our Adversaries whether this be true or no? If they deny it, then do we
obiecte against them the Lords prayer in the which we confess and pray,
saying: Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. And our Lord has said, whatsoever you ask in my name, you shall
receive it. Again we obiecte against them the Articles of our Faith, wherein
we confess we believe the remission of sins. Yea and we do certainly
know, that if we believe according to Gods word, we do also obtain the
same that we believe: but we believe the remission of sins, therefore we
obtain the same. To conclude, we obiecte the euydente promises contained in
the word of God, and chiefly that saying of Saint John. 1. Epistle. 1. If
we confess our sins, he is merciful to forgive us our sins. Wherefore
sith it is thus, as by the truth it is confirmed, then they which confess
their sins to God, and to his son our Lord, have obtained full remission
of the same, and so is there no need to use the Auricular confession of the
Romish Church. Furthermore there The confession to our neighbor.
is an other kind of confession commanded by our Lord to all the faithful,
to wit, that every man should confess each one to other his faults and
offenses wherein he has offended and injured his neighbor, and that each man
do heartily forgive every offense and injury which he has suffered, and forgive
him also which has don the same, and pray for him. And the Lords prayer does
prescribe unto us this kind of confession, for we say: As we forgive them that
trespass against us. And of this confession is it that Saint James speaks
in his fifthe Chapter, and not of that which is done unto the Priests. Against
confession made to the priest.
Furthermore, there is not one word in the whole Scripture of God spoken of
any other confession than this, and therefore their Auricular confession unto
the Priest is without all authority of Scripture. Furthermore, the blessed
Apostles did never give them selves to the hearing of confession, neither
gave them absolution, whispering in the ears of them that were confessed. For
the preaching of the Gospel is that joyful tidings, wherein the captives, and
such as are adjudged to death, are declared to be made free and delivered
from the falte and the punishment due for the same, and are received into
favor, and into the number of Gods children, and that by the death of Christ
Jesus, as Christ him self teaches out of Esai the Prophet ca. 61, at
Nazareth, as appears in Luke. 4. And Paul confirms the same. 2. Cor. 5.
Wherefore that which the adversaries object, saying: that the priest knows
not the state or condition of the sin, except the same be opened to him, and
therefore knows not what to forgive, or what to leave vnforgiuen, has no
manner of ground of truth. Wherefore if the Priest do remitte or retain any
sins, it behooves that those be disclosed and opened to him. But the words
of Christ touching the remitting or retayning of sins, appertains to the
preaching of the Gospel, and to excommunication, and not to the private power
of the Priest, whereof I will speak hereafter. Likewise when Christ bids
the Leper show him self to the Priest, he commands him not to confess
him self unto him, but that he should offer him self to be tried by the
Priest, and so offer his sacrifice. For the judging or trying of Leprosy
appertained to the Priest. Leuit. 13. and. 14. But in that they say, Leprosy
did signifye sin: we answer, that touching spiritual things and sin, the
Priests and sacrifices were figures of Christ, and therefore are they to be
sent unto Christ, to whom also that Samari^ane came when he was healed, and
not to any Priest. So also we trust that Christ will deliver and save us, if
we believe in him, and to him we confess our selves, although we come not to
the Priest. The ancient Churches, before the birthe of Christ, and a long
time after his coming, were altogether ignorant of the confession and
absolution of the Priest: and after it began to be received, yet was there no
commandment for the same, as appears De pemtent. Distinct. 1. But in the
counsel of Lataran under Innocentius the third Pope, it was commanded in the
year of our Lord. 1215. And I will not here tell how grievously the
consciences of the godly were by this Romish and Papisticall confession
troubled, and how they learned more evil thereby than good, and how horrible
and fylthie factes were in this confession committed, and how the same served
to uphold the power, pride, errors, and disceiptes of that vnspirituall
spirituality, as they call them selves. But it is no small fortress or
foundation of their kingdom, and therefore no marvel though they so
earnestly and busely labor to defend and keep the same. But all these things
thanks be unto God, are made manifest unto the whole world.

The. Lj. Question.
Whether those things which the Priest does enjoin us to do for our sins
which we have confessed, are not to be done as the punishments and deeds of
tepentaunce* and whether this our satisfaction be hurtefull or contrary to the
satisfaction of Christ?

The Answer.
Neither the confession Of popish satisfaction.
which is done to the Priest, neither yet the pain or penance which is joined
for the same, have any authority from the holy Scripture, but are only
grounded upon the authorities of a few fathers. And therefore I answer that
the faithful are not bound by the word of god to do that penance which they
call satisfaction, neither I say to require or do them. For there is one
eternal satisfaction, that is to say, a price, reconciliation and redemption
from our sins, to wit, the death and passion of Christ, by means whereof al
our sins, ^ffences and punishments deserved for the same, are clearly forgiven
and wyped away. And this is confirmed by Esai. 53. the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and chiefly of Paul to the Romans the third and
fifth chapters, and 1. Cor. 1. etc. If therefore by our works and penance
which we suffer, that is to say, if we attribute to our satisfaction, which
consists in the correction of our body, fasting, prayer, alms and other such
like works, the remission of our sins, and the punishment due therefore, or
if we suppose that by this satisfaction we satisfy and requite all those
things, for the which we were gilty before God, then truly this satisfaction
is directly contrary, and strives against the satisfaction of Christ. Or else
must they say that Paul in the like case reasoned not aright, when he said:
For if righteousness be by the law, then is Christ dead in vain. For even
after the same manner do we also reason, saying: If we our selves can make
satisfaction for our sins, what need then had Christ to dye? Wherefore the
Chuche keeps still that one eternal satisfaction, even the death of Christ,
and heerewith do all the faithful content them selves, judging their works
not to be so perfect or worthy, that by them their sins should be forgiven,
and that God by them should be satisfied, and eternal life be purchased.
Here also is to be noted, that the faithful The exercise of the faithful.
which acknowledge Christ's death to be their only satisfaction and
redemption, and are delivered by him, do earnestly and diligently avoid
sin, and willingly suffer whatsoever God lays upon them, and yet not to
make any satisfaction thereby (because Christ already has fully satisfied)
but because it pleases God so to exercise them, and call them from their
sins, showing how grievously the same offend him, and by this means
exercises their faith, and makes them partakers of the afflictions of Christ.
And therefore when GOD received Abraham and David into favor for Christ's
sake, and had forgiven their sins, yet did he exercise them in this life with
the mortification of their flesh. Christ also in the Gospel says unto the
man which he healed: Behold thou art made whole, see thou sin no John. ^.
more, least some worse thing happen unto thee. And therefore we use commonly
to say: to do the same offense no more, is a great punishment, but yet the
best punishment. And out of this penance and satisfaction which stands by
no warrant of the Scripture, is farrowed all the Whelps of Romish
indulgences. For after they had laid most grievous penaunces and punyshments
upon the poor Penitentiaries, for which they must make satisfaction for their
mortal sins, as by fasting many years together, then by their Indulgences
they mitigated Romish indulgences.
the same again: and so by this means heaped vy huge heaps of money, and so
of Gods house they made an house ^^remi. 7. John. 2. (...). 21.
or shop of Marchaundise, yea rather a very den of thieves: and therefore
doubtless God will shortly whip them out of his house.

The thirtenth Common place. Of the authority or power of Priests.
The. Lij. Question.
Whether Priests have power and authority to forgive or retain those sins,
for the which we be sorry, and confess our selves?

The Answer.
THe power which Christ Power is an office.
has given to the Ministers of the Church, is rather an office than a power:
for power belongs to Christ alone. And that power or Office which the
Ministers or Priests have received, is to edify, and not to destroy, as Paul
manifestly teaches. 2. Cor. 10. And the keys of the kingdom of god are given
in deed unto ye Ministers of the church. For our Lord promised them to Peter
The kayes of the kingdom of heaven.
and to the rest of the Apostles, Math. 16. with these words: I will give unto
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall lose in
earth shall be losed in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven: the same he gave to all the Disciples. John. 20. saying: Even
as my father sent me, so send I you: who soeuers sins you shall remitte,
they shall be forgiven, and whose sins you shall retain, they shall be
retained. Therefore Of binding and loosing.
to lose, is to forgive sins: and to bind, is not to forgive or to retain
sins. But because no man can remit or forgive sins but God only, therefore
the Ministers of God by his commandment preaching the Gospel, do declare
that god forgiueth their sins, and remitteth all punishmente, if they believe
in Christ: and that on the other side their sin remains, and that they
shall be punyshed for the same if they believe not in Christ: and therefore for
this cause does the Scripture say, that the Minister does bind or lose,
forgive or retain sins. And as the minister does truly preach this, so does
it undoubtedly come to pass both on the faithful and unfaithful. For God
being in heaven, performs that which his ministers here do promise on the
earth. By this we may easily gather, that the keys are nothing else but the
preaching of the gospel, and not a peculiare jurisdiction or power, as our
adversaries reach. For even as a master of some house, gives his keys unto
his servant, to open and shut the house, to let men both in and out. So is
the church the house of God, in the which who so ever abides, is an inheritor
of the kingdom of heaven, and those which through infidelity, are not in the
church, have no portion in the kingdom of heaven, but are even as it were in
hell: and the ministers received the keys of ye kingdom of heaven from
Christ, that is to say, the preaching of the Gospel, that thereby they might
open and shut. Therefore they open, when they teach true faith, promise
eternal life, and exhort all men to come unto Christ, that they may be saved.
And they shut up the kingdom of heaven, when they threaten eternal
damnation against the unbelievers, wicked men, and such as do not repent,
testifying unto them, that they are excluded from the kingdom 1. Corin. 3.
of God. But the power or effect to perform, appertains only unto the
Lord, like as Paul compares the ministers of the Church to husband men,
saying: Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he which vvatereth: but
God which gives the increase. What then is Paul, or who is Appollo, are
they any other but Ministers by whom you have believed, even as God has
given the gift unto every one? Therefore it is God only that does forgive,
or not forgive ours sins: and the ministers which have received the keys,
are only the publishers of this deliverance or captivity. Wherefore, some of
the Fathers have used in this case a certain distinction, saying: that Christ
governs in the Church by his own proper power, and the ministers as
servants only.

And hereby it manifestly appears that these Romish champions, which after
so strange a manner claim unto them self the power of the keys, and
persuade the simple people that by the authority of them they have obtained I
know not what wonderful power, are like those unthrifty and untrusty
servants, who having received some certain and limited office, not being
therewith content, do under the pretense thereof, usurp the power and
authority of their Lord and master. So these good fellows convert the use
of the keys which they have received, to the accomplishing of all that them
selves do like off. For of the keys (which in deed is the office of
preaching) these Popish prelates frame up great and marvelous matters, for by
them they do advance and lift up them selves and their authority, above
Kings, Emperors, yea over the souls of men, their dignities, goods and bodies.

Furthermore, under the pretense of these their keys, they heap up great
treasures, search out the conseiences of men, and mainetaine their purgatory,
of which much might be spoken that we here willingly ouerpasse. But we know
that the office given to the priests and ministers of the The office of
priests and ministers.
church was to preach the word of God, and to give good examples of life to the
congregation, administer the Sacraments to feed and preserve the flock of
God: as S. Paul teaches both to Timothe and Titus. And as touching any other
greater power, which the Romish prelates challenge in the church, there is not
one word spoken in the Scripture, saving that in an other respect, there is
somewhat written thereof in the Revelation of S. John, the. 9. 11. 13. 17. and
18. chapters.

The. liij. Question.
Whether me^ by this retaining of sins, are by excommunication, separated
from the church of Christ, and are delivered to the power of satan? And
whether he be to be judged a Publicane or Heathen which will not hear the
church?

The Answer.
IN good soothe I marvel Of excommunication and the abuse thereof
that these me^ dare make once mention of yt kind of exco^municatio^ which the
Scripture speaks of: for it it were in use, and might have his force, then
should them selves be first excommunicated. For eue^ in the same place, where
Paul commands him to be delivered to Satan, which had committed incest
with his mother, and yt to be don to the destruction of the flesh, even there
also does he forbid the faithful, to have any company with whooremaisters,
covetous, oppressers, drunkardes, idolaters. etc. And in deed we both know
and confess that the church of Christ has power to admonish, exhort,
punish, correct, and to Excommunicate all those who live in sins,
wickedness, slanders, and Idolatries, having no regard to repentance and
amendment of life.

But how, I beseech you have our Romish spirituality (as they call them)
used excommunication in their church, who are they whom they have
excommunicated? For they never used the same to the rooting up of vice and
ungodliness, but to the aduauncing and setting up of their own glory and
covetousness: yea hereby as with a bridle they have held in the godly, to be
subject to their Tyranntcall power. Not to hear the church.
And therefore diverse Popes and Bishops by means of this Excommunication,
have not only Excommunicated, but also persecuted, Kings, Emperoures, Princes,
whole Commonweals, and sundry honest men, yea hereby setting them together
by the ears, and that only to the end this proud spirituality might bear
ye sway alone, and purchase to them selves all the authority and power given
by God to the magistrate, and so make Kings and Princes subject to them. Read
the Histories of Gregory the second, of Gregory the third, and Gregory the
seventh, of Paschalis, Gelasius, Innocentius, Alexander, Bonifacius, and other
Popes, what they did to Leo the third, Henry the fourth, and Henry the
fifthe, to Phillip and Frederick, what they did to the Princes and kings of
Germany and France, with diverse others, whom these Popes most miserably,
both against the law of God and man, excommunicated and vexed with their
whole kingdoms.

In like manner we confess, that all those which will not hear the Church,
according to the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the
eightienthe Chapter of Mathewe, are like unto the Publicanes and heathen. But
what I pray ye, is this unto the Papists? Do they think, that all those
which speak and do against the Church of Rome, are Publicanes and Heathen?
Let them selves first become the Church of Christ, and then shall they be
Publicanes and Heathen, that will not hear them.

But if these Romish sort be Publicanes and Heathen themselves, then shall
all those be called and be in very deed true Christians which set themselves
against their church. To conclude, admonition, exhortation, reproving,
correction, and punishment ought to be in the church of Christ, and must be
applied as cause requires to edifying: and therefore who so ever resists
this good order, does grievously offend.

The. xv. Common place. Of Matrimony, Vows, and Chastity.
The. liiij. Question.
Whether marriage be lawful, and free for all men?

The Answer.
OUr Lord Christ after he had Marriage is fr^^ for all (...)
in the. 19. of Mathewe, taught that a man might not put away his wife for
every cause and there upon the disciples had said, If the matter be so then
is it better not to marie. He answers: All men cannot receive this saying
save they too whom it is given: and then making mention of three sorts of
chaste, adds: He that is able to receive this, let him receive it. By which
words in deed, he testifies and manifestly teaches, that the gift to live
chaste and without marriage is not common or given to all me^ as that any who
list might abstein from marriage and lead an acceptable life unto God. For
every man ought first too examine him self, whether he have this gift given
unto him of GOD or not. And then if he perceive him self too be chaste, that
is to say unfit for marriage, either by birth, or because he was so made by
men, or because he has received this gift of God to live chastely, and knows
that he is able so to do, then may the same live without marriage. And I
therefore say, that he may if he can, because S. Paul thus writes. 1. Cor. 7.
Nevertheless he that stands firm in his heart, that he has no need, but
has power over his own will, and has so decreed in his heart, that he
vvil keep his virginity, he does well. But if any man feel not him self to
be such, to them has Christ taught, that Matrimony is the institution of
God, that so they which are able thereunto, may live therein. And in like sort
does Paul in the aleaged place, write, saying: Of Virgins or of Virginity, I
have no commandment, but I give you my counsel. etc. And again, But for
the avoiding of fornication, let every manne have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband. Again: If they have not the gift of chastity,
let them marry: it is better to marry than to burn. Wherefore we say that
Matrimony is left free to all men of God, neither ought any man to be
forbidden the same, if they have not the singular gift of God to live chaste.

In the old Testamente, no man of any degree what so ever, no not the Priests
which were figures of Christ, were forbidden to marry.

And in the new Testamente also, the ministers of the Church are not
forbidden to marry, as may appear in 1. Corinthians. 9. 1. Timothe. 3. and
Titus. 1. And again, in the primitive Church, there were neither Monks nor
Nuns that vowed chastity. And Paul says plainly, if a virgin marry,
she does not sin. And in his Epistle to the Hebrews, he speaks more
plain in the thirteenthe chapter, saying: Marriage is honorable amongst all
men, and the bed undefiled: and as for vvhooremongers and adulterers, God
shall judge them. Wherefore, if matrimony be holy and honorable, because it
was instituted of God in Paradise, and if it be a bed undefiled and without
sin, truly then, no man ought to be forbidden so good and holy a thing as
marriage is. But whoredom, adultery, filthiness, and wicked lusts, are
forbidden, and those are judged and condemned of God, and not marriage.

The. lv. Question.
Whether vows are not to be kept, since the scripture says: If thou haste
vowed, perform the same?

The Answer.
Vows for the most part The vows which are made in our days are only idle
words without effect or works.
in the old Testament, were only external gifts and bodily Sacrifices: And who
so ever therefore had vowed these things, was bound to perform ye same. But
what doothe this appertain to the Uowes of Priests, Monks and Nuns, which
they make in their Monasteries and Colleges? For these vows of chastity,
poverty, and of obedience, were never known in the scriptures or primitive
church. And therefore they are in deed but vain words and no works amongste
our vnspirituall spirituality, as the whole world knows, proves, and is
forced to confess. For what chastity, poverty, or obedience is in these
days in their religious houses and monasteries? Truly all filthiness of
lutt, whoredom, gluttony, drunkenness, and all impudency, is both secret
and manifestly used and seen in them for the most part. Those which are
poor and needy in this world, leaving the same, and entering into these
religious houses, are in them made so rich and mighty, that oftentimes they
govern in the world, and feel no want of any thing. Yea, whilst they obey
their spiritual Lords, they do disobey the laws of God, the Magistrates
instituted of god, yea, and oftentimes their natural parents. And what may the
Faithful say of these? Or wherein may they praise them, having God and his
word to warrante the same? Why then do they obiecte against us, Uowes, and
the observing thereof? Let them rather show us, that God has commanded
these, and that these, which they now a days do, are acceptable unto him. For
which of the Prophets or Apostles, at any time made any such Uowe? And
again, if their Uowes be so good and holy, why then keep they them not the^
selves, since they so straightly urge them on others? But let us see what they
do, or what they keep, or what they are able to keep. For if they vow
chastity, there is none other chastity but of the body and mind, who so
therefore has not this, may marry, and the same is also called chastity.
Therefore, if they will observe chastity, they must either live chastely in a
single life, or else marry, and so live from whoredom, drunkenness, and
gluttony. But if they have vowed poverty, and would keep the same, then let
them leave their monasteries and princely palaces, their fat tithes and
yearly rents, let them be called no more Lords, and let them not be called
poor in name, but be so in deed. But if they Uowe obedience, and will
perform the same, let them obey God, the lawful magistrate, their parents,
and the holy laws of God, then truly shall they not long abide in these
places, and this kind of life, in which notwithstanding they seek now to
abide, and that by force, neither would they do that, which is so directly
against their Uowes.

The sentence whereof they seem to Al vows are not acceptable to god neither
yet to be performed.
make mention in their Question, is written in the fifth Chapter of
Ecclesiastes, thus: If thou haste vowed any thing unto God, be not slack to
perform the same. For a foolish and an unfaithful promise displeases him:
even because he has no delight in the unwise. And it is much better not to
vow, than after thy vow not to perform. Therefore this place which our
adversaries do use in this their question, does rather make for us, than
against us. For Uowes which are grounded on Gods word, and are in our
power to be done, unto the glory of God, the profitte of others, and our own
salvation, are not foolish Uowes: But what so ever are not after this sort,
are foolish, as those are whereof we have spoken before, being grounded upon
man's ordinance and tradition: and therefore not acceptable to God.

And not being acceptable unto him, he will not have us to take them in hand.
And therefore by this it follows, that in foolish Uowes we do offend, and
therefore ought not to proceed in the same, least that we double our offense.
For who so swears unadvisedly, offends, because he did it unadvisedly, but
if he perform the evil which he promised by his unadvised oath, then is his
offense thereby made the greater: like as Herod who not only rashely swear to
Herodias, but also performed his oath by the killing of John.

One makes a foolish Uowe of chastity, or poverty, but within a while after
perceyueth him self not able to keep them, yea that it is a cause of
whooredome, lusts, and many other sins: but he does well and godly, if he
keep not that foolish Uowe: that is, to say, if he cut off those causes of
sin. And so the Fathers teach, saying: In evil promises, break thy
promise. And that which thou haste unadvisedly vowed, do it not. etc.

But that which we do vow with good advise being just and honest, according We
must keep promis.
to the law of God, that let us faithfully and constantly observe, without all
disceite. For the just God is a revenger of all lying and wicked men, that
keep no promise with God or man. And I speak this from the bottom of my
heart, least any man should mistake our doctrine, and say that we teach
liberty, and that men should not keep their faith and promise. For we do
even from our hearts detest all filthy, and ungodly liberty.

The. lvj. Question.
Whether Christ be not able to give unto those the gift of chastity, which
do desire and crave the same from the bottom of their heart, and chiefly to
those which labor and apply them selves earnestly to their study, and
moderate them selves in meats and drink?

The Answer.
AS it ought not to be Whither god gives chastity to every man because he
ca^ give it.
sought, so may we not here seek what God may or can do, but what he has
commanded, and what he will do. And we must most warely observe this
precepte: Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. We all know, that all
things are possible to God, and yet must we know, that this rule is for ever
observed in Christ's Church, that it follows not that he does all things
that he can: but we must diligently mark what he commands and byddeth us
to do. And this rule, if we apply it to this place, it will appear that this
is the commandment of God, that he which perceives him self to have the
gift of chastity, should use the same, so that he well perceive that he has
grace so to do: and that he which has not this gift, should marry, and not
put him self in danger, or tempt God. For Saint Paul speaks of this
matter, saying: That he would entangle no man. 1. Corinthians. 7. And how
diligently they apply their Books in Monasteries, how they labor, and what
abstynence they use in meats and drinks, I leave it to the judgment of any
wise man to discuss. For it is evident, that they seldom apply their. Books,
but give them selves altogether to idleness, dayntinesse, and satisfying of
their paunche. In deed their talk has a goodly show, but yet wise men can
well enough perceive what they are, and therefore will not suffer them selves
to be seduced always with this spiritual babbling, when they so manyfestlye
perceive their wickedness. But if there be any that will be wylfull blind,
then let their own confusion fall on their own pate.

The. lvij. Question.
If any man be cast into prison, and fed hardly, he does not feel any great
temptations: Therefore is it not possible he should keep his vow which he
has made to Chrysts church, which keeps him self under by abstinence?

The Answer.
ALthough you have made An exhortation against persecution.
no mention in these your questions of the imprisoning and torments, with which
you have so grievously tormented the honest and godly married men, either for
marriage or for some other point of Religion, nevertheless those good men
which live now in this age, may know, and those which shall live after us
shall manyfestly see, that you are tootoo cruel in persecuting and tormenting.
I beseech you consider with your selves, why and wherefore you do it. If it
so greatly delight you to chasten naughty and wicked men with imprisonment and
with hard fare, why then do you not imprison whoremongers and adulterers, and
not those which live chaste in marriage? why do you not look upon you selves?
And why do you not keep under with abstinence those drunkards and horrible
offenders? But those men you never punish, but you punish those whom God
commands to favor: and whom God commands you to punish, those you let
go. You are nothing severe toward vice, and too cruel toward goodness,
which God has forbidden to punish. I beseech you remember the ancient
Histories of all ages, and you shall see that God did never forsake his, for
although he kept them a long time under the cross, yet at the last he
delivered them at his pleasure, and they which did afflitte them for
righteousness sake, he terribly rewarded them with most sharp and greenous
punishments. You would feign be called spiritual, and then favor and mercy
would better become you, than this rigor and cruelty. But if you do rather
delight in cruelty, take heed least that corner stone, against whom you thus
stryke, be found over hard unto you, and least it fall upon you, and grind you
to pieces. Fear God, and take heed in time, for all things have an end.
VVoe says the Lord to those that spoil, for they shall be spoiled.
Oftentites in deed it comes to pass, that in the time of misery, men are
least provoked or moved with affections, and that by reason of the grief of
sickness or other myseries, and yet hereby it follows not, that they should
keep them selves unmarried all their life time. Saint Paul who very well
knew and had good experience of the grace and help of God, and the infirmity
of our flesh, did permit those that are married to separate them selves for a
time, but yet by the consent of both the parties, that thereby being in some
great distress, they might the more fervently give them selves to prayer: and
yet he adds here unto, And come together again, least Satan tempt you for
your incontinencie. And why I pray you do not these which would so feign be
called Apostolic men, give such counsel to those which are troubled: and
specially sith we have so many woeful examples before our faces of those,
which whylest they profess chastity, fall into such danger, that they at
the last lose soul, honors, body and goods.

The. Lviij. Question.
Whether a Priest which marieth a wife (by name and as he supposes) contrary
to the vow which he has made, do not grievously sin: and whether such a
marriage be not double whordome, and inceste, and ought to be punished by the
sword, according to law?

The Answer.
I Beseech you speak more favorably, The marriage of Priests is lavvefull.
for this kind of speech is too filthy, declares what you are, and encreseth
most grievous judgment against you. For that marriage which is done in the
fear of god, and for lawful causes, is both just and lawefull, and being
celebrated between those whom no cause which God has ordained does separate.
And the lawefull causes are declared Genesis 2. 3. and. Cor. 7. But the vows of
the Spirituality are never once named amongst the impediments of marriage:
wherefore they may marry, notwithstanding their vows. And the marriage of those
are true and holy, and such a man's wife is not a wife only in name, or by
supposition, but is so in deed, except the word of God deceive us. But whereas
the authors of these questions whosoever they were, did call the lawful marriage
of such men whordome, or double adultery, it is horrible sin, and detestable
impudency, yea heinous blasphemy, and proceeds from most bitter malice. I
pray you let them remember the words of Esaias, saying: VVo be to those which
call good evil, and evil good. And call you the marriage of such as in times
paste had made vows a doubled whoredom and incest, and iudg^ ye the
lascivious, wicked, and adulterous life of these spiritual men which never a
whit observe their vows, for a thing of nothing or a trifle? For what have
they suffered for any such matter? Or who hurts the^ for any such thing? But
those which have married, ye seek utterly to destroy both with fire and
swoorde, and yet in the mean time ye suffer horrible, and things worthy to
be punished, which for the reverence of the godly ears I let slip and will
not once name. But if ye be so bent to the earnest punishing of wickedness
and ungodliness, why then do ye not punish those faults which God him
self, and equity, and justice, commands to be punished? For where there is
no lawful impediment found, no man ought to be punished for marriage.

But here they Object the saying of Whether (...) age which is co^tracted
after^ vovv be lavv^^^*
S. Paul in his. 1. Tim. 5. where he thus writes: But refuse the younger
widow, for they after they begin to wax vvanton against Christ, will
marry, receiving dampnation because they have broken the first faith. But
the Apostle does not say that they sin because they marry: but because (as
he plainly says) they have broken their first faith: that is, because they
being young, have dedicated them selves to the service of the Church,
promising freely to serve and attend on the necessity of the poor, and now
do it not: and therefore have they damnation, judgment, and reproach, because
they were inconstant in that function which they took upon them, and not
because they married.

And yet the order of the younger widows in the primative Church is not to be
compared with the order of your Priests, Munkes, and Nuns, because they
had their institution from God, but the order of your Priests, Munkes, and
Nuns, was never instituted by God. Last of all the Apostle does open his
own meaning, saying: Therefore I will that the younger widow marry to
bring forth children. etc. And that Paul speaks in this place of them which
have dedicated them selves to the ministry of the Church, the whole
circumstances of the words do declare.

When in time paste it was asked Cyprians judgment.
of Saint Cyprian the Martire, what should be done with those Uirgines,
which had vowed to keep their virginity, but by reason of the continual
resort of men, they lived in an evil name: a Synod of godly learned
Bishops being called together, he aunsweared: If by Faith they did vow them
selves to Christ, they would continue chaste and unspotted without any
deceit. But if they will not, neither yet can so continue, it is better they
marry than burn in their insatiable lusts. Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 11. And S.
Augustine in his book de bono viduitatis in his ninthe chap. upon the words of
S. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothe, and the fifth chapter, has
interpreted the same place even as we have done: and also he adds more,
saying: that those men do not rightly weighe this matter, which deny such
marriages to be true wedlock.

Furthermore, these words of S. Augustine, are recited in the Decrees
distinct. 27. beginning at this word Quidam, thus: Some say, that those which
marry after they have made a Uowe of chastity are adulterers: but I say to
you that they do grievously offend which do put such a sunder. But we need
not the testimonies of men because there are sufficient testimonies in the
word of God which plainly bids them to marry, ye though heretofore
they had made any Uowe to the contrary.

Wherefore to conclude, I leave this Against those which sclander and forbid
marriage.
place to the judgment of the wise, to discuss with them selves, whether not
only those which do forbid marriage, but also those which separate those that
are married, and rail at it, calling the same a double whoredom, were not
long before this time described and condemned by S. Paul, when he exhorts
the godly to beware of them, saying: Now the spirit speaks evidently, that
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall geeue heed to
spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils which speak lies through
hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot iron, forbidding
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. etc. 1* Tim* 4.

The. xvj. Common place. Of extreme unction called enoyling.
The. lix. Question.
Whether they use enoyling?

The Answer.
Mark, in the sixth chapter What the holy Scripture teaches of enoyling.
of his Gospel, and S. James in his fifthe chapter, make mention of
annoynting. But yt kind of annoynting does very much differ from that which in
our age is used in the Romish church to the sick, of whose life we stand in
doubt.

For in the primitive Church, the Acts. 8. 10. 19.
Apostles and their successoures did annoynte the sick with Oil, and by that
means they were restored to health. And it was a certain peculiare gift of
God, and done as it were miraculously: for even as in the primative church, was
the peculiare gift of healing, so also was there the gift of tongues. For the
Apostles laid their hands on the sick, and they received health, and spoke
with diverse tongues. But as the gift of tongues is ^eaffed in the Church, so
also is that of healing by the annoynting with Oil: and therefore the
ceremony of imposition of hands, and anointing with Oil, cease. All men
know that in the primitive Church there were diverse things necessarily
required, as the gift of healing, and of tongs, with other miracles, which were
signs for the unbelievers, and were done to confirm the religion: but now,
when by the preaching of the Gospel, faith, and the religion is published and
confirmed, the others have ceased, and are quite out of use.

And therefore the annoynting used in the Church of Rome, is not by this
confirmed that S. James and Mark do speak of annoynting, for their
annoynting did much differ from this, and was never instituted by Christ or
his Apostles, but devised by men, and that a long time after.

The Apostles used to annoint with Oil, to the end they might restore such
to health: but the Papists never annoynte any, until they be paste hope of
all recovery, neither use they this their enoyling for the health of his
body, but for the remission of sins. Yea, and in this their enoyling they
pray unto diverse Saints, which lived long since the Apostles time, and diverse
such other Ceremonies they use which were never known to the Apostles, and
therefore sufficientlye prove that this their enoyling was never ordained by
the Apostles.

And what shall I say of that, which they use to speak in this their enoyling,
when they say: In the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost, I
annoint thee with this holy oil, that thereby thou maiste receive remission
of al thy sins? What ground or form of institution of this have ye in all
the holy scriptures of Christ, and his Apostels? The Apostles taught that full
remission of sins was to be sought in the blood of Christ, and not in
Oil. And therefore even by this one point it may evidently appear to the
faithful, that for good consideration we use not this Ceremony.

Furthermore, when we believe that one baptism which we have once received,
wherein we were once Baptized with water, in the name of the Father, the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, is effectual by the operation of the holy Ghost,
even all our life long unto death, we think it not needful to be again at
the point of death rebaptized of a Baptism devised by man: for they call
this their anointing the last Baptism. But we according to Christianity
visit the sick, instruct them, admonish them, exhort them, comfort them,
strengthen them, and pray with them, and charitably looks unto them. etc.

The seuententh Common place. Of the Magistrate, and lawful obedience.
The. lx. Question.
Whether the spiritual and civil magistrate ought not to be obeyed, chiefly
when the things that they command are not against God?

The Answer.
WE will here make a The spiritual Magistrates.
difference between the Civil and the spiritual Magistrates. For the teachers
and governors of the Church are ministers, and not Lords to exercise a
government like kings, princes or noble men, and we ought to obey them as the
Ministers of Christ, so long as they be his, preach his word, and execute
the Christian ministry. And so Paul teaches with these words: We
beseech you brethren, that you 1. Thessa. 5
will know them which labor amongst you, and take the charge over you in the
Lord, and instruct you, that you honor them through love for their works sake,
and have peace with them. And again: Hebr. 13.
Obey those which have the oversight of you, and submyt your selves: for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give accountes, that they may do it
with joy. Likewise Christ says to his Apostles: He that hears you, hears
me. Luke. 10.
And he manyfestly forbids his Apostles to rule as Civil Magistrates, John.
13. Read more of this, Math. 18. and. 20. Luke. 22. where you shall manyfestly
find, that our Lord says: The kings of the Nations reign over them: and
those which exercise authority over them are called gracious lords: but it
shall not be so with you. And therefore the civil power which the Bishops and
governors of the Church exercise, has no ground or authority in the word of
god, neither has Christ at any time commanded them to use both the swords.
Saint Peter in the sixth of the Acts speaks of him self and the other
Apostles thus: It is not convenient that we should leave the word of God, and
serve Tables, that is to say, give ourselves to the feeding of the poor. etc.
And yet it is more like that the Apostles would take charge and care for the
poor, than to take upon them gouernemente and civil authority, unless they
had known the same to be against the commandment of God. And therefore
doubtless if such power had been offered unto them, they would never have
received it. And besides this experience teaches us now in our age, that
these two can not be joined together. Yet let the christians submit themselves
to these magistrates, so long as they command not things contrary to god, and
yet if they do, they may not therefore stir co^motio^s, but do that which god
has commanded.

Touching the Civil power, as kings The civil Magistrate.
Emperors, Princes, Counselors, Magistrates, and all other like, which
exercise any public office, by what name soever they be called, we are
bound to obey them by the word of God in all things that are not contrary to
God: yea God threatens vengeance against all those that are disobedient,
stubborn, and rebellious against the Magistrates. Moreover we are taught by
Gods word, that the Magistrate is ordained of God, and is for his sake to be
honored, and to be acknowledged in his Ministers, ordained for the wealth of
good men, but for the punishment of evil men: and that we must love them as
fathers, giving unto them their due honor, tribute loyalty, faythfulnesse, and
other bodily services which appertain unto the^, and that with a good heart and
will faithfully. And thus are we taught by the word of God, Math. 17. and 22.
and 1. Peter. 2. Romans. 13. and Titus. 1. And in the Epistle to Timothe Paul
commands that we make faithful prayers unto God for those which have the
gouernemente over us. And even as the Apostles for Gods cause were obediente
unto the Magistrates, so is it meet that Bishops and those which govern in
the Church, as teachers and preachers, be obedient to the Civil Magistrate
also, like as Jeremie in his first Chapter teaches: but yet in such sort as
they teach the word of God freely, But if any will not thus do, then let
them read the second Epistle of Saint Peter, the second Chapter, and the
Epistle of S. Jude, and see what the Apostles do think and judge of such.
And against those which resist their Magistrates, and so become worse than
thieves or murderers, many sharp things are written in the holy Scripture,
and in the Proverbs of Solomon.

The. Lxj. Question.
Whether the magistrate ought to be obeyed if he publishe, set forth, or
command any thing contrary to the universal church of Christ?

The Answer.
WE must here again The magistrate can command nothing contrary to the
church of Christ.
make a difference between the true Christian Church, and the false, bearing
only the name and title thereof. For that Church which is called, and is in
very deed the true universal Church of Christ, is that company of the
faithful which rightly believe in Christ, putting all their trust in God,
through Christ, giving ear only to him in his holy word, seeking all
things in him, and serving him in holiness and righteousness. And against
this Church can no Magistrate decree any thing, but if they chance to do,
then do the faithful know, that it is better to obey God than man. In deed
at the beginning, and in the time of the Primative Church Kings and Emperors
concluded and set forth many grievous things against the Christians, but the^
they which otherwise in all bodily services were content to be obedient unto
their Magistrates, did in deed disobey them in the things which appertayned to
their faith, for they would neither woorshippe their Idols, nor do sacrifice
in their Temples, or communicate with them in their Religion: and for this
cause many of them were put to death. Yet GOD in the end maruellouslye
punyshed those Magistrates, as Eusebius and Orosius do testify in their
Histories. And we have a manifest and an excellent example of this matter in
the second, third and sixte Chapters of Daniell. And in the History of the
Machabees, and the The godly^ Magistrate may make laws and decrees against the
false church*
Acts of the Apostles.

Furthermore the Church which is called Christ's Church, and is not so in
deed, has in it none of those things which it ought for to have, for they
neither trust in God, nor in Christ, nor in his word, but put their
confidence in other matters, and make diverse Laws and Customs of Religion,
and the service of GOD contrary to Gods word, and having among themselves
insimte Sects, yet will they be called the Catholyke Church. And in this
Church the godly Magistrate has power and authority to make and ordeyne
Laws and Statutes for the abolishing and taking away of those things which
are ordained contrary to the will and word of almighty GOD. For David,
Solomon, Josaphat, Ezechias, Josias, Constantinus, and other godly Princes are
evident examples hereof. Therefore when the Magistrate for the profit and
reformation of the Church, does ordeyne Statutes and Laws agreeable to the
word of GOD, they ought most diligently to be obeyed of al men, yea and if
need require, the magistrate must be assisted in them: and those which will
not so do, but resist their Magistrates, shall be most sharply punished of
GOD. But the Popes and Prelates of the Romish Church, to the end they may
defend and maintain their honors, pride, riches, pleasures, and horrible
wickedness, have hither unto persuaded with Princes, Noble men, and
Magistrates, yea and by force have hereunto constrained them, that they
should believe, that the laws and reformations which touched their
Pontifical state, were clean contrary to the holy church, God himself, and
all equity and Justice. And by this means they did not only maintain their
pomp and pride, but did also daily increase the same, when as yet rather it
had been their parts to have called them selves to accountes, and to have
considered diligently the state of the Church, and of the afflicted
Christendom, and so to provide for the same, and not only to exhort the
Magistrates, but also to help them, and further them in the reformation
hereof, and for the speedier redress to begin even with themselves. For
these are the last times, and the indgemente of the Lord, (in the which they
^. all render a most sharp accounte,) is not far off. And blessed are those
whom the corruptible trashe of this life does not let, but that they may
readily prepare them selves against his coming, when he shall judge both the
quick and the dead.

The Conclusion.
THus far (by the help of God, to whom I render most hearty thanks) have I
answered to. (...). Questions, and taught those to whom they shall be objected,
how to answer them: yea I have taught what is to be thought of each of these,
how to confess the true doctrine of Christ, and to take heed of the false.
And therefore now even for Christ's sake I heartily beseech al you which
stick unto the truth of the Gospel, and mind not to return to filthynesse
of Rome, that you answer soberly, and without fcare, and constantly abide in
the truth, being nothing amassed with the daily torments and afflictions which
are ever at hand. For the Religion my brethren, for which you suffer
persecutions, disple asures, and other greefes, is not of a^eight hundred years
standing, but has been ever from the birthe of Christ, yea and from the
beginning of the world, grounded upon the Scriptures, and is in deed the
very true and auucient faith. On the other side we are taught, that the
doctrine and Religion of the Church of Rome that now is, is not only a new
doctrine, but also devised by men, and ratified by the Counsels and Decrees of
men (with whom Christ says, that he is worshipped in vain.) Our doctrine and
religion gives all glory to God, and seeks salvation in Christ only. And
because we have all fullness in him, we have no respect unto the creatures.
And him we serve not with outward pomp and shows, but in spirit and truth,
in prayer and thanks giving, in righteousness, charity, purity, faith and
mercy. And even common sense teaches all men, that the true service of God
consists in these things, whereas on the other part all men cry out against
the uncertain doctrine of the Romish Clergy, being confirmed by no good
authority, yet they cry out against their filthy life, their intolerable
oppressions, pride, and tyranny. Wherefore although they have great power,
glory, and dignity, favor and help of great and mighty men: and that the
poor men which believe in Christ and embrace his word, and despise the
Romish church, do suffer persecutions, imprisonment, banishment, yea and many
times death, and that there appears no help many times from God, but that it
seems he does rather favor the other, yet was all this foretold by the
Prophets, Apostles, yea, and by our savior Christ him self, who suffered
for us, leaving us an example to follow his steps. And therefore we ought not to
take any thought for our goods, friends, body, or life. For we have great
promises of grace, help, and reward from God, if we abide steadfast unto the
end. On the other part our adversaries are dreadfully threatened, and shall in
time feel the same, and that without dout. Again, touching the things of this
world, we know they are unconstant, brittle, and corrupt, and therefore we
cannot long enjoy them, neither can the power or riches of our friends any thing
profit us. For we shall all die, and stand before the judgment seat of
Christ, unto whonte all our sins and secret thoughts shall be made most
manifest. Therefore, let no man be grieved, though he suffer affliction in this
life for the gospels sake. For at that general day, both the innocence and
offenses of all men shall appear. And hearken I beseech you, how lovingly
Christ speaks unto us, and comfort us: Blossed (says he) are those which
suffer persecution, for righteoufnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. Blessed are you when they shall speak ouil of you, and perfecute you,
and speak all manner of evil saying, making lies upon you for my sake:
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven: for even so did they
persecute the Prophets which were before you. The scholar is not above his
master, nor the servant greater than his Lord. If they have called the good
man of the house Bel^cbub, how much more will they call his servant so? you
shall not therefore be a fraide of them: for thereis nothing so hidden, but it
shall be known. Neither be you afraid of those which can but kill the
body, but fear you him rather, that is able to destroy both body and soul in
hell fire. Are not two sparovves sold for a farthing, and yet one of them
falls not unto the ground without the will of your heavenly father: yea
all the hairs of your head are numbered. Be not therefore afraid, for you are
more vvorth than many sparowes. Every one therefore that shall confess me
before men, him also vvil I confess before my father which is in heaven: and
who so denies me before men, him also will I deny before my father which
is in heaven. And he that loves father or mother more than me, is not meet
for me. And he that takes not up his cross and follows me, is not
worthy of me. Who so will seek to save his life shall lose it, and he that
will lose his life for my sake, shall find it. And unto this doctrine that is
so full of consolation and comfort, let us earnestly stick my brethren, and so
couple our selves to the grace and power of Christ, let us boldly confess
his name and doctrine, and refusing what so ever is contrary to the same. Let
us call upon him, crave his grace and holy spirit to abide sted-fastly in his
holy word even to death. And so let us jointly all pray unto our Lord, that
he will have mercy upon al men, and strengthen all those which suffer for his
sake, and lighten the hearts of the persecuters, that with S. Paul they may
clearly see and understand how hard a thing it is to kick against the
prick. God our heavenly father have mercy on his poor afflicted Church,
and comfort the same shortly with his coming, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for George Bishop.

ANNO. 1572.


