OF DIVORCE FOR ADVLTERIE, AND Marrying again: that there is no sufficient
warrant so to do. WITH A NOTE IN THE END, that R. P. many years since was
answered. By EDM. BVNNY Bachelour of Divinity.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. Ann. Dom. 1610.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God RICHARD, by the grace of God Archbishop of
Canterbury, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Chancellor of
the University of Oxford, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.
MAY it please your Grace to understand, that although, being so little known
to your Grace as I am, it may seem that I make over bold, so to present this
Treatise ensuing: yet, as my self am persuaded, diverse good reasons there be,
that do occasion me, so far this once to presume on your Graces goodness
therein; both in respect of a former interest, and of the present matter
besides.

The former interest that now I speak of, is, that by the place that then he
was in, your Graces immediate Predecessor, had this Treatise in his hands a
good while together, many years since; and to be his, if so it should stand
with his Graces pleasure: and afterward, when he saw his time, approved of the
publishing of it, and so to do at mine own discretion. Which notwithstanding
(by occasion) I thought not so good, the^ presently to do, as to awaite a
farther opportunity which then began to offer it self unto me. In the mean
season it has pleased God* to take him of from his labors and travells here,
and thus otherwise to furnish the room that he had. In which alteration,
besides that no way I have any cause to vary: I may not deny, but that now I
find iuster cause so to proceed, then I had in the other before.

In the present matter besides, it is very plain, that there is some question
of it: and then are such Treatise as are thereof, in bounden duty to awaite the
censure of such other approved judgments, as to whom in such case it does
appertain. Wherein it having hitherto orderly proceeded to that whereunto it
is come already, it was meetest so to finish the course likewise: and so
actually to acknowledge, that arising here, and hence proceeding, it was most
to submit it self unto, and to await your Graces censure.

It may be also, that even in godly policy (by our Superiors) it will be
thought meet, to take some farther order to preve^t the evil, that so free a
passage of that other course may seem to threaten: and the^, the better
opportunity that God has give^ your G. to such purpose, the less could I in
any duty or reason have turned aside to any other.

God long preserve your Grace among us, to the glory of God, to the good of
his Church, and to your own comfort withal in him.

Oxford July 3. 1610. Your Graces most humble in the Lord, EDM. BVNNY.

UNTO ALL THOSE THAT EITHER are entered already, or hereafter are to enter into
the holy estate of wedlock, E. B. wishes as all other Christian graces
whatsoever (such as are needful to every one in his own proper Calling) so
now especially rightly to know, of what force that bond should be among us,
and, how fast we ought to hold it.
IF yet it be doubtful to any, what is the corruption of our nature, and how
often it comes to pass thereby, that in many things we are hardly able to
conceive or to find out, that which is sound and right indeed: though there
be diverse other things besides, wherein we might see it plainly enough, yet
we need go no farther, but only to that which at this present we have in
hand: namely, how few of all sorts there are, that are able to see, how strict
and insoluble the bond of wedlock is, after that once it be rightly joined
together*

2 The Fathers of old, before that yet the law was given, Genesis 2.21.14.
had among them the truth of that holy ordinance, how it pleased God at the
first to ordain the same: of man and wife to make but one; and that he
ordained but only two, to make up the unity that then he spoke of. And yet
the story does plainly show, Abraham, and Sarai Genesis 16, ^ 4. Jacob and
Laban. Lea and Rachel Gen 29.27.30. and 30, 3, 4*9.10.
that not only the common sort of them, but even the better also, did not
account that bond so straight, but that they did, (for diverse of the^) take
others besides: though yet notwithstanding it must needs be true withal, that
they knew well enough, and could not be ignorant, but that therein they swarved
clean, from that pattern that God had given them, and from the Rule that
therein he left them.

3 When afterward the law was given to those that followed, though now that
matter were made a great deal more plain unto them, than it was before: yet
they also did as little find what they had to do therein; as did the others
that had not the light that was given unto the^. They were Hebrews themselves,
and the Law was given in their own mother tongue: the Text it self must needs
be very plain unto them, and some (we may hope) were dilligent in the study of
it, and that with unfeigned desire to know it, and in the fear of God withal;
and yet, it appears, they did not see this that we speak of Curious they
were (for diverse of them) in many things else of less importance, which
without any breach of the law of God they might have omitted; but their
diligence and watchful heeding of all those Books, words, syllables, letters,
and characters also (or the manner of writing thereof) and even in the number of
many words how often they were used, did never yet (for ought that we find in any
of the^) attain unto this. Deuteronomy. 24.1.4.
In one place it is clear (we speak now but of the Original, that is, of the
Hebrew Text it self; and not of the Translations that since have been in use
among us) that Moses did no more but only make mention of an usage that they
had among them, of putting away their wives on dislike, and marrying again, he
does (I say) but only speak of it, and does nothing at all approve it unto
them, nor allows them so to do: and yet a sort of the learned of them in the
time of Christ (and so belike of old likewise) did plainly show, that they
did take it, that Moses had allowed them, or given the^ their liberty so to
do. Mat 19 7. Mat. 10.4.
Howbeit there is fair ods, betwixt a bare mentioning of an usage among them
(though then also he go not against it) and to approve the same unto them: and
in many other things, there is no question (at the least, as they might be
chosen) but themselves would soon have perceived a lesser and a daintier
difference then this. And herein they have the Text it self in plain terms
to give the^ over, in that which they would build upon it; even the very words
themselves chasing the^ from that persuasion of theirs.

Lev. 18.18.
4 In another place indeed the words are for them, so far forth that they may
seem, to have the sense with them also: namely, that there they are not
forbidden, to take unto them any more but one wife at once. For the words are
but only of taking a sister to the wife that a man already has: insomuch that
it only may seem to be forbidden; that is, a man to take unto him a couple of
sisters to have them both in marriage together. But if the place had been
better considered, and conferred with other Scriptures, besides, then might
they have found, that the more likely sense of that place had been to have
forbidden them, when any man had one wife already then to take another unto
her. For first, that thereby we should be forbidden to take in marriage two
natural sisters, may seem to be no part of the meaning: partly, because of
somewhat that goes a little before; and partly in respect of some other
considerations that here we have in this place it self. That which goes a
little before, is, for that in the next verse but one before, it is forbidden
to marry the brothers wife: Lev. 1^.^6.
which in equity may serve for this also, to forbid unto us our wives sister.
Those considerations that we have in this place it self, are the reasons that
here are given: and the limitation that is used therewith. The reasons are two:
to afflict her withal; and to uncover her shame upon her. Which of all others
do least agree to natural sisters, for that, if a woman could brook any
other to be joined with her, she could best away with her own sister in those
respects: the one, of that greater love that by course of nature is betwixt
those that are so near; the other, for that such are (for the most part in all
such matters) most familiarly acquainted also. The limitation, so long as she
lives, has no place (without some harder construction of it) but only in this
sense that now we speak of, for that by that former law of the brothers wife
which is set down without any such limitation, we are forbidden to match so
near, after death likewise. But then, that this other should seem to be the
sense of it, is much more likely, both for that it does so fitly agree to the
institution of marriage it self at the first: and for that it is not, in the
law, elsewhere forbidden generaly, to have at once more wives than one. Unto
kings it is; Deuteronomy. 17.17.
but not generally unto al: and of it might they have reasoned, that if it were
forbidden unto kings (who, in diverse respects, might most of all have it
allowed unto the^) then were it much more forbidden to al others besides. If
the manner of speech might be thought, justly to hinder them from co^ceiuing
such a sense thereon, because the text names but a sister, though that kind
of speech may be somewhat strange unto us, to carry such a meaning with it;
yet was it not so unto them, for that in their speech it was often used: as, of
Genesis 26.31.
one swearing to another, of Exodus 26.3.5.
curtains that are fellows, of a Ezec 19 23 and. 3.13.
pair of wings, and of locl. 2.8,
soldiers that march together in their array. In all which (and in diverse
places besides, as Arias Montanus, and Tremellius, and Iunius have noted) the
Hebrew word is, brother or sister (according as the ge^der therein does
require) for that which we say one another, or some such like, in things
especially that go by paiers, couples, or fellows. So that in this also it is
a wonder to see, that they never found their Polygamie to be forbidden, when as
yet notwithstanding the institution of wedlock at the first, and the propriety
of their own tongue did lead them unto it: and an advised consideration of the
place it self did so strongly hold the^ of, and chase them away from that
sense that they would give it.

5 Since which time, there is greater light bestowed on us: eve^ on us al
generally, for all matters of learning; and on many of us, the knowledge of the
Gospel also, in plentiful I measure. And yet in this that now I speak of, we
are almost as blind as they. We do not see but that it was allowed unto the^,
to put away their wives (in diverse cases) and to marry again: and make no
question, but that in one case, Christ himself does allow it likewise. And we
lean so much unto this, that many of us are almost persuaded, that the other
also is no where forbidden unto us. At least in this place, we never find it,
notwithstanding the help that now we have in the knowledge of the tongue it
self, and whatsoever diligence we have in weighing the Text, and in conferring
one place with another: no, not when by other occasion (as when the question
is, whether two sisters may be taken in wedlock, one after another) we are
specially urged to look into it. In so much that when as for that sense we are
something crossed by those reasons and limitation that are joined withal: yet
does that also help us but little to find out the sense that now we speak of.
Which for my part, I cannot see, whereunto we may rather ascribe, then to our
own corruption of nature: being so much given (as we are) to that kind of
revenge; and, our selves to have change likewise. And the less marvel, when we
have such beams in our eyes already, if we ca^ so hardly see, that the bond of
marriage should be of any such force unto us, as it is indeed.

6 Hereupon, when time was, and the present occasion did so require, in a
Sermon I breefly noted, that the liberty, that in these our days many do
take, of divorcing their wives for adultery and marying of others, had not
such warrant in the word of God as they thought that it had: and afterward,
when that was hardly taken, I did more fully deliver the same in two other
Sermons, only of it. Which then also being hardly taken by some, and not so
fully allowed by others, as the truth of the doctrine might well have expected:
gathering thereby, that such were like to be the judgment of others in that
point also, and having good cause therein to extend that warning further, I
thought good since, to write a little more fully of it, and so to let it go
forth unto all. Whether therefore thou be married already, or art hereafter to
enter into it, keep unity now, and make thy choice so well as thou can: and
I, for my part, would never wish thee to conceive any hope at all, that when
once that knot is rightly knit, thou can afterward have any undoubted or
certain warrant, that for the adultery of thy wife (if it should fall out,
that thy case should be so hard) thou may be at liberty to marry again. For
the farther opening of which matter, I now refer thee to the Treatise it self.
And so in the Lord I heartily bid thee well to fare.

Bolton-Perey. December. 13. 1595.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
1 COncerning this Treatice, whereas it is of such an argument, as wherein
diverse of great learning have already dealt, and yet my self had done thus
much therein many years since (though I did never publish it til now) I have
thought it needful, gentle Reader, to acquaint thee somewhat farther with
either of them: both how it came to pass, that I also have thus far
entermedled therewith; and whereupon it was, that it has (as it were) kept in
til now. That I have thus far entermedled therewith, it arose first, out of the
nature of the thing it self* but then, somewhat farther of, by occasion. The
former of these was, that a gentleman of those parts wherein most I reside,
having such a purpose with him, and having already gotten (into a little
paper-book of his) the hands of sundry of the Preachers of those parts, came
to me also therewith, and desired my hand likewise: his case there being, that
for adultery by his wife committed, he might sue the divorce, and marry again.
His request I denied, and gave him some reason why so I did: but perceiving
then, that I did not content him, a while after I wrote unto him a few sheets
of paper of that matter; and so rested all the passage that was betwixt us. The
latter of them was, that the most reverend Father (that in those parts then
was) being minded to Visit, requested me to preach at the beginning of that his
visitation: wherein, among other things more fully prosequuted, I gave a little
touch to that point also; namely, that whereas diverse were persuaded, that for
adultery they might sue the divorce, and marry again, and some accordingly so
did, if the matter were well examined, that liberty would not (in my judgment)
be found, to have any undoubted warrant at al in the word of God.

2 There had been a few years before, of one family (but indeed, one of the
greatest in those parts) or thereunto appertaining, about four several persons,
and those of some note besides, who had the^ so gotten divorce, and were
married again. And besides those (who, it may be, had else where mo fellows
also, than that heady course any way deserved) an other there was of more
special reckoning tha^ they, who so got divorce against his wife also, and
married an other: on whose behalf, on that my warning then publicly given, I
found there was more dislike conceived, than might well arise on so easy a
course, as (in my judgment) then was taken. Whereupon I then resolved, when my
time should be to occupy that place again, seeing that little warning was
thought so strange then, so to unfold the matter it self whence it arose, as
that the Auditorie might better perceive, there was some reason, why it was
given. That time fell out to be some few months after; at which time I only
dealt in that matter, and made two Sermons of it: at that time showing, that
the said presupposed liberty, so to put away their wives for adultery, and to
marry again, was altogether without warrant in the word of God; and, diverse
other ways, faulty besides.

3 Hereupon the matter began to work: at home; and abroad. At home, though
most of the Auditory were glad to hear the matter opened so far as it was,
and conceaved well of it: yet there wanted not also, who having some of their
ways called into some question thereby, were much offended; one carrying
himself so inordinatly therein, that for it he was for a time committed. At
which time (I mean, while that matter was in hearing, for which the party
aforesaid was committed) there fell out this accide^t also. The honorable
Personage, who then was in chief place for the execution of justice there, by
occasion objected unto me, that although such liberty had no warrant in the
word of God, yet did the laws of our country allow it whereunto I answered
again, that his H. might perceive that was not so, for that neither those
second women were allowed any dowry, nor their children to be legitimate. His
H. therein could not be said by me, but told me I was much deceived therein till
some of the Council (then present) told him, that it was indeed as I had said.

4 See now the good nature, and plain dealing of that Noble Gentleman, right
noble in deed. A right learned man (and of good parts besides) of this our own
country, had before imparted, on special suit, to the gentleman that before
we spoke of, his judgment (in writing) of the same matter; not, by putting to
his hand to the gentleman's bosome-booke, as others before, nor in some few
lines of his own framing, which in such case is likewise used: but in a
Treatice or Book, of just volume (and the most learned, that any yet, in that
course, has written) and so, with all of that sort, of special reckoning; even
an undoubted warrant to hold on the way that themselves so much affected, and
wished to be allowed unto the^. Wherein he is in deed more copious than others,
to show that many have been of the same opinion: but in the principles or
grounds of that whole building, the common reading and judgment of others, so
far prevailed with him likewise, it seems, that so his resolution was nothing
so suitable, to that learning and judgment of his, as otherwise it was like to
have been. This Book fairly written had the same gentleman (as I understood)
delivered to that Noble Personage, his Lord and Master, so to let him see, how
clear and warrantable that course was, that he and others then were in. This
Book did that Noble Personage cause one of his attendants the^ to fetch: and
presently he gave the same unto me; as giving up therewith, all the good
liking, that of that opinion he had before conceived.

5 Abroad it so wrought likewise, that besides diverse others, one in the South
parts (for this that we speak of, was done in York) in the heart thereof, and
one of the chief in those parts also, hearing in some sort what I had there
of that matter delivered, sent unto me to be acquainted with my notes: which I
also accordingly sent; and heard, that there they were approved. But thereby
and otherwise perceiving, that not only many of the learned were carried away
with the oversight and prejudice of those learned that were for that
presupposed liberty, and with the revere^ce of their persons (which indeed, in
many good respects, was in great measure due unto the^) and that some farther
notice thereof was needful to be given to others likewise: I thereupon
gathered this present Treatise, and sent it up to my Lords Grace of Canterbury
that the^ was; to be published also, if so it should stand with his Graces
pleasure. For the matter, his answer (I heard) was, that he was of the same
mind himself: I heard likewise, that he imparted the same to some others of
special note, and place; and that they were of the same mind also. But as
touching the publishing of it, that he thought not good so to do: yet giving
no other reason then, but that he would have as few controversies in the
Church as might be; and that others had offered a Treatise of contrary
judgment which he had stayed (that, of the learned man's that before we spoke
of; and great golden means used, to have had it allowed) and should then be
thought partial, if nevertheless he should have admitted of this.

6 So there it lay for certain years, out of my hands: and I, having done my
endeavor, to have entered in by the door of orderly proceeding; would not then
attempt to clime in by a window of any inordinate course whatsoever.
Nevertheless to make some use of that time also, whereas that learned man that
before I spoke of, had by occasion written a set Treatise of that matter
affirmatively, I thought good to acquaint him also, with that which I had
conceived thereof negatiuely: and to that end both sent him a copy of that
Treatise of mine, and by my letter sent withal, desired him to let me
understand, if he found any thing therein that was not sound. The Treatise,
and my letter withal were both delivered: but the satisfaction that I received
thence again, was no more, but that, some reasonable time after, by another
friend of mine, that Treatise of mine was sent me again, with this answer,
that the party to whom it was sent, saw no cause yet, said he, to be of
other opinion therein, then he was of before; that other friend of mine in
such sort advising and wishing me besides, as that thence I might easily
gather, that the Treatise it self was not so welcome, as I had hoped it might
have been.

7 Speeding none otherwise there, then did I soon after put his Grace in mind,
whether, as that kind of loosnesse began then to grow bold and heady, it were
not unequal dealing, to stay that which by good right might well proceed, and
was needful too, for that which might not, and were not without danger
besides. To that I had no answer, neither was it material I should: but I
noted, that soon after there was some farther order taken for it, by public
authority. Others also of good reckoning, I heard, began openly to deal
therein: both in one of their chiefest assemblies of all this land; and, in
exercise of learning, eve^ in the University it self likewise. Whereupon
taking occasion again, to put his Grace in mind of that Treatise of mine,
whether yet his Grace could not like of the publishing of it, his Grace the^
readily sent it unto me, with his good leave to publish it all: at which time
there was an other impediment (which most did stay him) clean removed. But
then me self was already advised of an other good opportunity, the benefit
whereof, to the better furtherance of it, my hope was then, that I might in
reasonable time attain unto: and thereupon thought it best, to stay it farther
with me, till then.

8 In which mean time, some of the favorits of that liberty, by stealth or
secret means, have gotten a Copy of the Treatice of that learned and reverend
man aforesaid, to be printed and published: and, by such means as they have
used, have dispersed, and imparted the same unto many. By which inordinate
course of theirs, there is no question, but that diverse may be endangered: as
making no doubt, but that, as that indeed was his judgment; so his learning,
and their inclination meeting so fitly and kindly together, the truth of the
matter must needs be so also.

9 True it is, that many of the learned have been, and yet are, of that
opinion, and accordingly have interpreted, and yet do, such Scriptures as they
have conceived to appertain thereunto: but it is as true withal, that as many
of the learned again, if not far mo, have been, and are, of other opinion,
and have otherwise understood, and yet do, those Scriptures aforesaid. And as
some other Territories or several Churches, it may be, there are, who are of
opinion, that in such case divorce may be, and marrying again: so is it as
evident too that the government of this Church of ours, and so of many others
besides (if the same may not be co^ceived of the whole generally) does not
allow it So that in truth if we go to the opinion or judgment of me^, there is
no question but that the matter is very hard to be decided: but so far, as the
more general and settled judgment, may cast the balla^ce: as also in those
Scriptures themselves, which at the first sight do seem most properly to
appertain thereunto, we have the same difficulty also, unless we repair unto
those others besides, as whereby we may see see, that such sense does hardly
agree to some other duties that are required.

10 The controversy therefoe standing in such case as it does, and so many
being so ready to take fast hold of so plausible a liberty, and so little
regarding so great inconvenience as inseparably goes with that opinion of
theirs: as it was a clear case with me before, that both the matter it self
had need to be farther looked into, and that people did need to be warned of
the danger that was therein, so it is still; and so much the more now, as this
inordinate course of theirs may be more dangerous to many of our own
Countrymen here. And so far as the occasion hereof did set it self a working
in those Northern parts of ours, and I thereupon accounted my self, in
conscience and in duty bound, to give such warning as then I did: so far now,
the like occasion being in these parts also so plainly given, I thought it my
duty, to resume, or take unto me that purpose again; and now to discharge
that point of duty, so far at the least, as in my hands it should ly to do. But
now seeing the matter is, among the learned, in question already, and they are
much more able, the^ I, that have it in hand, and in all respects very well
furnished to such a purpose, that I may not seem, now to take part, but rather
to respect, eve^ originally, the truth it self, I have thought good to commend
to the press, that very copy of that my Treatise, that was then (those many
years since) under the view, together with the Preface thereto, and the date
thereof that it had before. So now I cease, and commend thee to God.

Oxford, Iun. 4. 1610.
THE CONTENTS OF THE TREATICE ensuing, according to the several Sections
thereof.
THe Argument of the whole Treatise following: and, that there be two sorts of
places whereon those of the learned do rest, that are for Divorce or Adultery,
a marrying again, Sect. 1.

What those places are whereon so they build. Sect. 2.

How ready diverse are, without any farther inquiry first made, to rest
thereon. Sect. 3.

That such as are of that opinion have little groundwork even in their
Leaders, for that they are so much crossed by others as therein they are. Sect.
4.

How doubtful resolutions themselves also for that matter have. Sect. 5.

Upon how weak reasons they have grown to such resolution. Sect. 6.

What Protestations they use withal. Sect. 7.

What we are to think thereof: namely, that where such things go with all,
there is no likelihood to find any certainety of Doctrine whereon to build
(especially, in so weighty a case as this.) Sect. 8.

Briefly declared that those places do little help: and that they do plainly
mistake those two that seemed to be strongest for them. Sect. 9.

How those places of Scripture are taken by them. Sect. 10.

That, in such sort taking those places (it may well be) they did mistake them:
both that of Deutrronomie. Sect. 11.

And that other of Malachie also. Sect. 12.

What our selves are to gather, on that their so taking of them. Sect. 13.

In those places that most are for marrying again, that they are so crossed by
others, that those also are, likely to help them but little. Sect. 14.

How far they may be charged therein: namely, that their own defectes are
such, as well may make their judgment suspected. Sect. 15.

How weakly they reason in such things as are in question, and so of the
substance of the matter it self. Sect. 16.

How weakly they reason likewise in such things as are but accidentarie
thereunto. Sect. 17.

How weakly they reason on certain other things also, as are of such a kind
or so near unto the^, as that thence they draw certain reasons also. Sect. 18.

How, when they come the word it self, they much mistake it. Sect. 19.

That on some places also they gather amiss: first Erasmus. Sect. 20.

Then, Mr Beza also. Sect. 21.

How weakly they do reason likewise on the authority of men. Sect. 22.

That they have diverse inconvenient and hard speeches besides: especially
Erasmus (who, in this age of ours, was if not the first, yet the greatest
motioner of this matter) Sect. 23.

Then also, certain others of that company. Sect. 24.

In the places themselves, first of that sense that they conceive of them.
Sect. 25.

Then, what we may think to be their meaning in deed: and first of that in the
fifth of S. Matthew. Sect. 26.

Then, of that other place in the 19. of the said S. Matthew. Sect, 27.

In such doubts as may be conceived, that the Exception in such sense as we
conceive it, will nothing at all help them. Sect. 28.

In the sense wherein they conceive it, that it will help them but little
also. Sect. 29.

And in such case that they also must be very well advised, and take good heed
what they do therein. Sect. 30.

And that they do nothing against any other Scripture, which they have strong
against them. Sect. 31.

Nor against convenience neither, which in that case they cannot avoid. Sect.
32.

That whereas the Apostle also permits the faithful (by an infidel
forsaken) to marry again, that it also does nothing help them. Sect. 33.

The Conclusion. Sect. 34.

OF DIVORCE FOR ADVLTErie, and marrying again. Sect. 1.

WHereas that, which heretofore came (lightly) no farther, but only to be
disputed among the learned, is now grown to so common a practice with many,
namely to prosecute divorce for adultery, and to marry again: the greater
danger that thereby we may see to grow up apace, toward the overthrowing of
such integrity as yet we have left, Euthim. Zigabemu^. page 35.
and to bring in the Turkish liberty of putting away such wives as they like
not, and marrying others; the greater cause have we so much the rather to see
unto it, and not slightly now, but soundly to examine, whether it have any
warrant at all in the written word. Which that we may the better find out, it
shall be good to note, that as there be two sorts of places of Scriptures,
whereon the learned that are for that opinion do commonly rest (some that
chiefly respect divorcing or putting away, others that do rather respect
marrying again) so are the judgments of the learned in such sort divided,
likewise: all of them (to speak of) generally, allowing of divorce; and many
of them, marrying again, in such case to stand by the word of God. And yet
notwithstanding if we can for a time set aside the judgment of others, and
consider of the thing it self, in what case it stands in the written word,
by help of that light that God in these days has give^ unto us, Sect. 2.
I make no doubt of it, but that soon we may find so good matter for the
contrary part, that whosoever shall indifferently consider of it, he will not
easily afterward think, that he finds in any of that opinion, matter of
worth to draw him back to that persuasion again. Which while we shall
endeavor to show, because many themselves being given to that fleshly
liberty, do nevertheless shroud themselves under the judgment of those
learned that favor the same; therefore it shall be needful (the better to free
them from that prejudice) not to dissemble whatsoever weakness we find in the
judgment of those that are for it: though otherwise they be (by very good
right) of that reckoning with us, that we ought to uphold their credit, the
best that we may. But because the truth ought to be much dearer unto us, and
seeing it is a wonted policy in Satan, by the principal men (so near as he
can) to hatch and rear up his errors among us: therefore the dearer the truth
is unto us, and the more we should take heed, that we do not bear with the
error of any, the bolder may we be in this case also, so farre-forth as the
nature of the case shall require, to examine their judgment, and not to spare
for that small discredit that unto them may arise thereby. Which that we may do,
with more perspicuitie unto the cause that we have in hand, I hold it best,
that we consider severally of those two sorts of places of Scripture that
before we spoke of, that so we may more plainly see how little warrant that
persuasion has in either of the^: notwithstanding whatsoever help it has in
those learned, What those places are, that be for divorce.
that are so much for it as they are.

2 In the former sort of places therefore we are to consider, not only of the
places themselves that are by diverse of the learned alleged in defense of
such divorce: but also how weakly that same persuasion is grounded on them.
The places themselves are, some of them such, as most of the learned do make
little reckoning of them to confirm that doctrine to any: but others of them
such as they do take to be of special force to that end; and accordingly lean
not a little to them. Those that are such as of which most of themselves do
make little reckoning to confirm that point of doctrine to any, are two: one,
in Ecclesiasticus; the other, found (in the vulgar Latin translation) in the
Proverbs of Solomon. That which is in Ecclesiasticus, is diversely read: but the
effect is this, that it wills the husband if the wife will not be ruled by
him, to put her away. But this book is not Canonical: Eccl. 25.35.36.
wherevpo^ as not many of themselves do seek any help thereby, so we also
will not waste any needless labor about it. The other that (in the vulgar
Latin Translation) is found in the Proverbs, is, Pro. 18.22.
that qui tenet adulteram stultus est and insipiens: that is, he that keeps
with him an adulteress, is a fool and unwise. But because this also is not
found in the Original, and may be understood of such harlots as diverse hold,
but not by marriage, therefore as it is of no force in deed, so do most of them
relinquish also the benefit of it: and therefore we likewise will not go any
farther against it. Those others that they take to be of special force to that
end, and accordingly lean not a little unto them, are diverse, and all of them
found in those Books that are Canonical, and therefore not to be denied to be
of sufficient authority so far as they go. But the^ we are to note therewith,
that whereas there are 6. of them in all, 4. of them they account of less
importance. And chiefly rest in the other two. Those four that are of less
importance are of two sorts, some that hardly censure, that a Priest should
marry with a woman divorced; others, that show the goodness of God to be much
greater toward them in that kind, then was theirs toward their wives when so
they offended. Those two that do so hardly censure that a Priest should marry
a divorced woman, are Lev. 21.7. and Ezech. 44.22. whereof the former does
plainly forbid it: Lev. 21.7.
Ezec. 44.22
and the other does greatly disgrace it also. For the former is, that the
Priest (among others) may not marry with any quae repudiata est a marito, quia
co^secratus est Deo suo. etc: that is, such a one as is divorced from her
husband, because he is consecrated unto his God. The latter likewise is, that
the Lord promising such a Priesthood, as should diligently walk in the
ordinances that he delivered unto them, among other things he recites that
also, that repudiatas non accipient vxores, that is, that they should not take
such as were divorced, to be their wives. Those two others that do show the
goodness of God to be much greater in that kind toward them, then was theirs
toward their wives when so they offended, are the one of Is. 50.1. the other
ost Jeremiah 3.1. Isa. 50.1.
In that of Isaiah, the Lord dema^deth, Ubi est libellus repudii matris
vestrae, quodimiferim eam? that is, Where is that Bill of divorce with which I
sent your mother away? meaning thereby, that he had never put away his people
nor cast them of: alluding to the custom that they had among themselves,
divorcing away their wives from them, which notwithstanding he had not done
unto them. That of Jeremie does likewise allude unto the same custom of
theirs: and shows; that although such as had put away their wives might not
have them again: yet the Lord himself would be ready to receive them. To that
end he says, Valgo dicitur, Sect. 3.
Si dimiserit vir vxorem fuam, Ier. 3.1.
and recedens ub eo duxerit virum alterum, nunquid revertetur ad eam vltra?
nunquid non polluta and contaminata erit mulier illa? that is, It is commonly
said, if a man shall put away his wife, and she departing from him shall marry
an other, shall he ever return unto her any more? shall not that woman be
polluted and defiled. Those two other that chiefly they rest on, are, the one
in Deuteronomie* the other in Malachie. That in Deuteronomie, as they do
allege it, is, Deuteronomy. 24.1.
Si acceperit homo vxorem and habuerit eam, and non invenerit gratiam ante
oculos ejus propter aliquam foe ditatem, scribet libellam repudii, and dabit in
manu illius, and dimittet eam de domo sua. That is, If a man have taken a wife
and have her, and she find no favor before his eyes for some uncleanness, he
shall write her (or, as others translate, the^ let him write her) a bill of
divorcement, and put it in her hand, and send her out of his house. That of
Malachie is much like unto it, namely, Mal. 2.16.
Cum odio habueris, dimitte, dicit dominas Deus Israel, that is, Seeing thou
hate her (meaning his wife) put her away, says the Lord God of Israel. By
which they conclude that Moses first, and Malachie after, did in plain words
of the Text, in such case allow divorce unto them.

3 The places being thus briefly noted, How ready many are unadvisedly to build
thereon.
now if we would see how weakly that persuasion is grounded on the^, it shall
not be amiss, first to note, how mavelous ready the common sort of those
loose wantons of ours are, to sort themselves to that opinion, and yet how
little grou^dworke they have, even in their Leaders themselves. How mavelous
ready they are to sort themselves to that opinion may sufficiently appear in
this, that when as it is granted that such places there are, whereon the
learned (that are for divorce and marrying again) do ground their opinion,
even that only is enough for them, and does so fully resolve them in it, that
hardly can they afford their ears, patiently to hear any more. For as we are
all by course of nature given unto sin, and especially, unto revenge, and to
the inordinate lusts of the flesh: so are there some (and those not a few) that
have afforded so hard entertainment unto that good spirit of God, whereby only
they should be preserved from so dangerous passions, that it is not of such to
be expected, but that, (he not vouchsafing to tarry with them) easily they
would settle themselves upon any semblance, that should fit their humor
whatsoever it were: which if it be so, then are we so much the less to marvel,
if, as when meat is set on the table, men commonly use to fall unto that which
best does like them, and, the more that themselves have their stomakes
possessed with unwholesome humors, ofttimes unto that which is worst of all for
them: even so in this likewise when diversity of opinions is broached unto us,
then every one to betake himself unto that which best likes him; and, the more
that any as yet abides under the power of error or sin, the more to like the
opinion of those, that best of all fiteth his inclination, though otherwi^e it
be not so near the truth as is some other. And as in the one, such is the
power of that diste^perature, that one that is in such sort distempered, can
hardly but think that that which he fancieth, is indeed simply the best of all
the residue: even so in the other, it is no news to see, that such as are so
strongly possessed of any such passion of humanity whatsoever they find that
does bear a show of the truth, ad yet does sort it self nearest to that
special disposition of theirs, do account that also the best Divinity.

4 How little groundworke they have, Sect. 4.
even in those that are their leaders themselves, Those that are for divorce,
and marrying again, much crossed by others.
may partly appear in that they are so much crossed by others, as therein they
are* but especially, in that which themselves have set down for that matter.
That they have little groundworke in them, if they be so much crossed therein
by others as they are, may likewise appear if we consider but these two
things: first, how far they are crossed therein; then, what it is that
follows thereon. To see how far they are crossed herein, we shall need to
go no farther, then to the plain confession of one of themselves, Erasmus by
name. Erasmus. In 1 Cor 7. page 491.
Who immediately after his very entrance unto that special discourse of his,
does plainly acknowledge, the general judgment of all Christendom to be
against that which he was then to propound, to be further examined. Scio, says
he, receptissimum esse inter Christianos, ubi semel coijt matrimonium, nullo
pacto posse dirimi, nisi morte alterius. I know, says he, that it is the
general or most received opinion of all Christians, that when marriage is once
made, it can no way be broken again, but only by the death of one of the
parties. And as here, in general terms he acknowledges the judgment of the
whole Church, or of all the people of God generally to be against that
presupposed liberty: so, in the next sentence following descending to
particulars, he acknowledges there likewise, that that is the judgment both
of Chrysostom and of the old Latins, Chrysosto^e
Old Latins
and of S. Ibid.
Augustine especially: Augustine.
and, that the same judgment of theirs, is confirmed by the constitution of
Bishops, and by the authority of the Laws Decretall; and allowed of by the
consent of the Schools of Divinity. Constitutions decretal; and the Schools
against it.
So himself grants, that he finds against that opinion (where unto
notwithstanding he inclines) many great Fathers, even all the Latins
generally, All the Latins Eccl. laws. Divinity.
the Ecclesiastical laws also, and (in effect) Divinity too: then the which I
think we need no more for the reasonable proof of that assertion, then so
plain a testimony of so special a patron of that persuasion. Wherein though
diverse of them besides have been more sparing, then to slip any so plain a
testimony (belike, least so they might further let down, in the minds of
many, the credit of their cause, then themselves were able, any way to raise it
again) yet neither do they reprove him for it, and besides, both Peter Martyr
abroad, P. Martyr.
and one other of our own at home (by very good right of special account for
many good parts, with the learned and godly among us) have set down somewhat,
not much abhorring from the same. The former of them, Non reperies in veteri
Testamento ullos celebres aut laudatos viros divortio vsos esse, Sect. 67. page
306.
quantum historiae sacrae referant, that is, Thou shall not find in the old
Testament, any of the better sort of men to have used (the liberty of)
divorce, so far as the holy Scriptures do testify. The latter of them, that S.
Augustine, the School Divines, D. R. Cap ^. sect. 1,
the Canonists, and the Church of Rome, though in case of adultery they allow
of divorce, yet allow they not to marry again. And it is sufficiently known
unto us, that though diverse particular persons there be among us of other
judgment (and diverse of them otherwise, both learned and godly) yet that form
of government which we have all generally agreed unto, to be in such case
observed of all (as by our laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil appears) is
directly against such marrying again, though divorce be for no less then for
adultery. That which follows upon it, is this, that unless those that are
for it, have such places for them, as are clear and without exception, they
can prevail but little therein, Sect. 5.
but must needs leave the better end of the staff unto others. For if
themselves will not deny but that there be many against it, and as many as there
be with it, or rather more, then, as the scales when they hang indifferently,
do show that the things that are weighed therein, are of one and the self same
weight, but when they vary, that then the one of the^ needs more weight to be
added: so howsoever that if our voices were even, or the matter but in
quaestion among us, and not overruled, then the allegations of either party,
might be alike esteemed of those that stand indifferent; yet when as it may
very well be doubted, that they are many more against it, then there be for it,
and the matter is (with us) overruled against them, then unless their proofs
be the better, they may not look to evict it from those whom they plainly
find in possession already. The evidence (indeed) may prove tobe such, that
neither the greater number of voices, nor possession of old, may stand against
it: but unless it be such, whosoever it is that would claim thereby, may
look for no more, the^ it will be able, in equity and truth to win unto him.

5 Of that which themselves have set down for that matter, Their doubtful
resolutions.
a good part respects most their own judgment therein: the residue, those
places out of which they do gather it. In so much of it, as most respects
their own judgment therein, we are first to note, what it is that they have
brought us: then, to advise our selves thereon, how far forth we may take to
our selves the advantage of it. That which they have brought us, is of two
sorts: either to show us how hardly and doubtfully they are resolved; or such
other things as follow thereon, that may be some warning unto us besides, to
take heed that we rest not too much on their judgment. As touching the former,
namely those hard and doubtful resolutions of theirs, I take it that the best
order will be; to take those whom I mean to allege, in such order of time,
as wherein themselves did write. Erasmus. In 1. Cor. 7.
And so beginning with Erasmus first, he began his Annotations on the new
Testament 1515. in which book that Treatise of his is, that he wrote of this
matter. In which he is so far from allowing of that course absolutely, that he
does no further; plead for it, but whereas the woman is Page 495.
flagitiis operta, Ibid.
quibus (maritus) nec causa^ dedit, nec mederi possit, and after again, Ibid.
qui nihil est commeritus; after this also, Page 504.
that nihil non frustra tentatum sit; and yet notwithstanding that then also it
be not done by themselves, or any, other private persons, but Page 501.
ubi res erit acta per Episcopos, aut per probatos and graves Iudices; that is,
that the wife (that so must be put away) must be a very bad woman; that her
husband (that may put her away) never gave her occasion to any lewdness,
neither is able now any way to help it, nor ever deserved any such ill dealing
of her; after this also that first he must have tried all good means, but can
do noe good on her, and that such divorce be never made but by Bishops or
other approved and grave Judges. Musculus.
Musculus also setting forth his Commentaries on S. Matthewes Gospel, 1554,
though he grant that divorce may be, stupri causa, that is, for whoredom: yet
he adds withal, In Mat. 5. p. 112.
Casus hic habet varias circumstantias, quas hoc loco excutere propositum non
est. Sed tamen admonuerim ut quibus tales conjuges divino judicio contingunt,
recordentur se esse Christianos. Et primum cogitent de lucranda coniugis
salute, si id fieri queat: si vero nequeat, tum demum liberate sua, neque id
sine animi dolor utantur. That is, this case (notwithstanding) has diverse
circumstances, which my meaning is not here to sift out. But this would I warn
them of, that those to whom by Gods appointment such wives have fallen, would
remember themselves that they are Christians. And that first they would think
to bring their wives to better ways, if it may be: but if that cannot be, that
then they take the benefit of their own liberty, but not without their own
hearts grief in that case also. Peter Martyr has two cautions; one, that the
man had need to be honest himself; the other, P. Martyr. In 1. Cor. 7.1552.
and habetur in locis. com. Sect. 68. page 306.
not to go without authority therein. For the former, periniquu^ judico, says
he, ut vir exigat ab uxore pudicitiam, quam ipse illi non exhibet (which he
says was the law of Antonius) that is, I take it to be very bad dealing, that
the husband should exact chastity of his wife, who does not yield the same to
her himself likewise. For the latter, Sect. 56. page 302.
Si quis autem propter stuprum solus cogatur degere, etc, cum eifacere leges
copiam nolint secundarum nuptiarum, etc: certe no^ possunt ei occurrere nisi
duo remedia: ut etc, jam arbitretur se a Deo vocationem habere ad coelibatum,
etc: aut, etc, si putet sibi expedire, ut liberate a Deo concessa utatur, etc:
conferat se in regiones ubi hoc liceat. That is, (so much as I thought good to
draw out of the place it self) But if (by putting away his wife for whoredom)
a man be compelled to live single, as in case, when the laws (of his country)
will not suffer him to marry again, he truly can have his choice but of one
of these two remedies: that now he account himself to have a calling from God
to single life; or if he think it expedient for him to use that liberty that
God has given him, that he then get him into those countries that will allow
him so to do. Again, Quin and in his quae Scriptura expressit, Ibid.
nihil absque Magistratus approbatione audendum judico: or, as by and by after
he says, publicis legibus vetantibus, that is, eve^ in these things that the
Scripture has expressly allowed, I think that nothing is to be attempted
without the Magistrates leave, or whenever the Laws of the country forbid
the same. And his reason there, is, for that although marriage be the ordinance
of God: yet for the circumstances thereunto appertaining, it has diverse
things that are to be governed by the positive laws. Kemnisius likewise,
writing against that part of the Council or Chapter of Trent 1566. Kemnisius.
Part 2, sess. 8. can. 7. page 2.87.
Omnino (says he) quantum salva conscientia fieri potest, opera danda est, ut
divortia etiam legitima caveantur, nexus conjugalis vel indissolubiliter
servetur, vel si interruptus fuerit, redintegretur. That is, In any wise we
must take heed, so far as with good conscience we may, that we take heed,
even of lawful divorces also, and that the bond of marriage either inviolably
be kept, or if that be (at any time) broken, that then it be made up again.
And a little after, Et pijs omnibus probatur, ut non statim ad divortia
prosiliatur, sed prius tententur omnia quae reconciliationi and redintegrationi
servire possunt. Ibid, p. 283.
Omnia enim mihi licent, sed non omnia expediunt, and aedificant, inquit
Paulus. That is, And it is thought meet by all good men, that men do not
forthwith set in hand with divorce, but that all things be first as^aied, that
may help forward reconciliation, and to make up the breach again. For all
things are lawful, but not all things expedient, and unto edifying, Beza. De
repud, and divor.
says the Apostle S. Paul. Beza likewise, in that special Treatice of his on
this matter published 1573. though he be much harder, Ob. 15. page 111:112.
than others of his fellows in this point, and thereupon sets down, that
although himself do pronounce them to be, veluti altero oculo captos, qui in
hoc unum ita sunt intenti, ut nocentem innoce^tireconcilient, ut interim
perexiguam habeant innoce^tis ratione^: yet both he disalloweth of the judgment
of those, that hold, that the innocent party is bound, dimittere potius qua^
illi reconciliari (which is somewhat:) and afterward more liberally he adds,
that of the two, he rather allows of them, qui reconciliandis potius, quam
sublata omni spe instaurationis, seperandis conjugibus student; (a great
matter.) So, his meaning is this, that although he account them al but one-eied
men, that in such sort labor to reco^cile the party offending unto the
innocent, that they have but little care how to provide for the innocent also:
yet neither is he of the mind of those, who account the innocent party bound,
rather to put away his wife offending, than to be reconciled unto her again;
and (that more is) does also allow, much more of those that labor that
atonement, than of those that labor to sunder them, without any hope of any
restitution after. Afterward again both he says, that it were praise worthy,
Page 113. Page 115.
not to do it without the leave of the Church, and going against that opinion
of Bueer, that seeing the Lord would have an adulteress put to death, he would
not have their husbands to keep them: he answers, hinc minime consequi, nefas
esse maritis (si cessent Magistratus) uxores resipisce^tes ex charitatis
Christianae norma recipere. Lex enim illa, quid facere Magistratus, non quid
privatos oporteat, praescribit. That is, that it does not follow thereon, that
it were any great offense, unto husbands according to the rule of Christian
charity, to receive their offending wives, when they are penitent. For that
Law (says he) does prescribe, what Magistrates, not what private men are in
such case to do. Lastly, Zegedinus in those common places of his, Zegedinus. De
coniug. and divor.
which in tables were published 1585, moving the question, whether the innocent
party, if he cannot contain may marry again, he answers, Tab. 2. page 354.
Bona conscientia id facere potest, Sect. 6.
at non absque Ecclesiae, ac etiam pij magistratus venia, ut infirmorum
offendiculis occurratur. That is, with good conscience he may: but not without
the License of the Church, and of the godly Magistrates too; that the weak be
not offended thereby. In all which we see, that they do not so absolutely allow
of divorce and marrying again, but that themselves also do something
restrain it, less or more, as every one is therein persuaded. So that if in
the end it do fall out (as for my part I think that it will) that in the
written word they have no warrant to grant so much as they do: then shall we
less marvel to see, that they do so much abridge and take short the self
same thing, that otherwise they are so willing to grant.

6 When in this sort they have resolved; then are we to see, Upon how weak
reasons they have grown to this resolution.
what other things they have besides, which may be some warning unto us, to
take heed, that we rest not too much on their judgments: and those may we
account to be of two chief and principal sorts. First the reasons alleged to
have induced them so to determine: then, the Protestations that they have
joined thereunto; and, as it may seem to qualify the hardness of their
judgment therein. As touching the reasons that induced the^ so to determine,
Erasmus, Erasmus.
when first he opened that passage (to himself and to those that would follow)
was so careful to set them down, that it seems others did not after think
it needful, to prosecute the same any farther: and so shall we also content
our selves to go no farther, but only to allege such reasons as he thought
meetest to use. And those reasons that he alleges, me think, we may reduce
unto two principal sorts: whereof some there are, that simply arise out of the
matter that is in question; others, that stand but only by the way of
comparison. Those that simply arise out of the matter that is in quaestion, do
some of the^ more specially concern the substance of it: others again, that
are taken of such matters as are but accede^tary thereunto. Those that concern
the substance of it, are all such discommodities as commonly hau^t disorderly
marriages (especially those, wherein the bond of wedlock is broken) which he
thinks to be so many and great, that S. Paul himself would have borne more
with them in that matter, as he is persuaded, if it had been propounded unto
him. Page 504.
Quod si Paulo (says he) proposita fuisset huiusmodi causa, stultus cum
stulta, puer cum puella contraxit, intercesserunt lenae, vinum, temeritas, art
in nassam inducti sunt etc, nihil inter coniunctos convenit, tunta est morum
and ingeniorum dissimilit udo, rixae iuges, odium immedicabile, timetur
venenum, timentur caedes, nihil no^ malorum expectatur, neuter coelebs potest
vivere, etc.: fortassis pro causae circumstantiis, aliud responderet Apostolus,
and nonnihil relaxaret de rigore co^silii superioris, suaque scripta civilius
opinor nobis interpretaretur, quam nos interpretamur. that is, But if this case
had bin propounded to Paul, one fool with another, a boy and a wench have
married together; bawdes, drunkenness, and rashness were doers therein; by
craft they were so far entangled: being so married, now they agree not, so
diverse are they in their ways and disposition: continual chidings, extreme
hatred; poisoning, and murder are feared also, and they look for none other
but for all manner of evil (each from other;) neither of them can live single:
it may be, that according as the circumstances of the case should require, the
Apostle would give some other answer, and would let down a good part of the
rigor of his former advise, and would interpret his writings unto us more
courteously then we our selves do. In which his speech though there be some
inconvenience besides: yet (leaving that to his proper place) now I bring it in
but only to this end, to show of what force he took the calamities of
disorderly marriages to be to the matter he has in hand; namely, to break of,
and to marry again. For so he says, Ibid.
Si cohaerent, bis perit uterque: si mutetur coniugium, spes est utrumque fore
incolumem. that is, If still they abide together, each of them does certainly
perish: if they may break of, and marry again, there is good hope, that both
shall be safe. Those matters that are but accidentarie thereunto, and out of
which he draws some reasons likewise, are the Scriptures thereunto
appertaining: and the judgment of others thereon. Of the Scripture he says,
Page 505.
videbam Scripturam hac in part, vt plerisque esse perplexam, and ancipitem,
that is, that he saw the Scripture to be in this point, as in many others,
intricate, and doubtful: and thereupon (belike) accounted that he might be
the boulder to afford his patronage to this, when as he thought that the
Scripture would not be against him therein. Out of the judgment of others he
chooses out two several considerations: one, that the old and the new did not
agree together; the other, that such things as were objected by those that were
of the contrary mind might easily be answered. Ibid.
For the former he says, Videbam veteres interpretes doctissimos, a
recentioribus dissidere; and for the latter, Ibid.
that he saw likewise, ea quae obijciuntur, facile posse dilui, citra nostrae
religionis injuriam: and so reasoning from these (as I do conceive him) out of
the former, that it should be no new, nor absurd thing for him neither, to
dissent from others herein; and out of the latter, that there were no danger of
hurt to come thereby, when as, by it, our religion should be nothing impaired.
Those reasons of his that do stand only by the way of comparison, are of two
sorts also: some, that stand in comparion of persons only; others, that
compare the matter in quaestion with others not unlike decided already. The
persons are of two sorts likewise: the Church or whole Body of the faithful;
and the Bishop of Rome, then the supposed Head of the same in earth among us.
From the Church he draws two reasons: one, of the authority of it, that
Christ did give it; the other, of the good direction that it has by the Spirit
of Christ her husband. For the former he says, Ibid.
Videbam quanta sit authoritas Ecclesiae a Christo tributa, cui dederit claves
regni coelorum; and so, that she might well set it down, by the authority to
her committed: and for the latter, that he accounted with himself, Ecclesiam
habere sui sponsi Spiritum, neque posse non recte statui, quod ad hominum
salutem, illo authore statueretur; Ibid.
and so gathering thereby, that if she should take such order, it must needs
be well ordained. From the Pope, he draws other two reasons likewise: one,
of a special good likelihood, that he would be most willing to help in time
of need: the other, of the ability or power that he conceaueth him to have to
do good therein. Of the former of these he says, Ibid.
Videbam quam esset ingens Romani Pontificis clementia, qui succurrat etiam iis
qui apud inferos, citra periculum exitii aeterni, cruciarentur, thereon
gathering, that seeing his compassion is so great toward those that are none
of us now, it cannot be, but that much rather he will help those that are so
much nearer unto him Of his praesupposed power, he reasons likewise two
several ways: one way, out of the general consideration of the whole; the
other, out of a more special consideration of it, as it has been employed,
and what force it has had in matters of much like nature to this. Of the
former he says, Ibid.
Videbam hoc tribui Pontifici Romano, ut Evangelicam and Apostolicam doctrinam
interpretetur, astringat, laxet, dispenset, and iuxta quosdam etiam abroget
aliqua in part: so gathering thereby, that seeing it is so commonly given to
the Bishop of Rome, not only to interpret the holy Scripture, but also to
enforce the same somewhat further, and to let it down again when he thinks
good, or to remit some part of it, as also to dispense therewith, and (in the
judgment of some) even to abrogate some part of it also; then need not he (as
I do conceive him) be thought to importune him too much, that does but comme^d
this to his good consideration, and no further neither the^ himself shall
think good to deal therein. In the latter he does not only set down the
ground of his reason: but himself also adds (more then before) what it is
that he gathers out of the same. The ground of his reason therein is, Ibid.
that he saw; per Romanum Pontificem person as reddi inhabiles, quos neque
natura, neque lex divina fecerat inhabiles: that is, that certain persons were
by the Bishop of Rome made unable (to marry) whom neither nature, nor the law
of God had made unable. That which himself does gather out of the same, is,
that it seems to be eiusdem potestatis, hominis autoritate vetare ne coeat
matrimonium; and efficere, ut dirimatur matrimonium. That is, of like power
that by man's authority marriage may be prohibited to any, and to bring to
pass, that when it is made, it be broken again. Those other matters not
unlike to this, decided already, out of which he brings some reasons also,
are first the allowance of divorce by men of great reckoning: then also the
breaking of, both of espousals and marriage also, in diverse cases. For the
former of those he says, Videbam viros olim probatae doctrine, sanctimoniae
que, Ibid.
non fuisse deterritos Evangelij, Paulique verbis, quo minus admitterent
divortium: and (for further confirmation of their doing) he adds, videbam
quaedam secus posse exponi, quam hactenus exposita sint. That is, that he has
noted diverse men in times past, of undoubted learning and godliness, not to
have been terrified by the words of the Gospel, and of S. Paul, but that they
have (sometimes) admitted divorce: and that certain places (belike that seemed
most against the^) might be otherwise expounded, then hitherto they have been.
(Which expositions if we may account the^ those, that himself in that Treatice
brings in, the^ is it not unworthy the marking, whether most of those that
are of that mind, do not since themselves also urge them unto us, as the
truth indeed, without any great examining of them, how they stand with other
Scripture.) For the former of the other two, espousals I mean, he says that
he saw, ob professionem instituti humani, ob mutatum pallium, sponsum
legitimum fraudari sua sponsa: that is, that for the profession of some
ordinance of man, even for the changing of the attire, a man lawfully espoused
or handfast, should be defrauded of his espoused wife. And for the latter, that
he saw likewise in that age of his, matrimonium dirimi ob errorem personae and
conditionis, etiam consummatum coitu: and, ob lapsum in haeresim, etiam illud
dissolvi, de quo dubitari non poterat, quin verum esset matrimonium. That is,
that he had seen likewise, marriage to be accounted void, for the error either
of person or condition, although it were consummate before with copulation: and
that, for falling into heresy, such marriage also was held as broken, which no
body might doubt of, but that it was true marriage indeed. In all which (these
his last reasons I mean) it seems that his inference is, that if so many
ways men make them so bold with that holy ordinance, to alter and dispose
thereof in such liberty, as in these cases they do: the^ may no body think
much with him, for no more but propounding of that, which he takes to be much
better warranted, even by the doctrine, and plain words of Christ himself.
That upon these his aforesaid reasons he thought good to propounde this matter
to be farther thought on by others, and that thereupon he does no more but
propound it neither, may sufficiently appear both in the words that he uses
withal: as namely, when a little before his reasons, and in the end of
handling the matter it self, he says, Haec tamen paucis libuit delibare, quo
doctis a^ studiosis uberiorem cogitandi materiam praeberemus: and immediately
after, His rebus commota charitas Christiana, proposuit ijs qui me plus
cernunt, dispicerent, si qua ratione sermo Eva^gelicus ac Pauli dispensari
posset ad plurimorum sulutem, etc. And anon after, Quod si hoc quod opto, fieri
non potest, certe illud potest statui, ne matrimonia praeter veterum omnium
morem, praeter aequitatem naturalem tam facile, ne dica^ta^ temere, coeant.
That is, yet these few things I thought good to give in as a taste, that I
might give occasion unto the learned and studious, to think better thereupon:
and, which follows, that Christian charity being moved herewith, has
propounded thus much to those that do see farther tha^ I, to the end that they
should consider, whether by any means that speech in the Gospel, and in S.
Paul, might be dispensed, to the good or safety of many. But if that which I
wish may not be obtained, yet certainly there might be order taken, that
marriages should not henceforth be so lightly, and so rashly made, so far
vnlik^ to all former good usage, yea and to natural equity it self. Sect. 7.
Which things I have more specially noted for two principal causes: one,
concerning the validity or force of the reasons he brings the other, how far
he builds thereon. The force of the reasons the greater it is, the iuster
cause was there then, and yet is, to help forward that motion so well as we
can: the weaker they are, the less need we to account our selves urged
thereby, to follow the course that they may seem to commend unto us. How far
he builds thereon would be marked likewise, because he does proceed no farther
thereon, but to make this motion only: whereon, if others since have set an
heavier building, by overruling that point as a manifest truth, that crept in
but (as it were) two days before, as a poor and a doubtful question, it
seems to me, either that they have more and greater reasons whereupon they
are gone so far; or else (which I rather think) that they have raised more
building thereon, than the foundation is able to bear.

7 What protestations they have thought good to join thereunto, What
protestations they vie withal.
(and belike to qualify the hardness of their judgment therein) is so much the
more needful to be considered, for that otherwise we might either charge them
farther than justly we may, or suffer our selves to be carried farther by them
than we ought. Both which are (so much as we may) to be avoided* the on^, for
the duty that we owe unto them; the other, for the care that we ought to have
of our selves. In which although chiefly I mean to rest on Erasmus, also for
that he was (so much as he was) our leader herein: yet shall it not be
amiss, somewhat to hear some others also, especially one, that most of all
has advanced that persuasion in these our days. In Erasmus (we ^inde, some
part of those his protestations to appertain to that whole work of his
wherein his Treatice is of divorce, and marrying again (his Annotations on the
New Testament) and some part of them more properly to belong to that very
matter, that now we have in question among us. Of those that belong to that
whole work of his, I have noted a couple: one, that shows how little he
arrogateth unto himself therein; an other that does show likewise, what
liberty he leaves unto his Reader. For the former he says, In praefat. page
ulc.
Nos ad utrumque juxta parati sumus, ut vel rationem reddamus si quid recte
monuimus, velingenue confiteamur errorem sicubi lapsi deprehendimur. Homines
sumus, and humani nihil alienum a nobis esse ducimus. That is, We are alike
ready to both these, either to give a reason of it, if any where we have
advised well, or plainly and readily to acknowledge our error, if any where we
be found so far to have slipped. For the latter he says likewise (after that
he craved but such indifferency as is afforded to all offenders at the Bar
generally, namely, that his book may first be read, before it be condemned by
any.) Legate prius ac inspiciat, deinde si videatur, damnet, ac reijciat. That
is, Ibid.
Let a man first read it and look into it, and then, if he think good let
him condemn it, and cast it from him. Of these that do more properly belong
to that very matter that is in question, I have noted likewise a couple in the
beginning of that his Treatice: and one other, toward the end. In those that
he has in the beginning first he protests his own good meaning therein, that
he does it but to enquire of the truth, and not to be contentious therein:
then after, he sets good reasonable bounds for the better deciding of it. As
touching the former, his words are these, In 1. Co^* 7. page 491
Ut semel in hujus operis initio sum testatus, perpetuo testatum haberi par
est, in toto opere me nus quam esse velle contentiosi dogmatis autorem; tantum
juvandi studio monere studiosos: semper inconcusso, and illabefacto judicio
sacrosanctae Ecclesiae; et eorum quibus uberius donum eruditionis et sapientiae
contigit a Christo: that is, As once in the beginning of this work I did
acknowledge, I think it mere to be acknowledged still, that throughout the
whole work I will never be author of any contentious opinion, and that my
meaning is but only to admonish the studious for their help: always reserving
the judgment of the holy Church, and of those on whom Christ has bestowed a
better gift of learning and wisdom, altogether untouched by me. As touching
the latter he says likewise a little after, Caeterum, si semper hoc bonis
viris cordi fuit, Ibid.
opinionem in melius commutare, and leges seu pharmaca co^venit ad morborum
habitum and rationem accommodare, consideremus an hic expediat idem fieri: and,
si expedit, an liceat ut matrimonia quaedam dirimantur, non temere, sed
gravibus de causis, neque per quoslibet, sed per Ecclesiae Praefectos, aut
Iudices legitimos: and ita dirimantur vt liberum sit utrique cui velit iungi,
aut alteri certe, qui divortio non dedit causam. that is, But if it ever
pleased good men well, to change their opinion unto the better, and if it be
good to frame our Laws even as medicines unto the nature or manner of our
diseases, let us consider, whether in this also it be good so to do: and if it
be expedient, whether (then) it be lawful or permitted unto us, that certain
marriages may be broken asunder again not lightly, but when the cause is
weighty, nor by any whomsoever but by the Governors in the Church, or other
lawful Judges: and that those marriages may in such sort be broken asunder,
that it may be free for either party to marry again where they think good,
or at least for the one of them, the same that gave no cause of divorce. That
which he has toward the end, is much like to the former of these, and of the
same nature with it. For when he has before protested, that he did propound
this but to whet up the studious to a further consideration of it, he
infers thereupon, Ibid. page 505.
Nec vllo pacto iudicio maiorum ob haec praeire conamur, multo minus Ecclesiae
Catholicae. that is, Neither do we in any wise hereby desire, to preve^t the
judgment of our betters, much less of the Catholic Church. Those others that
I have thought good to bring forth to be heard in this cause besides, are two:
Peter Martyr; and Beza. P. Martyr.
Peter Martyr though he run the self same course in effect, that Erasmus had
before propounded and laid it open to those that would: yet both he would have
the Magistrates leave first obtained as we saw before, and having then set
down a good piece of his mind before for that matter, in five whole Sections,
in the end of the fifth he adds, In 1 Cor. 7. and 7. et in Loc. com. Sect. 56.
p. 302.
Haec a me sictraduntur, ut melius, ac sanius consilium perpetuo sim paratus,
and audire, atque admittere. that is, These things are in such sort delivered
by me, that I am ever ready, both to hear and to admit any better and sounder
advise. Which words of his if we restrain only to that point that
immediately goes (in that place) before, both I should think that we should
do him manifest wrong, and that his own very words (not speaking of one, but
of more) would much favor our conviction therein: and if we enlarge them unto
the whole, or to the drift of his opinion in all those points before delivered,
then may we see that he was not (as some others are) so peremptory therein, but
that he professes that he would be ready so far to change, as at any time he
should see any better. Beza is more resolute in it, and has more largely
handled that argument; yet may we see, that he also does something moderate
himself therein: and that, both in his Epistle prefixed before the Book that
he wrote; and afterward also, in a special point of the Treatice it self. In
his Epistle it shall be good to consider, first what he says for the matter it
self: then, of his own dealing therein. For the matter it self he says,
Opusc. vol. 2. page 3.
that Nihil prohibet de istis quaeri and diverse as eoru^ sententias audiri,
quos apparet veritatis investigandae studio duci, modo publica authoritate
receptis pertinaciter non obsistatur. that is, Nothing lets, but that these
things may be called in question, and the opinions of those be heard, who seem
to be led with a desire to search out the truth, so that no stubborn
resistance be made to such things, as are by public authority already
received. Of his own dealing therein he says likewise, both that he could not
satisfy himself therein: and that his mind was not, any way to prejudice the
judgment of others. For as touching the former, his words be these, Neque vero
ipse mihi in hoc argumento satisfeci: sed doctiorum theologorum studia mihi
satis fuit commovisse. that is, Ibid.
Neither could I in this argument satisfy my self: but it was enough for me,
to have stirred up the studies of more learned divines. As touching the latter,
he says likewise, Ego, quid mihi de istiusmodi multis videatur, quasi vnus
quispiam exposui, nec cuiquam praejudiciu^ factum volui. that is, Ibid. page 4.
What my mind is concerning many such things as these, I have, as one of the
rest, declared and would not that any should be prejudiced thereby. That which
he has in a special point of the Treatice it self, is, that there handling
the question, whether the innocent party be bound in conscience utterly to
abandon his wife, or if she repent, to take her again, Sect. 8.
though there he acknowledges that it is not his part to send them away
doubtful therein: yet he takes hold of an other part of his function also
(non vt leges cuiquam praescribam) that he was not then to prescribe any laws
unto them, De repud. and divort. page 114.
and so may seem thereby to acknowledge, that albeit he then declared his mind
therein, yet meant he no otherwise, but to leave them unto the freedom of
their own judgment withal. Again Dixi quid mihi hic videatur: suum cuique
liberum iudicium esto, modo ex verbo Dei quisque sapiat. that is, I have showed
what is my judgment thereon: let every one be persuaded therein as himself
thinks good, so that he ground himself therein, on the word of God.

How far we may gather hereon: nothing at all to their disgrace; but only to
our own better instruction.
8 Now that we may more orderly gather what we are to think of these
resolutions, alleging of reason, and protestations, so doubtful, so limited,
and so fensed speeches, and how far we are to take the advantage of them, and
withal to show, why I have in this place presented a certain of them unto the
view: I am here to admonish; first that one way there is, wherein it may be
that some will take them, which in no wise is meant by me, but another there
is, which willingly I do acknowledge to be my meaning indeed. That which is
not meant by me, is, if any should so take them, as if I had alleged them in
the way of disgrace to those that wrote them: a thing of that nature, that
neither might I justly do it: neither would I though so I might. I might not
justly do it, because there were no cause so to do. For the case being such
as it is, they could write no more certainly, nor more boldly then they did so
long as yet they did not epsy how wrong they were, in some of the maine
principles of it. So that in such case they are so far from the desert of just
reproof, for not being resolute, but using great warines and limitation in all
such speeches as thereof they deliver, that it rather deserves right good
commendations, that in a case so intricate, doubtful and strange (as they did
take it) they framed their speeches so suitable unto it: that as those speeches
of theirs were sufficient tokens to all, how hardly themselves took upon them
to go so far as they did; even so might they be as good warnings to others,
there to read with the better attention and judgment, and not so much to
embrace the opinion that such have conceived, as to examine and ponder the
reasons, whereby they suffered themselves to be thereunto induced. And although
it be expected at the hands of all that are to lead others, that they be
resolute in that which they teach: yet if at any time the case be such, that
just occasion be given to give in their judgment of such things as yet are
not (among the learned) so fully decided, then is there no more at their hands
expected, then to deliver their mind accordingly. In a firm, plain, ready,
and beaten way, howsoever men are wont more freely to ride: yet if it be
covered with snow, rough, or stony, or yield any semblance of quicksands or
miers, although in such case there are found sometimes, that then also will
ride freely enough; yet was it ever, and ever will be accounted more wisdom,
in all such cases to be more wary. Examples hereof we have very many,
wheresoever the Scriptures have not so fully declared those things that
nevertheless we think are enough decided by them; as, at what time the
Angels were made: or, when the matters are prophetical, and extend to a farther
time then is conceived; as, the manner of Antichrist and of his coming to the
Fathers of old, and of the calling of the Jews and Turks to the knowledge of
Christ before the last day, to us now. Of which things (and some others
besides) those that have written (even the best of them all) may easily be
found to have diverse ambiguous and timorous speeches: and yet notwithstanding
are not therein to be hardly ce^sured neither, for that (as those matters are)
there was nothing more that justly might be expected of them. And so to come to
these others again, as in right I might not seek their disgrace thereby, as
having no sufficient ground work unto it: so God forbid, that if I had, yet I
should at any time have that meaning with me, being as they are, not only
partakers of the selfsame Grace with us; but also such instruments to the
advancement of the glory of God, and so comfortable lights to all the faithful
in these our days, as that the Church of God has seldom (if at any time)
had, for those matters, a greater blessing. That other which is my meaning
indeed, is, no more but to note, that seeing they are not, in that matter,
more fully resolved, there is no certainety (nor any great good likelihood
neither) for any to ground themselves upon, that gladly would take up that
opinion with them. If we had found them so resolute in it, that, without any
doubting, and without referring themselves unto those that might see farther
therein, they had flatly and boldly pronounced, that it was the undoubted word
of God, though therein also (in accepting of it) we might have been deceived,
as not looking unto the matter it self, with our own, but with other folks
eyes: yet had that been a more tolerable error a great deal, and more easy
(by many degrees) to be excused, especially to those* that in such cases are
(in many things) to depend upon others, either for that they are otherwise
employed, than that they may give themselves to such reading as such matters
require, or, if they may, yet have they not that depth of judgment, that such
things require. But when as themselves, whom we are content to make our
leaders therein, being in other things resolute enough, and as bold as Lions,
do not set down their opinion in this, but with great warines, doubtfulnes and
fear, with so many cautions and allegations, with such submissions and
protestations* it would be no final wonder to me (but that I know, how
inclinable to such things we are by nature) not only that any should be so
loose as to enter that course, but also that any should so much as conceive,
that such kind of speeches should be likely to yield any such ground, as
whereon a man that were willing so to do, might be bold to build, and to make
no doubt but that he had his warrant with him. We know well enough (and in many
other things strongly hold it against the adherents of the Church of Rome) that
we may do nothing at all but only that, for which we have some undoubted
warrant in the written word: and yet notwithstanding (I will not say that I
wot not how it comes to pass for that it is by our own bad inclination) we
are so far bewitched in this that finding great staggering in those that are
the stro^gest for it, and most forward in defense thereof, we nevertheless
conceive, that therein we have warrant enough. So easy a thing it is to bend
those, that so handsomely crook to such purpose already: and, in the freedom
we have in Christ so quickly to take hold, of an unseasonable liberty of the
flesh. But here we must take heed we forget not that is yet we do not consider
what it is that they bring but only, that whatsoever it be yet because the^
selves are no better resolved, therefore may no body be so bold as to build
upon them. We will not yet deny, but that, for ought we see yet, Sect. 9.
the truth indeed may be as they conceive: but if themselves be no better
resolved, then though they have the truth therein, yet because it is more then
themselves do know of, even that only is enough for the time to stay us,
until we see farther.

Of the places themselves.
9 That other part of that which themselves do set down for this matter, does
chiefly respect those places aforesaid, which they use to bring in for that
opinion of theirs: and partly the first four places of them; but then
especially, the other two. For seeing themselves do rest but little in the
first four of the^, but yet very much in the other two we also may briefly
dispatch those others, and follow them only in those wherein themselves do
think that they have their chiefest strength. Those therefore that belong to
the first four of them, are no more but these two: The first 4. of them.
one, concerning the nature of those places themselves; the other, as touching
the gathering of them. Concerning the nature of those places themselves, it is
no more but this, that, to see to, they do make much more against them (for
that they note such kind of divorce with so great reproach) than any way else
they can make for them; take them to the best advantage they can. As touching
the other, that is, how these do gather upon the^, it is no more but this,
that from those places it is, that they gather some part of their weak
co^clusions, as elsewhere in a fitter place is declared: which also is, for any
thing that yet I have found, the only benefit that to that opinion of theirs,
they seek to draw from these four places. The two latter.
Those that belong to the latter two only, are much like to the others: one of
them, in like sort concerning the nature of those places themselves; the other,
not how weakly they gather on these, but how clean they do mistake them. The
nature of those places is such, Sect. 10.
as that although the text therein were such as they conceive, yet even then
also do they make but little for any divorce: the judgment of the better sort
of the learned being thereon, that neither Moses before, nor Malachie after,
did simply allow it unto the^ but only in respect, or to some purpose, namely,
to avoid some further evil. But now, if they do mistake them withal, so that
the Text (being better considered) can never be found to yield any such sense,
as hitherto they have conceived, nor any thing at all for the opinion that they
have taken, then must their case be so much the harder, or rather their credit,
on this behalf, so very much sunk, as that their whole judgment therein, may
well be called in question for it.

10. This mistaking of theirs therefore being a matter of so special
importance, How the places of Scripture were taken by them.
it shall be good more specially to consider, first, whether they do mistake
them, or not; then, if it fall out that so they do, what we are to gather
thereon, concerning the matter we have in hand. That they do mistake them
indeed, will soon appear, if first we mark how they do take them: and then
examine that their taking of them, with such things as may be able to show us
the truth therein. How they do take them will best appear by their own
speeches of that matter. First therefore to begin with Erasmus, By Erasmus when
first he gave forth his judgment on them.
that was so forward therein, it shall be good to mark how he mistook it, not
only when first he gave forth his judgment therein: but also, when afterward
he was so impugned for it, that thereby he might have taken just occasion to
have looked better unto it. When first he gave forth his judgment of it,
Divortium, says he, ipfa lex palam indulget: that is, The law does plainly
allow of divorce. Again, Lex permittat mari^is qualibet ex causa repudiare,
modo dent libellum repudii: In Annot. in 1. Cor. 7. page 503.
that is, That the law suffers husbands for every cause to put away their
wives, so that they give them a bil of divorcement. Again, Viro permittit* ob
causam quamlibet, mutare vxorem. that is, He allows or suffers the husband,
to exchange his wife, for whatsoever cause he will. The same he has in so
many other places besides (or at least the effect thereof) that it is evide^t,
that it was not a slip in him against his own knowledge or will: but his own
very judgment, as he did then think that the Text it self would bear. As
this one place more will sufficiently declare, wherein he does not only
affirm it, as before, but also does further reason upon it. At mihi, says he,
non fit verisimile peccaturum fuisse Iudaeum si vxorem egregie so leratam
abiecisset, Ibid. p. 505.
and alteram duxisset domum: quum id lex palam concederet, nihil addens, hoc
datum duritiei cordis, praesertim cum ex sensu naturae, non posset fieri, quod
nos interpretamur. Et si concessum est duritiei cordis, utique licet, quod
concedit Deus: praesertim si nullo signo declaret eos peecare, qui permisso
vta^tur. that is, But it should not seem likely to me that a Jew should sin,
who had cast away his wife being a very wicked woman, and married another, when
as the law did plainly grant it, not adding thereunto, that that was granted
but for the hardness of their hearts, especially when as, by natural sense,
that cannot be known, that we gather of it (meaning, as I take it, that it was
granted but for the hardness of their hearts, which we Christians know by
Christ, but they could not know by natural reason.) And if it be granted
unto the hardness of their hearts, yet it is lawful that God has granted: at
least, if by no sign he declare, that those do offend which use the liberty
granted unto them. By these we may see, that Erasmus, Erasmus.
when he wrote that Treatice of his for divorce for adultery and marrying
again, did plainly take it, that Moses in that place of Deuteronomie, had
expressly or in plain words allowed husbands to put away their wives from them
upon dislike, so that they gave them bills of divorcement withal. When
afterward he was so impugned for it, When afterward he was impugned for it.
that thereby he might have taken just occasion to have looked better unto it,
yet then also, I do not find that ever he espied his former error, but that
still he continued in it. Of those that did reprove him for it, we find that
he does complain of diverse, and defends his doings against them so well as
he can, as against Natalis Bedda, and another whom he does not name, but he
gives a by-name unto him, Not. Bedd^ Tom. 9. p. 366. Ibid. page 775*
as him self thinks good. Among all which (for no doubt there were many more
besides those) it shall not be amiss to consider somewhat more specially of
his dealing about that matter, with one of the^, who may serve as a pattern
thereof with the rest: as also I make choice of him rather then of any other,
for that he was our own Countrima^, and by Erasmus but unthankfully used. It
was one Master Edward Lee, at that time soiourning at Lovain for learning sake,
and of so good towardness therein, Ed. Lee: In Apolog. sua Lovanii 4 Calend.
Ian. 1519.
that Erasmus himself when he came thither, sought his acquaintance, and
imparted unto him, that having set forth his annotations of the new Testament
before, he was purposed now to set them forth again, he craved his help to
note unto him whatsoever he thought might be amended. Which while M. Le did,
and (as those days were) in very good manner (as it seems by his own
defense, in his Apology in the front of his Book, in diverse of his Censures
on Erasmus Annotations, and in his answer to a couple of Erasmus Epistles in
the end) Erasmus showed himself to be so netled therewith, Sect. 8.
that even that only does much insinuate, that himself did now see, that in
some things he had lost the advantage. Else would he never so much have sought
to shake him of with contempt as he did, In responsione ad Annotationes Ed.
Leinovas ad annot 17. Tom. 9. pa. 221.
charging him, that nondum vllum in professione Theologica gradum adeptus est,
nec aliud quam artium liberalium septem professor, that is, that as yet he had
taken no degree at all in Divinity, but only was a professor of the seven
liberal Sciences, or as we commonly say, a Master of Art. As shortly after he
gives this frump withal, that whereas M. Lee had said, that he had left the
study of those liberal Sciences, and had bid them farewell, eodem opinor
tempore, says he, quo dixit illis salve: that is even the self same time, I
think, wherein first he bad them good morrow: meaning thereby, that therein
also he had profited nothing at all, as presently he says more plainly (if
more plain may be) that in those things that he had written against him,
there was nullum vestigium honestae disciplina, that is, not so much as any one
token of good learning in him: clean contrary to that which every one may see,
that shall read M. Lees writings against him. M. Lee himself does also charge
him with much other base dealing besides in that quarrel, and such as did not
become the order it self, whereof they were both alike partakers. Vt caetera,
In resp. ad Epistolas Erasmi fol. 140.
says he, omittam, quae non tam contemptim haberi oportuit, vel hujus
Sacerdotii ratio fuerat habenda tibi, quo ne me Christu^ Domini, ipse etia^
Domini, tam sordide foedares. that is, Omitting other considerations, in
respect whereof you should not have had me in so deep contempt, you ought to
have made some better account even on the order of Priesthood (only, though
there were nothing else besides) than that you being anointed of the Lord your
self, Sect. 10.
should so fowly bewray me an (other such like) Anointed of the Lord likewise.
But for the quarrel that was betwixt them, I meddle not with it: but leave them
both to their best advantage therein. Only thus much I gather, that whereas Mr
Le was of such towardnes then, that Erasmus himself desired his acquaintance
for his learning sake, and his special help therein, and not many years after
became Archbishop of York besides, it seems to me, that some where or other
(and as likely in this as in any where else) Erasmus did leese some special
advantage to Master Le, and so had he found in this I perceive if Master Le had
taken the advantage of it, and had called his adversary unto the Original.
But Erasmus himself also being thus provoked, and much more tha^ so, yet he
neither makes his recourse unto the Original: which notwithstanding in this
case had been much better, than so to labor the disgrace of those, that so
well had occasioned him to take that course. And now not to trouble the Reader
with the like sentences of others (which notwithstanding I thought to have
done, and had provided them accordingly) least so I might have grown tedious
therein, I will no more but note who^ I have noted besides so to have missed,
and the places where those misses of theirs are to be found: namely Musculus,
Musculu^.
on the fifth of Matthew, page 111. Peter Martyr, P. Martyr.
in diverse places, on the 1. Cor. 7. 7. and, as it is placed in his Common
Places Sect. 52. and 66. page 301, 3, 5, and 6. Calvine, Calvine.
in his Com: on the Harm. of the Gospels, on Mat. 5.31. and 19, 7. Gualter,
Gua^ter.
on Mark 10, and Malachie the 2. fol. 399.8. Chemnicius in his second part of
the Exam: Mart. Che^nicius.
of the counsel of Trent. Sess. 8. Can. 7. page 286, 8. Beza, Beza.
in diverse places of his Book de repudijs and divortijs, among his Opusc. vol.
2. page 113, 15, and 17. Sect. 11.
And last of all Steph. Szegedinus in his Tables of Common places. page 348.49.
Steph. Szegedinus.
For that of Malachie, I have not noted that Erasmus has meddled with it, but
Musculus, Peter Martyr, Calvin and Gualter in the places before recited, and
all others generally that are for divorce and marrying again (so many of them
as yet are extant that I have seen) do even so take it, after one and the
self same manner.

That so taking the^, they did mistake the^
11 That in such sort taking those Texts, they do (it may well be, and is most
likely) clean mistake them, it will best appear by the several consideration
of either of the^: first, that of Deuteronomy; then, that other of Malachie
also. For that of Deuteronomie, First that place of Deuteronomie. 24: ^* 4.
first we have certain probabilities, that it was never intended there, to
give any license of such Divorce: then also (as I do take it) much other good
proof besides. Those probabilities that we have, are some of them, out of the
Text it self: and one besides, out of the practice of the godlier sort among
them. Those that we have out of the Text, are two: one, out of that place of
Deuteronomie; the other, out of the fifth of Numbers. In that place of
Deuteronomie we plainly see, a kind of punishment to be cast on him that so
had put away his wife, namely, that if she had married another, he then
should never have her again: and, to be give^ in, in reason thereof, Per eu^
factu^ ^st etc. Trem. Iunius.
that thereby she is defiled; and that her defiling, in the judgment of some,
laid unto his charge also. If the^ the self same Text do not only something
punish him for it, but also charge him with defiling of his wife besides, eve^
only by that putting of her away at the first, it is most likely, that no such
thing is in that place allowed. That other out of the first of Numbers, is that
law of Jealousy, which (being an harder course than this, Number. 5* 13* ^1.
and a great deal more busy; and a peculiar remedy ordained when a man has
his wife in suspicion of adultery, or when as it was so indeed, but without
any witness; and not allowing the man to go any farther, but to hold himself
content, if she, in such sort as there is set down, should make her purgation)
does every way, me think, insinuate, that then there was no so easy a way as
this, for a man (for lighter matters) to be rid of his wife when he would, and
the same to stand good by the word of God. P. Martyr.
That which we have out of the practice of the better sort among them, is that
same which the learned have noted (as before I have partly touched) that in all
the Scripture we never read of any of the better sort, that ever used the
help of divorce: which notwithstanding, it is most likely, that many would
have done, if they had taken it, to have been so plainly, by God himself,
permitted unto them. That other good proof that we have besides, is the
Original or Hebrew Text and that by the judgment of diverse learned; and some
of those that were for this Divorce and marrying again, but since have amended
the mistaking that they had of the Text. The proof that we have in the
Original or Hebrew Text, and that by the judgment of diverse learned, is, that
now it is found to be otherwise in the Hebrew, tha^ our Tra^slators, either old
or new (a few excepted) of long have borne us in hand that it was: namely, that
it is not, he shall write a bill of divorcement, or, let him write a bill of
divorcement; but only, that he puts the case if so a man should do, and not
that it allows the same. And the learned that now have mended this oversight
of old that long has stood as current among us, are these. First, Imprinted by
Robert. Stephanus. 1557.
to my knowledge Franciscus Vatablus the professor of the Hebrew tongue at
Paris, F. Vatablus
and after him Benedictus Arias Montanus a Spaniard, that had the chief
oversight of the setting forth of that great Bible at the charges of the King
of Spain, Ar. Montanus.
and last of all Immanuel Tremellius, Im. Tremel.
and Franciscus Iunius together. Fra. Iunius.
All which in their Translations have very plainly amended the same: and
declared withal, that in that place there is no mention at all, of any divorce
allowed unto them, if recourse be had to the Hebrew it self. Those that were
for divorce and marrying again, and that first having erred in this Text that
now we speak of have since amended the same again, are two, and those of
special account among us, as of good right they ought to be: M. Calvine, M.
Calvine.
the one; and M. Beza likewise the other. As touching the former of them,
whereas, setting forth his Commentaries on the Harmony of the Gospels in the
year 1555. he then was of opinion (as before I have noted, and is there to be
seen of any) that Moses had commanded, a Bill of divorce should in such case
be given to the wife: afterward, having further occasion to look better unto
it, by gathering four of the Books of Moses into an Harmony also, which
accordingly he did, and published it about eight years after, in the year
1563. he did then amend his former reading of the Text it self, and in his
Commentary thereupon did set down his judgment accordingly also. As, among
other things of that nature, he comes in with these words following. Quidam
interpretes non legunt hos tres versus vno contextu, In Harm. in I^. Legis. p.
364.
sed plenam sententiam esse volunt, vt maritus testetur se divortium facere cum
vxore, non ob crimen, sed quid formae venustas eius libidini, non satisfaciat.
Si quis tamen propius attendat, facile videbit, vnum esse duncaxat Legis caput,
nempe, vbi quis vxorem repudiaverit, fas no^ esse iterum eam ducere si alteri
nupserit. that is, Certain interpreters (among whom himself was one, a few
years before) do not read these three verses (there be four in all, and so
does himself join the^) in one period: but will have one full sentence to
be, that the husband testify, that he does not divorce his wife for any
crime, but because her beauty or favor did not content him. But if any do
better mark it, he shall plainly see that the law that there is set down,
has but one branch only, which is, that when any has once put away his wife,
it should not be lawful for him to take her again, if in the mean season she
had married another (albeit the other were now dead, or had put her away
likewise.) Where also it is to be noted, that now he accounted it to be very
plain, for that he says, that a man that heedeth it, may plainly perceive
it; and that so he insinuates, that it was but want of heed taking that
therein deceived many before, as yet also it does, where it is not the better
heeded. Yet diverse then began to epsy it, and in Vatablus his Bible of 1557.
it was plainly noted, above five years, before that M. Calvine published this
that now we speak of. Master Beza, Mr Beza.
for any thing that yet I have found, is not so plain herein, as is M.
Calvine, yet has he enough of this also, to content any reasonable man. For
whereas in that Treatice of his, De repudiis and divortiis, which he published
1573. he shows himself diverse times so to have mistaken that place, as
others before were wont to do, and that so strongly, that out of the same he
reasons also, that it could not be that a man was bound to forgive his
adulterous wife (by that example of God objected out of ^he 3. Chapter of
Jeremy, Ib. page 115
and the first verse of it) for that then it should follow, illos peccasse
quilegem illam Mosis servarunt, cuius ibi facit mentionem Ieremias, quod
absurdum est dicere, quum eam e contrario servari oportuerit: that is, that
they should sin which did not observe that law of Moses, whereof mention is
made Ier. 3.1. which were absurd to say, when as, on the otherside, it was to
be observed. (which whence it comes, was apparent enough, if it be tried by
the rule which M. Calvine before set down; and then so much the rather to be
condemned thereby, as we may plainly see, by the consideration of the time,
that that wonted oversight of mistaking that place was espied, and noted so
near unto him, sixteen years before that he did publish this book of his:)
yet afterward (when Benedictus Arias Montanus also had publicly noted that
wonted oversight again, Ben. Ar. Mont.
two years before) he, in the year 1577, in that book of his which is
entitled Lex Dei moralis, Lex Dei etc. Page 75. Fr. Vatab. Tremel. Iun.
caeremonialis, politica, so sets down the Text it self, as Vatablus, and
Arias had done before, and Tremellius and Iunius since (and according as the
Hebrew it self is) saving that he makes a full period at the end of the
first sentence, whereas there is none indeed, nor ought to be, till the end of
the fourth, which might easily be the fault of his Printer. And so, by his
own reading now, it is no absurd thing to say, that those of the Jews sinned
which then did put away their wives; neither was that law so to be kept,
neither did Jeremy make mention of any such law of Moses, neither did Moses
ever make it. The^ the which, I think we need no more for this matter. But if
we do, then himself also, even in that his Book de repudiis and divortiis
does acknowledge withal, that eiusmodi divortia etsi lege civili tolerabantur,
tamen in foro conscientiae nunquam licuerunt. Ib. page 115.
that is, that such divorces, although they were tolerated by the Civil Law,
yet in court of conscience they were never lawful. Where we may note, that
although it be restrained only to such divorces; yet now he grants, Sect.
12.
that which he accounted the law of God before, is of no force in the court of
conscience: a matter sufficient, being well considered, mainely to cross the
force of the other.

12 Concerning that other of Malachie, Then that ^ther pla^e of Malachy 2:16.
we have not so much for it, in respect of the words or letter of it: but yet
somewhat more, if we go to the meaning, as there it is applied against the
people then. For as touching the words or letter of it, neither Vatablus, V.
tab. Mont.
nor Arias Montanus did for this matter swarne from the wonted reading: but
then we have, both the judgment of the Septuagint of old, and Tremellius and
Iunius of late that do. Septuag. Trem. un. Tom, 6* fol. 13^.
The Septuagint read thus (as Jerome himself does set down;) Si odio habens
dimiseris eam, dicit Dominus Deus Israel, operiet impietas cogitationes tuas,
dicit Dominus omnipotens. that is, If hating (her) thou shall put her away,
says the Lord God of Israel: impiety shall cover thy thoughts, says the Lord
Almighty. By which reading of theirs we may plainly see, that they give not
liberty unto him that hates his wife to put her away: but plainly show, that
the Lord misliketh it, if so he do. But Tremellius and Iunius do plainly
alter the reading also, referring the hating that there is spoken of, unto the
Lord, that he does hate al such putting away of their wives. For whereas the
common and wonted reading of the place is, If thou hate her put her away
says the Lord God of Israel: their reading now is, Sibi odio esse dimissionem
ait Iehova Deus Israelis. that is, That the Lord God of Israel says, that he
hates such putting away. As touching the sense or meaning of this place
notwithstanding the reading stand as it was wont, Siodio habeas dimitte etc,
First Mr Calvine says thereon, Hic rursus Prophet a exaggerat crimen illud, In
Mal. 2^ 16. page 77^
quod pro nihilo duceba^t Sacerdotes, Sect. 13.
dicit enim gravius eos peccare quam si vxores repudiarent. Scimus tamen
repudium nunquam fuisse permissum divinitus, proprie loquendo, nam etsi fuit
impunitas sub Lege, non tamen fuit permissic that is, Here again does the
Prophet exaggerate that crime, that the Priests did make so little account of,
for he says that they sin more grevously, then if they had put their wives
away. But divorce we know was never permitted of God, if we speak properly.
For although there was no punishment for it under the law: yet was it never
permitted. And after again, Haec igitur ratio est cur Propheta nunc dicat, Si
odio habeas dimitte: non quod veniam concedat repudio, que^admodum diximus: sed
vt hac circumstantia crimen augeat. that is, This therefore is the reason why
the Prophet does now say, If thou hate (her) put her away; not that he gives
them leave to divorce, as before we said; but that by this circumstance he
shows the fault to be so much the greater. Which also is the judgment of
others. So in the former of these two places we find, not only the Hebrew it
self and diverse of the learned (of special account) to show that the place
was clean mistaken before: but also, some of the chief of those that are for
divorce and marrying again, in effect to acknowledge their former oversight
therein. In the latter we have, both those seaventie Interpreters of old; and
two of special account of late, to show the very letter therein also to be
mistaken: and, though it do stand after the wonted manner of mistaking; yet
that the sense is such, as in no wise allows them so to do, as the words do
seem to leave unto them. How far this mistaking of theirs is to be urged
against the^.


13 What we are to gather thereon, concerning the matter that we have in hand,
is now to be seen: a matter that may be in few words sufficiently opened; but
yet notwithstanding so much the meeter to have a distinct place by it self, as
it is good that it should appear how far it stretches, or what bounds they
are we prescribe unto it. For otherwise it might arise in the conceit of some
to think, that my meaning is, out of the credit or learning of these that I
have brought in, to show how far those that are for divorce and marrying
again, have mistaken these places aforesaid, to conclude that those places
must needs be so as these others have now translated them; or at least, that
their opinion therein is the likelier of the two: and therefore that those that
otherwise took them, were therein without question deceived; or at least, of
the two, most likeliest to be. And the truth is, that my self am so persuaded,
as I have already declared: and have no doubt, but that therein I am not wrong.
But yet that is not the thing that now herevpo^ I mean to infer, because I have
no need at all so far to urge either their credit or learning therein. My
purpose therefore is no more but this: to show that such as think they have
warrant enough in the word of god to put away their wives for adultery and to
marry again, for that so many of the learned (and of the reformed Churches, as
some do like rather to say, though in this there be no reformation at al) are
of the same judgment likewise; may nevertheless find hereby, that their
warrant is not so sure, as they before had thought that it was. Unto which (so
long as we go no father the^ so) we have no need so far to urge them; but may
well enough content our selves with this, that those places are not so taken by
all, but that there is, among the learned themselves, a manifest diversity of
judgment therein: leaving the deciding, or the overruling of the question it
self, to fall out unto those that shall have the better part in it; and the
desire of it, to those likewise that shall need it more than we. It is enough
for us, unto the purpose that now we have in hand, to be able to show, that
diverse of the learned (and those of good account likewise) do not allow such
help unto them, as out of those places they thought that they had. Now, whether
those that do allow it, or those that now withdraw it from them, are the
righter, or nearer unto the truth therein, that will we not stick to refer to a
farther time to be farther decided (if need be) among the learned themselves*
urging it no farther at this present, but that it is not to be accounted an
undoubted truth, or a point out of question, that any liberty was at any time
given, by the law of God, so easily to put away their wives, as those places
imported, as hitherto for the most part they were delivered unto us. For so will
it plainly enough fall out, that whereas the most of our learned that are for
this kind of divorce and marrying again, do much the rather, as I do take
it, incline thereunto upon supposal that Moses first, and Malachie after, had
allowed it for lesser causes unto the Jews (so inferring, that then those
words of Christ, that are of that matter, might well enough be taken, as if
Christ's meaning therein had been, that for adultery himself also did allow it
unto us:) now finding, that it is not certain, that any such liberty, was at
any time; by any word of God granted to any, it is not unlikely, but that
themselves will be better advised of it, and rather search out some other
meaning of those words of Christ, than to make him (as else they must be feign
to do; and as after I trust to make it more plainly to appear) both the first
and the last in all Scripture, that ever allowed any divorce and marrying
again, and the only man of all the Prophets that went before, and of all the
Apostles that followed after, upon who^ not only that marrying again, Sect. 14.
but even divorce it self must stand; especially, when as they know, and
readily grant, that he came to uphold all the whole righteousness of the law of
God, and to loose none (though never so little) to any one jot of fleshly
liberty whatsoever.

14 As touching those other places of theirs, namely, Of those places that are
for marying again that they also will help them litt^e.
such as are for marrying again (wherein consists all the residue of the
strength that they have, for this conceived opinion of theirs) they also are
only two* both of them in the New Testament, and the words of Christ himself:
and nevertheless such, as when they are well examined, I believe will help them
but little neither. Which that we may the more orderly find, I hold it best,
first to see what considerations we have, that may induce us to that persuasion
then, to examine the places themselves, for the true sense and meaning of the^.
Those considerations that now I speak of which may well induce us so to think,
that in these also they have no sufficient groundworke of that their opinion,
are especially two: one, take^out of the judgment of others therein; another,
arising out of that which themselves have set down for that matter. That which
is taken out of the judgment of others, is, The judgment of others against them
that same that by other occasion before I touched, that the most part of men
are against them herein: and yet have those places as well as they, and are as
careful to leave them untouched (even at the full) unto the sense that they
ought to have. Who being as they are, both equal in learning (for any thing
that yet we know to the contrary) and more in number without comparison, may
easily induce those that stand indifferent (so long as the others bring not
better proofs to the contrary) to doubt less danger in abiding with them,
unto that resolution that being tried by long experience, Sect. 15.
is much more likely to be less faulty: than, so quickly to turn unto others,
to the embracing of a latter judgment, so lately (to speak of) sprung up among
us, and so newly broached unto us. By which kind of reasoning albeit no
certainty be to be concluded: yet neither may the probability be well
neglected. A certainty cannot be thereon concluded, because neither as yet is
it to be taken as proved by us, or granted by them (for some there are, that so
much as they may, do lean to the contrary) that they have the greater number
against the^: neither, if they had, were that any certain proof that they
were wrong. Yet, on the other side, the probability (for both) being so fair
as it is, it leaves so good a conjecture thereby, that such as take the
contrary course, may find themselves to be excluded from all good hope that
they are right: at least, that it is not a thing out of question.

Their own defects such as well may make their judgment suspected.
15 That consideration that arises out of that which themselves have set down,
is no more but this, that even their own manner of handling this matter is
such, as that diverse defects appear therein, both in weak reasoning: and in
diverse inconvenient speeches besides. As touching both which, before we come to
exemplify or to show wherein they do it, it shall not be amiss (especially to
put away such evil surmises, as otherwise might arise hereon) more distinctly
(yet briefly) to set it down, both how far we may charge them with those
defects: and how far we may thereby justly conclude against them. As touching
the former, we are not so far to charge them, as though (upon the principles
that they conceive) they had no arguments to be regarded, or that orderly did
conclude; nor that inconvenient speeches with them are so rife, as that therein
only there is sufficient cause to condemn the matter it self: but that they
do often use such, Sect. 16.
as are no good arguments indeed; and that diverse times they have inconvenient
speeches likewise. But yet by their patience (now to take in the latter withal)
they have both these so much and so often, that thereby they may justly breed
suspicion in others (even in as many as read with judgment, and stand
indifferent) that they are somewhat partial therein, and are carried not a
little with some private affection whatsoever: that in using so often so weak
collections, they do plainly insinuate, their store of stronger was not so
great; and that in adding such inconvenient speeches withal, others might
justly doubt, that then they were so far out of temper, as that they might
overshoote themselves, even in that also that is in question.

16 Wherein these defects of theirs appear, How weakly they reason, on the
things here unto appertaining* eve^ the same that are in question, and
appertain to the substance of them.
is now to be seen: and first how weaklie often times they reason; then, what
inco^venient speeches they have besides. Those reasons of theirs that now I
speak of, do most of them depend either on the things hereunto appertaining:
or, on the authority or testimony of others concerning the same. The things
hereunto appertaining, are either the selfsame that are in question: or else
certain others, of such a kind, or so near unto them, that from them they
draw certain reasons to these likewise. Of the self same that are in
question, there are two sorts: one, that is of the substance of them; others,
that are but accidentarie thereunto. That which is of the substance of them, is
the nature both of adultery, and wedlock it self in this respect. Out of the
consideration of which because they do so usually reason, therefore it shall
be good for us to note, both what reasons they are, and of what force we may
take them to be. The reasons that thereon they bring are such as bind all upon
this, that the nature of Adultery is such, as that it does quite dissolve
whatsoever band there was in marriage before: and that that was the cause, why
Christ made his exception only of it. And so they reason, not only to take away
an objection that otherwise would be strong against them: but also to express
their own opinion or judgment therein. First to take away an objection
The objection that otherwise would be strong against them is that conjunction
that God had put betwixt man and wife: whereupon it is inferred by Christ, Mat.
19: 6.
Quod Deus conianxit homo ne separet; that is, that which God has coupled, let
not man put asunder. For answer whereunto, Erasmus first says, that nullo
negotio solvi potest. Hoc Deus coniunxit, quod rite coniungitur: 1 Cor. 7. p.
499.
hoc Deus dirimit, quod rite dirimitur. that is, That doubt, says he, may
easily be loosed. For that, says he, did God join together, which was
rightly joined: and that does God himself put asunder, which is well put
asunder. And Musculus after, following the same, answers, In Mat 5. page 114.
that illi non rumpunt coniugii vinculum; but that the adulteress sua persidia
iam ante adulterando ruperit: that is, that they, (who in such case put away
their wives,) do not break the band of marriage; but that the adultresse by
her disloialty in committing adultery brake it before. To express their own
opinion or judgment therein, Then to express their own meaning therein. Ibid.
both these and others, do otherwise set down that same for the truth of
their doctrine for that point, For first Erasmus says; (Divortium) Christus
astringit ad vnam adulterii causam, non quood non sint alia flagitia adulterio
sceleratiora: sed quod adulterium tota ratione pugnet cum coniugio. Matrimonium
e duobus vnum facit: eam copulam dissecat adulteriu^. Musculus likewise, being
to show for what cause marriage may be dissolved, In Mat. 5. p. 11^.
says, Vna causa est quam Deus ponit dicendo, Nisi causa stupri. Nam hoc
crimine conjugalis fides dissoluitur. Again, Excipit causam stupri, Page 113.
significans tu^ licere etc. Quia, quod Deus conjunxerat, per adulterium
dividit, mariti fidem obnoxiam sibi iam amplius non habet, etc. Nam nemo
alterius improbitate, ius suum quod a Deo habet, etc. amittere debet. Again,
speaking of an adulterous wife Marito amplius non viuit, Page 114. P Martyr
also: loc. c. m. clas. 2. c. 10 sec 71. ^n Man 5:31. In Mat. 19.
sedei cui perfida and adultera adheret. Mr Calvine likewise, Merito abijcitur
mulier, que perfide coniugium violauit: quia eius culpa, abrupto vinculo,
libertas viro parta est. Again, additur tamen exceptio, quia mulier scortando
se quasi putridum membrum a viro rescindens, eum liberat. Gualter also, In Mar.
10. page 21. b.
being of the same mind makes his reason to be, for that the adulteress
coniugii vinculum perfide dissolvit, or otherwise sees not, but that adulteris
and scortatoribus coniugii dignitas patrocinabitur, quod Deus vt istis
vterentur, instituit. Last of all, Beza answering an argument, that so it might
come to pass, In lib de Repud. and divor^. page 110, 111.
that one man should at once have more wives: Respondeo, says he, in hoc
argumento esse petitionem principii. Praesupponit enim id ipsum, de quo
quaeritur: manner nempe vinculum matrimonij etiam post divortium. Concedo
igitur vni viro non licere plures vxores habere: sed addo, vxorem esse des^sse,
quae propter adulterium se a viro separavit. And anon after, Page 12.
Coniugii vinculum abrupit, quisquis factus est scortationis membrum. And after
that, Concludo igitur, Page 113.
adulterio abrumpi non tantum vsum, sed vinculum: quod nisi voluntate
innocentis rursum coalescit, integram esse eidem innocenti, si continere no^
potest, novas nuptias inire. etc. And lastly, Convictus adulterii, Page 116.
maritus esse desinit. The effect of all which, concerning the matter that now
we speak of, is no more but this, that (in the judgment of all these) by the
adultery of either of the parties, the bond of matrimony that was betwixt
them, is now dissolved, and broken again. Which if now we may a little examine
(notwithstanding that so great men have so resolutely overruled the same
already) it seems much rather unto me, Which judgment of theirs is further
examined, and the band of marriage further considered.
that the band of marriage is of that nature, that it is not in the power of
either of the parties, nor of both together so to break it, that now it be to
stand as altogether broken betwixt them. For there are, if we mark, two sorts
of bands wherewith they are bound the one to the other: one sort, that
concerns those parties themselves, that so do join themselves together; the
other, that concerns certain others, that join with them in that action
likewise. Those that concern the parties themselves, are two: one, of the
husband; the other, of the wife. For though they both do concur in time, so
near as may be: yet, both some little difference there is, such as it is (the
one going a little before, and the other following somewhat after) and well
they may be severally considered, as distinct things in themselves; as when
ships do grapple together, and not by the grapple of either of them, but when
each of them do fasten their grapple on other. Those others that join with
the^ therein, are, God himself, and his vicegerents on earth among us: both
which do join in that action with them; and, when first they have so tied
them (and that, with a several band for either) then do they tie them also
with other bands besides, even with one several band for either of them. 4.
Bands.
And so comes it to pass, that every party that is married, is, by the
virtue of that marriage, bound fast to the other in four several bands: one
of his own; the second, of his yokefellow; the third of the magistrate, or of
the Government under which they live; and the last, of God, or of his holy
ordinance. Whereupon me thinks that whatsoever it is, that may be thought to
be of force to dissolve the band of matrimony, had need to be such, as
wherein the whole interest of all these parties, and of every of them, is to
concur in full, and lawful consent: or else, whatsoever is, or can be done, by
either of those inferior parties, neither is it, neither ca^ it be of such
force as to dissolve the whole band, which was knit not only by themselves (and
by either of them, for their part severally) but also by others that are their
superiors, and whose leave first they must have. Or otherwise, that it were in
effect no better, but as if one should reason affirmatively from the part to
the whole: that seeing one of the bands is by one party broken (and but so far
neither as that party may) therefore the whole band is broken betwixt the^, and
now as loose as ever they were. Which how vicious it is, we may (as I take it)
much better perceive in some other such like, wherein we are not as yet by
prejudice so forestalled, nor our affections so blinded neither: in that band
that is betwixt the Master and the serva^t. For though the servant do behave
himself as il as may be, and directly against the nature of his service,
either generally or specially in that which more properly is committed unto
him; and whereby himself has so far deserved utterly to be cast off: yet, if
either the Master have absolutely taken him into his service, and to do for
him without exception, and not only for better, but also for worse, and much
rather if God do require, that as yet he cast him not off, or if but the laws
do not allow him so to do, in all these cases we may see some bond of duty,
so far as yet remaining and standing in force betwixt them, as that it were
hard for any to justify, that after such a lewd part of the serva^t, now there
were at all no band of that duty remaining betwixt them. And the less there is
to be said against it, but that in such sort a man might so reason against
diverse conjunctions besides (as of that which is betwixt Parents and children,
and of that likewise that stands betwixt the Prince and the Subject) the more
heed should be taken, that no such gap should be opened to any, as whereby the
looser sort, when they should get their desire in this, should cast about to
obtain the like in other things also of greater consequence. In which respect
I do so much the more marvel that Mr Calvine, so judicious a man as he was,
and being in so good a way unto this consideration, as that time also he was,
when he did set down that judgment of his, as before is declared: yet
notwithstanding did not take the advantage or benefitof either of them, so as
herein he easily might. For in that place before recited, his words that go
immediately before, are these: Sanctius est co^iugij vinculum, qua^ vt hominu^
arbitrio vel potius libidine solvatur. Tamet si enim mutuo consensu sese
conjungu^t vir and vxor, Deus tamen nodo indissolabili eos astringit, ne postea
liberum sit discedere. Additur tamen exceptio, Nisi obfornicationem. Merito
enim abijcitur mulier, etc: that is, The bond of wedlock is a thing more holy,
the^ that it may be dissolved when men themselves will, or rather when their
lust does move them unto it. For although man and wife do join themselves
together with mutual consent: yet does God (farther) tie them together with a
knot that cannot be loosed, that afterward they have no liberty to part in
sunder again. And hitherto well: but then he adds, yet, says he, an
exception is added, Unless it be for fornication. For the woman is justly cast
of who disloialy has broken wedlock, and so forth, as before. Wherein we see
that he noted two distinct bonds in the parties themselves by mutual consent,
or that the man had bound himself to his wife, and the wife likewise to the
man; then also, that God (above them both) had likewise joined them together
never to part: and yet notwithstanding in the end he allows the bond to be
(wholly) broken by one party only, following therein the judgment of others,
and upon persuasion, that such must be the meaning of those words of Christ,
which afterward I trust to show may rather have some other meaning. Again, put
case that there were no band but one, even that alone wherewith the adulterous
wife since, had before tied her self to her husband. Even in this case also me
think it were hard for any to hold, that such lewdnes of hers, had
altogether broken whatsoever band of marriage there was betwixt them: for that
in such case it is so generally held by all, that whatsoever lands the wife
brought with her, they still are the husbands, even by the virtue of that bond
that was betwixt the^. Whereas otherwise when the bond is dissolved by death
indeed, the^ (if he have no farther interest) he is to part with them likewise.
So in such case the bond may in some sense be accounted to be broken indeed
but rather, in respect of diverse benefits that by her marriage she might
otherwise claim, than that the bond in it self should stand as broken, unto
them both generally, or to set them as loose, or as free to marry again, as
they were before. And so does Erasmus himself afterward interpret one of those
his speeches of that kind. Not. Bedda
For when he is reproved by Natalis Bedda for that he said, I am vxor esse
desijt, quae se miscuit alteri viro, that is, She does now cease to be a wife,
that has committed adultery with another, his answer is this, Supputatione^
Beddae. 22.
Agnoscebat vulgatissimum tropum Bedda, sed captabat ansam calumniandi. Sic
filium esse negamus, Tom 9. page 472.
qui degenerat a paternis moribus, qui meruit abdicari, and tamen manet naturae
vinculum. Sic episcopum esse negamus, qui indignus est hoc nomine, and tamen
manet consecratio. Sic Christianum esse negamus qui moribus est impijs, and
tamen non tollitur baptismus. Ita mihi dicta est vxor esse desijsse, quae se
fecisset indignam vxoris nomine: that is, Bedda himself would not have
denied, but that we use so to speak, but he desired to pick out some
occasion of slander. So do we deny him to be a son, that does degenerate from
his fathers ways, who has deserved to be cast of: and yet the bond of nature
remains. So do we deny him to be a Bishop, who is unworthy of that name: and
yet his consecration abides. So do we deny him to be a Christian, that is of
a wicked behavior: and yet is not his Baptism abolished. In such sense did I
say that she ceased now to be a wife, who (by her own lewd demeanor) had
made her self unworthy to be so taken. And thereupon bringing somewhat such
like, both out of Chrysostom, and out of Jerome, he concludes: ut igitur est
vir non vir, vxor non vxor, ita est conjugium non conjugium: that is, As
therefore a man is not a man, a wife not a wife, so is marriage no marriage.
Which interpretation of his own words though himself, by that occasion, did
afterward so plainly give, yet others that followed him (with out any stop) in
that manner of speaking, did frame their judgment also thereafter, and so gave
in their resolution, and not after this latter qualification of his: a thing,
in my judgment, unto the purpose that now we are in, right worthy the marking.
And thus for them all. One thing more in one of them there is, that needs to
be warily taken, or else may easily breed a further error: namely, that
Erasmus by those words of his, may seem not to allow, the ioining together of
man and wife, to be of God, but only when it is orderly done. Sect. 17.
For out of it there might be a gap opened for men, to reason shrewdly for the
dissoluing not only of marriage, and but for adultery: but also of all other
societies, and subiections, almost; and for less trespasses, and lighter
indignities, then adultery also. So that, for this first argument of theirs,
that, if here either party commit adultery, then is there no further any band
of wedlock standing betwixt them, I trust it appears, that it is not so
clear, but that as yet some question may be conceived of it.

17 Those that are but accide^tary thereunto, How weakly they reason in suck
things as are but accidentary.
are partly some abuses going before: but especially, diverse inconveniences
following after. The abuses going before are such as are already touched among
the former reasons: namely, whenever marriages are, either one way or other,
so disorderly made, Sect. 7. Upon abuses
as that thereby occasion is given of so deep disco^tentme^t, that to require
the band of wedlock thereon to be broken, may seem to be a just request. And
disorderly may marriage be made, when as it is made betwixt such, as in whom
there can be no sound election at all, as in children and fools: or betwixt
those, that, though they be such as might soundly choose, yet notwithstanding
do so plainly bewray themselves to be carried away with ambition,
covetousness, or inordinat lust, that thereby they make it clear, that
therein they follow no sound advise. In which cases, and in such like, it is
very true, that great disorder is committed, and that the same is ri^e amongst
us. But yet if Erasmus, as before I noted, or any other would thereon conclude,
that in reason some ready way should be had among us for divorce and marrying
again, for the better amendment of those abuses, or that the Apostle himself
were not unlikely to bear In 1. Cor. 7. page 504.
with us further therein, then now we will allow that he does: this were no
doubt but a weak collection, and in no wise to stand for any sound reason to
urge us unto it. The inconveniences that follow after, are most of them noted
to be in the parties themselves that are so unequally knit together: Upon
inco^veniences.
but one, that concerns others also. Those that are noted to be in the
parties themselves, are of two sorts: some, that do concern them both
indifferently; others, that concern but the innocent or faultlesse person
only. Those that do concern both, are all such evils, as upon such marriages
are wont to vex both the parties so joined together, which indeed are many and
great. Of which Erasmus Videmus autem, Ibid 492.
says he, tot hominum millia infoelici coniugio sibi cohaerere cum exitio
vtriusque: qui fortasse disiuncti servari possent. that is, That we see many
thousa^ds that cleave together in their unlucky wedlock to the destruction of
them both: who, it may be, if they were su^dred again, might so be saved. And
thereupon he infers, that if it might be done citra iniuriam divini
praecepti, that is, without any breach of Gods commandment, then were it at
least to be wished: and his reason is, because it is Apostolicae pietatis,
omnium saluti quantum licet consulere, and infirmis etiam Ecclesiae membris sua
cura succurrere. that is, appertaining unto Apostolic piety, so much as may be
to endeavor the salvation of all, and especially to be helping unto the weak
members of the Church. Those that concern the innocent parties, are such as
more specially haunt them. For whom it is, that elsewhere he reasons, that
tales saepe existunt causae, vt crudele videatu^ non succurrere periclitanti:
Ibid. p. 496.
that is, that oftimes there are so just causes, that it may seem to be no
less then plain cruelty, not to help one that is in so manifest danger.
Whereunto the more to move us, he adds, Christus no^ gravatur ob vnam
oviculam lustratis omnibus obambulare, quam humeris reducat: and nos gravabimur
experiri, si qua multis pereuntibus succurri possit, praesertim quum Christus
salutis sit author, and humanae leges non aliter valere debeant, nisi quatenus
ad salutem conducunt hominum? that is, Christ thinks not much, for one sheep
only, to go up and down, every where seeking, that having found it, he may
bring it home again, even on his shoulders; and shall we think much to assay,
whether any way we may be able to help those that are ready to perish:
especially, when as Christ is the author of safety, and men's laws should be
of no further force, but so far as they tend to the good of men? And a little
before, somewhat more plainly, Ibid. p. 495.
Iam nemo poterit inficiari, says he, leges Christi multo aequissimas esse
etc. Whereupon he infers, An igitur aequum videtur vt maritus cum vxore
flagitiis operta, quibus nec causam dedit, nec mederi possit, cogatur vivere,
cum qua vivere non sit vivere: aut si divertat, compellatur omnem aetatem
orbus, destitutus, ac velut eviratus degere? that is, Now there is no body that
can deny but that the laws of Christ are most upright etc. But then, may this
be accounted to stand with any equity or right, that the husband should be
compelled to live with a woman that is so marvelous ill, when as he never gave
any just cause of that her lewdness, neither ever was able to make her better,
with whom to live is to be accounted no life at all: or if he leave her, that
then he should be compelled all his life long to live out of hope of
propagatio^, without his help, and as it were to be turned out even of his
very manhood it self? Beza likewise, if the woman after diverse pardons do yet
offend again, Derepu^. and divor^. page 113.
in such case quid iniquius, says he, quam innocentis, quivratur netum quidem
rationem habere? that is, What is more unjust, then even then also not to have
any care of the innocent party? That inconvenience that concerns others
also, Ibid.
is in like sort noted by Beza: that if divorce for adultery and marriage
again were so far restrained, it would make both harlots more bold and ready
to offend; and those that had the wrong, quietly to put it up, and not to seek
the punishment of it. Now, of what force these reasons are, may soon be espied
of any that will a little mark them: both that which stands upon the abuses
going before; and those others that stand upon the inconveniences that follow
after. For as touching that which stands upon the abuses going before, as I
have noted so much already, that if so we should use it, it would be but a
weak reason to urge any to be of that opinion: so in it self it is clear
indeed, that the abuses themselves were to be amended, and by force of good
laws, or by good government to be taken away; and that no such liberty is to
be granted for redress thereof, as may not stand by undoubted warrant of the
word of God. So that, if they suppose this to be such which now they do urge,
the^ though they do require no more then justly they may generally; yet therein
they mis^e, that first they take such hold of this liberty, before they have
found it to be, by the word of God allowed unto them. The like may be said of
the first sort of inconveniences also, such as concern both the parties
indifferently: and of the last likewise, which were such as concerned others
withal. But for the middle fort, such as concern the innocent parties (which
seem to be the strongest of all) although it cannot be denied, but that their
case is hard and much to be pitied withal: yet, as themselves do grant that
they cast no further to help them, then it may stand with the written word
(and so are therein, Sect. 18.
but only so weak, as in the other) so is it further to be considered, that
even those inconveniences of which they would so gladly ease the innocent
parties, may be either so just chasticements, or so needful exercises for
them, that we are not so much to cast, how to ease them therein (by taking of
that burden from them) as to encourage them, patiently to bear those crosses
of theirs, and to teach them, that it is their duties so to do. So, for these
reasons we are to suspe^d our judgments awhile, until we see these two things:
first that such liberty (of divorce for adultery, and marrying again) does
undoubtedly stand with the word of God; then, that those other inconveniences
(as they are called) are no such things as of duty should be sustained.
Otherwise it is very clear, that these reasons also do nothing hold.

18 Those other things that are of a kind, How weakly they reason, upon other
things whence they draw reasons to this.
or so near unto these, as that out of them they draw certain reasons for
these likewise, are diverse: some of them such, as from which they reason, as
from the like; and some others such again, as from which they reason, as from
the less unto the greater. Those that are such, as from which they reason as
from the like, As from the like.
are most of them taken out of the opinions or practice of men: but some of
them also, out of the word of God it self. Of the former sort are those,
whereof Erasmus brings reasonable good store: as namely, that the opinion of
Johannes Andreae is, In 1. Cor. 7. page 494.
matrimonium, antequam intercesserit copula, posse dirimi, non solum ob
professionem vitae monasticae, verum etiam sola Romani; pontificis authoritate:
that is, that espousals, before the parties have lain together, may be
dissolved again, not only for the profession of the monastical life, but also,
even by the authority of the Bishop of Rome alone, without any thing else. Ibid*
Again, out of Hostiensis, Augustinus, and Pope Lion, quod lapsus in haeresim
dirimat matrimonium, etiam consummatum: and ita dirimat, ut jus sit ei qui
perstiterit in fide, alteri jungi: that is, that to fall into heresy,
dissolveth matrimony, even consummate also: and dissolveth it so clean, that
it is lawful for the party that abides in the faith, to marry an other.
Thirdly, that Zacharias the Pope, dirimat matrimonium ob rem habitam cum sorore
vxoris: Ibid.
that is, does break of the bond of marriage, if the husband has had to do
with his wives sister: and farther gra^teth leave to the wife, if she did not
consent, to marry again. Lastly (so far as I think needful to allege at
this present) that Hostiensis making a question, an Ecclesia possit hodie
statuere, Ibid. p. 495.
ut altero fidelium prolapso in haeresim, possit alter conjugum transire ad
nova vota, definit posse: that is, that setting the question, whether the
Church may at this day take order, that if one of the parties that are married
fall into heresy, then may the other marry again, he resolves, that the
Church may so do. And then, having showed by those and such like, what opinions
there have been, not unlike (as he takes it) in matters of marriage, to that
which he moves, he is bold to go unto others also that are farther of: Page.
496.
as that the Apostles, to pacify the Jews, took order with the Gentiles, for
certain of those ceremonies to be observed of the Christians in Antioche; that
the Bish: of Rome makes other Bishops tha^ the Apostle allows of; and that
the Church has of late (to speak of) determined of diverse matters, that were
left at more liberty before, as Transubstantiation, the proceeding of the holy
Ghost from the Son also, the Conception of the blessed Virgin, Page 497.
and that the holy Ghost is of the same substance with the Father and the
Son. Al which he alleges to this end, to show that it is no new thing in
the Church of God, as they see occasions to arise, so to take farther order in
diverse matters, than by those had been taken that were before them: and so
would insinuate, that in that matter also they might do well to take such order
as he commended, if so be that the word of God would bear it, as he was
persuaded it would. Of the latter diverse particulars are likewise alleged, out
of that same part of the Sermon of Christ in the Mountain (wherein also we
have the first speech that Christ did utter concerning this matter) out of
which both he, and some others besides, do reason for the opinion they hold in
the matter that now we speak of: both, of the liberty that our selves do take
in other such like speeches of Christ; and of the perfection of those things
that Christ does there commend unto us. Concerning the liberty that ourselves
do take in other such like speeches of Christ, he says, that whereas he
forbids us to swear, to be angry, to reproach, to presume to come with our
offering to God before that we are at one with our brother, to go to law, to
requite displeasures, and to resist evil, and does farther command us to love
our enemies, to deserve well of them that deserve ill of us, and to pray for
them that curse us, first says, quum eodem in loco plura doceat, quae pure
germaneque Christianis digna sunt, Ib. page 498.
cur in ceteris omnibus recipimus interpretationem, in uno divortio tam rigidi
sumus, ut magis etiam astringamus verba Christi: that is, When as in the same
place he teaches many things which simply and plainly concern the duty of
Christians, why do we in all things else admit of some interpretation, and yet
are so crabbed in this one point of Divorce, that we do even farther restaine
those words of Christ? Concerning the perfection of those things that Christ
does there commend unto us, reasoning otherwise, on it than others do, he says
likewise, Christus haec locutus est, Page 499.
non turbis, sed discipulis, idque in monte, depingens purissimam illam sui
corporis partem quam appellat regnum coelorum cui nullis sit opus legibus: that
is, Christ spoke these things not to the multitude, but to his Disciples, and
that in the mount, painting forth that most pure part of his body which he
calls the kingdom of heaven, whereunto there will be no need of laws. And
by and by after, Pone talem populum qualem Christus optat, nec repudio fuerit
opus, nec jurejura^do. Quod si ob infirmos quos in tanto numero plurimos habet
Etclesia, nemo vetatur legibus jus suum persequi; nemo vetatur vim a capite
repellere; nemo vetatur jurare modo ob rem, and ne pejeret; nemo cogitur been
mereri de male merentibus: cur vnum hoc de divortio promiscue exigimus ab
omnibus? That is, Admit such a people as Christ wishes, and there shall be no
need either of Divorce, or of swearing But if for the weak, whom the Church
has in so great abundance, no body is forbidden to seek his right by law; no
body is forbidden to defend himself from violence; no body is forbidden to
swear, so there be cause, and that he forswear not; no man is compelled to
deserve well of those that deserve ill of him: why do we exact this matter of
divorce so generally of all? Others there be, that because Christ taught such
perfection there, do therevpo^ gather, that if a man put away his wife for
adultery, and marry another it may not in any wise be called in question, for
that it is allowed there, where things of so great perfection are taught. Those
that are as from the less unto the greater, A^ from the less unto the greater
are such as these. Because that Chrysostom gives in the reason why the Jew
is suffered to put away his wife, ne invisam occidat, that is, least that upon
his hatred of her he also slay her, thereupon he reasons, Annot. in 1. Cor.
7. page 502.
Itane prodesse debet apud Iudaeos flagitiosa sua malitia, and apud nos non
proderit marito sua innocentia? That is, Shall the Jew have that benefit of that
wicked malice of his, and shall not an husband among us have like benefit out
of his undefiled and honest dealing? The like again (and one strain farther)
a little after, Saltem hoc apud nos detur infoelici innocentiae, Ib. page 505
quod apud Iudaeos datum est perversae maritorum acerbitati, quod Paulus
indulget vidius intem^perantibus, ne quid admittant sceleratius. that is, At
least, let that be granted that we also may have our miserable innocence so
far releiued, as the Jews had their perverse crabbednes borne with, and so
far as S. Paul himself bearethwith intemperate widows, least they commit
some further evil. Of what force these reasons of his are if now we examine,
first as touching the opinion of those others (for such like matters as he
presupposes) that he brought in, the reason is sufficient to stop the mouths
of those that so hold: but not to establish that point of doctrine it self.
That the Apostles themselves, and the godly Fathers after, determined more
plainly of diverse things, then those that went before them had done, they had
the word of God for them therein, and then not to be reproved by any: but
their doing therein may be no argument to move us to determine of this, but
only so far (which appears not yet) as we may account, that we have the
word of God to bear us out in it. But whereas he shuffleth in (among the rest)
diverse things that they determined and did against the word of God, we ought to
be so much the more wary in suffering our selves to be led thereby, whenas the
reason is of that nature, as builds on falsehood, as well as on truth. As for
the liberty that we take in those speeches of Christ, we take none (in any
doctrine that thereof we hold) but such as stands by good warrant of the
word of God in other places, and then can that be no sufficient reason to move
us, to do the like in this, for which (as yet) we find in the word no warrant
at all. And, though much be to be attributed unto him: yet in this it may be
doubted, that himself understood not those places; else that never he would
have so reasoned on them. The perfection that Christ might seem thereby, to
commend unto us, was not to that end so laid open by him to show in how many
things we must be spared for our weakness sake; but plainly to show us, how
we ought to endeavor our selves to walk in that holy calling: and then does
it leese the force of the reason for which he brought it. Neither does Christ
therein teach us so absolute perfection in those points, but that some others
also there are, of an higher degree then those, of which he speaks no thing
at all. As in his first example of doing murder, though he forbid diverse
other branches of that evil root, yet neither does he recite but a very few
of them (to speak of) in comparison of the rest: neither does he speak any
thing of the contrary virtues, or great care that we ought to have of the
safety and good estate of others, which notwithstanding are by the commandment
also required. And so likewise in all the rest. So his purpose was not there to
teach all perfection; but to give them to understand, that he was so far from
setting them loose from that strict rule of life which the law prescribed unto
them, that he did require much more of them by virtue thereof, the^ they did
think they were bound unto: and that does he content himself briefly to
show, by those few examples. In which sense if we take it, then shall we soon
espy, Sect. 19.
how weak also that reason is of those others. Those that are taken, as from
the less to the greater, carry their own weakness with them so plain, that
no body need (as I do take it) any further to show it: being able to show, if
need were, that one of them has such a wem or gawl in it besides (that censure
of his, of those his widows) that there is no reason why it should be (in
this light that now we have) of credit with any.

19 The authority or testimony of others, How weakly they reason from the
authority of others* and first of God
whereon certain of their reasons rely, is either of God: or else of men. Of
those that rely on the authority or testimony of God, that is, upon the written
word, they have two sorts of reasons that are but weak: one sort, by mistaking
of the Text it self; an other, by gathering amiss thereon. First by mistaking
the Text.
Mistaking of the Text is (in this matter) a common slip almost with them all:
and then, if they ground any reasons thereon, needs must they be of small
importance. And first, Erasmus having conceaved, as we saw before, Erasmu^*
that the law did plainly allow the husband to put away his adulterous wife
(if she were very bad therein: for so he limiteth his judgment thereof) he
urges further (as in that place also was declared) that it is not added there
(fuisse) hoc datum duritiae cordis, Annot. in 1. Cor. 7. page 505.
praesertim quum ex sensu naturae non possit sciri quod nos interpretamur* that
is, that it was granted for the hardness of their hearts, especially when as
that which we do gather thereon (meaning as I take it, that which we have
learned of Christ, that it was but for the hardness of their hearts) cannot be
gathered by sense or nature. And immediately he adds further, Et si concessum
est duritiae cordis, utique licet, quod concedit Deus: praesertim si nullo
signo declaret eos peccare, qui permisso vtantur. that is, And if it be
granted but for the hardness of their hearts; yet is that lawful, that God
has granted: especially if he do no way declare that those do offend that
use the liberty that is permitted. In which notwithstanding he does not so
rest, but that he takes hold of an other help withal, adding thereunto as
follows* Verum haec utcunque habeant, ita conceditur, ut tamen impunt sit
marito duxisse quam velit, nec vetantur utcunque repudiatae nubere. Inter dum
enim hoc licere dicitur, quod Lex non punit: that is, But howsoever these
things be, it is so far granted, that there is no punishment for the husband
that (in such case) marries (another) whom he will, neither are these that are
divorced howsoever, forbidden to marry again (it may be notwithstanding his
meaning herein, that men are not forbidden to marry such as are any way
divorced; but the other I rather think to be his meaning. Then he proceeds)
For sometimes that is said to be lawful, which the Law does not punish. And so
does he reason before likewise upon that supposall of his, Ib. page 499
that such a liberty was by Moses granted unto them. Cur, quum idem si^
morbus, non idem admovetur remedium? that is, What reason is there that, when
we need that help as much as they it should not be granted to us as much as
to them? Musculus likewise in such sort mistaking it, does nevertheless build
somewhat upon it. Moses, ^^ Mat. 19.
says he, permiseret libellum repudit Judaeis: ex hoc permissu passiu^
repudiabaentur vxore^, that is, Moses had permitted a bil of divorcement unto
the Jews: by the means of that permission of his, it grew to be a common thing
among them, for husbands to divorce their wives from them. And so mistaking
another besides, nevertheless he makes it the chief part of the ground of
his opinion, that there is no divorce, but where the parties may marry again.
For having that point in hand, that in the Church there is no other divorce by
law allowed, Ib. page 11*
but that uterque maneat inco^ingatus, aut reconcilie^tur, that is, that each
party abide unmarried or be reconciled, he infers, that Christ spoke de
nullo ficto, sed vero divortio, per quod potestas dabatur denuo cum alia
co^trahendi conjugiu^, etc. Nullu^ enim aliud divortiu^ novera^t Iudaei, etc:
licuisse aute^ dimissae alteri nubere, vel hoc testimonij sufficiat, quod
sacerdoti praecipitur in lege, ne dimissam ducat: quae lex supervacanea esset,
sifas non esset repudiatae denuo nubere: that is, of no counterfeit, but of the
true divorce, by which power was given to marry again with another. For the
Jews knew no other divorce. And that it was lawful for her that was divorced
to marry again, this one testimony only may be sufficient, that commandment
was give^ in the Law, that a Priest might not marry a divorced woman which law
had been superfluous, if it had not been lawful for a woman divorced to
marry again. Which also (among others) is the collection of Kemnitius
himself, for the lawfulnes of this liberty of Divorce and marrying again,
Exam. par. 2. in Sam. 7. page 285.
against a contrary determination set down thereof by the Council of Trent a
little before. But hereof this little taste may be sufficient, for that the
chief part of the groundworke of their opinion does rest thereon (for that
which they have in the Old Testament to build upon:) which was a great part of
the inducement that led them unto it. Concerning which, and al such like, it is
clear enough in it self, that mistaking the Text whereon they grounded, the
opinion that they conceive thereon must needs be but weak, and needs
nothing else to discover the weakness of it, but only to show that they mistake
the Text it self. Sense of nature aperilous giud herein.
But in Erasmus we have some things else to note besides. First that in these
things he rested somewhat on the sense of nature: as perilous a guide in the
matters that now we speak of, as (of those that are of some credit) a man
could lightly otherwise have chosen. For being by nature so much given as we
are to the lusts of the flesh (and to have variety therein) and to be avenged
of such displeasures as are done unto us (especially such, as touch us so
near, as now we speak of) we are not to look for any other, but that we may
be as easily blinded in this, if we lean to our own judgment therein, as in
any thing else that can lightly befall us. So that, in this especially, he
should not have rested any thing at all on the sense of nature, but have
fought some better guide, whom he might more safely have followed. Then also,
how readily he takes hold on that permission, even only for that it was
permitted (not regarding how far, not how) though himself do find none
other, but that it was only for the hardness of their hearts: a sufficient burn;
to have discredited the use of that liberty to all that are godly, or that
have any reasonable care, even of their honesty before me^. And yet whereas he
does so readily take such hold thereon, it may seem to argue, that his store
otherwise is but weak. Lastly, that after a sort abandoning these, if they
should not be thought meet to serve, he takes hold of an other almost as
weak: namely, that because there was no punishment set down for it in the
Policy of Moses, therefore it was after a sort, or in some sense permitted unto
them. And yet is it sufficiently known unto al; that as in all other Policies
whatsoever, even so in that of Moses also, there be diverse things that are
unlawful, which there have no punishment at al devised for the^: and therefore
that we are not so to reason, that seeing it is not punished there (as neither
it was to have many wives) therefore it is no offense to do it. Sect. 20.
For although such a reason might best hold from thence, of any other Policy
in all the world besides: yet even that also would fail us herein, if any
should rest so far upon it.

20 But now, if we come to consider, Then by gathering amiss thereon: but
therein only of a couple of them.
how far they have gathered amiss upon those several Textes that they have
used, what others may think, I know not, but, for my self, I cannot but
marvel at many things that I find therein. Which kind of gathering when I
also had gathered, as needful to be commended unto the farther consideration
of the learned, I found them in number to be so many, and to proceed from so
many great personages also, that I thought it sufficient for the matter, and
meetest also in some other respects, to take but some few of them (leaving the
rest unto the search of those that desire to look farther into them:) and
therein also, not to deal with all those or many of them that so are minded,
but only with some few, and such as the equity of the cause it self shall most
desire to be called unto such trial. In which respect. I have thought good to
resolve on Erasmus for the one, and on Mr Beza for the other: because that (of
those that are extant, and yet I have seen) those two have of set purpose
discoursed thereof, and most largely handled the same. And in these also to
omit al such collections, as elsewhere by occasion may pass them, while
principally they intend some other matter, I mean to deal but only with
those (and but with some of the^ neither) that belong unto the chief and
principal points of the matter that is in question: namely, how they gather
their opinion or judgment therein; and how they answer such Obiectio^s as may
be alleged against it. And first as touching Erasmus, Erasmus.
although he profess no more but only to propou^de it, and to commend it to
the farther consideration of the learned, and to that end more largely shows,
both that diverse before have been of that mind, or at least inclinable unto
it; and that such like things they have in daily allowance among themselves:
yet does he plainly enough profess, that (for his part) he is of that mind
himself; and labors also to take away such objections as seem to be of
force against it. First for his own opinion herein.
As touching the former of them, the truth is, that as there is none of them
all, that do build this opinion of theirs on any other Text besides (excepting
those which they did mistake, of which I have spoke before) but only on that
exception which Christ used two several times, namely, in the fifth, and in the
nineteenth of S. Matthew: so he also (for that his opinion) goes no further
but only to it, and thereupon builds that which he has thereon conceived.
But those words of Christ does he account to make so plain for hispurpose,
that because we allow not on such divorce to marry again, he charge us that
in divortio tam rigidi fimus, ut magis etiam astringamus verba Christi. Annot.
in 1. Cor. 7. page 498.
that is, That in divorce we are so hard or grievous, that we do further
restrain those words of Christ. And his reason is, Etenim quum ille reliquerit
marito unam causam repudiandae coningis, nos came multis mo^is astringimus. that
is. For whereas he left to the husband one cause for which he might put away
his wife, we do many ways restrain the feign. Page 499.
And after again, Iudaei quod Moses ^eri^serat de libetto repudi^ sic
interpretabantur, quasi ma^veis jui effet qualibet lecit de causa reijcere
coinge etc. Id Christus astringit ad unam adulterii causam. that is, The Jews
did so interpret that which Moses wrote of the bill of divorce, as though
husbands might put away their wives for any cause though never so small. That
did Christ restrain only unto the cause of adultery. And by and by after, Ergo
suis Christus unam dunt axat causam indulget divortij. that is, Therefore
Christ allows unto his but only one cause of divorce. And in these (so far as
yet I have found) is his judgment most plainly declared. In which it is good
to note those two things: first that he builds for that matter on no other
Scripture, but only on that exception; then, that he so takes that exception,
that thereon he infers, that for adultery Christ himself allows divorce.
If he build upon no other Scripture but only on that exception, the^ our
business lying within less room, and nearer unto us, we may so much the sooner
find how it holds together that he gathers thereon. If he so take the
exception, that thereon he gathers, that Christ allows the husband to put
away his wife for adultery, the^, either must the place it self be of that
nature that it can have no other sense but it: or, if it may have some other
besides, the^ is he to show what reason he has why the place should rather be
taken as he would have it, then as others have taken it heretofore. Whereas
therefore it is evident (by the judgment of most men, in the Church of God,
who did otherwise take it) that the place may have another sense, and yet
himself, having showed no reason which may stand for any just proof, that the
Text must needs be taken in that sense that he would have it, does
nevertheless so enter upon it, and will have that to be the meaning of it
hence is it, that for any thing that yet I do see to the contrary, he can
hardly avoid the reproof of a forcible entry, or to look for so much courtesy
at his adversaries hands, as first to grant him, that that shall be the sense
of the place. And then having gotten so much for divorce, that in such case the
husband may use the benefit of it, that is to put away his wife if so she have
sinned, then will himself infer the other also (that then he may lawfully
marry another) only by telling us plainly, what divorce it is that he means.
For he says Divortium interim appello, Ib. page 498.
not that, quo dirimitur domestica consuetudo, manente coniugij vinculo, but
verum, and quale solum illa novit aet as, qua licebat, a repudio prioris,
alteram dacere. Whereby he gives us to understand, that he means such
divorce as altogether breaks the ba^d of marriage, and not such as stands
by law all Christendom through (almost) if there be no other cause but
adultery only. Which two if we lay together, namely, that Christ allows
divorce in case of adultery, and then, that the divorce must also be such as
gives free liberty to marry again, the collection that he makes on those
words of Christ must needs be this, that Christ allows those that be his, to
put away their wives for adultery, and to marry again: an opinion that is,
notwithstanding al his submissions and protestations before and after, more
boldly avouched; then it is with any of his proofs that yet I have found, or
(as I am persuaded) ever shall, strongly confirmed. Then, for his defense
against others.
As touching the latter, that is, how, for his defense, he gathers upon those
places that do seem to make against him, we are first to note, that some
there are with which at all he does not meddle, and yet are of special
importance against the opinion that he conceived: and then further we are to
consider how he gathers his defense out of those that he uses. If some there
be that he medleth not with, and yet are of special importance, then may we
account, that his defense is so much the weaker: and those places that now I
speak of are those two, the one of Deuteronomie, the other of Malachie, that I
showed before to be most likely to be mistaken, in which the Hebrew in them
both, and the Septuagint also in the latter of them, do so frame those Texts to
speak, as that to one that would have cleared the question of the doubts
thereof, those also had been as needful to be answered, as not many others
more. Those that he uses, are certain of those speeches, which (concerning
this matter) were uttered by Christ: and certain others of the Apostle St
Paul. Those that he takes of Christ are three: Out of the words of Christ.
two of the^ in effect but one; but the other, a several one by it self.
Those that are in effect but one, are those two so well known places, in the
first and nineteenth Chapters of the Gospel by S. Matthew. Where Christ does
so much restrain the liberty of divorce, restraining it unto adultery only, as
these men take it. Out of which how he gathers for his defense, is a thing
very specially worth the marking. For he does not now gather, as the residue
do, upon the advantage that is supposed to lie in the Exception; but out of the
whole restraint generally: gathering, that the doctrine which was there
delivered, did draw so near unto the perfection of true Christianity, that if
we should exactly apply it unto our lives, to make it a rule unto us, we had
need to use some favorable interpretation of many things therein; or that we
had some dispensation to avoid the strictnes of it. For the former he says,
Page 498.
Verum quum eodem in loco complura doceat quae pure germaneque Christianis
digna sunt, cur in caeteris omnibus recipimus interpretationem, in vno divortio
tam rigidi sumus, vt magis etiam astringamus verba Christi? that is, But seeing
he teaches many things in that place which may right well become Christians
indeed, how comes it to pass, that in all the rest we content our selves with
(some favorable) interpretation, and only in divorce we are so austere, that
we do even further restrain those words of Christ. And anon after, when he
has showed how much we restrain, as he does take it, those words of Christ,
coming to that course again that he may give in some examples of it, he
further adds, Hac igitur una in part tam mordicus tenemus summum, Ibid.
quod aiunt, jus, in caeteris quamvis recipientes interpretationem. Vetat
inibi, Ne juremus omnino: vetatque multo severius quam divortium, and pluribus
verbis inculcat: and tame^ ob tres drachmas juramus passim, sic excusantes, Non
est jurandum temere. Cur non item, Non est divertendum temere? Vetat ille
irasci: Mox subijcimus, Temere. Vetat ille compellare quenquam contumeliosius:
nos etiam colaphos impingimus, denique occidimus, and excusamus, Non laedendi
sed castiga^di animo etc; that is, Therefore in this point we do so strictly
cleave unto the uttermost that may seem to be urged thereby, receiving any
interpretation in the rest. He there forbids, to swear at all. And with
greater severity he forbids that, then he does divorce, and with more words
does beat upon it: and yet for the worth of a shilling we commonly swear,
excusing our selves, that we are not (indeed) to swear rashly. And why not as
well, that a man, may not leave his wife rashly? He forbids to be angry: and
we by and by add (the meaning to be, that we do it not) rashly. He
forbids to reproach any: yet we even beat, and slay also: and then excuse
our selves, that we do it but to chastise him only, and not to hurt him. And
so forth bringing diverse other such instances or examples besides: and so
concluding on them likewise. For the latter he adds likewise, Page 499.
Si ut conditus erat homo, perseverasset, nullum erat futurum inter vllos
divortium. Christus revocans suos ad pristinam innocentiam, non vult divortium,
quia non vult duros cord: and tamen Paulus indulget humanae fragilitati,
relaxans saepenumero Domini praeceptum. Cur non idem facere possit Romanus
Pontifex? that is, If man had continued as first he was made, there would the^
have been no divorce among them. Christ calling back those that were his to
that former innocence, will have no divorce, because he will not have them to
be hardharted: and yet Paul bears with the infirmity of man, releasing
ofttime the Lords commandment. Why may not the Bishop of Rome do the same
likewise? By which, I trust, it may sufficienly appear, that he rested not on
that supposed allowance of divorcing for adultery, but (over and besides that)
accounts the residue of that prohibition of divorce so straight, as that it
were needful for us, either to have some favorable interpretation for it; or
at least to be dispensed with all for some part of it: and yet that in either
of those his gatherings he has one special slip besides. For in the former,
when he pleads for such favorable interpretation, the only force of his
reasoning stands, as it were from the like, or else from the lesser unto the
greater. Which he endeavoreth to confirm unto us by all those examples that
there he brings, of which I recited but a few of them: showing, that seeing
we do in such sort interpret them, as that we do not account our selves to
be tied to the letter of the^ (as indeed we do for the chiefest of the^, and
those that give credit (that which he seeks) unto the rest, and so may do by
good Divinity; the rest being none of our interpretation of them, but only the
fruits either of the ignorance of those days, or of the corrupt affections of
flesh and blood) we should in like sort, if not much rather, interpret that of
divorce likewise, as his own words do plainly declare. But now the truth is
that that interpretation of ours which we give of the rest stands by
authority of the word of God, and that by other Scriptures we are forced so to
take the^ (as when there we are forbidden to swear at al, and yet elsewhere
are taught to swear by God, and that it is a part of the worship that we must
do him:) and that the interpretation that he would have us to make of the
other, is not such as any other Scripture does lead us unto; but such as al
other Scripture directly crosses as we do take it, and trust to make plain
ere we have done. And then, if we have Scripture for the one, but not for the
other, howsoever that motion of his may savor well of great humanity: yet well
may we doubt, that such stuff would be but seely Divinity. In the latter
likewise, besides that he charge S. Paul to dispense ofttimes with the Lords
commandment (which would be hard for him to prove,) and the^ he sees no
reason, but that the B. of Rome might do so also (wherein he spoke according to
the manner of those days, or else but offers somewhat to ride him) he may
seem to gather, that Christ did no farther restrain divorce unto his, neither
himself had any farther meaning, but so far as their hardness of hearts
should be also abolished, that thereby they should not stand in need of that
help to their infirmity: which course if in other things also we should
attempt, sooner should we show our selves to endeavor, rather to make our
corrupt inclination a rule to interpret the Scriptures unto us; than to allow,
that the Scriptures should be a rule unto us, whereby to amend, or to call to
the check, whatsoever ill ways there are in our own corruption. That which
is a several one by it self, is that same that in the 19 of Matthew Christ
also uttered, that it was not for man to put asunder, that which God has
coupled together. Concerning which he says, Porro quod obijcitur ex eodem
loco, Quod Deus conjunxit, homo ne separet, Ib. page 499.
no^ magno negotio solvi potest. Hoc Deus conjunxit quod rite conjungitur: hoc
Deus dirimit quod rite dirimitur. That is, Furthermore, that which is objected
out of the same place, that which God has coupled together, that let no man
put asunder, may soon be answered. That (only) has God coupled together, that
is coupled aright: and that does God (himself) break a sunder that is well put
a sunder. In which course also he then in such sort proceeds, that although
he well provideth that he will have no divorce to be made by the parties
themselves, nor by any but only such as are in authority for those matters:
yet he plainly shows, that he would have it to be done for more causes than
for adultery, and yet that it also should be Gods doing too. Quod male, says
he, co^glutinavit pueritia, quod vinum, quod temeritas, quod inscitia, quod
male per lenas ac lenones, Ibid p. 500.
suos Diaconos conju^ cerat diabolus, hoc per suos Ministros recte dirimit
Deus* that is, that that which childhood, which excess in wine, which rashness,
which ignorance had coupled together, that which by harlots and bawds his own
proper Deacons the Devil had joined, those does God by those Ministers of his
rightly put asunder again. Ibid p. 499.
To which end also he told us a little before, that neither among the
Gentiles, nor yet among the Jews marriages were accounted to be of force,
without the consent of the parents or the principal friends unto them
appertaining: and tame^ apud utrosque ali quo modo dirimi poterat matrimoniu^.
Apud Christianos facilime coit conjugium, and semel initum nullo pacto potest
dissolvi: that is, and yet with the^ both, marriage might some way or other be
dissolved among the^. But among Christians marriage is most easily made, and
yet when it is made, then is there no way to undo it again. In this
therefore (pleading for so great a liberty to divorce, as he does) he has
not only no Scripture for him, but now also even the most of those, that (in
these days of ours) are for divorce and marrying again, flatly against him:
and so, his gathering herein not only in truth, but also to them, who only
should have the benefit of it, sufficiently weakened. Those that he takes out
of S. Paul, are three likewise: Out of S. Paul.
but the first two of them, in effect, but one; and the third a several place
by itself. The first two are, the one, out of the seventh likewise of the
former Epistle unto the Corinthians. Hom. 7:2, 3, 4.
To the former of them, that shows the woman to be bound to her husband so
long as he lives, Ibid. p. 502.
his answer is, Non hic agit Paulus de divortio, sed similitudinem adducit
Iudaeis exipsorum lege, qua doceat ac persuadeat, antiquata jam Mosi lege per
evangelium, non amplius illos teneri legis caeremonijs, quu^ Christo novo
sponso nupserint. Nec est necesse similitudinem aut parabolam quadrare per
omnia, etc: that is, The Apostle does not here speak of divorce (which
notwithstanding himself does but say, and not prove) but he brings unto the
Jews a similitude out of their own law, by the which he may teach and
persuade, that the Law of Moses being now abolished by the Gospel, they are no
more bound to the ceremonies of the law, being now married to Christ their new
husband. Neither is it needful that a similitude or parable should in all
things agree, a thing that is not in this required: and yet must the thing it
self be true, if any thing shall be proved thereby. To the latter of them (much
like to the former) he answers likewise, Ib. page 503.
Ne hic quidem Paulus tractat materiam divortij, sed adhortatur pro illorum
temporum statu, ut quae liberae sunt a conjugio, praesertim vidus (nam ad haru^
causam videtur redire) abstineant a co^jugio, etc: that is, Neither here does
Paul treat of the matter of Divorce, but he exhorts, as the estate of that
time required, that such women as were free from marriage, especially widows
(for he seems to return to them again) would abstain from marriage, to the
end they might be freer from worldly affairs, etc. Which assertion of his,
besides that he has not proved it, makes little for him, for that though the
Apostle did not to that end speak it; yet nothing lets, but that so it may
be applied. That which is a several place by it self, is out of the self same
chapter also unto the Corinthians, where the Apostle requires in the name of
the Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband, and that the husband do
not put away his wife: which, as himself says, is locus omnium difficilimus,
that is, the hardest place of them al. Concerning which his best answer is,
Ibid. p. 503.
that S. Paul there does not treat de gravibus flagitijs, quae crimen
adulterij vel aequent, vel superent etiam: sed de levioribus offe^sis, ob quas,
apud Graecos potissimum, crebra fiebant divortia: that is, not of grievous
crimes which were as great as adultery, or greater rather, but of the lighter
offenses, for the which especially among the Grecians, there were often
divorces made. Alleging also a testimony out of Iuvenal, of one that had, by
such dealing, eight husbands in five years. And the reason that he brings,
why he takes it that the Apostle spoke but of lesser offenses, he gathers
out of the reconciliation that there is mentioned: which notwithstanding
prooveth it not; but leaves it only on the credit of his own judgment. Which
belike himself did somewhat perceive, because he rested not therein, but
took hold of some others, and those also as weak as it: one, of difference of
the sex, pleading that he gave that lesson but only to women (which while he
does, Sect. 21.
he lets slip a escape or two;) the other, his own guess, what the Apostle
would have set down for such matters, if the case had been put unto him, as
it is with us. And when yet he doubts that this his answer will not content
all, but that some may happily urge that the Apostle did not there mean to
exclude the cause of Adultery, for that, it seems, he had no more to say but
this, Cur non excipit quod excipit Dominus? Imo cur addidit, quod non addidit
Dominus, Maneat innupta? Cur viro prohibet ne dimittat, cui permittit Christus,
ut dimittat adulteram? that is, (altogether reasoning, if you mark it, on that
which is in question among us, and yet grounding thereon as if it were either
proved by him, or by us granted unto him) Why the^ did not the Apostle except,
which the Lord himself excepted? And more then that; why did he add, which
the Lord added not, namely, Let her abide unmarried? Why does he forbid the
husband to put any away, when as Christ himself allows to put his wife away,
if she be an adulteress? And thus much to show, how Erasmus has gathered,
both for his conceiving of that opinion at the first: and for the clearing of
it besides, of those objections which he saw might be made against it.

M. Beza how he likewise does gather amiss.
21 Mr Beza wrote long after Erasmus, when as the motion that he had made was
now considered upon by many, and condescended unto by some: and he wrote so
purposely of it, that if there be any thing that may rightly be gathered for
it, we may hope to find it in him; and, if that shall be sufficient to confirm
that point of doctrine unto us, that then we shall find nothing at all, that
will be wrong or hardly gathered. Here therefore it shall be good to consider, what
he has found, either whereon to build that opinion of his, or to defend it
against those Scriptures that are against it. What he has found, for the
grounding of his own opinion therein, First in establishing his own opinion.
we may sufficiently gather out of that which himself sets down for that
matter. For, De Repud. and divo^t. page 109.
after that first he has sundred certain other things from the question that
he has in hand, which owise might have cu^bred him very much therein, he
plainly infers Adulterio igitur coniugium, recte and bona conscientia,
dirimi posse affirmo, expressis hac de re Christi verbis. that is, Therefore I
affirm, upon the express words of Christ, that rightly and with a good
conscience, marriage by adultery may be dissolved: as resolute, and as plain
an asseveration, as at any time needs; and therefore likely enough to have
some special good ground work whereon it is grounded. Which, by his quotation
in the margent, himself does show to be those very words that before we spoke
of, and which are in question betwixt us, and that they are those express
words of Christ, Mat. 5:31, and 19:9.
that he did mean. Howbeit those are they, that, as touching the sense of
them, are altogether in question betwixt us: and by what right may he then
account them so express or plain on his behalf, when as he knows that that
is plainly denied unto him. Which because he could not but know, that therein
he was contradicted by many, therefore he addresseth himself immediately to
prove, that that must be the sense of those his words: and needful it is, that
we do well mark the force of his reason. Quum enim, says he, videret
Christus Legem de lapidandis adulteris latam (ut and alias plerasque) contemni,
cavere tamen conscientiis voluit: ideoque, interrogatus, an, ut facere plurimi
solebant, quavis ex causa divortij libellum tradere liceret, sic respondit, ut
non tantum negaret id fas esse quavis ex causa, verumetiam exprimeret, nulla id
ex causa nisi ob adulterium licere: quibus verbis nihil planius aut magis
perspicuum dici potest. Itaque nullus adhuc est, quod sciam, inter Christianos,
seu veteres seu recentiores inventus, qui non concesserit, probato adulterio,
fas esse innocenti nocentem dimittere: sed plerique excogitata distinctione
inter separationem a thoro, and dissolutionem ipsius conjugalis vinculi, quod
recte prius constituerant mox evertunt, qua^ novi conjugij potestatem separatis
non concedunt. Cujus sententiae quum etiam Augustinus ipse fuerit, necesse est
imprimis ostendere, quam firmis rationibus omnia contraria argumenta doctissimi
Theologi nostra memoria diluerint. that is, For when Christ did see that the
law of stoning adulterous persons to death (as diverse other good laws besides)
were not regarded; yet would he provide for the conscience therein: and
therefore being asked, whether as many did use to do, it were lawful for
every cause to give a bill of divorcement, he so answered, that he did not
only deny, that for every cause it was lawful so to do, but also did plainly
set down, that it was lawful for none other cause, but only for adultery: then
the which, nothing can be more plainly, or perspicuously spoken. And
therefore is there none found as yet, that I know of, among Christians, either
of old or of late, which has not allowed that adultery being proved, it is
lawful for the innocent party by divorce to put away the offender: but diverse
of them, having devised a distinction betwixt the separation from bed, and the
dissolution of the band of marriage it self, do by and by overthrow that,
which rightly they did allow of before, seeing that they do not grant liberty
to marry again, to those that are in such sort sundred. Of which opinion
seeing even Augustine himself was, it is specially needful to show, with how
strong reasons the most learned Divines in this age of ours, have clean wipt
away all the arguments of the contrary side. And so, he presently sets in
hand to answer those Objections, that he thinks to stand in the way of that
resolution. But first let us see what proof it is he has brought for his
own. Forsooth that Christ, for that he saw that the law for stoning
adulterous persons to death was despised, purposing to provide for the
conscience before God, he therefore etc. What have we here, but only his own
guess, that that was the purpose and meaning of Christ? Which if it were not,
as then we have herein no proof at all: so if it be no more but doubtful;
for that he might as likely have some other meaning (which after I trust will
easily appear) yet then also this conjecture of his may not justly stand for
any sound proof neither, although for his worthiness otherwise his judgment
may be had in special reverence. And it is not to be denied, but that that
which he brings in immediately after, of so general a consent of al, in the
allowance of Divorce for adultery, does much make for that judgment of his at
the first sight; but then there is to be considered withal, both that they
mistook those places of the Old Testament, which they thought to allow of
Divorce for less matters; Deuteronomy. 24. c.
and that yet they did not allow of such divorce for adultery, as might
dissolve the bond of marriage. For if they did so far mistake those places
aforesaid, as that then they made no question, but that by the word of God
divorce was allowed for lesser matters, then they might easily be of opinion,
that there was no doubt, but that much rather it was allowed for the greater:
and in that they were so loath to allow, that even for it also the bond of
marriage should stand as broken, it may seem thereby, that although they had
in mind those words of Christ, as well as these, yet how plain so ever Mr Beza
does account the^, they could not find that so they might take them. Now that
S. Augustine was of that mind too, that does weigh so much against him, as the
credit of his judgment stands with any. Whether therefore we may be bold to
account, that here among these plain and resolute speeches we have any proof
whereon to stay our consciences before God, or whether nothing could be spoken
with greater perspicuitie, when as so many (and so quick of sight) could never
so find it, that do I refer unto others, and think it needful to be pondred
of such, as any way have occasion to use the benefit of sound judgment therein.
But belike Mr Beza did not mean much to confirm, that to be the sense of the
words of Christ that he had gathered (for that he thought that matter clear
enough in it self) but hastened rather to answer such Obiectio^s as he found
to be made against it. And so are we also to see, how he contenteth himself
therein. The Objections therefore that himself acknowledges to be brought
against it, Then, in answering to certai^e Objections.
are half a score: where of the one half are brought out of the word of God;
the other, out of other reasons besides. As for us, it shall be sufficient to
take the assay only of those that are taken out of the word of God: and those
are the very same (and none other) that Erasmus before had brought, both for
the places of Scripture out of which they are taken, and for the order and
disposing of them; and, excepting the first, for the matter also. These
therefore are likewise taken, some of them out of the words of Christ: and some
of the^, out of the Apostle S. Paul. And so belike we have all this while found
nothing more in effect in the word of God for this matter, than Erasmus had
found at the first, when he made the motion of it. Those places that are of
the words of Christ are three: Out of the words of Christ.
but the first two are here also joined together in one and so do both stand
but for one, and the third for another by it self. Those two places of Christ
that make but one, are those former places out of the 5. and 19. Chapters of S
Matthew: but the Objection that Mr Beza gathers, is not like that which
Erasmus gathered before, but varieth from it. For whereas Erasmus gathered out
of the austeritie or strictness of the whole, but that one way or other the
strictnes of it was to be mitigated unto us, Mr Beza, on the other side, out of
the liberty that he supposes to be given by the one part of it, answers an
Objection that out of another part of it is made against them. As touching the
Objection he says, Primum opponunt ^lli istud Christi dictum; Qui repudiatam
duxerit moechatur. Nam certe si penitus solutum esset vinculum, moechari vir
ejusmodi non diceretur: that is, First they object that saying of Christ, He
that marries her that is divorced, commits adultery. For truly, if the
bond of marriage were clean broken, such an one should not be said to commit
adultery. Unto which his answer is, Exceptionem priori membro additam, in
posteriori quoque esse repetendam: that is, that the Exception that is added
unto the former member of the sentence, is to be repeated again in the latter
part of it. But this is no more but only said: the proof does follow
immediately after, in this manner; Nam si qui dimittat uxorem extra causam
fornicationis, facit ut ea moec^etur, consequitur eum qui uxore propter
adulteriu^ repudiata aliam duxerit, non facere ut ea moechetur. Ex quo tur sum
colligitur, id quod subijcit, apud Matthaeum de repudiata, non nisi repetita ex
priore membro exceptione intelligendum, quoniam Dominus alioqui sibi
co^tradixisset: that is, For if he that puts away his wife, without the
cause of fornication, makes her to commit adultery, it follows (says he,
but let others judge, whether it do so or not) that he, which putting away
his wife for adultery does marry an other, does not make her to commit
adultery. Out of which again it is gathered, that that which is there added
concerning her that is put away, is not to be taken but with the Exception that
is in the former member, because otherwise the Lord should contradict
himself, or in one part of the sentence should go against that which he
sets down in another. Which proof of his though he do somewhat further
back against one thing that is in that place objected besides: yet this is all
the proof that he has for this very point that now we speak of. But, if
we mark it, me think it will soon show it self to be a strange kind of
proof. For, admit that the Exception that now we speak of, must needs imply
(which notwithstanding we do not grant, but avow it to be the thing that
lies in question betwixt us) that for adultery a man might lawfully put his
wife away: yet does it not so necessarily follow that every one might so do;
or, that no case might be such, but that, if the wife committed adultery, then
might her husband lawfully divorce her from him. For it is sufficient for the
truth of the proposition (even in that sense taken) if any case be such, as
that for adultery it may lawfully be done. As, though we may truly say (as the
Scripture also in many places, in effect and meaning, does, though not in the
same terms) that God had no peculiar people for those days in all the
world, except the seed of Abraham, or out of that stock or race of his: yet
does it not follow, that all those were of that fellowship; but only, that he
had none other besides. Whereas therefore that exception may be satisfied with
any particular (that, for adultery, as the case may be, it may be allowed)
and yet he infers a general upon it, saying that he, that putting away his
wife for adultery, marries another, does not commit adultery (for though the
proposition, in those terms, be but indefinite, yet is it an universal by
nature) hence does it follow, that his proof is of no better force, then an
argument may be that is taken from a particular unto a general, or from the
part unto the whole: as, God for a time had no people in all the world to be
his peculiar people, but only the seed of his servant Abraham: ergo, all the
seed of Abraham were of his peculiar people. And therefore it is so much the
more strange that Beza infers, that otherwise Christ had contradicted
himself: as though it were any contradiction to say, that for adultery the
case might be such, as that the husband might lawfully put away his wife for
it; and yet, that in some other cases he might not. His other Objections, as
they are the same that Erasmus had gathered before: so are they by him sent
lightly away with the self same answer that Erasmus before had given them. For
unto that other, of the words of Christ, that no man should part those whom God
has coupled together, whereas Erasmus before had said, that such were not
parted by man but by God, Beza says likewise, Concedo totum illud argumentum
etc; sed nego divortij propter adulterium authors esse homines, etc: that is,
I grant, says he, that whole argument: but I deny that men are (to be
accounted) the authors of that divorce that is for adultery. So that, thus far,
and so in the very answer it self that they made to this objection, they both
agree. But then in the confirmation of it they vary, M. Beza quite giving over
that course that Erasmus is in, and betaking himself to another. Erasmus
building upon disorders that were commonly committed in making of marriages;
and M. Beza, upon that law of God that adiudgeth adulterers to death, and upon
that exception of Christ. Wherein whether M. Beza has bettered his course or
not, that I leave to be decided by others that will: but sure it is that
therein he likes not of that of Erasmus; in that himself has taken another.
For as touching that of Erasmus he says plainly, that he does not assentiriijs
qui putant Magistratibus licere novas divortiorum leges condere. that is, That
he does not join in opinion with them, who think that Magistrates may make
new laws of divorcements. And the proof that he will have for his opinion in
this (namely, that, not me^, but only God must be thought to be the author of
that divorce that is for adultery) is no more but this; Quum Dominus jam olim
adeo express voluer it adulterio matrimonia dissolvi vt etiam adulteros morte
punier it: and postea rursum Christus consulens conscientijs propter
Magistratuum negligentiam; adulterium acceperit, quum de divortio non licito
dissereret. that is, seeing that the Lord in times past, did so plainly
declare that he would have (even the band of) matrimony to be dissolved by
adultery, that he punished those that so offended even with death: and after
again Christ providing for our consciences, has for the Magistrates
negligence therein, excepted adultery, when he treated of such divorce as was
not lawful. Concerning both which we plainly see the latter of them to hold
no further, that that same exception of Christ may be found to serve his
purpose, which is the thing that is in question betwixt us, and seeing himself
knew that so it was, it may seem that he doubted of the other also, when as
he went about so hardly to help it in this. And the truth is, that in the
other his reason holds but very weakly, that seeing God ordained that
adulterers should be put to death, therefore the husband, if his wife have that
way offended, may account himself loosed now from the band of marriage that
was betwixt them: because, as it is a general rule with all the learned, so
Erasmus himself his own partner has set it down in plain terms, that, in
his judgment, dispicere quodagat is qui loquitur, that is, to consider what is
the intent or purpose of him that speaks, Annot in. 1. Cor. 7. page 503.
is praecipua clavis ad intelligendam mysticam Stripturam, that is, the chief
key to open unto us the secret sense of Scriptures. And then it is plain, that
in that law the meaning of God was not, to show when the married might account
themselves to be loosed of that band wherewith they were tied the one to the
other: but how Magistrates should in such case execute his judgments among
their people. Again, whosoever would so resolutely set down that the band of
marriage were so clean dissolved betwixt man and wife, only for that, when
either of the parties are found to have committed adultery, they ought by the
law of God to die, they had need to be further advised, first as touching this
present crime that now we speak of, whether that ought to be the determination
of all estates for life generally (as when one has that way deserved death, he
that is in reversion should then account the right of the thing to be his,
whether that the Magistrate and laws do nevertheless spare him his life or
not,) and whether, such as owe any other duty besides, as children to their
parents, servants to their masters, and such like, might likewise in such case
be allowed to account themselves discharged of it: and then, as touching some
others besides, when any men else have deserved death, either by those laws of
God (as for blasphemy, profaning the Sabbath, or whatsoever else) or else but
by the laws of the country wherein we dwell (though not against the law of God,
yet further then it in those matters is wont to proceed) whether in such cases
we were to allow that liberty; or otherwise, what reason we have to be so
resolute in the one, and so doubtful in the other. These that are taken out of
the Apostle S. Paul, Out of St Paul,
are three likewise, but two of them (as in the others) in effect but one; the
other, is of several force by it self. These that are in effect but one, are
those two before noted, the one in the seventh to the Romans, that the wife is
by the law bound to her husband so long as he lives, the other out of the
seventh likewise of the former to the Corinthians, tending to the self same
end in sense or meaning. And as they are in effect but one, so does he give in
effect likewise one answer to both: to the former, De Repud. and Divort. page
110.
Atqui Apostolus ibi non agit de causis divortij. that is, But there the
Apostle does not treat of the causes of divorce: and to the latter, Respondeo,
Apostolum ibi non agere de divorij causis. that is, I answer, that the Apostle
does not there treat of the causes of divorce. But though this in general be
the substance of his answer to both: yet he proceeds somewhat further in
either of them. To the former he adds, first that which he thinks, the
Apostle at that time meant; namely, that he did as it were but catch or pluck
to himself, ex coniugio similitudinem, quatenus id argumento proposito
conveniebat: that is, A similitude out of wedlock, so far as it agreed to the
purpose that he had in hand. Then also, both that the Apostle does speak
there, non de matrimonio per adulterium soluto, sed de matrimonio constante,
that is, Not of such matrimony as is dissolved by divorce, but of such as is
still in force; and that a woman condemned of adultery may not be said to be
under her husband, for that etsi adhuc is est superstes qui vir ipsius fuit,
non est tamen amplius vir ipsius, nec ipsa potest esse simul mariti and
adulteri caro, that is, Albeit he were yet living that was her husband, yet now
he is her husband no more, neither can she be the flesh both of her husband and
an adulterer. To the latter he adds likewise, both that he teaches widows
there, soluto per mortem matrimonio, posse bona conscientia ad secundas nuptias
convolare, that is, marriage being dissolved by death, they may with good
conscience marry again: and that therein he had respect but to the usual and
ordinary cause, praesupposing, inter fideles quibus scribebat, vix alia ratione
quam morte matrimonia dissolvenda, that is, that among the faithful to whom he
wrote marriage could hardly be dissolved but only by death. In the answer unto
both which, what have we else to ground upon, but only his own opinion
avouched again; and here also but weakly confirmed? He says the Apostle
does not here speak of the causes of divorce. Who says that he does? What is
that to the purpose, that of them he speaks not now? By other occasion he
speaks that, which may show us, how unadvised we are in this. And why should
he speak of that which was not? We praesuppose that divorce was, by the law
of God allowed unto them: and the latter Jews, in the time of Christ, seem
much to be of the same mind also, though they might so say to some other
purpose. But there was no such liberty given them indeed: and therefore we may
not look that the Apostle should speak of it. And should we never suffer our
selves to be better led, or our judgments to be rectified by any Scripture,
but only by such as specially treats of the matter we have in hand? If
Satan might so far prevail, by any special ones among us, he would not only
deprive us of a good part of that direction that we have by the word of God:
but also might have an easy way therein besides, to bring in, and settle, many
errors among us. When God spoke to Moses out of the bush and said. Exodus 3, 6.
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, was it his
meaning then, to deliver the doctrine of the Resurrection? and yet does not
Christ even only out of it notably deliver the same unto us? Mat. 22:31, 32.
Deuteronomy. 25.4.
When God forbad the Israelites to muzzell up the mouth of the Ox that trod
out their corn, was it his meaning then to teach men how careful they ought
to be to maintain a Ministry among them? 1. Cor. 9: 8-11.
and yet does not the Apostle well apply it thereunto? But there were no end of
such examples. In the former of them he adds farther, that he does but borrow
a similitude thence, so far as belonged unto the purpose he had in hand. What
then? Could his reason be good therein, unless that same, from whence he
takes the force of his reason, were sound it self. And if he ca^ thus put of
his Readers, to say, that he does speak of a marriage that stands in force,
and by adultery is not dissolved, does it therefore follow, that marriage may
be by adultery dissolved? If it be resolved and set down by him, that being
found guilty of adultery and condemned thereof, she is now no more under a
husband, or that having committed adultery she cannot be one flesh with her
husband; have we here any sufficient ground at al to rest on, for the husband
to account himself before God discharged thenceforth of al such duties, as by
the reason of that his wedlock he was before bound unto? In the latter, was
it so needful a point to teach widows in the Church of Corinth, after that
the Gospel was now already received among them; and that had a great part of
their light from so many of the ancient people of God conversing among them
(with whom such marriages were very common, the Gentiles also being little
behind them therein) that this sentence of the Apostle, which otherwise would
serve us marvelous well to give us sound direction in this, and in diverse such
other matters besides, must so be restrained to widows only, that we, in
this case, may not look to have any benefit of it? Truly it is good to care
for widows, and it is a thing that is much commended unto us, not only in the
word of God, but in all other good learning besides: but in all things there is
a mean to be kept; and widows themselves (it is to be thought) will be
content, that wives also have all their due. Or did he so restrain those words
of his, unto that which was then most commonly used, that, for the matter now
we speak of, he would not have us to take so much of our direction thence? Or
did the Apostle presuppose no farther on the behalf of the faithful as
touching their holiness and constancy in wedlock, but only that hardly or
scantly they accounted wedlock to be dissolved among them but only by death:
or, if of the two, may not a man that is careful to find the truth, rather
doubt, that this is but an hard and a scant interpretation of this place of the
Apostle? That which is of several force by it self, is out of this chapter
also of that Epistle unto the Corinthians, where the Apostle says, that not
he, 1. Cor. 7:1^.11.
but the Lord commands women not to depart from their husbands, and, if they
do, to seek to be reconciled again, or to abide unmarried: and that the
husbands put not away their wives. Whereunto he says, Respondeo, Ibid. p. 110.
Paulum hic no^ agere de divortio sed de dissidijs quae propter simultates
inter conjuges interdum oriuntur: adeo ut interdum una pars ab altera secedat.
Quod si evenerit, no^ vult Apostolus ejusmodi discessione solvi matrimonium:
that is, My answer is, that Paul did not here speak of divorce, but of such
contentions or debates as arise sometimes between man and wife upon
hart-burning among themselves: so that sometime they depart the one from the
other. Which if at any time it come to pass, the Apostle will not, that by
such departing, matrimony be dissolved betwixt them. He proceeds somewhat
farther, I grant, to confirm his judgment therein, I mean, that this must be
S. Paul's meaning: and so me think he had need in deed. For otherwise, besides
that the Text it self does not in appeara^celead us to that co^structio^
(whatsoever it may do by implication, wherein we are to see anon how himself
does gather thereon) it seems to me, that, in either of the Apostles dealing
in such matters, we have a great likelihood, that this should be no part of his
meaning. For it had been a very great and an intolerable disorder (and such
as, not only the people of God, but eve^ all the heathen also generally, did
ever detest, unless it were some special od loose persons among the^, that
now and then would not stick to break forth to such disorder) if that had
been in use among them: and most likely then, that the Apostle would
otherwise have stormed against them, as he did for other matters, as for the
variance that was betwixt them, and for those disorders, in partaking that holy
Communion, both which he might lay to the charge of many of them, and for
suffering that incestuous person, though he were but one. Whereas therefore
the Apostle is wont to be so round when occasion was given him, and gave so
good experience of it even in this Epistle also in diverse things else, it may
rather seem, that seeing it were such a disorder, so easily upon variance to
break of the bond of marriage betwixt them, that that was not the thing, that
S. Paul there does speak of, but some other thing that was more used and more
tolerable also* and yet not to be allowed neither; as, for the woman so to
depart, or for the husband to put her away, either for adultery, or at the
least upon some great occasion or cause given whatsoever it was. Else I should
hope, that among them, for any matter so apparently so foul, even among the
heathen also, the Apostle should not have need to have used the name of the
Lord therein: or at least should think, as I said before, that he would have
set his instrument on some other tune, for a matter of less importance then
it. Now the reason that himself alleges, why he is persuaded that that is
the sense of the Apostle, himself in this manner gives in unto us. Hoc autem
ita esse, manifest indicant Apostoli verba, qui inquit in genere: Vir vxorem
ne dimittito, and vxor a viro ne discedito. Quid si enim adulterio peccarit
altera pars, annon innocenti licebit saltem a nocente discedere? Relinquitur
ergo verum esse quod diximus, nempe, Apostolum de simultatibus and rixis, non
de vero divortio loqui: quod mirum est Augustino in mentem non venisse. that
is, But that this is so, the words of the Apostle do most plainly declare,
who generally says, or speaks to all indifferently, Let not the man put away
his wife, and let not the wife depart from her husband. For what if either
party shall commit adultery, shall it not be lawful for the innocent party,
at least to depart from the offe^der? So it must needs be true that we said,
namely, that the Apostle did not speak here of true divorce, but only of
contentions and brablings: which it is marvel that S. Augustine did never
think of. Sect. 22.
Whether these words of the Apostle do so plainly prove it or not let others
judge; for betwixt us, I peceiue very well, that in no wise it can be decided.
For what proof has it at all, but only which stands on this principle, that
the innocent party may in such case at least depart from the other? But what
warrant any where have we for that, either in the old Testament or in the new?
In policy, I grant and for the hardness of our hearts it may after a sort be
tolerated among us: and among the Jews before: but where have we otherwise any
one authority for it, when it is rightly examined? Again, as yet I see no
cause to the contrary, but that a simple man might so strongly hold, that the^
especially the innocent party had more just occasion to stay, the^ to go, that
I think it might cu^ber the most learned that is, to bring in any reasonable
probability against it: and much more, to evince it indeed, So strong is the
charge, that all married couples have taken upon them, the one of the other;
and so weak it is (setting our own private affection aside) whatsoever it is,
that as yet is brought to the contrary. And therefore I believe that himself
did not wonder more, that S. Augustine never conceived so much of it; then any
indifferent one of his Readers will marvel that he should make it so clear a
case as he does.

22 Of those reasons of theirs that rely on the authority of men, How weakly
they reason on the authority of men.
we have two sorts likewise: whereof some of them stand on the authority of
those that in some sense may seem to be with them; First, out of those that
may seem to be with them.
and others again, on the authority of those that are against them. Those that
in some sense may seem to be with them, are of two sorts also: some that are
directly with them; and others besides, that are not against them. Those that
are directly with them, are of two sorts also: some, in their opinions; others
in their doings only. Ofboth which by Erasmus, among others of that kind, we
have noted unto us, that first among the ancient Fathers non defuerunt qui
senserint a recte dirempto matrimonio, licuisse cum alia copulari. that is,
Annot. in. 1. Cor. 7, page 492.
That there were who thought that after marriage well dissolved, it was lawful
for them to marry another: and namely, that Origin, Tertullian, Pollentius
(whom belike because otherwise he was not to have his place in this company,
he terms Gravem and eruditum virum, that is, A grave and a learned man) and
Ambrose, were al of the same opinion, or at least did at some time incline unto
it; and that Augustine, though he wrote against the aforesaid Pollentius about
that matter, yet that he dealt not with him as with an heretic, but as with
an adversary in that opinion only, and did in such sort confute his opinion,
Ib. page 493*
that nevertheless he did not therein charge him with heresy. Again, that
clare pronunciat sceleratius esse extra connubium libidinari, quam a divortio
novo marito junctam vivere, that is, that he clearly pronounces, that it is
more wicked, out of wedlock to play the harlot, then after divorce to live in
marriage with another husband. Again, if a woman that after divorce marries
another, that he does not simply deny her bujus esse vxorem; sed magis esse
illius quem relinquit, quam cui nupsit: that is, to be the wife of this man;
but rather to be the wife of him whom she left, then of him whom she has
married since. Then also that si recentiorum opiniones excutiamus, Er. page 505
quibus hactenus plurimum authoritatis and fora and scholae tribuunt,
comperiemus inter hos fuisse, qui putarint matrimonium posse dirimi, aut certe
qui putarint hoc argumentum esse disputabile. that is, That if we examine the
opinions of the latter writers, Sect. 22.
unto whom both Courts and Schools do attribute much, we shall find that some
there are among those also, who thought that marriage might be dissolved, or at
least that it was a disputable argument. Concerning which matter, though he
have somewhat in John of Andrew for espowsals or marriage that is not finished
by carnal knowledge: yet, in that which is consummate he finds so little,
that he is feign to hold him contented with that same John and two more, which
are, Panormitanus, and Hostiensis: and has no more in them neither, but only
that one of them leaves it to the judgment of others, having first brought
arguments both against it, and with it; another but disputes it only, and
thinks the contrary side to be the more probable: and the third does but
seem to be for it also, namely of that opinion, that the Church might do it.
That such things sometimes have bin done, he brings in two miserable
examples: the one, that Pope Zachary, in a case of incest allowed the innocent
wife of the incestuous husband to marry again; the other, that that Antonius
narrat, sibi conspectum fuisse diploma, quo To: Pontifex dirimeb at matrimonium
ratum and consummatum, that is, Anthony reports, that he had ^eene a Bull,
wherein the B. of Rome did abolish or dissolve matrimony that was fully
established, and (by carnal knowledge) consummate. And one other of good
reckoning among us, has (for the former) added thus much also, D.R. Cap. 1
that the Pastors and Doctors of the reformed Churches have perceived, and
showed, that in such case a man may put away his wife, and marry another. And
true it is that diverse of them have resolved on that opinion, and have
published the same accordingly: but whether they have perceived or found it to
be so indeed; and whether they have showed, or by any sufficient demonstration
declared the same, let that (as yet) lie in question betwixt us, till we be
further advised of it. Again, that the Fathers do not so fully consent and
agree together against it, Ibid. c. 3.
as the adversary that he has chosen does bear men in hand that they did:
but were many of them for it; especially, for the first four hundred years.
An argument, that the better it can be proved, the stronger it will be indeed;
both against that adversary of his, and against all others of that company: but
simply to beat out the truth of the question, a reasonable good presumption
indeed, but that is all. Of those that Erasmus alleges as not against him, he
is if we mark it little better furnished: and his choice is of those two whom
before he alleged: John of Andrew, and Panormitan. And, seeing, the weight of
that matter hangs not on that pin, I have not thought good to go any
further, then to so much as himself has gathered. And so as touching the
former of the^, the help that he gets ofhim is this, that proposito casu, an
Po^tifex possit indulgere, vt filius unicus Regis monasticus, ducat vxorem,
eamque habeat donec gignat prole^ masculam: page 495.
rationibus in utra^que parte^ adductis, pro neutra pronu^ciat, re^ alioru^
arbitrio relinquens. that is, propou^ding a case whether the Bishop of Rome,
may dispense with a Monk the only son of a King to take a wife, and to have
her until he have begotten issue male of her, bringing in reasons on both sids,
he determines for neither, but leaves it at large to the judgment of others.
Which (we see) is but one special case, and does not concern this of ours:
and yet that in that case also, although he does not pronounce against him,
yet in that he makes such dainty in so special a case as this, he shows
himself plain enough how hard he would be in the whole generally. And that
does the other more plainly acknowledge, who reciting the same of his, adds
thereto thus much of his own. Ego satis putarem, Ibid.
quod nullo casu Papa posset dissolvere matrimonium consummatum inter fideles,
ita quod eligere^ partem negativam: that is, I should rather think, that in no
case the Pope might dissolve matrimony consummate both the parties being
faithful, so that I should choose the negative part. So that all the help which
(he conceives) he has in him, is no more but this. Nec hic asseverat, sed
argumentum ut disputabile proponit, Ibid.
cujus alteram partem ipse putat esse probabiliorem: that is, Neither does this
man affirm it, but he propou^deth the argument, as disputable, himself
thinking the other part to be more probable. And so likewise by and by after
commending one special reason, for that out of it an argument may be taken,
quod etiam Ecclesia no^ posset illud dissolvere: that is, that even the Church
cannot dissolve it, he gathers thereon, Rursus hic non affirmat Ecclesiam non
posse dirimere matrimonium consummatum, imopotius innuit posse: Ibid.
licet ex hoc capite dicat posse sumi argumentum pro diversa part. Neque
statim expugnatum est, quod oppugnari potest argumento: that is, Again he
does not here affirm, that the Church cannot break asunder marriage consummate
already, yea rather he implies that it may: although he say that out of this
place an argument may be taken for the contrary side. Neither is it by and by
won, that is at any time by reason attempted. How poor helps these are, I
think that every one will soon perceive: I for my part will so much spare them,
that nothing at al I will disturb them. The argument that they take of the
authority of those that are against them, Then out of those that are against
the^,
is in effect no more but this, that whatsoever is brought by any against that
co^ceived opinion of theirs, it is al but weak and may easily be answered.
And for this point I have thought good to note, not only that judgment before
to have been in Erasmus abroad: but also, that yet it seems in part to
remain in that one of good account among us at home (that before I spoke of)
upon whom, diverse I hear do rest not a little. That Erasmus was of that
mind, Page 505.
his words are plain; Videbam ea quae objiciuntur, facile posse dilui, citra
nostrae religionis injuriam. Videba^ rations quas adducunt hac in causa
veteres and neoterici, non esse tam vrge^tes, ut adtantam adigant necessitatem
hominum genus: that is, I saw that those things that were objected, might
easily be answered, without doing of any wrong to our Religion. I saw that the
reasons which the Fathers of old, and the late writers do bring for this
matter, are not so urgent, as to drive mankind to such extremity. Wherein
whether he were deceived or not, or whether he had but some overweening
conceit of that his motion, let it rest for me, until the cleerenes of the
matter it self (being first beaten out) may teach us both, whether it be so,
or not. But true it is, that before he had noted some things that might seem
to be no small part of the foundation and ground of that his opinion: as namely,
from what authors such persuasion came, and how wrong they were in some things
else besides, even the best of them al. For the former of them, Iam ut demus,
says he, conjugiu^ legis esse divinae, certe pleraque quae circa matrimoniorum
causas tractantur adjus positivum pertine^t, veluti de gradibus de
impedime^tis, de rescissionibus. Neque haec decreta a synodis celebribus
profecta sunt ad nos, sed a privatis Pontificum responsis, etc: nonnunquam a
seipsis dissentientibus: that is, Now that we grant that wedlock it self is
of the law of God, yet many things that are handled about the causes of
matrimony, do appertain to the positive laws, as of degrees, of impediments,
of undoing again. Neither did these decrees come unto us from the more famous
Councels, but of the private answers of Bishops, disagreeing sometimes even
from themselves. For the latter also, Nec mirum est, veteres illos tam iniquos
fuisse divortio, quod and apud Ethnicos fuit odiosum, qui conjugium etiam aegre
admiserint, aegrius digamiam, that is, Neither is it marvel, that the ancient
Fathers were so hard to allow of divorce (which was an odious thing eve^ among
the Heathen also) who did but hardly allow of marriage it self, and much
hardlier of second marriages. In both which he shows himself to be of
opinion, that this restraint of such divorce as he would plead for, is only of
men (one foul gawle in the argument:) and then, that it proceeds from such
me^ also, as whose credit (one way or other) is, in such cases, but very small;
for which I mean not here to co^te^d, but will rather adiourne it unto such
account in the end, as the issue of the cause shall then afford it. And yet so
far as I am able to see into it, he needs not so much to trouble himself in
spying holes in that judgment of the Fathers of old, as, in this, to defend
his own. In which respect I marvel the more, that he finds so many faults
with that kind of divorce which only in this case stands by law among us, 1.
Primum, says he, ita licebit divertere, ut posteae vivat castratus and orbus.
Page 498.
2. Deinde si post suspicionem adulterij rem habuerit cum uxore, excidit a jure
repudiandi. 3. Adhaet si ipse quoque fuerit adulter, cogetur cu^ adultera
cohaerere. 4. Postremo, particulam exceptionis huc detor quemus, no^ ut jus
faciat marito repudiandi, sed ut sirepudiet, non facturus sit adulteram,
quandoquidem jam adulteram abijcit. Nam id Augustini commentum est: that is,
First we have divorce but so far allowed unto us, as that whosoever will use
it, he must afterward live as a gelded man, and without (possibility of)
children. Then if after suspicion of adultery, he nevertheless have to do
with his wife again, then is he fallen from the right he had to sue the
divorce. Besides, if himself have committed adultery too, then must he still
clean unto his adulterous wife. Last of al, that particle of the Exception we
wrest unto this, that it shall not give any right to the husband to put away his
wife (for adultery) but, if he do it, then he does not make her an adulteress,
because he does not put away but such an one as is an adulteress already. For
that is, says he, Augustines conceit thereof. Wherein though he did seem to
himself, then to have found many faults in that their judgments; and, in the
last, with S. Augustine himself: yet I doubt not, but that in the end it will
appear, that therein he troubled himself more the^ he needed; and in the
mean season, that every one may perceive that he counts those such faults,
but only in respect of that presupposall, that such divorce as he requires,
does undoubtedly stand on the authority of the word of God, which if it do
not, will soon make those great faults of his to be none at all. As touching
that other that is of the same judgment likewise, he also accounts that to
be weak which is brought against it; and accordingly deals therein: and
especially against one, whom he has made his choice adversary in it, for
whom also, I for my part (but so far as he has the truth) will crave no
sparing. More specially whereas S. Augustine is accounted to be the strongest
of all against the liberty of divorce for adultery and marrying again he
notes more weakness in that judgment of his, D.R.C. 1.
then others do that yet I have seen: both in his own confession after; and
in mistaking a part of the Text. Sect. 23.
But how far that weakneth the force of his judgment is not so needful for us
to discu^se: as not so material but only to such as rest some part of their
judgment on him, which in this I mean not to do.

23 What inconvenient speeches they have besides, if now we examine, What
inconvenient speeches they have besides: Erasmus especially.
the truth is, that all of them (lightly that I have seen) have some* but yet
that Erasmus, the leader of them, has therein so far gone beyound them all,
that none of them (so far as yet I have found) have attained unto him. And
because inconvenient speeches, though they be no certain arguments that the
cause is not good that is handled by such; yet are they fair warnings for any
in such case to take heed, because they proceed from a troubled mind, and most
commonly argue a want of the truth, and even by that only oftimes are
occasioned: therefore it shall not be amiss that we somewhat consider of them,
but first of those that we find in Erasmus; then, of such as we find in
others. Of those that we find in Erasmus, there are two sorts: some of his
own, and for which himself is to answer; others, that are none of his, but
belonging to such authors as himself brings in to help to bear out his own
persuasion therein. Such as are his own,
Those that are his own, are of two sorts also: some concerning his own
judgment in this matter; others, concerning the Scripture it self. Concerning
his judgment herein.
Concerning his own judgment in this matter, he has in such sort ordered his
speech therein, that although he has not plainly set it down, yet he
seems to incline unto it, both that certain disorders in making of marriages
should be good cause to dissolve them again: and that even the wickedness of a
woman, want of children also (belike he means of such as are legitimate; and
that he may not so account of those that either he had or hereafter might have
by his adulterous wife) yea and burning lust also, should be good causes
likewise to marry again. For the former he says. Apud ethnicos no^ erat ratum
matrimonium, Anot. m. 1. Cor. 7. page 499.
nisi parentum aut tutoru^ authoritate comprobatum, ne apud Iudaeos quidem, and
tamen apud utrosque aliquo modo dirimi poterat matrimonium. Apud Christianos
facilime coit conjugium, and semel initum nullo modo potest divelli. ^urtim
inter pueros and puellas per lenones and lenas, inter stultos ac temulentos
copulatur matrimonium, and tam turpiter initum indssolubile est, and quod magis
est notum, sic initum fit sacramentum. that is, Among the Heathen there is no
marriage accounted of force, but that which was approved by the authority of
parents or tutors; neither yet among the Jews: and yet with both those might
matrimony, some way or other, be dissolved again. Among Christians marriages
are most easily made, and yet being made, may by no means be broken off. By
stealth betwixt boys and wenches, by bawds and harlots, between fools and
drunken persons have marriages been made: and yet, a marriage being so
ilfavourdly made, may not in any wise be dissolved; and, which is the stranger
of the two, is become a Sacrament also. To which end soon after he does
likewise insinuate, Ibid page 500.
that if the Magistrate or competent Judge should dissolve such, then were they
rightly dissolved by the Ministers of God, which before were naughtily made by
the Deacons of the devil. For the latter, he says likewise, At interim
seposita paulisper authoritate scriptoris rem ipsam mecum expendat lector, number
hae satis graves sint causae cur innoxius maritus debeat alligari sceleratae
mulieri, orbitatis molestiam, and libidinis incendium far per omnem vitam: ne
vel parum prudens habeatur a quibusdam, quod rem quae non successerit, denuo
sit aggressus (quasi turpe sit, qui semel tempestatem expertus sit, iterare
navigationem; aut qui in deligendo amico erraverit, quenquam alium in amicitiam
admittere) vel intemperans, aut avarus, qui formam aut dotem mutare voluerit,
non vxorem. that is, But setting aside for a while the authority of the writer
(meaning S. Ierom) let the reader consider with me the thing it self, whether
these be causes of sufficient importance (that then men would easily take
occasion diverse ways, to break of and to marry again) that the husband
should be tied to a wicked woman, or that he should suffer either the grief of
the want of Children or the heat of lust all his life long, least he should be
accounted of diverse either unwise, that having taken in hand such a course
before as did not fall out well with him, he nevertheless does take it in hand
again (as though it were a shame, that he which once had been in a tempest,
should go to the seas again, or he that had been before deceived in choice
of his friend, should never admit any other into his friendship again) or
intemperate, or covetous, as though he rather desired to make his exchange of
(more) beauty or (better) dowry the^ of his (so bad a) wife. Which course of
his if any people should establish by law among them, it were hard to find how
it might be avoided, but that for matters of marriage, and all others thereto
appertaining, some would all be clean out of order. For first as touching so
large a liberty of divorcing their wives away from them, upon any of those so
many branches of disorderly marriage, we may plainly see, that it would lay
open a ready way to many divorces: for because those disorders are such, as
that we may conceive no hope, that either they will or may be amended. So
likewise for marrying again thereupon, if but the two first causes only might
be allowed soon should we see, that such a liberty, so freely granted, would
be (by many) as freely used: but then, if the third should be added withal,
that so often as it would require, it should still be allowed a new and fresh
marriage, and not beaten back to the former again, then as we have a proverb
in another matter, so should we quickly find it in this (to the shame of our
faces that had so taught them) that but set a beggar on horsback, and we may be
sure, that he will ride. Concerning both which, although it may be that if
Erasmus had been, derectly demanded, whether he would have allowed
suchliberty or not, he would have bethought himself better, and in the end
would have denied: yet seeing he has fensed his speeches no better, but that
in the heat of his reasoning for the other, he has so far overslipped
himself in these, that the reader may probably gather, that he was of that
judgment indeed, therefore must he now be content, that these also be taken
for part of his inconvenient speeches. Concerning the Scripture it self, he
has so many hard speeches of the same (such I mean as may be taken ill,
Concerning the Scripture it self.
and in appearance do most incline thereunto) that it may seem, that both he
found that new motion of his to be very much crossed thereby, and that he
could not quietly bear it, that so it should, and thereupon uttered those
speeches of it: somewhat of the whole generally; but much more, of Saint Paul
more especially. Of that which he uttered of the whole generally, I have noted
no more but this, and that but only toward the end of his Treatice. Videbam
Scripturam, says he, hac in part, ut plerisque, Page 505.
esse perplexam and ancipite^. That is, I saw that the Scripture was in this
point, as in many others, intricate and doubtful. Of which, for this point,
albeit he had some probability so to say, so long as those places aforesaid
were so much mistaken, and by so many, as they were: yet those places being
duly considered, we may now plainly perceive, that the Scripture is plain
enough for the negative of that Motion of his; and that all the hardness and
doubtfulnesse of it, is for his Affirmative only. Which might and should (I
think) have taught him, rather to have suppressed that his doubtful motion,
than for it so hardly to speak of the Scripture it self. That which he
uttered of S. Paul more specially is dispersed almost throughout this whole
Treatice, especially while he answers the places (after this manner) that are
brought against that opinion of his. For in answering the fifth of Matthew, Non
probat Paulus, says he, Page 499.
digamiam: and tamen, ob incontinentiam permittit, quod non audet exigere:
satius esse judicans, nubere quam uri. Et nos de rigore divortij, nihil omnino
relaxamus? that is, Paul does not allow the second marriage, or a widow to
marry again: and yet for incontinencie he suffers (as I take it) the second
marriage, which he dares not require (or as I take it, as more agreeable unto
his meaning, howsoever the words do somewhat vary, that he allows to marry
again; because he dare not so strictly require that they contain) thinking it
better to marry, than to burn. And do we release nothing at al, of the hardness
or rigor of divorce? In which speech of his the inconveniencie that I speak
of, rests especially in these two points: that Saint Paul allowed not of
widows marriage; and, that himself accounted, that to allow of divorce no
farther than it was then (which notwithstanding was as much, as any of us may
lawfully challendge) was too hard and rigorous dealing. The text is the 19. of
Matthew, wherein while he deals, Page 499.
there he says again, Paulus indulget humanae fragilitati, relaxans
saepenumero Domini praeceptum. Cur no^ idem facere possit Romanus Pontifex?
That is, Paul bears with the weakness of man, releasing oftimes the Lords
commandment (what? often: where once?) Why may not the Bishop of Rome do so
likewise? what else? Coming to those places that the Apostle has, and
beginning with that which he has in the seventh to the Romans, there he
finds his motion so probably at least, but I would rather say so strongly
crossed, that it must be, Paulo peculiare, Page 502.
nihil non torquere ad Eva^gelij negotium, pia, Christianaque vafricie, etc:
that is, Paul's fashion, to wrest any thing for the Gospels sake, with a godly
and Christian subteltie. And anon after, on that other place in the seventh of
the first to the Corinthians, in effect al one with that to the Romans, he also
is the same that he was before. For there the Apostle (with him) must be
lubricus in disputando, nunc huc se proripiens nunc illuc: that is, slipperie
in disputing, Page 503.
shifting himself, now hither now thither: therein alleging Origin besides,
something to accord to his judgment therein. And on the latter of those two
places in that epistle to the Corinthians (which though it be in the Text
before, yet is it commonly taken after as a several place by it self) there
also both he calls the law of God, the Apostles law, and by and by after, he
does charge him with rigor also. For as touching the former he says, verum
haud scio, an Paulus tribuerit hac in part nonnihil suae legi, etc: that is,
But I know not, whether Paul in this point did attribute much to his own Law:
and for the other, Quod si Paulus tribuerit hac in part nonnihil suae legi,
etc: that is, But I know not, whether Paul in this point did attribute much to
his own law: and for the other, Quod si Paulo proposita fuisset hujus modi
causa, stultus cum stulta, puer came puella co^traxit, etc: fortasse pro causae
circumstantijs aliud responderet Apostolus, and nonnihil relaxaret de rigore
consilij superioris, sua scripta civilius nobis interpretaretur, quam nos
interpretamur: that is, But if such a case had been to Paul propounded, one
fool with another, a boy and a wench have married together, etc: it may be
that the Apostle, according to the circumstances of such a case, would give us
some other answer, and would remit unto us no small part of the rigor of that
his advise, and would interpret his writings more civilly unto us, tha^ we our
selves are wont to take them. Where also we may farther note, that he terms
it (if he keep to his place) but the Apostles advise or counsel, which the
Apostle himself calls the Lords commandment: and that he does something
insinuate farther, both that the Apostles rule was not absolute (for that, in
the case that he did put, he thinks that he might have given it another
answer) and that the Apostle himself were so flexible, that in courtesy he
would have yielded something unto them in that matter. And last of al, toward
the end of that Annotation or Treatice of his (that yet he may part with him in
friendly manner) he gives this special commendation unto him, that he is so
careful of the salvation of others, that to that end, page 506.
nonnunquam etiam detorquet sacras literas, that is, he often even wresteth
the holy Scriptures. But the Scriptures, it is well enough known, do so
directly tend to the salvation of us and therefore need so little to be wrested
to that end, that we have here mo wonders tha^ one: first, that Erasmus could
ever so write of the Apostle, and did not rather suspect his own motion, when
he saw whether it brought him; then also, that others, so many, and of so
special reckoning, did not take that as a warning to them to have seen
somewhat better unto it, that therein they had not followed him so much as they
did. Sect. 24.
As for those others, that are none of his own, but found in those Authors that
himself brings in to help to bear out his own persuasion, I note no more
but this, Such as are in the Authors whom he alleges. Page, 492, 493.
that whereas there he alleges but only three of the ancient Fathers (Origin,
Tertullian, and Ambrose) yet even in those, and in every of them, himself has
noted somewhat withal, that may crack their credit for this matter: a crasie
point of doctrine belike to be tried by the Fathers, if it had no better help
then he then knew of. And though he might have made better choice then so, yet
that also, in this case had little helped, because it is not by them, that the
estate of the question stands, as now we set it. So, for these we shall not
need so much as to recite them, but may better refer those that would see
them to the place it self; yet this notwithstanding is worthy the marking,
that most of the learned (that yet I have seen) that since have followed that
course, do in like sort rest on those Fathers also and lightly go no further
neither: D R. in all his third Chapter.
whereas we have one of our own, that has so far enriched that point beyond
them all, that although it be not such as is thought meet to be published, and
was written but on special occasion; yet therein we may see more learning
uttered for that matter, then in any of those that in other countries have
written thereon, though we (in our wonted humor) have them in better account.

24 Of those that we find in others, Inconvenie^t speeches in others.
there be two sorts: one, that is common generally unto all; and others that
are proper only to certain of them. That one that is common generally unto
them all, is, that they do so resolutely make it to be the duty of the
Magistrate to punish adultery by death, General to all.
and account it his negligence if he do it not. All which kind of speeches I
account inconvenient in two respects: first, because so they do imply
(withal) a point of doctrine, more then they ought; then also, for that most
of the Magistrates of all Christendom are such, as, if it were wrong, yet could
they not help it would they never so feign. That point of doctrine which those
speeches do implie (withal) more then they ought, is, that the Judicialls of
Moses should of necessity be observed in our government also; or, that
Christian Princes are bound to observe the same: a point of doctrine that
diverse are oftimes leaning unto, but such as may not be universally held (I
mean, for all those Judicials) neither is it further urged by the better sort
but according to the equity of them, and the negative plainly held by this
Church of ours. Art. 7.
That most of the Magistrates of all Christendom are such, as that, if it were
wrong, yet could they not help would they never so feign, it is plain enough
in it self, for that they deal with no power over those that are under them,
for lands nor goods, life nor lim, but so far as those lands by which they
govern allow unto them: and that no laws are allowed to stand in force among
us, but only such, as whereunto all the estates do first condescend. And then,
if the Magistrate (although it were a thing to be wished, and himself were,
for his part so inclined also) be so little able to do it, they do by such
speeches, not only farther charge him then there is on his part any cause, but
also let down no small part of his credit or honor among the people, which
they should rather seek to maintain, knowing that the people are ready enough
(of themselves) to think so meanly of their Superiors, that they need no such
provocation unto it. More special to certain of the^.
Those that are more proper to certain of them, are two: one, that they bring
in so many things else, to dissolve the band of marriage; the other, that some
of them account it so much against duty, to forgive their offending wife. More
causes of divorce.
If many ways else marriage may be dissolved in the judgment of diverse of
them, then (in their judgment) were it but a loose and a slender band: which
notwithstanding the word it self makes to be the strongest and fastest of all
others, above that which is betwixt neighbors and friends, yea and betwixt
Parents and their children, either by the duty of the one, or by the natural
love of the other. That diverse of the^ account that many ways the bond of
wedlock may be dissolved, Peter Martyr is of that credit among us, P. Martyr.
that his only voice may stand for many, and teach us also to conclude, that if
he be a Patron of that opinion, then is he not likely to want other followers
besides. He therefore, In 1. Cor. 7. and in loc. com. clas. 2. c. 10. sect. 69.
p. 306
when he is handling of that point, that man and wife must keep together,
adds thereunto, that he does not so say, quasi nunquam liceat conjugibus
quandoque a se invicem dividi, vel per morbum, vel per aliquas graves
incidentes necessitates: sed ut co^juges intelligant, nihil per suam voluntate^
debere obstare, quin simul habitent, neque refugere debent, ut una vivant. that
is, As though it were never lawful for married folk to be sundred again the
one from the other; either by disease, or by some other special necessities
that may befall them: but that married folk understand, that, by their own
good will nothing should let, but that still they cohabit, and that never they
ought to shrink from living together. And by and by after, putting the case of
an Atheist, though a while he make some question thereof, quia non licet de
quopiam, du^ vivit animum despondere, etc. that is, because we may not despair
of any man while he lives, nisi manifesta and praecipua revelatio de
damnatione illius intercesserit. that is, Unless some manifest and principal
revelation shall be given of his condemnation (an hard case to be found:) yet
afterward he plainly concludes, that a faithful woman may depart from such
an atheist husband, if in the mean season he blespheme and curse Christ, and
will not suffer, either that himself be therein reproved, or the truth of
Christ be by her acknowledged. But in the next two Sections following, Ibid.
Sect. 70, 71,
both he sets down the same liberty for the one that is weak, and by the
other party drawn from that faith by little and little: and and answers
besides diverse objections that he takes to be strong against it. Item si
contingat, says he, ut conjux fidelis debilis sit, and sentiat ex eo
matrimonio se de religione Christiana paulatim deijci ita ut abducatur
quodammodo a fide, ac in idololatriam ex idololatrarum convictu in procliui sit
ut ruat. that is, Also, if it fall out that the party faithful be weak, and
finds it self, by the reason of that matrimony, by little and little to be
carried away from Christian religion, so that he be after a sort led away from
the faith, and be in some special danger to fall unto adultery, by the reason
of his conversing with idolaters: in this case his resolution is, Non opor tet
ut maneat, that is, he is not bound in ^uch case to tarry: and his reason is,
for that we may not do evil that good may follow. To which end also, upon
that place of the Apostle he added further, that it is apparent, sententiam
Christi, quae tantum excipit scortationem, non esse completam, cum hic
Apostolus alteram adjecerit: that is, that the sentence of Christ, whereby he
excepteth no more but fornication only, is not complete or full, whe^as the
Apostle does here add another cause besides; he means, when the infidel
departs from the faithful, in cause of religion. Zegedinus follows the
self same course to speak of, first in that same sentence of Christ:
Zegedinus. In loc. com. p^o leg. in ^ab. 1. de divortio.
then in that presupposed liberty of divorce. On that sentence of Christ,
Quidam, says he, literae, seu dicto Christi mordicus inhaerentes, clamant
propter solam fornicationem matrimonia dirimi posse. Verum, cum Paulus
permittat repudium palam mulieri fideli, si propter religionem negligatur, and
abjiciatur a viro infideli, ac significet, no^ in fornicationis tantum and
infidelitatis casibus, fratrem aut sororem ab altero separari posse sed and in
similibus (ait enim, non est servituti subjectus frater aut soror in hujusmodi,
ubi paria peccata intelligit) liquide ex his constat, Christum fornicationis
nomen in genere accepisse per metonymiam, ac nomine fornicationis seu stupri
includere ea scelera quae fornicationi paria, aut certe majora sunt, excludere
autem minora: that is, diverse cleaving unto the letter or speech of Christ
over-precisely will needs have it, that marriage may be dissolved, for no cause
else, but only for adultery. But seeing Paul does plainly allow of divorce unto
a faithful woman, if for religion she be despised, and cast out by her
unbelieving husband; and signifies withal, that a brother or a sister may be
separated again, not only in case of fornication and infidelity, but also in
others such like besides (for he says, that a brother or a sister is not
brought into bondage in such things as these, where he understands such like
sins:) it does plainly appear by these, that Christ by the figure of
Metonymia did largely take the name of fornication, and that under the name of
whoredom he did include all such crimes, as were as great, or greater than
it, and that he did exclude or shut out of the same but only the less, and his
reason is, Qui enim posset Apostolus contra praeceptorem suum docere? that is,
For how can the Apostle teach that, which would be contrary to his Masters
doctrine? In that presupposed liberty of divorce he says likewise, In append.
ad tab 1. de divortio. p. 348.
Fieri non potest, ut rei foedae nomine intelligantur leves causae, ut vel
moru^ culpa, vel corporis vitium quo maritus offendatur: excludantur vero
majores causae, quibus matrimonia magis dirimi possunt: that is, It cannot be
that under the name of some unclean thing (spoken of, Deuteronomy. 24.1.) small
matters should be meant, as some fault in behavior or manners, or some
deformity in the body, wherewith the husband may be offended: and that greater
matters should be excluded, for which marriages might be much rather dissolved.
Not to receive again the wife offending Beza.
That it should be so much against duty, to forgive the wife that so has
offended, Mr Beza is both very plain and copious therein, as having of purpose
handled the same: and yet more moderate therein than some other are, and
therefore I rest only on him for this matter. And of this matter he sets two
principal questions: the one, of detecting such a wife to the Magistrate; the
other, of receiving her again to favor. Concerning the former, De Repud. and
divo^^, p. 113.114.
first he sets the question, An teneatur innocens persona noce^tem defer,
that is, Whether it be the duty of the innocent party, to accuse the other that
has offended unto the Magistrate. And his answer (in effect) is, Magistratui
inprimis indicare maritum vel uxorem praecipue decet, ne dum praepostera
charitate alienum peccatum fovent, justam lenocinij suspitionem incurrant: that
is, that right well or chiefly it becomes either the husband or the wife to
complain thereof to the Magistrate, least while they with a preposterous love
do cherish the fault of the other, they incur a just suspicion, that they are
no better than bawds themselves. And being then farther demanded, whether we
may not privatam injuriam condonare, that is, forgive our own private injury,
he so far intitleth the Commonwealth unto it, and makes it to come so near
unto Anabaptistrie, that he cannot allow it: and he adds in the end, Na^
certe Christiana charitas malis non favet, that is, For certainly Christian
charity favors not (either evil things, or as I should rather take it)
those that are evil. So likewise, being further urged with the example of
Joseph, that did not deal so hardly with Marie his espowsed wife, and that he
was commended for that his moderate dealing, he answers that it was but
doubtful in him, and that he had no certainty of it, and therefore, that in
that respect, he did the best, as his case was. But what lets, but that a
man might rather think, that Joseph made no doubt of the matter (as then also
himself had gone too far) but thought himself very certain of it? then is
this objection unanswered as yet. And Mr Beza him self allows Joseph thus
much to put him out of doubt of the matter (if that may serve) that uterus
eminens praegnantem esse demonstrat, that is, that her belly being grown so
great as it was did plainly show her to be with child: and so, that he, ejus
videlicet rei quae extra ordinem contigerat ignarus, that is, ignorant of that
matter which had befalne her extraordinarily, might well have thought (and
without any doubting, with himself) omnino ab aliquo gravidatam esse, that is,
that certainly ( omnino) she had by some body been gotten with child. So it
seems (even by that which M Beza does allow him) that he was nothing doubtful
of it: but only that he was therein deceived. Again, being further pressed, that
in this case also private admonition should go before, at least among friends,
and that rather the Church than the Magistrate (as themselves are wont to
speak) or some certain persons should be first sought unto, he both likes
not of that neither, and brings in certain reasons to be assistant unto him
therein: but yet in the end adds thus much withal, Dixi quid hic mihi
videatur. Suu^ cuique judicium esto, modo ex verbo Dei unusquisque sapiat* that
is, I have said what I me self do think of this matter. Let every one judge
as himself thinks good, so that no man go any further then he has the
word of God to lead him. Ibid.
Concerning the latter, he first likewise propou^deth the question: and then
sets down his judgment on it. The question is, An, inforo conscientiae,
nocentem personam convictam teneatur innocens ablegare; an vero poenitentem
rursus recipere. that is, Whether in conscience (before God) the innocent party
be bound, quite to put away the offender being once convicted of it; or upon
repentance to receive him again. In which point, when first he has granted
that many of our great Divines, both old and new, do little agree among
themselves, and, in his judgment, illos quidem nimium adversus nocentem
rigidos, istos vero nimium faciles videri, that is, That one sort of them
seemed to him to be too rigorous to the party offending, and others to be
over easy: yet the^ he so takes against those that he accounts too easy,
that little or nothing he differs from those that he thought before too
rigorous; rather showing (and that rightly in deed) that the reasons whereon
they grounded that austerity of theirs were to weak to bear it, or, that,
those reasons did not so conclude; then that he does so much dissent from
their judgment therein. For he finds no more in them (in neither of those
whom there he names, Ierom, and Bucet) but only the negative, that the
offender may be retained (which he accounts so great austerity) and yet
himself, though in some case he does qualify the same, yet in some other he
draws very near unto the^. His qualificatio^ is, that, he does not condemn
him, qui uxorem resipis centem recipiat, that is, Ibid. p. 115.
who receives his wife upon her repentance* and again, Deinde, vt modo dixi,
non nego posse iterum admitti adulteram resipiscentem, that is, Moreover, as
before I said, I do not deny, but that an adulteress, if she repent, may be
admitted again. And elsewhere he yields somewhat further also, as on other
occasion before I noted. But as in this place he yields thus much, so are we
to note that he adds withal that which does (if it be marked) not a little
impeach that which is granted: and first, though there be repentance afterward
found, in her that had committed adultery before; but the^ especially, if the
party offending as yet repent not. For though the adulteress do repent, yet
first he says, that multae aliae justae causae esse possint, cur adulteram
quantumvis resipis centem, in thorum rursus non admittat, qui tamen alioqui
illatam sibi injuriam ex animo condonavit: that is, that there may be many just
causes, why a man does not admit his adulterous wife to his bed again, though
she repent never so much, who yet notwithstanding from his heart forgiveth the
injury that is done unto him. Wherein seeing he sets down, that there be
many just causes, and that a forgiveness from the heart may be (betwixt man and
wife) without bedding together again; though neither he name any of those many
causes, nor shows how such forgiveness may stand with such strangnes too: yet
such as are corruptly inclined in those matters, may easily find matter enough
to their contentment, wherewith to feed that humor of theirs, both in the one,
and in the other, so rawly left as there they are. Then also he adds
further, that he is not of mind, that a man is bound in conscience to receive
the adulteress again, though she repent, sed, post modestam Ecclesiae
adhortationem adhibitam, Sect. 25.
unumque^que suae conscientiae relinquendum, that is, but after some sober
exhortation given by the Church, that every one is to be left to his own
conscience, and that they used the selfsame order in the Church of Geneva:
(such as most of the^ are, that stickle so hard for the liberty that now we
speak of) would in such case lightly desire, both in respect of the weakness of
those (to restrain any disorder of theirs) that M. Beza here means by the
Church; and especially in respect of that liberty, that when the Church has
said what it will, then may these notwithstanding freely do as themselves
think good. But before the adulteress repent, his judgment is plain, that
the husband in no wise may receive her again: little differing from that
rigor of those others before. For by another occasion speaking of receiving
the offender again, ante resipiscentiae testimonium* that is, before some
proof of repentance be given, he plainly says that fieri non potest, quin
sceleri faveatur, that is, that it cannot be done, but that wickedness must
needs be favored. A sufficient token, that so to receive an offender again,
has at all no favor with him: and thereby also a sword given into the hands
of those that are of that humor, to be long enough avenged on the offender, til
they may find tokens (to their contentment) of true repentance. So have we
hitherto partly seen, both how weak reasons they have, and what inconvenient
speeches (besides) they have now and then interlaced among them. The meaning of
the places themselves: and first that such is not the meaning of them as they
would have it.


25 Now to examine the places themselves (for the true sense and meaning of
them) for the better understanding of the order ensuing, we are first to
acknowledge, that when we have gathered the meaning of them, and withal have
made it reasonable plain, even out of the consideration of the places
themselves, yet is it not unlikely, but that it will hardly sink in the minds
of others, unless some doubts be answered withal, which otherwise will much
prevail with many: and therefore are we first to set down the meaning of
them; then, to consider of those doubts that seem to be so strong against it.
And to find out the meaning of them, we are first to set by that which is
not: then, afterward to declare that which is. That which is not, being first
set by, both the most of the business will be dispatched, and the other will
then more plainly appear: but herein also we are not barely to set down the
negative, that I mean unto it; but also to add some such proof thereunto as
may not well be wanting from it. The negative that I mean unto it is this,
that whatsoever Christ by those words meant; yet this, in no wise, seems to
be his meaning therein, that thereby he would give them liberty, so to
divorce themselves the one from the other. That which I thought needful to ad
thereunto, and is not meet to be wanting from it, least so it should stand as
a bare negation, rests on two principal grounds: one, that Christ himself
should not seem to be so favorable unto it; the other, that the nature of
wedlock does not well bear it. For that Christ himself is not like to be so
favorable unto it.
That Christ himself should not seem to be so favorable unto it, seems to
be a clear case, being well considered, for that we shall find, that there
was never any such allowed before, nor after neither: namely that for adultery
men might so part with their wives, as that thereby theywere at liberty to mary
others. In thenew Testament we never thought that we had any such liberty but
only so far as these words of his would help us. But in the old Testament we
thought we had many; at least those two: the one in Deuteronomie; the other,
in Malachie. And therefore so long as those stood in that credit with us, we
thought the sense of this Exception of Christ might well be, that he allowed
that liberty for adultery to all, that was allowed by Moses and Malachie, for
lesser matters, to the Jews before. And indeed that collection had been very
good, for that both Moses and Malachie also wrote those things not of their
own private motion, but as they were therein directed by Gods holy Spirit,
which spoke by the Prophets. But now if we find, that these also do fail us,
then must we grant, that now we have none: and so consequently, that, if
Christ in this exception has allowed that liberty unto us, it is such a thing
as himself has only done, and not one of his Prophets before, nor Apostles
since. Which thing (for my part) I think would prove a strange assertion, that
Christ in his holiness should give further liberty to that natural inclination
of ours, then ever any other of his servants had done, before, or after. And
for that matter we need go no further, then to themselves, that are for such
divorce and marrying again: and not unto all them neither, for that fewer will
serve our turn. Mr Calvine therefore instead of the rest (and one that in
weight may well stand, in matters of judgment, in most of his writings, formany
of them) even in his Harmony on the Gospels (which was, as I noted already,
some few years before that we find that he had noted how that place of
Deuteronomie was mistake^) says reasonably well for that matter. In Mat. 19, 3.
Duobus capitibus (says he) rem totam concludit: or dinem creationis debere
esse instar Legis, ut vir conjugalem fidem tota vita co^at. Divortia autem esse
permissa, non quod licita sint, sed quia cum praefracto and indocili populo
negotium erat. that is, He shuts up (meaning of Christ) the whole matter in
two principal points: (one) that the order of creation should be instead of a
law, that the husband al his life long should keep his promise made in
marriage; (the other) that divorces are suffered, not as though they were
lawful, but because they had to do with a stubborn and untoward people. But
yet more fully, on that place it self in Deuteronomie. In the beginning of
that his Treatice, Quod ad divortia spectat, says he, I^. Harm. i^ lib. Mos^s,
in Praeceptum.
quamvis per indulgentiam concessum fuerit Iudaeis, pronunciat tamen Christus
nunquam fuisse legitimum, quia primae dei institutioni, ex qua perpetua and
inviolabilis petenda est regula, palam repugnat. that is, Concerning divorce,
although by sufferance it were granted unto the Jews, yet Christ pronounces,
that it was never allowed unto them as lawful, because it does plainly cross
the first ordinance of God, out of which the rule of our life is to be taken,
and ever inviolably to be kept. Again, Et certe scheda vel libellus divortij
marito nonnihil asper gebat dedecoris, that is, And truly that instrument or
bill of divorce did not a little discredit the husband. Lastly, even in the
end, Ita admoniti fuerunt Israelitae, quamvis impune vxores reijcerent,
licentiam tamen hanc minime coram Deo excusari. that is, So were the Israelites
admonished that although they put away their wives without any danger of
punishment for it, to be inflicted on them by law, yet that so to have used
their liberty, they could in no wise excuse unto God. Quibus adijci potest,
says Gualter, viros saltem in speciem bonos and honestos, In Marc. 10.
libellos repudij non facile dedisse. that is, Whereunto may be added, that
such men as but in show (or as they would themselves be accounted) were good
and honest did not easily give those bills of divorcement. By which speeches,
and their hard (but just) censure of divorce, it appears, not only that no
man of reasonable honesty did lightly use the benefit of it: but also that it
was not thought a thing lawful neither before God. And may we then think, that
Christ would grant any such? For if they reply that that divorce that they used
was ofti^es for small matters, and so not this that now is spoken of which is
for adultery: true indeed that they used it for small matters oftimes (but then
much rather, by all likelyhoode, for this also, seeing the judgment of death
was so little executed among them) but yet that we know of none other besides;
and then, that still it remains true which I said before, that if Christ
allowed of such a divorce, himself is both the first and the last that has
done it. And for that the nature of wedlock cannot well bea^ it.
That the nature of wedlock does not well bear it, it may appear by that
which is said before of the weak reasoning of those, that conclude the bond of
matrimony to be by adultery broken, which is notwithstanding but the offense
of the one part only. Concerning which, although Mr Calvine took not to
himself the benefit of it, as we saw before: yet did he there set down both
a very good rule; and a reason for it besides. Harm in Mat. 5.31.
The rule is this, Sanctius est conjugij vinculum, quam ut hominu^ arbitrio vel
potius libidine solvatur: that is, The bond of Marriage is a more sacred thing,
than that it may be dissolved again, when a man thinks good, or rather when
his lust does solicit him unto it. His reason is, Tametsi enim mutuo consensu
sese conjungunt vir et uxor, Deus tame^ nodo indissolubili eos astringit, ne
postea liberum sit difcedere. Additur tamen exceptio, etc.: that is, for
although man and wife do join themselves together with their own mutual
consent: yet does God (otherwise) tie the^ together with such a knot, as may
not be loosed, Sect. 24.
that afterward they may not sunder themselves again. But yet there is added
(says he) an exception, etc.: meaning this that now we speak of, and so
himself does make little use of the benefit of that his good observation that
he leaves to us. For howsoever men and women may of themselves join together
in holy wedlock: yet when so they are coupled, the^ are they also in such sort
joined together by God himself, that themselves cannot break the bond again,
as before is declared. As Mr Calvine again says elsewhere, In 1. Cor. 7^ 11.
Penes virum non est, matrimonium facere irritum: that is, It is not in the
husbands power, to make void his matrimony: though himself there also, desire
no farther advantage of this general rule, but only that marriage by domestical
contention be not dissolved: a small matter in comparison of that, which
thereupon he might justly require. And therefore the council that in another
place he gives, In Mat. 19.7.
is so much the rather in this case to be regarded, for that we may have good
hope thereby, that this Exception of Christ will rather sort it self to some
other meaning, than to allow us so strange a liberty. Sed videant privati
homines, says he, ne sua vitia legum patrocinio tegentes, culpam eorum
duplicent. Nam hic Dominus oblique Iudaeos increpat, quasi ipsis non sufficiat
impune suam proterviam tolerari, nisi Deum iniquitatis suae authorem
inscriba^t: that is, But let private men take heed, that while they seek to
cover their sins under the patronage of laws, they so make not a double
fault. For here the Lord does covertly reprove the Jews, as though it were
not sufficient for the^, to have their naughtines (therein) to be without
punishment, unless they made God also to be the author of that iniquity of
theirs. As Iohanan and his company, Ier. 42.20.
being purposed before to go down into Egypt, Sect. 26.
yet would see if they could have obtained the consent of Jeremy so to do,
that so they might seem for to have done it, if not with the Lords direction,
yet at the least with his good leave and license first obtained. Number. 22,
10.19, etc.
As Balaam also would feign have gratified the king of Moab in that his bad
suit; but yet would first very gladly have had the Lords allowance thereunto,
if by any entreaty he could have obtained it: but he, for greedines of the
reward; and these, for the love of their wanton pleasures.

Then what we may think to be their meaning indeed, and first of that in the
fifth of Saint Matthew.
26 What then should be the meaning of these two places that now we speak of,
to the end that we may the better find, because they do something vary,
therefore it is needful, that we take them severally. First therefore to begin
with that in the fifth chapter of S. Matthews gospel, there will it be
needeful, first to search out his meaning therein: then to answer one special
Objection that properly to this place appertains. The sense of the Place
first set down
To search out the meaning of Christ herein, we had need to consider not only
how we may safeliest take it: but also, what we have to induce us so to do. As
touching the former it cannot be denied (neither is it, that I know of, by any)
but that in that notable sermon of Christ on the Mountain, calling his
auditory from the looseness of those days, among other things of that nature,
he also told them, that whereas it had been said of old, that whosoever did
put away his wife, should give her a bill of divorcement, he now said unto
the^, that whosoever did put away his wife except it be for fornication, should
cause her to commit adultery, and that whosoever married her that was
divorced, should commit adultery also. Which words, as it seems to me, we
may safeliest take in this only sense, that Christ did show himself thereby,
at that time to seek no more at their hands, but only so far to restrain that
liberty of divorcing their wives, as that they did it but only for adultery:
not meaning to show that he would allow that liberty unto the^; but only that
now he would so far restrain it. That which we have to induce us hereunto, I
mean, so only to take it, and not to stretch it further, rests on two
principal considerations: one, certain circumstances of this present place;
the other, such like in many other places of the Scripture besides. The
circumstances of this present place, are two: one, of the time; the other, of
the persons who were his Auditory at this present. The time was shortly after
that first he began to preach, having gathered many of his disciples, and done
such miracles, that now the people began to resort apace unto him. At which
time Christ might well think good, so far to bear with their weakness and
rudenes, as not to require (at that time) of them, the uttermost of that which
rightly he might. His Auditory consisted on two sorts: the common multitude;
and those his disciples that then were. The common multitude we may very well
think to have been so rude then, that well his wisdom might so far forbear
them. The disciples were of the common sort before, and but lately come to
Christ: and so consequently not unlikely to be almost as ignorant yet, as they
were before; and almost as much wedded unto such liberty, as in the loosenes
of that time had grown up among them, as the residue for the most part were.
His Auditorie therefore consisting of such, it is no absurd thing to conceive,
that he meant hereby to press them no farther than so, and not to grant as
allowed unto the^, whatsoever now he thought good, to leave out of the bounds,
that so he named. As, when men are disposed sometime to take in some part of
their land that lies toward the land of others, though upon some special
consideration they set not out their ^ense so far as they might, yet does not
that by and by import, that they aba^don the rest, or leave it to others. For
in such case they may so take in that which in such sort they compass about
with their ^ense, that nevertheless they do not mean to disclaim in the
other neither. So in this, Christ may in such sort restrain that loosnesse of
theirs, within those bounds that there he set down: that nevertheless there
may be much without them also, that he will not allow unto the^. And the rule
is good, that we take good heed, how we do gather any thing that is not said,
out of that which is at any time said unto us. For, seeing it pleases God, not
only to lead those, that seek unto him for the same, to all the parts of such
holiness and righteousness as is accepted with him, but sometimes also, in an
easier course to deal with the common sort, and so to restrain some things
unto them, that nevertheless he leaves them further liberty out of the
restraint, then he can like of that they shall use: it may very well be, that
Christ did not mean hereby to teach the uttermost perfection in that matter;
but only as Civil Magistrates do, restraining such things as they hope they
may obtain, winking at others, and altogether passing over the^ in silence, if
they fear that they can do no good therein. And seeing it is granted of all,
that that presupposed law of Moses was political, what lets but that this
ofChrist may be so too? Zegedinus, one of those that is for divorce and
marrying again, does plainly say it, though unto another end. Potest, says
he, and hoc responderi, dictum Christi de repudio, In loc. com. prol. page 347.
ad legem judicialem pertinere: quae pro ratione temporis, loci, personarum,
seu subditorum mutari, aut saltem mitigari potest. that is, This also (says
he) may be answered, that that speech of Christ which is of divorce, belongs
to the Judicial law: which, according as the time, place, and persons shall
require may be either clean changed; or, at least, made more easy to bear.
And then, if we may take it to appertain unto the Iudicialls, and to be
political (as no doubt it is the fairest, in that sense that before I noted,
neither can there be any thing of moment, I am fully persuaded, brought against
it) first Musculus, another of them, plainly faith, Civiles leges multa non
bona permittunt, propter subditorum malitiam, In Mat. 5.
ne status publicus perturbetur: again, nec omnia mala vetant, nec omnia bona
praecipiunt. that is, Civil laws allow of many things that are not good,
because of the untowardness of the people, least otherwise that public estate
should be hurt thereby. And those laws do neither forbid all things that are
ill, nor give in charge all things that are good. Master Calvine also, another
of them, Perperam, Harm. in Mat 5.31.
says he, sumebant pie sancteque vivendi regulam ex jure civili. Nam leges
politicae interdum ad hominum mores flectuntur: Deus vero, legem spiritualem
ferendo, non respexit quid homines possint, sed quid debeant. that is, They did
il to take the rule of holy and godly life out of the Civil law (meaning the
Iudicialls of Moses.) For political laws are sometimes framed to the ways or
manners of men: but God in giving forth the spiritual law, did not respect what
men are able to do, but what men ought to do. Idem in Mal. 2.
Again, Magistratus multa quae non probabit, cogetur tamen far: quia nunquam
ita praeclare agetur cum genere humano ut cohibeantur omnia vitia. Est quidem
hoc optandum, ut nullum vitium toleretur: sed videndum quid fieri possit. that
is, The Magistrate shall be compelled to suffer many things which he cannot
allow: because it will never go so well with mankind that all sin may be
restrained. It is indeed to be wished, that no sin at all were suffered among
us: but we must consider, what we may be able to do. And therefore as
Musculus says again, of that praesupposed Law of Moses, that Christ did
teach, that it was not given to any such end, ut quod in se illicitum, coram
Deo reddat licitum, that is, To make that lawful before God, that is unlawful
in it self: even so, not only we may safely take this exception of Christ;
but also it will soon be found, as I do take it, to be the most approved
sense that any way else we are able to find, if indifferently we consider
thereof as we ought to do. In many other such like places of Scripture
besides, we may so plainly find such sparing of the rude and ignorant people
to be of God, as that it need not to be thought any derogation to the glory of
Christ, if so be we take that only to be his meaning therein* and first, in
the old Testament; then, in the new. In the old Testament we find such like
dealing in two special Prophets: Moses the one; and Elizeus, or Elisha the
other. Exodus 34:29.^5.
Moses, so soon as ever he found, that God had put on him some special glory,
that the people were not able to behold his countenance for the brightness or
shining of it, by and by put a vail on his face while he was with the people:
which notwithstanding he did put off again, when he talked with God.
Afterward, when he gave them laws, and was not ignorant of their great
loosnesse in many of their ways, and namely in taking more wives then one,
De^t 21, 15.24.1.
and in divorcing such as they had, albeit he knew them well enough, and spoke
of them too: yet did he make no law against them, nor so much as reprove them
neither. 2. King. 51.17.^9.
Elizeus also, when his new convert Naaman did seek to have the Prophets
approbation, that he might (in one case) a little halt betwixt God and Baal (at
least, as it seems that his words did thereunto tend) the Prophet did
nothing at all reprove him, but after the usual manner did bid him farewell. In
the new Testament we have the like, not only in diverse of his servants: but
also, in the Master himself. In his servants we have such things, both in
diverse of them severally: and in the whole body of the chief of them all,
jointly together. Of those that are several, Ioh. 1.21.
first we have that faithful one that came before him, utterly denying (for
the peoples weakness, whom he found to be ready to have him in over great
admiration) that he was Elias: Mat. 11.14. and 17.10.13.
which notwitstanding in two several places Christ does as plainly ascribe
unto him. An other that followed, Heb. 5.11*4*
being in hand to speak of Melchisedek, and then remembering that such things as
were to be spoken of him, were many of them hard to be uttered, and withal
that those to whom he should utter them, were of a dull and hard understanding,
does suddenly break off the course of his speech, even in respect of that
weakness of theirs because yet they were not capable of so high points of
doctrine as those. In the whole body of the chief of them all jointly together
(I mean the Apostles and many other of the faithful assembled together, in a
Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.28, ^9
about the schism that a little before sprang up at Antioche) we have an
example of wonderful bearing with the peoples weakness, prescribing in a
manner nothing else unto them, but only that which tended thereunto, and that
not only in forbidding unto them, but such meats as had before been offered
to idols (which notwithstanding may well be eaten but when offense thereat may
be taken) and therewithal both blood and strangled (both which were but
ceremonial, 1. Cor. 8, 1, ^.^
and by the death of Christ, with the rest of that kind cried down already,
though the time served not the^ by and by to proceed for the funeral of the^,
or to have their dead carkasies unto the grave:) but also, in setting down
fornication (by the reason of the great loosenes of the people therein) yet in
like degree with those others, which notwithstanding is a great deal more
odious by many degrees. So much were they led by the Spirit of God to bear
with the weakness of the people then: so carefully they covered the brightness of
their faces, least it should dazzle (if not clean put out) the weak sighted
eyes of the ignorant people. In the Master of al, how often do we find, that he
forbids, not only Mar. 44, 7, 36,
others, but his Mat. 16.20.
disciples too, and the Mat. 17, 9.
best of the^ al, not to be so much as acknown of diverse things of special
importance, until they should be farther strengthened therein? not that those
things might not be by them declared, but that he would have them somewhat
stronger, before they should meddle with them. Job. 16.1^.
How plainly does himself likewise tell them, that he had many things to
speak unto them, but that they were not able then to bear the^? and for that
cause (as then) he did not trouble the^ any farther with the^. How quietly
also does he put up that dogged waywardnes of the elder brother, Luc. 15.^8, 31
only for that his father was so good to the younger, when he so little
deserved the same, that sweet (but foolish) conceit of him, Luc. ^8, 2^, 22
that thought he had so fully kept al those commandments of God: Mat. 20, 12
16.
that froward wra^gling of those, that though they had their full due, yet were
they not well, only because others had as much as they: Mat. 10.35.45.
that unseasonable and strange ambition of those two Apostles, and, the
repining of the rest against the^? Al which, though of diverse kinds, yet eve^
by it also, do so much the more plainly declare, that the infirmity or
weakness of man is always almost very favorably regarded, not only of good
men, but also of God. Then a certain objection answered.
That one objection that properly to this place appertains, is, that in this
place Christ was in hand to commend unto them a more strict observation of the
laws of God, than the better sort of them (in common account) had inured
themselves unto, or thought they needed to have done: and then, that it should
seem thereby, that taking the Exception in that sense that they would have it
in, and themselves using that liberty of it; they should therein do nothing
against the rule of godliness, no, not only when it is but easily or with great
liberty delivered unto us, but when it is in strictest manner exacted of us.
Howbeit whosoever advisedly shall consider of the place it self, may plainly
see that it does not afford any such argument, because we may see, that it was
not the meaning of Christ to teach the uttermost of perfection in those matters
that he spoke of, but only to call them on much farther therein, than they
thought any need to require, or at least that they in their ways regarded.
This may sufficiently appear, in those other examples, that there he brings:
whereof some there be that go before this that now we speak of; and others,
that follow. Those that go before, are two: one, Mat, 5.2^, 27
Thou shall not kill, the other thou shall not commit adultery. In both which
he discovers much more than they in that loose time regarded, but nothing so
much as those laws require of us. For in the former he speaks but of
certain other branches that are likewi^e forbidden; and nothing at al of any
of those that are required, which notwithstanding are both many, and of special
importance besides: and in the latter he speaks but of one branch only, and
omitteth many others, as far from the common loosenes of me^, as that which
he names (and some of them further) and all those that are required. Those
that follow are some of them in this fifth chapter: and some in the next. In
this fifth Chapter there are three: one, of a several kind by it self; the
other two, being both in a manner, of one kind. Mat. 5.33.
That which is of a several kind by it self is that of Not swearing: wherein
he forbids diverse other branches also that are forbidden; but yet leaves
many others of those, and all on the other side that are required, untouched
likewise. In those two others that are in a manner of one kind, he does but
reform their bad misconstruing of two special places: Mat. 5.^8.
one, that because Magistrates were appointed and allowed to inflict the like
punishment on the offender, as he in the way of private wrath or revenge had
inflicted on an other, as eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, thereupon they
gathered, that so far they might in their private quarrels prosecute their own
reve^ging desire, or at least that they might lawfully crave so much of the
Magistrate, Mat. 5.43.
though but to satisfy their own desire; the other (not altogether unlike to
the maine point that now we speak of) that because the letter of the law did
require their love but unto their neighbors, they thought therefore that they
were allowed to hate their enemies. Those that follow in the next chapter, are
other three likewise: one of them respecting some part of our duty toward me^,
which is doing of our alms; the others some part of our duty to God, Mat. 6.1.
Mat. 6, 5.16.
which are Prayer, and Fasting. In the first and last of which both he rebukes
the ostentation of it, and teaches them how to behave themselves for that
matter: and in the middlemost he rebukes but it again, and vain babbling
withal; and then teaches them, both how to pray, and to remember, Sect. 27.
that so often as they seek forgiveness of God, they also forgive such trespasses
as others do unto them. Tha^ the which it is sufficiently known unto al, that
there be in every of them many things else, that the rule of godliness, as it is
set down in the word of God, does also require: and then, there is nothing in
this to the contrary, but that, although Christ call them here to greater
godliness, yet may such as put away their wives and marry again (though it
were for adultery) account that they may well enough be great sinners therein.

27 In that other of the 19 of Matthew we are to go thus far also, The sense
of that other, in the nineteenth of S. Matthew.
both to search out the sense and meaning of those words of his there: and then
to see, what reasons we have for to induce us so to take them. As touching the
sense of those his words, it seems to be, not so much to teach any point of
doctrine, as to elude that subtle practice of the adversary, and withal to
stop their mouths. The reasons that we have to induce us so to take it, are
diverse: first because the authority, (...)
or judgment of others does so direct us; then also, for that the
circumstances of the Text it self do altogether seem to lean that way also.
Concerning the judgment of others, The judgment of oth^r^
Saint Jerome is reasonable plain therein, Igitur Dominus, says he, In Mat.
^^.10.9 sol, 26.
sic responsione^ temperat, vt decipulam cor um transeat: Scripturam sanctam
adducens in testimonium, and naturalem legem primamque Dei sententiam secundae
opponens: quae non voluntate Dei, sed peccantium necessitate concessa est. that
is, Therefore the Lord does so temper his answer, as best may serve to escape
the pitfall that they made for him: bringing in the holy Scripture, and the law
of nature to co^firm the same: and setting the first sentence of God against
the second, which it pleased God to afford them, yet not so much standing with
his own good liking, as yielding therein unto the necessity of those that are
so carried away with sin. Wherein that he speaks of a second sentence of God,
against which he says that Christ opposes the first, it seems thereby that
as yet he had not espied that the Original was not so: which notwithstanding
if he had better regarded, he might soon have found; and then being in a good
way already, in that he had noted that Christ's purpose was to avoid their
deceits, he might have given a fuller answer, if better he had followed on
that course whereinto he was so far entered. Musculus likewise Quoniam autem
quaerebant no^ discendi, In Mat. 19. p. 502.
sed tentandi gratia etc. videamus quomodo respondeat: hoc est, quomodo
sapientia Dei laqueor tentatorum Pharisaeorum evadat. that is, Seeing they came
not to learn, but to tempt him, let us see how he does answer them: that is,
how the wisdom of God avoideth the snares of the tempting Pharisees. And so, in
effect, Mr Calvine too, though in fewer words. In Mat. 19, 7.
Christus, says he, apt a responsione falsam invidia^ diluit: that is, Christ,
by a fit answer wipeth away that evil opinion, that they by their cunning would
gladly have brought to pass to have conceived of him. The circumstances of the
Text that seem to lean that way also, The circumstances of the Te^t it self.
are of two sorts: one, that many besides have noted; and two others, that I
have not yet found to be noted by any. That which many have noted, is, that the
Pharisees indeed, did not at this time come to learn any doctrine of him
concerning the matter that they the^ did propound unto him: but only to tempt
him, and to entangle him to some inconvenience, as to disgrace him unto the
people; or to accuse him unto the Elders. And then, coming in such sort unto
him, we have therein cause enough to take heed that we do not account, that in
such case needs it must be that Christ would give forth any part of that which
should be an ordinary doctrine in the Church: but rather, that he would
frame them some such answer, as might be meetest for them, to requite them in
their iniquity. Which that we may the better conceive, and resolve our selves
accordingly therein, it shall be good a little to consider what we have in the
Scripture to induce us thereunto, either of testimonies, that witness the same:
or else of examples, that so God has dealt with others already. For testimony
hereof it may suffice that Christ is so plainly said to be a Stone to stu^ble
at, Isa. 8:13.15. Luc. 2, 31. Romans 9.32, 33 1 Pet. 2:8, 9.
even to both the houses of Israel, and that to the ruin and overthrow of so
many as do not believe, or rest not in the word that he has spoken: Isa. 6, 10.
and that the Prophet is as plainly willed to infatuate the hearts of the
people, to stop up their ears and to shut up their eyes; least they should see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts,
and should be converted and he should heal them. Examples are many: but few
will serve. Ezech. 14, 1.8.
In the old Testament it is clear, that when, even the Elders came to the
Prophet, not in so good manner as they should, they were not vouchsafed any
good answer: and when those Captains with their Fifties in like sort came
unto another, they received an heavier judgment, 2. Kings. 1, 9*12.
though so they were sent by the King their Master. In the new Testament we
have some likewise, that are of such severity, in matter somewhat further off:
and some of like severity too, in matters that are of the same kind that now
we are in. In matters somewhat further off, Mat. 13.11^
not only Christ did use to speak in Parables unto the Jews, and himself
gave in the reason, because it was not given unto the^, to know those things,
that did appertain to the kingdom of heaven: Act. 5.1, 10.
but even the Apostle S. Peter also struck down with sudden death, both a
man and his wife, that came with a contribution unto them, though not in such
sort as they ought to have done. In matters that are of the same kind that now
we speak off, we shall need (I trust) no more, but only to note, how Christ
himself directed his answers in such like cases; and namely, when either they
tempted him: or whenas he questioning with them, they would not acknowledge the
truth when they saw it. Of their tempting of him, we need go no further, but
only to these two: the one, of Tribute, the other, of the woman taken in
adultery. Mat. 22.15.22
In that of tribute it is plain, that they went about to entangle him in his
speech, as himself also did tell them, and reprove them for it. Whereupon in
such sort he framed his speech, as was sufficient, both to clear himself, and
to put them to silence: but yet not so full, for the doctrine thereunto
appertaining. For though it be most true, that there he delivers that we
must give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things
that are Gods: yet both the doctrine is but general, not showing, whether that
which they spoke of be due or not; and that which might seem to be brought in
by him to conclude it, served rather to stop their mouths then that they and
others should thence have gathered, that the Prince having set his sta^p on the
coin, it is as thence forward made his so absolutely thereby, that none others
can have any property in it. In that other, Ioh. 8.3.11.
of the woman taken in adultery, as there also they came to tempt him, so they
were accordingly served: first vouchsafing them no answer at all, but
otherwise so employing himself, as if he would by his doings teach the^, that
it were as good to do nothing, as to give any good answer to them that came
so unto him; and, when that would not serve, but that still they urged him to
have his answer (because they thought they had him now on their hip) then
giving such an answer unto them as choked the^ all, and made them to be glad
to get them away. When he likewise did on a time so question with them, that
they could not but see the truth, and yet when they saw it, Mat. 21, 23.27
would not acknowledge it (which was to show by what authority he did those
things among them; which they pretended they would feign know of him) as then
they plainly bewraied themselves that they came to entangle him, and not to
learn of him; so he likewise dealt accordingly with them, confounding them
first in their own devise, and the^ denying to give unto them any further
answer. Those other two that I have not yet found to be noted by others, do
the one of them appertain to this present time: the other, to a time that
followed a little after. That which belongs to this present time, is to note,
in what sense the Disciples took it. For if the disciples then did not so
understand Christ, as though he had by those words of his allowed the liberty
of putting away our wives for adultery, and to marry again: then, of the two,
I think that we also may safeliest take it, that he granted, no such
allowance indeed. And that they did not so take it, but rather, that they
might not part with their wives in that case neither, and much less marry
again, it may seem by this, that they accounted themselves to be so much
straightened thereby, that thereupon they plainly said, that if the matter were
so betwixt man and wife, Mat. 19.10.
then were it good not to marry at al. For presupposing that they were none of
the loosest sort for such matters, but that a reasonable liberty might content
them, it will so fall out, that if they had taken those words of Christ in that
sense that these would have them, they would then never have accounted
themselves to be straightned thereby. For such as were of any reasonable
moderation, even among the prophaner sort, did yet account it liberty enough to
be allowed, for adultery to put away their wives, and to marry again: and we
may well persuade our selves, that the Apostles were the^ also much better than
those: and therefore that if they had so understood Christ, they would not then
have conceived such hardness as they did in the married estate. And then, if
the Apostles did so take the words of Christ, as altogether forbidding divorce
and marrying again, yea though it were for adultery also, even that only
consideration may well weigh with us to conceive better liking of that sense
likewise, if it should not overruled us rather. That which belongs to the
time that followed a little after, is, that when the Disciples, by occasion as
it seems, of this his speech unto the Pharisees, Mar. 10, 10 12
did ask him again, concerning this matter, he then left out (unto them) the
Exception that he had used before, and plainly told them, that whosoever
should put away his wife, and marry an other (not using the Exception of
adultery to these now, as he did to the Pharisees before) he should commit
adultery against her, and so should the wife likewise, if she should deal so
with her husband. Wherein I note a manifest difference, in those to whom he
has spoken in these two places: the former being the tempting Pharisees; the
others being his own Disciples, and inquiring (as it seems, in that they
were so troubled before) for their own better learning. Of which difference we
need not to doubt, but that Christ might well take occasion, Sect. 28.
so far to vary in his speeches unto them, as in those two places we see that
he does. And if now the question should be, out of whether of these two answers
of Christ, it were safest for us to take our direction in all such cases, me
think, there should be no question of it, but that this his answer unto his
disciples apart by themselves, should be more likely to give the sense to the
other, than thence to borrow a sense for it self.

28 The doubts that I speak of, Certain doubts answered, namely of the
Exception that it will not help them, in that sense that we do take i^ in
showed by diverse other places.
that seem to be strong against the sense of these two places that now I
have gathered, are especially two: one, the Exception that is used in both; the
other, that the Apostle, allowing either party in some cases to marry again
before the death of the other, may seem much rather to allow of this.
Concerning the Exception that is used in both, we are to note that first if we
take it in that sense which I have already given it, then do themselves
perceive, that it does help the^ nothing at al: but then, that they on the
other side may probably challendge, to have such a sense allowed unto it, as
will somewhat favor them herein. If we take it in that sense which I have
already given it, themselves do then willingly yield that it helps them
nothing at al, for that so in the former he does but bear with the rudenes or
weakness of them: and in the latter, vouchsafes to give them no better answer,
because then they came not to learn, but only to tempt him, or to disgrace him
unto the people. And then, allowing this sense to rest upon it, we have no
hardness but only in this, how to reconcile that kind of speech to stand
with the sense that now we speak of. Which in my mind may easily be done,
if we note, that the Scripture according to the aforesaid rule of S. Basile,
when it speaks of two things, as some way opposite the one to the other, does
oftentimes so deny the one of the^, that nevertheless it does not thereby
grant us the other: as many Examples do witness unto us, both in the Old
Testament, In the old Testament.
and in the New. In the Old Testament (among others) we have one that
concerns Princes only: and more that concern all others generally. Deuteronomy.
17.17.
That which concerns Princes only, is, that their King is so plainly
forbidden to take unto him many wives, and to gather him much silver and
gold. Where it is plain, that both those are so forbidden to Princes, that
they are not allowed to others. Of those that concern al others generally, I
have noted a couple: one, that forbids usury; the other, that forbids to
marry two sisters. Deuteronomy. 23.19.
That which forbids usury, is, that they were so plainly forbidden to
lend their money on usury to their brethren: whereupon it had been an hard
collectio^ thence to have gathered, that to strangers they might, had they not
had the same liberty in plain terms allowed unto them, as we see that it was
in the next verse after; but yet in such sort (we are to gather) as otherwise
was not against the law of God. Ib. 20.
For there are we thus to distinguish, that in that place which concerns
their brethren, they were utterly forbidden to take any usury; or any manner of
advantage whatsoever: and in that other that concerns strangers, that they
were forbidden but only that which was unlawful or ill: and not such as was
not against the rule of Charity. The like whereof we have before, Deuteronomy. 15. of
which Lyranus notes well, In Mat. 19.
saying, Concessit dare ad usuram extraneis, ne fratres gravarent. Sicut ergo,
qui non dat ad usuram nec extraneo, nec propinquo, facit magis secundum
intentionem Mosis: ita ille qui docet uxorem non dimittendam, non dicit contra
ejus intentionem, sed magis supplet and perficit illius legis datae
imperfectionem. That is, He granted them liberty to lend upon usury unto
strangers, that they should not be grievous unto their brethren. As therefore
he that lends not forth his money to any usury at all, neither to the
stranger, nor to his neighbor, does better follow the intention or mind of
Moses: so he that teaches, that a man may not (for any case) put away his
wife, he speaks not contrary to his meaning, but rather accomplisheth and
supplieth the imperfection of that law given. (Not seeing then, that Moses had
in plain words allowed that unto them, which now we see, he did not, as before
is declared.) But in this liberty that is so plainly given unto them, of
lending on usury unto strangers, we may well take good instruction unto the
matter that we have in hand. For as they, though they had that liberty
granted unto the^, yet because it was otherwise so plainly forbidden, should
therefore in that case diligently inquire, what kind; of usury it was that
was so far allowed unto them, or in what measure it was permitted; and not
(at adventure) rush at any: even so in this likewise, seeing divorce is a thing
so contrary to all Scripture generally, if in this case we think that it is
permitted, yet were it the duty of all that would take to themselves that
liberty, first to make diligent inquierie, how far that liberty of theirs
might be extended, not crossing any other word of God thereby; and not so
resolutely to determine, that supposing such a liberty is granted, they
thereupon conclude withal, that there is nothing against the course that they
have taken, to obtain to themselves the inioying of it. In that which
forbids the marriage of two sisters when are not only to consider of the
place it self: but also of Mr Bezaes judgment thereon. The place it self is,
that every one is forbidden, during his wives life, to marry her sister also: a
place so taken by the general assent of all, that although it seem to forbid
it, but only during his wives life; yet that no man thereon may gather, that it
is allowed for any man so to marry, after his wives death neither. But now if
we look somewhat further into it, we may find that (in the judgment of some,
and those none of the meanest) the sister that there is spoken of, Tremel. Iun.
is not meant of a natural sister (that being in effect, and by the like
forbidden before) but of any other woman; Ib. 16.
as, when a man has one wife already, yet to take another unto her: as indeed
those words in the Hebrew it self are diverse times elsewhere so used (as they
also have noted) and diverse other good reasons there are why rather we should
so take them. And then whereas the Turks (and such other libertines of that
kind) are wont to reason, that to have more wines then one, is no where
forbidden by the word of God in the old Testament (and the new they do not
much regard) and so take unto themselves the freer liberty that way to offend,
if now the judgment of these (being more then any of the rest that I know of,
have found) may be of force to weaken that resolute negative of theirs (not
indeed gainsaid much by others heretofore:) what lets, but that these also,
if the exception that now we speak of, may have in the judgment of some of
the learned another sense, may well doubt of so resolute conclusion, as they
make thereupon, and so consequently not think their liberty so clear now, as
they have presumed before that it was? Mr Bezaes judgment on this place I have
rather noted, M. Bezaes judgment herein, worth the marking.
for that if he would afford us, but the same indifferency or measure in the
matter of divorce and marrying again (that now we speak of) as he does in
this, the matter in question would soon grow to an end betwixt us. De repud.
and divort. p. 79. and 80.
For himself does call this kind of speech an exception also, and gives so
good an answer unto it, as our selves would desire no better for that other
Exception in the speech of Christ that now we speak of. For moving the
question, Cur igitur inquies, says he, in alta lege additur exceptio, illa
vivente, nisi ut intelligamus, una demum sorore mortua, alteram ducere fas
esse. that is, Why then (will you say) says he, in that other law is this
Exception added, while she lives, but that we may so take it, that when one
sister is dead, then may we lawfully marry another, his answer is this:
Respondet Basilius eadem illa epistola, non temere ex eo quod scriptum est,
colligendum esse quod scriptum non est. that is, Basil answers in the same
epistle (he means in his Epistle ad Diodorum which he cited a little before)
that out of that which is written we must take heed, how we gather any thing
that is not written. And then himself also adds his own approbation
thereunto saying, Et sane it a est quoties saltem id quod consequi videtur, vel
absurdum est, vel alio loco, sieve express sive tacit damnatum. that is, And
truly so it is, so often at least, as that which seems to follow thereon, is
either absurd, or, by some other place besides, either expressly, or by
implication condemned. Examples whereof he brings a couple: one, out of the
last; another out of the first Chapters of the Gospel by S. Matthew. Mat.
2^.20*
Promittit Dominus, says he, se Ecclesiae suae affuturum, quamdiu seculum hoc
perstiterit: an inde colliges, vel desinente mundo abfuturum illum a suis, vel
illud frustra adiectum fuisse? Non cognovit Josephus Mariam quamdiu praegnans
fuit: Mat. 1.25.
an ideo efficitur, vel illam postea fuisse a viro cognitam, vel illud frustra
expressum fuisse ab Evangelista? that is, The Lord promises that he will be
with his Church so long as the world stands: may a man gather thereon,
either, that when the world shall have an end, he will the^ absent himself from
them; or else, that that (limitation) was added in vain? Joseph had no carnal
knowledge of the blessed Virgin, so long as she was with child; does it
therefore follow, that either afterward he had such knowledge of her; or else,
that that (limitation) was to no purpose set down by the Evangelist? In which
judgment of his we have diverse things (me think) right worthy the marking:
some directly appertaining unto the matter we have in hand; and one other
besides, out of which we may take some benefit also to that purpose, though it
ly so far of from the same, that few there be that would so apply it. Those
that do directly appertain unto the matter that we have in hand, are, the
rule that he brings out of Basil: and his own approbation of it. The rule
that he brings out of Basil is such, as that if he will afford it in this
cause so far unto us, as in that other he takes it unto himself, we may
account our selves so fensed with it, for the matter that now we speak of, as
that neither himself, nor any other shall easily be able to bring any thing of
force against us. In those words of Christ let them take heed, how they gather
out of that which is spoken, that which is not, and then I trust that in the
matter our contention also will soon be ended. That which is spoken, is
plain, that no man may put away his wife, unless it be for adultery: but
that for adultery a man may do it, though they think that to be plainly
implied; yet unless that also, be either there, or somewhere else plainly said,
let it then stand as not said as yet, and then let them withal take heed, how
they gather it out of the other. In his approbation of it we see that he does
not only in plain terms approve it: but also does add some examples unto
it. If we go no further but only to the words of his approbation, we may see
that as he allows of the rule generally: so does he account it more strongly
to hold whe^soever it is either absurd, or against some other Scripture, that
should be gathered thereupon. If it be good generally, even that only, I trust,
will yield as much as we shall need. If it be stronger in those two cases,
then howsoever it may be, that very few can account it a thing absurd, that for
adultery a man should be allowed to put away his wife and to marry another: yet
if they will put it to the trial of other Scripture, I trust themselves will
not deny, but that they have none other for it; and that we do charge them,
there is much against it. His examples do altogether stand with us, and are
very strong against them, to bring them unto a better judgment in those
matters: and, howsoever the former of them is without exception (for the matter
that now I am to deliver) yet for the other, I think they may not deny, but
that to let go the limitation in the latter of them, were not of so hard a
consequence in the Church of God, as so far to enlarge the Exception that now
we speak of. That one thing that lies somewhat farther off, and yet is such,
as out of which we may take some benefit also to this that I speak of, is,
that notwithstanding M. Beza did (by this occasion) so specially look into
this place that now we are in (I mean Lev. 18:18.) yet did he never find
that, which before I showed Tremel^ius and Iunins both, to have noted thereon.
Of set purpose he disputes it to and fro: and uses the authorities of S.
Basil, Rabbie Solomon, S. Augustine, and Mr Calvine therein; and conferreth it
with some other Scriptures besides. And yet (being a good linguist himself) he
looked not so far into the propriety and use of the tongue for that point, but
that he let a good part of his matter to slip him therein, which otherwise he
would have bin loath to have missed. Wherein although he may well be excused,
for that all generally (for any thing that yet I have found to the contrary)
were wont so to take it, and to make no question of it: yet thus much may we
gather, to the purpose that now we have in hand that if we find, that in this
God has imparted to these a greater light in the Original, then to many others
besides: then may it be so in that other place also that before we had out of
Deuteronomie, whereon was laid a great part of the foundation it self of that
opinion. But if these had published that judgment of theirs before (as it may
seem that they had, or thereabout; for they published the second part of the
Bible but 3. years after this book of Mr Bezaes) thenwas the oversight therein
so much the more unhappy, for that then there was come abroad good means to
amend it. In the new Testament we may be the shorter, In the new Testament.
because that M. Beza himself has alleged a couple of good importance to
that end if they be considered, and we will lay but two more unto them: one,
of another speech of Christ; the other, out of the Apostle S. Paul. That other
of Christ, is, of not coming thence, until the uttermost farthing be paid.
That of the Apostles is, Mat. 5.26. 1, Tim, 3, 2.
that a Bishop must be the husband of one wife. In both which we may see, that
something is in such sort to be denied, as that the opposite is not to be
accounted thereby to be granted: in the former, that the coming out thence is
not so denied til then, that it may be thought to be affirmed, that the^ it
shouldbe; in the latter, Sect. 29.
that it is not so denied to a Bishop, to have mo wives the^ one, that it is
allowed to others to have. So in this it may be likewise, that it is not so
denied to any to put away their wives, unless it be for adultery, that thereby
it is granted unto them that so they may; but that herein also he does so deny
the one, that yet he grants not the other, especially when as no where else
we have any Scripture for it: but much, that (even themselves do grant) has a
great show to be against it; and we nothing doubt, but that it is against it in
deed.

29 If they will challenge the benefit of the other, How little the Exception
does help them, in that sense that they would have it,
than we are again to note, both how far it is, that the Exception that now
we speak of may stretch to their help and then, what themselves must yield
too withal, if so they will take it. How far it is that it may stretch to their
help, may soon be said: namely, no more but only this, that in some case it
were not ill, or at least might be tolerated, that for adultery the party
innocent might break of and marry again. For though he meant in that
Exception to grant that liberty, yet his words do not drive us, that we
should so take it generally: but will hold themselves contented or answered, if
some cases there be, in which for adultery it may be permitted. For though
the residue of the proposition be a general Negative; yet the Exception is
neither general, nor negative neither; but particular, and affirmative too. And
the^ the rule is good, that is used by diverse of the learned, A rule to judge
of things unlawful, and indifferent.
for the better quieting and establishing of men's minds in the truth of the
doctrine, that concerns things indifferent: namely, that howsoever, when the
general proposition is Prohibitorie or forbidding, all the species or the
special branches of it, are also forbidden, yet if generally it be commanded
or required, the^ the several branches thereof (at least many of them) may be
indifferent, and are according to the circumstances thereunto appertaining, to
be adjudged. As in the Commandments, they all forbid, but only two of them,
the fourth and the fifth. In those eight therefore that do forbid, there is no
special branch to them appertaining that can be indifferent, but is clearly
unlawful (no branch I mean, of that part of it that is Prohibitorie: for
every of them does imply the commanding part withal; as those two likewise that
first command, do also imply that which forbids;) as also in those two that
Command there be many branches which may be indifferent, till some such
circumstances shall be added thereunto, as shall cast the balance the one way or
other. For examples sake, the first commandment forbidding us to have any
other to be our God save the Lord alone, leaves not one of them to stand
indifferent (in such respect unto us) but altogether, forbidden unto us: but
the fourth, that requires to keep holy the Saboth day, leaves diverse of
those branches that belong thereunto merely indifferent, until, by farther
order taken, it be more specially set down, in what sort it must be kept
holy. And so consequently, so long as no farther order was specially taken, a
man that were careful not to tra^sgresse against the same, had no way at al,
but to make farther inquierie, in what manner he should keep it holy: and then
to follow the rule prescribed. And so in this, seeing there is nothing said but
generally, that for adultery a man may put away his wife and marry again (for
that sense now for the time, for reasonings sake, we are to admit) therefore
whosoever would be loath to offend therein, he had need more specially to
inquire, in what case, and in what manner, it might be done for adultery also.
For he that says, that for it, it may be done, Sect. 30.
does not say that in all cases, and howsoever it may be done, so that once the
occasion of adultery be thereunto given: but as he grants that in such case
there is a farther liberty than in many others, so does he likewise by the
same though closely, yet necessarily require, that if himself do not more
specially declare what it is, then that there be farther inquiry after it.
And then in this case, though the meaning of Christ in that Exception had
been, not to deny, but that for adultery such liberty might be allowed, yet
might no man in his own private case presume any farther thereon, than
elsewhere in the word of God, he should find the same warranted unto him: and
there is none of those that follow it (if themselves be honest, and have any
judgment) but that do add such limitation and conditions unto it (as partly
we saw before) as we may safely gather thereby, that they do not account it
allowed indifferently, or, at large unto all. So that, though this sense were
allowed unto them, so far as the words themselves should require: yet so also
were it like to fall out, that very few of them should be able, to shrowde
themselves under any just protection of them.

30 Which that they may the better perceive, That they ought to be well
advised herein*
now are they to be put in mind of the other: namely, what it is whereunto
themselves are to yield, if they would have any benefit of this latter sense of
the Exception. And that may they plainly perceive to require these two things:
first, that they be not too hasty to take unto themselves that liberty, but
that seriously they advise them selves what they do therein; and, when they
are advised of it, how far then they are to forbear it. That they be not then
to hasty to take that liberty, but that well they advise themselves what they
do therein, as themselves may see that they ought so to do: so have they good
provocation unto it. Themselves may see that they ought so to do, even by the
nature of the thing that they have in hand. For being so doubtful as it is,
being by many of the learned, so plainly and resolutely gainesaid, even common
sense will in such case teach any, that they ought to take good heed to their
doings, and not at adventure to intrude themselves into that, which as yet they
find not to befall unto them. The provocation that they have thereunto, is in
such examples as of that matter we have: and in the experience that we have
likewise of the great displeasure of God to diverse of those, that have
neglected that point of duty. What examples they may have, so to do,
The examples that we have are many, but few will serve to show us the way that
in such case we are to follow: even David alone, if we heed him well; but we
will add some others unto him besides. With David it was an usual thing, in
matters of difficulty, not to meddle at all, neither one way nor other, until
he had first sought to the Lord, and thence had taken his direction: and that
not only in the time of his trouble; but also, when he was to enter into the
possession of his Kingdom. In the time of his trouble we have good instruction
of this kind in his example, first in helping certain others: then in
recovering a loss of his own. Those others were the inhabitants of Keilah, 1,
Sam, 23 12.
whom the Philistines at that time beseiged. Whereof when tidings were brought
unto him he first inquired of the Lord, whether he should go to help them or
not, though it seems that himself would otherwise very gladly have done it:
Ib. 16.
and, when his company did cast some doubt of peril therein, he then inquired
of the Lord again, before he would proceed therein. In Keilah likewise, when
he had delivered the City, and in reason might think, that now among them he
might account himself reasonable safe: yet, upon some doubt that himself
conceived, that as then he saw a storm to be growing, Ib. 9.12*
he would not rest on his own reason and good deserts therein; but inquired of
the Lord again, and so escaped a special danger. That loss of his own that
he was to recover, was, that whilst he and the company atattended Achish King
of Gath, to have gone with him to battle against Israel (a very great
oversight in him) his own City Ziklag that the King had given him to
soiourne in, was by the Ama lakites taken in his absence, their wives and
children, and all that was therein taken away, 1 Samuel 25.5, 6
and the City it self consumed with fire. Whereat his company were so
greeved at their return (for they went not forward in that voyage, but were
discharged and sent home again, God providing much better for him) that when
they found what loss they had therein, especially of their wives and children,
they were so impatiently greeved therewith, that they thought to have stoned
David their Captain, as the^ they were enraged against him. 1. Sam. 30.7, 8
He thereupon again inquired of the Lord, whether it would please him, that
he might be avenged on those that had done him this wrong, and recover the
pray again or not: not resting on those perturbations, that the indignity of
that fact had kindled in himself and his men: but seeking unto the Lord
therein, and taking all his direction thence. When he was to enter into the
possession of his kingdom, he observed (a wonder to see) the self same
course. In so much, 2. Sam. 2, 1.
that when the kingdom was fallen unto him by the death of Saul: yet did he
not presently hasten unto it; but first enquired of the Lord, whether he
should make hi^ entry unto it or not. And when the Lord had resolved him for
that matter, and had given him leave to go and make his entry unto it, he
rested not there, leaving the rest to his own affections or choice: but
inquired further also, to what part of the kingdom he should make his first
repair, and where he should begin his kingdom. And yet he was before
anointed by Samuel the Prophet (and that by the commandment of God himself)
to succeed Saul in the kingdom: 1. Sam. 16.1, 13.
and then presently thereupon in token of it, and to enable him thereunto, he
was endued with a special gift of the Spirit. Shortly after which, ^. Sam.
17.49.^2, Ib. 18.6, 7.
it pleased God to work mightily by him in the overthrow of Goliath, and
therewithal putting to flight the whole army of the Philistines: and thereby
not only to bring him unto the knowledge of the people; but also into special
great honor among them. Ib. ^8.8.2^.2.
When thereupon Saul began to conceive hatred against him, and egerly to pursue
upon him to have his life, he plainly found that God had preserved him still,
and oftentimes in wonderful manner: and had given him withal many secret
friends with whom he did soiourne when he was chaced to and fro; 2. Sam 30:
26 30.
of whom he might well have conceived opinion, that seeing they stuck so far
unto him in his adversity, they would now undoubtedly have known him in that
his entry into prosperity. In which case, even in the most moderate (that for
the most part are among us) flesh and blood would soon have been doing:
insomuch that few there are, that would not have resolved in themselves to have
made no further question, for matters of less importance then it. Those others
that I thought good to add unto David, are these two: the Queen of the South;
and Iehosaphat. The former of which had diverse hard questions, and was wise her
self besides; but yet she would not rest in her self, nor in any of her own
sages neither, 1 King^. 10.1*2.
but came unto Solomon to be resolved. Ib. 22: 5.7.
The latter was so careful of this point also in an expedition against the
Syrians, that even in those affairs he craved, that first he might inquire
of the Lord, before they did set in hand therewith, and, though the^ he had
enough of Achabs Prophets, and all those agreeing in one, yet all those
contented not him, till he had that one Prophet of the Lord that yet was left,
that by him also they might inquire of the matter they had in hand. What wrath
they may fear, if so they do not.
What experience we have of the great displeasure of God against those that
neglect this point of their duty, is so plain a thing in it self, that we
need not to stand upon it, it does so plainly of it self appear, as in many
others, so namely in his judgment against those two sons of Aaron, and in
David too; but especially in one of his judgments against king Saul. For
howsoever the former were strange: yet was the last strangest of all. Those two
sons of Aaron that now we speak of were Nadab and Abihu, who were then but
newly entered into their office, and so not exercised therein before: and yet
because that therein, Lev. 10.1, 2.
they offended (not by doing any thing against that which was prescribed, but
only for not inquiring of a matter that was not give^ them in charge, and which
in reason they might have thought it had not been a matter of any such moment)
they were both on the sudden destroyed with fire. Whereupon that Moses does
charge them, that therein they did not sanctify the Lord, and that this
judgment did for that cause so fall upon them, it may teach us likewise, that
it is over profane dealing with God, and very dangerous unto our selves, if
we do not inquire of all such things as concern our duty to him, if
otherwise they be not made plain unto us. ^. Sam. ^.
David was about to bring home the Ark of the Lord, which was little regarded
in the days of Saul, and to that end had gathered unto him a great assembly,
that so it might the better be done: and yet because they did not well heed, in
what manner they did it, the Lord with a sudden and fearful stroke, dashed
all that whole solemnity of it. But the judgment of Saul is, as I take it the
strangest of al, for that he was rejected for being king, for no other cause,
then (according to the judgment of some of the best, and as the Text it self
does seem to import) but only for that he meddled too soon, and did not awaite
the Prophets coming, ^. Sam. 10.8.
who was first to show him what he should do. For besides that this matter was
(at least as the case stood then) a matter of State (wherein it it is commonly
thought that Princes may least have regard to their Prophets) Saul was before,
Ib. ^ Ib. 2.7. Ib. 6.
by the Prophet himself anointed unto it, confirmed also by diverse signs;
himself endued with a special gift of the holy Spirit likewise, whereby he was
also enabled to prophecy; afterward chosen by lot in a special assembly of
the estates; shortly after commended unto the people by a victory that he had
against the anointed, Ib. 22.21.
and thereupon by the whole army acknowledged, being the^ above three hundred
thousand: Ib. 13.8.
having now also tarried the time appointed, in a manner, even to the full, if
not to the uttermost of it (for it is said that he tarried on Samuel seven
days, according to the time that he appointed) and last of all being so
strongly urged as he was to haste^ so much as he did, his enemies lying so
near unto him, and his men for fear dropping away so fast as they did, that
unless he had then addressed himself unto his business, Ib. 8.1^.
he was in danger to have had none to have tarried with him. Sect. 31.
Whereas therefore we have on the one side so good examples, that lead us to
so careful inquiry first, before we presume to determine when so ever the
matter is any thing doubtful; and on the other, so fearful judgments
withal, on so many of those that have neglected this point of duty: it may not
justly be doubted of any, but that hardly he should be able to discharge that
point of duty to God, i^ in such sort he should take the benefit of that
Exception unto him, as a sufficient warrant in that case to marry again;
though there were no more in it the^ this, that as yet it is not resolved, but
is plainly in question, even among the learned themselves.

31 When therefore they condescended to this, That they do nothing against
other Scriptures, which in this case are strong against them
that they must be better advised of it, to the end they may the better see how
to determine, namely, how far they are to forbear it, so far as I see, they
need go no further, to find that they are not in such sort to take it, then
only unto these two points: first whether it may not well be doubted, that
they have not some Scripture against it; then, if they had not, whether yet
itwere not inconvenient. That it may well be doubted, that they have some
Scripture against it (and that in large and plentiful measure) I account it to
be so plain in it self that I do not think it needful to go any further,
but only in brief and short manner to point unto it: and that, not only, when
regard is had to those places, that directly treat of that matter that is in
question, and so are held by very many, as learned and godly as any others; but
also, if recourse be had to some other places, which are more general, and yet
may specially be applied to this likewise. Such as directly treat of the
matter in question.
Those that directly treat of the matter that is in question, and so are held
by very many, as learned and godly as any others, are such as either set down
the nature of marriage, as God ordained the same at the first: or else do teach
us the nature of it, after that once it is so ordained. Those that set down
the nature of marriage, as God ordained the same at the first, are of two
sorts: whereof one only is the Original; the others, are references
thereunto. That which is the original, is that known place in the second of
Genesis, how God cast Adam a sleep, took a rib out of his side, made a woman
thereof, brought her to Man, and so joined them both together. Of whom it does
immediately follow, that she was bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh: and
that, in respect of that so near a conjunction (in that she was taken out of
man, Genesis ^, 23.^4.
and to him delivered by God himself) a man should leave Father and Mother,
and cleave to his wife; and that they two should become one flesh. Those others
that are references thereunto, Mar. 19.4.6. Mar 10, 6.9 1. Cor 6.16. Ephesians
5.30.3^.
are diverse, as namely that of Christ, wherein he repeateth the same again, and
then adds thereunto, whom God has coupled together; let no man put a sunder;
and diverse others elsewhere besides, which we need not here to recko^. Those
that teach us the nature of wedlock (I mean for this matter) after that once
it is ordained, are diverse likewise: as namely, when the Apostle teaches, that
the woman, Romans 7, 2.3, ^* Cor. 7.3^. 1. Cor. 7, 10.11
so long as her husband lives, is tied unto him etc; and elsewhere likewise,
that the wife may not depart from her husband, etc, nor the husband put away
his wife. Which also we need not to gather together, for that there is no
body that does bring any of them against the doctrine that herein we are to set
down: but shun them rather, as altogether going against them; or, otherwise,
when they are pressed with them, then secke to qualify them so well as they
can. Those that treat of it but generally
Those that (in this respect) are but general, and yet may specially hereunto
be applied, Sect. 30.
are diverse: some that concern one point of our duty toward God; others, that
concern certain duties of ours toward our neighbor. Those which concern one
point of our duty toward God, are al such as reach us Mat. 11, 29.16.24.
patiently to bear the cross that he lays on us. Those that concern
certain duties of ours toward our neighbor, are of two sorts, some that
teach us, that we be ready to Mat. 5.39.41, Pro. 24.29. Mat. 18.22. Luc. 6.2^.
1. These 5.^5.
forgive him his offenses to us; others that call upon us to Act 20.^8 Jude 20,
25. Heb. 10, 25.12 13.15. Lev 19.17, 18. 1. These. 5.11.14.
bring on (so well as we can) to all Christian integrity, those whom God has
to our charge committed. Having therefore these Scriptures against them, and
diverse others such like as these, I see not how they can avoid it, but that
they are hereby forbidden in such sense to take that Exception unto them. For
they both are one flesh, even in the nearest society of al coupled together by
God himself:, and therefore not to be sundred by any, the wife to keep to
her husband so long as she lives, and the husband not to put away his wife.
If by our vnadvisednesse before, or negligence after, or howsoever else, it so
fall out, that herein God has laid a cross upon us, what better service can
we in such case do unto him, then truly, and quietly to bear it, til he be
disposed to ease us of it? If therein there be offenses committed against us,
we know who it is that has forbidden us al revenge, and has willed us freely
to pardon. If we have an untoward piece in our hands, to make any good
workmanship of, yet if we do our best endeavor, he will hold us excused; but
not if we cast it out of our hands: and the worse that any such is, the more
does every such party need, that the other should deal accordingly with it,
and the more work may the other see, that God has laid him forth therein.
Sect. 32.
So if we cast our eyes unto these either such as I have thus breefly
remembered, or any others that are of that nature we are so far from finding any
sufficient warrant at all, to that presupposed liberty of these wa^tons of
ours, in such sense to take this exception we speak of, that we rather are
flatly beaten, not only from hope of finding any help in these, but also, even
from all expectation of it any where else.

32 That if there were no Scripture against it, yet that it were not convenient
for us, The Inconvenience there of to be such at that only should stay us
I take it to be, though disputed by some, yet so generally granted almost by
all, that whatsoever inward conceits diverse may nourish (for the common
corruption of nature in us, works, in that kind, strong and strange fancies
in many) yet outwardly, very few, or none of them all, will seem to deny it.
But then the truth is, that they pretend to have this meaning withal, that
thereby they would occasion the Magistrate to punish that sin by death, so to
make an end of this question betwixt us: or else, that on him should rest the
blame of such inconvenience. First therefore it shall be good to consider, how
inconvenient the thing it self would be among us: then, how little cause there
is, under such pretense, How many ways it is inconvenient.
so far to take that liberty unto them. How inconvenient a thing it would be
with us, may soon appear, first in respect of the Public cause of all: then
in respect of certain private persons besides. In respect of the public cause
of all, it would be an inco^venient thing with us, partly for that we have
already taken other order among us: but especialy, for the disorder that would
come in upon us thereby. The other order that we have already taken among us,
is that part of the form of our sole^nization of marriage, whereby each party
is directed to take the other for better, for worse: which being the general
act of us all, allows no particular persons so far to break it, or to call
it in question, but that it concludes such doing to be more, the^ any such may
well set abroach among us. The disorder that would come in upon us thereby is,
that it would open too wide a gap to al disconte^ted couples, to break of, and
to marry again to their better liking (so long as we should have no stronger
restraint of that sin among us) and rather to commit the sin it self, being
so easily punished with us as it is, then otherwise to live all their whole
life in so great dislike. Those private persons, in whose respect it were
inconvenient also, are, themselves, and others. Themselves cannot live therein,
but at the least in doubtful estate, not only before men, but also before
God: or rather, as notorious sinners, in the judgment both of the most and the
best. Those others are of two sorts: some, that are blemished; others, that are
encumbered thereby. Those that are blemished thereby, are both those second
wives of theirs, and the children that by them they have: the former of them
being accounted no wives but only adulteresses by law; and their children
illegitimate also. Those that are encumbered thereby, are partly those to whom
their lands or goods should of right descend, who by such dealing should have
their right very much encumbered: but especially, those discontented couples
that before we spoke of, who by a few such examples would be so tempted to do
the like, that hardly would they be able to walk uprightly therein. How
little cause there is, No just excuse unto the in this that the Magistrate does
not punish adultery with death.
under pretense of that ordinance of God, to the children of Israel, that the
Magistrates there were appointed to punish adultery with death, to defend their
own usurpation of that liberty, as though thereby they might drive the
Magistrate to take that order here also, or else himself to bear the blame of
it may sufficiently appear in this, that themselves cannot but know, both
that as yet we have not that law among us: and that there is no great
likelihood neither, that ever we shall hereafter have it. If as yet we have
it not, then must we needs forbear that liberty that now we speak of, or
else quickly bring all (for those matters) to great confusion. That we are
not likely hereafter to have it neither; it rests on two principal grounds:
one, the unwillingness of all men generally to yield thereunto, though
otherwise we were never so free unto it; the other, that we are already
entangled by one certain let that is in the way. If all men generally be so
unwilling to yield thereunto, though otherwise we were never so free unto it
(as most men will not stick to acknowledge; and may appear in the Israelites
also, in that though it were so specially inioined to them, yet do we not
read, that I remember, that ever it was put in execution among them) then,
though the Prince himself would be willing, yet in what part of the world
should we find a people, that (the most part of them: for such must they be,
that any where lightly are allowed to make a law) would be ready to join with
him therein? That other let wherewith we are already entangled, is the liberty
that we take to our selves (and have in some cases established the same by law
among us) of marrying children, especially Wards, and of making other
disorderly matches in disparitie of years, or condition, for lands or goods.
Al which, so long as they stand (and they are not likely yet to fall) are
likely enough, so to entreat for their own estate therein, that it is not
likely that the other shall ever get in any foot among us. If then it be not
likely, that ever we shall have any such law, then the same reason that does
teach us to forbear that praesupposed liberty of ours until we have such law
established, should teach us likewise, altogether to forbear the desire of
helping our selves thereby, when as we are likely, never to have it (in any
good manner) allowed unto us. And then, what else may we think that
persuasion to be, but a special fetch of Satan, to bring in some special
confusion, and to work much mischief among us? And if there be so great
inconveniencie hanging thereon, not only the wise of the world do resolutely
determine, that of two evils, the lesser is rather to suffer a mischief in
some few particulars, than while they seek to relieve them, thereby to bring in
an inconvenience to all: but even the Apostle also has plainly told us, that
though things may be lawful, 1. Cor 6.12.
yet if they be not expedient or profitable, in that case also they are not to
be attempted by us; and besides has given in himself an example of it. As
Christ also (no doubt) himself, 1. Cor. 8.13.
by the selfsame rule, governed himself in many of his speeches and actions:
and in effect prescribed the same unto others. In which respect Abraham did
well, to refuse that great booty (even the spoil of all those cities, Genesis 14,
22* 23
which for Lots sake he had recovered, and nowby the law of arms was his) even
only for that he would not have the inhabitants of those parts to take
occasion to think that their substance had made him rich: being careful to
reserve the glory thereof, only to God, by whose only blessing indeed it
was, that he was grown so mighty among them. Wherein also it is good to note,
that in so doing he pleased God so marvelous well, that by and by he appeared
unto him, Gen 15.^*
promising safety from al his enemies (belike, especially in respect of those
four kings, Sect. 33.
who^ now he had so netled) and to be unto him besides (in respect of the
booty, that in such respect he had refused) an exceeding great reward. David
also in that respect did well to refuse the water that was brought unto him from
the well that was by Bethlehem, 2. Sam. 23, 25.27.
understanding that three of his Captains had put themselves in so very great
danger for it: though otherwise he was very thirsty, and longed more for it
than for others. Far unlike therein to Cleopatra that dainty and wanton queen
of Egypt, who (like unto her self therein) to satisfy her own inordinate
lust, did not stick at once to sup of, in one draught, a jewel of inestimable
price: of fifty thousand pounds, as some did value it; but, of six hundred
thousand, as others esteemed it. And even so these wanto^s of ours, for a little
beastly pleasure of their own for a time, little regard what infinite hurt they
do unto others, by the example that they do give them. So that, although the
exception might have such sense, as to import, that in some case it might so
be: yet, both we must needs be well advised of it; and we must take heed that we
never do it, either when those aforesaid Scriptures may not well bear it, or so
often as there is any so great inconvenience that hangs thereon.

The other doubt, of the Apostles gra^ting of marriage to the faithful
forsaken, answered also,
33 Concerning that of the Apostle, who in some cases allows either of the
parties (not only the man, but also the woman) to marry again, and therefore
may seem so much the rather to allow of this, we are first to consider only
of so much of it, as belongs to this that now we speak of: then, of
somewhat else besides, that comes in by occasion of it. That which belongs
to this that now we speak of, rests but in these two points: one, the
Objection that is gathered thereon; the other, the answer that may be given
it. The Objection that is gathered thereon, is this: that seeing the Apostle
does so plainly allow (in case of infidelity) that if the party that does
not believe, will forsake the party believing, that in such things a brother or
sister is not in bondage, or, must of necessity be forced, to live without the
help of wedlock, therefore if in this the bond of matrimony may be so broken,
that the party forsaken may marry again, it should seem to be much more
likely, that by adultery the bond should be much rather broken. For answer
whereunto, I think we need no more but this, that there is not the like reason
in the one, as in the other: whether we respect the offense that is committed,
or the inconvenience that redoundeth unto the other thereby. The offense that
is committed, The eases not like, and wherein they differ.
is adultery, a very foul and great sin, both odious to God, and exceeding
grievous to man, even intolerable almost unto many: in that forsaking that the
Apostle speaks of, an utter breaking of of the knot of wedlock that was
betwixt them, so far as in that party does lie. The former of which sometimes
proceeds but of infirmity: the latter of them, is an hatred to Religion it
self. Though therefore the Apostle allow the forsaken party to marry again,
especially, when it is for hatred of the Truth, and where the other has broken
of already from the bond that was betwixt them: yet it may be, he would not
allow (or at least it cannot hence be gathered, that he would allow) of
marrying again, where the party offending has but only sinned against that
holy ordinance, and therein was not purposed, nor yet is, to break of from the
other, and when that sin (it may be) was done by infirmity also, and much
provoked by some inordinate dealing of the other. The inconvenience that
redoundeth unto the other party thereby, is by such forsaking much greater (in
this kind) then is that other of committing adultery. For by such forsaking it
comes to pass, that the party forsaken is altogether deprived, not only of
a comfortable fruition of the good things of wedlock, but also of the things
themselves: of that needful preservation from sin; of children likewise, and
mutual help. But it is not so by adultery, for that the innocent party,
notwithstanding it, may have all those of the offender in some tolerable
measure, though not in so good, and comfortable manner, as were expedient: he
may have that needful help to preserve him from sin, and to accomplish
diverse of his affairs; and propagation of children likewise. If he cannot
take the benefit of any such help of the other that has been so unfaithful
unto him, that is like enough to proceed but only of such perturbation of mind
as some way casts how to reveng, or cannot yet digest so great a displeasure
done unto him: which, indeed, is justly deserved by the offendour; but not
justly entertained by the innocent party, for that he which has forgiven us
more, has willed us also, for his sake to forgive. And therefore such
perturbation is to be removed or at least bridled: and not any co^ceipt thereon
to be nourished, that now there can no such help be had of the party
offending. His children (I grant) may be somewhat doubtful, whether they be
his or not: but that is so general a case withal, that me^ must rather hold
themselves contented with that general determination of law that by marriage
does make them theirs, (which also is their own act too) then suffer themselves
to be so carried away from the opinion that they are theirs, by such suspicion
as il likelyhoods may easily breed. Else, if any will needs be so peremptory,
let them first show, that their own descent is utterly void of all suspicion of
any such blemish, before they deal so strictly with others. Albeit therefore
the Apostle allow of marrying again, to such as utterly are deprived of all
such good things as by marriage God ordained for men: yet is there no reason,
why any man should thereupon gather, that the like liberty were likewise to be
granted to those that may have the use of those things in some tolerable
measure, but so far as their own troubled affections do hinder them of it. An
other consideration out of the same,
That other thing that belongs not unto this that now we speak of, but
arises by occasion of it, is that hence it seems to me we may have a special
good light, whereby we may see how to determine of one other point, that in all
ages has much troubled the learned, and yet does: namely, for what causes
divorce may be had, and marrying again thereon allowed. For many there are
(and those of special account withal) that allow of no divorce, but only for
adultery (and think that those that go any farther, do make themselves wiser
than their Master) nor of marrying again, but only in that of adultery, and
in this of being forsaken: others again, that allow both of divorce and
marrying thereupon for diverse other causes besides. In which extending of that
liberty, there are of those that profess and teach the Gospel, that may well
be doubted to go over far: as on the other side the Papists generally are for
divorce so very liberal, that they without question stand in great need to be
better shod for their so far overreaching therein. But of this matter I mean
not to treat: which would be sufficient it self to occupy another Treatice
much greater then this. The thing that now I mean to deliver, is no more but
this, that whereas the Apostle does so plainly insinuate that the party that
is in such sort forsaken may marry again, Sect. 34.
and then does not altogether rely on that case neither, but takes in some
other withal, hence, it seems, may best be decided, in what cases it may be
permitted to marry again: so that the rule be not in this point exceeded, to
grant it to such, as have such use of marriage already as need requires. For
we do not here find that the Apostle does allow it to any, but only to such
as otherwise were altogether deprived of it: and though he take in such like
withal, yet must we therein have a good eye unto the original or pattern
given, and not account any like unto it, but only wherein the one of the
parties is as much otherwise deprived of the use or benefit of marriage, as in
the case that the Apostle himself has put. For howsoever diverse such there
may be, or at least some few, wherein it may be allowed to marry again: yet
certain it is, that having none other Scripture for it but this we have then
no warrant at all to go any further, or to extend that liberty to any other
besides whatsoever.

The Conclusion.
34 But as touching the main, if now we gather the cheifest and principal
points together, of all that hitherto has been said, what have we (to speak
of) but only the opinion of diverse of the learned that way inclining? For the
truth of the matter or any certainty whereon to ground, what have we else, but
only a brittle show of certain places of Scripture, which for a while may
seem to be for us: but so soon as ever they are examined, either plainly
they turn to the contrary side, or at least assure us, that for any
certainty of that point of doctrine, for which we have such recourse unto
them, get it where we can besides, but in them shall we never have it. We hoped
that Moses and Malachie too, would have helped us THE TABLE OF METHOD: WHICH
SHOWS, HOW the whole Treatise proceeds; and where every member thereof does
lie.
That such as are f^r Divorce on adultery and marrying again have two sorts of
places which seem to be for them, but yet are not (in deed) being better
examined: of which The first sort is of those which do chiefly respect
Divercing from those wives that we have wherein First, those places themselves
are set down. Sect 2. Then it is declared, how weakly that persuasion is
grounded thereon: and therein First, how ready diverse are to rest upon them,
without any farther inquiry. Sect. 3. Then, how little ground work they have,
even in their leaders so to do First, because they are so much crossed by
others. Sect. 4. Then in that which themselves have set down for that matter,
and therein, First, so much as respects their own judgment therein. In
which First what themselves do bring us, which Either tends to this end, to
show us how hardly and doubtfully they are resolved. Sect. 5. Or else are some
such other things besides, as may be some warning unto us to take good heed to
their judgment therein* least otherwise we be deceived thereby, viz. First,
such Reasons as they bring in for themselves, why so they determine. Sect. 6.
The^, what Protestatio^s they have besides, (beli^e to qualify the hardness of
their judgment therei^.)

Then what we are to think thereof, namely that where such things go withal,
there is no likelyhoode to find any certainety of Doctrine whereon to build.
Sect. 8.
Then, the rest due, which most respects those places the^ selves that they
use for it. Wherein First it is briefly declared* that those places do little
help them, and that they do plainly mistake those two that seemed to be
strongest for them Sect. 9. Then, that same mistaking of theirs is more largely
prosecuted, and in this order, First, by examining of those Places, whether
they be mistake^, or not and to that end, First, how they take them, Sect. 10.
Then, that so taking them (it may well be) they do mistake them and First that
of Deut^ronomy, Sect. 11, Th^n, that of Mal^chie also. Sect. 12,

Then, what we are to gather thereon Sect. 13.





The other of those, that withal respect marrying again: and therein First
what consideratio^s we have that may induce us to think that in th^se also
they have little help; which are, First, the judgment of others, wherewith
they are so much crossed. Sect. 14. Then, their own defective handling hereof:
and therein, First, how far we may chardge them therewith. Sect 15, Then
wherein those defects of theirs do lie: namely First, in weak Reasoning: of
which their Reasons, Some there are, that depend on the things thereunto
appertaining, and those Either the same that are in question: and then, Such as
are of the substance of them. Sect. 16. Or such as are but accidenta^y
thereunto. Sect. 17.
Or those that are of such a kind, or so near unto them, as that out of them
they draw certain reasons also* Sect. 18.
Others, on the authority or testimony of others First* of God, Either
mistaking his word therein. Sect. 19. Or else gathering amiss thereon, and
therein, First, of Erasmus* Sect. 20. Then of Beza also. Sect. 21.

Then, of men Sect. 22.

Then, in diverse Inconvenient and hard speeches: to be found, First, in
Erasmus. Sect. 23. Then, in certain others of them. Sect 24.



Then the places themselves examined: and therein First, to set down the
meaning of them, viz. First, that that is not the meaning of them, which they
would have. Sect. ^5. Then, what is the meaning of them, namely, First, that
place in the fifth Chapter of S. Matthew Sect ^6. Then, that other in the
nineteenth of the (...) Sect 27.

Then, to answer certain doubts that may seem to be strong against it, which
are 2. First, the Exception that is used in both, which (it is showed) will not
help them. And First, that it is clear in that sense that we do give it.
Sect. 18. Then also, even in that sense wherein they would have it; and
therein, First, how far it yields to them; namely, but thus far, that in
some cas^ it might so be. Sect. 29. Then how far they must yield unto it
again which ^^, First, to be well advised, and to take heed what they do
therein. Sect. 30. Then, that they do nothing Neither against any other
Scriptures, which they have strong against them. Sect. 31. Nor against
Convenience neither, which in that case they cannot av^^de. Sect. 32.



Then, that the Apostle, permitting the faithful (by an infidel forsaken) to
marry again, does nothing warrant this neither. Sect. 33.




well, for divorce we had certain others besides: but we made most reckoning
of these. Now we see, that not only those others, but even these also do give
us over, and refuse to yield us any help therein. Which divorce had they
granted unto us, we had made no doubt at all, but they had in like sort
allowed to marry again: but now finding them so strong in the former; we have
at all no hope of the latter. Even Christ also, we thought, did make no stay,
not only at divorce (so it were for adultery:) but, in that case also, not at
marrying again. But now we see not, with what face we may look for any such
liberty at his hands, when as we doubt it would fall out indeed, that if he
should grant so much unto us, he should grant us more therein, then ever any
other of his servants did, before, or since. Whereas therefore, his words may
indeed have another meaning, and such as agrees with much other Scripture, we
do not see, but that well, may we doubt, that such sense as agrees with much
other Scripture, is a great deal more likely to be his meaning, than that
which stands alone by it self, and has nothing else in all the Bible
neither in the old Testament, nor in the new, that accords with it. Being
thus strongly held of by the Scriptures, or rather clean abandoned by them,
when thereupon we return again (as passing loath to be clean put down in
this, if any way we might see how to help it) to that sorry help that
remains, the judgment of certain of the learned, before remembered, to
consider somewhat better of them, an^ to see if we have not some further help
in them, than yet we conceived (being so many as they are, and many of them so
resolute in it, and in all their writings generally of so special account among
us) there find we first, that they all mistook the Text it self, out of
which the first and principal part of all their opinion should have derived
the warrant that they thought it to have: and that diverse of the chiefest of
them, have themselves so acknowledged since. If we look somewhat further into
them, then do we in like sort find, not only that therein they go against
the universal opinion of all others therein (that long has stood in the
Church of Christ, even from the beginning, for the only truth of that point of
doctrine) and against the practice in government of this Church of ours, and of
all others almost besides: but also, that themselves give us in so weak
reasons why they thought good to side themselves to that opinion, and such
Protestations withal, the better to obtain to be excused for that they go so
far therein; and when they are in the matter it self, so many of their
proofs for that they affirm so very slender, and so inconvenie^t speeches
withal (boading such impatiencie, that they may seem to arise of the
weakness of the cause it self) that if we well advise our selves what
comfort it is that there we have gotten, we hardly find any thing throughout
the whole that will afford us any one piece of warrant, to entertain any such
conceit, for never so small a portion of time, or to give it so much as one
nights lodging. The remain then will be none other but this, that our selves
are carried so strongly away, with our own unbridled affections (with an hot
desire, either of change, or of revenge and sometime with both) that it was an
easy matter, for parcialitie and error in others, to settle us in that
conceit, we being loath (for fear of disturbing our peace therein) to fall to
any just examining of them. God give us grace that howsoever in all things we
daily offend, by our common infirmity, and great corruption that yet abides;
yet we may so far abandon all fleshly lusts, that thereby we grow not to be
so foul stains in the Church of God, nor so perilous examples to others:
especially those, that have an unfeigned care to serve him indeed, or, no more
but profess the truth of the Gospel.

FINIS.
AN OTHER NOTE FOR THE Reader.
THis former Treatice being thus finished, yet is there one thing more (gentle
Reader) that farther I am by late occasion, to impart unto thee: nothing at all
appertaining to the matter before; but only for that it lights on the time of
the publishing of it. The matter is no more, but this.

I have already diverse times heard, that certain of the favorites of R. P.
(the supposed Author of the Resolution) would not believe that I had made any
answer unto him for such matters, as he, in the preface of his second edition
of the same (which was, 1585) had charged me withal. And for these, I
contented me self to let the^ understand, that I had answered him many years
before: as it is known well enough I had done (so far as an whole Impression
might serve to witness it) now about twenty years since.

But now of late I perceive, that himself also does not take with his Answer,
or will not be acknowne of it: and this do I gather, for that now (a few
days since) I find, that having set forth that Book again, but about two
years past (namely, 1607) and having altered it again from that it was before
(but the first, it may be, will ever prove the best) he nevertheles charge me
a fresh, with many of those stale matters, answered so many years past
already; but makes no mention of that mine Answer.

Seeing therefore I came to the knowledge hereof, when this other was yet under
the Press, I thought it good herewithall to wish this to be marked, that
seeing that answer of mine was given forth and published, in the year of our
Lord 1589; and that since I never heard any thing from him of the same, and
that now he wra^gleth a fresh about some of those his stale matters again, and
so grossly (though warily enough on his own behalf) dissembleth mine Answer to
them and the rest: that all good and orderly dealing (of such a kind) was the^
somewhat far to seek in him.

I make no doubt, but that there (in that mine Answer) he noted much more to
be objected, than any way he was able well to answer (especially, the great
uncleanness of all that crew generally; their bad dealing with the Fathers; and
so many slips of his own withal:) and that therefore he would rather see, if,
for a flourish, he could not cull out something of his former matters to gibe
at again, to be in lieu or steed of some just Reply, so long expected. But
plain dealing is ever the meetest for all those that stand for the truth and
so base shifting, much more suitable to the desperate weakness of the cause
that he has in hand.

And if any man shall lay thereunto his bold promise of those other two parts,
of that which now he calls his Directorie, and therein how many years he
has been hammering about it, and yet could never get out of the first part
neither, and the second time made it worse than before (even in the judgment
of his own favorites:) the less that this third time also he has now again
answered their expectation, the more may such a man see, what hope he may
nourish in himself, as touching those others. But me self conceived long
since (and so did reasonable plainly tell him) that it was not in him to do,
as then he did bear the world in hand: namely, to frame such other two parts,
as should be of that argument, and yet suitable to that, which he had elsewhere
borrowed to the first part of it.

An other there is, one Radford by name, a foul of that feather, who in
certain discourses of his of other matters, published in the year 1599, has
been something chattering against me likewise, in the quarrel of his fellow
R. P. before: and yet none otherwise but like to himself. Of who^
notwithstanding I have already said something* somewhat more specially, in a
larger Discourse of mine, which now (God willing) next unto this, and so but a
few days hence, I trust, is to come to the Press: and so say I no more of
that matter now. Yet that no man deceive his expectation therein, both it is
but toward the end of that larger Treatice: and, as he, in those his other
discourses does no more, but as it were, by the way, take his pleasure on me;
so I likewise, following the suit, or, in such like manner, do give him his
answer.

So now again (gentle Reader) I commend thee to God.

Oxford, June, 22. 1610. EDM. BVNNY.

THE ALPHABET TABLE: WHEREIN, not only the principal Matters, but also the
Scriptures themselves, and the other Authorities do come in, in Alphabet order.
A
Abraham see Better course. Abuses not the thing it self to be abolished,
Sect. 7. Adultery, whether it dissolve the bond of Matrimony, Sect. 16. that
so it does, pl^inly set down, by Erasmus, Museulus, Martyr, Calvin, Gualter,
and Beza Ib. but yet that in some cases though it may be, those nevertheles a^e
very rare. Sect 21. whether the Magistrate ought to punish with death. Sect.
24. See, Marrying again. To be well Adv^sed before we seek to be divorced
thereon, for that it is at least much to be doubted, that the Scripture is much
against it, both such as does more specially treat of that matter; and such as
does it but generally, Sect. 31. An Aim, for what things divorce may be, Sect.
3. Allegations: see Excusable. Allowed, see Lawful. Ambrose, see Origin.
Amending his former reading: see Calvin. Amiss, see Gathered. Johannes Andrea,
that the bond of marriage may be oth^rwise dissolved, Sect. 18, Himself also,
Panormitanus and Hostiensis, very little for them, Sect. 22. Angels, what time
they were created, not certainly known, Sect. 8. Angry. see Divorce.
An^ichrist; what t^me he should come, not so well known of old, Sect. 8.
Apostle, see disorderly; Erasmus; Objection and Ods. Archbishop; see Edw Le. S.
Augustine, acknowledged by Erasmus not to be of his mind, Sect. 4, Much
against the opinion of marrying again after divorce Sect. 21. Again see Bond,
and Wonder. Authority, see Divorce.
B
Bad men, see Testimonies. Balaam, see Divorce. Balance, see Scales. Ban^, see
Bond. S. Basil, Rule, Sect 28. liked and used by M. Beza, Ibid. Be^ter course
propounded in the examples of Abraham and David, Sect. 32. M. Beza, how he does
moderate himself in the matter, S. 7. His better ei^ to the Original, S. 11.
His Bo^ke De Lege Dei, c. 11. How he also reasons for dissolving of marriage
on such inconvenience as does follow disorderly marriage, S. 17 Very resolute,
as having express matter for him, yet knowing that the same very matter lies
in question, S. 2^. What himself has found, either to build his own opinion
upon, or to defend the same against others. Ibid. Objections by himself
acknowledged. Ibid. Giving over the course that Erasmus took before. Ibid. Out
of the Apostle S. Paul how he defends himself for his opinion. Ibid. His
judgment of marrying two sisters more specially considered, S 28. His
judgment in an other case, somewhat strangely agreeing with his opinion for
divorce and marrying again. Ibid Himself brings examples of S. Basils Rule.
Ibid. Again, see Adultery; S. Basils Rule; Deuteronomy. 24. De Lege. Dei; Erasmus;
Jerome; Innocent; and Speeches of theirs. Bishops, see Constitutions, and Rome.
Bond, Four several bonds wherewith those that marry are bound, so that
though some break, yet the whole is not dissolved, S 16. That it may be
dissolved diverse ways, to be the opinion, of Hostiensis, Augustine, Pope Lion
and Pope Zachary, S. 18. That if the Magistrate the adulteres to li^e, yet that
the husband may account himself to be rid of the bond of wedlo^ke, a perilous
point, S. 21. The bond of marriage not relying on the parties only but on God
too: and as it is of God, that it cannot be dissolved, S 25. Again, see
Adultery; Lands, and Io. And^ea. Borne-with, or spared: see Weakness. Bucer, see
Jerome.
C
M. Calvin, his better cie to the Original, S. 11. and so amending his former
reading. Ibid On that place of Malachie. S. 12. Near to the point, yet not
lighting on it. S. 16. Again see Adultery; Came to tempt; Deuteronomy. 24. Divorce,
Mal. 2. Meaning, and Political. Order for Ceremonies: see divorce. Chemnizi^^:
see Deuteronomy. 24. Chief: see Places. Civil: see Pol^ticall. Christ, not likely to
be so favorable to such divorce. S. 25. That if he should allow it, he were
the first and last in all the Bible that so should do, Ibid. And so, though
we made no doubt therein of him before, yet now (for that matter) to give us
over* S. 34. See also, Divorce; Erasmus, and Liberty. True Christians, see
Laws. Chrysostom, not in, that course with Erasmus S. 4. Circumstance: see
farther Iniquity. Circumstances, one of the time, another of the persons, to
show that sense of theirs not to be the meaning. S. 26. One such circumstance
noted before, as that the Pha^ises came not to learn, but to tempt. S. 27*
Another, not noted by others, how the Disciples took it. Ibid. Not meddling
with all their Collections of this kind, but only with such, as themselves did
chiefly mean unto this. S. 20. Commanding: see Forbidding. Conception of the
blessed Virgin: see Divorce. The Conclusion. S. 34. Their Conclusions to be but
weak. S. 9. So ready Consent of many others to that opinion, whence it may
be. S. 21. Certain Considerations much against the^. S. 14. Constitutions of
Bishops much against Erasmus. S. 4. Coupled, see put asunder. Corrupt* see
Interpretations. Course: see better; and Beza. Cumbersome, see Way.
D.
DAvid* see better course, Death* s^e Adultery. Decretall; see Constitutions,
Their Defense but weak, and how ^o. S 20. and see Erasmus. Deus 24.1^4 Of
divorcing (as it is conceived) of such as they like not. S 2. In what sense
taken by Erasmus, Musculus, Martyr, Calvin, Gualter, Chemnizius, Beza and
Zegedinus. S. 10. See also, Hardness; Political; Probability; and
Translation. Such Scriptures as Directly treat of it: see Advised. Disciples,
see Circumstances. Coffeehouse after ^see Erasmus. Discovered, see
Weakness, Disorder, see Inconvenient. Disorderly marriages diversely made. S.
17. A weak kind of reasoning on disorderly marrying, divorce to be allowed,
and to marry again, yet by Erasmus used. Ib. By him also conceived, that the
Apostle would in such case allow it. Ibid. By whom such marriages are wont to
be contrived, S. 20. See also, Erasmus, and Inconveniences. Disorders before:
see Erasmus. Dispensation. see Interpretation. Displeasure: see Divorce.
Dissolu^ the bond: see Adultery, Bond, Inconvenient, and Martyr. Dissolved:
see Bonds, Dissoluing marriage: see Beza; and Erasmus. Distempered: see
Inconvenient. Diverse places, strong against that opinion, not meddled withal,
S. 20. Divorce held, in a manner, by all. S. 1. Noted, that the Lord does hate
it. S. 12 Tolerated, not allowed. Ib. An unlike thing that Christ should teach
both it, and thereupon to mary again. S. 13. Liberty thereunto over soon
taken hold on, when first they do not find it to be clearly allowed. S, 17.
Both it, and marrying again thereon, pleaded for, on the order that the
Apostles took for Ceremonies, and making of Bishops, and afterward on
determining of Transubstantiation, the proceeding of the holy Ghost, the
conception of the blessed virgin, and the substance of the holy Ghost. S. 18.
Pleaded for likewise on many particulars o^ that Sermon of Christ on the
mountain, as of Swearing, being Angry, Reproaching, Presuming, Lawing,
Revenging, Resisting evil, on that it is commanded to love our enemies, to do
good to those that do il to us, and to pray for those that cu^se us, S. 18.
I^, and marrying again thereon, conceived to be some spec^all perfection Ibid
That it was permitted, but only for the hardness of their hearts, to be more
the^ may be gathered by sense of nature. S 19. That we need it as much as
they, and therefore should have it as much as they. Ibid. It not to be made by
the parties themselves, but by such as are in authority. S, ^0. Urged for many
more causes ther^for^ adultery* Ibid. By the free leage of it, eight husbands,
in five years. Ib. That upon divorce for adultery a man may put away his wife,
to be the thing that does lie in question betwixt us. S, 21, Of our kind of
divorce how faulty they do account it to be. S. 21. Marrying again hereon
misliked by M. Calvine Sec. 25. A reproach to the parttie that takeththe
advantage of it. S. 23. Never any good or honest man (though but in a second or
third degree) thought to have done it. Ib. The nature of wedlock not to bear
it. Ibid. To account that lawfully they do it, to be little better then to
make God the author of their villain. Ib. Those that are such, to be like unto
Iohanan, and Balaam. Ib* To be conceived (as it may seem) to be a matter of
special godliness S 26. Nothing at all for it, but that which ca^ little
avail it, S. 34. See also, Aim; Bond; Christ, twice; Erasmus, Husband,
Lyranus, Marrying again; Speeches, Unlawful; and warrant. To be justly
Doubted, that there is Scripture against it. S. 31. Doubtful speeches how ill
to build upon. S. 8, yet see excusable. For doubtful cases, see Examples and
judgments,
E.
ECclesiasticus, 25.35 36. of a disobedient woman. S. 2 To love our Enemies:
see divorce. One farther Inquiry (as touching, divorce) what it was, that
Christ said unto them, S. 27. Euthimius Zigabenus. S. 1, v. 1, Erasmus his
opinion how far crossed by others. S. 4 How he prote^teth, S. 7. What
indifferency he offers Ibid. p, 31. For that opinion of his reproved by
Natalis Bedda. S, 16. Himself does better interpret one of those his venterous
speeches, but yet is little followed therein by others of his opinion. Ibid.
How he reasons for the dissolving or breach of marriage, on such
inconveniences as do follow disorderly marriages S. 17 How he reasons on
certain places of the word of God. S. 19. Of that company, but only himself
and M. Beza called to trial. S. 20. That he rests on* Mat. 5, 31 32, and
19.8, 9. to have his opinion thence S. 20. The places used for his defense not
only those o^ Christ, but some of the Apostle also. ^b. Somewhat disposed to
ride, it seems. Ib urging divorce for so many causes as he does he h^th al
men almost against him, Ib. How for hi^ defense he gathere^h of the Apostle
Ibid. His own be^p^s how weak they are. S. 22. Of certain disorders going
before, and certain discontentments after. S. 23. Certain wondersin those
speeches that he has of the Scriptures. Ib. No more Fa^hers ligh^ f^und by
the foreign patrons of that opinion then himself had first a leaued but one
of our own to have gone much ^arther in, and in kind (though defective too)
more commendably al^o Ib See likewise, Adultery, Bedd^; Deuteronomy. ^4. Disorderly;
Divorce, Hardness ^f heart. Lawful; twice, E^w. Le, Mal. 2.16 Marry again,
Obi^ction, Reasons, Speeche^, and weakness More Examples then are alleged.
Sect. 20, That such things have sometimes bin done he brings in two poor
examples S. 22. Diverse others to justify or make good the Rule of S. Basil: as
of many wives and much treasure, of usury, and of marrying two sisters* S, ^^.
Others likewise to show, how carefully in doubtful cases, the Lord is first to
be sought unto. S. 30. See also Testimonies. The Exception, in some sort,
waived. Sect. 20. This i^* though they had it in their own sense, yet that in
some cases might be, it would be for them, and not so generally as they would
have it. S, 29. Therefore that in that case also, they be very wary, S. 30 See
also Objections. Excusable notwithstanding, even those Resolutions,
Allegations, Protestations, and al sorts of their doubtful speeches, S. 8.
Ezechiel, 44.22. Priests* not marrying with divorced women, S. 2.
F.
In the ancient Fathers but little for them: and that themselves do to
acknowledge. Sect. 22. See also Erasmus* Favorable se^ interpretation.
Fearful: see judgments. So^e Few of those ga^herings of theirs only noted.
S. 20 Any liberty of the Flesh some taken hold on by us S. 8 Fleshly see
liberty. Generally Forbidding, and generaly commanding or requiring, to have a
special difference betwixt the^, S. 29 In such sort to proceed or deal, but as
it were a Forcible entry: and that the adversary much grant unto them
whereon to proceed S 20, The Former: see objections. Four* see Bonds, and
Places.
G
How far they have Gathered amiss on those places that they have used, somewhat
strange to consider S 20. Such Scriptures as in that respect are but General;
see Advised Generally: see forbidden, Geneva: see Seely. A Guess, instead of
proof, what should be the meaning of those words of Christ. S. 21., Also, see
Beza. God see Bond. To do Good unto those that do evil unto us: see divorce.
Great ods betwixt their innocent party, and the Apostles forsaken. S. 33.
Ground: see Principle. Their Groundworke to be so far weak, and those words
may be otherwise taken: and clear it is that so they may. S. 20. Gualter, see
^dulterie; Deu^ 24. and Mal. 2.
H
Somewhat v^ged by Erasmus that where he accounts divorce to be first
permitted, it is not there added that it was but for the Hardness of their
hearts. S. 19 And s^e Divorce Heed ^o be taken to that interpretation of his S.
16 and s^e Adv^sed, Examples and Exception. H^l^^* see divorce, and Seely.
Honest man see divorce. Hostiensis: see Joan. Andreae and Bond. One of his
helps not to stand, but that the Hos^^ensis must be no husband* S. 21. Not to
be in the power of (...) husband, ^o break the bond of marryage with his
(...). S. ^5,
I.
(...), a law thereof. S 11. Much against the sense that they conceive of Deuteronomy.
24.1.4. Ibid. Ier. 32.1. God ready to receive. S. 2. S. Ierom, how he sets,
down the Septuagint, in that place of Malachie. S. 12. He and Bucer misliked
by ^eza. S. 24. See Came to tempt. The Jews, whether to be called before the
com^ing of Christ, not so certainly known. S. 8. Inconveniences following
after disorderly marriages. ^. 17. Such as concern the innocent par^ie. Ibid.
such as concern both parties, Ibid, Such as by disorderly mar^iage do reach
unto others. Ibid. Such to be taken yeed of before: and marriage not to be
for them dis^olued. Ib. Inconvenien^ speeches much mingled withal, S. 15. Much
found in those that opinion. S. 23. Some of them of the Scriptures. Ib. Others,
that they talk of so many ways to dissolve marriage. S. 24. Some again
belonging to all* others but to certain of them. Ib. Others ^ow the innocent
party is to deal with the offender. Ib. Though it might be done, yet that it
were inconve^ient both in respect of the public cause of all. and in ^espect
of many private persons besides. S, 32. See likewise Erasmus; and Weak
reasoning. Indifferency: see Erasmus. Things Indifferent, a Rule for them. S.
29. Innocent party, whether bound to seek to the Magistrate for the
punishment of the offender, discoursed by Beza. S. 24. So likewise whether
again to receive ^he offender into favor. Ibid. See also, Inconvenience, and
Inconvenient. Their Innocent party: see Od^. Innocence, see Malice.
Insufficien^ie: see weakness. Intemperatenesse of a widow: see Malice.
Unwonted Interpretations, what is to be gathered out of them. S. 13. The
interpretation to be favorable, otherwise the dispensation will be needful. S.
20. Corrupt in^erpretation Ib See also, Heed. Iohanan. see Divorcers. Joseph.
for Marry, called in question. S. 24. Isa ^0, 1. God not divorcing his people.
S. ^. Judgments of God, diverse and fearful against those that in doubtful
cases have neglected, first to seek unto him. S 30. And for judgment, see
Opinion. Iudicialls of Mo^es of what force to bind others. S. 24. Iunius: see
Translation; and Tremellius. Justify S Basils Rule, see Examples. Iuvenall. S.
20.
K.
Kemnizius: see Chemnizius, See likewise, Musculus, and speeches of others.
L
LAnd^ of an adulterous woman, remaining with her husband and by virtue of
marriage, argue the bond not to be altogether broken S. 16. The old. Lat^^^^
acknowledged by Erasmus himself, not to to be of his mind. S. 4. Laws, Those
that be decretall, to be against Erasmus. S. 4, That any also are laid, not to
be needful for true Christians, had need to be warily taken. S. 18. To be
Lawful which God allows, how far urged by Erasmus. S. 19. That also
sometimes to be lawful, which the law punishes not. Ibid. Lawing, see
Divorce. Ed. Le, about this matter discourteously used by Erasmus. S. 10.
Afterward Archbishop of York, Ib. Leave out, see ground. Of the more Learned,
that generally they mistook the Text whereon they builded, and that certain
of the chief o^ them have so acknowledged since, S. 34. Lending on usury, see
Examples. Lev. 21.7. A divorced woman, not meet for any Priest to marry, S. 2,
Letting loosse to fleshly Liberty, not likely to be any work of Christ. S, 13*
And for such kind of liberty, Farther see divorce, and Flesh. Like to this, see
other things. Eras. how he Limiteth his judgment of divorce. S 19 Pope Lion:
see Bond, Love, see Enemies, Lyranus such for divorce, as for usury, S. 28,
His judgment for usury how to be applied against divorce. Ib. See divorce,
M
Magistrates, see Adultery; Bond; Innocent party, and P^etense, Making Bishops,
see divorce, The Malice of the Jew, and the intemperatenes of the widow,
thought by these to be more favored, then the innocence of the party not
offending. S, 18, Mal. 2, 16. If they hate them, to put them away S. 2. v, 7.
Erasmus not noted to have meddled with it S. 10. In what sense taken by
Musculus, Martyr, Calvine, and Gualter, S, 10. The place it self not to yield
so much in the letter: but more in the sense, S. 12. See also, Words, Many, see
wives, Of Marriages disorderly made diverse noted, S* 6, again see Bond;
disorderly, twice; Divorce, and Inconvenience. Marry That neither the man is
pun^shed if he mary another, neither divorced women forbidden to marry both
these by Erasmus pleaded, S, 19, see also Christ and. Divorce. Marrying again,
on divorce for adultery held by many of special account, S. 1, But many mo of
the learned against it then with it, S, 14. such place^ as seem to be for it
Ib. again, see August dovorce, 4. times and warrant, Marrying two sisters, see
Beza* and Examples. P, Martyr. that no men of any good sort, ever used divorce,
S, 4. How he protests. S. 7. many ways to dissolv marriage. S. 4, see also,
Adultery, D^ut 24. Mal. 2. and speeches of theirs, Mat. 5.31, 32. what we may
rather take to be the meaning thereof. S. 26. See also, Erasmus, and
Political. Mat, 19.3, 9. what may seem to be the meaning of this S. 27. See
also, Erasmus. Meaning, see Mat, 5. Circumstances, and Perfection. Not Meddled
with: see diverse places, Meddling, see collections, Misliked, see Calvin, How
far they Mistake, farther declared, S, 10, See also, Places, Moderate see Beza,
Ari. Montanus, on that place of Mal. not suerving from the wonted reading, S.
12. See also, Translation. How Musculus reasons on certain authorities of
the word of God, S. 19. Urged by Musculus first, and Chemniziusafter, out of
that law that a Priest might not marry a divorced woman, that it was lawful for
a divorced woman to mary again, S. 19. Again, see Adultery, came to tempt;
Deuteronomy 24. Malae, 2, Meaning Objection, Political, and Speeches of others.
N
Natalis Bedda, see Erasmus, Number. 5.13.31* A probability that Deuteronomy, 24.1.4. is
not so to be taken, S. 11.
O
An Objection strong against them, how Erasmus and Musculus do answer. S. 16.
In that Objection that they gather out of the Apostle, allowing the forsaken to
mary again (as the case may be) the matter to be clear, that the case is not
like: the one being altogether deprived of the benefit of marriage, but not the
other, S. 33. Objections but the same that Erasmus had gathered before, S. 21.
Some out of the words of Christ, others out of the Apostle S. Paul, Ibid,
Objections a couple, the former of them, of the exception used therein, S. 28,
See also Beza, and opinion, Occasion of this Treatise, S, 1. Ods, see Great,
Offender, see Innocent, How they gather their own Opinion or iudgem^nt, and
how they answer such objections as stand against them, S, 20. The opinion of
diverse learned men that way inclining* S, 34. Order, see Inconvenient, Of the
ancient Fathers Origin, Tertullian, Pollentius (by his welwillers in this
cause, said to be a grave and learned man) and Ambrose all noted to be (at
least) inclining to this opinion of theirs, S. 22. The Original, or Hebrew
Text, against that ^ense of Deuteronomy, ^4, 1, 4. S. 11, Diverse Other things which
they conceive to be like unto this, S. 18. Otherwise taken, see Groundworke,
Others, see private persons. One of our Own, see Erasmus,
P.
Panormitanus see Joan. Andrez, Pard^n, see Innocent. Particulers, see divorce.
Parties see Bond: Parties themselves: see Divorce, S. Paul. noted to let down
oftimes the rigor of that which Christ requires, S. 20 Perfection to what end
commended unto us, S* 18. That Christ in that his discoursedid not mean to
te^c^ it, but to lead them on somewhat farther, to appear^ by those examples
that there are aleaged, 526, se divorce A Perilous point. see Bond. Persons:
see Circumstances, How ready men are to sort themselves to that Persuasion. S,
3. Pharisees tempting, see Circumstances, Some such Places as the learned do
not lean much unto, S. 2. Of their first four Places, S 9, Much mistaken by
the^. Ib. such as they thought to be strongest for them. S. 12, Such of the old
Testament as they thought to be ^ most for them, first to leave them. S* 34,
See also Erasmus: Gathered, and Marrying again, That presupposed allowance of
Moses to be but P^liticall, and then that that other of Christ may be so (...)
S, 26, If it be so then that the judgment of Zegedinu^ Musculus, and Calvin
does make for that sen^e or me^ning, Ibid. The nature and Force of those laws
that are but Political. Ib. See Meaning* Pollentius, see Origin. Practice of
the Jews before: a token of no such (...) in Deuteronomy: 24 1, 4 S, 11. To Pray for
those curse us, see divorce* The Pretense they have of urging the Magistrate
th^^ by very weak S, 32* The Principle it self to be yielded otherwise tha^
they have no ground work for them S. 21. It to be craved. see forcible entry,
Private persons: see inconvenient. Probability. in the practice of them, that
Deuteronomy. 24. ^ 4* is not so to be taken S 11 See Number. 5.13.31* Proceeding of the
holy Ghost. see Divorce. Prohibitorie see forbidding. Proof, see Ghesle. How
it is Proved, that to be the sense of the words (...) Christ, Sect. 21.
Protest: see Martyr. Protestations, see Excusable. Prove. 8.22. Of keeping an
Adulteres, Sect. 2. Not Punished, see lawful.
R
D. Rainolds, that many, and those of special accoun^ though they allow of
divorce for adultery, yet in (...) wise to marry again, Sect. 4. Rare, see
Adultery Ready. see Persuasion. Reasoning, see Erasmus. Weak Reasonings,
together with inconvenient and d^stempered speeches, what they boad, Sect 15.
Reasons Such a^ simple arise out of the matter it self Sect. 6. Such as they
have so to induce them. Ib. Most o^ them al, set down by Erasmus. Ib Such as
stand most by comparison. Ib. Such as they have in certain inconveniences,
are but weak, S. 17. Such as they have on the Testimony of others: first of
God, Sect. 19. then of me^ See, Weakness. Reconcile. see Innocent. Reformed
Churches said to be much with those that (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) Erasmus. (...) Calvin for Deuteronomy. 24.1.4 See and, ^.
^a^l, (...) Indifferent.
S
(...) ^^^tance* see Similitude (...) of Divinity, against Erasmus, Sect. 4.
(...) two sorts of places most appertaining (...) Sect 1. See, Doubted; and
Inconvenient. Of certain Scriptures a britle show, and denying their (...) S.
34. See also directly; and General. (...) Meaning, and Words. The (...) his,
how they interpret that place of (...) ^ect. 12. (...) of Christ on the
mountain: see divorce. (...) to the Lord: see Example; and Judgments. A (...)
help, for the matter in question, in the order (...) the Church of Geneva,
Sect. 24. (...) of crooking to some special purpose, S. 8 (...) and diverse
appetites, S. 3 Of the grap (...) together, S. 16. Of one that takes in some
(...) of his ^round, and leaves out some part of it, S 26. Of (...) ready and
combersome way, S. 8. Of balla^ce or scales, (...) places, but two of them
chiefly, that seem to be (...) (...) may in fair possibility argue an (...)
(...) ^o^^e which. (...) of M. Beza for divorce: and whence (...) M. Calvin,
Sect. 1^. (...) of theirs, arguing themselves to note (...) in their opinion,
S. 5. See also, doubtful; (...) and Inconvenient, four times. (...) godliness:
see Divorce. (...) clear of them: see Game to tempt. (...) see diverse (...) of
the holy Ghost: see Divorce. (...) put a Sunder whom God has coupled, (...),
vn^erstand, Sect 16. (...), how to be moderated, Sect. 33. (...).
T
(...) (...) they came to Tempt him, he but sta^. (...) stops their mouths:
so (...) and Calvin, Sect. 27. (...) (...) and examples how bad (...) with,
Sect. 27. (...) (...) (...) the Universal opinion of the whole Church; against
the (...) here, bring us but weak reasons, are feign (...) protestations
withal; and have (...) distempered speeches besides, Sect. 34. Turn: see
Circumstances. The Translation of Deuteronomy. 24, 1.4. amended by diverse: Sect. ^1.
Transubstantiation; see Divorce. Treatice* see Occasion. Much Treasure
forbidden to Princes: see Examples. Tremellius and Iunius note the better
reading of that place in Mal. S 12 In Tremellius far^he^ see Translation.
Trial: see Erasmus The Truth to be, that our selves were so impotently given
to our own af^ections, that it was an easy matter to lead us to such opinion
as whereunto our selves inclined, Sect. 34. The Turks, whether to be called
before the coming of Christ, a thing that is to us unknown, Sect. 8. Two: see
Places.
V
Fra. Vatablus in that place of Malachie, not swerving from the wonted reading,
S. 12. See also, Translation. A Villainous sin: see Divorce. Vncurtiously used:
see Edward Le. Ods of Usury toward neighbors, and strangers, S 28. See also,
Examples; and Lyranus. The protestatio^s they Use therein, to what end it may
seem that so they do, Sect. 7.
W
NOt unlike, but there is at al no Warrant for them (in that opinion of theirs)
in the word of God, S. 1. And a clear matter (it seems to me) that those
places yield them no Warrant, Sect. 13. Way see Similitude. Weak reasoning
much used by the^ Sect. 15. How weak* notwithstanding they account al to be
that ^s b^ought against them: and that more specially noted in one of the
chie^e, S, 22. Sir also, Conclusions, Disorderly, Erasmus, Groundworke,
Pretense, Reasoning, and Reasons How Weakly by S Paul he helps himself
therein S, 2^ Weakness of Judgment in some wherefore to be noted S. 1. The
weakness of those reasons of theirs, some^hing discovered, S. 18. The same
again or the insufficiency of Erasmus his reasoning therein, in diverse poi^ts
noted S: 19. Weakness of the people much borne with by many examples in the Ol^
Testament, and in the new, S 26. See also* Reasons. Wedlock: see divorce.
Wiue: many, forbidden to Princes: see Examples. A Wonder with him, that S.
Augustine never espied so much therein, S. 21. See also Erasmus. Those Words o^
Mal, 2.16. though they should keep their wonted reading, yet that the sense
were much against them, S. 12.
Z
(...) Zacha^^^ see ^ond. (...) for dissolving of marriage, many ways, S. 2^
See also Deuteronomy* 24 Meaning Pol^ticall; and Speeches of (...)

