A GVIDE unto Godliness: OR, A Plain and familiar Explanation of the ten
Commandments, by Questions and Answers: Fittest for the instruction of the
simple and ignorant people. By Francis Bunny, one of the Prebendaries of the
Cathedral Church of Durham.

Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8. Thou shall rehearse these (Commandments) continually unto thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thine eyes.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for RALPH ROVNTHWAITE 1617.

To the right Worshipful, Sir George Selby, and Sir Nicholas Tempest, Knights,
my assured good friends: Grace and peace from God the Father, through Jesus
Christ, and the true comfort of the holy Ghost be multiplied.
RIght Worshipful, having traveled now a long time in my ministry, as your
selves can witness, I yet finding no great comfort of all my labors, may
perchance be deceived as was Eliah, (and with all my heart I wish it were so)
who in his time complained that none truly religious were left, 1. King. 19.10.
when God had reserved many. I will not therefore resolve with my self as did
Jeremy, not to speak any more in the name of God, Ier. 20.9
or to forbear to preach; but rather hope, that he who has set me to work
(though the seed of my husbandry lie hid for a time, and is not seen to
sprout) yet will in the end give a gracious blessing, and a plentiful harvest.
And for such good success of these my labors, I will always pray most
heartily to the Master of the harvest, the only giver of all good things. For,
as Samuel said, 1. Sam. 12.23.
God forbid I should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for you, but I
will show you the good and right way: so shall my endeavor be, I trust, always
(by Gods assistance) that the light of truth may shine in the hearts of you,
and of all my Parishioners, and guide every of you in all your actions. Being
therefore very desirous to see some fruit of all my labors: I resolved with
my self, that the readiest way to plant the true knowledge of God, is, to
instruct the youths in the grounds and Principles of Religion: assuring my
self, that such as once find a sweetness in that knowledge, will hunger and
thirst more and more for further understanding. I therefore expounded the ten
Commandments, indeuoring therein to be plain, for the instruction of the
simple and ignorant. For children (such as my people are in understanding, and
God of his goodness make them in deed his obedient and dutiful children) must
be fed with milk of easy doctrine, not being as yet able to digest strong
meats, or understand hard points of deeper knowledge. And much to that effect
that I taught out of the Pulpit, my pen also has set down, that words which
may easily be forgotten, though they be attentively heard) being again
presented to the eye, as another remembrancer of that which was said, may make
a deep impression in the heart, and so be more remembered, and better regarded.
These my small labors, though not worthy to be presented to your Worships, yet
the matter being such as no Christian may be ignorant of; and I intending the
same especially for the people, over who^ God has placed me, am bold to
publish the same in your names, earnestly desiring, and most heartily
beseeching God, that as in worldly reputation you are the most eminent of my
Parish; so you and your families, may be unto all about you godly patterns of
true Christian zeal, and all holy obedience. O that the light of true
godliness might so shine from you and your houses, that thereby others your
neighbors may be provoked and encouraged, with all alacrity to praise God for
the truth of his glorious Gospel, and in singleness of heart to serve him.
And that in this true Christian zeal and for wardnesse, you may be furderers
of Gods glory and of his truth: Imitate I most heartily entreat you, the
courageous example of that man of God, good Ioshuah, who to draw on others to
the service of the true God, thus professed: I and my house will serve the
Lord. Josh. 24, 15.
Which that you may say and do fervently and unfeignedly; the Lord in mercy for
his Christ's sake, work it in your hearts, and in the hearts of all them that
call upon the name of the Lord. So be it.

Your Worships in Christ, Francis Bunny.

An Exposition of the Commandments.
Question.

HOw many Commandments are there?

Answ. Ten.

Q. How are these ten Commandment divided?

A. Into two Tables.

Q. What do the Commandments of the first Table teach us?

A. Only to rest upon God, Mat. 23.38
and to worship him; and therefore our Savior Christ calls this first Table
of the Commandments, the first Commandment, and the great Commandment.

Q. And what learn we of the second Table of the Commandments?

A. The love of our neighbor: and this second Table is called by Christ, Mat.
22.40
the second Commandment.

Q. But seeing that there are ten commandments in these two Tables; how does
our Savior Christ call them but two Commandments?

A. Because they are all referred to two points, the love of God and of our
neighbor.

Q. There are in the first Table four Commandments, what learn we in every
of them?

A. The first requires our inward and hearty affection toward one God, and
that we rest and rely upon him only.

The second and third Commandments teach, how in outward manner we are to
worship and show our love to God.

The fourth commands the Sabbath, as the mean whereby we are to be
instructed and the better enabled to Gods service.

Q. And what is the effect of the six Commandments of the second Table?

A. Generally they teach us our duty toward our neighbors. But if particularly
we consider of the chief drift of every precept; the fifth Commandment which
is the first of the second Table, instructs how inferiors should behave
themselves toward their superiors, and withal superiors are put in mind of
their duty and place what manner of men they ought to be. The rest of the
Commandments are more generally teaching all of all sorts or estates of life,
to have a care of their neighbors life: in the sixth Commandment, of their
chastity and pure or undefiled conversation: in the seventh, of their goods and
possessions: in the eighth, and of their reputation and credit or fame: in the
ninth Commandment, and of all maintenance of truth. And in the tenth
Commandment we are taught, that it is not enough to perform these duties to
our neighbors in our outward actions only; but also that we must not cherish
in our hearts so much as a hidden lust or desire that may be any way hurtful
to our neighbor, but on the contrary must bend all our endeavor to do them
good.

Q. For a short view of the meaning of all the Commandments, let this suffice:
But to return to the first Commandment, why is it (as also many of the rest
are) delivered negatiuely, or forbidding that which is evil, rather then
commanding that which we ought to do, and the thing that is good?

A. Partly to give us to understand, that holy obedience cannot be performed,
unless we first cleanse our hearts from that which is evil, as God by his
Prophet advises, Esa. 1.16.17. 1. Pet. 3.11
Cease to do evil, learn to do well, and out of him S. Peter teaches:
Eschew evil, and do good. Insomuch, as when God spoke to Jacob, and willed
him to go to Bethel, Genesis 35.1
Dwell there (says God to him) and make there an altar unto GOD. Then said
Jacob unto his household, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange
gods that are amongst you, and cleanse your selves, Ver. 2. Partly also God
delivers the most of his commandments, forbidding yt which he would have his
servants to avoid; because he knows, and he would also have us to consider
earnestly with our selves, that we are too ready and prone naturally to sin;
and therefore that our first care should be to deny our selves, and our
natural inclinations, that we may more fervently follow after that which he
wills.

Q. Does then this first Commandment require of us any more then to take heed
that we have not any strange gods?

A. Yes verily. For in that it forbids any other, it teaches us that he,
and he only ought to be acknowledged to be our God. Therefore in the law such
precepts are very common: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and shall serve
him. Again, Deuteronomy. 6.13
Deuteronomy. 10.20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, thou shall serve him, and thou shall cleave
unto him. Yea, he in his preface unto his ten Commandments does challenge
unto himself that honor, I am the Lord thy God. Neither does so speak this
only to the Israelites, who were his only known people at that time, but even
unto all us, who profess that we are Gods children or servants.

Q. You say then that this first commandment not only forbids all strange
gods, but also commands us to cleave unto the true God.

A. It is so.

Q. But how shall we come to a more perfect understanding of this first
Commandment, that we know how to keep and obey the same?

A. If we truly consider how many ways we may transgress, and carefully take
heed to shun them: and then remember what God requires of us, that we serve
and worship him, and set our selves to the uttermost of our power to do them.

Q. Show me then how many ways this first precept may be broken.

A. To speak of every particular sin whereby this commandment may be broken,
it is hard: but I shall deliver certain general transgressions, unto the which
all the rest may easily be referred, and by which we may truly examine our
selves, and accuse our selves of disobeying.

Q. Is not the gross Idolatry of the Gentiles a manifest breach of this
Commandment?

A. Yes verily. And God does often complain of his people, for that they
delighted in their abominations: Deuteronomy. 32.21. Ier. 2.5. and elsewhere very
often.

Q. But the Angels are excellent creatures, always waiting to do Gods will,
may we not seek unto them for help?

A. We may not. For the Scriptures teach us in many places, that they are but
ministering spirits, and servants under God for our good, and therefore neither
are willing of themselves to do any thing, but when God sends them, nor able
by their own strength or power to help us.

Q. Yet we see in Gods book, that good men sometimes have offered to worship
them: As Manoah the father of Samson, as may be gathered by the 13. Chap. 16.
Verse of the book of Judges: So likewise Apo. 19, 10. and 22.8.

A. So it is. But Manaoh knew not that it was an Angel, as it is there
testified, but thought belike that God himself did speak to him: we may also
judge the like of S. John. And therefore as that Angel commanded Manoah, that
if he would offer a burnt sacrifice, he should offer it to the Lord: so S.
John is commanded by the Angel not to worship him, because he is but his
fellow servant: but worship must be done unto God.

Q. Some have worshipped the host of heaven, and had affiance in those glorious
creatures, as the Egyptians, who called the Sun Osyris, and the Moon Isis,
and worshipped them. And also before them (as Plato writes) the Grecians
accounted the Sun, the Moon, the Stars; the earth also and the heaven for
gods, as Theodoret reports in his third book of the healing the affections
of the Grecians.

A. It is most true, but not they only who had less means to know the true
God. But even Gods people who were acquainted with Gods Law, and were often
reproved by Gods messengers sent unto them for that purpose, that they might
know and detest that abomination: even they I say, are accused not only by the
Prophet Amos, but also, Amos. 5.26.
by the first Martyr S. Steven. Although God gave an express commandment unto
them, Act. 7.43. Deuteronomy. 17.3.5.
That if any have gone and served other gods and worshipped them, as the Sun,
or the Moon, or any of the host of heaven, they should be stoned to death.

Q. It seems, the excellency of these creatures, who are very glorious in
men's eyes, first alured the Gentiles to this folly, and Gods people were
deceived by their example, whilst they more regarded the doings of men, which
are many times deceitful, then the express Commandment of God, which always
points to the right way.

A. That must needs be granted. Therefore we must hereby take heed, that we
always have a careful eye unto Gods Law, that we may frame all our actions
both toward God and toward man, by the right rule of the infallible word.
Otherwise we may easily transgress this Commandment, as these have done, in
following after strange gods, bowing before Angels, and worshipping the host of
heaven, which were made for our use and comfort, and not that we should serve
them.

Q. We have heard how many ways such as have professed themselves to be Gods
servants, have broken this first Commandment under a persuasion (though
false) of serving God. But may not the same also be transgressed by having too
much confidence in things that cannot help?

A. Yes, and that two ways. Either in having too confident assurance in other
worldly means, that we can procure besides our selves: or in trusting too much
in our selves, and our own means.

Q. What mean you by them that seek help by other worldly means then
themselves?

A. All such as trust in men's strength or favor, for which sin Gods people
are very often bitterly reproved by Gods true Prophets: for they so relied
sometime upon the Egyptians, sometime upon the Assyrians, that they thought by
their help to avoid Gods judgments denounced against them by his messengers.
Some also put their trust in Chariots, Psalm. 20.7.
and some in Horses. So did Pharao when he and his people followed after the
Israelites, but they were all drowned in the Sea. And some trust to the
strength of their Towers, as did the Iebusites in their fort of Zion, in so
much as they scorned David's messengers whom he sent; 2. Sam. 5.6
but David prevailed against it. And so worldly men, as they have worldly
means to help themselves in resting too much upon such means, break this
Commandment.

Q. But it is not unlawful to use good means to escape any trouble or danger,
as infinite examples in the Scriptures may teach us.

A. True, so that we use them as means only, and not as things able of
themselves to make us any help; but as Gods instruments by whom he works for
our good. Physic is good, if we entreat God by Prayer to give a blessing to
it. Strength of men is needful against a mighty enemy; but the Lord, Even the
Lord that is mighty in battle, Psalm. 24.8.
does give the victory. The Husbandman does husband his ground and sow his
seed, but the increase comes of the Lord. And every work of every man in his
calling is good, and attaineth to the end for which it is wrought, if God
prosper it: otherwise our skill, strength, wisdom, and all our endeavors
(though very earnest) are but vain.

Q. By this that has been said, it is not hard to gather how many ways this
first Commandment may be broken, in respect of our confidence that we have in
other worldly means: but may not our own heart also beguile us, and cause us
to transgress the same?

A. Yes verily, and that two ways, either by inordinate love even of things
that we may, nay, that we must love; or by putting affiance and confidence in
any thing that we have, or that we can do.

Q. How can this be, that in loving that which we must love, we may displease
God, or break this first Commandment?

A. The love of Parents toward their children, is a duty that must be
performed, and commonly is so fervent, that God sets it as a pattern,
whereby he would have us to behold his love toward us his Children. Yea, Esaias.
49.15
for that cause he will be called Father of us, that the very name whereby we
speak unto Him, may assure us of his love. The love also of Children to their
Parents, of the mutual love of Husband and Wife, are much and often commanded:
so likewise the love of Brethren, is set for example before us of a true
Christian affection that we should bear one toward another, for it is
commended unto us by the name of Brotherly love. Romans 12.10.
Yet must our love to God so far surmount all these loves of any worldly
Creature, Heb 13.1.
how dear soever unto us, either by nature, or by any other affection, that if
it so be that we must show whom we most love by our obedience, in comparison
of our love to God, the love to man must utterly be extinguished, and be no
love, even as the Apostle accounted all (whatsoever holiness or righteousness
he might seem to challenge by the Law) to be but loss and dung, Philip. 3 8.
that he might win CHRIST. And this is that hatred of Father, Mother, Wife,
Children, Brother, Luke 14.26.
Sister, yea, and of our own life too, that Christ says must be in his
Disciples: Not that we may hate these, but that in comparison of our love to
God, these things must seem unto us. Abraham is a true pattern of this love,
who when GOD commanded, was willing to have offered his son Isaac, Genesis 22.
the only hope of all the promises which God had made to him. So we, unless
we can be content to obey Gods will, though Father, Mother, Wife and Children,
and all our friends, yea, though our own lusts, delights, or affections draw to
the contrary, do break this Commandment, because we rather obey the things
that hinder us, then God who commands.

Q. Your meaning is, that if we love any thing so, that it may make us neglect
our love, service, or worship of GOD, even by that love we break this
Commandment: Thou shall have no other God before me.

A. I mean so. For, if God were our delight and the joy of heart, then would
our affection unto other things be ruled and framed according to it. But if
other loves possess our hearts, they sit in Gods place, and draw us after them.

Q. You said also, that this Commandment may be transgressed, if we put our
trust or affiance in any other thing but in God.

A. True: for if in danger we trust in our own strength, as if thereby we can
be able to stand, or in our subtlety, that by wiles and shifts we will avoid
the peril, or in any such help as we think to make to our selves; these and
such like are but lying vanities, of which the Prophet says: Jonah. 2.8.
They that wait upon lying, vanities forsake their own mercy. Yea, if the
Husbandman assure himself of good increase, because he has done the part of a
good husband to his ground, or any tradesman thinks to be rich, because he is
painful in his trade; because they make their labor in their calling to be
in Gods stead, who only must give a blessing to all they do, such do
transgress this Commandment.

Q. Your meaning is not hereby, to find fault with such pains as men take in
their lawful calling. For, it is the decree of the Almighty: Genesis 3.19
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. Neither can we call it our
bread, as Christ teaches us to ask, unless some way or other we labor for
it: but when we have done what belongs to us to do, yet as Except the Lord
build the house, they labor in vain that build it: Psalm. 127.1
Except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in vain. So unless the
Lord give blessing to all that we do, it cannot prosper. For, it is God only
that gives power to get substance. Deuteronomy. 8.18.


A. You say well: and therefore if we persuade our selves by any such means to
supply our wants, not seeking to God by hearty prayer to prosper our doing; yea
if with good Moses we pray not: Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon
us, Psalm. 90.17
and direct thou the work of our hands upon us, even direct the work of our
hands. We shall want the desired success of our pains, because we rest not
as we ought to do upon help from God, and his direction, whereby we may be
taught and guided, with what mind, and to what end we should labor; namely,
for conscience toward God to live in our honest calling, not seeking with
greedy affection to enrich our selves, but to be painful in that state of
life that God has appointed us to live in, thereby to maintain our selves and
our families, and enable our selves to do good also to other; and also by
labor to banish the idle life, the bane of al goodness, and root of all
wickedness.

Q. Hitherto we are taught, that neither in any religious respect we must
repose our trust in any but God only; neither in any proud persuasion of our
heart must we hope for help, in any worldly means, how hopeful so ever they
seem unto us; neither yet must our love be so to any thing upon earth, but
that our chief delight may be in the worship and obedience of our good God. But
as we have heard how many ways we are in danger of breaking this
Commandment: so would I feign understand what it requires of us, that we may
do it?

A. Even the contrary to the things that it forbids. For as it forbids
all trust in any thing, but in God only: so does it require of us that in him
we should repose all our confidence in all our wants, dangers, or any
distress; as also the Prophet David advises, Psalm. 37.3. verse 7.
Trust thou in the Lord (says David.) Wait patiently upon the Lord, and hope
in him. So did David, when he encountered Goliath, that Champion of the
Philistims. He trusted not in the armor that Saul caused them to buckle about
him, but cast it away, and told the proud braging Philistim, that he came with
sword, spear, and shield, but I (says he) come unto thee in the name of the
Lord of Hosts, 1. Sam. 17.45.
the God of the Host of Israel, whom thou have railed upon. Now this confident
assurance cannot flow from any other fountain, then from a settled persuasion
in our heart, that God is our God, that is in power able, in mercy willing to
make us all help. Here-out, I say, does spring this resting upon him for help
in all distress. And this our confidence and acknowledging God to be our God,
moves us to invoke and call upon God in prayer, either to give us good
things which we want, or to keep us from evil that we hear. Thus was David
moved to consult whether he should lift up his eyes unto the mountains, and
then as if he corrected himself for that foolish thought, he asks from
whence his help should come, if he should think to lurk in those hills of
the land of Canaan: then setting down his resolution; Psa 121.1.2
Mine help (says he) is from the Lord which made Heaven and earth. Hence
comes that boldness that the Apostle speaks of, to go boldly unto the
Throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, Heb. 4.16
and to find grace to help in time of need.

Q. I see then that because we must trust in God only, if we will obey this
first Commandment, we must only pray unto him, and not to any Angel or Saint.
For how can they call on him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14
says Saint Paul. And if prayer be to be made only to them in whom we may
trust, then fie upon the Church of Rome, that so abuses the simplicity of
their followers, that they make the^ believe it is great devotion and a holy
worship to pray unto Saints and Angels, in whom yet they may not trust or
believe. For our Creed teaches us, that we must believe in none but in God,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

A. You say well: But you must know that the Church Romish loves not to be
tied within such straight limits as are the Scriptures, or that rule of faith
which we call the Creed. For in all these they can find no warrant, as their
Portuesse or Breuiarie teaches to pray unto Michael the Archangel to come to
help Gods people; or as their Masse-booke instructs to call upon the said
Michael thus: Defend nos in praelio, vt non pereamus in tremendo iudicio:
Defend us in the battle, that we perish not in the terrible judgment.
Ascribing thereby unto the Archangel Gods office. For salvation belongs to
the Lord, as all the Scriptures testify. And yet these blasphemies are in
their reformed editions of their Portues and Masse-booke, approved by Pius the
fifth, and commanded by him to be published.

Q. I have also read, that they pray unto Gabriel to destroy their enemies, to
Raphael to heal their sicknesses, to take away their diseases and to wash away
their faults: And that they teach men to pray to their peculiar Angel (if any
one be so appointed to be a guardian to any man) to save him, to come down and
govern him, to cleanse his mind from sin, to attend daily upon him, and
keep him from falling. What can they ask of God more then in these prayers
they sue to obtain of the Angels?

A. The Popish blasphemies, whereby they most impiously transgress against the
first Commandment are gross and infinite, as when they ascribe to the blessed
Virgin Marie, that she is the fountain of mercy, of health and grace,
consolation and pardon, of piety and gladness, of life and forgiveness. She
most happy Virgin drew salvation, pardon, life and forgiveness from another
Fountain, not dreaming of such Fountains of spiritual graces to be found in
her, as they most impiously ascribe unto her. And as blasphemous is that their
suit: Through the Virgin his Mother, our Lord grant to us salvation and peace.
Even the Popish Church following in that point the pattern of the purer times,
conclude commonly their Prayers with this clause, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. But in this Prayer Christ must be gracious to us through his Mother, or
for her sake. Christ, I say, who for our sakes was made man, humbled himself
to the death, even that shameful death of the Cross, that He might make
atonement between his Father and us, must now, if we believe such teachers,
and follow such guides, not save us according to Gods determinate purpose, and
mercy before all ages, and according to his own grace and mercy, who came to
save sinners, and dissolve the works of Satan, but for his Mothers sake must
he save us. O horrible popish blasphemy! And yet all these horrible impieties
are in their book, of the Office of the blessed Virgin; printed Ano. 1604.
Set forth, as they tell us, according to their reformed Latin. A deformed
reformation it may well be called, that publishes such idolatrus things, so
manifestly against the first Commandment, to the great offense of the simple
and ignorant.

Q. All popish prayer-bookes are stuffed with such abominations, asking of
their Saints (whereof some may justly be doubted of whether they were such or
not) the things that none but God only can give. I think that such offend
grievously also against this Commandment, as ascribe unto their supposed
saints, the praise and glory of such good things as they receive from God.

A. It is true: and God reprooueth his people for that unthankfulness to him
bitterly, by his Prophet Hosea, because they said: I will go after my lovers,
Hos. 2.5
that give me my bread and my water, my wool, and my flax, mine oil, and my
drink. As the Jews in like manner thought it was well with them when they
burnt incense to the Queen of heaven (say they) had we plenty of vittailes, and
were well, Ier. 44.17
and felt none evil. But since we left off to burn incense to the Queen of
heaven, and to power out drink offerings to her, we have had scarceness of
bread, and have been consumed by the sword and by famine. verse. 18. Even as now
our silly papists lul them selves in security of superstition; because, say
they, we had a good or merry world before this new learning was known among
us, for so basely they reckon of the glorious light of the Gospel. But as by
Hosea God threatens that unthankful people of Israel, to take those his
blessings from them, because they yielded not thanks to him for them, but to
their lovers, that is, to their Idols; so he by his servant Jeremy tells
the Jews, they had no cause to brag of their welfare when they worshipped
the Queen of heaven, for the Lord considered of it, ver. 21.23
and plagued them for it.

Q. What duty then does the Lord require of us for his benefits that he
bestows upon us? Can we make any recompense to God for the same?

A. None at all. For he stands not in need of any thing that we have. The
whole world is his, and all that is therein. Only a thankful heart is the
acceptable Sacrifice. What shall I render unto the Lord (says David) for all
his benefits toward me? Psalm. 116.12.
I will take the Cup (of thanksgiving for my) salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord, 13. I will offer to thee a Sacrifice of praise, 27. Of which
sacrifice of praise God himself gives this testimony: Psalm. 50.23
He that offreth praise, shall glorify me. This duty Noah performed at his
going out of the Arc. Genesis 8.20.
Genesis 12.7.
Abraham, when God promised to his seed the land of Canaan; and after also at
diverse times, when upon sundry occasions he had in his heart this promise
confirmed. Genesis 13.4.18. Genesis 26.25
Isaak also upon promise of Gods presence and multiplying his seed. Lastly,
Iaacob, when he had escaped the danger of his brother Esau, built an Altar
there, that is, at Shechem, where he bought a piece of ground to set up his
Altar thereon, and in token of a thankful heart for his great deliverance, he
called the Altar, The mighty God. But among infinite examples of this
Sacrifice, which the godly did offer for Gods goodness toward them, I will
conclude with that of Iosaphat and his Soldiers, who when God had given them a
great victory over their enemies, 2. Chron. 20.26.
they blessed the Lord in the valley of Berachah, upon performance of which
godly duty (that it should never be forgotten) that place received that name.
And as if this had not been sufficient once to have given thanks unto God for
this benefit, every one of them go to Jerusalem; yea to the very Temple to
rejoice before the Lord for this his mercy.

Thus were the godly at all times very careful by offering to God only, praise
for his goodness, to acknowledge their obedience to the first Commandment,
and to profess that they trusted not in any other God, but in him alone.

Q. The sum of all that is said, is this, that God forbids all kind of
religious worship, either to the works of men's hands, or fancies of men's
brain, or to the Host of heaven or to Angels, though excellent and glorious
creatures of God, then also all vain confidence in worldly helps, or in any
kind of thing that we have or can do. Lastly, all inordinate or excessive love
to any creature or delight whatsoever: Then it commands us that we rest upon
him as our only hope and help, looking for all good things from him alone,
praying unto him for whatsoever we want, and entreating him to keep us from
whatsoever we fear or would shun; and in regard of his manifold mercies,
whereof we daily taste (unless we be too senseless) let us knit up the duties
required of us in this Commandment, With giving thanks always for all things
to God, even the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 5.20.


A. These are in deed the general duties that God here requires of us in this
first precept, whereby we are to learn, that seeing we must know that all good
must come from him, we must not then think that we can so much as offer to
God a good thought of our selves, much less do a good deed, unless he enable
us; and therefore he must have the glory of all that we have or can do.

Q. Let us now come to the second Commandment, wherein (it seems to me) GOD
teaches us how and after what manner he will be worshipped.

A. Very true, and it is needful he should so do. For when we are once
assured that there is a God, our own heart within us tells, us that this God
must be worshipped: and therefore we search and examine by our own reason and
judgment (unless we follow the light of GODS word) what may be the most
acceptable service unto Him, whom we esteem as God. This has been the cause
that even the Gentiles and such as knew not the true God, have thought, those
things that most delight the senses, to be also best pleasing to their false
gods: And for that cause they had Music to please the Ears, Lights and gay
shows to satisfy the Eyes, Perfumes and Odours for delighting the Nose, and
so as they set up to themselves vain gods, and such as could make them no
help, so they served them with vain worship, and such as could not be
acceptable to the Divine power.

Q. What is then the end which God here especially respects in this
Commandment, when He forbids graven Images, and any likeness of any thing
in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth?

A. God would not that his people should imagine, that such worship as
consisted only in outward obseruances, might please Him. He would that his
service should be answerable to his Nature, spiritual and heavenly: for as
Christ says, The true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and
Truth. In Spirit, I say, Ioh. 4.23.
and sincerity of heart without hypocrisy; and in Truth, not only in outward
rights and obseruances, which were but shadows and figures of the true
worship. For (says our Savior Christ) the Father requires even such to
worship him.

Q. If God meant hereby to command a spiritual serving of him, why did he
charge his people by the ministry of Moses, with so many outward ceremonies as
he did, and that even in that place, and about that very time, that he gave
the Law of the Commandments unto them?

A. God gave the Law of that Carnal Commandment, Heb. 7.16.
as the Apostle to the Hebrews calls it, for a time to train his people in
obedience to him, which in outward obseruances they would more readily learn;
but in such obseruances as had in every one of them a spiritual meaning, and
might have led them to that true worship that GOD requires, and is delighted
in. Circumcision was the first that God appointed, and that before the Law
Moral was given about 400. years. The next unto it was that ceremony of the
Paschall Lamb, commanded about two Months before the Law was given, as may be
gathered; if we compare the 33. of Numbers, verse 3. with the 19. Chapter of
Exodus, verse 1.

Q. What spiritual meaning was in those two obseruances required?

A. Circumcision did give this to understand, that they brought with them from
their Mothers womb such corruption of flesh as must be taken away, if they
will be in truth the people of God, and therefore that they should look farther
then to the outward ceremony. For if thou be a transgressor of the Law, thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision, Romans 2.25
as S. Paul teaches. For he is not a Jew, that is one outward, neither is that
circumcision that is outward in the flesh. Verse 28.
But he is a Jew (that is a true servant of God) that is one within, and the
circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter (or outward
observance) whose praise is of GOD, Verse 29.
and not of man. And therefore Jeremy calling the men of Judah and Jerusalem
to the true consideration of that ceremony, wherein they so justified
themselves above other that were not circumcised, thus exhorts them, Ier. 4.4.
Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among the thorns; be circumcised to
the Lord, and take away the foreskin of your hearts. So that this ceremony
giving them to understand, how by natural birth all flesh is corrupted and
sinful, they should acknowledge their pollution, and endeavor to become new
Men.

Q. And is this all that circumcision teaches?

A. No, It assures them also of grace and mercy. And therefore is it called
the Covenant, which is indeed as is called in the next verse the sign of the
Covenant (says God) between me and you. Genesis 17.11
Because God thereby assured to them the blessedness that he promised to
Abraham and his seed. In which respect also S. Paul says, that Abraham
received the sign of circumcision, Romans 4.11.
as the seal of the righteousness of Faith which he had, when he was
uncircumcised.

Q. Circumcision was then unto the people of Israel, as the sacrament of
Baptism to us.

A. It is very true, saving only that in the outward signs they differ. For
as in Baptism we have a promise of the favor of God, forgiveness of sins,
and of everlasting life, if by a true Faith we take hold of the promises. So
they had also: and as God requires of us, that we who are baptized, should
die unto sin, and as the Apostle admonishes us, should walk in newnes of
life. Romans 6.4.
So did he require of Abraham, that he should walk before God, and be
perfect. Genesis 17.1.
And as we acknowledge all this to be performed unto us in Christ, in whom all the promises of God are Yea, 2. Cor. 1.20.
and are in him Amen: even so they also were not to look for the promised
blessings, but in the promised seed of Abraham.

Q. Had the Paschall Lamb also a spiritual meaning, or was it but a sign for
that time, by which the destroyer might know what houses should be free from
the destruction, and the people might by that sacrament be the rather
encouraged to rest upon God?

A. It was not only an assurance to Gods people of their deliverance from
Egypt: but also in that they were commanded yearly to solemnize that feast,
they were taught that God would have them always mindful of that redemption.
Moreover, this their deliverance from Egypt, was unto them an assurance of
their deliverance from the bondage of sin, as their planting in the land of
Canaan, should have made them lift up their hearts to that Spiritual blessing
in that heavenly inheritance, whereof the land of Canaan was but a shadow,
persuading themselves, that as neither we in this world, so they had not here a
continuing City, Heb. 13.14
but we seek for one to come; Even one that has a foundation, Heb. 11.10
whose builder and maker is God.

Q. I see plainly, that by that Sacrament, the people of God were not only put
in mind of a temporal happiness, but had also promise of eternal glory, in
which respect, 1. Cor. 5.7.
S. Paul speaking of that Ceremony, incorageth the Corinthians to look for
endless blessedness. But what learn we, or what was taught them by the
Ceremonies used in the eating of their Paschall Lamb?

A. First, the Lamb it self must be without mayme or spot, of a year old, a
Weather Lamb, to point to the great perfection that must be in him that
should free us from sin; greater, I say, then can be in any man, conceived
according to the common course of nature. It was to be kept from the tenth day
of the Month, until the foureteenth, showing that, as the Apostle says; Heb.
7.26.
He must be separate from sinners. The blood of the Lamb must be sprinkled,
to teach, that without sheading of blood there is no remission. Heb 9.22.
And this particular sprinkling of the doore-posts of every house with the said
blood, shows that not a general knowledge of Christ his satisfaction for
sins is sufficient for us, unless every one of us do find in our own hearts,
by the grace of God, and the effectual working of Gods Spirit, this atonement
by faith, that Christ has made for us.

Q. This that has bin spoken, concerns the Lamb it self, and how it should
be used, and the blood sprinkled. Now let me hear how the Israelites should
eat the same.

A. Some of the Ceremonies used in eating of it, signified their speedy
departing out of Egypt, as we must upon any occasion offered, speedily and in
haste shake off the fetters of sin: such was their eating with shoes on
their feet, their staves in their hand, and perchance their rosting it, and
their eating it with unleavened bread (for they might not stay to sour it with
leaven.) Their eating it with sour herbs, might put them in mind of their
hard diet in Egypt, and therefore make them more thankful when they came to
better: Or else rather, that being made free from that Egypt; yet many
adversities might be looked for. Hereby also we see, that though we be freed
from the bondage of the spiritual Egypt, the power of sin: yet we shall have
many sharp combats with our corrupt affections, and many afflictions in this
life; for such is the estate of Gods servants.

Q. Many more such Ordinances were commanded to Gods people, wherein the outward
service was very particularly set down, and strictly observed of them.

A. But without the spiritual meaning thereof, they might well be compared to
the Nut before it be broken. For keep it vncracked never so long, you have no
good thereof, open it and taste of the kirnell, it is pleasant: even so, the
ceremonies of the Law, except the inward meaning thereof be practiced, are so
far from pleasing God, that he rejects, nay, he hates the same, as he
often professes, and most plainly in the first and last chapters of his
Prophet Esaias.

Q. What was then that spiritual service, signified by their washings, their
sin offerings, their sacrifice of perfumes, peace offerings, and such like?

A. Their washings and purifiings that were commanded, taught them that they of
themselves were unclean until they were washed, and also that this cleansing
was but ceremonial, and directed them unto that sanctifying spirit mentioned,
Esaias 44.3.
without which no man can be cleansed. The sacrifice of perfumes signifies our
Prayers, which cannot be a sacrifice of sweet savor to God, but by the
mediation of that high Priest figured by that Priesthood of Aaron, who must
offer much odours with the prayers of the Saints. Revel. 8.3.
The offerings for sin, teach Faith and Repentance: Repentance, I say, in
that the beast they brought did but supply their room, and was slain, to show
what they deserved, and withal, that it now behooves them to crucify the old
man, and all those corrupt affections, the fruits of our sinful nature, and to
rest only on the blood of Christ (whereof the blood of those beasts was a
representation) to make the atonement with God. And thus much by way of
digression, to show that these external rites which God commanded his people
to use for a time, namely, until the fullness of time was come, that God should
give his Son to take our Nature upon him, and wherein he taught them, that
reverently and truly used them, both Faith and Repentance should be no warrant
for the Idolatry and gross blasphemies used in the Church of Rome in their
Idol service.

Q. It is plain then, that as in this Commandment God requires spiritual
worship, and forbids that service, that by Images or the likeness of any
thing, men offer unto him, so always even when ceremonies were most commanded,
the spiritual and inward worship of the heart only seasoned that outward
service, and made it acceptable. Then they are in my judgment much to be
blamed, who still retain in their Churches, or cha^bers, or any where else,
the Images so expressly forbidden by God himself, for adoration sake.

A. They are so, but yet to cover their shame, they have certain pretenses to
make show of reason for their doings, but much like Adams fig tree leaves,
which could not hide him from God. Neither can all they devise to answer the
words of this second Commandment, although they have found out many bad
shifts. One Ambrose Catharine affirms this Law to have been given only to
that people of Israel for a time, but that it belongs not to us. But
Bellarmine himself is ashamed of that answer, and rejects it, in his second
Book of Images Chapter 7. Many of them say, that in this Commandment the gods
or Idols of the Gentiles are forbidden, not the Images which Gods servants do
make. Bellarmine himself teaches, that this Commandment forbids only the
Image that is accounted a god, or represents as a God, that which is none, in
the beginning of the Chap. before alleged. Caietan another great Papist,
would make us believe, that not every Image is here forbidden; but that it is
unlawful for a man to make an Image, that he will have as his peculiar god.
Lastly, as Pope Adrian the first, in that absurd Council of Nice the second,
writing to Constantine the Emperor, and Irene his Mother, very Pope-like
expounds that Commandment, not to forbid holy Images (now we deny that in
this case there be any such) but Agalmata, which he expounds to be the Image
abiecti animalis, of some base creature. To answer every one of these their
answers particularly, would be too long. But the precept it self being thus
general as it is, is without any further answer, to show the absurdity of all
these answers.

Q. The Commandment forbids all likeness of any thing whatsoever in
heaven, earth, or the waters, neither has respect unto the Images, by whom
they are made, or of whom they have been worshipped, but plainly and expressly
forbids all. But because they like best of that which Bellarmine answers,
that those are only forbidden that are accounted as gods, I pray you show your
judgment therein, whether they in their worship of Images, whether of Angels,
Men, or Women, seem not to make them as gods.

A. Howsoever the Papists would seem to deny this, (for such Idolatry is too
gross and abominable) yet themselves must confess, that in their own
Prayer-Bookes, they pray before them, as if they were gods, they use kneeling,
censing, kissing, lighting of Candles before them, and whatsoever we must ask
of GOD, they ask of them.

Q. But they do not beg these things of the Images, but of the Saints whom
these Images do represent.

A. In deed so they say, but what can they do more, if ye Saints themselves
stood before them, to ye Saints (for such outward worship) then they do to
their Images? Neither is it likely that the common people is able to put such
difference between the Image, and the thing thereby represented. Seeing in
that assembly of their Bishops and learned Clergy, in the second Nicen
Council, one of them could say, Acts 4.
It is plain, that he who worshippeth the Image, and says, This is Christ,
sins not. It is no sin with them to say the Image is Christ: shall the
people then think they need be so scrupulous, to put such difference between
the Image, and him that is signified thereby? Nay, I dare say, the Priests would
not have them so well learned, as to know that difference. For the things so
plentifully offered in many places, can do no good to the Saints themselves,
(for they who are dead, whether good or bad, need not the things of this
world) and the Image it self never was the better for any thing that was
offered, neither could have any use thereof, (for what can stocks and stones
do with gold or silver, or Jewels of price?) It is therefore a dangerous
doctrine that the simple should be taught, that their prayers and offerings
(for doubtless to whom they pray, they also offer) I say, it is dangerous for
the Church-Romish to teach, that they pray not or offer to the Image, but to
the Saint represented thereby: Lest a Christian seriously considering of the
matter, remember how the Prophet David gives as a name due to God only, Psalm.
65.2.
to be a hearer of Prayers, and not belonging unto the Saints, and therefore
also says, that all flesh shall come unto GOD: the simple man then thus
concludes with himself, Seeing my service must not be to the Image, and the
Saints cannot hear or help me, it is vain that I pray or offer before them.
Again, we see the practice not only of unlearned men, but of their learned
and religious men to the contrary of their doctrine. We read in ye second
Nicen Council, so much esteemed of the Romish-Church for setting up Images,
Acts 5.
how one Dennis told them a tale of one John an Abbot and Anchorite, a man
famous, says this Dennis. This John had in his Cell where he lay, the Image
of the Virgin Mary, and his fashion was when he went abroad, as he did sometime
for 5. or 6. months together, to make a candle, and being ready to take
journey, he prayed to our Lady (as he terms her) Totus in Imaginem eius
intentus, wholly respecting her Image, Thou holy Mother of God, because I have
a long journey in hand, care for thy Candle, and see that it burn not out. And
having spoken thus to the Image, he took his journey. Is not this a plain
testimony of praying to the Image it self, and allowed in that Council of
Nice for good stuff?

Q. It is strange, that any that profess the name of Christianity, could so
break this Commandment of the Almighty in making Images to worship, seeing,
even diverse of the heathen Philosophers that knew not the true GOD, thought
that things that cannot be perceived by outward senses, but by understanding
only, must be by Faith comprehended, as Theodoret out of Parmenides, Solon,
Empedocles and Antistenes teaches in his third Book against the Idolatry of
the Gentiles. Yea, he there reports, that Antistenes would not that any
Image should be made of God, because says he, God cannot by any counterfeit or
picture be comprehended, but by believing: and therefore very aptly calls
Faith the Eye of the mind.

A. Certainly, these Heathenish Philosophers shall rise up in judgment
against these Popish Idolaters, to whom we may truly say, as there Theodoret
speaks to the Gentiles, that worshipped the creature in stead of the Creator,
and fell down before Images: Solis visibilibus contabescitis manuque confecta
simulachra venerantes, doctrinam quae de inuisibili traditur non admittitis:
You even pine away (says he) about things visible, and worshipping Images
made with hands, you receive not that which is taught of the invisible God. And
in deed the Romish Church so doteth upon, and for their Images, that they
little respect Gods word in comparison of them.

Q. Can that be true?

A. It is most true. For when they saw that they could devise no good answer,
to warrant their Images from the force of this 2. Commandment, and that the
words were so plain, that they in keeping their Images must be accounted
transgressors of the law, in so much also as Vasquer a Jesuit confesses,
that diverse Papists are against the making of the Image of God, as also sundry
of the ancient Fathers: when, I say, this Commandment was such a block in
their way, that this and their doctrine of Images could not well stand together:
then they began to loose this knot, as Alexander the great did that Gordian
knot in the Temple of Apollo; he cut it in pieces with his sword. So have the
Papists handled this Commandment, they could devise no answer to stop the
mouths of their adversaries, and therefore in their Catechisms they quite
leave out this Commandment. Vaus, the Jesus psalter, both in English, an old
office of the blessed virgin Mary, printed more then forty years since:
likewise, a new Breuiary or Office of the Virgin Mary in English and Latin. A
book entitled, Bulla super forma iuramenti, etc. And Bellarmine in his
catechism, all of them leave this Commandment quite out, as if God had never
spoken such a word, not fearing the curse pronounced against such as put or
take any thing from Gods word.

Q. But this Commandment forbids not the making of all Images. For the
representation of men or women, whom for their authority or other good parts
in them we reverence, or love, is not unlawful; or if they be made to garnish
and beautify any place, or in any other civil respect, this Commandment is
not thereby broken.

A. Most true; and therefore in the commandment it is said, Thou shall not
bow down before them or worship them, thereby teaching us what Images they
are, whose making is in this commandment forbidden. And in these words we are
to learn, that all kind of honor external and internal, of the body, or of
the Spirit, is utterly unlawful to be done to those Images.

Q. But they make us to believe who are ignorant people, that the honor, that
is done before the Image, is not done to the Image, but to that which the Image
represents.

A. So they teach, but the practice of learned and unlearned seems to be
contrary. For it is very hard to find any among the simple, who if they
confess the truth, do not kneel and pray to the Image it self. Yea, why do
they so trim up, with clothes of price and precious Jewels, their Images? why
do they make them to speak, as did that at Winchester, whereof Pollidor
Virgil in his history of England, in his sixth book reports? why do they
devise to make them turn away their faces, to auert their eyes? sometime also
to foam at their mouth, and make such tokens of being displeased, when their
offerings do not come in so plentifully as they have done? Are not these things
done, that the Image it self might the rather be reverenced and worshipped? To
what end is the incense offered or the candles lighted before them? The things
by them represented stand not in need of any light; if they be saints, they see
by a much more glorious light, if not, the taper-light cannot pleasure them.
Neither can the savor of the Incense come to the place where Gods Saints live
in eternal bliss; or if it could, might it please them any thing, who are
wholly ravished in beholding the unspeakable glory of God, and all whose
exercise is to sing praise and glory unto him that sits upon the throne, and
to the Lamb. And that idolatrous assembly at Niece, called, the second Nicen
Council, has many things to justify this that we accuse the Romish church
of; namely, that they do honor to the Image it self. There was one John,
entitled Sanctiss. Praesbyter, a most holy Priest, who said, it was a clear
case, that He who worshipped the Image, Acts 4.
or said, This is Christ, sinned not.

Another tells a tale of John an Abbot, whom he commends very much to be
famous in his time, who used often to go on pilgrimage. And his manner was when
he would take any journey in hand, to make a candle, and setting it before the
Image of the blessed Virgin which he had in his cel, Totus in Imaginem eius
intentus, Being wholly devoted to her Image, thus to say: Thou holy Mother of
God, take care of this thy candle, and as I would have it, keep it that it go
not out; and so when he had been away five or six months, at his return he
found the candle burning. And there is also another such like tale of a woman,
that was at great charges to dig a Well, and could get no water, until she
had put an Image into the Well, and then she had plenty of water. Acts 5.
Much such good stuff there was in that second Nicen Council, giving much
honor to the Images themselves as if they knew not that old Verse: Hoc Deus
est quod Imago docet,
sed non Deus ipse:
That which thou see
stand in Gods steed,
This Image is not God indeed.


Q. It seems then, howsoever they now would seem to give no honor to the
Image, but to that which is thereby represented, yet the contrary appears so
plainly, both by their words and deeds, that they must be holden guilty of
the breach, at the least, of this part of the Commandment, wherein external
service of Images is forbidden.

A. You judge truly. And that spiritual worship also which God prohibiteth in
this word, Thou shall not serve them: they give to other the Images contrary to
this commandment, or to the Saints thereby represented to them, and that is
contrary to the first commandment. For if we trust in any thing but in God,
looking for help from them, it is as before is said, a plain breach of this
commandment; Thou shall have no other god before me.

Q. The Romish teachers make us believe, that there is one worship that they
give unto God, another wherewith they honor the Saints, and therefore will not
confess themselves to be transgressors, either of the first, or this second
Commandment in worshipping the Saints.

A. It is true, that they speak of two sorts of worships, one belonging unto
God, another, say they, may be given to the creature; the first they call
Latria, the second Doulia, which distinction, howsoever it may seem to have
some show of antiquity, yet (if it be truly examined) it has no color of
verity. For first, the words themselves differ not in signification, but both
signify service, unless Doulia (which service they reserve for the Saints) be
more base service, and therefore more fit to give to God, because reason would
we should more humble and subject our selves unto God, then to any creature.
Secondly, it is hard for a simple man to put any difference between these two
services, because howsoever their teachers say, the one service belongs to
God, the other to Saints: yet if thou look unto the outward behavior, they
are alike to both. We kneel to God, they to their Saints, if not to their
Images, we lift up hands and eyes to God in our prayers, so do they to their
Images, or to their Saints at the least: yea they set lights before them, and
offer unto them incense, which is more then we do to God, because he needs
it not. To be short, with greater solemnity by far, they observe their Saints
days then the Lords day. So that the service to the Saints in outward
ceremonies, is in every thing equal to that of Gods with them, in some things
much greater.

Q. But in the spiritual honor they tell us there is great difference. For
these acknowledge God to be the giver of all good things. As for Saints, they
make them but Advocates to God for them.

A. If this which they say were true, yet it were intolerable wrong so to rob
Christ of his office. For if any man sin, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Just: And he is
the propitiation for our sins. It is he also that is at the right hand of
God, Romans 8.34.
and makes request for us. But they content not themselves thus to rob Christ
of his office of mediation, but that also they rob God of his glory, and that
mo ways then one: That appoint to every Country their peculiar Saint, to be,
as it were their Patron; as to England, Saint George; to Scotland, St. Andrew;
to Spain, St. James, and to other countries, other Saints, wherein they
imitate the Gentiles, who had for every Country and City their several gods, as
Tertullian in his Apology for Christians, and Theodoret writing against the
Idolatries of the heathen in his third book does charge them.

Q. It seems they have forgotten that it is God who disposes of the greatest
Monarchs at his pleasure, and brings their kingdoms to an end when he
will. If that watchful keeper of Israel, Psalm. 121.4
who does neither slumber nor sleep, do not protect, not all the Saints in
heaven can work security: and if God be with any Kingdom or City, or house
to defend it, not all the powers of the earth, nor all the devils in hell, shall
any thing annoy it. So that the godly may with much joy and comfort say; Psalm.
2.12
Blessed are all they that trust in the Lord: And Blessed is the Nation, whose
God is the Lord, Psalm. 33.12
the people that he has chosen for his inheritance. But the simple may judge,
that without all doubt in this, the Romish Church give that honor to the
Saints, that belongs to God only; yea, and that in much greater abundance
to them, then to God. For the seventh day, which God himself commanded to be
sanctified unto him, which is now unto us the Sabbath, or the Lords day, is
nothing so solemnly kept as those Saints days are, unless they fall upon the
Lords day, and then God for their sakes shall be served after their best
manner, not they for his sake. But you said that sundry ways they rob God of
his glory, I pray you let us hear more of this.

A. Prayer belongs to God only; first, because he commanded so, Call upon
me in the day of thy trouble: Psa. 50.15
then also it is a spiritual sacrifice, one of them that the Apostle St. Peter
speaks of, 1. Pet. 2.5
We are (says he) a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to GOD by Jesus Christ; and sacrifices were not to be offered to
any but to God. Thirdly, ye practice and examples of all the godly, whose
prayers we read of in the scriptures teach this. And the reason is, because
they did know it was Gods office only to hear our prayers. O thou hearer of
prayers (says David) to thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 65.2
And the Godly confess, that Abraham was ignorant of them, and Israel knew
them not (yet I hope these were as good Saints, as any that the Romish church
can afford us) Thou O Lord (say they) art our Father and Redeemer: Esa 63.16
showing hereby for what cause they came to God for help, even because other
could not hear or be acquainted with their wants. And as prayer, so giving of
thanks for such good things as we receive, is due to God only. David assuring
himself of help from God in his distress promises to praise the name of God
with a Song, Psalm 69.30
and magnify him with thanksgiving. And he confesses this will please God
better then a sacrifice. So elsewhere the Prophet exhorts Gods people to offer
sacrifices of praise to God; Psalm. 107.22. Chap. 14.3
which are called by the Prophet Hosea, The calves of our lips: and by the
Apostle to the Hebrews: The fruit of the lips to confess Gods name; Chap.
13.15.
and must always be offered to God, as there the Apostle exhorts.

Q. It seems then, that God challenges as due to him, all religious service
outward and inward, of the body and of the mind, so as we must love the Lord
our God, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
with all our heart, soul, and might: so must we serve him too. What service
then is that of Dulia, which the Saints must have? For all this that is spoken
of, is Latria; and therefore, by their own confession is due to God only.

A. I know not any religious worship that their saints can have (much less
their Images) unless they rob God of his honor, as they have done hitherto,
and Christ of his office: or else that they must return to Gentilisme or
Iudaisme, to borrow some rites and obseruances of theirs, as their lights,
their censing and many such like. But the true honor that we can give unto
the Saints, is to commend as patterns of godliness and religion, their
virtues to others, and our selves to imitate the same. Thus howsoever they
please themselves in this distinction, when it is examined, we find that they
are all one, and there is no difference between them, but that indifferently
they are used to set forth the service of GOD, but never for Saints in
Scripture; yea, and the word it self used in the original, because it is
general, and signifies all kind of service, even that which is done unto men,
and not only that which we perform to God, may plainly teach us, that Gods
meaning was not to allow of any such distinction, as now is used for
maintenance of Idolatry, by Popish teachers, far otherwise then ever St.
Augustine (upon whom they father it) did mean.

Q. This is then the sum of that which has been said, that any religious
service, whether outward or inward, that is done to any Image, or the likeness
of any thing, is a breach of this second Commandment. And because they say, it
is not done to the Image, but to the Saint thereby represented, therein they
do against the first Commandment; of which, though we have heard before in
expounding the first Commandment, yet upon occasion, somewhat also has been
said in teaching the things required in this second Commandment of that too.
And is there not any thing else forbidden in this second Commandment, then this
making and serving of Images?

A. Yes; for we may make Idols of our own fancies, or of such doctrines as God
has not commanded or taught: but because my meaning is briefly to touch the
most plain matters of this Precept, although I might justly have spoken against
all doctrines and traditions of men, not grounded upon Gods undoubted word;
yet I mean rather to omit them for this present time, and to follow the words
of the Commandment, and point unto that only that may plainly be gathered out
of them.

Q. What may we learn out of the reason, that is added in the end of this
Commandment?

A. It seems to be a general inducement to obedience of Gods law, terrifying
the sinners by fear of Gods terrible judgments, and withal, letting them
know, that by their sin they show themselves to be such as hate God: And
encouraging and comforting such as by their holy obedience show that they love
God.

Q. But what more special reasons are in the Scriptures, to work in us a
detestation of all transgression against this Law?

A. Diverse: and first, the great care that God did show, when he gave them his
law, in that he did not appear in any likeness, so that they only heard his
voice, but saw nothing; to the end (as Moses himself does testify) that they
should not corrupt themselves, Deuteronomy. 4.15 16.
and make them a graven Image or representation of any figure. Secondly,
whereas the Image-worshippers would tell us that Images are Lay men's books,
which they learned of the Gentile Idolaters, the Spirit of God, which can more
truly judge of them what these are, then any popish Idolater, tells us that
The stock is a doctrine of vanity; Ier. 10.8.
and an image is a teacher of lies. And must not they, who look upon such
books, be led into error? Thirdly, the men of God speak of them so
scornefully in the Scriptures, as if they disdained that such as profess
themselves to be Gods servants, should esteem of them, as that they are the
work of men's hands, eyes have they but see not, ears and hear not, and such
like. Yea the Prophet Esaias tells us, that men are in their Idolatry so
besotted, and witless, that having roasted their meat by one piece of a tree,
and warmed themselves by another piece of it, of the third they make a god.
Lastly, if there were no other reason, yet this one may make us to detest them,
because that whereas God is a Spirit, and they who will worship him, Ioh. 4.24.
must worship in Spirit and truth: (for so Christ teaches us) the beholding of
their painted Images or otherwise richly decked, does not a little withdraw the
mind from heavenly and spiritual meditations, and so hinder our true and
spiritual service.

Q. The third Commandment has in it, I see, a prohibition or forbidding of
that which is unlawful, and a reason why we should obey.

A. It is true.

Q. But may we not in diverse things transgress against this Commandment?

A. Yes verily: we have so many by-waies to lead us out of the right path of
holy obedience, that it is very hard to walk in it without wandering, for in
those things wherein Gods name should be glorified (such is our corruption) we
many times dishonor him: for swearing, if it be in such sort as it ought to
be, is a thing commended unto us, and God is glorified thereby. And therefore
God himself by his Prophet Esaias, prophesiing of the calling of the Gentiles,
and that they shall set forth Gods honor, says, Es. 45.23.
Every tongue shall swear by me, and elsewhere, They shall swear by the Lord
of Hosts: Es. 19.18.
but yet it is but too true, and greatly to be lamented, that by swearing, the
name of the Lord is taken in vain, and so this Commandment broken.

Q. But some ancient Haereticks thought, and the Anabaptists now maintain an
Oath, to be unlawful.

A. It is so, but their error may well be confuted by diverse reasons: For
first, there are many good uses of an Oath, as the ending of strife and
controversies, Exodus 22.8 11.
yt might arise among neighbors, as in such cases as are set down. Therefore
the Apostle to the Hebrews says, Eb. 6.16.
that an Oath for confirmation is among men an end of all strife. Secondly, it
has been used for assuring of bargains and covenants, as between Abraham
and Abimelech. Genesis 21.31.
And when Jacob bought Esaus birthright, he made Esau to assure the sale
thereof unto him by an Oath. Thirdly, Ge^. 25.33.
an Oath has been used to bind more strongly the servant to faithful service,
Genesis 24.9.
as Abraham swore his servant, when he sent him to get a Wife for his son
Isaak: and the Subjects to loyalty and alleagance. So did Nebuchad-nezar take
an oath of alleagance of Iehoiakin king of Judah, and God called that oath his
Oath, 2. Chro. 36 13.
and threatens grievously the King and people for breach of that Oath. Ezech.
17.18.19.
But besides these good uses of an oath, we see it is often commanded in the
Scriptures, which should rather be forbidden, if it were unlawful. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6.13
and serve him, and swear by his name. Again, Deu. 10.20
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall cleave unto Him,
and shall swear by his Name. Yea, the Prophet does testify, that they shall
be praised that swear by his name. Ps. 63.11.
If unto these I would ad examples of godly men, who upon good occasions did
swear, besides Abraham and Iaacob already spoken of, Ge^. 47.31.
I might allege Joseph, Moses, Josh. 14.9.
and many more, who, if an oath had been unlawful, would not have sworn.

Q. But they make show of reason for this their error, alleging the words of
Christ, Mat. 5.34.
Swear not all: after whom, also Saint James the Apostle taught the same
lesson.

A. These words being truly understood, make nothing to maintain their
error. Christ reproves in the words alleged, two corruptions of those times
concerning Oaths. The first, that if they swore by the creatures, though in
them Gods Majesty does shine, they did imagine they took not the name of God in
vain. But Christ tells them, that his honor is so tied unto his creatures,
that without diminishing his glory, they cannot swear by them. The second
corruption was, that they had these Oaths in their common talk, and as it
seems, were of that mind that many now are, that so they swore truly, they
sinned not. Christ therefore teaches them, that in their communication or
ordinary talk, they should use no swearing, but they should simply affirm a
truth, or deny an untruth; which he means by these words, that their
communication should be yea, yea, nay, nay, and whatsoever is more, comes of
evil. Mat. 5.37.
And S. James thus expounds these words of our Savior Christ, that their
yea, should be yea, and their nay, nay, that is, whether they affirm or deny,
it should be true that they say. But against other Oaths, then such as are
used in ordinary or common talk, and in deed are too commonly used among us,
there is nothing in these words.

Q. I see then it is lawful to swear: but teach me, how in Oaths the name of
God may be taken in vain.

A. First, by false swearing: for the end of an Oath should be to lay open the
truth, and to make it known, that might otherwise lie hidden within us. If then
the taking of the name of God work not this effect, it is taken in vain. God
therefore by his Prophet Jeremy, teaching his people, how they might keep
themselves in this point from breaking this Commandment, Iere. 4.2.
says, Thou shall swear, The Lord lives in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness. And by the same Prophet reproving his people for their
hypocrisy, Ier. 5.2.
says thus, Though they say, The LORD lives, yet they swear falsely. Yea, he
gives a plain Commandment, Leuit. 19.12.
Thou shall not swear lyingly by my Name.

Q. If then the end of an Oath be to discover a truth, what shall we think
of the doctrine of aequiuocation, which teaches not only to deny a truth, but
to do it upon an Oath, and think they do well, that so forswear themselves?

A. I say, it is a doctrine very fit and suitable to the Priests and Jesuits,
who mainetaine the same, for as they strive as much as they can, to take all
truth out of the Church, so do they hereby what in them lies, to take away
all Faith and honest dealing from among men. For, when men may not be trusted
upon their word, no not upon their Oath, but that still they may suspect some
secret reseruations to be hidden in their deceitful hearts, what safety can
there be in dealing with such men?

Q. Let these Aequiuocatours then pass as wilful transgressors of this third
Commandment, and as wilfully deceiving others by their most irreligious
doctrine: is this Commandment broken only by false swearing?

A. It is broken also by all vain swearing, for as we must swear in truth,
so in Judgment also, as out of Jeremy I showed before. And this word of
judgment does signify, Iere. 4.2.
either that the Oath must be taken before a Judge, as in the cases formerly
mentioned out of Exodus, Exodus 22.8 and 11.
it was commanded, or at the least iudicially in matters of great importance,
and for ending of weighty controversies, as the Oaths that the godly of whom
I spoke before were made; but to call God to witness in matters of no moment, is
a great dishonouring of Him and his name. Much like as if a king or mighty
Prince of gravity and wisdom, should be called to be a Judge among children
of their push-pin or blow-poynt, or such toyish games.

Q. Besides the vain matters that men swear for many times, such oaths bring
men to a custom of swearing, whereby this Commandment must needs be broken,
and they who use such oaths, are in danger to be snared thereby.

A. The son of Sirach gives very good counsel for this matter: Accustom
not thy mouth (says he) to swearing, (for in it there are many falls) neither
take up for a custom the naming of the Holy one: (for thou shall not be
unpunished for such things) A man that uses much swearing, shall be filled
with wickedness, Eccle. 23.9.11.
and the plague shall never go from his house. And if he swear in vain, he
shall not be innocent, but his house shall be full of plagues. Again, to talk
with him that swears much, Eccl. 27.14.
makes the hair to stand up, and to strive with such, stops the ears.

Q. We must needs accuse our times then of great corruption, wherein too many
scarce can speak, but with oaths, yea, swearing if it be done with a grace,
in so grievous and graceless sin, many pride themselves too much in, as if
it were a token of valor, yet such men, howsoever they seem perchance many of
them to fear no man: yet the lest breath of GODS mouth, Psalm 76.12
who cutteth off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the
earth, shall make them tremble and quake, as the Aspe-leafe, Dan. 5.6.
as did Bellshazzar in all his royalty. But may Gods name be taken in vain,
any other way then by swearing?

A. Yes, If we think or speak of Gods works with less reverence, and due
consideration, then we ought to do, thereby is the second Commandment broken.
For, as men by their names, so is the glory and Majesty of GOD apparent unto
us by his works, so that his power and might, his wisdom, his mercy, may
easily be seen to them that reverently consider of his creation of all things
of nothing, of the order wherein he has made and appointed them, and how he
has made all his creatures for our use. And in his governing the world as he
does, both his justice and his greatness may be seen. So that to talk of his
works, and not worthily to praise the workmanship, or not to give honor to
the worker thereof, is to take his name in vain, because that which may be
known of God, is not so reverently esteemed of us, as it ought to be.

Deuteronomy. 23.21.
Q. We read that if the people of God, to rouse up their slothfulness, and
to reform their negligence in Gods service, should vow any thing to God, they
might not be slack in performing that they promised: does this any thing
belong to this third Commandment?

A. Very much: For a vow is as it were a holy promise, not made, only before
God, and whereof he is a witness, but also made to him, and therefore not
without great dishonouring of his name, can be broken or left unperformed.
Number. 30.3
Whosoever voweth a vow unto the Lord, or swears an oath to bind himself by
a bond, he shall not break promise, but do according to all that proceeds
out of his mouth. Therefore the Psalmist advises thus, Psa. 76.11.
Vow and perform unto the Lord.

Q. You mean not here to commend to the godly the popish vows, wherein they
who have vowed, do so much rejoice, as if they were the chief professors of
Christianity.

A. No, those Popish vows are commonly to abstain from things lawful in
themselves to be used, with such a bond of conscience, as yt howsoever unable
to perform it they find themselves, yet must they still strive (though
altogether against ye stream) to do that they have promised. Again, they think
to merit thereby, and so rob Christ of the glory of his meriting for us, the
forgiveness of our sins, and the fruit of his sacrifice, which only could
make the atonement with God for us. These and many other such superstitions, or
rather blasphemies, do so stain their Popish vows, that they are in the sight
of God and all good men, most abominable. Yet I commend as godly helps against
our weakness and infirmity, that we shall easily find in our selves, in our
endeavor to serve God, such purposes and promises as with our selves we make
unto God, of daily praying, reading, abstinence, and all other godly exercises,
whereby we may grow in knowledge of God, and all true obedience. For such
exercises do not only keep us well occupied, and so are a redeeming of the time
from the vain conversation that we have had in times past, but are as a
continual manuring and watering of the godly thoughts, which God by his grace
has now planted in our hearts. And for such vows or promises, if we make to
God, and perform them not; we shall be found guilty of taking the name of the
Lord our God in vain.

Q. What say you to such godly wishes as are ordinary in our mouths (godly, I
say, in outward show) Good morrow, God speed, or such like; is there no danger
of breaking this Commandment in uttering them?

A. Yes, very great, for we use them but too often as words of course, rather
for fashion, then with any true devotion, we tumble them out of our mouths,
before we think in our heart of that we speak. Nay, the solemn Prayers that
we purpose to make unto God, are by this means become, as the Preacher terms
them, Eccle. 4.17
The sacrifice of fools: for when we should talk with God, if our affections
be wandering, and our thoughts carry us sometime to pleasures, sometime to
profit, or to any other worldly things, we perform not herein our purpose to
God, and therefore we take his name in vain.

Q. We learn then, that we have great need, when we have a purpose to sue
unto God, to free our selves as much as possibly we can, from all thoughts
that may hinder us, or cause our hearts to wander from heavenly cogitations.
Yea, do what we can, our heart will not so be knit unto God in prayer, as it
ought to be, and therefore it behooves us not only to watch and pray, Mar.
13.13. Ephe. 6.18.
but also to watch unto prayer, that spying the time when we see our selves
best enabled thereto by the spirit of God, Romans 8.26
which helps our infirmities, then we should take hold of that grace that is
offered to us.

A. You say true.

Q. But what say you of our profession of Christianity, and that we are the
children of God? May not this our profession be a transgression of this
Commandment?

A. Yes, and is but too often. God complains of his people of the Jews thus,
Esaias 52.5.
My Name is all the day continually blasphemed. Again, When they entered unto
the Heathen whither they went, Ezech. 36.20.
they polluted my name. And therefore Saint Paul is bold to charge the Jews,
to the end he might humble them, and make them know themselves, thus, The name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you: Romans 2.24
declaring thereby, that profession of serving God, without conversation
somewhat answerable, is a taking of Gods name in vain. To this end tend these
exhortations, Ephe. 4.1.
I pray you walk worthy of the vocation whereunto you are called. Phil. 1.27
Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Walk worthy of
the Lord. Yea, Col. 1.10.
the Apostle Saint James says plainly, If a man think himself religious,
Iam. 1.26
and refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's
Religion is vain. If the not-guiding of the tongue may make vain all our
profession of Religion, then much more, if our life be polluted and stained
with sundry sins. In what case then are they who go forward in all kind of
uncleanness and wickedness, not in one, but in almost all kind of sins? do
not they, howsoever they profess themselves to be Gods servants, dishonor
him in taking upon them the name of Gods servants, or Gods children, and care
not how in life they dishonor him?

Q. We learn then that this Commandment may be broken, by swearing, either
falsely, or vainly, by talking of Gods works irreverently; by vowing or
promising to God, not caring to perform the same, by inconsiderate wishes and
wandering prayers; and lastly, by making profession of serving God, when we
serve our own lusts, sin, or Satan.

A. It is true: But one thing I had almost forgotten. For we dishonor Gods
Name, not only in our wandering prayers (as is before said) but also in praying
to him for things unseemly, or that against our enemies he would be an
executioner of our wrath. In all these or such like requests, we dishonor the
name of the Lord our God. And also in oaths, besides false and vain swearing,
already proved to be against this Commandment, it is a great dishonor to Gods
Name to match him with any other in swearing, or any other service of GOD, as
Gods people did, for which, GOD by his Prophet threatens to destroy the land,
and to cut off the people, and the beasts, the birds, and the fishes also; and
this seems to be a great cause of that general destruction, because they did
worship and swear by God, Zeph. 1.5
and by Malcham. For our great and mighty God, who governs all things as he
will, scorneth so unequally to be matched with Idols, or any creatures.

Q. Now besides all these transgressions of this Commandment, we read, that
God very often finds fault with false prophets, that came in his Name when
he sent them not, spoke in his name, when he bid them not, and made the
people believe they were his true Messengers, and yet were nothing less: Did
not such take the name of the Lord in vain?

A. Certainly they did. So that as by that which has formerly bin said, we
have learned how every man may transgress this Law: so here we are taught how
these in their particular function do grievously and very dangerously for
other, break this Commandment. And herein do all popish, and other false
Teachers, wickedly offend, in that they vaunt themselves as messengers from
God, to teach his truth, when they speak of nothing but their own fancies, and
men's traditions, unless as graceless murderers will cast Sugar upon poison to
deceive him that eats it, so they now and then allege somewhat out of
Scriptures, to make their hearers believe, that all that they deliver is like
that, when their doctrine, and Gods word in his book delivered, are no more
like then night to day, darkness to light, or Antichrist to Christ. And thus
much for this third Commandment: I mean for the things prohibited therein.

Q. But what is required in this Commandment that we should do?

A. He who will not that we dishonor his name, would have us occupied in
sanctifying the same. For, as Christ says; Mat 12.30
He that is not with me, is against me, and he who gathers not,
scatters. So he who honors not GOD, dishonors him, whenever occasion
is given to honor him, in that he omitteth that duty. And therefore Moses,
though he did not any thing whereby God might be dishonored: yet is charged
not to have honored God, because, when opportunity served (with assured faith
in Gods power and mercy, he commanded not the Rock to send forth water, Exodus
17.6
as sometime before he had done. Because (says God) ye believed not me, Number.
20 12.
to sanctify me before the Children of Israel; therefore, ye shall not bring
this Congregation into the land which I have given them. And God accounted this
such a dishonor to him, Deuteronomy. 3.25
that though Moses prayed God that he might go in, and see that good land
beyond Jordan: Yet God would not hear his prayer for that thing. verse 26.

Q. It appears then, that this prohibiting or forbidding to dishonor Gods
name, does necessarily contain in it a commandment to honor the same; and
that worthily. For the honoring of his Name, is the first thing that our
Savior Christ has taught us to beg of God, in that form of prayer which he
has taught us, which we call the Lords Prayer. Therefore, as you have taught
us, how his Name may be in diverse sorts, or many ways dishonored, so let us
hear how we may apply our selves to honor the same.

A. First, if we do the contrary to those things, whereby Gods name is
dishonored: As if taking his name in swearing, we swear always truly and in
judgment, or for deciding of controversies of weight or importance; if we
think or speak of his works reverently; if we perform the holy means
which we have promised in our hearts, to use to further us in his service; if
in our short and ordinary wishes, or solemn prayers, we with fear and
reverence sue to God seriously: lastly, if our outward profession of religion
be joined with care and endeavor to serve God truly, and walk worthy of our
calling, by these means we shall rightly perform this holy service.

Q. Are there not some particular or special observations, which if we
follow, we may more religiously apply our selves to all these duties before
mentioned?

A. Yes verily, and briefly they are these: A diligent hearing or reading of
Gods word. For without it, we are like men that have a desire to work and
will be doing somewhat; but in the dark night, when through want of light,
they know not whether it be right or wrong, good or evil that (...) were in.
Therefore, that in all our doings and sufferings, God may be glorified, Romans
15.5
we must pray to the God of patience, as S. Paul calls him, that he will
give unto us, Phil. 1.29
not to believe only, but to suffer also for Christ's sake. 1. Cor. 6.20.
So shall we glorify God in our body, and in our Spirit, as St. Paul wills.

Q. What is meant by the words following: For the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain?

A. God thereby moves this people to take heed that they offend not against
this law. For, many go forwards in their sins rashly, thinking that as man
does not, so God cannot espy; or at the least does not see their wickedness,
or if he see, yet he regards it not, or that he will not punish, or that he
is not of power sufficient. For what is so absurd that ungodly men will not
surmise, to flatter themselves in their own ways? therefore, God here gives
his people to understand, that if they profane his name, they provoke against
them the LORD himself, whose All-seeing Eye beholds the very thoughts of the
heart, and whose Power is infinite, and not to be hindered by any device or
policy, or to be restrained by any strength of man: Who if he where his
glittering sword, Deu. 32.41
and his hand take hold of judgment, will execute vengeance on his enemies,
and will reward them that hate him. So that howsoever they deceive themselves,
and plead not guilty; yet he who knows them better then they know themselves,
and holds that for a dishonouring of his name, whereof they make no
reckoning, will both charge them, and punish them too (unless speedily they
repent) for their grievous transgressio^.

Q. You told us in the beginning, that the fourth Commandment (if it be well
observed) is a very good mean to instruct us how we may perform these duties
unto God, and to further us in doing the same.

A. It it most true: for it commands the sanctifying of the Sabbath, that is
upon that day, the occupying of our selves about such holy exercises, as might
ravish our hearts with a consideration of Gods goodness toward us, and his
wisdom in all his works.

Q. This Commandment, as it is repeated by Moses in the fifth of Deuteronomy,
is this, Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God commanded
thee, and so forth from the beginning of the 12. verse, to the end of the 15.
wherein I observe some things that seem not to belong unto the first table of
the Commandments, whereof as yet we speak.

A. That is truly observed. And for your better understanding of this
commandment, you must remember, that first the commandment it self is given
in these words; Keep the Sabbath day. Then is the chief and principal end
why it should be kept, mentioned. Afterward the commandment it self is
explained; namely, what God requires of us, or what he means by these
words, Keep the Sabbath; In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou thy son,
etc. And by this occasion, is showed a second end of giving this Commandment,
That thy man servant and thy maid servant may rest, as well as thou. Fourthly,
diverse reasons are scattered here and there in these words, some inducing to
obedience in respect of the principal end, which is the sanctifying of the
Sabbath, others in regard of the second end of this day of rest (for the
Sabbath day in the true signification of the word, and the day of rest is al
one) namely, that servants might have a day of rest, as well as their masters.

Q. That I may particularly be instructed in this Commandment; I pray you
first to teach me the precept it self, what is thereby meant, Thou shall
keep the day of rest. Are all works forbidden in these words?

A. The Prophet Moses is informed from God himself concerning this point,
Leuit. 23 8
The seventh day is a holy convocation, in it thou shall do no servile work.

Q. But what are those servile works?

A. The works of every man's several vocation, wherein he is to bestow his
labor, either for the good of the commonwealth wherein he lives, or the
maintenance of his own estate and of his family. Which works, because they
are especially wrought in respect of this present life that here we live, in
comparison of those that aim at the everlasting life, are worthily called
seruise, because that curse of God belongs to these our bodily labors: In
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, Genesis 3.19.
until thou return to earth. And servile also they may be called, because
(for the most part) they are not wrought with such sincerity and respect to
Gods glory as they ought, but savor somewhat of our corruption, and are too
much inthralled to either our greedy desire to enrich our selves by painful
travel, or ambitiously seeking praise of men, or are otherwise sowred with some
such leaven, and so serve in some part at the least our polluted and naughty
affections.

Q. But being commanded to keep the day of rest, we are not forbidden all kind
of works.

A. No. For there are works of Religion, such as were circumcising the
children, which if the eight day, wherein by Gods Law they were to be
circumcised, fell upon the Sabbath, was to be performed without transgression
of this Law, Ioh. 7.22.
as our Savior Christ affirms. And the killing of the Sacrifices upon the
Sabbath day must be done. Mat. 12.5
So the pains or labor in coming to Church upon the Sabbath day, is a labor
not only lawful, but commanded, and necessarily required of all Christians as a
duty that they must perform. Some other are works of necessity; as if an Ox
be fallen into a pit upon the Sabbath day, it is no breach of this Commandment
to pull it forth. Luke 14.5
But here we must deal wisely, and sincerely. For, if any business may
without great danger be put off until another time, then this is not a work
needful to be done that day: so that every occasion cannot make a work of
necessity, but only danger of great hurt or loss. There are also works of
charity, whereof Christ gives this example, Luke 13.15
Does not every one of you loose an Ass or Ox from the stall, and lead him to
the water on the Sabbath day? Such works are the visiting of the sick,
comforting of them that are in heaviness, and such like works.

Q. Among the works of charity; many reckon this, that they make drinkings,
and gather great companies together upon the Sabbath day to benefit some poor
man, as their pretense is: may not this be truly accounted among the works of
charity that this day may be performed?

A. No. For when a work that seems to proceed from a charitable affection
toward man, is crossed by some commandment of the first table (all which
belong to the immediate honor of God) thou must rather show thy love to God
then to man. And indeed they who will not choose other days wherein they may
perform duties of love toward their neighbor, then that which God appoints
for to honor him in, do plainly show they love their own profit better then
either God or their neighbor, because they take such time only to do good to
their neighbor, as God challenges to be honored in, being loath to leese the
work of a day appointed for labor.

Q. Is there then great necessity in consecrating the Sabbath day to a day of
rest?

A. Very great, as may appear by the charge that is given. For the word, Keep
the Sabbath, the word, I say, used in the Hebrew, requires often a great and
diligent care in keeping that which is there commanded, as Deutero. 8.11. and
24.8. 1. Kings 2.3. 2. Kings 11.5. In all which places and many such like, the
self same word is used that here Moses has; to show the watchful care we
should have to keep this day of rest. Yea God himself in giving this
commandment, Exodus 20
gives it with a memento. Remember, that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.
Remember, not only when it comes, to keep this day of rest from bodily
labor, but think of it before hand. As a wise builder will provide his stuff
needful for his building, that when the work is in hand, nothing be wanting.
Or a discreet Captain purposing to fight with his enemy, will muster his
Soldiers, appoint his Captains and Officers, furnish them with armor,
weapons, and victual, and all things needful, that when he goes to
encounter his adversary, there be no want: even so God would have us to
consider all the week before what we have to do on the Sabbath day, that we
might so dispose of our six days of work, that the seventh might be wholly
bestowed (without any let) upon Gods service.

Q. This Commandment requires not only the rest of the masters, or chief of
families but of servants too, that they should not be appointed to any labor
that day. And therefore they who send their servants upon errands upon such
days (which is a sin wherein too many offend) transgress this Commandment.
They likewise who appoint the^ that are under them (so they work not their
wonted work) to do other business either at home or abroad, and think they
break not the Sabbath, are much deceived.

A. It is so. Yea, God has such care that servants should also rest that day,
that he would the cattle should rest, lest by any means the servants (if the
cattle rested not) should be constrained to work. And that this commandment
might more religiously be observed, eue^ the stranger (though he were not tied
to such laws as Gods people were) yet being then among Gods people, might not
work that day, lest his example might be hurtful or offensive to other.

Q. I see then, that there must be rest from our ordinary labor, upon the
Sabbath day. But is it enough that we rest from work? is that a sufficient
sanctifying that day?

A. No: for the end why we should rest from bodily work, is that we might be
wholly occupied in Sanctifying it, and apply our selves to heavenly meditations.

Q. Then to be idle, is not the rest that is here commanded, much less to
bestow that day or any part of the Sabbath in excessive drinking, feasting or
gaming.

A. You say truly: for the rest from bodily labor is to this end only, that
the mind of men being occupied in spiritual and heavenly meditations, they
might more assuredly enjoy that sweet rest and quietness of conscience, which
is, that Peace that the world cannot give, Ioh. 14.27
(as our blessed Savior tells us) in such sort as he gives it.

Q. I pray you then, teach us how we may sanctify this day of rest, in such
sort as that we may find this heavenly rest.

A. We must understand, that this Commandment, as it was given unto all that
God brought out of the house of bondage, even to Moses and Aaron, as well as to
the people, so is it general now, and belongs unto all states of life, to
all callings, to Men, and Women, and every body in his place must seek to
further this work. The Magistrate and the Minister, the Pastor and the People,
the Master and the Servant must endeavor to help forward, as the Prophet
Zephanie speaks, Chap. 3.9
with one shoulder, this sanctifying the day of rest.

Q. Has the civil Magistrate any thing required at his hands, in this
sanctifying of the Sabbath, but that for his own self and his household, he
be careful to resort to the holy exercises of that day?

A. Yes, he is also bound even by this Commandment, in respect that the talent
of government is committed to him from God, first, to have a care that good
laws be made against the profanation of the Sabbath: secondly, to take order
that such Laws be duly executed, and punishment inflicted against offenders,
as Law commands. Hereof we have in Nehemiah a godly pattern for
Magistrates, who seeing the Sabbath day (when the people of the Jews were
returned from the captivity of Babylon) wickedly profaned by treading
Wine-presses, selling Grapes and such like labors, earnestly reproved them for
it, yea, and the Magistrates too with these words, Nehe. 13.15.17.
What evil thing is this that ye do, and break the Sabbath day? And the night
before the Sabbath he caused the gates of Jerusalem to be shut, and set his
servants to watch the gates that none should open the same, but they should be
kept shut until after the Sabbath day: so that he kept the Merchants, which by
their bearing of burdens profaned the Sabbath day, without the walls all
night once or twice. But seeing them somewhat obstinate and loath to be
restrained, he also threatened them, that if they came any more in such sort to
offer such profanation on the Sabbath day, he would force them by violence to
depart. By which Story that is left unto us as a commendable fact, for all
Magistrates to imitate, we see how careful and how earnest Magistrates should
be to show themselves as the LORD has appointed them, Conseruatours of his
Sabbath.

Q. As for Ministers of the word, we know that their vocation is holy, and
should especially be directed to the true sanctifying the day of rest.

A. It is most true, that we have a holy calling, which that we also should
walk in holily, it were to be wished. But as this Commandment was given to
Aaron as well as to Moses, or the people, so no doubt, we must have great
regard to the sanctifying the Sabbath day, and go before other therein, our
selves I mean and our households, that by our example other may the rather be
moved to this holy rest. And besides those duties that God requires of us in
regard of our general calling to Christianity, we have a special calling
unto the Ministry, whereby we must strive to the uttermost of our power, to
call our people to the sanctifying the Sabbath day, to teach them how the day
is to be sanctified, to exhort such as are slack, to reprove such as
obstinately offend therein, and by all extremity that we can, to compel men to
the sanctifying thereof. And we must do this as God has enabled us,
sincerely, and seeking only the glory of GOD, not our own praise, or moved by
any other corrupt affection, if we will truly and effectually teach our people
to sanctify the Lords Sabbath. For how much the more zealously, and from a
sanctified heart the word is delivered, the more powerfully (no doubt) will it
work a godly reformation.

Q. Magistrates and Ministers (I see) must use their talents of authority, and
gifts, to sanctify the Sabbath, and themselves by their example also must move
other thereto: have not any other charge to help forward herein?

A. All Parents, and heads of households must further this duty likewise, to
have a great care that their children and servants profane not the day that
God commands to be kept holy. Yea, one neighbor ought to stir up another,
as Gods people did, Come, Esaias 2.3.
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iaacob,
and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Come, let us
go to the Church, let us reverently hear his word, let us not spend the day in
drinking, wantonness, or idleness, that God bids us bestow in holiness, yea,
and servants and children should frame themselves willingly to perform this
duty.

Q. We have heard what persons should be furtherers to this work of
sanctifying the Sabbath. Now let us hear what duties are required of us, to
the sanctifying thereof.

A. If we will holily, as we ought, apply our selves to this holy service,
we must begin with our selves, for unless we be first sanctified, Mat.
7.18.
our service cannot be holy: An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, says
He that cannot lie. The Priests in the Leuiticall Law, when they went about
that holy service that belonged to their office, must first themselves be
sanctified. Exodus 28.41.
And therefore Josiah that good King, minding to have the feast of the
Passover kept, 2. Chro. 35.6.
commanded the Priests to sanctify themselves for that service. And God
commanded the people of Israel to be sanctified, Exodus 19.10.
when he appointed to declare to them his Law. Good Ezechia therefore entreated
God to be merciful to some that came out of some Tribes of Israel, to the
feast of the Passover, that prepared their whole heart to seek the LORD, 2.
Chro. 30.19.
although they wanted the Legal sanctification. This good foundation of
sanctifying our selves, being thus laid, all that we do will be better
accepted with God. Then must we carefully follow all the holy exercises of
that day: such as are these; hearing of the Word attentively, and as men greedy
to learn, Praying to GOD fervently, for the assistance of his holy Spirit in
all our godly endeavors, yielding to him most hearty thanks for his graces
bestowed upon us, godly conference when we are out of the Church one with
another, of the lessons that we have heard by the Ministry of the Word,
company with such as can and will instruct us, either by reading to us good
Books, or by godly talk either of Gods goodness to our selves, or his mercy
showed to others, or his fearful judgments against the wicked, for contempt
of Him and his truth: or generally, of his wonderful works in creating all
things in such order as they are, and all for our use.

Q. I perceive, they that are sanctified, and with sanctified hearts do keep
the Sabbath day, may find much comfort in such holy exercises, but how may we
sanctify our selves?

A. It is a harder work then we are able to perform; yet, if we heartily
call upon God for his grace, entreating Him to work that in us, which we of
our selves are no way able to do, and then keep a careful watch at the door
of our lips, that we speak not unadvisedly, and have a watchful eye unto our
ways, that we walk warily: if (I say) in sincerity of heart, we thus seek
to prepare our selves, to sanctify our selves to this holy rest, no doubt, God
will give a blessing to these our good endeavors.

Q. Alas then, how lamentable is the case of many in our days, who spend
scarcely one hour of the day in the Church, and think that time also (how
short soever) long and tedious? But in the Ale-howses, or the ungodly feasts
and meetings, which too many resort unto, they willingly tarry very long: yea,
the whole day seems too short, when it is bestowed so rebelliously against
Gods express Commandment.

A. In truth, the carelessness and supine security of men in these our days,
is much to be pitied, wherein many, who have the name of Christians, and would
scorn to be deemed not to be so; have only heard of GOD, and are acquainted
with the name of Christ, and so by continual company among Christians, have
some general knowledge of good words; but yet are so careless to attain to
any true knowledge, by the light of Gods word, so godless and irreligious in
profanation of the Sabbath day, so wholly devoted to such unchristian meetings,
and so loose and lewd in behavior when they are there, that if any Turks or
Infidels should behold their conversation at such times, they would then detest
the very name of Christianity such stains are they to the very profession.

Q. But God forbid, all that resort to such meetings were so unruly: some are
more moderate, and come but at the entreaty of their friend, or for company of
their neighbors or fellows, not delighting much in drinking.

A. True, some are more moderate, but he that is most moderate, if he trust too
much in himself, that he can in such dangerous meetings carry himself
soberly, may soon be deceived, and therefore may seem by his overboldness
to tempt God, as presuming of his own natural disposition. And let all men
assure themselves hereof, that God in his just judgment forsakes them, and
leaves them to themselves, who contemptuously do break his Law. And therefore,
if their friend entreat them to disobey Gods Commandment, in resorting upon
the Sabbath day to such feasts, it is the part of a good Christian, rather to
move his friend to detest his wicked profanation of the Lords Sabbath, but in
any wise let not the servant of God consent to his wicked persuasion. Exodus 23.2
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, much less one seducing friend.
And since they say they go with their friend, and think that should serve to
make their fault less, I would all Christians should remember, 1. These. 5.11.
their duty is to exhort one another, (to good) and to edify one another in
the things that belong to godliness, but to suffer thy self to be drawn away
to wickedness, is a token of great weakness, and to consent to such
persuasion, procures Gods wrath: to be short, seeing the godly must abstain
from all show of evil, 1. The. 5.22.
and must in all their doings (as the third Commandment teaches) glorify
God, it is most certain, that the resort to such ungodly meetings upon the
Sabbath day, how moderately soever they carry themselves, is a breach of Gods
Commandment, and therefore God in his justice may, and will in his good time
punish such offenders, unless they repent, and take a new course.

Q. What are the reasons, whereby the Israelites are moved to obey this
Commandment?

A. The first reason is, the Commandment of God, which Moses here in
repeating the Law, sets forth and strengthens, partly, in respect of the
authority of the Commander, in calling him Lord, partly, he allureth them to
perform unto this Commandment willing obedience, because he has many ways
declared himself to be their good and gracious God, whom they cannot disobey,
without great note of unthankfulness. Secondly, in giving them 6. days, to
supply all wants of their body; and for dispatch of their worldly affairs, he
reserueth only one, to be wholly employed in his honor and service, the
bestowing of which day in such sort as we ought to do, is also most to our
own good, because it is the gaining our souls to God. I say, by this his
large allowance of so many days for bodily labors, they justly are to be
charged with a stain of ingratitude, if they willingly give not this one day
to holy and spiritual exercises.

Q. Are we so tied in the six days to labor in our calling, that we may not
in them resort to places where Gods word is preached and taught?

A. No: For the knowledge and service of God must chiefly be sought for of us:
Mar. 6.33.
First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, says our Savior
Christ. We see, GOD himself, who gave this charge to the Israelites,
commanded also his holy service to be performed of them, sometime on the six
days, as namely, it may appear Leuit. 23. and Numb. 2. but most plainly in
the story of Ester, the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the Month Adar, with
feasting and joy were kept by Mordecai his commandment, and no doubt, Ester
9.22
their joy and reioicing was seasoned with thanksgiving to God, for their
deliverance from so imminent danger, and is left unto us as a pattern to
follow in like case, and is also observed of us, on the 5. of November, in
giving thanks to our most gracious God, who saved us from ye most unnatural
Gunpowder-Treason. And they who in sincerity of heart, seek after the
knowledge and service of God at such times, will also, the more diligently
early or late, follow the works of their calling to supply their wants, and
such faithful care of serving GOD, shall not want a blessing from God.

Q. But may a pretense of following such holy exercises, be any excuse to such
as will perchance bestow a little time that way, and then the rest of the day
they employ in idleness?

A. It seems there were some such, whereof the Apostle admonishes Timothy,
1. Tim. 5.13.
and they were young widows: but Saint Paul liked not of their doings, and
would not in any wise that such should be tolerated among Christians.

Q. But what think you of these words, Six days shall thou labor? They
seem to be a Commandment, and to require the labor of six days, every man
in his calling.

A. They are unto the godly a toleration or permission to follow their
vocation, and to work for the maintenance of themselves and their families.
But they have also the force of a commandment, to the condemnation of the
ungodly, that spend their life in loitering and idleness, and may work in
them a sting of conscience, when they shall remember that God says, Six days
shall thou labor, and their own heart tells them, they have not wrought, but
loitered. For seeing God has after man's fall, set this down as a Decree, that
may not be altered (unless we spend our time in some religious exercise, as
before I said) In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread: Genesis 3.19.
good and godly is the exhortation that the Apostle makes to the
Thessalonians, to work with their hands; as he also before had commanded
them, 1. These. 4.11.
that nothing be lacking to them, Verse 12. And just cause he has to give
that heavy charge which he afterward gives unto them: 2. The. 3.10.
If there were any that would not work, that he should not eat. So hateful is
the idle life to God and good men, and so unseemly for any Christian.

Q The Commandment of God, if there were no other thing to move GODS people to
obedience in this thing, ought to be sufficient, but much the rather, seeing
God has dealt with them so favorably, as to have consideration of their
wants, that they might have time to supply them.

A. There is yet a third reason to move them then, and us also now to sanctify
the Sabbath, in these words; But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. For God challenges this day as his due, and not to be spent, but as he
appoints; that is, in holiness and sanctification.

Q. But the seventh day which is here commanded, is not that which now we call
the Sabbath day; so that it seems we transgress this Commandment,
howsoever we keep our Sabbath.

A. Indeed the day here commanded, as that also wherein God rested, was the
seventh day of the week, and the day that we keep and endeavor to sanctify,
is the first day of the week. For that seventh day being ceremonial, and so by
the coming of Christ abolished (for he was the end and fulfilling of all the
ceremonial Law) needful it was that the chief and most substanciall end of
that ceremony should be still retained, that is, that one day should be
wholly consecrated to Gods service. And this day which we now solemnize, being
the first day of the week, was upon good ground thought to be fittest;
because, as God rested the seventh day from his work of creation: and
therefore that day was then thought most convenient, to be unto his people a
day of rest: So Christ rising again from his work of redemption, upon the
first day of the week, the Apostles being directed by the Spirit of God, upon
this first day of the week had their holy assemblies, as is most plain, Ioh.
20.19.26. Acts 23.7. and in other places, and of the work that Christ wrought
in rising again, it is called, The Lords day. Reu. 1.10
And by this is there (as it was fit) a difference put between the Sabbath of
the Jews, and that which we keep.

Q. Almost in the very beginning of handling this fourth Commandment, you said
that there was a principal end why we should keep this day of rest, which I
think is this, that you have spoken of already, the sanctifying it. Declare
then, if there be any other end of keeping the Sabbath, though not of such
importance as this is.

A. Moses, a true expositor of Gods meaning, expresses it in these words That
thy man-seruant and thy maid may rest as thou do. Deu. 5.14
Not giving therein liberty to any servants to rest from bodily labor, and
spend their time in idleness, but their rest must be such as their masters
rest ought to be, a rest from servile work, that they may the more carefully
and seriously bend themselves wholly to the sanctifying of that day. I am not
therefore of that mind, that this part of this commandment belongs to the
second table (as some think) but rather that Moses expounding those former
words, Thou shall do no work therein, etc. gives them to understand, that the
rest which in these words God commands them to give their servants, must be
to that very end, that themselves also must rest, that is, to sanctify that
day. And to the end they might more willingly give this time of holy rest unto
their servants, he puts them in mind of their servitude in Egypt, Deuteronomy.
5.15
wherein they lived in such thraldom, that they could not have liberty to
serve the Lord; from which, if they acknowledged truly, and as they ought,
confessed Gods great goodness, in that he delivered them: then must they also
think that their servants must not always be tied to their work, but that
they (as well as their masters) must be freed from all bodily labor, that upon
the Lords day they may serve the Lord.

Q. You have now spoken of the first table of the Commandments: I desire also
to hear somewhat of the second table, that as in the first, God has taught us
how to serve him, so we may likewise learn how to perform our duties to our
neighbors.

A. You say well. And you must understand, that we are first taught such
duties, as inferiors owe to superiors; and how superiors must care for such
as are under them, and then other duties more common one toward another are
set down.

Q. And why is this Commandment, Honor thy Father and Mother, set in the
first place of the second table?

A. As in obeying the fourth commandment, we have very good means and great
helps, to the performance of the three former, even of whatsoever pertains
to the service of God; so in keeping well this first commandment, we shall
much more readily be framed to the keeping of all that follow.

Q. What is then meant by Father and Mother in that Commandment? For it is not
to be thought, that God, who gives a perfect Law unto his people; Psalm. 19.7
Romans 7.12
the which, whosoever does, shall live thereby: Gal. 3.12
would leave unspoken of any duties that we owe to any.

A. You say right: and therefore under the names of Father and Mothers, he
commands all superiors to be obeyed of their inferiors: And that is done
upon good ground. For, the superiors in this their superiority, have a great
representation of the power and care that good Parents have over their
children. As to begin with Kings and Magistrates: Xenophon says, that a good
King differs not from a good Father. Romulus called his Senators Fathers: and
Augustus (who refused the title of Lord, willingly yielded to be called, The
Father of his Country. As for Pastors or Ministers, not only the Prophets in
times past were styled Fathers, 2. King. 2.12. and chap. 13.14. but the Apostle
St. Paul calls himself father of Timothy, Titus, Onesimus. And St. Peter
calls Mark, his son. 1. Pet. 5.13.
And St. Paul yields a reason to the Corinthians, why Teachers are Fathers to
them whom they teach; 2. Cor. 4.15.
For in Christ Jesus I have begotten you, through the Gospel. Therefore also
the name of spiritual or ghostly Father is given unto Pastors. And masters
toward their servants, supply the room of Fathers, in bringing them up in the
fear of God, or at the least so they ought to do; therefore are called, Patres
familias, Fathers of households. Naamans servant therefore aduising his master
to follow the Prophets commandment, in washing in Jorden 7. times, said thus,
Father, if the Prophet: 2. King. 5.13.
had commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? So we see,
that by this word Father, may well be understood, Kings and Magistrates,
Pastors and Masters, and that to all these honor is due, and here commanded.

Q. What is meant by this word honor?

A. First it teaches us, that such duty as we owe to superiors must
willingly be performed. For honor is a reverent affection imprinted in our
hearts toward others, without forcing or constraint; without which affection of
the mind, the outward show is scarce a shadow of honor, and is many times
done by cap and courtesy, or such outward reverence, to them who are contemned
and scorned of them that do it. So did the Gouerners soldiers to Christ,
putting upon him a skarlet robe, and upon his head a crown of thorns, and in
his right hand a Reed (for a Scepter.) Then they bowed their knees before him
and mocked him, saying: Mat. 27.29
God save thee, King of the Jews. Then also, that which here is called honor,
is elsewhere expressed by the name of fear. Ye shall fear, Leuit. 19.3
every man his mother and his father.

Q. Why is the mother named in these words before the father?

A. Because, through the greater familiarity that the mother has commonly with
the children, they become less awful to their children (for such is our
natural corruption, that where we have any hope of liberty, we will too
readily seek for more then we should have, or can well use.) Therefore, lest
this our badde inclination should too much abuse the mothers facility; it is in
this commandment especially provided, that the mother be feared; and that we
should have a special regard thereof, the Mother is first named as the Parent
that is in greatest danger to be wronged, and to have her due honor taken
from her.

Q. This honor then that inferiors owe to their superiors, because it is also
called fear, as you have taught, seems to be nothing else but a reverent
respect unto our betters, and that child-like fear which the Scriptures teach,
Psalm. 111.10.
to be the beginning of wisdom; if it be the fear of the Lord. And likewise,
no doubt this fear or reverent respect of our betters, frames us also more
sincerely to perform all duties unto them. But as you have taught what persons
are to be honored, as Parents, Kings and his inferior Magistrates, Ministers
and Masters of families; and likewise, what is meant by this term of honor,
so for my better instruction, vouchsafe to handle more particularly the
particular duties are due to every of these.

A. You must understand, that this honor or reverent fear here commanded, is
as it were a root, out of which the several duties to every of our superiors
do grow. So that where that is truly planted, there will be no want of
honor to them, to whom honor belongs. And first to begin with Parents who
are here expressly named, because they were first that among men were honored,
and children (if they be not too graceless) have even naturally an inclination
to reverence them, so that they seem to be set as a true pattern of such
subjection as becomes all inferiors: to begin, I say, with Parents, and to
show how they of their children must be honored, the wiseman teaches thus,
Pro. 23.22
Obey thy Father that has begotten thee, and despise not thy mother when she
is old. The Apostle also, Ephesians. 6.1
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord; for that is right.

Q. Obedience then, I see, is one of the fruits that spring from honor which is
commanded. But is it sufficient that children be obedient when they are
commanded?

A. Nay, the very advice and counsel of Parents should be reverenced also, and
is wheresoever the true honor toward Parents is seated. And so Solomon
teaches, My son, hear thy fathers instruction, Pro. 1.8
and forsake not thy mothers teaching. Bind them always upon thine heart, Pro.
6.21.
and tie them about thy neck.

Q. But alas in our wicked days wherein we live there are too many who little
regard either the counsel or commandment of their Parents, but the more
fatherly and kindly they are dealt withal, the more stubbornly they disobey.

A. The cause thereof is much in the folly of the Parents, who are so tender
over their children, that when they offend, they cannot find in their heart,
they should be corrected. Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a child, Pro.
22.15
but the rod of correction shall drive it away from him. Pro. 23.14
Thou shall smite the child with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from
hell. But if in their youth they be not corrected for their disobedience, the
father and mother shall find them like to trees, which being but young might
be bowed any way, but being come to some growth, will by no means be bended,
and so shall know by experience, that a dissolute or foolish child is the
calamity of his father. Pro. 19.13


Q. If we obey and harken to the Commandments, and follow the advice of our
Parents, have we then discharged all the duty that this Commandment
requires?

A. No: For children must further have a continual care every way to be a stay
and comfort to their Parents, if by their strength they may help their
weakness; if by their sight they may guide their blindness; if by their
wealth they may supply their want; if by their knowledge they may reform their
ignorance; if by their pains they may ease them of travel: to be short, if
their place, their credit or reputation, their acquaintance or any other mean
that they have may do them good, they must by all such means which they have,
testify their honor to their Parents. A notable example we have in Joseph,
who did every way honor his father Iaacob, Acts 7.14
and relieved him and his family in number 75. when there was a great dearth in
the land. Therefore the son of Sirach thus exhorts: My son, help thy father
in his age, Eccles. 3.13, 14.
and grieve him not so long as he lives; if his understanding fail, have
patience with him, and despise him not when thou art in thy full strength. And
Christ reprooueth the Scribes and Pharisees, because that under color of their
blind devotion they hindered children from performing this honor. Mat. 15.4,
5, 6.


Q. But Christ has commanded, Call no man father upon the earth, for there is
but one, Mat. 15.9
your Father which is in heaven. How can we keep this precept of our Savior
Christ, and not break this Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother?

A. The words of our Savior Christ are not simply to be understood but
comparatively, as if he had said: If the question be, Mat. 10.37
whether thy heart shall be more tied to God, or to thy earthly father, thou
must without all doubting or co^sultation, wholly addict thy self to thy
heavenly Father. For He that loves father or mother more then me (says
Christ) is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or daughter more then me,
is not worthy of me. Yea, in another place, he wills that we hate all these
things, yea, and our life also, or else we cannot be his disciples. In all
which, Luke 14.26.
Christ teaches us to honor our father, but so, as we obey God, to love him
that begat us, but yet more to love him that made us. He would have us to
distinguish aright between the love that we owe to God, which must be, with
all our heart, and soul, and mind, and with whatsoever we have, and the love
to Parents, which is thus limited, that it must be in the Lord, that our
obedience also may be framed accordingly.

Q. How children should honor their Parents, we have now heard. But what
honor is due to Princes and Magistrates?

A. Such like as to Parents. For as Parents are over their children, so are
Kings and Magistrates over their subjects, and such as are under their charge.
St. Paul gives therefore charge unto Titus thus: Put them in remembrance (with
who^ thou art, and whom thou have a charge of) that they be subject to
principalities and powers, Tit. 3.1
and that they be obedient. Be ye subject to every ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior: or unto
governors, as unto them that are sent of him, 1. Pet. 2.13 14.
says S. Peter. And S. Paul writing to the Romans, wills, Romans 13.1
that Every soul be subject to the higher powers: Not only for fear of wrath,
but for conscience sake, Ver. 5. So that this obedience must be hearty, and
not in show only, but from the very soul and inward man, and that not for
fear, but for conscience sake, because God has appointed us under them, and
them over us.

Q. To perform the honor commanded; what other thing besides obedience is
required of us to do to Princes and Magistrates?

A. We must afford them maintenance fit both for their estate and for the
defense of the Commonwealth, when need shall be. The Apostle yields this
reason, to make them of his time more willingly to give such aid, For they are
Gods Ministers, Romans 31.6.
applying themselves for the same thing; that is, for encouragement of the
godly, and the repressing of evil whereof he wrote, Ver. 4. And thereupon he
groundeth this exhortation, Give to all men their duty, tribute to whom
tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor is
due, Verse 7. If Paul would have Princes and Magistrates in those days obeyed,
honored and maintained, when they were enemies to the Gospel, how much more
now when they maintain the Gospel, should al such dues be performed to them?

Q. Does this Commandment require yet any further duty to be performed to
them that are our governors?

A. Yes, we are willed also to pray for them: 1. Tim. 2.1 2.
I exhort (says Saint Paul) first of all that prayers, supplications,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: For kings, and for
all that are in authority, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all
godliness and honesty. Jeremy also exhorted the Jews, who had very
stubbornely opposed themselves against the correcting hand of God, and sought
al ways that they could devise, not to serve the Babylonians, whom God for
their sins appointed them to serve, he (I say) exhorts them, that they
should pray for the peace of Babylon, (no doubt also for the peace of the king
thereof Nebuchadnezar) for in the peace thereof (says he) shall you have peace.
Ier. 29.7.
In the twentieth Psalm, the people of Israel pray for David their King. And
in the 72. Psalm, David now at the point of death, having made Solomon King,
prays to GOD for him. And this prayer for our governors, is not the least
testimony of a true affection that we have to honor them, if our prayer for
them be fervent: neither is this duty to be performed only for Princes and
governors, but for Parents also, although I thought good especially in this
place to speak thereof, because the words of the Apostle are herein so plain
and pregnant, yea, it is a duty generally to be performed for all, not only
our superiors, but also for inferiors.

Q. Samuel told the people when they would needs have a king, 1. Sam. 8.11.22.
in a manner whether God would or not, that their king would take their sons,
and appoint them to his Chariots, and to be his horsemen, and some to run
before his Chariots, and to be Captains, meaning, that they would make them to
venture their lives in the wars, as also many examples in the Scriptures do
teach. For David, Asa, Iehosaphat, and other good Kings, when they needed,
chose Soldiers from among the people, for the defense of them and their
Realm. This, I take, is one point of obedience, that we must perform to
kings.

A. It is so: and was very willingly yielded unto by the people of God. Josh.
1.11.
And Captain Joshua commanded the people to prepare victuals: for after three
days they should go and take possession of the Land of Canaan, which they
could not get but by battle. Also, he put the Rubenites, Gadites, and the
half Tribe of Manasseh, of the charge that Moses gave them, not to rest when
they came to their possession, but to help their brethren to conquer the Land,
and they willingly obeyed, verse 13.16. because they knew it was a duty which
they ought to Joshua, (who was then in stead of their king to them) and so they
went, and came not to their own possessions, until Joshua sent them away, chap.
22.

Q. Is there an honor also due to the Ministers of Gods word?

A. Yes, unto them, as to Parents and governors, obedience must be given.
Heb. 13.17
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves. For they
watch for your souls as they that must give accounts, that they may do it with
joy.

Q. Wherein consists this obedience to the Ministers of the word? Parents
command or advise their children, and as has been said, they must therein be
obeyed. Governors likewise have their commandments, and their laws, which we
may not transgress. But what commandments has the Minister of the Word to
charge us with?

A. Such as are, I will not say as needful, but indeed more necessary then
any other. For, if that which he commands be obeyed, neither Parents nor
Governors shall want their due, but shall most reverently be honored. He is
a messenger from GOD, the Commandments which he brings (if he be faithful
in his Ministry) are from that great Commander, whose Laws are directions to
Parents and Children, Kings and Subjects, Masters and Servants, yea, to all
sorts, sexes and states that are, they belong not only to this present life,
but teach us how to attain to the life that lasts always. To be short, this
office is to beat down by threatenings out of Gods Law, the proud and haughty
hearts, to comfort with the sweet promises of the Gospel, the consciences
burdened with sin, to break the Bread of Life to the hungry, and as
faithful stewards, to give to every one their portion in due season: the
Apostle therefore, not without great cause, admonishes that we have them in
singular love, 1. These. 5.13.
for their works sake.

Q. I see then, governors and Parents, and all superiors, are in regard of
their superiority Gods Images, and therefore as his deputies must be honored,
and those sparks of Gods Majesty that shine in them as Governors, must be
reverenced: but the chief honor that can be done to the Minister, is the
obedience to his Word, and he is to be accounted of as Gods messenger, who is
sent to teach Gods will, therefore his office is highly to be esteemed of, and
he in doing his office is to be heard, his words to be received with
reverence, that they being printed in our heart, may also by Gods good grace
work in us newness of life, and a godly reformation. But is there no other
duty to be performed to our Ministers? 1. Tim. 5.18


A. Yes, as in other callings, so in this too: The workman is worthy of his
wages, as the Apostle Saint Paul taught us, who also learned that lesson of our
Savior Christ: Mat. 10.10 Gal. 6.6.
therefore the same Apostle thus exhorts, Let him who is taught in the word,
make him who has taught him, partaker of all his goods, 1. Cor. 9.11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
your carnal things? Nay, he plainly affirms, that if the Gentiles be made
partakers of the spiritual things of Gods people, their duty is to minister to
them in carnal things.

Q. This is a lesson very needful to be taught in many places of this Realm,
where very small pensions are appointed to the Minister of the Word, and that
causes small teaching of the people in such places, though (for the most part)
the number of the people where is least maintenance, is very great. Yea, and
where there is by law reasonable maintenance established for the Minister of
the Word, yet the hearts of many of the people are not open enough to part from
that which they ought to give both by Gods Law and man's. For howsoever tithes
are due (whether by Gods Law or not) to the Minister: yet, that being
appointed for his maintenance, then Gods Law commands that every man should
have his due. But many of us may justly take up the complaint of the Prophet,
or rather accuse the wrongful dealing of the people, as he did in his days,
when he charged the^ to say (for their deeds proclaimed it) The Table of the
Lord is not to be regarded. Mal. 1.7.
And then shows that they offered the lame, the blind, the sick in sacrifice.
So there are too many that think, this is to much or too good for the Parson,
and therefore they lesson, or change to worse, their tithes, according to their
greedy humor, not caring in the mean time, how much they diminish their
pastors maintenance, nor how like thieves as they are, they rob him of his
due. Well, honor, obedience, and maintenance, are the ministers due. But what
if the people be not obedient to his doctrine, what danger may follow
thereupon?

A. Very great, Luke 10.16
for he that hears you (says Christ) hears me, and he that despises
you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Is
it not a dangerous thing to despise God, as the despisers of the preaching of
the Word are here said to do? Yea, the very dust of the Apostles feet which
they shake off when their word is not received, Mat. 10.14.
shall be a witness against the contemners, and the wrath of God is so heavy
against despisers of the Word, that it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah
at the day of Judgment, then for them, verse, 15; most miserable therefore is
the estate of all such, how great soever they be, who in these our days so
little regard the Ministry of the Word, as themselves might see, if they had
grace to mark how often, and how fearfully Gods Judgments are threatened
against them that will not hears, throughout the Scriptures.

Q. Let us now hear what honor servants owe their masters.

A. Saint Paul teaches it plainly: Ephesians. 6.5.6.7.
Servants, be obedient unto your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto Christ, not with service to
the eye, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God
from the heart: with good will serving the Lord, and not men. Which
commandment of the Apostle requires such service, as is not now commonly done
to Masters; for it must be hearty and sincere, being more careful to do the
duty of a servant, then to require reward, yea, striving rather to deserve
well, then to ask recompense. The Apostle says it must be with fear and
trembling: Saint Peter likewise, Servants, 1. Pet. 2.18
be subject to your Masters with all fear: not that their meaning is, that
servants should always be afraid of anger or punishment, but their fear
should be such as the Wife-man speaks of, Pro. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always, that is, that always mistrusteth his
own doings, that never thinks that he has served God sincerely enough, but
suspecteth his own ways, not wholly to be guyded by Gods Spirit: even so,
servants should fear lest they be short in performance of their duty, or doing
their service: to be short, they should rather fear ye Lords Eye, then their
masters wrath. And where this hearty service is, and so seasoned with fear of
Gods All-seeing-Eyes, and a true view of our own inability to serve so
perfectly as we should, there doubtless will be a faithful endeavor to serve
truly. And such servants, for a good supply of their own wants, will carefully
entreat the Lord, both better to enable them to do their duty, and to give
such blessing to their desire to serve truly, as may be to their Masters good.

Q. But, many times Masters are froward, and too too rigorous, insomuch as such
service may seem a very grievous bondage: are such masters to be honored
also?

A. Saint Peter answers this question, commanding servants to be subject to
their Masters, not only to the good and courteous, but to the froward also.
For this is thank-worthy, 1. Pet. 2.18
if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. So
that, a true Christian servant must do his duty toward his Master, remembering
that so doing, he serves the Lord, as Saint Paul in the place alleged,
teaches, (who) howsoever their master cannot be pleased, yet will take in good
part, and plentifully reward their faithful service. Therefore must servants
strive to bridle herein the corruption of their nature, and to serve, as S.
Paul would have us to do al things, Phil. 2.14.
without murmurings and reasonings: for as before I said concerning honoring
of Parents, so here also, and in all duties that we owe to our superiors, an
honorable and reverent affection printed in our hearts toward them, must be
the root from whence true service must grow, that it may be willing.

Q. Besides these superiors, that now you have spoken of, there are others
also, as old folk, husbands, Schoolemasters, which are accounted superiors,
to whom also honor belongs.

A. Most true, concerning aged folk, God has given this Commandment, Leuit.
19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoare head, and honor the person of the old
man, especially if godliness be joined with many years, then age is a Crown
of glory, Pro. 16, 3.
when it is found in the way of righteousness. As for Wives, Saint Paul
teaches them obedience, Ephe. 5.22
Wives, sub your selves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord. And that more
willingly they might perform this duty, he yields this reason: for the
Husband is the Wives head, verse 23. Now, it were a monstrous thing for the
body not to be under the head. Again, Wives, submit your selves to your
Husbands, as it is comely in the Lord: teaching that it is a foul and uncomely
thing, if the wife be not in subjection to the husband. And for the comfort of
all inferiors we must note, that they must be subject unto the Lord, and for
the Lords sake, as is to be seen in the subjection of children, subjects, and
servants, that their mind being still fastened upon their heavenly (rather
then upon their earthly) Master, or Husband, they may with less grief bear
the yoke of obedience. Yea, Scholars, if they knew what good they get by their
Schoolemasters who train them up in knowledge, and lay in them the very
groundwork of Learning, whereby they are made fit to serve most profitably in
the Church or Commonwealth, willingly also would confess, that they should
defraud them of their due, if they do not honor and reverence them.

Q. We have now heard of the honor that inferiors owe to their superiors,
whether by nature as Parents, or by public place in the Commonwealth as
governors, or in the Church as Pastors and Ministers, or by age, as Elders, or
by voluntary subjection, and that either in private households, as to Husbands
or masters of families, or to Schoolemasters, as profitable to the youths of
many places: but do not these superiors also owe to their inferiors some
duties?

A. Yes: and first to begin with Parents, as they of their children must be
honored, so must they also give cause of honor. Parents owe to their children
diverse duties, whereof some are to be done in the childhood of their children,
some when they are come to riper age, and some at all times must be performed.

Q. What are Parents bound to do to children in their childhood?

A. First, in their infancy they must have care that they may have things
necessary for the sustenance of their life, when they are not able to help
themselves; and this the fathers and mothers may learn of the beasts of the
field, and birds of the air, who leave not their young ones, until they be fit
to shift for themselves; 1. Sam. 1.23.
as Anna gave her child suck until she would weine him. Secondly, when they
are come to any understanding, they must not prolong the time to instruct them,
first in the very principles and grounds of Religion. For, if Thou teach thy
child in the trade of his life, Pro. 22.6.
when he is old he will not depart from it. And therefore the Apostle
admonishes thus: Fathers, Ephesians. 6.4
bring up your children in instruction and information of the Lord. In the
book of Deuteronomy, it is a charge very often given unto Parents to teach
their children Gods Law. Yea, it is worth marking, how in all their
extraordinary ceremonies or actions the children were instructed what was meant
thereby. As if the children should inquire when they saw their fathers to eat
in such sort as they did the Paschall Lamb; they must teach them that it was
to put them in mind how the Lord spared the houses of the Israelites (wherein
the Passover was eaten, as God commanded) when he smote the Egyptians. Again,
Exo. 12.27
when the children should demand, what was meant by the putting apart the
first borne, they must say, that thereby they should call to remembrance how
Pharao when obstinately refused to let the Israelites go to serve God, Exo.
13.15
the Lord destroyed all the firstborn of man and beast of the Egyptians, but
spared all the first borne among the Israelites. Yea, and that with more
reverence their children might hear the Law, and more readily and willingly
obey the same; they must teach them how terribly the Law was given in the
mount Horeb. Deu. 4.9, 10.
To be short, they must be made to understand what was meant by a heap of
stones that was in Gilgal near Jordan; Josh. 4.22.23.
namely, that it was a testimony that Jordan was then dried up, so that the
Israelites passed over it on dry land, when they went to take possession of the
land of Canaan. An example of this duty we may see in the Parents of Timothy,
2. Tim. 3 15.
who knew the holy scriptures of a child: and therefore Paul puts him in
mind to continue in the things which he had learned, and was persuaded of,
Ver. 14. If Parents were herein more careful, they should have more dutiful
children.

Q. But how can Parents teach their children that which themselves know not?

A. It is the more pity that men and women professing the name of
Christianity, should content themselves to live in such brutish ignorance of
their duty toward God and man, as do very many: or that they are not ashamed
of the name of fathers, who cannot perform any duty that they owe to their
children. Nay, it is great marvel that they are no more diligent to learn
herein their duty, that in some good measure they may perform it, since God
was so offended with Eli the Priest and Judge of Israel, for that sin, as
that he swore, that the wickedness of the house of Eli should not be purged with
sacrifice or offering for ever. 1. Sam. 3.14.
And he was as good as his word: for Hophni and Phinehas were both slain in
one day in the battle (a just judgment against those wicked sons of Eli:)
and Eli himself hearing of this news, and that the Arc was taken, fell
backward in his chair and broke his neck. 1. Sam. 3, 4.18.
A fearful example for careless Parents to think upon. Neither can Parents
that neglect this duty, hope for any blessing from God upon their children.

Q. But children are many times loath to learn any good, and will spend their
time in loitering and idleness, rather then in any good imploiment: what can
Parents then do?

A. In that case, hear what Solomon (renowned for wisdom) advises, Pro.
13.24
He that spares his rod, hates his child: but he that loves him,
chasteneth him betime. Pro. 29.15
For, the rod and correction give wisdom, but a child set at liberty, makes
his mother ashamed. 2. Kings 2.24.
If those Idolatrous children of Bethel, had been by correction taught to know
God, they had not mocked the Prophet Elisaeus, the man of God, calling him bald
pate, and so might have escaped that fearful death: for they were destroyed by
2. Bears, even 42. of them.

Q. Great then is the sin of Parents in these days, who suffer children that
might be well occupied in learning some thing or other, that might after do
them good, to play all the day long before their eyes, and never think they do
amiss. Surely, the gamesome life that in their childhood they are inured with
will never suffer the^ to take in hand any painful occupation whereat they must
continue. Neither can this be amended, unless fathers and mothers would fully
determine and resolve with themselves, to follow this counsel of Solomon:
Chasten thy son while there is hope, Pro. 19.18
and let not thy soul spare for his murmuring. But, as not to chastise or
correct breeds in children contempt of Parents, and a carelessness what they
do: so too much severity would not be used against them.

A. S. Paul is of that mind; Ephesians. 6.4
Fathers (says he) provoke not your children to anger. And the very selfsame
exhortation he uses to the Colossians, showing his reason, Col. 3.21
Lest they should be discouraged. For as moderate correction is fatherly, and
a token of love: so rigorous punishment proceeds rather of fury.

Q. These are the duties that fathers owe to their children being yet but
young: Education, Instruction, both in the knowledge and fear of God, and also
in some honest trade of life, and reasonable correction. But what must Parents
do for their children being come to ripeness of years?

A. They must allow them reasonable maintenance, reasonable, I say: for too
much may make them unthrifty, and to mis-spend their time and their goods; and
too little may drive them to badde shifts for their maintenance. Genesis 25.5, 6.
Abraham, though he gave his goods to Isaac his eldest son: yet to other
children he gave gifts also. Iehosaphat had diverse sons (besides Iehoram his
eldest to whom he gave the kingdom) to whom he gave great gifts of silver and
gold, 2. Chron. 21.3.
and of precious things, with strong Cities in Judah. 2. Cor. 12.14.
And S. Paul teaches us, that children ought not to lay up for the fathers,
but fathers for their children: whereby it does appear, that fathers should
not suffer their children to want necessary maintenance, but should relieve
them if they can. Yea and that they may as the Apostle speaks, 1. These. 4, 4
Keep their vessel in holiness and honor: Parents must be careful to
provide marriages for their children; Genesis 24
as Abraham was to provide a wife for Isaac, Genesis 28
and as Isaac advised Iaacob to go to the house of Bethuel, and so he did.
Genesis 3.4
And Hamar herein was careful to provide for his son Sechem, and solicited
for him. And it were much to be wished, that children would give this honor
unto Parents concerning their marriages, that without their parents counsel and
good liking they would never attempt so weighty matters: And also that Parents
would be more careful to provide in time fit matches for their children, so
that by consent of such friends marriages might be made; no doubt God would give
greater blessing to this his holy institution, then many times he does.

Q. What are the duties that Parents ought at all times to be careful to
perform to them or for them?

A. The first is love. For as Parents must love their new borne babes, so must
they still continue their loving affection. It is a debt always to be in
paying, yet never fully paid, so long as he lives to whom it is due. And this
love is a true and sincere affection, truly settled in the heart of the Parent,
without any outward respects: and therefore when God will express his love
toward any, he says, he will be his Father. As he spoke to David concerning
Solomon; 2. Sam. 7.14.
I will be his Father, and he shall be my son. The Apostle, to testify his
kind affection, and great care he had over the Thessalonians, 1. These. 2.11.
Psalm. 103.13.
says, He exhorts them as a Father his children: the Prophet David says,
As a Father has compassion of his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him. And God himself, assuring his people of his Fatherly love
tells them that his kindness to them shall be more certain, Es. 49.15
then the mothers to the son of her womb.

Q. This duty is of all men (even of such as know not God) so performed to
children, that they who are wanting therein, are condemned as most unnatural.

A. It is true: yet would it be more sincerely performed, if men would from
the heart acknowledge, that their children are a gift of God, as Jacob said to
Esau, Genesis 33.5
They are the children whom God of his grace has given thy servant. And Joseph
to his father, Genesis 48.9
They are the children that God has given me. Psalm. 127.3
Behold (says David) Children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit
of the womb his reward. If this were considered as it ought, fathers would not
set so little by so precious a gift from the Lord as children are, suffering
them to run on in all lewdness, but would in a Christian and true fatherly
care, seek to prepare their children to the Lords service in some holy
calling, and not to live in idleness.

Q. What other duty owe Parents to their children all their life long?

A. To offer up to God the sacrifice of prayer for them. This office they must
perform always in their childhood, in their riper age, yea, so long as they
live. They must be of that mind concerning their children, that Samuel was of
concerning the Israelites: God forbid (says he) that I should sin against the
Lord, 1. Sam. 12 23.
and cease praying for you. When Iaacob was to part from his father, and to go
to his Uncle Bethuel, Genesis 28.3
his father Isaac dismissed him with prayer. David made earnest prayer for his
son Solomon. 1. Chron. 29.19.
But how great was Jobs care for his children! they went banqueting from house
to house one with another. Job 1.5
Job fearing, that in their feasting they might offend God, soght daily to
pacify God, and to entreat him for them.

Q. I see Parents, as they are of their children to be honored, so must they
have a continual care of their children, even from their childhood, for their
maintenance, for their instruction, and for their Christian conversation:
wherein, I fear, Parents are as much to be blamed for neglect of their duty,
as children for not giving the^ their due honor. But let us now hear somewhat
of the duties of Governors.

A. Governors and all superiors, if they know how to behave themselves as
Parents over their children, will soon learn what duties they must perform
as superiors, to their inferiors. For the very title of fathers and mothers
whereby here they are noted, teaches them that they must use the talent of
authority which God has given them, with a tender affection to the good of
them who are placed under them. And love, if it be such as the Apostle
teaches it should be, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1.5
will make men to study and labor by all means they can, to be profitable in
their place and calling to others, especially to such as their duty binds
them to respect and care for.

Q. I see then, that fatherly love must be in the hearts of Magistrates, or else
how great so ever their authority is, such as are under them, shall not feel
any good or comfort by their government. But what duties does God who has set
them over other, require of them toward such as are committed to their charge?

A. Their first and chief care must be to maintain the truth of the Gospel
by all means they can, and to take diligent heed, that laws made to that end
may duly be executed. O how careful was good King David for the building of
Gods house? And when it was told him, that not he, but his son Solomon should
build it, he made yet great preparation for that work, and earnestly
encouraged he his son to build Gods house, and the Princes to further that
building. When David was dead, and Solomon established in the kingdom, one of
the first works that he did, was the building of Gods house. 2. Chron. 29.3. 2.
Chr. 29.5.2. 2. King. 18.4.
Yea Hezechiah in the first month of his reign, began with reformation of
things amiss about Gods house, and most zealously abolished Idolatry. To this
end also is the zeal of Josiah much commended in scriptures. By all which we
learn, that Princes not only may, but must have a great care to set forth true
Religion, and God requires this duty of them, that their subjects by them
should be brought to the love of the truth, and detestation of sin and all
Idolatry. Great was the forwardness of Asa herein and of his people, who made
a covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, 2. Chr. 15.12, 13.
with all their heart, and with all their soul: And whosoever would not seek
the Lord God of Israel, should be slain, whether he were small or great, man
or woman. And for the binding themselves the more straightly to keep this
statute Law, They swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting,
and with Trumpets, and with Cornets, Verse 14. This care also of Nehemiah and
other Governors among the people, Neh. 10.29.
after they were freeed from their captivity in Babylon, does notably appear,
how they bound themselves by Oath, and cursing themselves (if they did
transgress) to reform disorders among them, and to be obedient to Gods Law.

A second care must Magistrates have for the good and quiet government of the
people, which, that they may perform, they must always follow those rules,
which Moses from God gives to the people of Israel: Pervert not judgment,
Deu. 16.19
accept no persons, take no bribes: for bribes blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the Just. And else where, Ye shall not do unjustly in
judgment. Leuit. 19.15.
Thou shall not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the
mighty; thou shall judge thy neighbor justly. And to be short, in all their
government, they must have a tender affection and fatherly care that their
people under them may live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty. 1. Tim. 2.2


Q. What are the duties of Pastors to their flock?

A. Saint Peter sets out their duties thus: The Elders which are among you,
I beseech, 1. Pet. 5.1.2
which am also an Elder: feed the flock of God which depends upon you, caring
for it, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but with a
ready mind. Now this feeding must be partly by doctrine and instruction, partly
by example of life and conversation.

Q. By doctrine, you mean not only delivering of godly lessons, but also
exhortation, admonition, reprehension, commination, and all such means whereby
godly lessons may be applied to the people.

A. It is very true. And all these things must be done according to that rule:
If any man speak, 1. Pet. 4.11
let him talk as the words of God. Keep the true pattern of wholesome words
(says S. Paul) teaching Timothy how he should feed with the word the flock of
God. 2. Tim. 1.23.
The same Apostle also moves Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.12.
to be unto them which believe, an ensample in word, in conversation, in love,
in spirit, in faith, and in pureness. And he thus charge Titus: Above all
things show thy self an ensample of good works with vncorrupt doctrine, Tit.
2.7.
with gravity, integrity. But because all the food that man can give, either by
words or deeds, will nothing nourish the Souls of the people, unless our
gracious GOD give a blessing therewithal; a faithful Pastor will carefully
follow the Pastor-like pattern that Paul sets before him in many places,
and namely, writing to the Ephesians, when he assures them, Ephesians. 1.16, 17
that he makes mention of them in his prayers: that God would give them his
Spirit of wisdom. And again, Phil. 1.3, 4
I thank my God, having you in perfect memory always, in all my prayers, for all you, praying with gladness. For Prayer of the Righteous (S. James tells
us) avails much, Iam. 5.16
if it be fervent: to draw down from heaven a blessing upon the people, for
whom the faithful Pastor is an humble suter. This duty, because in a Minister
it is so necessary, both for himself, that God will give him wisdom and
utterance, and for his people, that God will give them attentive ears to
hear, and faithful hearts to receive the Word, I could not but mention it in
this place, although I said before, in speaking of the duties of Governors,
that all superiors and inferiors must offer this sacrifice of Prayer one for
another.

Q. Now let us hear somewhat of such duties, as masters owe to their servants.

A. Out of that which has been said of the duty of Governors toward them,
over whom they are set, that may well be gathered. For every household is a
little Commonwealth, as a Commonwealth is as it were a universal household. So
that to train them up in godliness, and to be watchful over them, for their
honest and peaceable living among themselves, and their faithful discharge of
their duty; should be the chief care of the Masters. And as old men have
honor due to them in respect of their age, so must they take good heed yt they
give no ill example to the younger, by staining their gray hairs with
lewdness of life: Col. 3.19
and in a word, Husbands must love their wives, and not be bitter unto them, 1.
Pet. 3.7.
And dwell with them as men of knowledge, ruling them with discretion and kind
behavior, not with cruelty or bitterness.

Q. Now that we have heard of the reciprocal duties of superiors, and
inferiors, and that a great piece of duty that inferiors owe to superiors,
consists of obedience: It is, I think, very needful to inquire whether
Parents, Princes, Pastors, or Masters, must in all things be obeyed? For it is
plain, Dan. 3.
that the three children obeyed not the Kings Commandment, (for they would not
worship the golden Image) and that which they did therein, GOD delivering them
so miraculously from the fierceness of the fire, did well approve: and the
Apostles being commanded to preach no more in the Name of JESUS, said plainly,
Acts 5.29.
We ought rather to obey God then man, and preached Christ, not regarding the
commandment of their governors.

A. As it is reason that the Prince should rather be obeyed then the Master, so
is it our duty, rather to serve the Commander of all Princes and Potentates,
then any Prince or Magistrate whatsoever.

Q. May Subjects then, if Princes command things which they think unlawful,
repine and murmr? May they as our new masters of Rome now teach us, the
Jesuits, those bloody politicians, rebel, depose and kill them?

A. In deed so they teach, and so they endeavor to practice too: but God forbid,
we should not detest their wicked doctrine and doings herein: let us leave
such Atheistical axioms to the wooers of that purple harlot, drunken with the
blood of the Saints, Apoc. 17.6
who care not what Countries and Kingdoms they ruinate, so they may have any
hope to effect their savage designs, but in all unlawful commandments: we
obey God, in not obeying them, and we obey men, in patient enduring their
punishments, rather then we would do that which God forbids. Neither are
we to stir up mutinies, or incite to rebellions, as the popish Clergy does
continually: but the weapons wherewith we must resist the violence of ungodly
Princes, when they command unlawful things, are first, Patience, whereby
sometime even savage Natures are tamed; and Prayer, both that God will give us
strength to continue in his holy obedience, and that he would mitigate the rage
of all such cruel persecuters.

Q. What reasons does Moses, in repeating this Law, use to induce our corrupt
nature to obey?

A. Two, the first in respect of the Commandment, which should be of great
force to such as account themselves to be the servants of God. For if men's
Commandments be obeyed, though we are not sure always we do well in obeying
them: how much more must we frame our selves to do what the Lord our God
commands, in which there can be no danger of sinning? The second, in respect
of the good that GODS people should get thereby. For, as the Israelites now
ready to take possession of the land of promise, are warned, that if they will
long enjoy that land and prosper therein, they be obedient to their Parents: so,
if we will long and happily have use of Gods temporal blessings, we must
truly yield this obedience to our Parents, whether by nature, as Father and
Mother, or by calling, as Governors, Pastors, and Masters, or by age, as old
men, that they may be moved by such our dutiful carriage toward them, to pray
unto God for continuance of his favor toward us.

Q. But, because this promise is sometime more general unto all obedience,
Deuteronomy. 32.47.
as By this word you shall prolong your days: 1. King. 3.14.
and to Solomon, If thou walk in my Commandments, I will prolong thy days:
Why is it here a peculiar promise belonging to such as honor their Parents?

A. That disobedient children may know, that they who perform not the duty of
honor to them, who under God are authors and governors of their life, may
look for no promise of long life, but rather may fear the shortning of their
days, as a punishment due to their disobedience.

Q. But how is long life promised as a blessing? We see it is full of
miseries, wants, fears, cares, and troubles, in so much, that death is many
times rather desired then long life. 1. Kings 19 4.
Eliah sitting under the Juniper tree, desired that he might dye, and said, It
is now enough, O Lord, take my soul: for I am no better then my Fathers.

A. Long life is not of it self a blessing, because many times wicked men live
long, 1. King. 13.11.
as the Prophet that deceived the man of God that came from Judah, 1. Macha.
6.16.
is said to be old. Antiochus lived 149. years, but the sinner, Esaias 65.20
though he be a hundred years old, shall be accursed. Yet, because God
promises long life often as a blessing, no doubt it is so unto his servants;
but then he so seasoneth the bitterness of this life, with the sweet comfort of
his favor, that not only their days are prolonged, but also as here Moses
says, it goes well with them: whereby it comes to pass, that such do feel
to their unspeakable consolation, the performance of this promise, With length
of days will I satisfy him, I will show him my salvation. Psalm. 91.16


Q. But how can it be said, the Lord their God gave them that Land, seeing
Joshua and the Israelites fought many battles, Josh. 12.24
so that before they could enjoy the land, they smote one and thirty Kings?

A. First, when they went to take possession of that Land of promise, God made
the waters of Jordan miraculously to give place, Josh. 3.17.
so as they went over dry-shod. Jericho the first City that Joshua did
assault, had the walls thereof battered with no other engines, Josh. 6.16.
then the sound of seven Trumpets made of Rams horns, and the shout of the
Israelites. When the five Kings of the Amorites were discomforted, did not God
show that he fought for them? the Amorites were put to flight: and many were
killed in the flight, GOD also cast hailestones from heaven upon them, so that
more were slain so, then by the sword. And ye it might yet more plainly
appear, that the Lord took their part, Ioshu. 10.
at the Prayer of Joshua the Sun stood still, that they might have time enough
to pursue their enemies. And the Israelites being scarce well settled in that
promised land of Canaan, the Amalekites and Madianites, and all they of the
East in number like Grasshoppers, gathered together against them, Gideon the
Captain of the host of Israel, only with three hundred men divided into
three bands, set upon this great multitude in three several places, every man
having a Trumpet and a Pitcher, wherein was a Lamp. The Israelites sounding
their Trumpets and breaking their pitchers, holding their Trumpets in their
right hands, and their Lamps in their left, cried, The sword of the Lord, and
of Gideon, and stood in their places: so the Lord set every man's sword upon his
neighbor, and upon all the host. So all the host fled. Upon good ground
therefore said the Prophet, Psalm. 44.3.
They inherited not the Land by their own sword, neither did their own arm
save them, but thy right hand (O Lord) and thine arm, and the light of thy
countenance, because thou did favor them. Yea, God himself even in Joshua
his days sold his people, Josh 24.12
Not by thy sword, or by thy bow did thou conquer the land of Canaan. So that
although the people sometime fought, yet GOD so miraculously subdued their
enemies unto them, that it must needs be confessed that GOD gave them that Land.

Q. Now, let us hear somewhat of the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill.

A. The words themselves are a prohibition, but out of them we must also gather
a Commandment.

Q. But why are the three first Commandments, and this and the rest that
follow delivered negatiuely, or prohibiting the thing that is evil, rather
then commanding that which is good?

A. Because through the corruption that is in us, we are so prone and
inclining to evil, that we must first learn to eschew evil, before we can
apply our selves to do good, we must after the counsel that our Savior
Christ gives, Mat. 12.33
first make the tree good, because, Mat. 7.18.
an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Therefore our Lord God herein
teaches us, where our reformation must begin: we must purge out the old
leaven (of sin) that we may be a new lump, 1. Cor. 5.7
and for this cause are we forbidden to do that which is sin, that by little
and little vnaccustoming our selves from our own ways, we may grow and go on
forward in newness of life.

Q. But what is forbidden in this Commandment?

A. First all killing with hand, heart, or tongue, and the things that tend to
the hurt of any man's person, then also the bereauing him or spoiling of his
goods, or possessions. Thirdly, the Omission of such duties, as tend to the
safety or good of other men.

Q. I desire to hear of these points more particularly, and first, of killing
with the hand.

A. The killing with the hand is diversely, sometime it is done bluntly without
any care to cloak it, as Cain killed Habel, Ioab, Abner, and Amasa, sometime
craftily, as David killed Vriah. For though he thought the matter was wittily
contrived, 2. Sam. 11.
so as no body could charge him with it, yet, Nathan the man of GOD told him,
Thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the sword, 2. Sam. 12.9
thou have slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. Sometime men
murder under show of justice, and so was Naboth put to death for his Vineyard.
A fast was proclaimed, Naboth accused of blasphemy, the accusation proved, and
he stoned: who could say Achab had any hand in this? Yet was the Prophet Eliah
sent from God to examine him upon this interrogatory, 1. Kings 21 19.
Have thou killed and also gotten possession? A lesson needful to be learned
of many Politicians in these days, who care not by secret practices, to take
out of the way any that may hinder their proud attempts. Yet, even the greatest
of them must one day stand and give account of their doings, before that just
Judge, to whom no such thing is secret, because his Eyes behold their very
thoughts, and their very intents, and all the means which they used are known
to him.

Q. But how may murder be committed with the heart only, death not ensuing?

A. Our Savior Christ in expounding this very Commandment, and reproving the
interpretations of the Scribes and Pharisees thereof, says, But I say unto you,
Mat. 5.22.
whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, (that is, without cause or
immoderately, upon small cause) shall be culpable of judgment. And Saint John
says, 1. Ioh. 3.15.
Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer. Envy is another bad affection of
the heart, that wishes often, sometime also practices the death of them whose
good success they grieve at, as we see in Cain who killed Habel his brother,
Genesis 4.5.
because God better accepted of Habels sacrifice, then of his. This envious
heart is a murdering heart, and was in the brethren of Joseph so cruel, that
they had a purpose to kill him, Genesis 37.
had not Ruben first, and after Judah persuaded them otherwise. And out of
these, or some one of them grows a third kind of murdering hearts, namely, a
purpose to execute their malice and mischief, such as was in those above
forty men that had conspired to kill Paul, which they could not effect, Acts
23.
yet murderers they were, because they in heart intended murder. And in this
sort no doubt many of our Romish-Catholicks, who knew in general that
mischief was intended on the 5. of November, when that most inhumane and
savage purpose that ever was thought upon, should have been executed, and
wished in their hearts it might take effect, are cruel and monstrous
murderers. And so are many other who since have been as bloudyminded: nay, when
are not Papists in these our days, plotting some or other bloody designs
against this State? As for murdering with the tongue, Mat. 5.22
Christ tells us, Whosoever shall say, Fool, is worthy to be punished with
hell fire: teaching thereby, that if with unseemly words, we execute the anger
that in heart we have conceived, we are guilty of breaking this Law, Thou
shall not kill.

Q. But concerning the goods of our neighbor, you say, this prohibition may be
broken.

A. It is true, yet not because he that robs or takes from a man his
riches, takes away his life also, but because bringing him to want things
necessary, he makes his life bitter and unpleasant, in which respect the
son of Sirach says, Eccle. 34.23.
He that takes away his neighbors living, slays him. Thieves therefore
robbing and stealing, are breakers of this Commandment. Usurers, that by their
biting gain undo them for the most part with whom they deal. Other by
tedious suites and continual trouble weary poor men out of their livings: and
all oppressors, Who beat the people to pieces, and grind the faces of the
poor, as Esaias speaks, chap. 3.15. that oppress the poor, and destroy the
needy, as Amos 4.1. charge them: all such are guilty of breach of this
precept, Thou shall not kill. Another sort of transgressors of this Law may
weep and houle, as Saint James says, and why, Iam. 5.4.
Behold (says he) the hire of the laborers which have reaped your fields
(which is of you kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have
reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts. God gave unto his
people a straight charge, Leuit. 19.12.
The laborers hire shall not remain with thee all night. Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15.
Thou shall not oppress thy hired servant which is poor and needy, thou shall
give him his hire for the day, neither shall the Sun go down upon it; for he
is poor, and therewith he sustaineth his life, lest he cry against thee to
the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. The transgression of this Law in this
respect is too common. Poor men, when they have wrought and wasted their
strength in working, cannot get many times their hire at the weeks end for
their sustenance. Yea, poor men many times are forced to take it up in far
worse penniworths, then they might have in the market for ready money. A sin
every whit as crying a sin as not paying the reapers hire in due time, and a
plain breach of this commandment. Take heed then you, that have the labors
of many poor men, not only of that woe denounced by Jeremy, Iere. 22.13
Woe to him that uses his neighbor without wages, and gives him nothing for
his work; but also, of not giving them their hire in due time to supply their
needful wants: take heed (I say) that not any under you keep back any thing
from them by fraud, which S. James charge them of his time with. To be short,
all kind of cruel dealing is here utterly forbidden.

Q. You told us of three sorts of murder, with the hand, with the heart, and
with the tongue. Of this last kind of killing I pray you speak somewhat.

A. First, vile and reproachful speeches, either to a man's face or behind his
back. And therefore our Savior Christ says, Mat. 5.22
Whosoever says to his brother, Racha, shall be worthy to be punished by a
Council: and whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to be punished with
hell fire: by which words his meaning is to teach us, that this commandment
Thou shall not kill, is broken, by the least signification of our anger uttered
by word of mouth, but that conuicious and reproachful terms are a grievous
transgression of this Commandment.

Q. Are there any other kind of words, by which we may be thought to kill?

A. Yes, as by reproachful, so also by slanderous words: Pro. 22.1
for if a good name is to be chosen above great riches, as Solomon tells us,
and is better then a good ointment, Eccle. 7.3
as elsewhere he teaches us: then must the slaundering tongue be a murdering
tongue, in that it takes away a man's reputation, which is as it were the life
of a man's name, as well as the hand that takes away a man's goods, should be
judged a murdering hand, which is before proved.

Q. But without danger of breach of Gods law, a man may reprove sin and lewd
life in another.

A. Yes, and so did Eliah very plainly, when he said to Achab a wicked King
of Israel, who charged him with troubling Israel, 1. King. 18.18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that you have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. And the
Prophet Esaias calls the Princes of Judah, Princes of Sodom, Esaias 1.10.
and that people (who judged themselves a very holy and religious people) the
people of Gomorrah. Yea, it is the duty of Pastors and Ministers now, as in
times past it was of the Prophets, to tell Gods people of their sins, Leuit.
19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin: as also S. Paul wills. Gal. 6.1.
But there is great difference between slaundering or reproaching, which is
here condemned, and this Christian reprehension much commended to us by Christ
and his Apostles. First, in the root, for that springs from the bad
affection of a cankred heart: Secondly, in the manner of reprehending, for it
is done sharply and with bitterness: Thirdly, in the end, which is the
discredit and disgrace of them whom we reprove or slander. But that godly and
Christian reprehension rises from a charitable and loving affection, and
concerning the manner, is done in the spirit of meekenes, and the end is the
reforming of our brother.

Q. But this sin of slandering, I would judge rather to be against the ninth
Commandment.

A. This sin of slandering is a transgression against two Commandments at
the least, howsoever it be true or false that a man reports, to the hurt of
his neighbors good name, because he does it of an uncharitable mind, he is a
transgressour of this sixth Commandment. But if the reports be untrue, whether
devised by them which do so report them, or that they have heard them of
others, and without consideration have rashly published that to the discredit
of another, therein they sin against the ninth commandment. And because they
in so doing steal away their neighbors credit, which is much deerer to a well
minded man, then much wealth, and the loss thereof he esteems greater, then
of worldly goods, such men are also guilty of breach of the eight
Commandment, Thou shall not steal.

Q. You have told us of many ways whereby this precept may be broken, by doing
either against the person of anyman or against his goods or name: but how by
omission of duties do men transgress.

A. There are certain particular duties belonging to particular callings,
certain duties general belonging to all. And these particular duties are
diverse also, some being helps unto eternal life, some for the maintenance of
this our present temporal being here. And first to speak of that which should
especially be cared for. If the Ministers of the Word do not in some measure
their duty, in admonishing ye people of there danger they are in, by reason of
their sin, they break this Commandment. Thou shall dye the death (says God
to Ezechiel) if thou do not speak and admonish Ezec. 33.8
the wicked of his way, that wicked man shall dye for his iniquity, but his
blud will I require at thy hand. S. Paul therefore as he was careful to perform
this duty himself, Act. 20.31
I have not ceased (says he) day and night with tears, for the space of 3.
years to admonish you. So he charge Timothy, to preach the word, to be
instant in season and out of season, 2. Tim. 4.2
to reprove, to rebuke, to exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. And
himself feared woe, Cor. 9.16
if he preached not the Gospel. Then also Parents, masters or dames of
families, if they omit this duty in using all good means to bring their
children and servants to the knowledge and fear of God, and do not seek to
whet the word of God unto them, by careful and often putting them in mind
thereof, as Moses charge the Israelites to do, Deu. 6.7
by omission of this duty they are found transgressors of this Law.
Magistrates should by due punishments repress bloodshed and all disorders in
the Commonwealth; for to that end were punishments commanded. So thou shall
take away evil from among you (says Moses) that all Israel may hear it and
fear, Deuteronomy. 21.21.
speaking of disobedient children, commanding that they should be stoned to
death. So that as Pastors, and Masters of families in neglecting the duties
above mentioned, put the souls of such as are under them in danger of being
hunger-starued, for want of good food; so Magistrates omitting their duty in
punishing especially bloody and cruel offenses, do encourage offenders; nay,
strengthen their hands to further mischief, and by omission of this duty, may
make themselves accessaries and partakers of other men's faults. Moreover, if a
man has an Ox that has used to gore, and the owner is acquainted therewith
and knows that he is a dangerous beast, and does not provide for the safety
of other; if that beast kill man or woman, the owner of that Ox shall be put
to death as guilty of the murder, because he had not due care of his
neighbors life. If a man dig a pit or Well, and a beast fall into it and
dye, he that dug the pit must pay for the beast that is dead, by that
means. If an Ox that used to push kill another Ox, his owner (if he knew he
used to push, or gore) must make restitution. Exodus 21
These laws being set down, teach us, that we must not omit a care of our
neighbors life or good, whereby man's life must in some good sort be
maintained. Lastly, the omission of those duties, which our Savior Christ
speaks of; I was hungry and you gave me no meat, Mat. 25
I thirsted, you gave me no drink, I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not,
etc. is a breach also of this Commandment.

Q. Are all then that seek to have their wants in such things supplied, to be
relieved for meat, drink, or other such like?

A. I think not. For the vagrant and wandering persons, which with most
importunity seek for relief, first lead an idle, and therefore an ungodly
life (for abundance of idleness, Eze. 16.49
was one of the crying sins of Sodom.) Secondly, they are commonly reported to
live most filthily without fear and shame. Thirdly, as they are not any
members of the commonwealth wherein they live: so they are not belonging to
any particular congregation or Church, and the most of them scarcely come at
any: Now for such people so hateful to God and good men, in respect of their
lewdness, to be fed and clothed wheresoever they come, is nothing else but to
cherish and maintain them in their wicked course, against most Christian and
godly laws. Not to relieve their necessity may be thought a want of charity.
Two things are therefore for reformation of these unchristian disorders, to be
wished rather (I fear) then hoped for. The one, is the restraint of this
rogueing life with all sharpness, the other, diligent and careful endeavor to
set to work such as are able (or else let not him eat that will not labor; 2.
These. 3.10.
and provision for maintenance of the impotent. And how unwilling soever these
vagrants are to be tied to one place, and thereby do much hinder the execution
of our godly laws; yet were it the part of them, to whom authority is
committed, to combine themselves together to put in practice such Christian
laws, tending so much to abandon lewdness and idleness of life, and to do
it with resolution not to be daunted or discouraged for any pains. And thus
much of the omission of duties, whereby we may be made transgressors of this
now.

Q. Hitherto you have spoken of the prohibition: it now remains that you
speak of the Commandment.

A. Christ, who is the best Interpreter of this law, and of all the
commandments of the second Table, says, love is commanded in them all, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Mat. 22 39
And S. Paul affirms love to be the fulfilling of the law. Romans 13.10
Now love, if it be unfeigned and hearty, not in word or in tongue, but in deed
and in truth, 1. Ioh. 3.18. brings forth two fruits: The one is a rescuing
from evil, the other doing of good to them whom we love. But to speak
particularly of the fruits or effects of love, it is not needful, since we
have already declared what is forbidden. For as we are forbidden to hurt
another in body, name, or goods; yea, or to think or wish uncharitably to them
or any thing belonging to them: so on the contrary, by this commandment we are
bound to have a tender care of the safety, welfare, and reputation of others,
as well as of our own. For the love we owe, or at the least should owe to
others, must not have any other measure, then the love we bear to our selves.
And to be short, as we will be careful not to omit any thing that makes for
our safety, wealth, or credit: so careful must we be to cherish and maintain
these things for other. And thus much for the sixth Commandment.

Q. The seventh Commandment is also a prohibiting or forbidding of that which
is evil. Thou shall not commit adultery. And is adultery only forbidden?

A. Adultery in the proper signification is, when the husband not contenting
himself with his wife, or the wife with her husband, commit folly with others.
But there are besides this many sins of this nature in Scriptures utterly
condemned, all which are in this commandment forbidden. Thou shall not lie
with any beast to be defiled therewith, Leuit. 18.23.
neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: for it is
an abomination; and the punishment thereof is death both to the man or woman so
unnaturally offending, and to the beast. The sin of Sodom is likewise
forbidden; Leu. 18.22
Thou shall not lie with a Male, as one lies with a woman. They must dye the
death. Leuit. 20.13.


Q. These are monstrous and beastly sins, such as it can hardly be thought that
any of Gods people would ever commit, especially that lying with beasts.
Neither do I remember that ever I read, that any of the people of Israel were
charged therewith in all the Scriptures.

A. True: But we must know that God gives not this commandment in vain: but
seeing no sins are so gross but that men may commit them, unless God by his
grace restrain and bridle them, it is needful that God should warn them
thereof, lest being careless and secure, and trusting too much in their own
detestation of such sins, they might upon a sudden at unawares be taken. But
as concerning that sin of Sodom, it did cleave too fast even to the house of
Judah. For as there were Sodomites in the land in the days of Rehoboam; 1.
King. 14.24.
so when Asa, his grandchild, a good King, did his best to put them away (for
of him it is written, 1. King. 15.12.
that He took away the Sodomites out of the land:) yet some were left, and
Iehosaphat his son labored therein, and as it seems prevailed. For, 1.
King. 22.46.
the Sodomites which remained in the days of Asa his father, he put clean out
of the land. Notwithstanding the care these two good Kings had to abolish that
filthy sin, yet about three hundred years after, this sin was crept, not
into the Country of Judah, or city of Jerusalem, but even into the Temple it
self; 2. King. 23.7.
and Josiah broke down the houses of the Sodomites that were in the house of
the Lord. And therefore, how unnatural soever this sin may seem to be, yet
was it too well liked of Gods own people, and therefore in this Commandment
forbidden, as also all uncleanness of the flesh is of any sort.

Q. What think you of incestuous marriages, or the unlawful company of near
Kinsfolk?

A. All those are forbidden by the Law of God, Leuit. 18. and also expressly
against this Commandment. For if the sins of that nature that are less
offensive be condemned thereby, then much more they which are more offensive, as
Buggery, Sodomitry, and Incest are. And concerning this last, it is that which
John the Baptist reproved in Herod, and lost his life for it; Math. 14.4
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. And Saint Paul
reprehendeth in the Corinthians, that one should have his fathers wife. 1. Cor.
5.1
Yea, it is among those sins which God punished grievously in his own
people; Ezec. 22.10
In thee have they discovered thy fathers shame. Ezech. 22.31.
Therefore have I powered out mine indignation upon them, and consumed them with
the fire of my wrath. As for Adultery, Leu. 20.10
it is not here only forbidden in plain words, but also to be punished by
death.

Q. But what say you to fornication, which some account not to be a grievous
sin? For Martin Chemnizius writing against the Council of Trent (that wicked
co^spiracy of the Romish Church against God and his truth) alleges out of one
Burchards Canons and rules concerning penance, wherein is appointed for
adulterers fourteen years of penance, and to fast, bread and water
fourscore days: but to fornicators but ten days penance. In the fourth part
of that examination (for so the book is called) Page 72.

A. It makes no great matter what they say hereof, for they account it more
lawful, then for some to marry, as among other, D. Smith against Peter
Martyr; (that is a wanering and unconstant Weather-cocke, against a grave
learned man) according to his poor skill endeavored to defend, that it was
better for their Priests to keep a Harlot, then to enter into that estate of
marriage honorable among all men. Heb. 13.4
But sure I am, that by Gods Law fornication was death. For if a man take a
Maid to be his wife, and she prove not a Virgin, she must be stoned to death.
Deuteronomy. 22.20, 21.
And among other manifest works of the flesh, S. Paul reckons Adultery, Gal
5.19.
Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness. As therefore those other monstrous and
unnatural pollutions and adultery are against this Commandment, so is
fornication also.

Q. And is not this Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, broken but
only by such acts as these?

A. Yes: our Savior Christ says in expounding this very commandment, I say
unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, Mat. 5.28
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. For the just it self
without any action for performance of the same, is sin. And that a gazing and
wandering eye is as a dangerous gulf or we will to draw us by little and little
into the bottom of filthy lust, daily experience might teach all men. But this
corrupt affection blinds men's eyes so, as we are not able to see our danger.
2. Sam. 11.2.
For David by his eyes was driven into lust with Bethsaba. And Ammon his son,
by beholding the beauty of Tamar Absolons sister. 2. Sam. 13.1, 2.


Q. Our eyes then being so necessary members as they are, the guides of our
ways, and directours in all our business, how may we avoid the snares of
lust?

A. The very next words of our Savior Christ teach us: Wherefore if thy right
eye cause thee to offend, Mat. 5.29.
pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is better for thee, that one of
thy members perish, then that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Not
that he delights in the mangling of our bodies, but in the subduing of our
lusts. His counsel therefore is, that seeing by our eyes we may so be
deceived, we must not let them wander to behold the beauty or comeliness of
men or women, lest they become snares to entangle us. But turn away thine eye
from a beautiful woman, Ecclus. 9.8
and look not upon others beauty, for many have perished by the beauty of
women: for by it love is kindled as a fire.

Q. The meaning is, that we give no liberty to our eyes to sin, but should
avoid all occasions whereby we might be snared. And as we should be very
watchful for our selves herein, so should we be also over other, that are
committed to our charge, that we do our endeavor, to restrain their eyes from
wandering, for fear they lust.

A. Very true, and therefore we must neither our selves, nor suffer our
children or servants, to resort to these merriments, or feasts and meetings,
where there is great resort of youths. The example of Dina Jacobs daughter
should teach us this lesson, Genesis 3.4.
how dangerous it is for maids to go to gaze or wander abroad, for she thereby
was defloured. It is therefore good counsel that the son of Sirach gives,
Ecclus. 7.24. Ecclus. 26 10.
If thou have daughters keep their bodies, and show them not a pleasant
countenance. If thy daughter be not shamefast, keep her straightly, lest by too
much liberty she abuse her self. Which counsel, if it were necessary in those
days, when pride was not grown to that height that now it has, and for that
people who were by all likelihood far better instructed in the Law, then
either our selves, or our youths are: how needful then is it now, when youths
do to the uttermost of their power, trick and trim themselves that they may be
seen and liked of, and both old and young among us, are for the most part
utterly ignorant of the very principles of Religion, and of their duty toward
God or man. And besides the wanton eyes, there are also in those meetings, 1.
Cor. 15.33.
wanton tongues, And evil speakings corrupt good manners, they are even as a
pair of bellows to blow and kindle the cole of lust, to make it burn: but
Saint Paul charge, Ephe. 4.29
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is
good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. Col.
4.6.
Let your speech be gracious always and powdered with salt. Ephe. 5.3
But fornication and all uncleanness, and covetousness, let it not be once
named among you, as becomes Saints. But above all things, Idleness is a
great nourisher of filthy lust, and gives leisure to the eyes to behold and
spy out that which is the bane of the soul. And therefore the son of Sirach
says truly, Ecclus. 33 26.
Idleness brings much evil, and as David was by his eyes brought to lust
after Bathsheba, so his idleness brought his eyes to behold her. For sending
Ioab to fight against Rabbah a City of the Ammonites, himself remained at
Jerusalem, and after his noone-sleep, walking in his gallery, he saw Bathsheba
and lusted after her. It is therefore good counsel that Saint Jerome gives to
Rusticus: Always be doing somewhat, that the devil may find thee occupied.
And in observing these and such like rules, we shall if not pluck out our
eyes, yet may we have an Antidote to preserve our souls from the danger
thereof.

Q. You have taught what is forbidden in this Commandment, I desire to hear
what is herein commanded?

A. Even that which S. Paul in these words teaches, 1. These. 4.3 4.
This is the will of God your sanctification, and that you should abstain from
fornication, that every one of you should know how to keep his vessel in
holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence.

Q. But how may we perform this?

A. It is a thing hard for man to perform: yet, if we be willing to do our
best endeavor herein, in diet we must be temperate, in apparel modest, not
given to garishnesse, and every new fashion, in our calling painful, and in
reading or hearing of good books and godly meditations diligent, and in
Prayers fervent: If we carefully strive to do these duties, and avoid as is
before said, these common assemblies and meetings, evil talk and idleness,
God will assist us in our godly endeavors. And that we have great reason to
strive earnestly to obey this Law, our selves will readily confess, if we
consider that our calling unto the knowledge of the Gospel, is to this end,
that we should be a holy people unto the Lord. Secondly, the hurt and danger
that comes by adultery, to body and soul, may make us both fear and hate
that sin: For, it wastes the body, in respect whereof, Saint Paul says, 1.
Cor. 6.18.
He that commits fornication, sins against his own body. And Solomon
thus advises, Give not thy strength to women: Pro. 32.3
it consumes the goods: Pro. 29.3 Job. 31.12
He that feeds harlots wastes his substance. Adultery (says Job) is a fire
that shall devour to destruction, and which shall root out al mine increase.
Add heereto the shame it brings in this world, and the heavy judgments of
God every where in the Scriptures denounced against that sin, and our own
heart will testify within us, that Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God, Heb. 13.4
But whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

Q. Has God given us no remedy against this so dangerous sin, dangerous (I
say) in respect of our infirmity, whereby we find our selves too prone to fall
into it, (it is so natural unto us) and dangerous in respect of the end
thereof, which is deserved damnation?

A. Yes, If they cannot abstain, 1. Cor. 7.9
let them marry: for it is better to marry then to burn. And this estate of
marriage is not permitted to some kind of men only, and unlawful for other,
but Marriage is honorable among al men, Heb. 13.4
and the bed undefiled. As for such as forbid marriage and certain meats,
Saint Paul being witness, they depart from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.1 2, 3.
and give heed to the spirit of error, and doctrine of devils, speak lies
through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with a hot iron, therefore
such are to be accounted deceivers and false teachers.

Q. What learn we in the eight Commandment, Thou shall not steal?

A. I first observe therein the order, for after God has commanded holiness
of life, and as the Apostle speaks, 1. Thessa. 4.4. to keep our vessel in
sanctification, then he provides for goods, teaching us thereby First, to
seek the kingdom of heaven, and the things that belong unto eternal life,
and to let these worldly things be of less account with us. Then for the
words themselves, they are as most of the other are, a forbidding of that which
is evil.

Q. What is then forbidden here?

A. Al ways whereby others may receive hurt, that we may gain: some get by
violence and oppression, others by more secret means: By oppression also, some
more violently, some more craftily. The first sort are they which rob and
spoil, and take away men's goods by plain force: such are all robbers.
Oppressors also, who by wealth or other greatness, whether by Law or other
means, get from other that which they have no right to. Usurers, also a kind
of people not allowed to follow their trade among Gods people, are
transgressors of this Law: for God by his servant Moses gave this Commandment,
Thou shall not give to Usury to thy brother, Usury of money, Usury of meat,
or of any thing that is put to Usury, Deuteronomy. 23.19. Again, Exodus 22 25.
If thou lend money, to my people, to the poor that are among you, thou shall
not be as a Usurer to him, thou shall not oppres him with Usury. Yea, there are
other yet greater thieves then these, who content not themselves with men's
goods, but whole Kingdoms and countries must be unto them a prey. And,
howsoever God in his justice punishes wicked men, by great and grievous
sinners, as Tyrus and Egypt were given into the hand of Nabuchodonosor, a
great wronger of all his neighbors; yet was Nabuchodonosor who subdued them, a
plain transgressor of this Law.

Q. But it may seem otherwise, for God commends his service that he did
against Tire, and seems as if he held himself indebted to him for it, but
withal promises, that he would give to him and his soldiers, Egypt for a
reward of that service, Ezekiel 29.

A. True, for that which he did, was decreed of God, though he neither knew
Gods will therein, neither cared for it: so that the deed was good, which God
also enabled him to do, (for he could not have done any thing but as the
executioner of GODS wrath against those wicked people) but he did it with a
cruel and ambitious mind, and therefore it was not well done. God therefore
commends the work that he wrought against Tire, but in his manner of
working it, he is a transgressour of this Law.

Q. By this which we have heard, we may in some sort judge of other means,
whereby men oppress one another. And this you set down as most certain, that
whosoever oppress others, are transgressors against this Commandment, and
may be called cruel thieves. Against such God denounces heavy judgments,
Esaias 33.1
Woe to thee that spoylest, and was not spoiled, and do wickedly, and they
did not wickedly against thee. Esaias. 30.12 13.
Because you have cast off this word (whereby I have admonished you by my
Prophet) and trust in violence and wrong, and stay thereupon, therefore this
iniquity shall be unto you as a breach that falls, or a swelling in an hie
wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in a moment. For God will not suffer
unpunished the contempt of this his Commandment, Thou shall not do thy
neighbor wrong, neither rob him. But all thieves are not violent, some by more
secret means deceive. Therefore Saint Paul in few words forbids both sorts,
1. These. 4.6
That no man oppress or defraud his brother in any matter; for the Lord is
auenger of all such things. Of oppressors we have heard, now let us hear
somewhat of these other who steal by craft.

A. Some of them we call thieves, but many of them though thieves they are, and
make it their trade, yet will not they be called thieves. Of these we read
as an exposition or Commentary upon this Commandment, Ye shall not steal,
nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another. Under these three, stealing, false
dealing, lying, may all this sort of stealing be understood. Stealing is a
secret taking away of our neighbors goods, whether by night or day. Of this
sort are not only they, whom we call thieves, but all such as get into their
hands some one commodity or more, which other may not meddle with, but as from
them. These Monopolies have always been evil thought of among wise
governors, condemned by the Roman Laws, and are by experience found to be
very hurtful to Commonwealths: for by inhauncing the prices of such things as
they have engrossed, they steal away the wealth of the comminaltie. It seems
there were such among Gods people in Salomons days, and how men judged of them
it does appear by his words, Pro. 11.26
He that withdraws the corn, the people will curse him. But Amos the
Prophet is very bitter against them, who, when they had stored themselves with
full garners of corn, thought their solemn feast days appointed for Gods
service, to be a hinderance to them. For every minute they judged an hour,
Amos 8.4 5, 6.
they longed so much and so greedily after their unlawful gain. But in these
our days such kind of men are so much the worse, because they will not stick
sometime to profane the Sabbath day, to deliver their commodity and make their
gain, which these men (though bad enough) would not do, neither was it
lawful for them: for we may see by Nehemiah, Nehe. 10.31. and 13.15 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21.
that buying and selling upon the Sabbath, was utterly unlawful.

Q. What do you think of selling to a day, as it is most commonly used now for
Corn, Cattle, or any other commodity: even for a short time to have too much
increase, and for a longer time much more? Is not this a secret kind of
stealing?

A. Yes, and that a very unchristian stealing of our neighbors goods. So
selling by false waights and measures, Leuit. 19.35.36.
Thou shall not do unjustly in line, in weight, in measure. You shall have just
balances, true waights, true Epha, true Hin, that is, both thy great measure
of the Epha, and the little measure of the Hin shall be just and true. Some
steal Land by removing the bounders, contrary to ye advice of Solomon, Pro.
22.28 Deuteronomy. 19.14.
Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds which thy fathers have made. For,
Deuteronomy. 37 17.
Cursed be he that remooueth his neighbors mark: and all the people shall say,
So be it. Yea, Numa Pompilius, though he knew not these Laws of God, yet he
so hated this kind of stealing, ye he decreed it should be no offense to kill
him, that would remove a bounder, as Dionys. Halicar. reports, lib. 2. Some
steal their neighbors money, by praising above the worth that which they
sell, and so persuading them the thing is better then it is, whether Merchants
for their wares, or workmen for the work, which they make many times rather
to the show, then for the profit of the buyer: and to such Merchants the son
of Sirach adds Vitailers: There are (says he) two things, Ecclus. 26 39.
which I think to be hard and perilus, A Marcha^t cannot lightly keep him from
wrong, and a Vitler is not without sin. Yea, the laboring man as it is fill he
should have his wages for his work, so if he work not truly for his wages,
does but steal the money of him yt set him to work. He that is slothful in
his work, Pro. 18.19
is even the brother of him that is a great waster, either of his own, if he be
slothful in his own business, or of his that hires him, if he work for
another, and so is a breaker of this Law.

Q. What shall we judge of them who never think they have work enough for
their money, but by all means they can, seek to increase and add unto other
men's toil?

Deuteronomy. 25.4
A. God thus commands, Thou shall not mouzell the Ox that treads out the
corn. And Solomon tells us, Pro. 12.10
that A righteous man regards the life of his beast, to teach us thereby to
be much more merciful unto men, and not to suck out by too toilesome work the
very life of them that work for us, as if we thought men should live only to
serve our turn. But to rehearse all the means whereby we steal from other
men, their goods and possessions, it is impossible, and therefore I set this
down as a touchstone, whereby we may try whether we be faulty or not, that
whosoever seeks by other men's loss to enrich himself, is a thief and a
transgressour of this Commandment. And yet there is one thief more, which,
because he first begins with himself, stealing first from himself, I
leave to the last place of this kind of thieves: That is, the unthrift that
spends his Patrimony, if he have any, or whatsoever by his hands he gets,
if he live by his occupation or labor, in drinking, playing, or some unthrifty
course, so robbing himself of the means whereby he should live: this I
confess seems to be but a foolish thief, but a thief he is, yea and not in
robbing himself only; for he robs others too. For the poorest man if he be
married or keep a house must thus think, that which he gets, his wife and
family have their part therein, and so in spending their part he is a thief
and robs them: If he have Copie-hold, or free land, or any inheritance,
other whom he leaves behind, have interest therein, and so the child unborn is
robbed by such unthrifts. Foolish therefore and false is that which they think
and say sometime, that they spend naught but their own. For they spend that
also that belongs to their family, and to their posterity. And thus much of
thefts that are done or committed.

Q. Are there also thefts by omission of duties, which diverse men, according to
their several callings ought to perform?

A. Yea, diverse. And first to begin with the greatest thieves that rob men of
the food of the soul. Behold, says the Lord, Ier. 23.30.
I will come against them which steal my word every man from his neighbor.
Now the Pastors that are negligent in teaching are thieves of this sort. They
also who when they teach or instruct their people, bear with men's sins, and
will not tell them of their transgressions, as God commands his Prophet, but
will rather seek to please, as the desire of sinners is to sleep securely in
their sins, Es. 30.10
as we may see. To be short, they may truly be said to steal Gods words,
which take them from the eyes and knowledge of men, and in stead thereof deliver
men's traditions; much like the Harlot, 1. King. 3.20.
which rising in the night stole away the living child from the true mother,
and laid the dead child in the room of it. Next unto these are Judges, if they
judge not the cause of the Widow and fatherless, but either for fear dare
not, or because they favor great ones that are adversaries to their cause,
will not; or for any other worldly respect care not to do speedy right to
them, as their state requires and the equity of their cause should move them
to do. This their duty is commonly required of them in the Scriptures, so that
I need not bring particulars of that I say herein. If a man find a thing and
make not restitution, it is sin to him; Leuit. 6.3.
and therefore a breach of this commandment. And because this, as all other of
the Commandments require love: Thou shall not see thy brothers Ass or his Ox
fall down by the way, and withdraw thy self, Deu. 22.4.
but shall lift him up with him. Yea, if thou meet thine enemies Ox or Ass
going astray, Exodus 23.4
thou shall bring him to him again. For the omission of such duties is a breach
of this law.

Q. Now let us hear somewhat of the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear
false witness against thy neighbor.

A. As the last Commandment whereof I have spoken, restrains our deeds and
actions from doing wrong; so this teaches our tongues, not to speak any thing
whereby our neighbor may be wronged. And in effect it requires that which S.
Paul wills the Ephesians, Wherefore cast off lying, Ephe. 4.25
and speak every man the truth unto his neighbor. For he is called, Psalm. 31.
The God of truth, and loves truth (not in word or show) in the inward
affection, Psalm. 51.6
and therefore would have us to walk in the truth.

Q. But being forbid to bear false witness against our neighbor, may we do
it against others whom we call not neighbors, as the Jews think it lawful
to take usury of us, because it is thus prohibited to them, Deu. 23.19
Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother, and us they account not their
brethren?

A. The word neighbor has that sense in this place, which our Savior Christ
taught the captious expounder of the Law, in Luke 10.37. as if it had been
thus commanded: Thou shall not bear false witness against any man.

Q. Then teach us, I pray you, how many ways this law may be transgressed?

A. Either by ending matters in controversy between neighbors, or by false
reports or conceits of others or our selves.

Q. How in ending controversies?

A. Two ways, either when matters are ended by daies-men, or by law. Leu.
19.13
For seeing Thou may do no wrong to thy neighbor; but must follow Justice
justly: that is, Deu. 16.20
in all sincerity, I take this to be a good lesson, both for daies-men, and
such as are produced as witnesses before them, whereby, both the one and the
other may be taught, better to do a Christian duty herein, then many do.
Witnesses, although they speak not (in such case) upon oath, yet ought in
honesty, nay in Christianity to discharge a good conscience, and not to speak
untruly. For if they do, they transgress against this law. As for them who as
friends are appointed to arbitrate and order such matters, if they be stiff
for a friend, against that which, by witnesses, shall appear to be truth, and
thereupon give their order accordingly; they then bear false witness against
their neighbor. For all the friendship that a true Christian friend can show
to his friend in this case, is to take heed that he be not wro^ged, neither
the witnesses words wrested; but if he yield not to the truth, he is a
transgressor. As for the^ that are brought before Judges to give their evidence,
because they are sworn to speak the truth, if they do it not, their fault is
much the greater. Thou shall not do unjustly in judgment. Deu. 19.35
Their fault, I say, is much the greater, because they make that al-knowing
God, Pro. 6.19
who hates the false witness that speaks lies, and threatens to be a swift
witness against such as forswear themselves: Mal. 3.5
because such as swear falsely by his name, Leu. 19.12
pollute the name of their God, who is the Lord, who can and will be reue^ged of
such transgressions, they make him a witness of their lies. And as their
offense is heinous against God himself, so do they abuse the Judgment seat,
the Court of Justice, drawing the same by their falsehood unto injustice. Pro.
19.28
A wicked witness mocketh at judgment, and the mouth of the wicked swalloweth
up iniquity. For such witnesses hide and keep out of sight the truth of the
cause which is to be tried, and by that means undo such as through their
false oath leese their right.

Q. As such men by their perjury sin against the third Commandment, so in
thus wronging their neighbor, they steal away their neighbors maintenance of
his life, and so offend against the sixth and eighth Commandment, and therefore
may justly be hated of God and man.

A. So are they. For as concerning God, it is reckoned up among the things that
his soul abhors. Pro. 6.19
And in respect of the wrong that is thereby offered to men, God takes order
that among his people, what hurt soever a man might have by a false testimony,
the same should be laid upon the false witness, whether loss of life or any
limme, and this without pity God commands to be executed. Deu. 19.21
As for men, in diverse places diverse punishments have bin appointed to such,
and all show a detestation thereof. In Scotland, Keneth a King ordered, that if
a man told but a lie whereby another was hurt, the liar should be disarmed of
his sword, and banished out of men's company. The City of Millan in Italy (if
the sum of money were not great, which by forswearing a man sustained) something
imitated that punishment that God appointed among his people, yet adding this,
that such should go about the City 3. days with a paper about his head, to
show his offense; the second fault was loss of his hand; the third fault was
punished by burning to death. The Venetians cut out their tongues that so
offended. Francus, the first of that name, French King, made a law that such
should suffer death. In all which it may appear, that governors and
magistrates seeing the great hurt that false witnesses wrought in all societies,
sought by sharpnes of punishment to root out that evil out of their
governments.

Q. All such as raise against any man untrue reports, whereby they may be
defamed or il thought on, are transgressors of this law.

A. Most certain. Therefore, Speak not evil one of another, brethren. Iam.
4.11
He that speaks evil of his brother, or condemns his brother, speaks
evil of the law, and condemns the law, says S. James. The Prophet David
professes he will be an enemy to such men: Him that privily slandereth his
neighbor, Psalm. 101.5
will I destroy. And the son of Sirach tells us what reward the slanderer may
expect. Eccl. 5.15
He that is a back-biter, shall be hated, envied, and confounded. Therefore,
The righteous man hates lying words, Pro. 13.5
but the wicked causes slander and shame. Such men were so troublesome to
David, that he esteemed their tongs sharpened as the Serpents, Psalm. 140.3
and Adders poison to be under their lips. I need not produce the examples out
of Scriptures, to show what evil such men work among neighbors: daily
experience affords too many, and too lamentable effects that grow thereof; how
godly men are disgraced, the innocent and spotless, in comparison of their
accusers, blamed, and holy conversation is unjustly accused.

Q. But what think you of them, who readily and too rashly give ear to such
reports?

A. They are guilty of transgression of this law likewise. Prou 17.4
The wicked (says Solomon) gives heed to false lips, and a liar harkeneth to
a naughty tongue. But whatsoever themselves are, such, by listening too well to
such slanderers, give more encouragement to them to go forward in that wicked
course, and there is no doubt such an impression in their own heart of that
which they hear so willingly, that in the very persuasion of their heart, they
bear false witness against the guiltless, and condemn too often the
faultlesse.

Q. Are there no other transgressions against this law?

A. Yes, diverse, Our offense against it is too common in this country. A man
binds to peace one of who^ he stands in fear of some bodily hurt. The
other for the most part for a revenge, will be content to take his Oath, that
he also stands in fear of him, though his own conscience tells him it is
not so. By this means, even against his own knowledge, he bears this false
witness against the other, that he is a dangerous man, though himself
believes it not, yet he seeks to persuade others thereof by his Oath. A
grievous sin, but too common. Another will extol a man (though evil) whom he
loves, far above his worth, and whom he misliketh will lode with all disgrace.
Solomon tells us, Pro. 17.15
that he who justifies the wicked, and condemns the Just, even they both
are an abomination to the Lord. Esa. 5.20
And Esaias cries, Woe to them which call good evil, and evil good. And all
such are false witnesses which God here forbids. Other transgressions also
there are; as these counterfeit foolish, too much made of by many, yea by some
great men, and these common players, may slander, they think, by authority;
and the more satirical that they are, the better they are liked of, and the
more they please themselves too. So this grievous transgression, and very
unchristian course of life, commended and approved of some with too much
applause, is after some sort warranted to break this law of God. Another sort
transgress in giving themselves praise, Pro. 27.2
which were fitter to be done by some other. So did that young man that said,
but very untruly, All these (commandments) I have observed from my youth. Mat.
19.20
Their own conscience will tell such men, that they bear in saying thus, false
witness. And herein the Church of Rome does grievously offend, deceiving
themselves and others by transgression of this commandment. They call
themselves Catholic; it is not their name, it no way belongs to them. Their
church is not catholic, their faith is not catholic; therefore themselves not
catholic. Their church, nay not any church can here be catholic truly,
because so long as this world indureth, all the members shall not be added to
it, and until the number be complete, it cannot be called catholic
properly. And therefore we believe that there is a holy Catholic Church,
which in regard of the true faith therein taught agreeable to the first promise
of faith, and doctrine of obedience, which has consent of all ages among the
godly, is called Catholic, but then in deed shall be truly made Catholic,
when it shall have the whole number added to it. In the mean time also, in
respect of the Donatists, who tied their Church to Aphric, the godly called
their Church Catholic, because the members thereof were in all places, and at
all times, and not restrained to any one time or place. As for theirs, I
suppose themselves will be ashamed to say it is catholic, many points whereof
are so newly hatched; yea and some principal points which they hold not yet
well agreed upon that if they would say their faith is catholic, their own
mouths and pens would reprove, yea strongly confute them. Howsoever therefore,
the mouth of the wicked covers iniquity: Prou. 10.6
as Papists with the plausible name of Catholic hide their Idolatries,
Heresies, and Blasphemies: yet shall these patrons of popery (I doubt not)
find by their own experience, that because they have said to the Apostataes
from the faith, Thou art catholic; that is, Pro. 24.24
to the wicked, Thou art righteous, the people shall curse them, and the
multitude shall abhor them, as already all such, as by the light of Gods word
see how damnable and dangerous their doctrine is.

Q. Seeing then, not only such as report slanderous things to the disgrace of
other, but such also as willingly hear such slanders, and rashly believe them,
transgress this law: it is very expedient we should always remember the
answer which is made to this question; Lord, who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle? Psa. 15.1.3
who shall rest in thy holy Mountain? He that slaundereth not with his tongue,
nor does evil to his neighbor, nor receives a false report against his
neighbor: so shall we be free from this grievous sin of backbiting, which
whosoever uses, Psalm. 14.11
shall not be stablished upon the earth; as God by his Prophet threatens.

A. It is so, as also Solomon advises, Put away from thee a froward mouth,
Pro. 4.24
and put wicked lips far from thee.

Q. What think you of the tenth Commandment? Is there any thing forbidden
therein, which is not prohibited in the other Commandments? For we have
heard, that not only the outward action of murder and other transgressions is
forbidden, but also the inward affection.

A. In other of the Commandments, not the deed only is forbidden, but also the
willingness or desire to perform ye same. But here the very motion to
disobedience and lust it self, although we give no consent thereto, is
prohibited, and condemned as unlawful, as the Apostle teaches saying: Romans 7.7
For I had not known lust (to be sin) except the law had said, Thou shall not
lust.

Q. What then is the use of this Commandment?

A. It has many good uses: for first, it serves for instruction, to teach us
ye way how to obey the former commandments. For, if we withstand the first
beginnings of sin, and stop the springs thereof, so as they cannot break forth,
and snub the sprouts that come out of the root, not suffering them to have any
growth, we shall find sin much weakened in us, neither will it be hard by Gods
grace to keep it under, so as it shall never reign in these our mortal
bodies. Secondly, it serves for direction to reform the corruption of our
judgment, whereby we oftentimes deceive our selves, thinking we do well, when
it is nothing so. Saul said, when he had spared the Amalekites and much of that
which belonged to them, which God commanded that he without pity should have
destroyed, 1. Sam. 15 13.
I have fulfilled the commandment of the Lord. That young man in the Gospel,
Mat. 19.20
I have observed all these things (whatsoever love or duty I owe to my
neighbor) from my youth up: when no man (save Christ only) could ever attain
to that perfection of love. But here we may learn, Romans 7.7
that seeing even Lust it self is a breach of Gods Law, as the Apostle teaches
us, as before is said; we must neither believe such Commentaries of Gods Law,
which teach the obedience thereto to consist in the outward performance only, as
did the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 5.20
whom therefore our Savior Christ reproves, verse. 21.27. neither justify our
selves in any thing that we can do, seeing perfect obedience is so hard; nay, so
impossible for man to attain unto, so long as we are in the flesh: for these
motions unto sin will ever be stirring, as a root howsoever often stubbed, yet,
while it lives, will ever be sprouting. The third and last use thereof is,
that it is a preparatiue to the performance of a necessary duty, which God
requires of us: For, God has created us excellent creatures, endued with
reason, and enabled by many good helps, to the end we should by our holy
obedience glorify Him. Math. 7.18
But an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit: and such trees are we, if Lust
reign in us, and had are our fruits. Therefore to every one of us, who have a
desire that our light so shine before men, Math. 5.16
that they seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in heaven.
God says, Thou shall not Lust. For Lust is as leaven that sowreth and makes
unsavory all our actions: The end therefore of this Commandment is, Ephe. 4.22
That casting off, concerning our conversation in time past, the old man, we
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1.
and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God: That being sanctified
throughout, 1. These. 5.23.
our whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept blameless until the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Unto which holiness, that we may truly
strive to attain as we ought to do, we must carefully regard this
Commandment, Thou shall not Lust.

Q. It seems, that rash wishes for some things which either we see other
enjoy, or our selves upon some occasion think we want, are against this Law.

A. True: for even those motions argue a discontentednesse of our own estate,
and a wishing of better then God has given us.

Q. The several things that we are forbidden to covet, have been before
handled in the seventh and eighth Commandments, so that here we need not
any further declaration thereof.

A. It is so: for that that we are in them forbidden to do, or so much as we
purpose or be willing to perform, we are here forbidden to lust after, or to
suffer within us any motion to accomplish it.

Q. If Gods Commandments require so strict and holy and perfect obedience,
that it permits not so much as any wandering thought at any time to be
cherished within us, considering our own infirmity and weakness to withstand
sin; nay, our pronenesse and inclination to fall from our sincerity in
performance of our duty; it seems it is impossible for any man (CHRIST only
excepted, whose conception was by the holy Ghost) to fulfill the law.

A. It is so.

Q. Why then are we blamed as transgressors, if God require more of us in his
law then any man (even the best that lives) is able to perform?

A. We are justly blamed, because God requires no more at our hands, then man
by his first creation was made able to perform. For, the Law that now we
have, was written in the table of man's heart at his creation, and our first
Parents to whom it was given were enabled to do it. Now that they through
their disobedience, whereof both were partakers, Eve in intising, Adam in being
persuaded, have lost that ability to do the good they would and should do, it
is their fault; for GOD created them good and holy. And as the corruption of
blood, even by man's laws, disableth all the posterity, when the father has
committed some grievous fault: Romans 5.14
even so in Adams sin we are all transgressors. God therefore, in commanding
perfect obedience, commands no more then of right he might do: and we by
our disobedience deserve blame, because it is our own corruption that
disableth us, that we cannot do what we are commanded; yea and what we
willingly would do, being now regenerated.

Q. What use then have we of the law, since we are not able to keep it?

A. It is a true glass, wherein if we look without partiality, we shall
behold our selves as we are, that is, sinners. Romans 3.20 Romans 5.20 Gal. 3.19.
For by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Yea, by it sin is made unto
us more manifest.

Seeing then our selves by the law to be far from all hope of salvation, it
drives us to seek elsewhere to obtain mercy, in which respect it may be well
called, Gal. 3.24
A Schoolmasters to Christ, and not only in respect of the Ceremonial laws
which were but figures and shadows, Christ the truth and the body. For when we
see it impossible for the law to save us, Romans 8.3
in as much as it is weak, because of the flesh, then must we seek unto him,
whom God sent in similitude of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3
and for sin, by whom also, he condemned sin in the flesh.

Q. The most comfortable use then that we may have by the law, is not to hope
by observing or keeping it, to merit at Gods hands the kingdom of glory, as
Papists do, being so blinded in conceit of their own works, that they cannot
see the^ to be imperfect, being tried by the touchstone of the law, as in
truth they are; but to look unto the remedy that God of his endless and
infinite mercy has provided against our transgressions; namely, to the
satisfaction which Christ has wrought. Gal. 3.13
For Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a
curse for us. But have we no other use of Gods law?

A. Yes: it is to us as to a workman his rule and square, according to which we
ought to frame all our actions. And if any thing that we do, agree not with
this rule, we must not only acknowledge it not to be right, but to the
uttermost of our power we must endeavor to reform it according to the rule.

Q. The promises then of the Gospel free us not from obedience of the Law. No;
Romans 3.31. Mat. 5.17
God forbid (says Saint Paul) that it should so be. And Christ tells them of
his time, Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the Prophets: I am
not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them. So that although the law can
now bring no condemnation to the godly that are in Christ Jesus: Romans 8.1
Yet are we still bound to the observation or keeping of the law of the
commandments.

A. This to be true, many answers that Christ gave to such as asked what they
should do to inherit eternal life, do plainly prove; for he willed them to
keep the commandments: To love God with all their heart, soul, and strength,
and their neighbor as their self: Yea, after him all the doctrine of the
Apostles tends to that end; yea, our accusing conscience when we transgress
them, and our excusing heart, when in some good measure we strive to do them,
is a strong witness within our selves to testify, that we acknowledge our
selves bound to obey them.

Seeing therefore we cannot so keep them as we ought to do, though God in
justice may require this obedience of us, and punish our disobedience: Let us
humble our selves in fervent and faithful prayer, craving the assistance of
his grace in some good measure to obey his will, and pardon for our weakness
and imperfection in doing the same, that of his mere mercy, and (by us)
undeserved grace we may escape deserved wrath, in the day of wrath.

FINIS.

